

  [621] See his letters to his wife in December 1810 and January 1811,
  about his brother’s ‘mauvaises dispositions à mon égard.’

  [622] He writes that at his most splendid State banquets nothing but
  china is now to be seen on his table.

  [623] The question of the Consuls and Soult (mentioned in an earlier
  chapter) crops up again in Joseph to Berthier, Nov. 28.

  [624] Napoleon to Berthier, Oct. 4, orders Digeon’s brigade of
  Lahoussaye’s dragoons to cross the Sierra Morena, thus leaving the
  king only four regiments of French cavalry in New Castile.

  [625] Ducasse, _Correspondance_, vii. p. 361.

Meanwhile, the other government which claimed to be the legal
representative of Spanish nationality was even more truly ‘aux
avant-postes.’ The Cortes had assembled at Cadiz, where the booming
of the French cannon was perpetually heard, and where an occasional
shell from Villantroys’ celebrated mortars would plump harmlessly
into the sand of the Peninsula or the outskirts of the town itself.
The Cortes had opened its sessions on September 24, though less than
half its members had assembled. The difficulty of collecting them had
been very great, since all had to arrive by sea, and many had to come
from regions very remote, such as Asturias, Galicia, or Catalonia.
The assembly could not be called satisfactory or representative. The
scheme drawn up for its election by the commission that had sat in
the preceding winter was complicated. There was to be a deputy for
every 50,000 souls throughout Spain; but the form of selection was
indirect: the villages chose each one primary elector; the primary
electors met at the chief town of the district to choose a second
body of secondary electors; the secondary electors chose a final
committee for the whole province (_Junta provincial electoral_) and
these last, aided by the Governor, Archbishop, and Intendant of the
province, nominated the deputies. But this complicated system could
only work in the regions which were in the hands of the patriots.
Only Valencia, Murcia, Estremadura, the Balearic Isles, and Galicia
were wholly free at the moment. In Catalonia the capital, Barcelona,
and large tracts of the country were occupied by the French. In the
Asturias three-quarters of the province were held down by Bonnet.
The two Castiles, Andalusia (excepting Cadiz), Biscay, Navarre,
Leon, and Aragon were entirely or almost entirely in the hands of
the enemy. The delegates supposed to represent them were either
chosen in hole-and-corner meetings of insurgent juntas lurking in
some remote fastness, or--where even this semblance of local election
was not possible--by nomination by the Regency, or in wholly casual
assemblies of the natives of those districts who chanced to be in
Cadiz at the time. The representatives of Madrid, for example,
were chosen in this fashion by the body of exiles from that city
meeting in the spacious courtyard of a large public building[626].
The result of this informal and irregular method of choice was that
many provinces purported to be represented by deputies who had no
real local influence therein, but had chanced to commend themselves
to the insurgent juntas, or to the persons--in some cases a mere
handful--who happened to have fled from that particular region to
Cadiz. It is said that the very names, and much more the persons, of
a good many of the deputies were absolutely unknown to their supposed
constituents. Most of all was this the case with the members of
the Cortes who were supposed to represent Spanish America. It had
been decreed by the late Central Junta that the colonies formed an
integral part of the Spanish monarchy, and were therefore entitled to
representation. But the modest number of twenty-six members allotted
to them were elected at Cadiz, by a committee of Americans nominated
by the Regency from those who happened to be resident in that town.
Most of the deputies were out of touch with the people beyond the
seas, of whom they were theoretically the delegates.