

  [606] See especially Napier, iii. 199.

  [607] Suchet, _Mémoires_, i. 205.

  [608] See previous page.

Thus six months had elapsed between the fall of Lerida and the
commencement of the next stage of the French advance in Eastern
Spain. If it is asked why the delay was so long, the answer is easy:
it was due not, as some have maintained, to Suchet’s slowness or to
Macdonald’s caution, but solely to the splendid activity displayed
by Henry O’Donnell, a general often beaten but never dismayed, and
to the tenacity of the Catalans, who never gave up hope, and were
still to hold their own, after a hundred disasters, till the tide of
success in the Peninsula at last turned back in 1812-13.




SECTION XXII: CHAPTER II

KING JOSEPH AND THE CORTES AT CADIZ: GENERAL SUMMARY


It only remains that we should deal shortly with the higher politics
of Spain during the last months of 1810--the troubles of King Joseph,
and the complications caused by the meeting of the Cortes at Cadiz.

Of the growing friction between the King and the commanders of the
‘military governments’ created by the Emperor in February, we have
already spoken[609]. Joseph did well to be angry when his dispatches
to Saragossa or Barcelona were deliberately disregarded by his
brother’s special orders. But things became worse, when he was not
merely ignored, but openly contemned. A few examples may suffice.
In the early summer a brigade sent out by Marshal Ney raided the
province of Avila, which was not included in any of the military
governments, raised requisitions there, and--what was still more
insulting--seized and carried off the treasure in the offices of the
civil intendant-general of the province[610]. Joseph wrote to Paris
that ‘the Emperor cannot be desirous that his own brother--however
unworthy--should be openly humiliated and insulted; that he asked
for justice, and abstained from any further comment’[611]. Napoleon
replied by placing Avila in the block of provinces allotted to the
Army of Portugal, and withdrew it for the time from the King’s
authority. It was soon after that he created Kellermann’s new
‘military government’ of Valladolid, thus taking another region
from under the direct authority of Joseph. Some months later
Kellermann asserted the complete independence of his viceroyalty,
by causing the judges of the high-court of Old Castile, which sat
at Valladolid, to take a new oath of allegiance to the Emperor of
the French, as if they had ceased to be subjects of the kingdom of
Spain[612]. Soult, too, continued, as has been shown before, to cut
off all revenues which the King might have received from Andalusia,
and Joseph’s financial position became even worse than it had been in
1809[613].

  [609] See pp. 201-2 and 316.

  [610] See p. 242.

  [611] Joseph to Napoleon. Ducasse’s _Correspondance du Roi Joseph_,
  vii. 278-9. The Emperor gave Avila back to the King in September, see
  Nap. _Correspondance_, xxi. 126.