

  [619] Napoleon to Laforest, ambassador at Madrid, Nov. 7.

The mere first rumour of his brother’s intentions, transmitted
by Almenara and the Duke of Santa-Fé, his ambassadors ordinary
and extraordinary at Paris, drove Joseph to despair. ‘The Spanish
nation,’ he wrote[620], ‘is more compact in its opinions, its
prejudices, its national egotism, than any other people of Europe.
There are no Catholics and Protestants here, no new and old
Spaniards; and they will all suffer themselves to be hewn in pieces
rather than allow the realm to be dismembered. What would the
inhabitants of the counties round London say if they were menaced
with being declared no longer English? What would Provençals or
Languedocians say if they were told that they were to cease to be
Frenchmen? My only chance here is to be authorized to announce that
the promise that Spain should not be dismembered will be kept. If
that is granted, and the generals who have misbehaved are recalled
to France, all may be repaired. If not, the only honourable course
for me is to retire into private life, as my conscience bids me,
and honour demands.’ On November 18, after having received more
formal news of the Emperor’s intentions from his envoys, Joseph
declared that the die was cast: he would return to his castle of
Mortefontaine, or to any other provincial abode in France that he
could afford to purchase, as soon as his brother’s resolve was made
public.

  [620] Joseph to the Queen of Spain, Oct. 12. Ducasse,
  _Correspondance_, vii. 355.

Yet the crisis never came to a head. The annexation of the Ebro
provinces was never published, though private assurances of their
impending fate were laid before the Spanish ministers and the King.
What caused the Emperor to hesitate, when all was prepared? The
answer may be found in his dispatch to Laforest on November 7: ‘I
need hardly warn you,’ he writes, ‘that these insinuations (the
ultimatum to the King) are to be made only on condition that the
French army has entered Lisbon, and that the English have taken to
their ships.’ And again, ‘The Emperor is acting in sincerity: if
in reality the capture of Lisbon, and an offer from the cabinet of
Madrid, might possibly decide the rebels to treat, His Majesty might
consent, &c., &c.’ It was the Lines of Torres Vedras which saved King
Joseph from abdication and Spain from dismemberment. The evacuation
of Portugal by Wellington was the indispensable preliminary to
the carrying out of the great annexation scheme: its completion
was deferred till the ominous silence of Masséna should be ended
by a triumphant dispatch proclaiming the capture of Lisbon. Since
that dispatch never came, Napoleon kept postponing his ultimatum.
Then followed the news, delivered at Paris by Foy on November 21,
showing that Masséna had been brought to a standstill. Even then the
Emperor’s plan was kept back, not abandoned. It was not till the Army
of Portugal had recoiled in despair and disarray to the banks of the
Coa that Napoleon abandoned his cherished scheme, and consented to
treat with his brother on reasonable terms. But Joseph’s visit to
Paris in the spring of 1811 and its consequences belong to another
chapter of this history. It must suffice here to point out that
he spent all the winter of 1810-11 in a state of mental anguish,
expecting every day to be forced to publish his abdication[621], and,
meanwhile, living a life of shifts and worries--selling his last
silver plate to feed his courtiers[622], and exchanging an endless
correspondence of remonstrances and insinuations with Soult and the
commanders of the ‘military governments’ of the North[623]. Even
from the military point of view he did not consider himself safe;
the Empecinado and other guerrillero chiefs carried their incursions
up to the very gates of Madrid; and La Mancha, from which, by the
Emperor’s orders, much cavalry had been withdrawn for the benefit of
Soult[624], was frequently raided by detachments from Blake’s Army of
Murcia. ‘À chaque instant du jour et de la nuit,’ wrote the unhappy
sovereign, ‘je suis exposé à monter à cheval pour défendre ma vie
contre les bandes exaspérées des insurgés, qui entourent Madrid:
cette ville est aux avant-postes[625].’