

  [605] Martinien’s invaluable lists show only three Italian and one
  French officer hurt, which agrees well enough with Vacani’s estimate
  of 80 to 100 _hors de combat_.

This new budget of troubles contained two main items. The first was
that the August supplies thrown into Barcelona were nearly exhausted,
and that the town urgently required revictualling. The second was
that it was impossible to send on the necessary convoys, because of
the extreme activity of the somatenes, and the inadequate number
of troops left in Northern Catalonia. One considerable train of
waggons had been captured and destroyed near La Junquera, on the very
frontier of France, by the Baron de Eroles, who had now taken up
the command of the northern insurgents. Another was standing fast
at Gerona for want of sufficient escort, a third had been collected
at Perpignan, but dared not start. So pressing was the need for the
relief of Barcelona, that Macdonald made up his mind that he must
break up from his present cantonments--even at the risk of making the
siege of Tortosa impossible--and transfer himself to the north-east.

Accordingly, on November 4, he commenced a toilsome march by way of
Calaf, Manresa, and Hostalrich to Gerona, where he arrived in safety
on the 10th. Campoverde followed him, for some way, by parallel
paths along the mountains, but never dared to strike, the strength
of the 7th Corps when it marched in a mass being too great for him.
It is probable that the Marshal would have had more trouble if
O’Donnell had been in the field, but that enterprising general was
not yet healed of the wound which he had received at La Bispal. It
had gangrened, and he had been sent to Majorca by his physicians,
who declared that a complete cessation from military work was the
only chance of saving his life. The interim command was turned over
in November to the senior Lieutenant-General in Catalonia, Miguel
Iranzo, a very poor substitute for the hard-fighting Spanish-Irish
general.

Macdonald, having joined Baraguay d’Hilliers, had now an imposing
mass of troops under his hand. Moreover, he got back the services of
his old divisional generals Souham and Pino, who arrived from sick
leave, and took over charge of the divisions lately in the charge of
Frère and Severoli. A great draft from France and Italy had rejoined
in their company. The Marshal was therefore able to collect the
fractions of the great convoy destined for Barcelona, and to conduct
it to that city after a slow and cautious march on November 25. He
then changed the battalions in the garrison of Barcelona, where he
left both Pino and Souham, sent back to the Ampurdam the troops he
had borrowed from Baraguay d’Hilliers, as escort for the returning
convoy, and marched for the second time to join Suchet; moving by way
of Momblanch, he got once more into touch with the Army of Aragon at
Falcet, near Mora, on December 12.

Thus the campaign came back, at mid-winter, to the same aspect
that it had shown in the first days of September. It has been the
wont of military critics to throw the blame for the lost three
months on Macdonald[606]. But this seems unfair: it is true that
he was absent from the post which he had promised to hold, for the
protection of Suchet’s rear, from November 4 to December 13. But why
had so little been done to forward the siege of Tortosa during the
time from September 4 to November 4--two whole months--while the
Marshal was in the covenanted position, and actually carrying out
his promise to contain the Catalans, and leave Suchet’s hands free
for the actual prosecution of the projected siege? The commander of
the Army of Aragon had been given two of the best campaigning months
of the year--September and October--and had no enemy about him save
the ever-unlucky Valencian army, the local somatenes of the Lower
Ebro, and the scattered bands of Villacampa in the hills of Upper
Aragon. It was only sixty miles from his base at Mequinenza, where
his siege-train had been collected months before, to the walls of
Tortosa, and he had brought up his field army before that place as
early as August. No doubt the country between Mequinenza and Tortosa
is rough, and its roads execrable, while water-transport along
the Ebro was rendered more difficult than usual by a rather dry
autumn, which kept the river low. But twenty-six heavy siege-guns
were got down to Xerta, only ten miles from Tortosa, as early as
September 5, during a lucky flood, while a considerable number more
were pushed to the front during the same month, by the land route,
formed by Suchet’s new military road from Caspe to Mora. It seems,
therefore, that Suchet’s inactivity in September and October can be
explained neither by laying blame on Macdonald, nor by exaggerating
the difficulties of transport. If, as he wrote himself, ‘Notre corps
d’armée se trouvait enchaîné sur le bas Ebre, sans pouvoir agir, et
son chef n’avait d’espoir que dans une crue d’eau et dans le secours
des circonstances[607],’ he was himself responsible for his failure,
either from over-caution or because he had undertaken a task beyond
his means. The real cause of his two months’ delay was the vigorous
action of the enemy. There was no danger from the disorganized
Valencian army, which only made a feeble attempt on November 26-27
to beat up the small force under General Musnier, which lay at
Uldecona to cover the blockade of Tortosa from the south; the attack,
led by Bassecourt, was driven off with ease. The real opponents of
Suchet were the irregular forces of the Catalans, and the Aragonese
insurgents in his rear. The former, though few in numbers, since
Macdonald was attracting their main attention, attacked every convoy
that tried to float down the gorge of the Ebro, and sometimes with
success. On the 15th of September they captured a whole battalion of
Pignatelli’s Neapolitans, which was acting as guard to some boats. On
other occasions they took or destroyed smaller or greater portions
of flotillas carrying guns or stores to Xerta, where the siege park
was being collected. But Villacampa’s Aragonese gave even greater
trouble; from his lair in the Sierra de Albaracin that enterprising
partisan made countless descents upon Suchet’s rear, and so molested
the garrisons of Upper Aragon, that the French general had repeatedly
to send back troops from his main body to clear the roads behind him.
Villacampa was beaten whenever he tried to fight large bodies, even
though he was aided by a General Carbajal, whom the Regency had sent
from Cadiz with money and arms, to stir up a general revolt in the
Teruel-Montalban region. The Polish General Chlopiski, detached in
haste from the blockade of Tortosa, broke the forces of Carbajal and
Villacampa in two successive engagements at Alventosa, on the borders
of Valencia (October 31), and Fuensanta, near Teruel (November 11).
The insurrection died down, Villacampa retired into his mountains,
and Chlopiski returned to the main army. But only a few days later
Suchet had to cope with a new danger: Macdonald having taken himself
off to Gerona, the Catalans were at last able to detach regular
troops to reinforce the somatenes of the Lower Ebro. A brigade under
General Garcia Navarro came up to Falcet, opposite Mora, and formed
the nucleus of a raiding force, which beset the whole left bank of
the Ebro, and made its navigation almost impossible. Suchet had
to detach against it seven battalions under Abbé and Habert, who
attacked Navarro’s entrenched camp at Falcet on November 12, and
stormed it. The Spanish general, who showed distinguished personal
courage, and charged valiantly at the head of his reserves, was taken
prisoner with some 300 men. The somatenes fled to the hills again,
and the regulars retired to Reus, near Tarragona, where they were out
of Suchet’s sphere of operations. It was just after this combat that
the unfortunate Army of Valencia made the useless diversion of which
we have already spoken[608]. It, at least, kept Suchet busy for a few
days. By the time that it was over, the greater part of the remaining
siege-material was ready at Xerta, the water-carriage down the Ebro
having become easy since Garcia Navarro’s defeat. When, therefore,
Macdonald’s arrival at Momblanch was reported at Suchet’s head
quarters, and an adequate covering-force was once more placed between
him and the Catalan army in the direction of Tarragona, the actual
leaguer of Tortosa could at length begin. It lasted, short though
it was, till the New Year of 1811 had come, and must, therefore, be
described not here but in the fourth volume of this work.