

  [627] For details see Schepeler, iii. p. 691. The goods must also be
  carried in Spanish vessels, so the grant was not a very liberal one!

But it was not the American question alone which lay as a source of
danger before the newly-assembled Cortes, nor was it the American
deputies alone who misrepresented their constituents. Speaking
in general, it may be said that the whole assembly showed a
disproportionate number of liberals, when the relative numbers of the
democratic and the conservative parties throughout Spain were taken
into consideration. The events of the next ten years were to show
that the _Serviles_, as their opponents called them, were really in a
majority in the whole country-side and in many towns. If that had not
been so, Ferdinand VII could not have restored autocratic government
with such ease when the Peninsular War was over. Reactionaries of
the blackest dye, who would have liked to restore the Inquisition,
and would have put back the press into the shackles which it had
endured before 1807, were probably in a clear majority in the nation.
The clerical interest was in many ways the mainstay of the War of
Independence, and the clergy, with very few exceptions, would gladly
have gone back to the system of the eighteenth century[628]. The
majority of the old official class sympathized with them, and the
peasantry were almost everywhere under their control. On the other
hand, the liberals, if all shades of them were reckoned together,
had a clear majority in the Cortes, both because the regions which
were properly represented in that assembly chanced to be those
in which they were most numerous, and because they had secured a
disproportionate number of the seats belonging to the lost provinces,
which had been filled up by more or less fictitious elections within
the walls of Cadiz. That town itself was the least conservative place
in Spain, and the refugees who had served as electors because they
happened to be on the spot, were not drawn from the bulk of the
population--were neither priests nor peasants,--but mainly came from
those sections of the upper and middle classes where liberal opinions
had made more progress.

  [628] Liberal clergy of the type of the journalist Blanco-White
  (Leucadio Doblado) were rare exceptions.

The Cortes on the whole was a democratic body: Spain, on the whole,
was reactionary. The number of those who hated Napoleon because they
regarded him as the enemy of the Church, the jailer of the Pope,
and the breaker-up of old laws, was much greater than that of those
who hated him because he was the embodiment of autocracy, and the
foe of all free self-government. Intense national pride was common
to both parties, and all could unite against a foe whose aim was
the dismemberment of Spain. But the union was made difficult by the
fact that men who had imbibed, more or less consciously, some of the
‘Principles of 1789’ had to co-operate with men who looked back on
the régime of Philip II as a Golden Age. ‘I can see no prospect of
Liberty behind the crowd of priests who everywhere stand foremost to
take the lead of our patriots. I cannot look for any direct advantage
from the feeling which prompts the present resistance to Napoleon,
as it arises chiefly from an inveterate attachment to the religious
system whence our present degradation takes source. If the course
of events enables us to attempt a political reform, it will be by
grafting the feeble shoots of Liberty upon the stock of Catholicism,
an experiment which has hitherto, and must ever, prove abortive’
wrote a desponding Liberal[629]. How could the writer of such words
and his friends work cordially in company with such fanatics as
the Estremaduran deputy who, in one of the earlier sessions of the
Cortes, proposed the astonishing motion that, in spite of all that
had happened since 1807, ‘the Inquisition remains in full possession
of its ancient authority, and can make free use of all the powers
which it has ever enjoyed in the past[630].’ There were others
who objected to the use of the dangerous word ‘constitution,’ and
even to the phrase _las leyes de España_, as implying an authority
independent of the crown[631].