

  [626] Argüelles, _Cortes de Cadiz_, p. 160.

This fact was specially unfortunate when the first symptoms of
discontent and sedition in Buenos Ayres, Mexico, and the Caraccas
had begun to show themselves. Though few realized it as yet, the
insurrection of Spanish America was just about to break forth. The
least foreseen of all the results of Napoleon’s aggressions in Old
Spain was that the colonies, which had been called upon to take their
part in the national war against the French, and had been promised
a share in the administration of the empire, should accept the
show of freedom and equality that was offered in a serious spirit.
The Americans demanded that they should no longer be treated as
subjects and tributaries of the mother country, but recognized as
possessing rights and interests of their own, which must be taken
into consideration when the general governance of the dominions
of Ferdinand VII was in question. And these rights and interests
included not only a claim to such self-government as other Spanish
provinces possessed, but a demand that their commercial and economic
needs should no longer be subordinated to the convenience of the
mother country. The colonies could not see why the monopoly of all
their trade should be left in the hands of the merchants of Old
Spain. They wished to traffic on their own account with Great Britain
and the United States. This claim was one which no inhabitant of Old
Spain could view with equanimity. The monopoly of South American
commerce had always been believed to be the most essential item in
the greatness of the realm. It had been preserved almost as strictly
in the eighteenth century as in the seventeenth or sixteenth. The old
_Asiento_, which gave Great Britain a minute share in that commerce,
had been conceived to be a humiliation and a disgrace to the king who
granted it. Spain had fought more than once to preserve the American
monopoly--it is only necessary to allude to the war of ‘Jenkins’s
Ear’ to show what she was prepared to face in its defence.

And now, when the mother country was in such desperate straits, the
questions of American self-government and American trade were raised
in the crudest form. Great Britain had provoked the distrust of her
Spanish allies by many of her acts, even when they were done in good
faith and with no ulterior motive. But the most irritating of all
was the request, which had been already made more than once in a
tentative fashion, for a measure of free trade with South America.
Wellington had recommended that the point should not be pressed,
when Spain was in her extremity; but it was inevitable that since
nearly all British subjects, and nearly all Americans, were desirous
to see the old barriers removed, the question should crop up again
and again. The opening of the American trade was the only return
that Spain could make for the aid that Great Britain had now been
giving her for more than two years of war. When Canning in 1809 wrote
that ‘in questions of commerce any proper occasion must be used to
recommend a more enlarged and liberal policy than has hitherto been
acted upon in Spain,’ it is easy to see what was in his mind. The
ministers in power in 1810 were mostly of the same opinion. But to
ask for free trade with America in the year when Hidalgo was making
his first rising in Mexico, and the _cabildos_ on the Rio de la Plata
were quietly substituting municipal self-government for the ancient
autocratic rule of their viceroys, was to provoke acute suspicion.
In 1806-7 Great Britain had backed Miranda and other colonial
separatists, either with the hope of getting a footing for herself
in South America, or at least with that of establishing republics
which would grant her all the commercial privileges that she asked.
The successive Spanish governments of 1808-10 could never convince
themselves that the scheme had been completely dropped, and mistook
British demands for open trade with America for a desire to sever the
discontented colonies from their mother country. The most unpopular
act of the Regency of 1810 was their decree of May 7, issued, as
all Spaniards held, in base subservience to their allies, which had
granted England and Portugal a certain limited right of exchanging
their products with the colonies, on paying the heavy customs-due of
ten and a half or fifteen and a half per cent[627]. So great was the
cry raised against it in Cadiz that the Regency was cowardly enough
to cancel it on June 22, under the pretext that it had not been
ratified in a session at which all its members were present!