

  [601] See vol. i. p. 311.

  [602] See this vol. p. 295.

  [603] Only about eighteen miles distant.

  [604] The best narrative of Schwartz’s disaster may be found in
  the diary of the Lippe-Bückeburg officer Barkhausen, one of the
  prisoners, pp. 110-15.

Without waiting for Rouyer and Baraguay d’Hilliers to assemble their
forces, O’Donnell departed from the scene of his exploits without
delay. He himself, having received a severe wound in the foot,
embarked with the prisoners on board Fane’s ships and returned to
Tarragona. Campoverde, with the land-force, retired hastily past
Gerona to the mountains of the north, retook Puycerda, beat up the
outposts of the French garrison of Montlouis on the frontier of
Cerdagne, and raised some contributions on the other side of the
Pyrenees. From thence he descended the Segre, and established himself
at Cardona and Calaf, facing Macdonald’s northern flank.

So thoroughly had the main body of the 7th Corps lost touch with
the troops left behind at Gerona and in the Ampurdam, that the news
of the disaster of La Bispal only reached Macdonald, via France and
Saragossa, more than a fortnight after it had happened. It alarmed
him for the safety of the north, but did not suffice to draw him
away from Suchet, as O’Donnell had hoped. The news that the Spanish
raiding division had disappeared from the neighbourhood of Gerona
encouraged him to remain in his present position, which alone made
the siege of Tortosa possible. Presently he was informed that a
considerable force had appeared in his own sphere of operations--this
being the same division of Campoverde which had done all the
mischief in the north. He therefore marched on October 18, with
two French and two Italian brigades, to attack this new enemy.
On the next day he occupied Solsona, where the Junta of Upper
Catalonia had hitherto been sitting. The place was found deserted
by its inhabitants, and was plundered; its great cathedral was
burnt--either by accident or design. On the twenty-first, however,
when the Marshal came in front of Cardona, he found the town, the
inaccessible castle above it, and the neighbouring heights, manned
by Campoverde’s division, strengthened by several thousand somatenes
of the district. The Italian general Eugenio marched straight at
the position, with Salme’s French brigade in support, despising his
enemy, and not waiting for the Commander-in-Chief and the reserves.
He met with a sharp repulse, for the Spaniards charged his columns
just as they drew near the crest, and hurled them down with loss.
Macdonald refused to throw in all his troops, and contented himself
with bringing off the routed brigade. He then returned to Solsona
and Cervera, much harassed in his retreat by the somatenes. It is
curious that he did not press the combat further, as he had a large
superiority of numbers over the Catalan division, and had not lost
much more than 100 men in the first clash[605]. But the position was
formidable, and the Marshal more than once in this campaign showed
himself averse to taking risks. Perhaps, also, he may have already
made up his mind to return to the east and abandon Suchet, since
it was at about this time that more disquieting information from
Baraguay d’Hilliers reached him by way of France.