

  [615] _Correspondance_, xxi. p. 213.

  [616] For a specimen, see the plate of coins in vol. ii, facing p.
  478.

The line of argument which Napoleon adopted with regard to this
proposed annexation is very curious. His directions to his Foreign
Minister, Champagny, run as follows[617]: ‘Herewith I send you back
the Spanish documents with six observations, which are to serve as
the base for negotiation. But it is important that you should broach
the matter gently. You must first state clearly what are my opinions
on the Convention of Bayonne [viz. that the Emperor regards his
guarantee of the integrity of Spain as out of date and cancelled].
Then speak of Portugal[618], and next of the expense that this
country [Spain] costs me. Then let the Spanish envoys have time to
reflect, and only after an interval of some days tell them that I
must have the left bank of the Ebro, as an indemnity for the money
and all else that Spain has cost me down to this hour. I think that,
as in all negotiations, we must not show ourselves too much in a
hurry.’ The mention of Portugal means that the Emperor contemplated
making his brother a present of the Lusitanian realm, where Spain
was hated only one degree less than France, as a compensation for
Catalonia and the rest. On the same morning that Mina found himself
a Frenchman, all the Ordenança of the Beira hills were to discover
that they were Castilians! Mad disregard of national feeling could go
no further.

  [617] Napoleon to Champagny, Sept. 9, 1810.

  [618] I cannot find anywhere any authority for Napier’s strange
  statement (iii. p. 261) that it was Almenara, and not Napoleon, who
  started the idea that Portugal should be exchanged for the Ebro
  Province. The nearest thing to it is that ‘M. d’Almenara déclare
  formellement qu’il ne consente à aucune cession de territoire
  espagnol, que cette compensation [Portugal] ne soit pas stipulée et
  garantie; mais comme il est dans l’intention formelle du roi de ne
  pas consentir à aucun démembrement, même avec une compensation plus
  avantageuse, il n’aurait jamais ratifié un pareil traité.’ Ducasse,
  _Correspondance_, vii. 190.

A letter to the French ambassador at Madrid explained at much greater
length the Emperor’s reasons for breaking the oath that he had sworn
to his brother at Bayonne, when he named him King of Spain. ‘When
the promise was made, His Majesty had supposed that he had rallied
to his cause the majority of the Spanish nation. This has proved not
to be the case: the whole people took arms, the new king had to fly
from Madrid, and was only restored by French bayonets. Since then he
has hardly rallied a recruit to his cause; it is not the King’s own
levies that have fought the rebels: it is the 400,000 French sent
across the Pyrenees who have conquered every province. Therefore
all these regions belong not to the King, but to the Emperor, by
plain right of conquest. He intends, for this reason, to regard the
Treaty of Bayonne as null; it has never been ratified by the Spanish
nation. One only chance remains to the King: let him prevail upon
the newly-assembled Cortes at Cadiz to acknowledge him as their
sovereign, and to break with England. If that can be done, the
Emperor may revert to his first intentions, and ratify the Treaty of
Bayonne, except that he must insist on a “rectification of frontiers
sufficient to give him certain indispensable positions”’--presumably
San Sebastian, Pampeluna, Figueras, Rosas, &c.[619]