

  [612] See Miot de Melito’s Diary, Sept. 8, 1810.

  [613] Joseph to Napoleon, Aug. 25, 1810. Ducasse, vii. 321, and
  ibid., p. 332 of Sept. 12.

The summary of his complaints, containing a declaration that he
wished to surrender his crown to the Emperor, was drawn up as the
autumn drew near; it deserves a record; it is absolutely reasonable,
and confines itself to hard facts. ‘Since Your Majesty withdraws
Andalusia from my sphere of command, and orders that the revenues of
that province should be devoted exclusively to military expenses, I
have no choice left but to throw up the game. In the actual state
of affairs in Spain the general who commands each province is a
king therein. The whole revenues of the province will never suffice
to keep him; for what he calls his “absolute necessities” have
never been formally stated, and as the revenues rise he augments
his “necessities.” Hence it results that any province under the
command of a general is useless for my budget. From Andalusia alone
I hoped to get a certain surplus, after all military expenses had
been paid. But its command is given over to a general who would
never recognize my authority; and with the command, he gets the
administrative and governmental rights. Thus I have been stripped of
the only region which could have given me a sufficient maintenance.
I am reduced to Madrid [i.e. New Castile], which yields 800,000
francs per mensem, while the indispensable expenses of the central
government amount to 4,000,000 francs per mensem. I have around me
the wrecks of what was once a great national administration, with
a guard, the dépôts and hospital of the army, a garrison, a royal
household, a ministry, a council of state, and the refugees from
the rebel provinces. This state of affairs could not endure for two
months longer, even if my honour, and the consciousness of what is
due to me, would allow me to remain in this humiliating position.
Since the Army of Andalusia has been taken from me, what am I? The
manager of the hospitals and magazines of Madrid, the head jailer of
the central dépôt of prisoners!’ Joseph then states his conditions.
If he is allowed (1) to have a real control over the whole army;
(2) to send back to France officers, of whatever rank, notoriously
guilty of maladministration; (3) to reassure his Spanish partisans
as to rumours current concerning his own forced abdication and the
dismemberment of the monarchy; (4) to issue what proclamations
he pleases to his subjects, without being placed under a sort of
censorship, he will retain his crown, and pledge himself to reduce
all Spain, and ‘make the country as profitable to the interests
of France as it is now detrimental.’ If not, he must consider the
question of retiring across the Pyrenees and surrendering his
crown[614].

  [614] Joseph to Napoleon, Aug. 9, Ducasse, vii. 307.

Napoleon could not give any such promises, and for good reasons:
he rightly distrusted his brother’s military ability, and knew
that--whatever was the title given to Joseph--men like Soult or
Masséna would disregard his orders. Apparently he considered that a
conflict of authorities in Spain, such as had been existing for the
last six months, was at least better than the concentration of power
in the hands of one indifferent commander-in-chief. It is doubtful
whether he did not err in his conclusion. Almost anything was better
than the existing anarchy, tempered by orders, six weeks late, from
Paris. But a second, and a more fatal, objection to granting Joseph’s
conditions was that the ‘rumours current concerning the dismemberment
of the Spanish monarchy’ were absolutely true. Napoleon was at
this moment at the very height of his wild craze for adding alien
and heterogeneous provinces to the French Empire, in the supposed
interest of the Continental System. It was in 1810 that he declared
Holland and the Valais, Hamburg and Bremen, Oldenburg and Dalmatia,
integral parts of his dominions. And Northern Spain was destined to
suffer the same fate. Mina and Rovira, Eroles and Manso, were to
wake some morning to find themselves French subjects! On October 12
the Emperor wrote to Berthier: ‘You will inform General Caffarelli,
in strict confidence, that my intention is that Biscay shall be
united to France. He must not speak of this intention, but he must
act with full knowledge of it. Make the same private communication to
General Reille about Navarre[615].’ Aragon, or at least the portion
of it north of the Ebro, and Catalonia were to suffer the same fate.
Already justice was administered there in the name of the Emperor,
not in that of the King of Spain, and a coinage was being struck at
Barcelona which no longer bore the name of ‘Joseph Napoleon King of
Spain and the Indies[616].’