

  [636] See Wellington to Henry Wellesley, Nov. 4, 1810:--‘If the
  Princess of the Brazils be the person appointed regent, the Court
  will be inundated with intriguers of all nations, and attended by
  other evils.’

The second dynastic scheme which was running its course at this time
was engineered by another branch of the Spanish royal house. The
restless and unscrupulous Queen Caroline of Sicily could not forget
that if Carlotta of Portugal was the nearest relative of the captive
King, yet her husband Ferdinand was his nearest male kinsman, save
the princes in Napoleon’s hands. She availed herself of this fact
to urge that one of her children would be a very suitable person to
be entrusted with power in Spain, and thought of her younger son
Prince Leopold as a possible candidate for the Regency. But since he
had not the necessary reputation or age, the Queen soon fell back
upon her son-in-law Louis Philippe, Duke of Orleans, the exiled son
of the infamous Philippe Égalité. He had not only a good military
record for his services at Jemappes and elsewhere in the early
Belgian campaigns, but was universally known as a man of ability.
Unfortunately, he had fought on the Republican side in 1792--a thing
hard to forget, and certain to cause suspicion: and his ability was
always displayed for purposes of self-interest, and savoured of
unscrupulousness.

Nevertheless, Orleans had already made overtures to the old Regency
in the spring of 1810, and had been promised by them a command on the
borders of Catalonia. They had failed to keep the pledge, and he now
appeared at Cadiz, and wished to present himself before the Cortes
and plead his cause. He took small profit thereby, for the assembly
regarded him and his relatives as suspicious persons, refused to
give him an audience when he presented himself before its doors, and
politely but firmly insisted that he should return to Sicily in a
few days--an order which he was forced to obey. ‘Whether it was that
he was a Frenchman, though a Bourbon, or whether it was that he had
once been a Republican, though he had ceased to be one, or whether
it was that he was a prince of the royal house, and therefore
distasteful to the newly-assembled Cortes, who were secretly inclined
to democratic views, the majority viewed him with disfavour[637].’ On
October 3 he set sail for Palermo.

  [637] See Galiano, quoted by Arteche, ix. 76.

At the end of 1810 we leave the Cortes still indulging in fiery
constitutional debates, still busy in asserting its own supreme
power, and curbing many attempts at self-assertion in the new Regency
which it had created. With the English government it was not on the
best of terms: though it decreed the erection of a statue to George
III as the friend and deliverer of Spain--a monument which (it need
hardly be said) was never erected--it was very slow to seek or
follow the advice of the allied power. It clamoured for subsidies,
but refused the opening of the South American trade--the only return
that could be given for them. Money in hard gold or silver Great
Britain could no longer supply--for the years 1810-11 were those
when the paper-issues of the Bank were our sole currency; cash had
almost disappeared, and could only be procured by offering six pounds
or more in notes for five guineas. But the Spaniards did not want
paper, but gifts or loans in gold or silver. They got no more of
the precious metals--Great Britain had none to spare, and found it
almost impossible even to procure dollars to pay Wellington’s army in
Portugal. All that was given after 1809 was arms and munitions of war.