

English observers in the Peninsula were not well pleased with the
first months of the rule of the Cortes. ‘The natural course of
all popular assemblies,’ wrote Wellington to his brother, Henry
Wellesley, now minister at Cadiz, ‘and of the Spanish Cortes among
others, is to adopt democratic principles, and to vest all the
powers of the State in their own body. This assembly must take care
that they do not run in that tempting course, as the wishes of the
nation are decidedly for monarchy. Inclination to any other form of
government would immediately deprive them of the confidence of the
people, and they would become a worse government, and more impotent,
because more numerous, than the old Central Junta.’ A few weeks later
he doubted whether even a Regency under Carlotta of Portugal, with
all its disadvantages, would not be better than mere democracy[638].

  [638] Wellington to Henry Wellesley, from Cartaxo, Nov. 21, 1810.

Vaughan, on the spot at Cadiz, gave quite a different view of the
situation, but one equally unfavourable to the Cortes as a governing
power. ‘It is full of priests, who (united with the Catalans) are
for preserving the old routine, and adverse to everything that can
give energy and vigour to the operation of government. Fanaticism
and personal interest direct their opinions.... Be assured that the
Cortes is, as at present constituted, anything but revolutionary or
Jacobinical.... If there is not soon some new spirit infused into it,
it will become an overgrown Junta, meddling with every paltry detail
of police, and neglecting the safety of the country--and the Regency
will be content to reign (very badly) over Cadiz and the Isla[639].’

  [639] Charles Vaughan to Charles Stuart, Feb. 27, 1811.

There was much truth in both these verdicts, though Vaughan
underrated the force of self-interest in driving a popular assembly
to claim all power for itself, while Wellington underrated the
dead-weight of clerical conservatism, which was the restraint upon
that tendency. Both were right in asserting that, whatever the Cortes
might be, the mass of the nation had no wish to set out on the path
of Jacobinism. They both perceived the danger that the Cortes might
turn itself into a constitutional debating society, and at the same
time prevent any really efficient executive from being established.
Such was its actual fate. Except that Spain now possessed a
governing authority which, with all its faults, had infinitely more
pretension to claim a legal mandate from the people than any of
its predecessors, the situation was not greatly changed. From the
military point of view, as we shall see in the next volume, the
aspect of the Peninsula was in no degree improved. The same blunders
that had marked the administration of the old Provincial Juntas, of
the Supreme Central Junta, and of the first Regency, continued to
exhibit themselves under the rule of the Cortes.




APPENDICES


I

THE SPANISH FORCES AT THE SIEGE OF GERONA