

  [633] ‘Que la nación era soberana _con el rey_, desde luego prestaría
  el juramento pedido. Pero si se entendía que la nación era soberana
  _sin el rey_, y soberana de su mismo soberano, nunca se sometería á
  tal doctrina.’ See more of his argument in Toreno, ii. 225.

  [634] Compare Toreno’s insinuation against the Regent Lardizabal (ii.
  213), to whom he ascribes a definite plot, with Arteche’s defence and
  eulogy of the late Regency, ix. 109-11.

Between the time of the first assembly of the Cortes and the change
in the Regency an infinite number of subjects had been dealt with.
The Liberal majority, led by Agustin Argüelles, had decreed liberty
of the Press in all political discussions, but very illogically
refused it for discussions on matters of religion. They had abolished
all feudal rights and privileges of nobility. They passed a decree
of amnesty for all rebels in America who should lay down their
arms, and proposed many projects for improving the position of the
Colonies, few of which, unfortunately, happened to bear any relation
to the chief grievances under which the South Americans conceived
themselves to be labouring. The insurrection still went on, and,
though the mother country was placed in such a desperate condition,
troops were actually withdrawn from the Murcian army to sail with
General Elio, who was directed to restore order at Buenos Ayres and
in the provinces of the Rio de la Plata. Discussions continued,
with much heat and a considerable amount of eloquence, on many
other points, during the early days of the Junta. The subjects of
debate were generally constitutional, occasionally financial. It was
worthy to be observed that the two topics on which all the deputies
rallied together were the question of opposition to the French, and
the question of the defence of their own sovereign rights. Even the
majority of the _Serviles_ would join with the Liberals whenever any
doubt was raised with regard to the right of the Cortes to arrogate
to itself the title of Majesty or the attributes of supreme power.
When, for example, the Bishop of Orense refused to take the oath of
obedience, several clericals of most reactionary views took part
against him; and when a few weeks later the Marqués del Palacio,
named as a deputy-regent during the absence of Blake, also displayed
reluctance to swear to the same form on similar grounds, he did not
receive the report that he had expected from the reactionaries.
Indeed, he was put under arrest for some time, without, as it seems,
any attempt to protect him being made by the _Serviles_. Like the
Bishop of Orense, he ended by swallowing his scruples and accepting
the prescribed formula[635].

  [635] Toreno, ii. pp. 222-3.

A similar desire to assert its own absolute supremacy impelled the
Cortes to refuse to countenance two dynastic intrigues which came
from different quarters. The eldest daughter of Charles IV, Carlotta,
Princess of the Brazils and wife of the Regent João of Portugal,
was the nearest of kin to Ferdinand VII who had escaped Napoleon’s
claws in 1808. She was of opinion that she had a good right to
expect the Regency during her brother’s captivity at Valençay, and
her agents repeatedly urged her claims, both during the days of the
first Regency and after the Cortes had assembled. Sousa-Holstein,
the Portuguese ambassador, naturally lent them his aid, and she
had Spanish partisans, though few of them were persons of good
reputation. Yet, by constant persuasion and promises, Carlotta’s
representatives actually succeeded in inducing great numbers of the
deputies to pledge themselves to push her interests. It is said
that, at one time or another, a full half of the members had given
the intriguers encouragement. But to do this, and to make a formal
attempt to pass a decree conferring the Regency on her, were very
different things. When overt action was urged by her agents, or their
partisans in the Cortes, nothing came of the attempt. The assembly
was naturally unwilling to surrender its own sovereignty, and to
introduce a court and its intrigues into Cadiz. It must be added
that João of Portugal had no liking for his wife’s scheme, that
Wellington saw its disadvantages[636], and that the great bulk of
the Spaniards would have resented the whole affair, as a Portuguese
intrigue, if it had ever been laid before the nation as a definite
proposal.