---
source_url: "https://cdn.nationalarchives.gov.uk/documents/education/resistance-and-rebellion.pdf"
final_url: "https://cdn.nationalarchives.gov.uk/documents/education/resistance-and-rebellion.pdf"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "52b66f7776c51b9b56012a5644cd6ee8ee0fa728c807b045054f90f0a5f878be"
title: "Resistance and Rebellion in the Caribbean"
content_kind: "page_text"
---


The National Archives Education 
Service
Resistance and Rebellion 
in the Caribbean
Preparation materials for 
videoconference/virtual classroom 
(KS3)
CO700/Jamaica 24
Resistance & Rebellion in the Caribbean Preparation materials for videoconference/virtual classroom (KS3)
2
Teacher’s notes 3
Background Information: 4
Document 1 - CO 116/143: 5
Extract from a Punishment Record Book, Vryheid Plantation, Guyana, 1826-27.
Document 2 - CO 7/1: 6
Advert from The Barbados Mercury, looking for Billy a runaway slave, 2 December 1786.
Document 3 - CO700/Jamaica 24: 7
Map showing 1500 acres of Jamaica, given to the Maroons in 1739.
Document 4 - CO 1/53 f 266: 8
Letter found in a Bush in Barbados, 1683.
Transcript 4 - CO 1/53 f 266: 8
Worksheet: Virtual classroom/Videoconference Document 
Analysis: 9
Contents
Resistance & Rebellion in the Caribbean Preparation materials for videoconference/virtual classroom (KS3)
3
This pack of documents and transcripts will allow you to prepare your students for the videoconference/ 
virtual classroom session. It is vital that all students complete the preparatory work beforehand, so that they 
are fully prepared for the session. 
This session will investigate resistance and rebellion in the Caribbean. Through close analysis of the 
documents held at The National Archives, students will identify different types of resistance and their impact 
on both the enslaved Africans and the system of slavery itself. 
Teacher Preparation 
In preparation for this session, students will need to read through Document 1 (CO 116/143) and answer the 
following questions:
1. What type of document is it, and when was it produced?
2. Can you work out any of the words/ headings on the document?
3. Who created it and why?
Additional teacher’s notes for Videoconference ONLY:
In preparation for your videoconference, please divide the class into three groups. During the session, the 
Education Officer will ask each group to begin analysing a document (from documents 2-4). Please distribute 
the following documents to each group during the videoconference:
o Group 1: Runaways. Document 2 (CO 7/1)
o Group 2: The Maroons. Document 3 (CO700/Jamaica 24)
o Group 3: Plots and Rebellion. Document 4 (CO 1/53 f 266)
To help students analyse the documents, questions are provided on the Videoconference Document Analysis 
worksheet in this pack. 
Teacher’s notes
Resistance & Rebellion in the Caribbean Preparation materials for videoconference/virtual classroom (KS3)
4
Resistance and Rebellion in the Caribbean 
In the Caribbean, the enslaved workers resisted their conditions by finding ways to keep a sense of identity 
that helped them to survive the slavery system. They also continually struggled for their rights and liberties 
against the colonial authorities, developing strategies of resistance and survival as a response to the 
conditions they faced. Historians have discovered that resistance took place from the 17th century until 
emancipation in 1838, which means there was hardly a generation of enslaved people that did not confront 
their enslavers, often in armed struggle in their pursuit for freedom. 
Resistance took many different forms. There was day to day resistance, not designed to overthrow the slavery 
system but to make it less efficient. Examples of this would be killing livestock or pretending to be ill so work 
took longer to be completed. Another form was cultural resistance- maintaining one’s cultural identity by 
rejecting the European cultural practices and practicing African ones in secret. Enslaved workers would 
practice obeah, a belief system that involved practices that were African in its origins. Some enslaved workers 
maintained the languages of the regions of Africa from which they came, which was passed down and spoken 
in secret. Many enslaved workers committed suicide rather than lived as slaves. Armed revolt, plots of armed 
revolt and marronage was the most serious form of resistance. Marronage involved large numbers of enslaved 
workers escaping plantations and forming communities in colonies with forested and mountainous areas. 
Maroons were a massive concern to the colonial authorities, unable to find them or to remove them, they 
made a number of treaties with them not to disturb the plantations or encourage more fugitives to join them. 
Rebellions happened for different reasons. Firstly, enslaved workers were driven to rebel because of the 
extremely cruel laws established by the colonial authorities to keep them under control, and the brutal 
punishments they meted out when these laws were broken. Secondly, when the authorities did not appear to 
be in control, the enslaved workers would take advantage. The rebellion in St Dominque, which eventually led 
to the establishment of Haiti, the first black republic outside of Africa, is an example of this. The enslaved 
workers there took advantage of the infighting among the planters over whether the coloured (mixed 
heritage) population should have equal rights under the new laws of the French Republic. Thirdly the 
frustration of slave expectations led to three of the most serious rebellions in the British Caribbean – Barbados 
in 1816; Demerara in 1823 and Jamaica in 1831-32. All three of these uprisings occurred in part because of 
the enslaved awareness of abolitionist pressure and policies created by the government in London to improve 
the conditions of the enslaved. In each case, there was an assumption that emancipation had been granted 
and was being withheld by the colonial authorities. It was decided that if freedom would not be given, then it 
would be taken.
Background Information
Resistance & Rebellion in the Caribbean Preparation materials for videoconference/virtual classroom (KS3)
5
Extract from a Punishment Record Book, Vryheid Plantation, Guyana, 1826-27
Document: CO 116/143
Resistance & Rebellion in the Caribbean Preparation materials for videoconference/virtual classroom (KS3)
6
Advert from The Barbados Mercury, looking for Billy a runaway slave, 2 December 1786
Document: CO 7/1
Resistance & Rebellion in the Caribbean Preparation materials for videoconference/virtual classroom (KS3)
7
Map showing 1500 acres of Jamaica, given to the Maroons in 1739.
Document: CO 116/143
Resistance & Rebellion in the Caribbean Preparation materials for videoconference/virtual classroom (KS3)
8
Letter found in a Bush in Barbados, 1683
Transcript
“Brothers; Our design is discovered but not be disheartened. Let us begin the next Sunday about Midnight, doe 
not let us minde the Patrol or Companyes, for I understand Some of our Brothers are in hold, and if wee doe 
not begin we Shall all be brought in trouble, and withal Lose our lives; if not then, Sometime next weeke, for 
wee will have it for wee have done for our Brothers here, Methinkes long the time, for wee have most of all 
Countrys of our Side Therefore be not afraid”
29th November 1683
Document: CO 1/53 f 266
Resistance & Rebellion in the Caribbean Preparation materials for videoconference/virtual classroom (KS3)
9
In your groups, examine your document and answer the following questions:
Group 1: Runaways 
Advert from The Barbados Mercury, looking for Billy a runaway slave, 2 December 1786 (CO 7/1)
1. For what reason/reasons do you think Billy has run away?
2. Some runaways tried to pass themselves off as free people, Underline two reasons why Billy might 
have an advantage compared to other runaways? 
3. Five pounds is a high reward. Why do you think Sarah Bradford cares if he is returned? 
4. What do you think Billy’s punishment might be if he is found? 
5. Why was running away an important form of resistance? 
Group 2: Maroons 
Map showing 1500 acres of Jamaica, given to the Maroons in 1739 (CO700/Jamaica 24)
1. Circle the area of land inside the red line. Why do you think the Maroons have chosen to settle in this 
area? 
2. The land has been given to the Maroons as part of a deal with the British. What do you think the 
Maroons have promised in return? 
3. What do you think happened to the Maroons who broke the deal? 
4. Jamaica had the biggest number of slave revolts of all the Caribbean Islands, look at the map why do 
you think this was? 
5. Why was joining the Maroons an important form of resistance? 