---
source_url: "https://www.napoleon.org/en/history-of-the-two-empires/articles/napoleon-and-the-pope-from-the-concordat-to-the-excommunication/"
final_url: "https://www.napoleon.org/en/history-of-the-two-empires/articles/napoleon-and-the-pope-from-the-concordat-to-the-excommunication/"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "092f9791ccef0e3d396cd2e769dd72c98ab3fd6e7f23f9d53c1c19be4912c14d"
title: "Napoleon and the Pope: from the Concordat to the Excommunication - napoleon.org"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

Napoleon and the Pope: from the Concordat to the Excommunication - napoleon.org

- Go to menu
- Go to content
- Go to search

# Napoleon and the Pope: from the Concordat to the Excommunication

Author(s) : HICKS Peter

Share it

It should have been a marriage made in heaven. One of Napoleon’s first acts as consul was to bring religion back to France after the atheistic years of the Revolution. Pius VII, the somewhat progressive pope, saw the concordat of July 1801 as the presage of the great return. But the Organic articles (not part of the Concordat negotiations and added to the agreement without Pius’ knowledge) left the Curia with the feeling that they had been duped.1 The coronation in 1804 was attempt by Pius to win back the lost ground and also to re-initialise the relationship. But in the end, Pius found himself negotiating in the void. He returned to Rome empty-handed. From then on, Franco-Vatican relations slowly deteriorated. And for both men, it was the other’s fault.

Jacques-Louis David, Napoleon crowning himself in the presence of the seated pope(study for the "Sacre"), RMN-Grand Palais musée du Louvre Thierry Le Mage

In 1805, Pius was deeply exasperated by French incursion on Papal territory. Troops under Gouvion St-Cyr retreating from Calabria had been sent to occupy Ancona (a strategic port on the east coast of Italy) with the aim of preventing a British landing there during the Austerlitz campaign. On 13 November 1805, Pius (certainly aware of the result at Ulm but also possibly au fait of Trafalgar)2 was moved to write a letter of remonstrance to Napoleon. His strongly worded complaint railed at the occupation of Ancona, demanding evacuation of French troops and bemoaned Napoleon’s unwillingness to offer a quid pro quo for all the papal goodwill shown up to that date (notably Pius’s agreement to come to Paris for the coronation and consecration). Napoleon did not reply immediately. He was after all in the thick of things at Austerlitz. He finally wrote to Pius from Munich on 7 January 1806, strong after the treaty of Pressburg.3 He was angry with what he saw as the Vatican consorting with Britain and Russia, allowing agents of those two countries to operate freely in the Papal States. He called the Pope’s letter a stab in the back. Pius, he said, had given the impression that he thought Napoleon and the Empire were lost (the Emperor possibly suspected that the Pontiff knew about the naval defeat). Napoleon went on to berate the Pope for his unaccommodating attitude to France and claimed the moral and religious high ground as the ‘Church’s eldest son’.4 The French Emperor also wrote to Cardinal Fesch on the same day calling the P’ope’s letter ‘ridiculous and senseless’ and encouraging his uncle and French ambassador to the Holy See to communicate his letter to the Vatican. This upping of the diplomatic ante brought about a conciliatory reply from the Pope (dated 29 January), but the latter did not renounce his aim of ensuring French evacuation of Ancona; and he even went so far as to demand that France hand over Venice to the Vatican.5 This polite intransigence led Napoleon to an even stronger reply, dated 13 February.6 He told the Pontiff in no uncertain terms that though the Holy Father may be spiritual head of the Church, political matters and notably Italian matters were under Napoleon’s control. In a remark censored by the editors of Napoleon’s correspondence during the Second Empire, Napoleon made clear his vision of the political/spiritual relationship between France and the Papacy: “Your Holiness is sovereign in Rome, his relations with me are the same as those your predecessors with Charlemagne. You are sovereign in Rome, but I am its Emperor.” He exhorted the Holy Father to put aside dealings with “heretical” Britain and “extra-ecclesial” Russia, which could not protect the Holy See nor harm it. The French Emperor furthermore demanded that the Pope expel any Sardinian, British, Russian or Swedish agents living in the Papal States. As he had done a month earlier, Napoleon then wrote a parallel letter to his ambassador, Fesch, dated the following day.7 In this he dictated the famous threat to the Vatican, namely: “Tell them that I have my eyes open. That I am only fooled inasmuch as I let myself be fooled. That I am Charlemagne, the sword of the Church and their Emperor. And that I should be treated as such. […] I have briefly laid out my intentions. If he does not reply, I shall reduce him to the condition of his predecessors before Charlemagne.”8 Pius’s answer (dated 21 March 1806) was serene: “I reply with apostolic frankness that the Holy Father […] does not recognise and has never recognised, in his states, any power superior to his own, and that no emperor has any rights over Rome”. The institution of the Imperial catechism in the same month did nothing to defuse the conflict. Franco-Vatican relations had reached stalemate. And yet Napoleon could not do without the Catholic church. Indeed he was all too aware of what she brought him in terms of internal politics. As he noted in 1806: “Catholic priests are a great help; they were the reason why conscription this year worked much better than in previous years… No other state body speaks as well as they do regarding the government.”9