

The conflict was to escalate seriously over the following two years with Napoleon gradually appropriating Papal lands. The pressure on Pius was increased to such an extent that at the beginning of 1808, he was forced to react. But since he had no other weapons at his command, Pius fell back upon a policy of inertia; in other words he began refusing to invest certain bishops nominated by Napoleon. Irritated by this administrative blocking tactics, Napoleon for his part decided on force. On 2 February,1808, Rome was occupied by French troops and on 2 April 1808, Napoleon decreed that the papal territories of Urbino, Ancona, Macerata and Camerino were ‘irrevocably’ part of ‘my kingdom in Italy’. And finally in the following year (May 1809), Napoleon published the decree annexing Rome to the Grand Empire. With the Pontiff’s lands now seized, all that was left for the Holy Father was his spiritual domain and his palaces, initially the Quirinal and then Pontifical palaces, into the latter of which the pope finally retreated. And for a protest, the Pope took the drastic step of excommunication. But it was a timid excommunication. Whilst the bull Quum memoranda (in the night of 10-11 June 1809) excommunicated all those who “usurp, encourage, advise or perform” violation of the temporal sovereignty of the Holy See, Napoleon, the usurper, encourager and advisor, was not explicitly named. He did however understand. On hearing of the bull of excommunication Napoleon wrote an angry letter first to Murat (19 June 1809): “If the Pope preaches revolt, then you must arrest him”.10 He then wrote to Miollis and once again to Murat. In the first letter, the Emperor ordered the military governor of the city to lock up all those who infringed public law and order, even those in the Pope’s household, and in the second he wrote that Pope was mad and that he ought to be locked away. It is true that these letters are aggressive, but they do not amount to ordering the kidnapping of the Holy Father. But that was indeed the result. On the night of 5-6 July 1809, General Radet with a small force entered the Vatican with a mission to arrest Cardinal Pacca and kidnap the Pope.

Radet’s men took with them ropes, ladders, axes and some locksmiths, and they had bribed an ex-papal servant (he had been sacked for stealing) to guide them through the labyrinthine passageways of the Vatican palace. Once the Pope had turned out the light in his chamber (at about 2am), the papal guard stood down and French forces went into action. But it was not to go smoothly. Some of the ladders used by Radet’s men broke noisily, waking the guard and spoiling the element of surprise. What followed was complete confusion: a papal servant rang an alarm bell; a group of soldiers who had entered through a window let the main body of French troops into the palace; the Pope’s Swiss Guard abandoned the papal chambers; and soldiers began ransacking the palace. After a long while the Pope rose from his bed and went to his public audience chamber, accompanied by Cardinals Pacca and Despuig. Radet was then let into that room with his men and, after a brief conversation with the Pontiff, he led the Pope into captivity. When later asked how he felt arresting the Pope, Radet remarked that it had all been business as usual until he set eyes on the Holy Father. “At that moment,” he remarked, “my first communion flashed before my eyes!”11