                     INGRODUCGTION


                                  I

When a Great Power defends a small one in time of war the
Great Power often finds it hard not to meddle in the domestic
concerns of the small Power. At the same time the Great Power
is often less interested in these domestic concerns than the small
Power (or the later historian) imagines. The British occupation
of Sicily between 1806 and 1815 illustrates both these truths.
What is surprising is not that Britain interfered, but that her
Governments twice decided to interfere in full and deliberate
strength. The first attempt, in 1806, came to nothing. The
second, in 1811, the Government entrusted to Lord William
Bentinck to carry out as Minister to the Sicilian Court and
Commander-in-Chief in the Mediterranean. This time the con-
sequences were far beyond what anybody—Government or
envoy—had had in mind at first.
   At the end of 1805 the Court of Naples, for the second time
in seven years, abandoned their continental possessions to the
French and fled to Sicily. From then on British Governments
provided money, troops, and ships to keep the island—but for
Sardinia the only piece of Italian soil outside French control—in
friendly hands. For most of the next six years this was all they
cared for. It was a negative policy: the highest stakes lay else-
where. To people in Sicily, of course, things looked very
different, and in particular to the British agents there. A month’s
voyage separated them from home and left them mostly to
their own devices. The problems they faced were thorny and
seemed urgent. They distrusted the Court and the Court dis-
trusted them. As the years wore on relations became steadily
worse. By 1811, when the British Government made up its
mind to intervene, and stuck to its decision, a succession of
Ministers and Commanders had long been urging it to do so.
   What made this intervention notable was that it became
inextricably mixed with a crisis in the domestic politics of Sicily.
The internal struggle that led to the revolution of 1812 could
not have taken the course it did without British help; nor could
