                         INTRODUCTION                             3
  The policy of the central Government—it was the typical
enlightened absolutism of the time—was launched by the
Viceroy Caracciolo in the 1780's; his successors then carried it
forward with more or less determination.
   Caracciolo tried to restrict the extremely wide powers of
alienation and succession which the barons had enjoyed ever
since the period of feudal anarchy under the Aragonese kings;
he investigated dubious titles; he attacked feudal jurisdictions;
and above all he attempted to deprive the barons of their virtual
freedom from taxation. All these measures constituted the first
serious threat to the aristocracy as the ruling class, and led to
a constitutional conflict between Crown and Parliament.* The
conflict never came to a head in the 1780’s and 90’s, because the
Crown chose to yield or compromise; but it was only put off;
and meanwhile Parliament had begun to appear, for the first
time, as the focus of baronial resistance to the Crown. This
Parliament, the only one of its kind in Italy, had until then been
no more than an Estates General, meeting once every four years
to vote supply—an automatic process—and present petitions.
But now its one real power, that of distributing taxation—a
power of the greatest importance to the barons—had been
challenged. From then on its members gradually became better
aware of their constitutional rights than they had ever been
while those rights were still unquestioned.”
   At the same time the barons were beginning to notice a more
radical threat to their predominance. It has lately been pointed
out* that the growth of absentee landlordship in the 18th century
was accompanied by a sharp rise in prices: so that while the
barons’ expenditure increased, the real value of the fixed rents
they drew from their estates tended to fall. In other words, the
barons, while they gradually surrendered to intermediaries their
functions as feudal landlords, began to lose the benefits which
those functions had once brought them. The greatest families
were often unable to avoid huge burdens of debt and mortgages;
some even went bankrupt. Hence the restrictions which the
feudal system still placed on the alienation of lands began to
appear burdensome, and the system itself to lose its raison d étre.
This helps to explain why, in 1812, the barons’ triumphant
assertion of the constitutional rights of Parliament went together
