2                  BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
Britain have intervened as she did had that struggle not provided
both occasion and warrant.
   The British Government, which thought it was trying to
achieve immediate military ends, found itself forwarding a
liberal revolution in Sicily and plans for independence and unity
in continental Italy. This happened not merely because the chief
agent, Bentinck, behaved as he did, but because (as so often
before and since) diplomatic and domestic affairs could not be
kept separate: they depended and acted on one another.
   What happened in Sicily to help along this interplay was the
rise of a movement of resistance to royal power which in the
end became the ‘English party’. But what was this movement?
It has not even an accepted name: the ‘patriotic’ movement, a
name used at the time, must do as well as any. Some historians
have seen in it a straightforward liberal opposition to despotism,
some (more recently) the embodiment of class privilege and
insular tradition. But this is too simple. For it was their very
particularism that led the more advanced patriots to attempt a
reform, along English lines, of the country’s institutions; and if
they had succeeded they would have ended by jettisoning many
of the privileges which their movement as a whole had begun
by defending. But although this attempt at making reform
grow from an enduring root of conservatism had (not quite by
chance) an affinity with English practice, it did not work in
Sicily: the outcome was not a resolution but a lasting contra-
diction which the movement was never able to get over.
   The movement began and ended as the affair of a small
number of nobles and their dependents, mostly lawyers and
clerics. Useless to look for political consciousness or strength
elsewhere;   useless, too, in a country where land-ownership
conferred the highest prestige and tended to draw what wealth
there was away from industry or trade, to look for a middle
class apart from these people and from a number of landlords’
agents or chief tenants.* This aristocracy faced two dangers. One
was external—the inroads of a monarchy bent on centralisation
and authoritarian reform; the other internal—the gradual worsen-
ing of the barons’ own economic position. The one scratched
the juridical shell of Sicilian feudalism; the other threatened to
eat it away from within.
