Io                    BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
The Court’s improvidence and ambiguity, Howick thought,
had already lost Naples; if they were allowed to go on as before
they might lose Sicily as well. But he and Grenville, it seems,
also wanted to get value for money during the war and to secure
Sicily as a useful naval and trading station in peace-time. What
all this might have led to we cannot tell: the necessary instruc-
tions were drawn up, but the Talents fell just in time to stop
them from being sent out.”
     Canning, when he came to deal with Sicily, made no demands
on the Court beyond vague ones for their confidence and co-
operation. Later on he did insist—as Howick had—that Britain
could not guarantee the return of Naples at a peace, though she
would do her best. He also asked that the Sicilian army should
come under the British Commander if the island was attacked;
but he seems not to have been particularly worried about this,
for the question still stood unresolved when he left office.”
Otherwise Canning’s Sicilian policy, so far as he had one, was
conciliatory; he wished to set at rest any suspicion the Court
might entertain of England’s abandoning Sicily or meddling in
her internal affairs. So far, indeed, was Canning from thinking
of the British subsidy as a possible means of coercion that when
a new treaty raised it to £400,000 a year he removed its payment
from the hands of the British Minister at Palermo to those of
the Sicilian Ambassador in London—and this on no more urgent
grounds than that whoever paid it out bore the loss on the
exchange.*
     The fact was that the strategic situation had changed. In 1806,
after Maida, one could still think of using Sicily as a springboard
for an invasion of Italy. In 1807, after the Peace of Tilsit, that
hope was, for the time being, as good as lost. Sicily was now of
little positive importance. The British Government accordingly
treated the garrison as a reserve which might be drawn upon
for service elsewhere, and whose task was the merely negative
one of holding the place.*
   As for Howick’s envoy to Palermo, William Drummond,
he had approved and even urged ‘measures which would have in
fact rendered Sicily a province of Great Britain’, and had at
first gone so far as to suspend the subsidy. But he changed his
mind even before he knew of Howick’s fall. Drummond had
