8                   BENTINCK      AND   SICILY
tions on the same subject; let one person instruct him, he begged,
else ‘que peut faire votre dévoué serviteur?”
  Ferdinand, or ‘Nasone’, with his great gawky body, his
plebeian manners, his superstitious, diffident mind and his bursts
of Neapolitan bonhomie—here was (the British representatives
who dealt with him agreed) a man who might be trusted to act
sensibly and loyally if only he was not bedevilled by intrigue.
And if he took no more than a momentary interest in affairs,
that was mere weakness and indolence. Certainly the King
preferred to lead a simple life at one of his country villas, hunting
or tunny-fishing. But his ‘indolence’ was rather a propensity
for leaving others to do the dirty work of government and take
the consequences. He always tried not to commit himself on
important issues, and if he had to, he preferred to do so through
members of his family or through subordinates who might
later be repudiated. He could on occasion prove a master of
delaying tactics in defence of his prerogative; and when he did
take a hand in affairs he shewed a good deal of native shrewdness
and common sense.”
   His wife, Maria Carolina, then in her fifties, had given birth
to seventeen children, and the vicissitudes of her life had affected
her health and mind, never very stable at the best of times.
Bentinck was not far wrong in his impression ‘that with ex-
ceeding good abilities, she probably never had any common
sense and that her mind enfeebled by age, by vast quantities of
opium and the operation of violent passions has reached a state
little short of insanity’. She talked volubly and endlessly; she
poured out her lamentations in innumerable letters whose
breakneck style outran spelling, punctuation, syntax, and often
sense. Occasionally she struck the dignified attitude of the
daughter of Maria Theresa; but she generally lived at an extreme
pitch of exultation or—more often—of despair; she saw treach-
ery on every side; she would, she knew, perish at the block like
her sister Marie-Antoinette. And since all opposition seemed to
her disloyal, she surrounded herself with compliant French
émigrés, Neapolitan adventurers, spies and dubious characters.*
Through them she directed a traffic of intrigue and espionage
which cost much but produced little; and as she lavished money
on this and on charity she was perpetually insolvent. Her one
