I2                  BENTINCK      AND   SICILY

From time to time alarming reports came in of the Queen’s
intrigues with one or other of the Powers: Russia, or Austria,
or even France or Murat. Her object was always the same: to
restore her family to Naples by some arrangement, if necessary
by the surrender of Sicily. These reports, though convincing,
did not amount to proof; they grew still more alarming after
the Austro-French     alliance,   for was   not   Marie-Louise   the
Queen’s granddaughter? But protests only drew counter-protes-
tations of loyalty from the King and Circello, and furious re-
criminations from the Queen.”
  Drummond had thought the Queen a mere dupe of the
French faction, and Amherst would not at first believe the re-
ports. But the military had no such scruples. As early as 1807
Sir John Moore—then second-in-command—had urged that the
Queen should be expelled and Sicily annexed to the British
Empire. Even Sir John Stuart (commander 1808-1811), though
at first more favourably disposed towards the Court, eventually
lost his temper and blurted out in public: ‘as for the King, his
cause is desperate; he has lost one kingdom, and he must lose
the other. There is no alternative for England but to take Sicily
for herself, or to abandon it altogether.” To Amherst he wrote
that “we may (as eventually we must do) dictate to the Govern-
ment its measures as well as its policy’. The staff officers at the
Messina headquarters, long convinced of the Court’s treachery,
derided Amherst and Stuart as fatuously blind to the perils that
threatened them, and clamoured for drastic action.*
   This state of anxiety and frustration might perhaps have gone
on indefinitely, had present danger not broken in on it. In May
1810 Murat came down to the Straits of Messina to attempt an
invasion. But not only did the Court profess a ‘strange incre-
dulity’ as to the danger; not only did they persist in refusing
the united command: they failed, for all Amherst’s remonstrances
throughout the summer, to provide a single soldier for the
defence of the Straits. Murat’s landing, when it came in Sep-
tember, was repulsed by British soldiers and by Sicilian peasants
armed with rifles, axes, and sticks.* Only with the greatest
difficulty did Amherst induce the Court to make even a verbal
stand, and to deny Murat’s published assertion that they awaited
him as a liberator. Fresh evidence of the Queen’s traffic with
