                        INTRODUCTION                              9
great desire was to recover Naples; she hated the Sicilians and
they her.* Very likely the Queen had less to do with bringing
about the critical state of affairs than her contemporaries be-
lieved; but she herself, by appearing to do so much, gave them
every reason to believe it.*
   Between these two poles of Court life swung the several
members of the Royal Family. Somewhere about the middle
stood the Hereditary Prince (later King Francis I), whose wari-
ness and submission kept him as inconspicuous before Bentinck’s
arrival as they were to make him unhappy afterwards; while
a curious outrider was Louis-Philippe, Duke of Orleans, who,
though Ferdinand’s son-in-law, was still a little suspect for his
antecedents. But he shewed signs of what he was to become
when interest and conviction led him to side with the British
and with his friend Belmonte. As for the man the British saw
most of, the Marquis of Circello (Foreign Secretary from 1806
to 1812), he had to put up with remonstrances against measures
he knew little about and had had no share in concerting. An
elderly, affable Neapolitan courtier of the old school, he com-
plained only on occasion of ‘all the tracasseries which really make
my life very hard’.* Neither he nor the British agents had a happy
time of it during the years of attrition between Great Power
and small Power. Maria Carolina, indeed, was not the only Red
Queen in Palermo.

                                II

The story of Anglo-Sicilian relations from 1806 onwards opens
with a bang and goes on for five years as an extended whimper.
It was after the failure of the 1806 peace talks with France that
the Ministry of All the Talents decided to intervene. At first
they tried to exhort without threatening; but very soon they
decided on measures which, had they been enforced, would have
brought about then what did not in fact take place until 1812.
   These measures would have turned Sicily into a virtual British
protectorate in peace as well as war. Howick, then Foreign
Secretary, proposed to remove the Queen’s Franco-Neapolitan
faction from the Government,      replace them by Sicilians, and
put the Sicilian army under the British Commander-in-Chief.
