                         INTRODUCTION                              II
lost his early hopes of the Sicilians’ fitness to regenerate their
country under British tutelage; but he came to believe that he
could by his own influence neutralise the Queen and lead the
King along the path of reform and cooperation. He therefore
resumed payment of the subsidy, and took up a conciliatory
attitude which, on the whole, he maintained until his recall in
1808, despite recurrent friction and disappointment.*
   Occasions for mutual ill-feeling were not wanting. The Court,
the Queen especially, wanted above all to recover Naples: not
only would the British Government not guarantee Naples, but
their generals had year after year to put off, for one reason or
another, the expedition on which the Court pinned their hopes.
And when an expedition was at last attempted in 1809, its failure
coincided with the disastrous defeat of Austria. The Court were
plunged into deeper dismay than ever. They could not be sure
that England would win the war; and if she did, they might
still be left stranded in Sicily at a peace, or worse, be deprived
even of that. The Queen remembered with horror how close
they had come to such a fate during the 1806 peace negotiations.”
Perhaps, too, she knew       something    of the drastic measures
Howick had planned: at any rate Lord Amherst, Drummond’s
successor, found it difficult to remove from her mind ‘an im-
pression to which she willingly recurs that it is still the intention
of the British to render themselves masters of Sicily’.* She filled
her letters with complaints of the English who ‘overpowered,
humiliated, ill-treated’ her, and their least request seemed to her
the beginning of subversion.*
   The British representatives had no less cause for anxiety.
Invasion was always a possibility. The British forces were often
depleted, and the subsidy seemed to bear no fruit whatever:
Drummond had hoped to see the Sicilian army put into fighting
shape, but three years later Amherst found it still ‘weak, ill-
provided... dissatisfied’, and he urged that since the Court
refused to grant a united command, the British Commander
should at least be given control of the subsidy.” The Queen’s
influence seemed the root of the trouble. She could not be kept out
of affairs, as Drummond found after a premature announcement
that she and her faction ‘ruled no longer, either in appearance
or in reality’.* But the worst was not her meddling and suspicion.
