                         INTRODUCTION                            13
Naples came tumbling in to confirm the general belief that the
Court were in league with Murat. Even the cautious Amherst
became at length convinced that ‘jealousy of the designs of
Great Britain predominates in the Queen’s mind over the hatred
she may entertain for Bonaparte’: it was high time, he declared,
‘to put an end to a system of duplicity and intrigue the existence
of which I have been almost the last person in Sicily to believe’.
He too now preached the need for interference. Britain, he said,
could no longer afford to leave her troops open to defection in
their rear: if the Queen continued to ‘separate her interests from
England’, then England had better “direct the concerns of those
who are themselves unequal to the task, and... administer by
force the remedies on which the salvation of this kingdom will
ultimately depend.”*
   Amherst had another ground for this opinion: the Sicilian
people, he thought, detested their government to the point of
welcoming foreign interference; if the English did not help
them they might turn to the French. How much stronger, then,
was the contrast that summer between the Court, who had
‘trifled and temporised, and sought to palliate ambiguous con-
duct by plausible but unsatisfactory explanation’, and the people,
who had ‘shewn themselves boldly and openly the foes of
France and the friends of England’. Their feeling for national
independence seemed to provide the only alliance England could
count on. One finds the official British paper appealing to it as
the surest means of rallying the population: Murat’s design on
Sicily, it said, was ‘to make her an integral part of the Kingdom of
Naples; as they have destroyed law and religion, so they wish
to do away with history as well.’ Sicily’s independence had been
recognised by every King since Roger, but ‘Signor Murat now
wishes .. . to humiliate the good Sicilians, and strip them of all
the rights and prerogatives they have ever enjoyed’. So when
the ‘patriots’ appealed to Amherst for help in defending these
same rights, he was much more inclined to listen to them than
before.
   What had happened was that a political crisis coincided with
the military emergency of 1810; and that the conflict between
Crown and Parliament now shifted decisively from merely
fiscal to political and institutional ground. But taxation remained
