                           INTRODUCTION                       I$
With Orleans’ support they approached the Queen and pro-
posed a bargain. The Court was to dismiss the Neapolitan
Ministers and put in Sicilians—among them, apparently, Bel-
monte and Cassaro. Orleans was to command the army. Parlia-
ment would meet again and effect a certain amount of consti-
tutional reform; for their part, Belmonte’s friends would make
sure that enough additional supply was passed to meet the
Government’s needs. The Queen hesitated and toyed for some
months with this proposal.* When, however, Parliament did
meet for a second session in August, the Court—it is not clear
from what motives—chose to secure the political defeat of
Belmonte’s party by sacrificing the hope of increased supply.
That is to say, they bought off Cassaro and a majority of the
Barons—first with a reshuffle which made Cassaro a Councillor
and two Sicilian nonentities Ministers; then with an undertaking
that no more donativi would be asked for. Belmonte and his
friends thus found themselves left out of the Government and
outvoted in Parliament: oddly enough, they voted for more
taxes than the Government majority.”
   At this point Belmonte’s party secretly appealed to Amherst
for his and England’s help in getting concessions from the
Crown. The old Sicilian Constitution, they told him, was in
theory enough to maintain Sicilian liberties; but in practice it
was constantly violated.
  What was needed was a reform of the Constitution inspired
by that of England, but not copied from it; a genuine Sicilian
administration; and the control of the Army by the British
Commander. Parliamentary demands, they foresaw, would
meet with no success. If England did not intervene, Sicily might
yet rebel and call in the French.
   Ambherst told them his instructions did not allow him to do
anything of the kind; he dissuaded them from taking action.
But—as he wrote to Wellesley privately—he agreed with them
entirely. The Court’s behaviour during the invasion scare made
intervention of some kind necessary. If that intervention were
not only to remove the Queen’s influence but to establish a
native administration and a free Parliament, with a Sicilian
Constitution remodelled along English lines, then one could
expect as ‘natural consequences’ such reforms as would give
