22                    BENTINCK      AND    SICILY

not be held without reform, and yet it was still held. Reform
would in any case be a hazardous undertaking, and would have
to deal with feudal as well as governmental abuses. The Queen’s
‘treachery’ he discounted, commenting that her distrust of
England was only natural after the revolution which Grey had
planned and which the British in Sicily had freely canvassed
ever since. Eventually, after some discussion, Bentinck yielded
to Wellesley’s arguments, and to those of his friend Sir Edward
Pellew (who was going out to the naval command in the
Mediterranean): he agreed to carry out what instructions the
government thought fit to give him.”
     These instructions, when they were drawn up, embodied an
uneasy compromise between Bentinck’s view and Perceval’s.
Bentinck was to represent that ‘the evident tendency of the
measures now pursued being not only to destroy the resources
of the island, but to exasperate the people to acts of violence
against their Government’, Britain must warn the Court of the
dangers to which they exposed themselves and their allies. If
on the one hand, the Court treated the island as they ought—if
they granted the Sicilians a greater share in the government,
attended to the wishes of Parliament, and remedied abuses—then
the British Government would do all in its power to maintain
them in Sicily and to bring about their restoration to Naples.
But if on the other hand they persisted in their present course,
‘neither the terms nor the spirit of the alliance would require that the
British arms should be employed to assist . . . in enforcing such a system
of government against the resistance of the people of Sicily’.

     It was ‘not however inconsistent’ with these warnings to
assert that not for a moment did the British Government mean
to interfere in the domestic affairs of Sicily, or to change or
upset the Constitution. Bentinck was not allowed to go beyond
discreet representation: he might threaten to recommend the
suspension of the subsidy if it seemed ill-spent; but the decision
would rest with London. Wellesley’s instructions were like
Howick’s of 1806—those which he gave Drummond before the
Talents chose to intervene in full strength—in that they coupled
unwelcome advice with professions of delicacy, and provided
no means of enforcing it.*
