                        BRITAIN     INTERVENES                           21
 designate to submit his own proposals. Bentinck, after studying
 the diplomatic files, wrote a memorandum in which he reviewed
 at length the precarious situation of Sicily. The Court, he
 admitted, by failing to cooperate, had shewn  only  anegative kind
 of hostility; but so persistent had they been in this that ‘treason
 itself could scarcely have taken any other course’. Still it was not
  on the score of treachery—though it existed—that he proposed
 the British Government should act, but ‘upon the broad basis
 of mutual self-defence and welfare’. Everyone said the Sicilians
 were basically friendly to England, though disaffected to their
 own government almost to the point of revolt: their help would
 be essential if the island was ever to be safe. Britain should
 therefore demand: the united command, carrying with it control
 over the subsidy; a Sicilian administration; and a reform of
 abuses. Without a Sicilian administration the Queen’s party
 would never be curbed; as for reform, one might think it a
 ‘natural consequence’ of the change of administration, “but the
 demand will please the people, and it may have a very great
 political effect in Italy, whenever ... the Italians shall be pre-
  pared to assert their independence’—for Bentinck, like Leckie,
- already thought of Sicily as a stepping-stone towards the lib-
 eration of Italy. Should the Court reject these demands, he
 would withdraw to his camp, proclaiming his determination to
 defend the King and the country in accordance with the alliance
 and ‘in concurrence with the Sicilians’. Such a policy, Bentinck
 admitted, amounted to interference in the domestic affairs of
 Sicily, ‘almost a forcible seizure’ of the government; but it
 would be justified and disinterested, and its effect would be
 ‘to place the King safely on his throne, to give happiness to an oppressed
 people, to make their island forever independent of French invasion,
 and to exalt the British character’.
    This course, he said, should prove ‘plain and easy’ if the
 British Government agreed to it; but if they still preferred a
 policy of mere representation, then he was not the man to carry
 it out.”
    Wellesley did not altogether accept Bentinck’s proposals, and
 Perceval objected to them strongly; they were, he said, neither
 justifiable nor necessary. The soldiers all claimed that Sicily could
