                        GHAR
                           OE           Ral

               BRITAIN        INTERVENES

‘A brilliant and unbalanced egoist,’ writes Sir Charles Webster,
‘all the more dangerous because he was also imbued with a
species of idealism’; but then the second son of the Duke of
Portland ‘could not be denied a high military or diplomatic
post’. That is one view, though an authoritative one; there are
others. Was the Cabinet so careless, or its motive so irrelevant,
when it chose Major-General Lord William Bentinck to fill at
once the Palermo mission and the Mediterranean command?
At 36 Bentinck had experienced a good deal of responsibility
as a soldier and administrator; and he had already been in
trouble. His Governorship of Madras (1803-1807) had ended
in his recall amid bitter controversy; in earlier years (1799-1801)
he had served as a young officer in Northern Italy and had learnt
something of the country; earlier still he had fought in the
Netherlands. More recently, at the start of the Peninsular War,
he had carried out a mission to the Spanish Junta and held a
command under Moore in the retreat to Corunna. If what the
Government wanted was an orthodox diplomatist he was not
their man. But if, as now seems clear, they had made up their
mind to intervene in the domestic concerns of Sicily and needed
a proconsul for the purpose, then their choice seems less arbi-
trary.”
  It was indeed an arduous task. In Sicily Bentinck was to be at
once diplomatist, politician, even for a time dictator, besides
commanding two separate armies, one of them scattered as far
abroad as Lissa, the Ionian Islands, and Catalonia. We have a
picture of him at Palermo, immersed in a roomful of plans and
documents and waving aside as so much waste paper the letters
of recommendation brought by a young newcomer from Eng-
land—let him work hard for promotion, he said bluntly.* We
hear, too, from another who, just arrived from occupied Italy,
found Bentinck a shrewd questioner: ‘he sucked me so dry that
I came home in the shape and likeness of'a squeezed lemon. . .”.*
Neither a careful subordinate nor a place-hunter of the kind
that made up his father’s and other “connexions’, Bentinck had
