I4                  BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
the first matter for dispute. The Court,were badly short of money
when Parliament met for its regular session in January 1810.”
The Speech from the Throne—whether as a sop to constitutional
sentiment, or a warning against insubordination—exhorted
members to safeguard from the democratic peril their Consti-
tution and privileges, ‘institutions lost by other nations for lack
of public spirit and national energy, and preserved only in the
two most famous islands in the world, Great Britain and Sicily’.*
The Government let it be known that they meant to obtain not
only an extraordinary subsidy (donativo) of 360,000 ounces a
year (about £ 235,000), but also a fairer distribution of taxation.
The Barons, alarmed, and led by Belmonte and Cassaro, countered
by voting to pay a larger share of a smaller sum. On the one
hand they cut the donativo down to 150,000 oz.; on the other
they adopted a plan for tax reform far more radical than the
Government had intended. This plan, drawn up by Balsamo,
swept away the ‘monstrous multiplicity’ of the old donativi and
the cumbersome machinery for their collection; instead it estab-
lished a single tax on every kind of real property, to be assessed
according to a new survey. Thus ‘every Sicilian’, said Balsamo,
‘was according to strict equity to pay the Exchequer in pro-
portion to what he owned and consumed’; and the barons could
no longer be accused of merely defending their own privileges.
When the Ecclesiastico followed suit it came about that Parlia-
ment, by a curious reversal, passed in 1810, against the Court’s
wishes, the very reforms it had rejected when Caracciolo pro-
posed them in 1783.*
   But after taking this first step Parliament was still unready to
go any further. Belmonte, Castelnuovo, and Balsamo tried at
the end of the session to carry several political resolutions: the
most important of these would have made supply run for one
year only, thus establishing an annual Parliament. But most of
the resolutions failed.* This helps to explain why Belmonte and
his friends then shifted their ground and started negotiating
with the Court.
   These negotiations went on for several months after Parlia-
ment had risen. They were complex and obscure. Belmonte’s
friends, it seems clear, feared that the Court might take to
unconstitutional measures if it was left badly short of money.
