                     BRITAIN    INTERVENES                        23
   So closely, indeed, did Wellesley’s policy during the next
few months follow Howick’s in its change from good advice to
the threat of force that the British intervention in 1811-12
reminds one of a theatrical performance, once rehearsed, then
put off and given only after a lapse of five years. But those five
years of mounting tension within Sicily and between the two
allies made the final clash look inevitable, as it could scarcely
have done in 1807.
   Bentinck landed at Palermo in July 1811 to find the Court
in no mood to listen to advice. The Queen, apparently having
got wind of the British Government’s intentions, had decided
that only the most unbending resistance could foil what she
saw as a plot to annex Sicily. For two months past relations
between the Court and the British Legation had been poisoned
by a matter trivial in itself—yet another dispute over the re-
cognition of British shipping licences—but inflated out of all
proportions in the tension of the moment. At the same time
the Court had dealt with the Barons’ protest against the Febru-
ary Decrees: they had got the Deputation to say that the decrees
were   legal, and the protest invalid; and three days before
Bentinck’s arrival, five of the protesting Barons—Belmonte,
Castelnuovo, Aci, Anjou and Villafranca—had suddenly been
arrested and imprisoned on various islands off the coast of Sicily.*
   Bentinck, though he had no hope of achieving anything by
persuasion in such a state of affairs, followed his instructions to
the letter. Circello’s reply to his first representations was simple:
if the British Government said they did not wish to interfere,
then why did they in fact interfere? Besides, they must have
been misled by malicious gossip, for Sicily was perfectly con-
tented: so there was no case to answer. Bentinck could make
no headway against a refusal even to discuss the situation. For
this obduracy he blamed the Queen: her mania for Naples and
distrust of England would wreck any chance of an improvement
until she was removed from the government. “The Court’, he
declared, ‘must be frightened into their duty to themselves and
to us. Otherwise we shall all be sacrificed in the ruins of one of
the best people upon earth’—by which he may have meant the
Sicilians, but more likely the Italians, who might be freed if
Sicily was once set in order. Meanwhile all he could do was
