20                  BENTINCK     AND    SICILY
and what kind of intervention had hein mind? It is not easy to
tell. Until then he had taken virtually no interest in Sicily. Even
now he apparently set little store by the reports of the Queen’s
‘treachery’. Though he later claimed more general motives he
may have been moved by a simple fact: the resignation of
Ambherst and Stuart. Both men had from the start, most ex-
ceptionally, done their best to placate the Sicilian Court; now
that Court’s behaviour in the face of the threat from Murat had
led both of them to throw up their posts in disgust. After that
any Foreign Secretary must have found it difficult merely to go
on with a policy of hopeful conciliation, or to avoid reaching
some kind of decision.”
  But whatever his motives Wellesley, it seems clear, acted to
meet a specific military and diplomatic crisis: he took no more
notice than Canning had ever done of the demands for inter-
vention on general grounds which some people in England had
been putting forward for years. The Opposition regularly used
the annual Commons debate on the subsidy to press for such a
change of policy: the defence of the island, they said, would be
surer and easier if its people could be relieved of an oppressive
system of government; some of the London newspapers echoed
them, one or two going so far as to contemplate the annexation
of Sicily to the British Empire.* More important than these
casual references were the writings of one or two publicists,
particularly G.F. Leckie: with some knowledge of Sicilian con-
ditions, he called for a wholesale reform under English tutelage:
this was to induce the Italians to rise and unite against the French.
At the same time Leckie looked forward to an expansion of
British power all over the Mediterranean, such as would simul-
taneously benefit British trade and prove to the world that
‘while France conquers to devastate, Britain conquers to do
good’.* Finally, the British merchants who at this time carried on
most of Sicily’s foreign trade asked many times for redress of
what they said were discriminatory practices by the Sicilian
Government: but the Board of Trade turned a deaf ear to their
petitions, and Wellesley seems to have given little thought to
commercial advantage."
     Instead of settling from the start on a detailed policy of
intervention, Wellesley asked the commander- and Minister-
