                      BRITAIN    INTERVENES                        I9Q
about him something of the energy and forthrightness of the
Victorian public servant. However one may judge what he did,
he did it thoroughly and, in the circumstances, efficiently. A
soldier, he shewed a rough but undeniable skill in the tactics of
political management: where immoderate sentiments prevailed,
his was often the moderating influence. Just as at Corunna, seated
on his “quiet mule’, he had talked to Charles Napier through
the heavy gunfire ‘as if we were going to breakfast... with
perhaps an increase of good-humour and placidity’—‘this chap
takes it coolly or the devil’s in it’, Napier exclaimed—so now in
Sicily he often got his way by cool persistent bullying, stopping
short of the limit beyond which he would have lost control.*
   Thus far the public man in Bentinck—and the public man is
nearly all we can see of him. This figure, as it appears in official
papers, is almost extravagantly simple. We see a man who must
be doing; to whom le mieux est Pennemi du bien meant little; who
had such an appetite for responsibility that, while he could
rise to situations that would have tried most men hard, he in the
end took too much upon himself and caused his own downfall.
Through his eyes, again, we see men and events in black and
white: character sharply defined, right and wrong sharply di-
vided. Yet this is not the whole truth. There is a private Bentinck,
who sometimes disconcerts us by confessing to ‘a great deal of
irritable shyness’-—such a great deal that to have to wear the
K.C.B. newly awarded him strikes him as ‘the infliction of a
positive misery’.* There is a Bentinck who, far from being the
doctrinaire Whig one would expect, shews in his political
dealings a variety of moods—empirical, diffident, even des-
pondent—which he none the less banishes from his official
despatches. Altogether there seems to have been in him a divorce
between ‘official’ beliefs and private feelings—feelings of which
he was perhaps not quite aware, or which he hesitated to define
clearly even to himself. It is a human condition, and among some
men a peculiarly English condition. Bentinck cannot be charged
with duplicity towards others. But because he wanted to see his
world steadily he failed to see it whole: he deceived, if anyone,
himself*
  This, then, was the man the Foreign Secretary had chosen.
But exactly how did Wellesley judge the state of affairs in Sicily,
