28                       BENTINCK        AND     SICILY
satisfactory Ministers; when Circello asked him whether                          he
meant to impose them on the King, he replied that ‘those...
who had created the embarrassment must take the Court out
of it as well as they could... to the feelings of the King, the
interests of the Nation were not to be sacrificed’. Still he tried
not to be drawn into actually dictating a specific Ministry; in
the end, after long bargaining, he and Circello reached a com-
promise. Cassaro was to become a sort of interim Prime Minister
(for he now appeared in the guise of a patriot and a man who
could withstand the Queen’s influence); Circello might stay,
while the other departments would be left to under-secretaries
until such time as some of the exiled barons might decently
come into them. No sooner had this arrangement been accepted
in principle than the Court changed its mind—apparently after
the usual tussle between the Queen and Ascoli, who was the
more frightened of the two. A partial reshuffle was announced,
which left the existing Ministry almost unchanged—the very
arrangement to which Bentinck had objected most strongly in
previous discussions. At the same time Circello stated in a Note
that the Court could listen to no more demands.
   Bentinck now decided to use force: he ordered part of the
British garrison in eastern Sicily to sail to Palermo. In a long
conversation with the Hereditary Prince he recapitulated Britain’s
grievances,     and at the same          time    assured him of her good
intentions:
    ‘The fact of our never having assumed the possession of the island, when
it had been in our power for six years together, and when it had been the
general wish of the inhabitants, was the best proof of our intentions. .. .
I concluded... by saying that I should use force if my representations
were not attended to. This force was not against, but for the benefit of
the King and his family. . . . If he himself at the head of the army should
resist me unsuccessfully, I should, if his father still persisted in his retirement,
be the first to place himself on the throne, and if he declined, to support
the succession for his son. It was against the enemies of the Crown that
my opposition would be directed. He was much struck with this statement
and made me repeat it.’

     In the face of this threat the Court’s resistance collapsed. On
January 16th the King announced that ill-health compelled him
