32                 BENTINCK AND SICILY
right principles with the political skill needed to guide the
Prince. Castelnuovo was too stiff, Aci too violent, Cassaro too
conservative. Belmonte, on the other hand, though somewhat
glib and transparently vain, seemed by his intelligence, boldness
and fluency the only man able to hold the Prince and the barons
together. Orleans—Bentinck’s new friend and counsellor—
pressed Belmonte’s claims; and Bentinck set out to build him
up into a Sicilian Prime Minister. Yet this course had disad-
vantages which he could not perceive at the time. Belmonte
united a desire for quick and forcible action (by the British)
with a high regard for ‘public opinion’. By this he meant some-
thing akin to ‘face’: without doubting the sincerity of his po-
litical convictions, one may say that he had something of the
typical Southern Italian faction leader of later times—he and
his personal followers must achieve power, and be seen to
achieve power, to the exclusion of all others.* Bentinck thought
little of Sicilian public opinion, judging on past performance,
though he appealed to it often enough when urging the Prince
to carry out the desired changes; in any case, he told Belmonte,
‘the only way to retain it was to deserve it and be indifferent
to it’.* Nevertheless he gave in to Belmonte on several important
points. The new ‘system’, he had thought at first, should start
out by alienating as few sympathies as possible: advances from
the sitting Councillors and Ministers (and there were plenty)
should therefore not be rejected out of the hand, and some
provision should be made for them. But Belmonte would not
have it: he was sure he could manage both Government and
Parliament alone; and he persuaded Bentinck to demand              a
Ministry and Council made up of none but supposedly safe
Patriots. Now the Prince wished, as he said, to “unite all parties’
and consult all shades of opinion: Bentinck had therefore to
expound to him the doctrine of Cabinet solidarity, a doctrine
which, though he might hold it good in itself, he had not
previously thought of applying so drastically in Sicily. Bentinck
was similarly induced, against his better judgment, to foist Aci
on the Prince as one of the proposed Ministers: this was a man
whose incompetence everyone admitted, but whose recent exile
gave him, according to Belmonte, a claim to favour.
  In any case Bentinck was steadily losing patience with the
