                     BRITAIN    INTERVENES                        27
by milder means. He began at once by suspending the subsidy.
The Court were in no position to resist: if the ensuing crisis
lasted as long as five weeks that was no doubt because they
could not agree among themselves. The King fled at once to
La Ficuzza, his shooting-lodge in the hills, leaving his wife and
Circello to cope with Bentinck’s demands as best they could.
In his fright he tried several times to abdicate: it was all the
Queen could do to stop him. Bentinck, when consulted about
this unexpected resolve of the King’s, advised abdication: it
would save the King from a humiliating change of front, which
coming from the Prince would be more like an act of grace.
But he had to make it clear that he could not and would not
ask for such a step.” The Queen, for her part, swung between
despair and defiance. She knew she could not count on the King
or on Ascoli, and she feared—rightly—that they might use her
as a scapegoat.” At times she tried to conciliate Bentinck—she
had always been English in feeling, ‘and now, she added smiling,
I must be English par nécessité, vous voyez comme je vous
parle franchement’; once she actually asked for a ship to take
her away from Sicily. At other times she railed at him, accused
the British of having always planned to seize Sicily, and refused
to make the slightest concession. She sought for ways of doing
without the subsidy; she harangued the Guards from the Palace
window, bidding them resist the King’s enemies. They might
use force, she cried, ‘but she would never yield, she could but
die in the contest’.*
   The hubbub was at its height. There was talk of invasion;
there were rumours of assassination. Some feared for Bentinck’s
life, some for the five barons who where still in exile.* Altogether
Bentinck’s negotiations with Circello could scarcely follow a
coherent course. With some difficulty Bentinck won two points:
the recall of the barons and the command of the Sicilian army.
On the first he was willing to help the King by letting the
barons’ recall look like a spontaneous act of grace: he wished,
he said, to act as ‘a mediator between the violence of parties’.
But the command was useless to him without a trustworthy
Ministry. The Court, however, stood out longer against the
change of administration than against any of his other demands.
To Bentinck’s mind, the exiled Barons would make the most
