                     BRITAIN    INTERVENES                       29
to hand over power temporarily to the Prince, who was to be
Vicar-General for Sicily and to act as his alter ego. The Prince
at once repealed the 1° tax and recalled the barons. British
troops garrisoned Palermo. The King stayed on at La Ficuzza
and the Queen repaired to a villa in the suburbs.
  Bentinck had got a delegation of powers that he had not
asked for, but he had not got a change of Ministry. The King,
he was aware, had secretly arranged to keep the diplomatic
correspondence in his own hands. He did not, however, realise
as yet how little real power the King and Queen meant to
delegate to their son; besides, he had formed a very favourable
first impression of the Prince’s character and good intentions.
He therefore resumed payment of the subsidy without exacting
an immediate change of men or measures: ‘I was disposed’, he
said, ‘to place all reliance in the Prince’s word and his assurance
that certain things would be done would be satisfactory to me.’
At the same time, he agreed to give a personal guarantee of the
Royal Family’s possession of Sicily (though not of Naples); he
tried to moderate the novel anti-Neapolitan zeal of the Prince,
who claimed that ‘now it was necessary everything should be
Sicilian’; and he refused the offer of a seat on the Council:
   ‘T thought it would not look well... and would not be pleasing to
my Government—our principle had always been not to interfere in the
internal concerns of our neighbours. We had only done so now because
we were compelled.”
  Bentinck sent his government complete and detailed accounts
of all these transactions, as he was to do with hardly any excep-
tion throughout his mission. By the time they were received,
Wellesley had resigned and Castlereagh was Foreign Secretary.”
Castlereagh hastened to send Bentinck the government's ap-
proval of his conduct in the ‘very delicate and arduous circum-
stances’ he had been faced with. In a private letter he asked for
proofs of the treachery which had regrettably compelled Ben-
tinck to use his full powers: the proceeding might have to be
defended in Parliament. Although his approval was unqualified,
there was perhaps a slight hint in his expression of satisfaction
at Bentinck’s having declined a seat on the Council: it shewed,
he wrote, ‘that Your Lordship’s views were strictly confined to
