26                    BENTINCK       AND    SICILY
shared his view that Italy might soom rise, and Sicily therefore
take on an ‘incalculable importance’. One voice alone preached
caution, Wellington’s: he advised Bentinck merely to ‘maintain
our position’ in Sicily; as for Italy, ‘trust nothing’, he wrote,
‘to the enthusiasm of the people. Give them a strong and a just,
and, if possible, a good government; but, above all, a strong one,
which shall enforce them to do their duty by themselves and
their country...’. Still, Bentinck might well believe, as he
approached Palermo, what Pellew wrote to him at the time:
   ‘The battle you have nobly fought, and the conquest will reward you
amply . . . Ithink every obstacle will now fall prostrate and the Q... . be
very happy to put herselfin your harness. You have, or will now have,
quite a smooth path and see your way clear.”
   Bentinck landed at Palermo on December 7 to find things
no better than he had left them. His departure had at first startled
the Court into a more cautious frame of mind; but they were
unable to settle on any definite policy against his return. As
usual the Queen and Ascoli were at odds. Ought they once
again to try calling in the Russians? (The Queen wrote off to
Petersburg.) Ought they to release the five Barons and so draw
Bentinck’s teeth? (Afterwards the Queen and Ascoli each claimed
to have advised this and to have been thwarted by the other’s
influence.) Anyhow nothing was done.* At the same time all
the old suspicions of treachery had flared up more strongly than
ever during Bentinck’s absence: fresh correspondence came to
light between the Court’s agents and the enemy, as well as
various plots seemingly designed to bring about new Sicilian
Vespers, this time against the British. The whole business was
tangled and obscure, but Ascoli and, by inference, the Queen
seemed to be involved. If the British staff and legation were
highly alarmed, poor General Maitland, left in charge by
Bentinck, was in despair: ‘I am quite sick of spies and devils...
Where is Lord William and when will he come—I am groping
in the dark ...’. Bentinck, hearing this news on his arrival,
considered that it entitled him to take those ‘most decisive
measures’ contemplated in his new instructions—that is, to use
force if necessary.”
   At first, however, he attempted to bring the Court to heel
