                        BRITAIN     INTERVENES                           31
sider the conquest of Italy and the restoration of Naples as half achieved.
All eyes on the Continent will be turned to Sicily’—and, he threw out
as a further inducement—‘possibly not only Naples but many of the sur-
rounding States may desire the blessings of the same Chief and the same
Government’.*
   To achieve all this, Bentinck had to set up the Prince as a
constitutional monarch, and the patriots as a responsible Minis-
try. Both these ends, as it turned out, were harder to achieve than
Bentinck had expected: indeed it took two months merely to
change the Ministry. The Prince seemed at first disposed to
make Bentinck his confidential mentor; he professed the most
laudable constitutional sentiments, and he may even have meant
them at the time, for it soon became clear that he could not
think or act decidedly on any matter. He was afraid of his
parents, of the British, of the barons. To Bentinck he ‘confessed
his doubts and fears... they turned his head’—but, he added
apologetically, ‘perhaps they are the effect of my anciennes
habitudes which in time I shall overcome’. Bentinck combated
these vacillations, assuring him that ‘no Prince ever had so fine
a game’; but after a few weeks’ inconclusive discussion, his
early esteem for the Prince began to wilt. This, he decided, was
not the mere hesitancy of a novice; for when ‘a truth so evident
was not acted upon’, must there not be ‘some secret cause which
got the better’? Still he excused it, and rather blamed the influ-
ence, past and present, of the Queen.* The Prince’s good in-
tentions ought at least to be put to the test, as he told the barons:
for they were inclined to stand on their dignity and refuse office
altogether. “Why was I alone to act?’ he asked them:
‘ .. take office and see if your advice is followed—if not go out and
then I shall have ground to go on. Belles Paroles will not do—we must
take things as we find them and act accordingly’.
  The use of force against the Royal Family, which Belmonte
rather favoured, might achieve quick results, but no lasting
settlement; whereas
to persuade a stupid distrustful man would be a work of time and
difficulty, but not impracticable—the good if done would be permanent.”
  Even so it was difficult to form a Ministry combining the
