                     BRITAIN   INTERVENES                       25
excite the people of Italy to any exertions which they may not
think necessary’ or to act before the time was ripe: any plan for
an expedition must be concerted with Wellington and other
British agents in the Mediterranean.*
   To Bentinck’s mind intervention in Sicily was clearly con-
nected with this plan for the liberation of Italy: the one must
precede the other. Whether it was the same view that led Welles-
ley to agree to stronger measures in Sicily is not clear.* At any
rate he allowed Bentinck to press not only for the changes
already asked for, but also for the united command, the recall of
the imprisoned barons, and the removal from the government
of persons hostile to the alliance. Bentinck was given great
freedom of action: the only real limitation to his powers was
that he must not resort to force so long as he had no proof of
the Court’s treachery—but if such proof should come to hand
it would justify ‘the most decided measures’. Meanwhile he
could control and suspend the subsidy on his own authority;
beyond this, the utmost retaliation to which the British Govern-
ment would agree if the Court rejected their demands was the
withdrawal of the garrison.*
  Bentinck now sailed again to Sicily, confident of success. His
mood was not unlike that of a proconsul setting out on a puni-
tive expedition: writing to Wellington, he compared the Court
to a native Indian Durbar; to Wellesley he had already hinted
that what he was now carrying out was ‘the same enlarged and
enlightened system of policy, which has already saved another
Empire... * He was by no means alone in his confidence or
in his high hopes of Sicilian and Italian regeneration. He sailed,
as it were, amid a chorus of good wishes from high-ranking
generals, admirals and diplomatists. These men detested the
Queen—‘the she wicked one’, they called her, or ‘the Lady’,
or ‘the very high author of so much mischief’, or simply ‘“She’—
and they had no doubt that she would be worsted in ‘a contest
where treachery and deceit are pitted against virtue truth and
honour’. Some hoped the birth of Sicilian happiness would
‘take its date from the time of your arrival among them’. Leckie
had sent Bentinck his books and his blessing. Amherst sent him
suggestions for reforms, culminating in the maxim ‘Assimilate
generally as much as possible to the British Constitution’. Others
