30                     BENTINCK        AND    SICILY
the removal of evils incompatible swith the defence of the
island, the safety of the British troops and the preservation of
the alliance’.*
     The guarded and conciliatory policy which these words of
Castlereagh’s implied was just what Bentinck himself had in
mind immediately after the proclamation of the Vicariate. So
eager was he to let the Prince and the Patriots carry on the
government with the least interference possible from the British
that he even decided to leave Palermo for a while. Yet Bentinck
could neither think his task completed nor refrain from making
plans for the future. As early as January 31st he noted
   ‘my plan for Sicily—Parliament—Constitution and national force to
protect it....’ But, he added, ‘I wish to go on gently and to accomplish
by degrees and by fair measures rather than by force.”*

   Parliament, he thought, must meet in any case, as the govern-
ment could scarcely go on without additional supply. But a new
Constitution was rather more than the mere reform of abuses
which he had been instructed to achieve. No doubt the patriots
were convinced that the present Constitution would no longer
work: it must be made anew; only thus could Sicily be restored
to her ancient glory, and her inhabitants enabled to cry out one
happy day “We too are a Nation!’ Bentinck met them more
than half-way: when he saw Belmonte and Castelnuovo on
their return from the islands he was the first to broach the
subject, and he is said to have told the Queen: “Constitution or
revolution: there isno middle way.” But itseems likely that what
he wanted was rather a Constitution than a particular collection
of reforms; that is to say, a political gesture which might have
a resounding effect in Italy. Sicily was still to his mind a stepping-
stone to the Continent; and he was stating his own opinion
when he told the Prince that Sicily could
‘contribute most powerfully to the conquest of Italy, not by its arms,
but by the example of its happiness. The Italians are an intelligent people.
They have long desired a Constitution which should give them national
liberty. They never will submit to be transferred from one despotism to
another. . . . If by the desire of the Prince a Constitution is given to Sicily
which shall assure a moderate and reasonable freedom to its people, and
shall promote its happiness and prosperity, from that period I should con-
