                       BRITAIN    INTERVENES                        33
Prince, who plainly had no wish either to call Parliament or
change his advisers. He had been mistaken, he admitted, in
trusting him in the first place: now he exacted the new Minist
and Council from the Prince by reminding him that he had
merely delayed, not given up, carrying out the British Govern-
ment’s instructions. The new Ministry, consisting of Belmonte
(Foreign Affairs), Castelnuovo (Finance), Cassaro (Justice), and
Aci (War), came in at the end of March; but only after the
Prince had so far abandoned his constitutional professions as to
insist on Bentinck’s signature to a document urging the change
and so in a sense taking responsibility for it. ‘He was indeed
acting very magnanimously towards me’, Bentinck told the
Prince on this occasion. ‘I had wished to give him all the credit
and none of the blame. He was now making me a return, by
wishing to make it appear that he was compelled to the change,
that he was always attached to the old system and to its agents.’
   Bentinck was irritated at having lost two valuable months,
at a time, too, when the rumoured approach of Franco-Russian
hostilities promised a chance of action in Italy. Conciliation, he
concluded, would not work after all: stronger measures would
be needed, and steady support from home:

   ‘Nothing but the firm and just exercise of our superiority will...
secure to this country that better administration from whence its own
happiness and greatness and our safety can alone be derived. I beg the
British Government not to be deceived on this point.’*

   In three months Bentinck had come to see the need for nothing
less than a continuing British protectorate over Sicily. His early
hope that the new ‘system’ might go on almost by itself had
rested on several assumptions: now these props were falling out
one by one. He had wanted the Patriots to carry on the govern-
ment by themselves, with the British Minister a mere paternal
counsellor in the background: he soon found that they could
not; by sheer force of circumstance, as will be seen, he himself
had to become an active political leader. He had thought the
Royal Family little more than a spent force: presently he found
that he could not impose on Sicily a policy acceptable to the
British   Government    without   engaging    in a running    contest
