                     BRITAIN INTERVENES                          35
peremptory Notes.* But what pressure from one quarter did,
pressure from another undid. The King had ostensibly delegated
power to his son. But, he asked Bentinck on one occasion, ‘if
I had appointed my son to manage my Estate [should I] not
expect him to be subordinate to me?’ This was the King’s
candid opinion: he regarded his kingdom as his personal proper-
ty; he was ‘displeased at the Nation being mentioned . . . it was
a new mode which did not exist in former times . . . his power
came from God’.* His view of the Vicariate—like the Queen’s—
was simple. Their position at the centre of affairs was for the
moment inconvenient: the Prince must therefore take it over,
and with it the embarrassment of dealing with Bentinck; but he
was to be ‘like an egg in [the King’s] hand which he might
preserve as long as he pleased and crush’ or rather set aside when
it suited him.* This device was not new to the Royal Family;
it had served at Naples in 1799, and it was to serve again in 1821.
   The King and Queen, then, considered that the government
was still theirs, with the Prince as their puppet, and that the
Ministers ought to be their Ministers: indeed, they dropped
circuitous hints to Belmonte and his friends that their accession
to the Ministry would be invalid unless they asked for and
got the King’s approval.* The government ought to do nothing
of importance (so the King thought) without first obtaining
his consent: his insistence it was that delayed the summoning
of Parliament until May, and then caused the text of the Despatch
to be altered.* He rejected the Prince’s view that conciliation
was safest: for a long time he refused to believe that Bentinck
was not exceeding his instructions; stubborn and suspicious, he
went on hoping that the British Government would recall or
disown their Minister even when his own intelligence from
London gave him no grounds for comfort.* He and the Queen
therefore wanted the Prince to resist Bentinck at every point; if
he deviated in the least from their commands they castigated
him as an ‘enfant pervers’, an ‘ambitious and ungrateful son’.*
He, for his part, was too weak either to assert or to resign his
authority, though Bentinck often forced him to the former, and
he himself often threatened the latter.
  In this dilemma, the Prince took to playing off one party
against the other. If Bentinck wanted something to which the
