36                  BENTINCK     AND    SICILY

King and Queen objected, he would ask Bentinck to ‘make a
Note of it’, preferably a strong one which he could produce to
his parents as evidence of the British Minister’s terribilita and in
justification of his own compliance. If the measure was im-
portant—like the change of Ministry or the meeting of Parlia-
ment—he would get Bentinck not only to press it in strong
 terms, but also to guarantee the Crown against any dangers to
which it might give rise.* In this way he presumably thought to
 escape responsibility; but at the same time he played into
Bentinck’s hands: for Bentinck could afterwards maintain that,
since he had pledged himself to see that a particular measure did
no harm, he must demand that it should be carried out as he
wished. Thus the Prince bought present comfort at the cost of
future trouble. Caught between two forces greater than his own
(sometimes, to his despair, between      three, when his parents
were at odds)—or, to put it on a higher plane, with “Hell on one
side and the reproach of Posterity on the other’*—the Prince
swung to and fro, anxious to please everybody, unable to please
anybody, and rightly accused by all of weakness and duplicity.
  Bentinck knew the Prince’s subjection to his parents, but not
the full extent of it; he thought the Prince more responsible for
his own actions than he was, and he did not at first guess how
far the King interfered. This error was easy to fall into: Ferdinand
had been notorious for decades as one of the idlest monarchs in
Europe; in his present retreat at La Ficuzza he assiduously fed
this reputation, declaring to all and sundry that he was suffering
for his sins and wished to be considered a dead man. Bentinck
naturally assumed that he cared no more for affairs than formerly,
and—when he did act—that someone else was pulling the
strings. Who then was to blame? Obviously the Queen.*
   Much has been written on the long struggle between Bentinck
and Maria Carolina, perhaps too much: for the personal conflict,
though dramatic in itself, was really no more than an outgrowth
of the essential political conflict, a somewhat irrelevant descant.
Bentinck, it is true, spent needless time and energy in his cam-
paign against the Queen, only to discover too late that her
expulsion—first from Palermo, then from Sicily altogether—
was no remedy for the island’s political troubles.* But then all
circumstances told against the Queen. She was the perfect scape-
