           THE PROTECTORATE         AND THE ‘BASES’             43
and prevent what he apprehended as revolutionary develop-
ments.”
   The fact was that nothing like a Cabinet system had ever
existed in Sicily or Naples. The Ministers were still very much
the Prince’s secretaries; so true was this of Belmonte that the
Prince did not even allow him to read the foreign despatches, in
spite of his and Bentinck’s protests.* They worked independently
of each other, meeting officially only in Council, with the Prince
in attendance; and though they might hold informal councils of
their own—which Bentinck sometimes attended—no discipline
could be imposed on an individual Minister such as Aci or
Cassaro. Furthermore, though there had been powerful chief
Ministers at Naples in the past—Tanucci, Acton—it gradually
became clear that Belmonte was not, after all, the man to emulate
them: but it took Bentinck some time to realise his friend’s
shortcomings.
   Altogether, the relations between Bentinck and the Sicilian
patriots could only be described as peculiar. He must try to lead
them, and most of them still wanted his advice and support;
yet he was not of them. He was inevitably a foreigner, had
still something of the East India official, observing with detached
amusement the antics of the natives.” ‘I began to know my
compatriots the Sicilians’, he said sarcastically; ‘vanity was the
great defect of the country—I never had seen anything like it
in any part of the world’. And he thought he detected in the
blustering Aci the vices of a nation: ‘the Sicilians in general are
bullies and are only to be managed by fear. They take advantage
of the least concession and always construe conciliation into
weakness’.* What, then, led him to persist in doing what he
could (as he conceived it) to help the Sicilians? “Bonaparte made
Kings, England makes Nations’, he is supposed to have said at
one time; at another, that ‘England ought to give liberty to
every country she could reach’.* Perhaps, too, pride forbade
him to abandon an attempt the success of which he had confi-
dently prophesied in his first despatches: he seems to have
realised quite early how unlikely the new ‘system’ was to survive
the withdrawal of British force—though this was probably the
kind of truth which he could perceive but did not dwell upon.*
Yet he seems also to have been moved by a genuine concern for
