42                  BENTINCK     AND    SICILY
  When the new Ministers came in at the end of March,
Bentinck conceived of himself as their friend and confidential
adviser; he did not then mean to lay down the law. True, he and
Belmonte were so close that it is difficult to speak of their acting
independently of one another: a later but typical entry in
Bentinck’s journal runs, “He [Belmonte] wrote me a Note
asking it and helped me to write the refusal of it.’* Even so,
Bentinck allowed Belmonte, as newly installed chief Minister,
considerable play: he had previously seen and exhorted the
Prince nearly every day, but he now left to Belmonte the task
of managing both Prince and—later—Parliament. This Bel-
monte was confident he could do; and his confidence outlasted
that of all his friends.
   Everyone had assumed that the Ministry would be united
and that they would be responsible, in the sense of being in
actual control of the government. United they certainly were
not. Aci proved a liability from the start: he and Bentinck
clashed, and went on disputing for months, over details of
day-to-day army administration. To Bentinck’s mind the
Minister for War ought not to concern himself with this any
more than the Secretary of State at home. Aci had larger views,
and quoted a French Encyclopaedia (art. Ministre de la Guerre)
in support. He promoted officers, moved troops without
Bentinck’s knowledge, quarrelled with the Sicilian Chief of
Staff, and generally displayed what Bentinck thought intolerable
wrongheadedness and vanity, until Bentinck decided that he
‘would not permit’ such behaviour any longer. But the Prince
had taken a fancy to Aci, probably because of his very dis-
agreements with Bentinck; if asked to dismiss him, he could
retort that Bentinck had imposed Aci on him in the first place.
Belmonte, whose nominee Aci had been, could neither control
nor dislodge him. Indeed he asked Bentinck on occasion to
write a Note to the Prince and so prevent some step which Aci
was about to take and which he, Belmonte, disapproved.*
   Similarly Belmonte, finding that Cassaro was giving the
Prince constitutional advice at variance with that of the other
Ministers, asked Bentinck to tell him that ‘England would not
allow any opposition to its views for the interests of both
countries’; and Cassaro himself wanted Bentinck to intervene
