                     BRITAIN   INTERVENES                      37
goat for everyone,    above all for her own     family. She was
notorious, to begin with, as an insatiable meddler. The King
had the sense to lie low; but she could not stop the flow of her
wild talk and fruitless activity. To all who would listen she
confided her fears of the block or of a trial before Parliament;
her tirades against the ‘bestia feroce’ Bentinck; her sudden and
ephemeral resolves to retire to Catania, to Vienna (where her
nephew the Emperor had invited her), even to England.* She
ever clung to the belief that Bentinck must shortly be recalled
for exceeding his instructions, and she clutched at straws to
justify it—a platitute of Castlereagh’s in a Commons debate, or
the prattle of a visiting Englishman.* She dabbled in preposterous
intrigues to bring the King back to power as a constitutional
monarch; and the riffraff of spies and agents continued to infest
her antechamber.* Then rumour amplified the whir of her
 activity; she was alleged to be fomenting popular disorder,
plotting a counter-revolution, appealing to Austria and Russia
 for help.* Naturally those whom her fall from power had
compromised now did their best to blame her. Her son, even
while he was begging Bentinck not to ‘act horribly’ towards
her, shewed plainly that he thought her the skeleton in the
family cupboard, beloved but utterly irresponsible. “Ma mére
a une telle téte, une telle téte’, he would cry. Her husband did
the same; and his two confidants, Cassaro and his confessor
Father Caccamo, scarcely let slip an opportunity of setting
Bentinck against her. She was, they told him again and again,
the arch mischief-maker; the King was under her thumb, though
he would willingly be rid of her: ‘he had been married 44
years .. . they were so many years of Martyre’.* So general was
this attitude that when the Prince at one time became dangerously
ill, she was suspected of having poisoned him: Bentinck
suggested to the Prince’s physician that heat might be the cause,
but ‘he cried out shaking with palsy all over, Ce n’est pas la
chaleur—c’est sa mére—sa mére’.*
  In fact the Queen, as her letters shew, did interfere in affairs
as much as she could. Her husband and son may on occasion
have found her a convenient scapegoat, but there can be little
doubt that they were often genuinely harassed and influenced
by her outcries. It was quite natural that Bentinck should fasten
