34                   BENTINCK     AND    SICILY
with the King and Queen; and the.contest went on almost
without intermission for a whole year.
     But of all broken reeds the Prince was the most obvious. Not
only had he delayed bringing in a new Ministry; he would not
modernise the Army. In January he had accepted Bentinck’s
plan for a smaller, efficient, national Sicilian Army, fit for service
anywhere in the Mediterranean. But he was, after all, no less
a Neapolitan at heart than his parents: he had no desire to lose
his large inefficient Neapolitan army, and with it (as he thought)
the chance of recovering Naples: try as Bentinck might, he
could not get the Prince to act. The Prince proved equally
reluctant to call Parliament, as his new Ministers at once urged
him to do. Bentinck did his best to support them; he played on
the Prince’s hopes of Naples, declaring that although the day
for action in Italy might be near at hand, he could not take a
single soldier out of the island until a Sicilian Parliament had
given Italy the example she was waiting for. But the Prince
feared a Long Parliament, and Bentinck’s guarantees did not
reassure him. Even when he resigned himself to it, he objected
to the mention of constitutional reform which Castelnuovo
had inserted in his draft of the Royal Despatch summoning
Parliament: and although Bentinck hammered away at the
familiar tack of Italy, the magic word Constitution had to be
omitted from the Despatch when it was finally issued on 1 May.*
   Bentinck’s regard for the Prince had by then quite evaporated.
The man, he concluded, was inherently weak, distrustful and
dilatory, at bottom as despotically-minded as his parents, super-
stitiously afraid of them and incapable of taking an independent
line. Fear and fear alone would make him go on in the path of
constitutional monarchy.*
   Yet the Prince remained an ambiguous figure. The fact—more
obvious now than at the time—was that although he had a
policy of his own, he had not strength enough to be a free agent.
He wished to conciliate the British, not out of conviction—his
constitutional fervour, if sincere at all, was only momentary—
but out of fear, a realisation of his own impotence, and a desire
to save what could be saved for his family. Bentinck certainly
frightened him into a wish to comply—‘gettiamo acqua!
gettiamo acqua!’ he would cry on receiving one of Bentinck’s
