38                  BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
on her the blame for the delays and difficulties he experienced.
He therefore concluded that only her removal to a safe distance
from Palermo could put an end to her evil influence over King,
Prince and populace. She herself talked of going away; she even
said she would leave Sicily altogether if England paid her debts.
But Bentinck set no store by this, for, he said, ‘human nature
was the same everywhere—She could not divest herself of habits
of forty years’ continuance, that of governing ...’.” What he
needed was a pretext. This came to hand unexpectedly in March
1812, when one Cassetti, once a spy of the Queen’s, and now
in prison, confessed to having acted as go-between to her and
Murat and revealed her so-called plot for new Vespers against
the English.* Bentinck did not take this information very seri-
ously: ‘I did not believe that she had any serious intention of
giving up the island. She had been instigated by her love even
to madness of intrigue . . . this I believe to be the truth.’ But he
could use the ‘proofs’ to attack what he really feared, the Queen’s
political influence: he wrote her a letter respectful in manner if
not in matter, suggesting that after this discovery—which he
hoped to keep secret—she would do well to withdraw to a
remoter part of Sicily.* Six weeks’ negotiations ensued; letters
flew back and forth between the Queen, the King, the Prince,
Bentinck and Caccamo. The King wanted Bentinck to shew
his proofs to the Prince, to Cassaro, to anyone but himself;
while Bentinck refused to shew them to anyone else. Finally,
at the end of April, the Queen agreed to join the King (much
against his wish) at La Ficuzza. The distance from Palermo,
about 25 miles, still seemed too short to Bentinck; he contem-
plated using force, but—reflecting that ‘the pushing things to
an extremity might have had an appearance of cruelty —he let the
matter drop for the moment. He could still return to the charge
if necessary, brandishing his proofs, the validity of which the
King had tacitly admitted by refusing to see them.*
   Castlereagh, whom Bentinck informed of all these trans-
actions, took the proofs very seriously indeed: they justified, he
said, all that Bentinck had done in Sicily; and he left it entirely
to Bentinck’s discretion how far they should be disclosed, and
‘what conditions with respect to Her Majesty’s residence and
her abandoning all interference in the Government it may be
