50                   BENTINCK       AND    SICILY

   It pleased the Patriots for several reasons. A successful expe-
dition would mean a wonderful chance to get rid of the Nea-
politans and wrest from the King the independence of Sicily
under a separate dynasty. The English Constitution they ee
admired; even so they took to it—as will be seen—not so muc
with the intention of copying it in toto as with a desire to gloss
over their present differences. It suited Castelnuovo’s moderate
reformism, as well as Belmonte’s aristocratic leanings and his
hazy preference for the popular solution. It even suited Cassaro
and Butera: on first hearing it proposed Cassaro ‘grew pale’,
but presently his son ‘translated’ it—from what text we do not
know— and he ‘read it with great pleasure’; Butera too thought
‘anything was better than the speculations of those wild poli-
ticians’.*
   The Prince ‘jumped at it’ naturally enough, since he saw a
chance of moving against Murat with the support of both the
British and the Sicilians. This the Bourbons could not do
without; and they must not let Bentinck move without them,
else he might throw them over in favour of the Archduke
Francis and Naples might then slip out of their grasp. Perhaps,
too, the Prince was ready to contemplate with momentary
favour the separation of Sicily from Naples, since it would
give him a kingdom to himself. But if there was to be an expe-
dition there must be a Constitution; that was Bentinck’s price.
And if there must be a Constitution, the English was safer than
most: it would be something like a Constitution octroyée; it would,
he said, calm the hotheads; Parliament would soon be over,
‘and we can then turn our views to other matters’. Besides, it
would keep Bentinck and his friends busy, and draw their
attention away from more perilous matters. Above all the
English Constitution had the great advantages of ‘the devil you
know’: the Prince was so ready to accept it (Bentinck concluded)
because

‘he [had] always thought he would have less power than the King of
England. ... He had often remarked to me, when I had talked of the
Civil List and of other parliamentary interference—mais le Roi d’ Angle-
terre a ce et ce pouvoir, not adverting to the particular point in question
but generally as if it was intended to make a complete cypher of him.’*
