            THE PROTECTORATE            AND    THE ‘BASES’              53
sarcastic congratulations; when Aci read him ‘the leading princi-
ples of the British Constitution as compiled from Delolme,
Pinkerton(?) [sic] Blackstone in the course of two days’, he
refused to pronounce on them—'I was no legiste’. But in the
end he relented. Apparently Balsamo came to the rescue by
putting together yet another draft which followed the English
system but modified it to suit Sicilian conditions—and Balsamo
was much the most reliable draftsman at hand. Anyhow when
Bentinck wrote home he had so far changed his mind as to say:
   ‘I must confess that at first Iwas very much against the adoption of the
English Constitution. I doubted very much whether the people have
sufficient steadiness, wisdom or virtue to execute it. Iwas however much
better disposed to it when I saw that no other plan presented so few
difficulties; and my fears were very much lessened when I read the outline
of a Constitution formed upon that of England, but with great moderation
and wisdom modified and adapted to the debased state of this society,
by certain salutary restraints upon the liberty of the Press, and by sus-
pending for the moment the Trial by Jury.’
  For this great work he gave credit to Castelnuovo and Bel-
monte, ‘men who would do honour to the most enlightened
and virtuous nation’.*
  Did Bentinck really believe all this? Or had he perhaps made
up his mind to stand by the new ‘system’ even though an im-
portant element was brought into it against his better judgment?
At all events his enthusiasm did him no good: by commending
the English Constitution (however modified) he implanted in
the minds of Ministers at home the notion that it was all his own
work; and so enabled them later on to ‘cast a ridicule’ on his
mission.
  Aci’s other main proposal—the expedition to Italy—was one
which Bentinck himself had often talked of since his arrival;
he had used it effectively as an inducement to reform in Sicily.
But coming from the Prince at this particular moment the
proposal was most embarrassing. Bentinck certainly wanted
nothing so much as to liberate Italy. But the British Government
had allowed him only to look into the possibility of doing so,
and had told him to move only after consulting with Wellington
and with themselves. Finding, on his return to Sicily in De-
cember 1811, disappointingly little evidence that Italy was ripe
