44                   BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
the Sicilians’ welfare—a concern of*which his indignation at
their shortcomings might well be the revers de la médaille. This
it was that led him to lecture the uninterested Prince on the
greatness and prosperity which Sicily might recover through
a better road system and a colonisation of the land; to oppose
the grain-tax that crushed the peasantry; to realise (what many
of the patriots did not) that the aristocracy were as unpopular
as the former Neapolitan government, and their abuses no less
burdensome.” He could so far shed insular intolerance as to
attend Mass, kneeling side by side with Orleans in Alcamo
church (they were on an excursion to Segesta) and feeling
embarrassed because he did not know enough to bow at the
Elevation.* Altogether his ironic detachment was not complete,
his exasperation with the Sicilians not permanent; in an odd,
intermittent way his affections were becoming engaged. Later
on this emotional commitment was to lead him into steps both
drastic and damaging to his own career; meanwhile he could
only do his best to shore up and hold together his friends in office.
   In these circumstances, then, Bentinck set out on the more
specifically political part of his programme. By May 1812 he
had got several of the things his Government and he himself
had wanted. The Queen’s mischief seemed temporarily checked;
the Prince, though a disappointment, did not yet seem irre-
trievably lost to Bentinck’s and Belmonte’s influence; and on
the first of the month the Royal Despatch had at last gone out
to summon a new Parliament. The time had come to launch
that constitutional reform which Bentinck ardently desired as
a rallying-cry for Italian patriotism, and which Castlereagh was
at that very moment directing him to strive for.
   The Sicilian Constitution of 1812 has won some notoriety as
that “which for the first time laid down in writing the glorious
principles of the unwritten constitution of Britain’.* But this
deliberate copy of an elusive foreign model came about partly
through a chapter of accidents; Bentinck, far from imposing it,
deplored it before he came to acquiesce in it.
     The Patriotic leaders began to discuss constitutional reform
in February, soon after the establishment of the Vicariate.
Balsamo undertook to draw up, in consultation with Belmonte
and Castelnuovo, proposals for specific reforms. Bentinck saw
