48                     BENTINCK    AND    SICILY
ently moved him, as well as conservatism— ‘they might suffer
with their lives’, he said.* As the King’s confidant he had reason
to know that his master was opposed to any change. To the
King the word Constitution was as meaningless and distasteful
as the word Nation: he was ‘a little displeased’ to learn from
Cassaro what he professed not to have known before—that he
had been a constitutional monarch in Sicily these 53 years. As
early as January 29th, a fortnight after his delegation of power,
he had warned the British Government through Castelcicala of
the dangers which constitutional reform would entail. There is
no sign that his attitude had changed in the meantime; and it
was certainly not he who (as has been stated) first thought of
adopting the English Constitution—quite the contrary. In fact
he was the last to reconcile himself to reform of any kind; only
later did he set himself up as the champion of the pure English
Constitution.*   The    Queen,    now    her husband’s   unwelcome
companion, was said to be plotting for his return to power.
The Prince wavered: he did not know exactly what reforms
his ministers proposed, for Belmonte, fearful of future harm,
would not shew him Balsamo’s draft without a written order;
and this the Prince, no less fearful, refused to give. He and
Belmonte both tried, for different reasons, to draw Bentinck
into taking part in discussions with the other Ministers and so
achieving an agreed draft. Belmonte wanted Bentinck to silence
Cassaro’s feudal opposition; while the Prince still hoped for a
Constitution octroyée as the lesser of two evils, and probably
wished to throw the burden of responsibility for it on Bentinck.
Bentinck, however, had come round to Belmonte’s view that
Parliament should be given a free hand; besides, he said, ‘I
would rather be left out... it was an interference which my
Government might not like’. Still he gave in to Belmonte’s
argument that Cassaro could not be persuaded otherwise, and
that his interference would be quite unofficial. No sooner had
he done so than the Prince decided, on May 20th, to put
off the meeting of Parliament, on the pretext that it might
lead to popular commotion. Bentinck, plausibly suspecting the
influence of the King and Queen, riposted by holding up a
badly needed loan. But with the Crown plainly hostile, and
Cassaro still unreconciled, the prospect for reform was bleak.*
