§2                    BENTINCK      AND    SICILY

ment.’ The King, to be sure, had good reasons of his own for
balking at the separation of Sicily from Naples; and Bentinck’s
plans for Italian independence were not such as to reassure him.
But the Queen’s loud presence at his side may well have helped
to goad him into action. However, this latest proof of Bentinck’s
inflexibility swayed the King: he appeared to give way to his
son’s views. But he did no more than suspend his obstruction:
he did not commit himself to outright approval of the proposed
constitution. The Queen went further in her sudden reversal.
Persuaded, apparently, by Moliterno of the overriding ad-
vantages of an expedition to Naples, by June 15th she was
writing to her son in favour of the English Constitution for
Sicily and a constitutional settlement for anything they might
acquire on the Continent. “A most sensible letter,’ Bentinck
thought; ‘... it was much to be regretted that she could talk
and write so well and acted always so ill. Her misfortune is to
have all sense but common sense.”*
  One person was not at all pleased with Aci’s plan—Bentinck.
To him both the English Constitution and (just then) the
proposed expedition came as unwelcome surprises. He was still
ready to use the prospect of an expedition as a bait and so get
the Royal Family’s consent to a Sicilian Parliament and Consti-
tution; but he thought Aci was ‘pushing’ them too much, and
he did not wish the Patriots to use his own influence to impose
on the Crown the independence of Sicily and the English
Constitution ‘as if I had insisted on it which I had not and when
I even thought it would not suit them’. Independence might
be good for Sicily, but not necessarily for Naples, Italy, or
Britain; he had no powers to secure it. As for the constitution,
he told Belmonte,
  ‘I was very sorry that they had adopted the English Constitution
which no one understood or could define. ... It would cast a ridicule
upon their measures. . . . Iinfinitely preferred his plan which was founded
upon the principles of the English Constitution.’

   So slavish a copy might be dangerous as well as absurd—‘some
leading principles might be omitted by mistake, an omission
which might be fatal to their liberties by being construed into
an intention’. He greeted the ‘translation’ by Cassaro’s son with
