          THE PROTECTORATE         AND   THE   ‘BASES’         A7
an innovator, preferred to please ‘public opinion’ by letting
Parliament set itself up as a Constituent Assembly. Bentinck
sided at first with Castelnuovo and the Prince in this matter;
but Belmonte eventually persuaded him that Sicily should be
allowed ‘spontaneously to give herself a constitution, without
the interference of any authority, much less that of Sicilian or
English bayonets’.*
  This decision made the election of a new Braccio demaniale
or Third Estate all the more important. It took place in May,
against a background of general economic confusion. The
Ministry, faced from the outset with a running deficit of 40,000
ounces a month,” could scarcely pay the army, let alone their
creditors, for all Bentinck’s loans and advances. Corn had been
short for months: and Castelnuovo made things worse by
removing the traditional controls on the sale of bread. Popular
discontent failed to move him: he knew the Palermitans, he
said—‘it did not answer to caress them’. In this doctrinaire
policy he was supported by Balsamo with the arguments of
economic liberalism, and opposed by Bentinck with those of
common sense. As a result there were bread riots at election-time
in Palermo, and later on in other parts of the island.*
   The election itself was marked by a few incidents. In Palermo
the masters of the guilds traditionally elected to the Demaniale
their Lord Mayor     (Pretore). Now, however, Aci and others
—from motives of personal jealousy, it seems—induced them
to break with custom. This was a mistake, for the Pretore, the
Count of San Marco, though aristocratically inclined could have
been made into a useful ally. Besides, independence went to
the masters’ heads; they threatened to elect one of their own
number instead of the pocket candidate whom Aci and his
friends had provided for them. But in the end they fell into line.
Elsewhere too the Government, like its predecessors, influenced
the elections—to what extent it is impossible to tell.*
  Parliament was due to meet on June 18th. One month before
that date the Ministers were still divided on constitutional
reform; and the attitude of the Crown was most doubtful.
Cassaro continued to assert that Balsamo’s draft went too far,
and that in any case Parliament was not entitled to change the
constitution without the King’s leave. Fear of the King appar-
