           THE PROTECTORATE          AND THE ‘BASES’               45
this draft in April; he had not helped to prepare it except in the
way of general conversation; it was only later that he discussed
specific proposals with Castelnuovo and Belmonte, and that
some of them were amended at his suggestion. Nobody at this
early stage thought of drawing up an entirely new constitution;
Balsamo and his friends agreed that the old one should be ad-
hered to as much as possible. They wished on the one hand to
restore it to its original state in the Aragonese period, and on
the other hand to adapt it to modern conditions. To this end
the reformers took as their guide the English constitution,
‘recommended by the experience and success of centuries’, while
they rejected the Spanish and French, ‘which are too democratic,
and therefore tending to anarchy; and which assume in society
that wisdom and virtue, which may be imagined, but are not
to be found in man’. But when Balsamo produced his draft late
in April, it was already clear that the Ministers and their followers
were anything but unanimous, either as to the reforms them-
selves or as to the means of carrying them out.*
   All were agreed on two points: first, the power of the Crown
—on the increase for the last thirty years, and lately asserted in
defiance of the Constitution—must be curtailed; second, Sicily
must shake free of Neapolitan domination. A return to the
Aragonese capitularies, such as Balsamo’s draft provided for,
would serve both these purposes. But beyond this there were
many points of disagreement.
  Constitutional reform had to resolve the crisis of 1810-1812.
Not only had the conflict between Crown and Parliament then
come to a head, but the barons’ standing as a class had been
called in question. To some it might seem that Bentinck’s defeat
of the Crown meant the setting up of a baronial oligarchy:
that was what the Queen feared and Cassaro, for one, desired:
he would be quite content if the clock was merely turned back
to the status quo ante Caracciolo. He had formerly stood up to
the Crown in defence of the barons’ privileges; now that the
Crown was beaten he feared any innovations which might
weaken or destroy the feudal system. This fear led him to ally
himself with the King, and to advise the Prince that he had no
right to call Parliament or set about reforming the Constitution
without the King’s consent.* At the other extreme from Cassaro
