           THE PROTECTORATE         AND THE ‘BASES’             51
   So the Prince took up Aci’s twin notions of expedition and
English constitution with great zeal; he decided not to prorogue
Parliament after all, and undertook to convert his parents. The
King was suspicious from the first. The Prince’s ideas, he noted
at the beginning of June, were ‘diametrically opposed’ to his
own; in his son’s enthusiasm he thought he detected a mask
for unfilial ambition. He still objected in principle, he told
Cassaro, to any kind of new Constitution, and he wanted the
meeting of Parliament put off until September, by which time
he hoped Bentinck would have been recalled. But, he added, if
Bentinck promised an expedition to Naples ‘he would consent
to some Novita being introduced’. For a moment it seemed the
Prince and Cassaro had persuaded him.* The Queen, however,
was up in arms against Aci’s proposals, which she denounced
to her husband as ‘malicious’ and ‘erroneous’. She urged him
to set his face against a new Constitution and above all against
the ‘rebellious proposal’ of the separation of Sicily from Naples.
The King replied cautiously that he agreed with her but that
British pressure might force him to accept some kind of Consti-
tution for fear of ‘fatal consequences’. But he changed his mind
once again: two days later (June 9th) he sent Bentinck, on his
Own initiative, a questionnaire which shewed that he still thought
Bentinck’s conduct revolutionary and probably unauthorised;
he hinted at a desire to resume power, and demanded a pension
for himself and his family (not including the Prince) in case
Bentinck really meant to ‘annihilate’ him. At the same time he
plunged the Prince into dismay by again refusing to countenance
the opening of Parliament, which was now only a week off.*
   Bentinck was most annoyed. He replied that he had faithfully
followed his instructions; if the King resumed he expected to
see those engagements fulfilled which the Vicar had entered
into—that is, Parliament, reform, and army reorganisation; and
he seized the chance once again to press his case against the
Queen, including the famous proofs. Encouraged by Cassaro,
he blamed her as usual (and not altogether wrongly) for the
King’s recalcitrance: ‘I had been justly punished for my moder-
ation towards the Queen... it was only since her sejour with
the King that H.M. had become uneasy, had interfered in the
public business, and was now induced to resume the Govern-
