           THE PROTECTORATE         AND THE ‘BASES’              49
   At this point came the proposal to adopt the English Consti-
tution in its entirety. It came from the unlikeliest quarter—Aci
and the Prince of Moliterno—and it came linked with a plan
for an immediate expedition to Italy. Aci, volatile as usual, seems
to have acted on his own.       He merely conceived a brilliant
notion and put it to the Prince: if Sicily adopted the English
Constitution, Naples would want a similar boon; an expedition
would most likely succeed. Then Sicily would be independent
with the Prince as her King; or, if Ferdinand persisted in his
retirement, the Prince would rule at Naples and his brother at
Palermo.* Moliterno, for his part, had long been full of wild
schemes for the unification of Italy into one kingdom, with
—of all people—Ferdinand as its constitutional ruler. He had
approached Bentinck in March, proposing the formation of an
‘Armée de la Constitution Italique’ to be subsidised by Britain,
and vaunting his connections with the Italian patriots; but
Bentinck had thought him no more than a crank and an ad-
venturer. Now, however, Moliterno once again urged his plan
on the King and Queen. An expedition meant a constitution:
his own ideas on the subject were rather vague; since the
prestigious English Constitution was now in the limelight, why
not take it as a model and a slogan ?*
   These proposals of Aci’s and Moliterno’s did not spring fully
armed from the inventors’      brains. Anglomania,    as we have
seen, already prevailed in Sicily at this period. It had not abated
by 1812: the very terminology of British politics seemed to bear
some magical virtue. The new constitution, when it came to
be written, talked of bills and budgets; Aci thought to entice the
clergy with the offer of a Convocation; those who considered the
new constitution not ‘popular’ enough complained that “it even
established Star Chamber’. The learned Balsamo himself won-
dered for a moment whether Sicily had not better adopt the
elaborate comedy of ‘fine and common recovery’ as a means
of getting round entails.» When Aci spoke to the Prince, the
English Constitution had already been chosen as an ‘inspiration’;
Aci merely changed ‘inspiration’ to ‘model’. The state of Sicilian
thought explains why he could do so. The circumstances of
the moment explain why his proposal pleased nearly every-
body.
