60                   BENTINCK    AND   SICILY
     The Bases established the separation of powers, with Parlia-
ment taking to itself, besides the sole power of taxing and
legislating (subject to the Royal Assent), that of trying and
punishing Ministers, officials and magistrates. The three houses
were reduced to two—Peers and Commons—the temporal and
spiritual peers being merged into one house, and deprived of
their plural votes; money bills were to originate in the Com-
mons; and Parliament was to meet annually. No Sicilian could
be deprived of liberty or property without due process of law.
The articles where Parliament departed from Balsamo’s draft
were those concerning finances and feudal rights. Article X
gave the Royal Domain to the nation, in exchange for a Civil
List, and vested the administration of the nation’s property and
revenue in Parliament. This was the result of “democratic
feeling, especially in the Braccio Demaniale, and ran counter to
the Ministers’ opinions—Castelnuovo in particular objected that
it would make him, the Minister of Finance, ‘a Comptroller
only’. Articles XII and XIII abolished all feudal dues, juris-
dictions, and privileges, and converted all fiefs into alods. But
an amendment of Cassaro’s was carried by the barons—Bel-
monte, Castelnuovo, Aci and seven of their friends dissenting—
which made the surrender of certain privileges, such as local
tolls and monopolies, subject to compensation by the communes
benefited. This amendment met with resistance in the Dema-
niale: Belmonte, however, went down to the lower House;
overcoming his own distaste for the measure which he had just
voted against, by his eloquence he persuaded the Demaniale
members to overcome theirs also and thus maintain a united
front. In the Ecclesiastico the Archbishop of Palermo could
muster only a little less than one-third of the members to vote
against the extinction of their own Estate. The final article of
the Bases looked forward to the filling out of the Constitution by
Parliament along the lines of the English model.*
   The Bases of the Constitution, particularly those concerning
feudal rights, have given rise to a question which is still debated
—how far did they spring from a genuine surge of national and
reformist sentiment, how far from the desire of the baronial
class to maintain, perhaps even to increase, their power in the
state? The question must be considered later on. The Bases did
