                           GHA     PIE       RAITT

THE      CONSTITUTION                  AND           THE   ‘PROMISE’

‘A work of Herculean labour....It is the triumph of humanity
and Reason over darkness, cruelty and oppression and stamps you the
Benefactor of Mankind... you will enjoy the prayers of millions who
will ultimately derive freedom and happiness from this distant example... .
   Thus Pellew, on hearing of the Bases of the Sicilian Consti-
tution. That this was not the mere effusion of a politically naive
sea-dog is shewn by the chorus of praise and encouragement
which reached Bentinck from British observers, both after his
first victory over the Court in January and after the voting of
the Bases on July 20th. It was perhaps not surprising that the
generals and admirals should expect Sicily to reap great and
sudden benefits from the change—like nearly everyone else they
believed in her potential. prosperity, which (they thought) only
misrule had stifled, and only the Queen’s mischief still imperiled.
Nor was it strange that they, like Bentinck, should see in
‘regenerated’ Sicily a great accession of strength to the British
cause—'the world may be saved by it’, exclaimed Pellew. No
doubt these illusions were the outcome of a classical education.
But it was noteworthy that the Prince Regent himself, according
to one report, praised Bentinck’s conduct highly in private; it
was, one supposes, unusual for the Under-Secretary of State to
tell the envoy who had just revolutionised the country to which
he was accredited: ‘I congratulate you du fond de mon cceur’.
This enthusiasm for Bentinck’s achievement was not confined
to one party; it sprang from the most disparate motives: from
the Benthamism ofa pompous East India official who wrote that
Bentinck had done ‘that for a sea-girt isle in the Mediterranean,
which one of your ancestors assisted in doing for the island of
your birth’; or from the forthright John Bull attitude of the
Bishop of Limerick, who trusted that ‘that miserable country
will now be... made sensible of its good fortune in being
placed under the control and protection of the British Govern-
ment’.
   What doubts and suspicions there were likewise cut across
party lines. A Government supporter like Lord Sheffield disliked
