           THE PROTECTORATE          AND THE ‘BASES’              55
Italy. He reported the country to be at a high pitch of discontent,
ready to rise for religion, peace, an end to conscription, and a
British alliance—‘That cry from Venice to Naples... would
not leave one Frenchman alive in three weeks . . .’. Switzerland
and Tyrol were also ripe for revolt. Riper than any were the
Neapolitans, but they would bear anything sooner than the
return of the Bourbons. Concannon’s enthusiastic reports might
normally have made little impression on Bentinck; in his present
dilemma, however, they seemed to justify that change of plan
which he personally inclined to. Even so Bentinck was not
going to take so much upon himself unless he could run the
expedition on his own terms. These he put to the Prince in an
interview of June 8th—he had, indeed, mentioned most of
them in earlier exchanges, but only hypothetically. Now he
told the Prince outright that ‘the only chance of success was to
declare at once to the people that the deliverance of Italy’ (and
not merely of Naples) ‘from the French yoke was our sole
object. The choice of a constitution and a chief must be left to
the free will of the people’. He would neither mention the
Royal Family in his proclamations nor allow any of them to
accompany their own forces; for, he said, to thrust them upon
Naples from the first would alienate the people. All that Ben-
tinck would concede to the Prince, either then or later in the
month, was that he would ‘do all in his power to persuade the
Neapolitans to accept the Hereditary Prince for their sovereign’,
and that he would take no other prince—meaning the Archduke
or Orleans—with him to Italy. Bentinck’s terms naturally dis-
mayed the Prince, though they were not entirely news to him;
still he did not at first reject them.* Bentinck accordingly counter-
manded the Catalan expedition on June 9th.
    In doing so he exposed himself for the first time to the charge
that he had disregarded his instructions without sufficient cause.
Wellington was of course much annoyed at the news, and so
were Liverpool and Mulgrave. Bathurst, however—who was
Bentinck’s only friend in the Cabinet—was more indulgent.
Apparently he was not averse from Bentinck’s Italian plans in
principle, and thought a descent on Venice a promising possi-
bility. His Under-Secretary, Henry Bunbury—an old Sicilian
hand—was     more favourable still: if Russia held, he thought,
