            THE PROTECTORATE             AND
                                         THE ‘BASES’           61
hold the seeds of those differences over institutional and feudal
matters which were later to wreck the Constitution, and class
egoism certainly damped the Barons’ reforming zeal in the
matter of compensation. All the same we can have little doubt
that the great majority of parliamentarians sincerely and (at any
rate) consciously believed they had sacrificed their particular
interests to the general good of the nation. The sitting of July
2oth was thus the high-water mark of the patriotic movement,
and in the eyes of the participants it stood for the rebirth of
Sicily. Bentinck wrote home exultantly:

   ‘So strong an expression of national feeling is scarcely upon record . . .
an unanimity almost without a precedent, and more than ever surprising
upon an occasion when the ancient privileges and jurisdictions of families
were to be resigned, when long cherished prejudices were to be sacrificed,
and when the two more powerful orders of the State were called upon
to give up their preponderancy, to unite themselves into one Chamber,
and co-operate to confer upon the third an influence which it had never
possessed. These things are really honourable to the Sicilians, and the
exultation and hope which prevail are universal’.

   In a quieter strain, he confided to G.F. Leckie—in a sense the
first father of British intervention in Sicily—his satisfaction,
tempered though it was with regret that feudal privileges had
not been abolished outright:
    ‘The business is new to all, but notwithstanding there is a good deal
of vanity and egoism among the great and that there will be a good deal
of scrambling for loaves and fishes among all, yet there is a great portion
of good sense, honour and patriotism, that I hope will keep the ship
right, even should she be in danger. There is also at hand our independent
protecting force that I trust will be able effectually to secure this infant
Constitution from all mishap—and a very gratifying and proud duty
this is.”*

   This was undoubtedly the culminating point of Bentinck’s
mission: never afterwards could he feel so unmixed a satisfaction.
The credit for this golden moment he gave to his Sicilian
friends, to Belmonte in particular. But it was he who received
the congratulations of his British friends—of Ambherst, for
instance, who wrote that Bentinck had accomplished, without
