56                    BENTINCK      AND    SICILY
‘the time is not far distant when we shall see all the nations
from the Lake of Constance to the sea of Malta up in arms
against Buonaparte’. Between them they passed over Bentinck’s
step as an exercise of discretion which was permissible if ill-
judged. Castlereagh, for his part, warned Bentinck privately
that the Government would not hear of his encouraging the
Neapolitans to ‘elect’ Ferdinand, whose recall, “however volun-
tary on the part of his continental subjects, should be in fact a
restoration rather than an election’. To which Bentinck replied
that the Neapolitans would have resisted a plain restoration:
‘I... thought that the expedition proposed to me could not succeed
without the cooperation of the people and that this cooperation could
not be obtained without the inducement of getting rid of the French
Government and of substituting Freedom for Tyranny. Upon my own
responsibility I can proceed on no other grounds... though the con-
dition required seemed contrary to the King’s interest, yet in my opinion
it was directly the reverse.’

Of Bentinck’s wider visions of Italian independence and self-
determination Castlereagh, it may be noted, said nothing.*
  Meanwhile the prospect of an expedition, however stiff the
terms that went with it, was enough to keep the Royal Family
attached to the English Constitution. More than ever it seemed
the one safe haven in the storm of constitutional speculation
which then prevailed at Palermo. On the very eve of the opening
of Parliament the Prince took fright at an anonymous paper
proposing that Sicily should adopt part of the new Spanish
Constitution. This he thought ‘the precursor of democracy and
revolution’;   he refused to open Parliament          unless Bentinck
pledged himself to see that the new constitution did not differ
from the English. Bentinck objected that ‘this would have
committed me directly and personally in the affairs of the
Parliament and of the Government, which I have carefully
avoided’. He did, however, sign a guarantee of his support to
the legitimate exercise of the Prince’s authority against any
possible disorder. The statement concluded:

   ‘T certainly would not undertake to establish by force and against the
will of the people even that Constitution which to my conviction were
