           THE PROTECTORATE           AND THE ‘BASES’               59
on the ground that the reorganisation of the army, promised
since January, had still not begun. These, he admitted, were
negative weapons, ‘but I could do no more and with respect to
the Ministers, although I could not name those who should be
appointed, yet I could do as much by objecting to such as might
be offered’. To Belmonte’s qualms he replied that ‘the more
embarrassment there was the better’. He warned Cassaro and
through him the Archbishop that ‘the Constitution must be
carried—that was my business—It must be done either by the
Parliament or by force’. The Prince tried to stand firm on the
army question; but Bentinck returned to the charge, rubbing
in Sicily’s need for British help; he urged the Prince to follow
the example of Portugal by abandoning an ambiguous attitude
which might seem ‘a lurking hatred, too weak to refuse obli-
gations, too ungenerous to acknowledge them’. The present
Sicilian army, he said, was a drag on Britain, even a danger; the
subsidy treaties had not foreseen ‘a case... by which the one
buys the privilege of defending the other at the price of £400,000
a year, and is repaid by enmity and insecurity’. Finally, he
threatened that if Britain resumed

‘the right which the bad faith of the high Personage who directed the
preceding administration has given [her] of adopting the most extreme
measures, a right waived from mere respect and confidence in Your
Royal Highness’ upright intentions, she will stand acquitted before God
and man for preferring an open enemy to such a friend, the most active
hostility to such an alliance’.

   ‘Quite a declaration of war’, the Prince thought it; but he had
to bend before the storm. The Ministers’ resignations were not
accepted; and a meeting of Parliament was called for 20 July.
   On that date, in the course of an all-night sitting, Parliament
passed fifteen fundamental articles or ‘Bases’ of the new Consti-
tution. These were taken mainly from the draft in which
Balsamo had sought to distil the quintessence of the English
system while modifying it to suit the ‘debased state’ of Sicily.
But Parliament made changes in the draft which shewed that
the chosen model would not escape unscathed. On the contrary,
it already faced a double       challenge from conservative        and
‘democratic’ forces.
