54                    BENTINCK       AND    SICILY
for revolt, Bentinck told Liverpool so in a despatch of January
25th. To him and to Wellington he suggested various uses to
which part’ of his troops might meanwhile be put; one of them
was making a temporary diversion in Catalonia. Nothing could
have suited Wellington better; and Liverpool ordered Bentinck
on March 4th to carry out the diversion, provided that the
Sicilian situation allowed it and Italy remained quiescent. On
May 17th Bentinck decided to send 6,000 men to Spain, though
by then he would rather have kept them on hand; ‘we all think’,
he noted, ‘that this force will do no good’. But Murat’s departure
for the Russian campaign had left Sicily in safety; and Italy
continued disappointing. The Archduke Francis’ plan to raise
and liberate the country depended on slow and tenuous commu-
nications with Vienna        via the Balkans;      months     passed and
nothing was done. Overtures to the Italian Patriots were more
easily thought of than made: ‘I am taught to believe’, com-
plained one of Bentinck’s agents, ‘that there is no more commu-
nication with Italy than with China.’ Overtures from Italy there
were none. As Bentinck told the Archduke,

   ‘Le malheur est que I’Italie est trop humiliée par la police francaise.
Elle ne fait aucune démonstration de cette décision sans laquelle sa cause
n’intéressera jamais beaucoup le public anglais. Ils sont mécontents sans
doute, et deviendraient puissans contre les Francais. Mais ils sont passifs.
Je ne recois aucune proposition de l’'Italie, une circonstance que ne
marque ni une inquiétude trés pénible avec leurs souffrances, ni le
caractére de Grandeur d’ Ame qu’on a vu dans les Espagnols. Ce sont les
plaintes d’esclaves plutét que les murmures d’un peuple magnanime qui
veut vaincre ou mourir pour la liberté et l’indépendence.”*

     Bentinck wrote this in October, and it expressed the accumu--
lated disappointment of several months. At the beginning of June,
when the Prince proposed an expedition, he was still fairly
hopeful. None the less he now found himself committed to
acting in Catalonia; and he had no evidence from Italy that
would justify a change of plan. Just as the Court was ready to
cooperate he could not. Perplexed, he asked for time.*
  At this very moment, decision came to Palermo in the shape
of one Lucius Concannon,           an Irishman connected with the
Archduke’s party, who had travelled from Vienna by way of
