58                   BENTINCK      AND    SICILY
still; he took advice from Circello and other relics of the past
regime; Parliament met no more after the State opening. The
Royal Family fell back on the policy which had served them in
1810, that of playing off the aristocratic against the progressive
section of the patriotic party. The King let it be known that he
was ready to revert to the Sicilian Constitution as it had stood
at the beginning of his reign; that is to say, he would give up
all the ‘enlightened’ legislation of the Neapolitan Viceroys,
all the inroads made on the power of the nobility, all the fiscal
reforms the Crown had attempted, for the sake of averting the
present danger of revolutionary innovation. He did add that
if innovation there must be, he would prefer the English
Constitution to any other; but this was plainly a second-best.
In order to convert Parliament to his proposals the King set
about forming a party through the Neapolitan Archbishop of
Palermo and through Cassaro, whose fears for feudal privilege
had re-emerged. By juggling with proxies and by persuasion
both sides in the conflict attempted to make sure of a majority
when and if Parliament met.*
   This volte-face destroyed what little was left of Bentinck’s
regard for the Prince, and of his early conciliatory attitude.
Delay, he decided, was the cause: had he forced a meeting of
Parliament in January, none of this would have happened:
   ‘T have done violence to my own judgment and feelings in endeavour-
ing to attain the objects of my instructions by the means of conciliation
only. I regret the sacrifices of great advantages to the common cause
which have arisen from this undeserved delicacy. I am not ashamed to
confess that I have been deceived, because when acting for a great and
magnanimous nation, I should have been sorry that from any illiberal
construction of the motives of this court I had for a moment abused the
power committed to my charge. Every act and advice on my part has
been most sincerely and anxiously intended to promote [the Prince’s]
own honour and greatness in the eyes of his own subjects and of the
world. It has been all in vain. And I am now in the decided conviction
that fear and nothing but fear can direct a mind which many believe to
be as false and cunning as it is certainly weak.’*
  Bentinck now counterattacked on all fronts. In a Note he
urged that Parliament should be reassembled. He made the
Ministers tender their resignations. He suspended the subsidy
