               THE PROTECTORATE AND THE ‘BASES’                         $7
the best. Y.R.H. knows that I have had no part either in the recommen-
dation or selection of the British Constitution. Y.R.H. has the sole merit
of deciding upon a Constitution which agreeing in many respects with
the Constitution of Sicily, and sprung as it were from the same root,
does promise under salutary modifications to confer the greatest degree
of happiness and prosperity. ... The period with all its circumstances is
truly glorious to the Prince and to the People.’

   This statement, by eliciting which the Prince as usual hoped
to escape responsibility, later served Bentinck as a pretext for the
assertion of his own power; it also started a popular legend that
Britain had in fact guaranteed the Constitution. For the moment
it reassured the Prince. Parliament met on June 18th, and the
Speech from the Throne pointed to the English Constitution
as the fount of wise and moderate legislation.*
  But the honeymoon was brief. Bentinck knew he had taken
a risk in deciding on an Italian instead of a Spanish expedition.
Opinion among his military and naval colleagues in the Medi-
terranean command was divided. All agreed that Italy was in
principle a much more fruitful battleground than Catalonia;
and some shared his hopes of independence for the whole of
Italy.   But    Pellew,   Maitland    and    his   second-in-command
McFarlane warned him that only the certainly of a resounding
success could justify his disregard of instructions—a certainty
which his Italian intelligence was too flimsy to establish. Then
Nugent reported from Spain that the authorities there and at
home were quite set on the Catalan expedition; they would
not, he thought, take kindly to Bentinck’s about-turn. Even
this advice—so Bentinck later said—would not have swayed
him if the Court had gone with him all the way; but after some
hesitation they found his terms too much to swallow and re-
jected them. He accordingly changed his mind once more, and
decided on June 28th to send the troops to Spain after all. They
sailed at once under Maitland.*
   Thus the whole raison d’étre for the Crown’s acceptance of
the English Constitution fell to the ground. As a result the
Prince threw himself back into the arms of his parents, and
appeared openly as what he was, ‘the King’s Prime Minister’,
their differences made up. He began to complain of Bentinck’s
interference; government business came practically to a stand-
