        THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISR’                            71
biguous shuttling to and fro of Cassaro and Caccamo,                 the
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern of Sicily. As before, the Queen’s
debts complicated the issue. Who was to pay them if she left
Sicily ?When, somewhat later, Bentinck suggested that the King
might, the Prince made a face “expressive of the opinion that he
would not give her a farthing’. Bentinck himself had no au-
thority to pay them, and in any case he thought power, not
money, was the Queen’s object. Another difficulty was the way
the King and Queen fastened on Castelcicala’s reports from
London—and in particular on what Castlereagh and the Prince
Regent had said about the Queen. Castlereagh had told the
Sicilian Ambassador, and was still telling him at that time, that
the Queen ought to go away—perhaps not out of Sicily alto-
gether, though he could promise nothing; but he was sure
Bentinck would ‘act with all due delicacy and forbearance’;
the notion that force might be used against her was repugnant.
The Regent had dropped some well-meaning remark to the
effect that the Queen might come into Palermo now and again
to see her family. The King and Queen took all this to mean
that Bentinck had no powers to use force in the last resort: his
threats and demands could therefore be discounted.* Faced with
this opposition, Bentinck did contemplate the use of force:
‘...it was impossible for me to recede. My influence and
authority depended upon the result’, On October 8th he con-
sidered sending troops to the neighbourhood of La Ficuzza and
facing the King with the choice of abdicating or giving in; he
even got Belmonte to draw up a form of abdication. If need
be he was ready to expel the Queen bodily from the island,
should the King refuse either alternative. After a further flurry
of letters and talks Bentinck rode up to La Ficuzza on the rsth,
with the form of abdication in his pocket; but the King would
not see him, for fear of an attack of bile, and Bentinck had to
deal with Father Caccamo.
   ‘The question must be decided,’ he told him; ‘I had been burlato for
the last six months by the Queen’s continual declaration that she would
go away... I had always known she would not and I told him now
that until I came at the head of a British force she never would.’
  He therefore gave the King an ultimatum: if he did not hear
