66                  BENTINCK    AND   SICILY
the Ministers decided to obtain at once. Even Cassaro was with
them in this: Bentinck, he realised, having guaranteed that
Parliament should not disturb the peace, was now entitled to
demand that the Crown should not drive Parliament into violent
opposition. In fact Parliament already looked like getting out
of hand: only a week after the voting of the Bases, Bentinck
had, at Belmonte’s request, to go to the Demaniale lobby and
urge moderation on the more radical members, who shewed
signs of wanting to set themselves up as a Long Parliament of
Sicily. Here Belmonte’s own brother, Ventimiglia, was one of
the leaders and another member—Sperlinga—threatened, if the
Royal Assent was withheld, to move for a parliamentary com-
mittee to investigate the abuses of the previous regime. Bentinck
and his friends, however, decided—partly as a sop to Cassaro,
partly as a safeguard for the future—that the King, not the
Prince, should give the Royal Assent to the Bases.*
     The King, however, proved stubborn. Possibly the current
report was true that he and the Queen had countenanced the
English Constitution in the first place only because they had
never expected Parliament to adopt it—the clergy would never
agree to abolish their own Estate. At any rate the King, when
Cassaro first approached him, began by threatening to dissolve
Parliament and refusing to sanction any of the articles. Cassaro
pointed out that Parliament had kept fairly closely to the
English Constitution: “but who wanted, he cried, the English
Constitution?’ The Queen agreed that they did not. On August
 1st Bentinck himself saw the King for the first time since
January. The King still said he would never sanction the Bases,
 ‘mai mai mai’; he obviously thought the Parliament null and
void, reform abhorrent, and Bentinck’s acts unauthorised. He
shifted his ground, however: he would sanction the English
Constitution “but this was neither carne nor pesce neither
English nor Sicilian... he had not slept for 15 nights... his
conversation was very much mixed with religion’. He tried to
bargain with Bentinck—let Britain, he said, guarantee the safety
of the whole Royal Family (meaning the Queen), as well as
the Civil List—and ‘no man royal or common ever played the
beggar better’. But he found Bentinck, as he put it, ‘like an
inanimate statue of the hardest marble’, and the interview ended
