68                 BENTINCK      AND SICILY
ment with Castelnuovo and Bentinck—who now attended an
official meeting of the Council for the first time—the Prince
vetoed the’ article concerning the Civil List and the adminis-
tration by Parliament of the national revenue,       and reserved
judgement on the proposed compensation for feudal rights—this
last in the hope that the Barons might later be induced to
surrender their privileges outright.”
   But the difficulties over the Royal Assent marked only the
first act in the conflict that summer between Bentinck and the
King. The second centred round the army question. The Sicilian
Army was still not reorganised, and therefore the subsidy was
still suspended. Bentinck decided after eight months’ delay that
the matter must be brought to a head. He had, on July 22nd,
suggested a new and more binding Anglo-Sicilian treaty of
alliance; he now demanded several specific measures. A Sicilian
corps in British pay must be formed to serve outside Sicily—first
in Spain, later if possible in Italy; then the Captain-General
must be given greater powers, designed to get round Aci’s
meddling; and finally the King’s Neapolitan Guards must be
reduced and partly replaced by Sicilians. This last measure was
aimed at the Queen, who supposedly pinned her hopes on the
Guards’ support if the King should attempt to resume power.
The negotiations over the proposed treaty dragged on through-
out August and into September. Meanwhile the army could not
be paid, and the government were left at one time with only
three days’ bread and forage in hand. The Prince kept up his
threats of resignation and his desperate appeals to his parents,
but the King found his letters ‘impertinent’ and ‘incomprehensi-
ble’, while the Queen denounced him as ‘a traitor, a revolution-
ary!’ When the Prince tried to convince them, on the strength
of fresh despatches from Castelcicala, that Bentinck had the full
backing of the British Government, ‘the answer sent back was
that Castelcicala was either a fool or a traitor. The Hereditary
Prince cried out que diable puis-je faire’. The King wanted to
deal separately with Bentinck through Cassaro and Caccamo;
once again he tried to bargain for a guarantee of the pure
English Constitution and of the Civil List. He fought especially
hard to keep his Guards intact; but once again he could not
resist indefinitely, and once again he left the Prince the responsi-
