         THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’               73
  Parliament and the Constitution had, indeed, been constant
sources of concern to Bentinck throughout this series of diplo-
matic crises. We have seen that in his opinion delay had produced
a constitution much more impracticable than it need have been.
In the same letter to Bathurst he had to complain, of the very
Parliament to which three months earlier he had given such
high praise, that there was ‘but a very moderate proportion of
public spirit among them’. Experience had taught him that a
Constitution octroyée would have done better after all: ‘at first all
would have received with thanks whatever had been proposed,
but by delay cabal and intrigue has got ahead and the Parliament
has been entirely for a long time past out of all control’.* How
had this come about?
  The Parliamentary session of 1812, during which the Consti-
tution was worked out, lasted from July 20th to November 4th;
it revealed dissensions among the Patriots which, by choosing
to adopt the English Constitution, they had only glossed over.
Dividing lines were not always clear. There was, on institutional
questions, the old split between, on the one hand, the
conservative barons and their friends, led by Cassaro and the
Archbishop of Palermo, and attached to baronial, ecclesiastical,
sometimes to royal privileges; and on the other hand the strictly
‘constitutional’ majority led by Belmonte and Castelnuovo. But
these “constitutionalists’ were not always united; the new radical
group which had emerged in the May elections to the Dema-
niale, the Ventimiglias and Sperlingas, sometimes led them into
measures which the Ministers disapproved, or else broke away
altogether. More important, on the feudal question there began
to appear a split between Belmonte and Castelnuovo, which was
to grow in subsequent months and eventually to wreck the
movement altogether.
  The split originated partly in personal jealousies among the
lesser members, and partly in differences of opinion and tempera-
ment between the two leaders themselves. Belmonte was bril-
liant and fertile in expedients, but—as Bentinck gradually came
to see—he was not the man to be Prime Minister except in his
own fancy. He had little notion of Ministerial leadership in
Parliament: ‘when he passed the doors of that House’, he told
the Barons, ‘he forgot that he was the Minister of the Prince.
