72                     BENTINCK       AND    SICILY
from him by the 1oth, ‘I should consider myself to be at liberty
to do what I pleased’.           .
     The King gave way: Circello was called out of retirement; he
and Cassaro together persuaded the Queen to go to Santa
Margherita, in the southwestern part of Sicily, for the winter,
and to announce her intention of going to Vienna in the spring.
Negotiations went on for ten more days over the wording of
the written promise which Bentinck now demanded from the
King: Bentinck wanted the word ‘assurance’ to be included,
while the King wished him to be merely ‘informed’ of the
Queen’s decision. Bentinck won in the end; even then the
‘assurance’ was signed, not by the King, but—according to true
Bourbon practice—by Cassaro and Circello in his name.*
   Bentinck was exasperated by this continuous succession of crises:
    ‘T have found myself in very great embarrassment about the Queen,’
he told Bathurst. ‘I had quite made up my mind to take her away by
force, fully convinced that, if the British Government would not support
me, it was better for this country and for our own that I should rather be
sacrificed than she allowed to remain.... They cannot resist decided
language, and it is a pity that what has been so easily and so justly done
should have been left undone for six years. The Hereditary Prince said
to Belmonte the other day, il n’a qu’d montrer ses dents et ils (the King and
Queen) cederont tout de suite. Ihave done my best to keep up all the forms
and have sacrificed to the desired appearance of conciliation real and
substantial advantages. If I had been empowered at first to have said
‘this must be’, I could have arranged in one month what has occupied
a year, what has deprived Spain of the aid of many thousand men, and
what has given to Sicily a much worse and more impracticable Consti-
tution than she would otherwise have had. . . . Itrust that the Government
will not relax in anything, even the least trifle, respecting the final
arrangement that I may make with the Queen. The way is not smooth at
all... . There will always be abundant means with which she can put in
practice her wicked and artful designs. She is I think now completely
beat, if 1am supported.’
     At last Bentinck could look forward to leaving for Catalonia,
where his staff officers were steadily clamouring for him to
come and take charge. Now that the Queen was ‘beat’ he might
be able before leaving to settle the whole internal Sicilian
situation and even (he began to think) to reconcile the King
to the Constitution.”
