           THE CONSTITUTION           AND THE ‘PROMISE’                  69
bility of signing, on September 12th, a new treaty. This embod-
ied: all of Bentinck’s demands, together with a British guarantee
of the possession of Sicily—though not, as the Prince had
wished, of Naples. The King might, and did, assert that the
treaty was invalid without his own assent; he tried to undermine
it through Castelcicala, who was much more his personal am-
bassador in London than the Prince’s, let alone the government’s;
but the treaty could not be undone.*
  Bentinck now had in fact complete control over the Sicilian
army; in a moment of optimism he foresaw that as soon as
Parliament finished its work of constitution-making all Sicilian
problems would be solved, and he would be able to join his
‘distant flock’—‘the best and dearest part of my army’—in
Catalonia. To his Government he wrote that the new treaty
‘may be said to have been made not only between the two
sovereigns, but between the two nations, sealed by the unani-
mous    gratitude of the Sicilians, and indissolubly fixed in the
feelings of political interest, of liberty and of independence
common to both’. To his friend Bunbury he had written a few
days earlier: “We are now masters and kings if you please.”
   Yet there was still one more          act to come, and one more
problem to be settled: the Queen’s interference. Ever. since
January Bentinck had had to complain of delay and obstruction
at almost every point: the new Ministry, the summoning and
later the meeting of Parliament, the reorganisation of the army,
the sanctioning of the Bases, the new            treaty. The ostensible
cause was the King’s stubbornness: as he told the Prince:
   ‘His Majesty, who had before renounced all business, now insisted
upon seeing every paper, and directed every measure till at length the
Government exhibited the singular spectacle of an ostensible head without
any power, unable to decide upon any question, without the previous
permission of a superior; and that superior at a distance from the capital,
in no communication with the leading persons of the country, unac-
quainted with the temper and circumstances of the nation, and viewing
them through the false medium of the passions and prejudices of the
single person in whom he reposed confidence.’
  The Queen, as usual, seemed the real source of the trouble.
Everyone said so: the Prince repeated that ‘if his mother was
gone the King would be easily reconciled’; the King himself
