          THE CONSTITUTION            AND THE ‘PROMISE’                 65
a reformation without violence, and a regenerated constitution, under
the sanction and with the aid of the legitimate sovereign’.

   But there remained unresolved a lasting, and, one may say,
a fatal ambiguity in Castlereagh’s thinking. A statement of his
in a Commons debate of April 1813 illustrates this. Whitbread
had asked him whether the new measures taken in Sicily at
Britain’s suggestion were likely to give the people those political
advantages which had been hoped for. ‘It was a very great
question’, Castlereagh replied, ‘which had been put to him’; the
constitution was still incomplete, but
‘he was sanguine enough to hope great advantages from it. He trusted
it would prove beneficial to the Sicilians and their posterity, and secure
their attachment to this country... this country had never attempted
to exercise such a controlling power in Sicily as would be inconsistent
with the independence of its government. It had been the endeavour of
Ministers to unite the feelings of the people, and embark their whole means
of defence in the common cause.’

  Thus the Sicilian constitution could be seen in three different
ways: as the outcome of deliberate British policy; as the hobby-
horse of a Whiggish proconsul; or as the spontaneous achieve-
ment of the Sicilian people, with which Britain and her Minister
had nothing to do. The trouble was that Castlereagh held all
three views simultaneously, kept them all, as it were, in reserve;
or if, as seems likely, this statement implies a greater and more
calculated attention than he could give to Sicilian policy, one
may say that he never thought out until too late which view
the British Government should adopt. True, Sicily was far away
and he had to leave Bentinck great latitude. But flexibility is
one thing, letting matters take their course is another. That the
Foreign Secretary should keep in mind, and prepare for, every
eventuality was not the same thing as that he should scarcely
realise or even inquire what his own policy was leading to.*
   Meanwhile the Bases were only a beginning: the Constitution
had yet to be worked out in detail; and the attitude of the Royal
Family was still uncertain. They had been defeated in the
attempt to avert a new constitution; they must now be made to
acquiesce in their own defeat. This acquiescence Bentinck and
