         THE CONSTITUTION        AND THE ‘PROMISE’             79
would strengthen the judiciary against the interference of power-
ful individuals. Inevitably the plan ran into opposition: from
Palermo, whose many lawyers—strong in Parliament—saw
their livelihood threatened by the setting up of new courts
elsewhere; from a number of other towns, which kept up the
enduring spirit of Italian municipal rivalry and feared domi-
nation by their neighbours. Belmonte took sides with the op-
ponents of the plan; and Bentinck too argued against Castel-
nuovo that it would prove cumbersome, expensive and hard
on the poorer districts—they had better have half the magistrates
and pay them well. In the end Parliament passed the plan in
part; but the whole question was left unsettled, as was that of
the new criminal and civil codes; in fact judicial reform was
never completed or properly tackled until the Restoration
period, when the Constitution itself had been destroyed.*
  The rock on which       the Patriotic movement split beyond
mending was the feudal question. The abolition of feudalism
on July 2oth has long been a matter for debate. Some have held
that it was largely a gesture and did not effectually cut down
—was not in fact meant to cut down—the social and economic
power of the Barons. In this view the whole movement of
opinion among the Sicilian parliamentary classes in these years,
and its culminating point the 1812 Constitution, came to no
more than an attempt by the Barons to defend their position
against the inroads of the central government, even to strengthen
it. By converting feudal tenure into personal property—so the
argument runs—they gave up more burdens than they did
benefits; they exacted compensation for the loss of local privi-
leges like tolls and monopolies; and they saw to it that the
nobility as a class and a power in Parliament was kept intact.*
But this seems too simple. The night of July 20th was a time of
high excitement; Castelnuovo’s followers, and even for a time
Belmonte’s, were swayed by the thought of the Enlightenment;
in latter years, too, their cause had seemed to develop into a
national one. So far as we can judge their motives many of the
barons did at first believe they were abdicating their privileged
position in the State. None the less there was already a conflict
between conservatives like Cassaro and reformers like Castel-
nuovo. As the initial fervour faded away the conflict spread; an
