      THE KING S$RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE             83
   The King’s own intentions, however, were not clear. There
was certainly talk of his returning to power; the Queen con-
tinued to agitate for it from her own retreat at Santa Margherita;
and Bentinck foresaw that she would do all she could to evade
the ‘promise’. But when the Archbishop suggested to the King
that he should at any rate return to Palermo, he ‘put his hand
upon the Archbishop’s mouth and said Tace Monsignor... .
What I am doing is right and one day you will be of the same
opinion.”* No less difficult was it to make out the King’s
attitude from the behaviour of the Prince. The various crises
of the summer and autumn, throughout which the Prince had
been the helpless advocate of compliance, had left a coolness
between father and son. The Prince now put on a tentative
show of independence; when Orleans advised him to be l’homme
des Anglais ‘si vous voulez rester sur votre throne’ he ‘made a
face and said—Je le veux bien’. The King complained that he
was kept in the dark; he threatened to wash his hands of the
whole business: the ratification of the new treaty, the sanctioning
of the Constitution—his son might attend to them alone and
take the consequences. Yet the Prince was more dilatory than
ever: the Constitution awaited his assent, but Bentinck—now
an ad hoc member of the Council—was shortly to complain that
in three months there had been three Councils on the subject.
All the Ministers complained of the Prince’s distrust and mania
for detail, which slowed down the course of business almost to
a standstill. He conferred with subordinate officials without
telling their Ministers; he sent for paper after paper until the
departments ran out of despatch-bags, and he kept the papers
for weeks without doing anything about them. The Ministers
had found, on taking office, that many of their subordinates
were hostile to the new ‘system’; but they could not induce the
Prince to replace them: as usual, he promised much but per-
formed little. And over one important appointment the Prince,
as will be seen, seemed determined to thwart Bentinck and the
constitutional leaders.*
  The only explanation Bentinck could find for these difficulties
was that the King was still interfering and still unreconciled.
As Orleans put it,
