80                     BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
                                          *


increasing number of barons began to take fright at what they
had done; gradually they slid back into the conservative camp.
     Parliament, under Castelnuovo’s influence, did confirm the
abolition of feudal privileges, this time without compensation.
But the opposite tendency manifested itself in an article abolish-
ing common rights on former feudal lands—a step akin in its
effects to the contemporary English enclosures. The clash came
when Castelnuovo’s followers proposed the abolition of entails
(fidecommessi). Members at once recognised how important
was this proposal. They might and did quote Blackstone at one
another in debating it; but they seem to have been clear in their
minds that what was at stake was the survival of the barons as
the exclusive ruling class. On one side Castelnuovo and Balsamo
foresaw that abolition would lead to an increase in small pro-
perty and to the rise of a new class of middling landholders, like
the English gentry the pillars of the Constitution: this meant
the partial break-up of great estates. Cassaro, on the other side,
was extremely worried: he hoped Bentinck “would not permit
the nobility to be destroyed.’ All the same the issue was not
quite so clear-cut. Many barons, burdened with debts and
mortgages,     might have welcomed        a chance to alienate their
lands: but they were ‘moved less by private interest . . . than by
vanity and class considerations or prejudices’. In the end the
majority of the Barons voted against abolition “for fear of seem-
ing enemies to their own order and degenerate sons of their
illustrious ancestors’—had the vote been secret, thought Castel-
nuovo, it would have gone the other way. As the other two
Estates voted for abolition, the question stood unresolved.*
     But politically the conflict had already had far-reaching effects.
The split now ran not only between Castelnuovo and Cassaro,
but between Castelnuovo and Belmonte. For Belmonte, whether
from a desire to conciliate the Barons, or from his own aristo-
cratic leanings, voted against abolition, as did his followers. The
full consequences were not felt at once; but the question—which
was, indeed, fundamental—remained a source of dissension. In
the next few months it was to split the constitutional majority
into “Belmontisti’ and ‘Villermosisti’ (so called after Castel-
nuovo’s other title, Villermosa), and gradually to estrange the
two leaders.*
