          THE   CONSTITUTION      AND   THE   ‘PROMISE’          8I
   Bentinck took little part in this stage of the debate. His
sympathies were with Castelnuovo, for he too thought the
barons were unpopular and their privileges a burden to the
country. It is not clear whether he already despaired of their
political capacity—as he was later to do—and therefore, like
Castelnuovo, wished the middle classes to come into a greater
share of political power. But it was bad enough that the dispute
over the feudal question should have still further split the
Ministry.”
   ‘The Barons wanted an aristocracy, and...all wanted to
avoid paying’, said the Prince about this time. He was right, at
any rate, about the Sicilians’ willingness to pay: only at the very
end of the session did Parliament bring itself to vote even an
unsatisfactory budget. The economic situation was no better
than before: the grain shortage continued, leading here and
there to riots;* and Castelnuovo’s patriarchal notion of political
economy only matched the antiquated financial structure of
Sicily—a state with no modern system of banking or tax-
collecting and no funded debt, quite unable to bear the strain
of a long war even with a British subsidy. To these difficulties
were added the reluctance of Parliament, first to vote supply at
all for fear of a dissolution, then to vote adequate supply; and
Castelnuovo’s own reluctance—whether from delicacy or for
fear of unpopularity—to put pressure on Parliament. The upshot
was that the deficit remained almost as large as before.”
   This was a serious disappointment to Bentinck; and so was
the failure of Parliament to do much for the Sicilian Army
except keep Neapolitans out of it. “They want the most contra-
dictory things,’ he complained; ‘they first vote that foreigners
shall not be employed in the army, they next vote that no
Sicilian shall be forced to serve....They then desire a large
army and navy but will not vote any money for it.’ Still, Parlia-
ment was over by November sth and the Constitution made.
After several stormy months, Sicily lay for a few weeks in the
doldrums.
  Early in December Bentinck foresaw that in about a fortnight
the Royal Assent to the Constitution would be published. The
next step would take him to Spain.”
