        THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’               75
on the need for solidarity. They ought to realise that ‘one
department was inseparably connected with another’. The
Government, he complained, ‘has in fact no power and energy
—they are afraid of the people—the Parliament is the same—they
all want character’. Castelnuovo was too austere to be popular,
while Belmonte “did not see the necessity of collecting round
him a strong party—the consequence was that the Parliament
was under no guidance and were doing what they pleased’. In
fact the whole political system was far too fluid: ‘there must be
two parties—those who had the places—and those who had not
and wanted them...’. But if the idea of a strict two-party
system was new enough in England, it was quite unthinkable in
Sicily: Bentinck might grumble, but he could not alter the
existing confusion.*
   In the proceedings of Parliament Bentinck seldom interfered
directly. He did once or twice, at Belmonte’s invitation, lecture
the more intemperate members—they of course protested that
‘they wished to do nothing disagreeable’ to him, but little came
of it. One member of the Demaniale was a paid British agent,
and as ‘he was supposed to speak my sentiments’ Bentinck
arranged that they should meet to concert his attitude to specific
measures. But on the whole Bentinck confined himself to giving
advice in conversation with members and Ministers; in fact the
constitutional leaders complained that he was too reticent and
did not interfere enough.” Only at the end of the session did he
throw his weight into the scales: and then on a matter which,
typically, stirred Belmonte and Orleans all the more because it
touched their interests rather than their principles.
   At the end of October the Demaniale passed the new Civil
List: after the usual fashion of Civil Lists it provided separately
for each adult member of the Royal Family. But when the bill
went to the two upper Estates some members threatened to
amend it so as to give the whole of the Civil List to the King
and let him look after the distribution. Cassaro and the Arch-
bishop of Palermo, apparently, were behind this move, together
with a boon companion of the King’s, the Prince of Pantelleria;
and their inspiration could be traced easily enough to La
Ficuzza. All this quickly threw Orleans into high alarm (then
as later nothing moved Louis-Philippe like money); the Prince,
