         THE CONSTITUTION AND THE ‘PROMISE’                       77
ground or in the open, the abolition of feudal rights, in particular
the question of entail. The one major question on which all
were united was, as before, the independence of Sicily.*
  English Constitution or no, it became clear early in the session
that Parliament meant to depart from it—and from Balsamo’s
draft—over the executive and legislative powers. True, Anglo-
mania was as strong as ever: members paid lip-service to the
English model and used it as a justification, claiming that unless
the executive was hemmed in on every side it would reduce
Sicily to slavery ‘like England in the time of Henry VIII’.* But
their motives were plain fear of the Crown; in some quarters,
a new interest in French and Spanish constitutional doctrine;
in others a desire to preserve the financial and administrative
control which     the Barons    had exercised through the old
Deputation. For these reasons Parliament adopted once again
the article (vetoed out of the Bases by the Prince) which vested
the Crown lands and revenues in the nation. This time their
administration was left, on Castelnuovo’s advice, to the execu-
tive; but the spirit if not the letter of parliamentary dictatorship
prevailed, so that when the time came to vote supply, Castel-
nuovo as a matter of course did no more than present his ac-
counts, leaving it to Parliament to distribute taxation. In the
same way Parliament, while it adopted the structure and pro-
cedure of Westminster wholesale, interpreted the Commons’
right of arrest, trial and impeachment rather in the spirit of
17th century than of early 19th century English practice; it
tended to follow the Spanish model in making nearly all
Government     servants ineligible; and the radicals would have
made Parliament appoint to all offices. In the end Ministers
were not, as in Spain, excluded; but once again the spirit of the
new constitution was such that they had scarcely more initiative
or authority than any other member.          Still departing from
Balsamo’s draft, and against the strong advice of Castelnuovo
and Belmonte, Parliament lowered the property qualification
for electors and candidates, and freed the municipal councils
almost entirely from central control. None the less the Crown
was given a real power of veto; so that formally the executive
was no weaker than in England. What was missing was any
notion of Cabinet government.”
