                       CHAPTER IV
          '     THE KING’S RETURN:
              THE QUEEN SIDEPAR TURE

Unhappily for Bentinck what happened in the winter of
1812-13 was not his own departure for Spain; it was the King’s
return to Palermo and his attempt to resume power. The
resulting crisis lasted from December to April: if it proved to be
the longest and fiercest yet, that was because it brought to a
head not only Bentinck’s contention with the Royal Family
but also the conflicts that had for some time been growing up
among the patriotic Ministers and their followers. The ostensible
question was whether the King or the Prince should rule; the
real question, whether the new ‘system’, launched with British
help and now embodied in the Constitution, should stand.
   The King’s decision to delegate his powers in January 1812
had been an accident: Bentinck, taken by surprise, neither able
nor willing to press the King to the point of abdication, had
accepted it. Since then nothing had, on the face of it, prevented
the King from putting an end to the Vicariate at any moment.
He had not done so; all the same Bentinck had been unable to
preserve the new ‘system’ from continual trouble and delay,
due in part to the King’s obstruction.
  Now, at the beginning of November 1812, Bentinck held in
his hand what looked like several strong cards. He had just
exacted the ‘promise’ of the Queen’s departure; Parliament had
risen, and the Constitution, which it had at length drawn up,
seemed likely to be no longer a matter for dispute. Yet Bentinck
was aware that the King’s means of interference were not
exhausted; he wished before leaving for Spain to improve on
his latest victory by reconciling the King once and for all to
the existing state of affairs. No sooner, indeed, had he exacted
the ‘promise’ than he hinted to Caccamo that Ferdinand ‘the
Queen gone would make an excellent King. He had a good
understanding and an honest heart.’ Why should he not leave
his self-imposed retreat at La Ficuzza to come and shoot at La
Favorita, the royal villa near Palermo? ‘I would carry the King’s
gun for him.”*
