78                   BENTINCK     AND    SICILY
     All this made Bentinck uneasy. He had no wish to see Parlia-
ment enthroned as the arbiter of the new constitution. In fact
he shewed ‘a moderate spirit rather at variance with the flam-
boyant tone of some of his despatches. When, for instance, Aci
argued with him that the Lockian doctrine of legitimate resist-
ance to royal authority ought to be included in the Constitution,
he replied that ‘there was no necessity to sanction those acts
which were acts of revolution, perhaps necessary, by law’. He
told Anjou—one      of the five Barons arrested in 1811, now         a
prominent radical—that present fear of the Crown ought not
to influence Parliament:
   ‘They were now legislating for Posterity ... though there was now
an interest different from that of their Nation, that must cease here-
after ...a broad line must be drawn between Executive and Parlia-
ment ...the Executive would not have the responsibility they ought
and the Houses of Parliament would be a scene of perpetual intrigue.’
But ‘I did not convince him’.*
   Bentinck’s attitude was much the same on the other two
institutional questions which agitated Parliament, the Press law
and the reform of the judicial and administrative system. He had
originally approved, because of ‘the debased state of this society’,
the restrictions placed on the freedom of the Press in Balsamo’s
draft. But when the radical group in the Demaniale voted to
make the Press quite free, and when, after a conflict with the
Ecclesiastico, a compromise was reached freeing all but religious
publications, he did not object: not because he approved the
principle—he apparently did not—but because it seemed as well
to let Parliament have its way unchecked and uncriticised in
matters not of the first import."
   As for judicial and administrative reform, it was the occasion
for the first serious disagreement between the constitutional
leaders. Castelnuovo and Balsamo had devised a plan to divide
Sicily into 23 districts, each with its own court, sheriff and other
officials. The districts were to be drawn less arbitrarily than the
French Departments;      all the same, Castelnuovo, so far as he
meant to impose uniformity on a country ridden with multiple
jurisdictions, seemed to accept some of the administrative prac-
tices of the new France even while he rejected its political
 doctrine. He also claimed—though dubiously—that his plan
