74                 BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
He came there as a Sicilian Baron and his duty was to his coun-
try.’ This attitude—aristocratic at bottom, however veneered
over with liberal ideas—was one cause of friction with the more
systematic Castelnuovo. Early in the session Orleans complained
that, partly through ill-health, partly through his princely neg-
lect of details, Belmonte was losing his grip on his followers;
after the first few weeks he attended Parliament less and less
often, until towards the end he scarcely turned up at all. He
was just as nonchalant in matters of day-to-day administration:
‘business was not his fort’, Orleans complained; ‘he would
neither write nor read. His delight was in lounging and conver-
sation.’ Besides, he was as usual quite unable to impose unity on
his colleagues, and all too ready to fall back on Bentinck for
support. Bentinck and Orleans would meet and shake their heads
together over their friend’s shortcomings: his vanity, they
agreed, blinded him to the dangers of the situation; though he
was still supremely confident of his own ability to manage
everyone and everything, Prince and Parliament, his followers
were practically out of hand and ‘nobody [was] so humbugged
by the Hereditary Prince as Belmonte himself’.
   Then it was that Bentinck began to prize Belmonte less as a
politician, and Castelnuovo more. Castelnuovo had the virtues
of Belmonte’s defects; but he had adopted ‘the unalterable
system of not giving in to anyone      or on any issue when he
believed truth and reason to lie on his side’. This was shewn in
his management of the finances: moved (as the Prince put it)
by ‘a morality too philosophique’, he refused at one time to
pay out the army credits, on the ground that the State’s debts
were not yet all discharged: until that was done, ‘there were no
credits’. On that occasion and on others he tried to resign and
had to be dissuaded by his friends. Bentinck thought him
‘wrong-headed’ in this: still ‘it would be a great pity to lose
him... a man of the same character for integrity and firmness
was not to be found—I regretted in some respects his inflexibility
—If I could remake him, I would alter him, but as he was he
must be taken and he was the man of all others calculated to
establish the public credit.’*
   As the split between Castelnuovo and Belmonte became more
obvious, Bentinck took to lecturing them and the other Ministers
