76                 BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
too, faced with the prospect of being kept in leading-strings by
his parents, became ‘very reasonable’ and talked of proroguing
Parliament ‘on some pretext before the fatal amendment could
be carried; his sister Marie-Amélie, for her part, was ‘very much
montée... sure if left to the King and Queen they would get
nothing’. Of course they all looked to Bentinck for help; and
Belmonte automatically complained that Bentinck had not
interfered even though he himself, by neglecting Parliament and
allowing dissension to grow between his followers and Castel-
nuovo’s, had given Cassaro and the Archbishop their chance.
Nor was this all: not interest merely but principle also agitated
Parliament. The Demaniale claimed—mistakenly, for the Eng-
lish Constitution was not yet in force—that the other two
Estates had no right to amend money bills, and it sent the
Barons a message to say so; at which the Barons were furious
and drew up a counter-remonstrance. Bentinck, visited by one
after another of these men with a grievance, was annoyed: ‘the
fault’, he told Belmonte, “had been that the Ministers had not
been united. They opposed each other in the House—I could
only support them as an administration, it being their business
to lead the House.’ Still, if they could gain time ‘I was sure I
could obtain a majority’. This he set about doing by means
both informal and official, He argued with Cassaro, who
hastened to put the blame on Pantelleria but still seemed afraid
to offend the King; he tackled Butera, the wayward but influ-
ential first baron of Sicily; on Belmonte’s advice he wrote a
Note opposing the amendment, which the Prince could lay
before Parliament (the grounds for this unwonted interference
being that changes in the Civil List would affect the Army
supply). Meanwhile Lady William Bentinck had canvassed
Princess Cassaro on Marie-Amélie’s behalf. Forty-eighthours after
the original alarm Parliament met in the evening and sat until
3 p.m. on the following day; Butera made a long speech against
the amendment in the Militare; the Civil List was finally carried
according to the original draft; and so the situation was saved.*
   The chief matters for dispute in the three months’ debate on
the new Constitution were: the powers of the legislative and
executive branches; the freedom of the press; judicial and ad-
ministrative reform; and, most important, whether in the back-
