       THE KING'S RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE                 87
first in the dark; and Cassaro, who as usual acted as go-between,
managed to keep him there for some time. Bentinck was faced
with two happenings, which seemed related but need not be
equally objectionable: the breach of the ‘promise’, and the King’s
desire to resume power. About the former there could be no
doubt: when the King tried to explain it away—he had merely
stated the Queen’s intention of going, and if she now changed
her mind he could not help it—Bentinck lost no time in shewing
‘very great anger . . . for the indecency and meanness of this at-
tempt to declare nugatory a solemn assurance of the King
certified by persons of such respectability as Prince Cassaro and
Marquis Circello’.* But the King’s wish to return to power was
another matter: Bentinck might use it as a lever to obtain the
Queen’s removal and the fulfilment of the ‘promise’: and this
he tried to do during the next six weeks. Besides (Bentinck began
to think) the King’s return, if properly managed, might even be
useful in itself as a settlement of the whole Sicilian situation.
  In the first place, the King was popular, as Bentinck tried to
convince Orleans:
   ‘I said there were four points upon which there was a very general
sentiment in this country:
   1. Popularity of the King
   2. Hatred to the Neapolitans
   3. Do. — — Queen
   4. Dislike of the Barons.
   He did not believe the first and last. I asked him how it could be other-
wise with the general oppression exercised by the latter and their refusal
at all times to contribute to the public burthens. He was not convinced.
He said it had always been the policy of the Court to destroy the Barons
and their privileges thinking by that means more easily to govern—this
had been the object of Caracciolo’s administration.”
   The Prince had, on the contrary, so lost whatever popularity
he had had that the King’s return would (Bentinck thought)
be greeted with joy. True, the Prince had latterly seemed to
acquiesce in the truism that (as Orleans kept telling him) “when
a sovereign for his protection received from a foreign power
a large subsidy and a large force, that sovereign could not be
called independent’; he appeared genuinely to desire the Queen's
departure; and whether he liked the Constitution or not, he
