Q2                    BENTINCK       AND    SICILY
   Bentinck’s prevailing mood was confidence: ‘in such crises
as these I had always gained more than I had asked.’ Might he
not cither prevent the King from resuming, or else carry out
his threat to expel the Queen by force? Yet on second thoughts
he decided to continue negotiations. The fact was that Bentinck’s
position was hazardous. The Sicilians seemed useless—'they
were all afraid and would do nothing . . . they were run already
to kiss the King’s feet... on the side of the Nation and of
liberty not a man would stir—we were now completely the
principals.’ The recent split had disheartened as well as weakened
his friends; and he was no more certain of support at home.
Ministers were ‘slippery chaps’ at best; presently he heard from
Nugent, who had just arrived from London, that
‘it was very comical to remark the conduct of Ministers in England
about Sicily. They were very anxious... to see what had been done next
and who was to get the better—as if the business was entirely left as far
as regarded them to itself’.*

   Here the King uttered one of his Neapolitan boutades, which
so impressed Bentinck that he underlined it heavily in his journal
and (perhaps as a hint) in his despatch to Castlereagh:
    ‘But that’s what the English always do,’ the King exclaimed when
Belmonte tried to convince him that Bentinck was following instructions;
‘they let their Minister act as he pleases; if he succeeds they approve him;
if not they break his neck.’*

   There was enough truth in this to make Bentinck keenly alive
to the dangers of proconsulship in his present circumstances.
     Bentinck’s verbal threat to ‘enlever’ the Queen made the
King put off his resumption until she should have left La Ficuzza.
Negotiations went on. In his first Note to Belmonte (26 Febru-
ary) Bentinck laid down his terms for the King’s return: they
were those he had put verbally to Cassaro a week earlier,
but included—besides guarantees of the ‘promise’, of the Consti-
tution, and of a constitutional Ministry—an undertaking to
summon Parliament by April. The King’s answer (1 March),
like Cassaro’s, accepted these terms in principle but insisted on
the pure English Constitution, and on his constitutional pre-
rogative to choose his own Ministers.
