     THE KING'S RETURN:         THE QUEEN'S DEPARTURE            85
hold on the public purse-strings, he said, was a security essential
to the British Government. But the Prince shewed unexpected
powers of resistance: was one thing after another, he cried, to
be extorted from him by Bentinck’s ‘couteau 4 la gorge’? At
the New Year the matter was still unsettled. Bentinck had,
however, decided that Aci must go: ‘His opposition to me I
forgive—but his attempt to get rid of Villarmosa to put in his
place a creature of his own I shall never pardon.’ He guessed
that Aci was ‘achetable’: he did not know that for the last five
months Aci had been conducting a secret correspondence with
the King.*
   If personal jealousy and spite accounted for Aci’s defection,
Cassaro’s was a symptom of deeper differences among the
patriots. He, too, opposed Balsamo’s appointment, but he did
so because in the Parliamentary debates Balsamo had supported
the abolition of entail. When at the end of December the Prince
seemed on the point of giving way to Bentinck and Castelnuovo
over the appointment, Cassaro tried to resign, but was dissuaded
by the Prince and by Bentinck himself. Bentinck was at pains to
puzzle him out: ‘his prejudices against the new system I had
seen with concern,    but I respected his integrity and always
recollected with pleasure his uprightness and firmness under the
administration of the Queen’. Cassaro was, he thought at one
moment, ‘an honest man in his way . . . he liked the old system
well administered’. Yet his behaviour was disquieting: he had
begun to complain that the Prince was a hopeless failure as a
ruler, while he hinted that ‘the King was now as desirous of
governing as he had been all his life averse to it’. Bentinck began
to reconsider his estimate: Cassaro was (he decided at the end
of December) ‘a very ambitious man... in the last adminis-
tration he could not bear Ascoli—now Belmonte. He is violent
and cannot command his temper. . . . He sees no chance of being
Prime Minister.”*
   Here Bentinck put his finger on a part of Cassaro’s motives:
the fact was—and Bentinck took a surprisingly long time to
find it out—that Cassaro was the chief engineer of the King’s
attempt to resume power. He may well have been moved by
jealousy and thwarted ambition, as Bentinck and the Prince
believed; and he managed for a while to throw a smoke-screen
