84                    BENTINCK AND SICILY
   ‘The King was at present as it were retired into his citadel from whence
he was ready to make a sortie whenever he pleased, waiting for the turn
of events and encouraging by his hostile position all those who were
unfavourable to the Constitution.’
     How was this state of affairs to be remedied? Orleans and
Belmonte suggested on December 17th that Bentinck should
present the King with these alternatives: he should either resume
power, or else give his “decided countenance’ to the Prince’s
administration. Bentinck doubted whether the King’s ‘counte-
nance’ would in fact turn the Prince into a satisfactory ruler;
but it seems he was already toying with the notion of bringing
back the King on terms that would put an end to delay and
dissension.*
   For what moved Orleans and Bentinck to make their sugges-
tion was the split within the Government. This was no news,
but it had lately gone so far that the Government could scarcely
carry on as it stood. Bentinck was losing patience: ‘although
Belmonte was always complaining of the backwardness of the
English ...the Ministers must be the principals... the British
Minister could only be an auxiliary’. The Ministers, he insisted,
must work together at all costs; if they did not, England could
do no more, short of assuming the government; as it was ‘we
appeared to have everything our own way and to have all the
power in our hands while in fact we had nothing at all—We had
our own Ministers, but they were not united together did not
know how to manage business and had no power over the
Prince’.*
   Aci and Bentinck had been at odds for months; but since the
end of Parliament Aci had come into conflict with Castelnuovo
as well, over the Army credits which the ‘too philosophique’
Castelnuovo refused to pay out. This quarrel became further
embittered in December when Castelnuovo proposed. various
appointments designed to give him effectual control over his
own     department,    among     them    that of Balsamo       as Under-
Secretary (Direttore). The Prince objected to Balsamo as a
‘republican’; when Castelnuovo threatened to resign Aci urged
the Prince to seize the opportunity of getting rid of his inflexible
and ‘democratic’ Finance Minister. Bentinck came to the rescue
with the usual expedient of suspending a loan—Castelnuovo’s
