      THE KING’S RETURN:            THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE                 93
    ‘His Majesty’, Bentinck commented, ‘had no difficulty in giving a
general assent to future measures which not requiring immediate exe-
cution might hereafter be evaded. We were now at one of the moments
the most critical for the successful establishment of the constitution. It
was upon the point of being sanctioned and carried into execution. I
was deeply impressed with the King’s ill will and bad faith. To overturn
the constitution by force he knew to be impossible—but it was easy to
attack it by sap—to get rid of the Ministers one by one—to bring in by
means of the Sheriffs, all in Prince Cassaro’s nomination and under his
influence, to whom the first formation of the lists of the electors is
entrusted under the constitution, persons attached to the old Court party.
It became necessary to put the King’s sincerity to the test, to discountenance
this bold and menacing behaviour—and to obtain sucha Ministry as would
give confidence to the public, and would not be blindly subservient to
the King’s projects.”*
   In fact, Bentinck was determined to stop the King, if he could,
from resuming at all; the Prince he now thought ‘infinitely
preferable’.
   Bentinck therefore raised his terms: he demanded (3 March)
that the date of the Queen’s departure for Vienna—announced
for the spring—should be fixed, and that Cassaro should be
dismissed.* The King (6 March) evaded the first demand and
refused the second. To Belmonte he remarked that the English
‘wanted to get Sicily and that was the object of all their meas-
ures’; at the same time he thought Bentinck had no powers to
use force and his bluff could therefore be called: “before the
troops went to Spain he was obliged to be quiet but now...
he had the means’. So when Bentinck sent in a still stronger
remonstrance (8 March) in which he warned the King that his
hostile attitude might endanger the Alliance, the King did not
even read it. For on the same day the Queen, her protests
overborne     at last, left La Ficuzza for Castelvetrano;            on the
evening of the 9th the King drove from La Favorita to
the palace, hastily summoned the Prince and the Ministers, and
—to the ‘great surprise’ of Bentinck, who had never expected
him to take so bold a line—announced that his health was
restored and the Vicariate at an end.”
   The King was, for the moment, exultant. Bentinck, he said,
might do as he pleased, but he would not be his ‘Maestro di
Scuola as he had been that of Francesco . . . he consigned himself
