86                  BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
about his intentions. But although constitutional issues seldom
came to the surface in the ensuing crisis, they were there all the
same and they mattered at least as much as personal motives.
Cassaro’s action meant at bottom that after much ambiguous
behaviour—and perhaps real hesitation—he was seceding from
the Patriots outright and going over to the King in opposition
to the constitutional leaders, Belmonte and Castelnuovo. Other
great noblemen—people like the Prince of Trabia and the former
Lord Mayor of Palermo, San Marco—also moved closer to the
King about this time. Some of them had, like Cassaro, defended
baronial liberties in the past; we must suppose that in their minds
the abolition of feudalism (and its more effective corollary, the
abolition of entail which they feared would “democratise Sicily’)
now outweighed the political advantages of the new Constitu-
tion: the King seemed their last refuge.” Ferdinand, of course,
had his own reasons for wishing to forestall the sanctioning of
the Constitution: the loss of the Royal Domain in exchange for
a Civil List, and—most important—the separation of Sicily
from Naples, were measures he could never stomach.
   Such was the confused and perplexing situation when on
January 4th the Queen produced a coup de thédtre by returning
to the King’s side at La Ficuzza. She acted most likely on her
own impulse—or as she put it by the will of God—though
Bentinck disbelieved it. Cassaro at any rate had tried to dissuade
her; he deplored her coming as likely to complicate matters
unnecessarily by antagonising Bentinck from the start. As for
the King, his wife’s move put him (according to Caccamo)
‘nel inferno’: ‘Iam in the situation of Tantalus’, he said, ‘I know
what I ought to do, I wish to do it, but I cannot do it.’ What
in fact ensued—and Bentinck was not at once aware of it—was
a backstage tug-of-war between the Queen and Cassaro, with
each of them trying to make the King resume on his or her
terms: Cassaro telling the King that ‘tutti i buoni’ desired his
return, but that he ought first to send the Queen away again;
she hoping by the King’s return to undo the ‘promise’, forestall
her own expulsion and regain her influence. The King’s inability
to make up his mind between these alternatives prolonged the
crisis.*
     About this intestine conflict at La Ficuzza Bentinck was at
