feye)               BENTINCK     AND,SICILY

at the end of January, with a flourish: ‘surely’, he cried, ‘the
English Minister was not to govern Sicily ...he was no in-
triguer...he cared not what priests were made Archbishops
or Abbots or Archangels...if he had listened to the calls of
ambition he might have been the first man in Sicily . . . his
influence over the King might have made him Prime Minister
years ago.’ After a fortnight’s delay due to the Prince’s customary
doubts and fears, Ruggiero Settimo, a friend of Castelnuovo’s,
was appointed in Aci’s place. Thus three out of the four Ministers
were now staunch constitutionalists; while the fourth, Cassaro,
continued to hint that he too would presently resign, or else
become Prime Minister if the King resumed power.”
   For the King was still thinking of resuming. Cassaro brought
the matter up during the negotiations with Bentinck (13-18
February) which led to a mutual withdrawal of Notes and a
momentary détente. Bentinck realised that he could not openly
object, nor did he as yet particularly wish to. Nevertheless, he
told Cassaro, he had made himself responsible for the tranquillity
of Sicily, and he must therefore demand of the King an under-
taking to sanction the Constitution and to make no great change
of men or measures for some time. Cassaro agreed, with the
proviso that the King would sanction the Constitution so far
as it conformed to the English—in fact he meant to send it to
England for examination;     this made Bentinck uneasy, for it
implied a long delay. Cassaro also declared that the King could
not accept the separation of Sicily from Naples, as it was quite
contrary to the ‘English system’. The representative of the
United Kingdom could not press this point officially; but as
a matter of ‘private sentiment’ he strongly urged that it should be
accepted. Bentinck, however, still doubted whether the King
would resume, and thought that if he did, he would most likely
find the work too much for him, and would end by abdicating
or restoring the Vicariate.
   But these exchanges were only informal; and Bentinck was
in two minds whether to approach the King direct. He was
reluctant to leave the King wholly in the hands of Aci and the
other enemies of the Ministry, who were now clustering about
 him at La Favorita; on the other hand a letter setting out
 Bentinck’s terms for resumption might seem an invitation,
