      THE KING’$ RETURN:         THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE            89
 Queen alone ‘comme ennemie des intéréts de I’Angleterre,
comme    cause de tous les désastres de la Sicile’; but now the
King’s breach of promise had placed him in a position hostile to
the interests of both countries, and might lead to the most
disastrous consequences for him and his family. Bentinck there-
fore demanded prompt action. This Note had the effect Cassaro
desired: the King decided on February 2nd that he would go
to La Favorita, near Palermo, and the Queen to Castelvetrano
in south-western Sicily. On the 6th he arrived at La Favorita:
to Orleans he ‘spoke... with horror of the 14 months he had
passed [at La Ficuzza] ... he was now in a paradiso’.*
   But the situation was not so rosy as the King thought. Out-
manoeuvred by Cassaro, the Queen still refused to leave La
Ficuzza: snow, she said, made the roads impassable; and she
went on urging her husband to resume at once. Bentinck, on
the other hand, refused to see the King while the ‘promise’
remained unfulfilled. On the roth he got a reply to his Notes
from Cassaro and Circello: this amounted to a blank denial that
there had ever been any promise, and a rejection of his charges.
Orleans and Belmonte urged a strong reply; but Bentinck
preferred to enter into conversations with Circello and Cassaro.
The outcome was a mutual withdrawal of Notes, and a fresh
and more conciliatory reply by Cassaro and Circello, in which
they promised that the Queen would go to Castelvetrano as
soon as the snow thawed.*
  Meanwhile the Prince and the Government had been carrying
on as best they could. Councils on the Royal Assent to the
Constitution were held in the intervals of the political crisis, and
the Prince even seemed, for the first time, in a hurry to get the
business over. He kept aloof from the crisis, but was obviously
displeased with Cassaro for attempting to play Grand Vizier,
so much so that he shewed favour to Belmonte and even to
Castelnuovo. At the same time the conflict between Aci and
Castelnuovo over the appointment of Balsamo had come to a
head. Aci was now openly on the King’s side; relations between
him and Bentinck became more and more strained until, at the
end of one heated exchange, ‘di Aci continued to talk but I
took my hat and walked out of the room’; the man was (Ben-
tinck decided) ‘a miserable dirty fellow’. Aci finally resigned
