      THE KING'S RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE              97
this he did at the insistence of Belmonte, who wanted revenge.
It was unnecessary and rather weak of Bentinck, who would
himself have preferred forbearance.*
   The King’s remarkable powers of resistance dragged out the
crisis for ten more days. At first he would not discuss the new
delegation of powers at all; then he took his stand on the vague
powers of January 1812; then (21 March), goaded by another
ultimatum from Bentinck, he chose to delegate ‘in accordance
with the English Constitution’, which meant nothing. Mean-
while Bentinck had taken alarm at rumours that the King meant
to slip away and join the Queen and her guard of Calabrian
brigands at Castelvetrano: ‘I never should catch him again and
he might involve us in a civil war.’ Bentinck therefore posted, on
the night of March 21st, a troop of dragoons outside the gates
of La Favorita: a number of members of Parliament spent the
night there too to await the outcome, and ‘many of the common
people flocked thither as to a spectacle, buying nougat and other
trifles that were being sold there, as they commonly are at
religious processions and similar events’.* In the morning Ben-
tinck himself rode up, withdrew the troops, and met the King,
who had been sitting quietly in the front garden since dawn.
The King greeted him with an announcement that as a token of
his loyalty he meant to go to Malta, among the English.
Bentinck, somewhat taken aback, decided not to require—as he
had intended to do—the King’s signature then and there to the
full delegation of powers: if he did so he might appear to be
driving the King into exile. Instead he asked for a verbal assent,
which the King gave at once. There was a kind of reconciliation:
Bentinck told the King ‘I was not that méchant homme that I
had been represented to him—he took me by the hand’.
   In fact the King had momentarily outwitted Bentinck: he
did not, of course, go to Malta, but he did go back on his word.
It took another week’s hectic coming and going to secure the
full delegation. By now the proceedings were taking a grotesque
turn: witness a proposal by the King’s chief counsellor at this
time, the Duke of Sangro, that the King should be allowed to
resume on condition that he made Bentinck his Great Chancellor
for life. Bentinck’s patience was exhausted:
