      THE KING'S RETURN: THE QUEEN’S DEPARTURE                          05
his tomb would be written Ferdinandus Rex delle due Sicilie’.
His attempt (12 March) at a face-saving compromise—among
other things he wanted Bentinck to pay the Queen’s debts
before she left—fell on deaf ears. For Bentinck, despite the
failure of all but a few Sicilians to rally actively to his side—or
rather in a sense because of it—was convinced that he ‘could
not retreat’: he must now hold out for nothing less than com-
plete surrender.* He was therefore ready to declare the alliance
at an end if need be, and to treat the King as an enemy. Britain
(he later explained to Castlereagh) would have been justified
in doing so at any time by the flagrant ‘treachery’ of the Sicilian
Government in 1810-11. But
   “Where the one party was so entirely at the mercy of the other, it was
essential that moderation forbearance and disinterestedness should dis-
tinguish every part of our conduct. It would have been easy—it would
have been fortunate for all the parties concerned, had a decisive stroke at
once... terminated and adjusted this question. The interests of Sicily
and of England, the happiness and dignity of the King and of the Royal
Family would have been eventually saved. The necessity and humanity
of such a proceeding might have been evident to the nearest spectators,
but to the distant public and to posterity the honour of Great Britain
might have received a stain.’
  Persuasion had been tried for a whole year, fruitlessly.             Now
that the Constitution, in the success of which ‘our honour, the
interests of both countries were involved’, was imperilled by
the ‘faithless and evil advice’ of the King’s counsellors, Bentinck
felt justified in using force unless the King gave way—as his
instructions had always empowered him to do in an extremity.
This decision he embodied in a final Note (14 March): at the
same time he sent for part of his troops from Spain, and con-
templated deposing the King by force if necessary:
   ‘The principle of the arrangement was to be that we took possession
of the country and gave up the right to the nation. The Parliament must
nominate to the vacant throne’ (i.e. the Prince would be ‘elected’ to
succeed his father, rather than visibly imposed on the country by the
British).*

  The tension was at its height: Government business had come
to a standstill; some of the constitutionalist leaders, including
