                  THE   CONSTITUTION      FAILS                103
two converts with little influence on policy—Bunbury, Miinster,
Pellew—neither the British Government nor its agents would
budge;* and Bentinck’s secret negotiations with Murat, held at
Ponza in June—in the course of which he again insisted on the
necessity of making all Italy free and independent—came to
nothing.” He therefore went to Spain convinced that his army
was being frittered away there to no purpose, and a golden
chance lost in Italy. This conviction he frequently expressed,
and so added another difficulty to his already rather uneasy
relations with Wellington; he also laid up another grievance in
Ministers’ minds against the day when they should decide,
in King Ferdinand’s words, to ‘break his neck’.*
   If Italy was a reminder of what might be, Sicily was a commit-
ment both tangible and disquieting. Bentinck, as we have seen,
assured his Government that there all was for the best. Perhaps
that was what he himself wished to believe. Yet even before his
departure he had been aware of possible danger ahead.
   The Constitution was sanctioned. But the Councils held for
the purpose from December onward—part of the time under the
shadow of the King’s attempt to overthrow the ‘system’—had
perpetuated old dissensions and given rise to new ones. At first
the Council had been divided, over such questions as the freedom
of the press, between the conservative Cassaro, with whom the
Prince generally sympathised, and the constitutionalists Bel-
monte and Castelnuovo, often though not always supported by
Bentinck. The Prince usually gave way to the latter: most of
the institutional articles were sanctioned without serious changes.
Bentinck was sometimes deputed to find out the ‘English prac-
tice’; far from dictating to the Council, he was often to be found
on the side ofcompromise; and he failed to carry the Council with
him when, for instance, he attempted to secure a clearer sepa-
ration of powers and a stronger Executive.
   The first serious trouble came over the confiscation of the
Royal Domain in exchange for a Civil List, and the separation
of Sicily from Naples. The Prince wished to veto both measures:
he knew his father was irreducibly opposed to them, and he
disliked them himself—as for separation, he scarcely concealed
his belief that Sicily was a natural dependency of Naples, and
the Sicilians ‘good for nothing’. He yielded on the Civil List,
