I0O0                 BENTINCK       AND   SICILY

‘here where cowardice was carried to such an extraordinary pitch...
they never looked forward in this country. They only considered the
present danger but... the greatest possible evil... they never contem-
plated at all, and that was the possible disavowal by the British Govern-
ment of my acts.”*
   No doubt Bentinck wrote his despatches with an eye to
publication if the Queen should decide to bring out her side of
the story. All the same, one wonders whether he still could not
help judging the Sicilians by a double standard—on a particular
occasion they might prove cowards, but in the abstract they
remained ‘this great population’.
   At all events Bentinck’s victory now seemed complete. After
the re-establishment of the Vicariate on March 28th, and the
simultaneous arrival of Castelcicala’s despatch announcing that
Bentinck was fully supported by his Government, the powers
of resistance of the King and Queen were broken. Bentinck
could prepare to leave for Spain at last.
   The King confined himself henceforth to wrangling with his
son over the Civil List; he refused to have anything to do with
the settlement of his wife’s debts—‘affatto, affatto, he would
not read a word’. In May he even had a friendly conversation
with Bentinck, in the course of which he complained bitterly
of the Prince—though ‘he loved him and forgave him and
prayed God every morning illuminarlo’. Of the Sicilians ‘he
said, to speak plainly, we are living in the midst of cannibals.
He knew them well . . . the changes which had been made must
end in bloodshed and anarchy’. He therefore asked for British
protection in case of need. Bentinck agreed to it, but added
that he too knew the Sicilians: ‘they made a great outcry...
oe barked very loud but had no teeth—they did not dare
  ite
  The Queen made no more serious resistance, though illness
and wrangles over her debts delayed her departure for over two
months, and the ever-present threat of force—not force itself—
was still needed to make her go. She sailed from Mazara on
June 14th. Rather than ask for a French laissez-passer through
Trieste or Fiume, she travelled to Vienna via Constantinople and
Odessa. Delayed by winds and quarantines, she reached Vienna
only in February 1814. Seven months later she died of a stroke.”
