                         CERUAE     ERs Vv’

            THEICONS          TEBOHT TON BALDS

Bentinck, when he sailed to Spain in May 1813, turned his back
for a time not only on Sicily but also on Italy. It looks as though
he was not sorry to exchange the heat and dust of Sicilian
politics for the warlike quiet of Catalonia, where, indeed, his
army had long stood in sore need of leadership. But Italy was
another matter: even as he left Bentinck went on pressing for
a change in British policy that would enable him to raise, free,
and perhaps unify the greater part of the country.
  The liberation of Italy had been Bentinck’s chief aim at the
beginning of his mission; Sicily was to have provided a stimulus
to revolt and a springboard for invasion. But his reluctant
decision to send most of his troops to Spain in June 1812 had
scotched the plan; nothing had come of his attempts at coopera-
tion with Italian patriots;* while the successive crises of the
summer and autumn had taken up much of his time and had
turned Sicilian reform into an end rather than a means. Still he
went on urging his plans for Italian expeditions on the British
Government, though with little hope of immediate success. For
Ministers at home were unanimously in favour of his concen-
trating his efforts on Catalonia; at most Bathurst and Bunbury
held out vague hopes of action in Italy if and when Spain was
wholly freed; and Nugent found, on one of his peripatetic visits
to London in September, that ‘c’efit été inutile de lutter contre le
torrent’.” The winter and spring of 1813, however, bringing
news of the retreat from Moscow, gave new life to the Italian
project, which now appeared at once more urgent and more
feasible than before. Bentinck renewed his entreaties; moved
the Prince to support them; sent Lamb home in April to state
that the Italian patriots seemed ready to rise for ‘the expulsion
of the French . . . and the union of all Italians in a single Nation,
governed by a system of representation’: apart from the un-
doubted military advantages of an expedition (Lamb was to
argue) England ought to secure the future balance of power of
the Continent by giving Italy her protection and so forestalling
the ‘private ends’ of Austria and Russia.* But except for one or
