94                   BENTINCK     AND    SICILY
to the hands of God’. Next day he drove in state amid cheering
crowds to a Te Deum service at the Cathedral. On the same th
(10 March) Bentinck got an answer to his last Note, in whic
the King merely stood his ground. He therefore “determined
to go personally to the King and see ifI could not frighten him’.
Bentinck’s arrival at the Palace on the morning of the 11th
threw the King into a panic, but (as he himself relates) he ‘made
the Holy Sign of the Cross’ and brought himself to face Bentinck
for the first time since August. The interview was stormy:
Bentinck repeated his recent warnings, and stated that the
British Government would not permit the Constitution to be
destroyed: “The King took fire at the word Permit. Permit, per-
mit, permit, he repeated, England has no right to interfere.’
When Bentinck began to hint at the past ‘treachery’, not of
the King but of his government, the King cut the interview
short: ‘Ni moi, ni mon gouvernement. Je ne peux pas écouter de
pareil langage. Ecrivez-le, écrivez-le! And he left me.’ No
sooner was the interview over than the King—‘alterata la bile’—
had an attack of nerves and took to his bed.*
   Meanwhile Bentinck was counter-attacking on another front.
The King had planned to stage a second popular demonstration
in his own favour by attending yet another thanksgiving service
that evening. The city was in a ferment:
   “Amidst the exclamations of God save the King it was said that cries
of “Out with the English” had also been mixed. Money was universally
stated and believed to have been spread among the populace, and all the
partisans of the Queen were zealously engaged in exciting disorder.’

     Bentinck therefore warned the Sheriff of Palermo that, since
he was responsible for the tranquillity of Sicily, he would march
British troops into the city to ‘protect’ the King. The King
decided to go on being ill, and called off the service. Meanwhile
‘the troops had already been in motion and the passage of some
cannon through the town made a very good effect greater said
someone than all my Notes for the last year’.*
   The King, though frightened, still would not yield. For his
sins God had plagued him with this man, he exclaimed—‘ma
poi questa tribulazione will operate to my salvation. . . Under
the cross of Jesus Christ was J. Nazarenus Rex Judaeorum—on
