96                  BENTINCK     AND SICILY
the Orleans family, were preparing to take refuge aboard
British ships if the King held out to the point of hostilities.* He,
indeed, did not yield at once: still apparently unconvinced that
Bentinck meant what he said, he drafted a reply (15 March)
conceding nearly every point but asking for time and, where
the Queen was concerned, for money. Belmonte, however,
refused to sign the draft; a few hours later, at Bentinck’s insti-
gation, all three constitutionalist Ministers resigned. The King,
who had already thrown Cassaro to the wolves, was left without
a single Minister. Almost abandoned in his half-empty palace
by his relatives and courtiers, he began to lose heart. Orleans,
whom he sent for on the 16th, found him distracted: Bentinck
might blow him up with grapeshot, he cried—he had a pain
in his breast and in his side—me ne vado—I am dying—Oh,
how I wish to be quiet’. He had committed a bestialita in
resuming; for most of his misfortunes he blamed the Queen.
Yet, in spite of his fears, he still would not commit himself to
making her go away, especially so long as Britain refused to
pay for her; and he categorically refused to consider abdicating.
Finally, faced with a 24-hour ultimatum from Bentinck, the
King did as he had done in January 1812: he announced verbally,
on the evening of the 17th, that he meant to restore the Vicariate
and not to resume in future without the consent of the British
Government. He then decamped to La Favorita.*
  At this point Bentinck could perhaps have pressed the King
as far as abdication, and indeed Orleans urged him to do so;
but he had no authority for such a step. Instead he went on de-
manding the Queen’s departure; and he insisted that the Vicar’s
new powers should specifically include all those matters—such
as Parliament, the Constitution, foreign affairs, and appoint-
ments—in which the King had kept interfering since his first
delegation of powers in January 1812. The Prince agreed with
Bentinck that sooner than accept such another delegation in
general terms—absolute in theory, at the mercy of the King’s
whim in fact—it would be better to let the King resume again;
though (Bentinck added privately) ‘if he resumed, it should
only be with the condition that he should be bound hand and
foot’. Finally, Bentinck demanded the dismissal from their Court
functions of three of the King’s partisans, among them Cassaro:
