                   THE   CONSTITUTION        FAILS                IT3
als’ misdeeds; while Montgomerie had again to threaten force
and dissolution to forestall a motion in the Peers calling on the
King to resume power. Party hatreds were still further em-
bittered by the appearance of the first political newspapers ever
seen in Sicily: amid the resulting uproar the Commons started
setting up a cry for the Spanish Constitution, making forays
into the executive and judicial powers, interfering with the
courts, attempting to try one of their own members, and gener-
ally giving an imitation—superficial and in little—of the French
Convention. On September 11th Montgomerie, worn out with
illness and worry, at last got a letter from Bentinck announcing
his return: he therefore asked the Prince to prorogue Parliament
for twenty days and so gain a breathing-space. The Prince
agreed with some misgiving, but Parliament dispersed quietly
enough on the 15th.*
   Bentinck had decided at the end of August that he would
have to go back to Sicily and restore order. It was with con-
siderable disgust that he gave up his military command, for
he thought of himself as a soldier first and foremost. In the first
revulsion of feeling he wrote to Castlereagh that such was
‘the weakness of the Hereditary Prince, and such... the inca-
pacity of any set of men who may be placed at the head of the
Government; such also the silly, the interested and depraved
character of the people’, that henceforth the British Minister
would be unable to leave Sicily: he therefore asked to be relieved
of the mission and so freed to follow his military calling; and
a few days later he asked for leave in England to look after his
Parliamentary seat and his private affairs.” This move was a
mistake,   for it later allowed    Castlereagh to put an end to
Bentinck’s mission without actually recalling him. For the
moment, however, Castlereagh asked him to stay on, and tried
to soothe his disappointment: ‘I know of no hands in which the
British influence can at present be satisfactorily placed except in
Your Lordship’s.. . .’ He felt it unnecessary to send further instruc-
tions, merely approving ‘the generalline of policy’ which Bentinck
had recommended to the Prince and Montgomerie. A month
later Castlereagh added that, although Bentinck would be sacri-
ficing his military career,
