                THE CONSTITUTION FAILS                III
tutional government was now quite adrift and beyond their
help.
   Bentinck, hearing this news before Tarragona, felt ‘necessarily
hurt at so bad a result to all the exertions I have made, but...
much more disappointed for the discredit that it gives to the
cause of freedom’. He had already warned Orleans that, with the
Ministry hopelessly divided as it had been, ‘a new set of bold
Patriots’ were likely to spring up and ‘put all that weak aris-
tocracy to the rout’: if so the Prince and the British would have
to ‘side with the strongest’. The government had lost control
of Parliament
‘by their own folly, their own want of energy alone, and then like the
carter who prayed to Jupiter when his cart was in the mire, [they]
complain of the apathy of the British Authorities, if by a timely parade
of cannon through the Cassaro [the high street of Palermo], or by a
nocturnal deportation of obnoxious citizens without enquiry or trial, a
system of terror is not established’.*
   As for Parliament, Bentinck was not too alarmed by its
alleged ‘Jacobin tendencies’, which he rather attributed to the
inexperience of
‘persons brought up in a country where... despotism... has estab-
lished a rooted distrust and perhaps distaste towards all government,
where education has been very bad, and instruction very limited, and
where the freedom of the Press has not impressed upon the minds of the
people that knowledge and justness of political principles and reasoning
which discriminate the British Nation’.
   Bentinck therefore advised strongly against any recourse to
the old despotic system of force, or even to prorogation or
dissolution. The government, he said, should keep strictly within
the law: Parliament should be given its head; if it should
threaten the Constitution itself, the Prince could always use his
power of veto. Of course Parliament might go on refusing
supply. In that case
‘there will and must follow a revolution, as the machine of government
as established by the constitution will stop. But in the first place time will
be gained by this process, during which ignorant but well-intentioned
men may see their error; and they probably will avoid an extremity
which will threaten their personal safety; for timidity I consider to be a
peculiar characteristic of the Sicilians. In the second, if anything like
