106                 BENTINCK     AND. SICILY
scarcely existed as yet in Sicily; most of the available commoners
were lawyers and not ‘respectable’ enough as a group.” This
being so, the Ministers could hardly be anything but aristocrats.
But their need for unity was all the stronger, especially in the
face of a coming Parliament which might ‘ride this new liberty
horse too hard’ as Bentinck put it. Before leaving he therefore
renewed his exhortations; he took with him as a precaution a
private letter from Belmonte which gave warning of ‘demo-
cratic’ perils ahead and might justify a sudden return to Sicily;
and he urged the Prince to ‘cling fast to the British Consti-
tution.*
   Bentinck’s fears were all too well grounded. A helpless spec-
tator separated from the scene by the whole of the Western
Mediterranean, he had that summer to watch the Constitution
and its defenders speedily collapse under a double attack by
democrats and conservatives. This attack grew naturally out of
the previous course of the Patriotic movement; but it was helped
to its success by weaknesses in the British and constitutional
camp, some of them fundamental, some only contingent.*
   The split between Belmonte and Castelnuovo over the feudal
question had shewn how unready were most of the original
Patriots for a programme of moderate social change such as
Castelnuovo advocated. That the split had been papered over
only temporarily was brought out by the behaviour of the
constitutional leaders during the elections to the new Parliament.
Castelnuovo in particular deliberately refrained from using his
influence to avert the obvious danger of a large number of
‘democratic’ victories at the polls. Whether he did so, as Balsamo
maintained, from ‘a greater reserve and delicacy than the character
of the nation, and very likely the stubborn nature of the human
heart, should have allowed’; or whether, as the Belmontists
claimed, he wished to secure a majority for the abolition of
entail, the result was the same. The Ministers and their followers
therefore entered the fray not only divided among themselves
but scarcely certain of a majority in Parliament.*
   Other circumstances hampered the government. The finances,
never sound, were now in so bad a state as to be beyond the
usual remedy of short-term British loans and advances: a speedy
Parliamentary supply would be essential. Castelnuovo’s policy
