                      THE   CONSTITUTION          FAILS                   IO}7/
of economic liberalism had increased food prices and with them
popular discontent.* But a greater peril, over which the govern-
ment had no control, was the plague, which had spread from
the Middle East to Malta and might spread to Sicily. The
measures taken to avert the peril made things worse politically
by jeopardising the position of the British as the protectors of
Sicily.
   The British, it appears, had already incurred some unpopu-
larity by their display of force at the time of the King’s return
and the Queen’s expulsion;* but the plague gave rise to much
stronger grievances. Most of the traffic between Sicily and the
rest of the Mediterranean,          including the infected areas, was
carried on by British ships. Amid the alarm caused by the
plague, it was easy for the opposition to accuse the British of
neglecting the quarantine regulations; it was even convenient
for the government, if their policy was attacked, to reply ‘the
English have obliged us to do so’. The British generals, for
their part, were often overbearing and tactless in their protests
against what they considered the unreasonable attitude of the
government and the local boards of health.* Neither Lord
Montgomerie, a British resident to whom Bentinck had en-
trusted the mission, nor Joseph Smith, his Secretary, had the
authority or the strength needed to control the situation: both
were in poor health, one was new to diplomacy, and the other
to Sicily.* Orleans, writing to Bentinck, complained of the lack
of ‘une adresse et une circonspection qui n’est pas toujours
congenial avec le caractére anglais’, and reported ‘the irritation
produced by the manner in which the English Societies mount
each other [i.e. se montent] against foreigners when there is no
superior chief to give the Ton and to take the lead’. In Bentinck’s
absence the British authorities did not always act in concert:
besides, said Orleans,

   ‘T think, My Lord, that generally they don’t see enough of the Sicilian
Ministers, of the Hereditary Prince and of the heads of this government . . .
this lack of communications lessens the English influence over the Sicilians,
and... it renders impossible to adjust beforehand and privately the
points which must afterwards become the objects of official Notes and
public discussions.”*
