104                   BENTINCK      AND    SICILY
however, after thrusting responsibility for it on the Councillors.
It took longer to make him accept separation. Bentinck admitted
that England ‘did not care about it’—in fact it might be against
her interests, since while the two countries were united she
could always put pressure on Naples through Sicily. But the
Sicilians, he pointed out, did seriously resent their subjection
to Naples, and they did want independence; the two kingdoms
had different interests—‘Naples... must always follow the great-
est political powers of the Continent; Sicily the greatest maritime
power —and that maritime power would certainly not help to
thrust them together again by force. Sicily, independent, re-
formed, properly developed, would be strong enough to stand
on her own      feet and have ‘allies, not masters.’ Besides, she
might one day take to reunion of her own free will, especially
if her free constitution was extended to Naples. The Prince at
length gave way to the advice of the Council—this time unani-
mous; but he did so with obvious distaste, and the setting up
of separate dynasties in the two kingdoms was put off until a
general peace.*
  No sooner had this obstacle been removed at the beginning
of May than fresh trouble arose over the abolition of entail.
This measure, passed in 1812 by the two lower Estates only,
had caused the first falling out of Belmonte and Castelnuovo.
When it had come up in Council the two had again opposed each
other—with Bentinck supporting Castelnuovo—but at length
all had agreed on a compromise which safeguarded the rights
of immediate heirs. Now, however, Castelnuovo reopened the
whole question by proposing that Parliament should be left free
to decide it ‘according to the English Constitution’: this really
meant that he hoped to secure outright abolition later on.*
Belmonte and Castelnuovo now quarrelled in earnest: the one
flippant and sarcastic, the other angry and immovable. Bentinck
tried to make peace:
  ‘He should consider himself as Prime Minister,’ he told Belmonte,
‘and Villermosa as one of his instruments—whom on account of his
utility he should court as a fine lady. He said he had neither time nor
health for this operation which would occupy a man’s whole life—I said
that I knew Villermosa was a very impracticable man but I believed him
to have no ambition. . . . Ihad seen nothing in him inconsistent with the
