Ii2                  BENTINCK       AND   SICILY

revolution is to take place, it had better proceed from embarrassments
produced by the conduct of the Parliament. . . . The conduct of govern-
ment should be marked with the utmost moderation. If in the end it is
compelled to extraordinary measures, they should be so obviously just
and necessary as to admit of no question. The Government has to act for
the future as well as for the present time, and this forbearance cannot
lead to active revolution as in France, because the whole military force
is foreign, and in the country there are no native troops and no military
spirit.”*

   In Palermo, meanwhile, the Prince had anticipated Bentinck’s
advice by declining to dissolve and by appointing a new
Ministry. He did not, indeed, bring in the successful democratic
opposition—they frightened both him and Montgomerie too
much. But he managed to find two officials (Marquis Ferreri
and Duke Averna di Gualtieri), a soldier (Marshal Naselli) and
an aristocrat (the Duke of Lucchesi Palli)—in other words, a
parcel of nonentities—who were willing to carry on the govern-
ment.
   To the minds of the outgoing constitutionalists—Belmonte
and Orleans especially—the next step was simple: the new
Ministers were to be mere puppets set up to carry through the
dissolution they themselves had shirked; then the British would
‘take the country in trust’, and Belmonte expected to ride back
to power under that shield. But the British did not fall in with
this convenient plan. After a few days’ hesitation Montgomerie
decided, in agreement with the Prince, to give Parliament
another chance of voting supply.* This move worked, if only
temporarily: the threat of dissolution did what dissolution itself
could not have done. Early in August the Commons partly
overcame what Balsamo liked to call their ‘niggardness for the
restoration of the desolated finances’*—at least so far as to pass,
not indeed the whole Budget, but the Civil List and part of the
army estimates, and to extend the financial year until November
Ist:
   None the less Parliament was now wholly in the hands of
the Democrats and King’s Friends, who grew still more dis-
orderly as the summer wore on. Misunderstandings over the
quarantine regulations culminated in a Commons motion to
send an embassy to England to protest against the British gener-
