I1IO               BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
and inquiries into the finances and into contested elections; they
set up a multitude of committees to which government proposals
were referred and never heard of again, and they refused to
submit to any rules of procedure—'the House wants no chains’,
cried Rossi. The Ministry might have kept some control if their
followers had been united; but the Belmontists voted more often
than not with the Democrats against the government; when
Castelnuovo, Orleans and Montgomerie tried to instil some
notion of Cabinet solidarity into Belmonte, he replied—perhaps
with some truth—that he could not control his friends. “The
Council never meets except in the Prince’s presence’, wrote
Castelnuovo to Bentinck; ‘the Ministers are therefore often at
odds over business.... Belmonte... behaves in such a way
that if I did not know and esteem him I should say he was
intriguing to make me leave the Ministry.”
   Both he and Belmonte felt that Parliament had fallen into a
hopeless anarchy; the only remedy they could think of was a
dissolution and the use of British force. Then, on July 18th and
t9th, food riots broke out in Palermo and spread to the prisons:
they were put down by the troops, but the Council (including
the Prince and Montgomerie) panicked and took to unconsti-
tutional measures: that is, they prorogued Parliament for a week
without the proper procedure, and they set up a military com-
mission to try the rioters. Belmonte now at last realised his
mistake and made it up with Castelnuovo. But it was too late:
when Parliament met again on the 27th both Houses were out
of hand: not only did they persist in refusing supply, but they
threatened to pass a vote of censure on the government’s
handling of the riots.
  At this point the Ministry collapsed. Castelnuovo, as Minister
of Finance, had borne the brunt of the Commons’ attacks: now,
unable to obtain supply, and unwilling either to dissolve or to
go on collecting taxes after the approaching end of the financial
year, he resigned. The other Ministers, failing to dissuade him,
resigned with him. ‘I foresee this egg is about to break’, the
Prince told them; ‘I believe you had rather not have it break in
your hands’.* Indeed they insisted on going out of office at once,
and both they and their followers stopped attending Parliament
altogether: so far as they were concerned, the ship of consti-
