                   THE   CONSTITUTION       FAILS                10g
aristocratic predominance of Palermo. Whether it was also trul
representative of the nascent bourgeoisie may be doubted. Its
members were mostly lawyers—that is to say, as often happened
in the later history of Southern Italy, they formed an ‘intellectual
bourgeoisie’, vociferous but small, largely divorced from its
economic origins, talking and acting in a void. In 1813 they
seldom rose above petty factiousness in their tactics, or, in their
political aims, beyond a noisy but vague desire for equality and
Parliamentary dictatorship; and in joining with the King’s
Friends to overthrow the constitutionalists they seem to have
been moved more by opportunism than by any notion of a
lasting alliance between the monarchy and bourgeoisie against
the ruling aristocracy. It may be argued, of course, that the
constitutional movement was no less insignificant than the
democratic—a ripple on the surface of that huge lake, the
economic and social immobility of Sicily. But even a Marxist
interpreter might admit that the constitutional movement repre-
sented, at any rate at first, the only class strong enough to carry
out—because it was also strong enough to frustrate—any meas-
ure of social and economic change; and that Castelnuovo’s
aristocratic but mildly ‘progressive’ policy along English lines
was the utmost that Sicily might conceivably have been prepared
for at this time.
   The constitutional leaders and the British may well be excused
for thinking they detected in the democratic party ‘all the
symptoms of the terrible French Revolution’.* Even Castelnuovo
could scarcely be expected to see in this band of noisy lawyers
the middle class on the English model which he had hoped
might arise in Sicily. If his fears were exaggerated, one must
remember that the French Terror was still fresh in men’s minds,
and parliamentary criticism of any sort still new to Sicily: violent
words therefore had a disproportionate effect.
  The weakness of the Ministry was made plain immediately
after the opening of the Parliament, when the Commons refused
to consider voting supply, though the end of the financial year
was only six weeks off. No doubt they felt that “good govern-
ment [consisted] in paying nothing’*; but they also feared that
a dissolution might follow on the heels of a vote of supply.
They went on to demand wholesale revision of the Constitution
