                    THE   CONSTITUTION         EAILS                 105
most straightforward conduct—Belmonte admitted that he could not
act without him—that if Villermosa left the Government,        he should
also. ... I said... I did not think he had always treated Villermosa with
proper respect.... Why did he refuse to him that great conciliation
which he shewed to everyone else . . . their disunion would ruin every-
thing. Belmonte said he knew it... but if they did not quarrel now
they would do so afterwards.’

   Belmonte, in fact, was very ready to take offence. He was
nettled when he heard that Bentinck had called Castelnuovo
‘the only man in Sicily... had I said this of him (Belmonte) I
should have said justly’. At length an uneasy peace was patched
up between the two; and Castelnuovo carried his point. But
Belmonte’s injured vanity might be expected to make more
trouble.*
   This dispute between the constitutionalist leaders came at the
worst possible moment, when elections to the new House of
Commons were about to be held. Their party, already isolated
by the defection of Cassaro, Aci, and an increasing number of
barons on the right, now had to face a new threat on the left
from a ‘democratic’ movement that appeared to be forming in
the country. Even with Castelnuovo and Belmonte united the
Ministry would be none too strong. The two Ministers who
had replaced Aci and Cassaro were both nobles with little
following in the Commons. Settimo, a member of the princely
Fitalia family, was able but young and new to politics; while
the Prince of Carini, the new Minister of Justice, an honest man
but so ‘perfectly unfit for the charge’ as to ‘throw ridicule upon
the Government’, had been appointed merely for lack of a
better. Bentinck did his best to shore up the Ministry by preaching
union and ‘encouraging’ Carini.* But the trouble, to his mind,
lay deeper: as he later told Orleans,
   ‘The aristocracy in Sicily hangs upon a thread. I never could convince
Belmonte that the nobles were universally despised and hated... be it
ever recollected that my strong advice was to mix the Cabinet of Peers
and of such respectable commoners as could have given the best support
to the Peerage and to the Crown.”*

  But the enlightened middle class whom Bentinck and Castel-
nuovo hoped to see taking a greater share in the government
