108                  BENTINCK      AND   SICILY
  Orleans therefore clamoured for Bentinck’s return. All sum-
mer long Bentinck was to receive letters by every boat from the
Prince, the British authorities, and the constitutional leaders, all
bearing the same refrain. ‘Oh My Lord, ot étes-vous donc?
Croyez-moi, sans vous, cela n’ira jamais.”*
  There can be little doubt that had Bentinck been there he
would have imposed greater unity on the British authorities
and the government and prevented much needless friction. He
might also have done something to heal the rift within the
government, which became more apparent as Parliament met
on July 8th in the intense summer heat and amid an explosion
of speeches, pamphlets and petitions.*
  Already the forces opposed to the constitutional settlement
could be discerned. In the Upper House there was now a ma-
jority of conservative barons, in whose minds fear for their
interests had damped the early ardour with which they had voted
to abolish feudal rights. Their fears had lately been increased by
the behaviour of the new municipal councils set up under the
Constitution, which had taken to occupying baronial lands and
escaping for the first time from baronial control. Since the defection
of Cassaro many of the barons could be classed as King’s Friends
—though the King himself kept studiously aloof to all appear-
ances—and therefore as enemies of the ‘system’ they had them-
selves helped to launch.* In the Commons, on the other hand, a
large number of members—a potential majority if the Ministers
failed to hold their supporters together—could be classed as
‘democrats’ or ‘Jacobins’. The leaders of this party, Rossi and
Vaccaro, had spent years of exile in revolutionary France; to
the British and the constitutional leaders they seemed bent on
setting themselves up as local Robespierres and Marats; and until
recently Sicilian historiography has echoed that judgement, or
at best has described them as merely factious and irresponsible.
An attempt has lately been made to shew the democratic move-
ment not as a rootless faction, but as the emanation of a new
and genuine force in the country: the middling landowners of
Eastern Sicily—of the Messina and Catania regions in particu-
lar—then as now the most advanced part of the island socially
and economically.” The democratic movement certainly did
embody an attempt by Catania and Messina to shake free of the
