118                   BENTINCK      AND    SICILY
of the running, while all the others dreaded ‘the violence of the
Parliament and the national proneness to vengeance and blood’.
Bentinck felt hurt:
   ‘I stated to them the hardship of my being deserted by everybody. . . .’
It would have been much easier for him to withdraw to Messina and
allow the Constitution to collapse: ‘if I went through with it as I was
prepared to do, I should have to undertake a great deal of responsibility
and I was to do all this in conjunction with men whom I did not know
and of whose principles I could not be assured.”*

  None the less it took ten days to patch up a Ministry. Of those
who finally came in Settimo (War) at first would not serve
without Belmonte; Villafranca (Foreign Affairs)—a young
Belmontist nobleman “more respected for goodness of character
than for abilities’**—had been one of the five barons arrested in
1811, and his fearful wife had to be pacified before he would
serve; Carini (Justice) was no more use than he had ever been;
and Gaetano Bonanno (Finance), though ‘a sensible bold man’,
was a lawyer turned Government official.
   Even then there remained the question, by what authority
were taxes to be collected after November ist, when the Parlia-
mentary grant lapsed? The Prince wished to issue a proclamation
in his own name and the Ministers’; but ‘the whole of them
were alarmed and wished to have nothing to do with it’. The
proclamation was therefore drawn up in Bentinck’s name alone
—without even a mention of his functions as Captain-General;
in it he made himself responsible for the safety and tranquillity
of the kingdom until Parliament should meet again, and an-
nounced that he would court-martial ‘disturbers of the public
peace, murderers, and whatever other enemies of the Consti-
tution may oppose the policy of the Government’. On October
30th the proclamation was published; troops marched into the
interior to ensure order; and Parliament was dissolved. Bentinck
was now in fact dictator of Sicily.*
    Reflecting on this turn of events, Bentinck consoled himself
with the thought that ‘in the progress from slavery to liberty,
more or less disorder must have taken place’: it was better that
it should have come at a time when a salutary check might
still bring the Sicilians to their senses.
