                    THE   CONSTITUTION        FAILS                  II7
   What Bentinck was demanding was in fact the suspension
of the Constitution, for the government would shortly have
to start collecting taxes without Parliamentary authority. Why
did he take such a step, against his own advice earlier in the
summer not to do so except in the last resort?
   No doubt Parliament if allowed to go on sitting would have
kept up its practice of voting taxes a month at a time, and so
would have been in a fair way to become a Sicilian Long
Parliament. But the government could have carried on some-
how, and Bentinck’s control of the army would have prevented
anything like revolution. No doubt, too, Bentinck felt that on
the question of the Budget he had committed himself too far
to retreat. But even he seems to have felt the need of some other
justification, for he told Castlereagh that what had compelled
him to act was
‘all the bad signs that preceded .. . the French Revolution. ... Agrarian
law, universal suffrage and provisions at low prices were preached aloud
among the people. Contempt was endeavoured to be impressed towards
the British army. Their small effective force was contrasted with the
numerical strength of the nation... .’

   How true or significant this was we cannot easily tell: we
are ill informed about what was going on in the depths of the
country, away from the rather empty hubbub of Palermo. But
it is difficult not to suspect that Bentinck, for all his complaints
of the Sicilians’ unworthiness, was emotionally committed to
making the ‘system’ work, to ‘regenerating’ Sicily; and that
that was why he took on a responsibility greater than his mere
duty as British Minister warranted. Though his work was now
‘all to do over again’, he meant to save Sicily from herself by
using present force for her future good.
   This was made plain when Bentinck turned to the task of
forming a new Ministry. The Prince liked his present Ministers,
who were accommodating though weak; but Bentinck would
not have them, and quickly dropped the pretence of not himself
suggesting who should replace them: the new Ministers were
to be constitutionalists, and the Prince openly treated Bentinck
as the head of the party. But it proved very difficult to find
anyone willing to serve: Castelnuovo and Belmonte were out
