              DICTATORSHIP      AND   THE ‘DREAM’              I2I
trusted him again. The King kept ostentatiously aloof, though
privately he posed as the only man really attached to the English
Constitution, which Bentinck’s proclamation had infringed. He
continued to associate with such conservatives as Cassaro, Trabia
and the Archbishop of Palermo, and—Bentinck thought—to
encourage them in their latent hostility to the ‘system’. To a
hint that he should end this silent opposition the King replied
blandly that he had not the slightest notion of what was going
on (‘the greatest imaginable lie’). Bentinck hoped to keep him
sweet by playing on his hopes of Naples; indeed, as will be seen,
the swift changes then taking place on the Continent brought
the two men closer together, and Bentinck went so far as to
appear at an interview, to the King’s gratification, with his hair
symbolically powdered. But this did not stop the King (as
Bentinck was aware) from playing his own hand in his corre-
spondence with the Sicilian envoys abroad; he was no more
reconciled to the Constitution than he had ever been; and he
might be expected to overthrow it as soon as British power
was withdrawn.*
  The noisy factions of the 1813 Parliament seemed to have
melted away. The constitutionalists themselves were now little
more than a set of place-holders kept in power by Bentinck’s
will. Even so, the dissensions which had begun when they
formed a real party perpetuated themselves within the narrow
circle of Ministry and Council. The formation of the new
government had been a papering over of cracks, so much so
that care had been taken to give the Belmontists and Villermo-
sists equal representation. This balance was soon upset, however:
Bonanno, the new Minister of Finance—who held the key post
in the government,     since as Bentinck’s   right-hand man     he
controlled the local officials and dispensed patronage—had come
in as a presumed Villermosist, but soon went over to Belmonte.
As a result Castelnuovo and Balsamo began to complain—prob-
ably with some justice—that he was making an unscrupulous
use of his powers by wholesale dismissals and promotions of
officials and by unwarranted interference in local affairs. Bel-
monte, for his part, had no more cause for satisfaction: Bentinck,
taught by experience, was determined not to let him be more
than a figurehead.* These enduring differences did not matter
