122                  BENTINCK      AND SICILY
much so long as Bentinck remained there to impose a semblance
of unity; but they were enough to suggest that the constitution-
alist rump would not long survive Bentinck’s departure.
   With Bentinck’s dictatorship established and unchallenged,
the question might have been asked, what kind of political
settlement would it lead to? The short answer was that Sicily’s
pocket revolution, having followed the course of its English
and French exemplars through constitutional monarchy and
parliamentary anarchy, was now entering a phase equivalent,
at any rate in the conception, to the Protectorate or the Consu-
late. Political liberty had been tried and found wanting; so a
kind of benevolent despotism was to take its place, with en-
lightened but authoritarian reform as its aim.
  Here Bentinck’s attitude was ambiguous. The official opinion
he gave in his despatches home was that the people—except for
some   of the barons, whom        the abolition of feudalism had
alienated—shewed ‘perfect unanimity’ in support of the Consti-
tution; but that, still suffering as they were from the after-effects of
misrule, they would be unable for some years to shield it from
the attacks of a few mischief-makers. So, although ‘our enemies
are a faction, our support a people’, an interval of British
tutelage would be necessary, at the end of which Sicily would
have been made safe for political freedom, and the Constitution
could be restored to its full and free operation.* Bentinck’s
personal opinion is not so clear. He seems never to have given
up the hope that eventually the free Constitution might be made
to work. But for the present he had few illusions. If the King
were to abolish the Constitution tomorrow, he remarked, ‘not
a hand would be lifted against so arbitrary an act’. The best he
could hope for was that the international situation would keep
Sicily “free in spite of herself and all her efforts to the contrary’.
In conversation with members of the former opposition, he
said that while he remained in Sicily he hoped ‘to hold up to
Europe a whole nation united in the cause of liberty’, but in
any case he would carry the thing through ‘bon gré mal gré’:

  ‘Tt would have been much better if I had done the work in three
months... but I did not know the nation as well before as since...
they never reasoned upon what they saw but upon what they supposed
