                   THE   CONSTITUTION       FAILS                I1l§
the first to give it [ie. liberty] so I should be the first to take
it away if I found it to be incompatible with the happiness of
the Nation.’ But he wished first of all to negotiate with the Parlia-
mentary leaders and if possible bring them to their senses—that is,
induce them to promise, before Parliament met again, that they
would vote the Budget at once. He therefore asked for a further
prorogation until the 1sth: the Ministers, anxious to conciliate
Parliament, objected, but with the Prince’s support Bentinck
carried his point.*
   Bentinck then set about conferring both with the Parliamen-
tary leaders and with his defeated friends the constitutionalists.
His meeting with the latter was melancholy: he dined with
them and toasted ‘les véritables amis de la Constitution’, but
they were shame-faced at the mess they had made of the
government in Bentinck’s absence. There could be no question
of their being returned to power by British force, as the in-
corrigible Belmonte still hoped he might be, ‘like the Vizier of
a Sultan’. About Belmonte Bentinck was especially disillusioned:
politically he seemed quite hopeless, “dangerous as an opponent,
still more dangerous as a friend’; both he and Castelnuovo were
now too unpopular to make possible Ministers. The best thing
his friends could do, Bentinck told them, would be to form a
compact and active opposition, ‘the Peers protesting—the
Commoners speaking and dividing the House upon all occasions.
It was necessary that there should be a standard round which
the good might rally.’ They agreed readily enough, but they
were plainly demoralised and frightened by the turn their own
Constitution   had taken:   their countrymen,       they concluded,
were by no means so civilised as they had imagined. Balsamo
was already drafting the plan of a revised Constitution which
would strengthen the executive and judiciary: he proposed a
partial return to the old system, and the deletion of ‘all abstract
maxims concerning liberty, equality and the like’; for, he said,
‘in France the rights of man did more harm than anything else’.*
   Bentinck’s negotiations with the Parliamentary leaders did
not go as smoothly as he had hoped. He began by telling Rossi
and Vaccaro that while he meant to stand by the Constitution
‘as long as possible’, he would not tolerate anarchy: if they
agreed to vote the Budget, however, he for his part undertook
