I16                BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
that they would not be dissolved, as they feared, immediately
afterwards. If they wanted freedom they must make some sacri-
fices for it—‘I would have them independent both of their
enemies and of their allies and I should not use this language to
them if Great Britain wanted to keep them in subjection.’ But
they disbelieved him, and steadily refused to consider voting
supply before the very end of the session, even though Bentinck
threatened that ‘for the sake of the Sicilian Nation of which I
was the advocate...I was determined to dictate the law to
them and I would do so’. After several inconclusive meetings,
Bentinck began to suspect that evil influences had been at work—
perhaps the French, perhaps the King: the events of that summer,
he perceived, had damaged the prestige both of the British and
of the new ‘system’ more than he had thought. As often before,
he regretted his early conciliatory policy: when Rossi remarked,
perhaps sarcastically, that ‘it was unlucky England had not con-
tinued them in their slavery for one night longer and given
them the Constitution ready made’, Bentinck noted it as a
‘curious and just remark’: had it been possible in the first place
to work through the King alone (he began to think) his task
would have been much easier. A further prorogation—which
Bentinck obtained from the Ministry only by officially taking
responsibility for it—failed to bring about any agreement, and
Parliament met again on October 2oth.
   Bentinck now decided to carry the Budget in the Commons
by force of numbers. He mustered 53 constitutionalists—my
53'—and drove them back to the House they had abandoned
in July; he also counted on a further (and sufficient) number of
votes which the new Ministers assured him they could scrape
together. But the Ministers—whether from ‘perfidy’ or impo-
tence—failed to deliver the goods: the motion was lost by 61
to 53. Bentinck at once went to the Prince and demanded a
new Ministry and a dissolution.
  He was furious: ‘If I had known as much of the general
character of the people as I did at present,’ he said, ‘I do not
think I should ever have undertaken the business. I doubted
whether these people were made for freemen.’ If the next
Parliament was no better than this, ‘the sooner the country
reverted to another form of government the better’.*
