II4                     BENTINCK       AND, SICILY
‘ .. yet Iam persuaded that as the new constitutional system of Sicily
is in part a creation of your own... you will not be disposed to hazard
its fate in all time to come by confiding it prematurely to other hands.
I shall not consider the island safe till we see the Parliament acting cordially
with the Government, of which as yet there are no visible symptoms’.*
   ‘In part a creation of your own’: the words were double-
edged; for Bentinck was shortly to find that the Sicilian Consti-
tution had become, in English eyes, a very dubious offspring
for him to acknowledge. The same generals and admirals who
had first greeted it with jubilation now inveighed against the
Sicilians as ‘miserable wretches’, ‘a degraded government and
corrupt people’, fit only to be dealt with by martial law, like
the Luddites at home. Bunbury talked of giving up the island
altogether except for two or three fortresses, and leaving the
Sicilians to stew in their own juice. Liston, remembering his
Montesquieu, doubted ‘whether the natives of a hot climate were
susceptible of the happiness of a free government’.* From
London Bentinck heard that the 1813 Parliament had set nearly
everyone against the Constitution, and that he was beginning
to be blamed for it:
   “On est persuadé qu’en laissant faire aux Siciliens leur Constitution,
vous n’en n’avez pas eu l’ordre positif du Ministére, mais que vous avez
agi d’aprés vos propres lumieéres et sur la Carte blanche . . . que le Ministére
vous avait donné... il y a méme tel Ministre qui le dit cuvertement. II
est probable que si la confection de la Constitution avait réussi, les
Ministres auraient dit quils l’avaient ordonnée. C’est ainsi que va le
monde.”*

   Bentinck landed at Palermo once again on October 4th. By
this time his spirits had risen and he was fairly confident of
setting matters to rights by ‘some bullying and some coaxing’;
however extravagant the recent behaviour of Parliament, he
thought, the country at large would still look to the British for
guidance. Next day he met the Prince and the new Ministers.
He had come ‘to bring these gentlemen to reason’, he told them:
‘if Sicily was not true to herself—if instead of pursuing with
wisdom her own good and the final establishment of the Consti-
tution her representatives chose to be governed by their own
passion... despotism itself was preferable and as I had been
