                DICTATORSHIP         AND THE ‘DREAM’                      123
—They were led by their imagination and not their reason—-No man
calculated that 2 and 2 make 4—It was either 5 and 6 or 2 and 3—They
were poets. *
   Similarly, in conversation with Sperlinga (a refractory noble
whom he threatened to banish from Palermo), Bentinck antici-
pated a later statesman by declaring that the Sicilians were to
be managed only by “Bonsbons in one hand and il bastone in
the other’. In fact, for practical and immediate purposes Bentinck
had given up any interest in political liberty and representative
government. He did not care who the members of the next
Parliament might be, he said—he would make them do their
duty in any case. If the barons, as he expected, kept up their
hostility, ‘I was resolved’ (he told Sperlinga) ‘to abolish the
order altogether’.*
   A distinctly anti-aristocratic tone, together with an implied
contempt for the representative institutions he had himself
helped to set up—these seem to account for Bentinck’s state of
mind during his brief career as benevolent despot. A friend of
his put it more plainly still:
    ‘Tout le monde se demande, que fera-t-on pour la Sicile? Pour moi
je demanderois, que mérite-t-elle qu’on fasse pour elle? Rien, si l’on ne
considérait que la nonchalance et l’immoralité des nobles et des prétres,
la scélératesse de la seconde classe de la population, celle des gens de loi
et des agents des nobles tous compris sous le nom de Paglietti. Mais la
populace des campagnes, les agriculteurs, les artisans de l’intérieur de l’ile
ont quelques vertus, et ils ont besoin d’étre soulagés du pouvoir trop
arbitraire du souverain, de la tyrannie des nobles et de la rapacité des
PagliettiimCe fut la votre objet quand vous laissates faire une Consti-
tution. Il semble démontré maintenant que pour étre utile 4 toutes les
classes il ne faut laisser faire 4 aucune, mais leur faire faire par force ce
qui leur convient.”*

   Drastic and effective reform of the administration was a need
more essential than representative government: ‘both Parlia-
ments’, Bentinck thought, ‘had been pursuing the shadow and
neglecting the substance.’ His mood was far removed from the
orthodox Whiggism usually attributed to him: in fact Balsamo
complained that his chief defect was the unsystematic and excess-
ively pragmatic way he dealt with particular problems. He was
