126                 BENTINCK AND SICILY
Bathurst and Castlereagh to give Austria his military and diplo-
matic cooperation in Italy, if need be to the point of recognising
—sub spe ratiMurat’s possession of Naples, and accepting the
principle of compensation for the Bourbons. This Bentinck did
not like at all. Murat, he thought, by taking part in the battle of
Leipzig on Napoleon’s side (something Castlereagh did not
know about when he drew up his instructions) had altered
matters and made so great a concession inadvisable. None the
less great and critical changes were plainly about to take place.
How then did Italy and Sicily stand ?*
  In Italy—Bentinck agreed with his Italian soldier friends at
Palermo, the Piedmontese Sallier de la Tour and the Friulan
Catinelli—it was ‘necessary to do something to be beforehand if
possible with the old sovereigns and to give the people an oppor-
tunity of asserting their rights, liberty and independence’. True, a
small-scale landing on the Tuscan coast, which Bentinck ordered
as an experiment late in November, proved disappointing: the
troops—ltalian volunteers under Catinelli—met with no re-
sponse from the local population and had to re-embark. But a
larger force might yet do better: the setback did not stop
speculation about the chance of creating an independent Italian
kingdom; and Bentinck’s private Secretary James Graham was
not alone in seeing him as a possible ‘Lord Wellington of Italy,
only with this marked superiority—he would “draw the sword
to create a free government’.*
   Sicily, however, was another matter. When Bentinck talked
of raising Italy and forestalling the old sovereigns, he meant
North and Central Italy; the Two Sicilies he reckoned as quite
separate politically from the rest of the peninsula, and he seems
to have assumed like everyone else that if the Allies won the
war the Bourbons would be restored to Naples.* What would
then become of Sicily’s independence and constitution? As early
as November 20th Bentinck warned the constitutionalists that
England could not be expected to go on garrisoning the island
after a peace. He already had good reason to guess that the
British Government would do little to safeguard Sicily from
Neapolitan reaction. Already Castlereagh had asked Lamb
—Bentinck’s former Secretary—‘When is all this interference
to cease?’ Three months later, on hearing that Sicily was quiet
