128                   BENTINCK   AND   SICILY
  On December 3rd, travelling between Messina and Catania,
Bentinck thought out, and, in a letter written that evening, put
to the Prince his ‘réves d’un voyageur’. The dilemma which
faced them both—he told the Prince—was that while Sicily was
not yet fit to govern herself alone, still she would not let herself
be reunited to Naples without bloodshed. He therefore proposed
that Sicily should be governed by Britain. Such an arrangement,
he said, would be advantageous to all parties. Sicily would
prosper; from a burden to Naples she would turn into a friendly
neighbour, whose dependence on a Power without continental
ambitions would make impossible any conflict between the two
kingdoms; and the Royal Family could be compensated either
with additional territory on the Continent, or—more likely—
with a British subsidy equivalent to the Sicilian Civil List, and
with military aid.*
  Bentinck’s proposal was ill-judged; but in itself it was not
fantastic. Since the beginning of the eighteenth century Sicily
had passed from Spain to Savoy, from Savoy to Austria, and
finally from Austria to the Neapolitan Bourbons. It might have
taken one more change in its stride. The Queen had talked of
selling it to England or of bartering it against help towards the
recovery of Naples. The Prince secretly considered Bentinck’s
proposal of compensation on the mainland.* As for the Sicilians,
they wanted independence; but they wanted it chiefly because
they disliked Neapolitan domination and could not forget their
own former glories; they hardly thought in terms of the modern
national state, and such a man as Belmonte was quite ready to
see a permanent British protectorate. Of Italy “beyond the
Garigliano’ (the frontier between Naples and the Papal States)
they were, as Michele Amari later said, scarcely aware;* of the
notion that Sicily might help to make up a united Italy not a
trace is to be found in this period. So if one looks at Sicily alone,
rather than at the international situation, Bentinck’s proposed
settlement was at least conceivable.
   What led Bentinck to propose it? The question has exercised
a number of historians. Balsamo attributed the ‘dream’ to
‘bizzarria’, Weil to overweening personal ambition, while
Bianco thought it a mere manoeuvre aimed at the unreconciled
King’s Friends. None of this is very convincing. Then certain
