               DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’                           129
Italian writers—among them such an historian as Croce—sus-
pected that Bentinck’s letter wasa token of some deep-laid British
design on Sicily.” Bentinck’s own explanation—which, repent-
ing at leisure, he sent off a few days later in reply to the Prince’s
agitated enquiries—was this:

   ‘The Sogno Filosofico ... was the offspring of my disordered brain
alone, was brought to light for the first time in the journey from Messina
to Catania, and has its derivation from no other source whatever.’*

  However that may be, one thing is plain: the British Govern-
ment knew nothing about the ‘dream’ until well after it had
been put forward, and even then the Foreign Office (though
not Castlereagh) first heard of it from Castelcicala. It is also
clear that the Government’s policy before and after the incident
was quite opposed to anything like the annexation of Sicily;
and Bentinck knew this and said so. Since the evidence was
published Italian historians have accepted it and left it at that.*
But, as sometimes happens, what one set of documents es-
tablishes a fresh set of documents calls in question. The notion
that Bentinck had a brainwave and Castlereagh dismissed it out
of hand must now be qualified.
   The annexation of Sicily was not a new idea. In 1806-7
Howick and Grenville had thought of establishing a permanent
protectorate over the island; and Sir John Moore had put it
more bluntly still. But neither Canning nor Wellesley nor
Castlereagh had ever mentioned it or, so far as we can see,
thought about it. Bentinck himself, until his return from Spain
in October 1813, always assumed that Sicily was on the way to
becoming her own mistress. Britain might keep some permanent
influence over her, largely for reasons of geography, but that
was all. Since his return, however, Bentinck had come much
more openly to doubt her ability to secure her own inde-
pendence. He himself had had to become in effect a dictator
rather than a mere envoy. It may be that at some point in
October or November Bentinck began to form the idea of
making this British rule permanent; and that what he saw on
his tour precipitated it. He had been used—as he told Castle-
reagh—freely to discuss with the Prince all large matters of
