124                 BENTINCK     AND   SICILY

willing, for instance, to throw over the experiment in economic
liberalism (which had caused much trouble) so far as to acquiesce
in fixed prices for necessities. In general, too, he behaved less
and less like a British agent, more and more like a Sicilian ruler:
when Anglo-Sicilian disputes recurred over the quarantine regu-
lations, he backed the Sicilian Board of Health; and in his
despatches home he scarcely mentioned his part in domestic
politics, merely stating that the island was perfectly quiet.*
  The need for reform was greatest in the financial and judicial
organisation of the country, which the last two Parliaments had
done no more than upset without definitely settling on a new
system. Balsamo’s plan for financial reform, passed by the 1810
Parliament, had laid a new uniform tax on all land and called
for a thorough survey as a basis for assessment: the logical
consequence should have been the end of the barons’ virtual
exemption from taxation. But in November 1813 the land
survey—the pet project of reformers, both Neapolitan and
Sicilian, ever since the 1780’s—had still not been carried out;
the land tax had had to be collected on the basis of voluntary
declarations of value (riveli); as a result the barons evaded tax-
ation more successfully than ever. Small landowners, whom
Balsamo had meant to benefit, had actually suffered, and so
had the Exchequer. Now, however, the new Minister Bonanno
at last set out in earnest to prepare the essential survey. At the
same time he overhauled the government service: no doubt he
meant above all to exert political influence in the constituencies,
but he achieved other things as well: a number of redundant
offices, relics of the old regime, were swept away, and the
Ministers gained control of their own officials—which was more
than Castelnuovo or Belmonte had had. How far Bentinck had
a hand in these practical reforms is not clear, though he and
Bonanno were certainly in close touch. That they were not
begun until Bentinck took over the government is at any rate
significant. He certainly took an interest in financial reform, and
he advocated a more equal distribution of landed property.*
  Judicial reform was an equally pressing problem. Bentinck had
already complained to Castlereagh of ‘the total impotence of
the laws, venally administered, giving no protection, and there-
fore imposing no check upon the lively imaginations and warm
