132                  BENTINCK       AND SICILY
and it proved convenient to Castlereagh then and later. What
the new relationship between England and Naples did not suit
at all was Bentinck’s own plans both for Italy and for Sicily.”
   In Sicily the ‘dream’ was now obviously out of the question
in its original form, since it did not look as though the Bourbons
would ever get back to Naples. ‘I was however resolved to
stick by Sicily,’ Bentinck declared; and he thought it might
still be possible to maintain the British protectorate de facto if
not de jure: for while Murat was at Naples the Bourbons could
not do without the British garrison in Sicily.* Immediately after
the signing of the armistice, therefore, Bentinck started moving
on two fronts—the British and Sicilian—to secure the ‘system’
as far as he could.
  Castlereagh by this time was already on the Continent, at
allied headquarters. To him Bentinck sent his private secretary,
James Graham, who was to act as his personal representative
and deliver the despatch—already quoted—in which for the
first time Bentinck revealed and defended the ‘dream’. Graham
saw Castlereagh at Chatillon on February 21st, had a long talk
with him, and handed him a memorandum outlining Bentinck’s
views on Sicily. But Graham’s account of what was said differs
from Castlereagh’s.
   Graham began—he afterwards recorded—by explaining the
state of Sicily as Bentinck saw it. Though the constitutional
system could at present be kept going only by British influence,
yet that system had for the first time led Sicily to contribute
effectively to the Allied cause; in any case it was not meant ‘for
their good alone, it is principally for our own’: through it Sicily
would become a real ally not a burden. Next Graham came to
what Bentinck privately hoped for: at most, that Sicily should
become ‘the Queen of our Colonies’-—and here Graham reca-
pitulated all the arguments in favour; at the very least, that the
British garrison should remain in Sicily, and that the Neapolitan
and Sicilian missions should be united, with the Minister at
Naples and a good second-in-command at Palermo. In any case,
said Graham, Bentinck

‘will not desert the Sicilian cause in which he has embarked, and even
should he be left there alone without any force, to encounter difficulties
