             DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’             131
   At all events Bentinck seems to have acted on impulse,
without realising what strange reading his letter would make at
Palermo. The Prince at once told his father; both of them were
highly alarmed and thought they saw their worst suspicions
confirmed. Both confided their fears to Castelcicala even before
Bentinck had had time to answer the Prince’s anxious request for
an explanation. But they wrote separately, and phrased their
despatches so cautiously as to throw on Castelcicala the onus of
any action he might take in London: when it came out that Castel-
cicala had used the ‘dream’ to demand Bentinck’s recall, father
and son accused one another of having put him up to it. For
the moment,     however, the incident was closed: Bentinck ha-
stened to withdraw his proposal unconditionally; and he dis-
sociated it wholly from British policy.* But the Prince, Bentinck
noted, even while he rejected the idea of ceding Sicily to Britain,
had dropped the remark that anyhow the proposed compen-
sation would not be enough. This, Bentinck thought, was only
‘the ordinary proceeding of Italian intrigue, with the view of
making a better bargain’;* so, although he took care not to
raise the matter again with the Prince, he continued to nurse it
in his mind.
   But in the meantime changes were taking place in Europe
which soon made even less likely the realisation of Bentinck’s
dream. Only a few days after writing the notorious letter
Bentinck heard for the first time of the negotiations then going
on at Naples between Murat and the Austrian agent Neipperg.
These led, on January 11th 1814, to the Austro-Neapolitan
treaty of recognition and alliance; and, on February 3rd, to an
Anglo-Neapolitan armistice. The treaty Bentinck thought “im-
politic, inexpedient and unnecessary ... a sad violation of all
public and private principle’;—the armistice he resisted as long
as he could—that is, until he heard from Aberdeen, the new
Ambassador to Austria, that the British Government approved
of the negotiations. But even when he resigned himself to going
briefly to Naples and signing the armistice he insisted on a mere
cessation of hostilities; he would not formally recognise Murat’s
hold on Naples. This stubbornness annoyed the Austrians and
Murat, but—since Aberdeen had accepted the Austrian plan too
hastily in the first place—it restored the balance of British policy;
