                DICTATORSHIP
                          AND THE ‘DREAM’                                133
which, he fears, he could not overcome, he will try his utmost to preserve
a Constitution which he has reared amidst so many dangers, and while
permitted to remain, he will not leave his post’.
   According to Graham, Castlereagh ‘treated me, I must say,
as a friend, and I shall always be grateful for his good humour
on this occasion....’ But when Castlereagh dealt with the
possible consequences of the armistice he ‘spoke... like one
who remembered that the Rod of the House of Commons was
suspended over his head... .’ The ‘dream,’ he pointed out, was
now quite impracticable: ‘our engagements with Murat were
decisive’; the Bourbons would therefore have to be compensated
elsewhere for the loss of Naples, and nothing they were likely
to get, even if it was padded out with money, would tempt them
to part with Sicily. But if on the other hand Murat should
prove treacherous and the Bourbons be restored to Naples,
then the ‘dream’ would become ‘feasible and worthy of consider-
ation’. In any case, even if Murat stayed on in Naples Castle-
reagh agreed entirely that the British garrison could and should
be maintained in Sicily after the peace. Nobody would object
except Murat, and he could be made to acquiesce. Altogether
Castlereagh was ‘in the best possible disposition’ about Sicily;
‘nothing could be more           flattering’ than his remarks          about
Bentinck. He also seemed to think well of the proposed joint
mission at Naples and Palermo; at all events, he said, Bentinck
would keep the Sicilian mission.*
  Now we come to Castlereagh’s version. Just after the inter-
view he wrote the following brief and non-committal letter to
Bentinck:
   ‘T shall not lose sight of your suggestions about Sicily, I agree with you
that its safety would be more than precarious if left to its own defences
alone. It is however a most difficult problem in all its parts.”*
   When a month later, the storm broke over the ‘dream’
incident, Castlereagh explained his former silence by saying that

   ‘When Mr Graham mentioned Your Lordship’s impressions to me
at Chatillon . . . and afterwards sent me a memorandum upon the subject,
considering the whole, even in Your Lordship’s view, as necessarily at
an end, in consequence of the connexion formed with Murat, I paid
