130                    BENTINCK       AND SICILY
policy, and the Prince for his part encouraged him to do so.
Now, all-powerful as he seemed to be, and eager to test the
Prince’s reaction, Bentinck may have forgotten the difference
between a passing remark in conversation and a letter, however
private. Why did he act so hastily? When, two months later, he
explained his act to Castlereagh, Bentinck recapitulated the
dangers that had faced Sicily at the time of his letter: the after-
effects of misrule; the King’s undying hostility to the ‘system’;
the prospect of a Neapolitan reaction at a peace; and he affirmed
his belief that
   ‘Sicily, in the hands of Great Britain, would become in a very few
years a source of wealth and strength, and after Ireland, the brightest
jewel in the British Crown. The capacity of the country exceeds all
belief. It is only necessary to have seen it fully to believe all the accounts
transmitted by history of its former greatness. But I affix more importance
to the character that Great Britain will acquire by the successful establish-
ment of Sicilian liberty than to the value of Sicily as a British possession.
I wish Sicily to exist as a perpetual example of the blessings of our
friendship, in comparison to that of France; and, in the event of a new
war, which, if Buonaparte lives, must soon recur, I would have Sicily
become not only the model, but the instrument of Italian independence.”*
  Here Bentinck seems to have been perfectly sincere. We
should not underrate the impact of a Sicilian tour on a mind
formed by a classical education. As Croce points out, down to
the latter half of the nineteenth century educated men sent up
the parrot cry that Naples was one of the most fertile and blessed
countries in the world because they trusted more to the lessons
of the past than to the evidence of their own senses.* Bentinck
could see well enough that Sicily was in a poor way. Messina,
which he left on the morning of December 3rd, was politically
‘the worst disposed place I have seen’; and the ‘horrible road’
along which he drove to Catania spoke for the long effects of
misrule. (Bentinck had often lectured the Prince on the inestim-
able benefits which a good road system would bring to Sicily),
But on the way there was Taormina in its ruined magnificence,
which he had not seen before—a reminder that Sicily had been
great and prosperous in happier times and might become so
once more; though now, it seemed, only through British pro-
tection.”
