             DICTATORSHIP AND THE ‘DREAM’                      125
passions of the people’. More murders, he reported, were prob-
ably committed in Palermo than in the rest of Europe put to-
gether, Sardinia and Corsica excepted. The new Constitution
had begun to undo the old system without setting up new codes
or carrying out Castelnuovo’s plan for the reorganisation of the
courts. Bentinck took a great interest in this question: it was
uppermost in his mind when at the end of November he set
out on a month’s tour of Sicily. He was also concerned, on this
occasion, with ensuring that the right people were elected to
the forthcoming Parliament, but (he told the Prince) ‘my great
object was the administration of justice—to hear what the people
wanted’; and he returned much impressed with ‘the prepotenza
[bullying] that generally prevailed—the result I believed of the
feudal system and of the administration of justice being in the
hands of the barons’. Early in 1814 he discussed judicial reorgani-
sation with Bonanno; and throughout this period a committee
of the Council sat to work out new codes.” But all these attempts
at reform were cut short by the swift turn of events on the
Continent;   they bore fruit only after the Restoration, when
Sicilian independence and the British protectorate had both
come toanend. Abortive though they were, they mattered in that
they shewed what might have happened in Sicily if the protect-
orate had gone on. With Bentinck’s dictatorship the wheel had,
besides, come full circle, for his policy was now very like that
of the former Neapolitan Viceroys—authoritarian in manner,
‘enlightened’ and anti-aristocratic in purpose. The difference
was perhaps not so much that Bentinck still hoped Sicily might
later become fit for free institutions, as that his policy was
intended to make and keep her independent; while the Viceroys
had been very distinctly the agents of Neapolitan centralisation.
   But all this (it quickly became clear), and indeed the future of
the British protectorate itself, must depend on the fate of the
Continent. Of this Bentinck was well aware; immersed though
he was in Sicilian affairs he kept an eye on Italy, whose inde-
pendence he still hoped for. When he set out on his tour of Sicily
in late November he had not yet heard of the negotiations
between Austria and Murat which were to lead to a treaty of
alliance between those two powers, and then to an Anglo-
Neapolitan armistice. But he had received instructions from
