142                   BENTINCK      AND>SICILY

as definitive as possible which it would be the more difficult
for the Allies to upset’; while at the same time he blithely found
a loophole in the thought that ‘it was always in the hands of
the Allies to make whatever arrangement they pleased.”
  Bentinck’s conduct, indeed, in these first confused weeks of
peace came to look more and more like a desperate gamble. He
encouraged the Milanese in their hopes of independence—and
therefore in their opposition to Austria,          the Power      which
Castlereagh had time and again told him to cooperate with in
Italy. He sent troops to Corsica on what proved to be an abortive
repetition of Sir Gilbert Elliot’s adventure there. He wished
success to certain Neapolitan generals when they secretly ap-
proached him and told him they hoped to force a constitution
on Murat.* But he was not long to be allowed a free hand in Italy.
   Already at the beginning of April Castlereagh had told him
that, while he had ‘very properly’ attempted in the past to
free Italy by raising an insurrection—'the only system which,
previous to the revival of the Continent, could afford a
prospect of shaking the power of France’-—he must not, now
that ‘a different and better order of things’ had come about,
give the impression of being ‘actuated by “une arriére-pensée”
inconstistent with the arrangements understood between the
great Powers of Europe. . . . It is not insurrection we now want
in Italy or elsewhere—we want disciplined force, under Sove-
reigns we can trust’.” Now, a month later, the storm broke. “We
shall have something to unravel in Corsica, and also at Genoa’,
wrote Castlereagh to Liverpool: Bentinck’s proclamation at
Genoa was ‘very inconsiderate’, and his dealings with the
Neapolitan generals shewed
‘how intolerably prone he is to Whig revolutions everywhere. I am
confident his mismanagement at least doubled all the natural dangers of
Murat’s rascality; and my persuasion is, if the war had gone on much
longer in France, we should have had a most disastrous complication in
Italy. ... He seems bent upon throwing all Italy loose. This might be
well as against France, but against Austria and the King of Sardinia, with
all the new Constitutions which now menace the world with fresh
convulsions, it is most absurd.”*
  The ‘dream’ re-emerged from brief oblivion, and added its
weight to that of all the other official grievances against Ben-
