134                   BENTINCK      AND, SICILY
little attention to the point, and in the press of other business, did not
till yesterday read Mr Graham’s paper.”*

   What really happened at Chatillon? Graham’s report is so
full that it is hard to believe Castlereagh did not take in the
‘dream’ or grasp the singularity of such a proposal from a
Minister to a sovereign. A devil’s advocate might maintain that
Castlereagh understood quite clearly what Graham had said;
that the annexation of Sicily had been, not indeed the aim of
British intervention, but in the air as a possible consequence,
more or less remote; that now it was impracticable; but that
Castlereagh kept it in mind as ‘worthy of consideration’ if
events should take a new turn on the Continent. Castlereagh
certainly took the “dream’, then and later, more calmly than did
his fellow-Ministers at home. But there is another explanation,
It is this. Graham—a romantic young man of 21, given to
writing long rhetorical letters—may have bored Castlereagh
with a verbose account of Bentinck’s views (Graham himself
reported that he had ‘insisted at great length’ on one point).
Castlereagh had a great many other matters on his mind; he
thought the armistice had settled the fate of Naples; probably
he did no more than half-listen to Graham, but now and then
uttered some encouraging platitude which misled his interlocutor
into thinking that he strongly agreed with what was being
said. When we keep in mind Castlereagh’s whole European
policy this seems much the likelier explanation. But some small
doubt must persist.*
   This was not the end of the ‘dream’. Early in March Castel-
cicala used the incident—which the Foreign Office still knew
nothing about—to support a demand for Bentinck’s recall. He
got a strong rebuff when it came out that he had acted without
specific instructions from the Prince. Liverpool, however, was
much annoyed. The proposed annexation of Sicily he thought
inexpedient rather than immoral, but Bentinck’s act was most
objectionable—as he might have pointed out, Drummond had
been recalled in 1808 for a ‘private’ indiscretion on a different
and less serious matter. Bentinck, he thought, was obviously
finding that ‘his new constitution and the Sicilian court are never
likely to work together’, and the ‘dream’ was ‘a device for
