                THE   END    OF   THE   PROTECTORATE                    143
tinck. At the same time Castlereagh recollected two convenient
facts: in September 1813 Bentinck had asked not only for home
leave but also for his recall from the Sicilian mission. All
Bentinck now wanted—so he told Castlereagh through his
aide-de-camp—was         a few months’ leave, and he was in fact
anxious to stay on in Sicily; but Castlereagh replied merely that
‘when I have the pleasure of seeing you in England, we can
converse on this subject’. Meanwhile William A’Court would
take over the Palermo mission. So, although Bentinck had not
yet been officially recalled, he was already in disgrace. When he
sailed from Genoa to Palermo at the beginning of June he knew
that he would shortly be going home on leave; but he had good
reason besides to suspect that this would be his last visit to Sicily.*
   He knew, too, that the appointment of A’Court marked a
change of measures as well as of men. Castelcicala was probably
exaggerating when he told the King that A’Court was his candi-
date for the Sicilian mission; but he was correct in describing
A’Court as ‘well intentioned’ and ‘hostile to popular assemblies
in foreign countries’. When it came to Sicily the new Minister
—who had been Secretary at Naples between the two French in-
vasions—often sounded more Neapolitan than the Neapolitans.
As early as February A’Court, already chosen to be Bentinck’s
locum tenens, had recorded that to his mind the Sicilian consti-
tution had virtually come to an end when Bentinck had sent
Parliament packing in October 1813; in any case it was quite
unsuited to the Sicilians ‘in their present state of ignorance and
profligacy’. The end of the war, he said, would mean the end of
that British preponderance which alone could make it work.
A’Court’s secret instructions, drawn up on March oth, did not
go quite so far: whatever the defects of the Constitution, ‘it
ought to be the policy of the British Government, who were the
original promoters of it, to endeavour to support it, at least in
its essential principles’. The excessive dependence of the Crown
on Parliament was the ‘original error’ which the British Minister
should use his influence to correct.
  ‘The principle of liberty is admitted by the existence of the Constitu-
tion itself and until the Sicilian Patriots shall have been trained to more
temperate notions of liberty and popular privileges the excesses of faction
are more to be dreaded than those of authority on the part of the Crown.”
