                       GHA PTE         ReViLl

      Mie ENDIOPaRHE             PRO     LEG TORATE

Bentinck was away from Sicily for just over three months, until
June 8th, 1814. Brief though it was, this period decided the
fate of Italy: at the end of February the Viceroy Eugéne was
still defending himself in Lombardy and the French still held
Liguria and Piedmont; by the end of April the Allies had overrun
not only Northern Italy but France itself. Bentinck’s acts in
this short period were in some way the culmination of his
Sicilian proconsulship; and the fall to which they brought him
had decisive effects in Sicily.*
  Bentinck, we may say, shewed himself at this time strikingly
irresponsible. Now his position in Sicily over the past two years
had been, in the most literal sense, irresponsible: he had been
allowed and even encouraged to go his own way with only
the vaguest of instructions, while Ministers in England looked on
and waited to see ‘what had been done next’. Lately he had
become the virtual dictator of Sicily. Bentinck was neither the
first nor the last proconsul to kick over the traces when, after
having in effect ruled a satellite country, he was suddenly told
to obey instructions which he disliked.
  Power went to Bentinck’s head; there can be little doubt of
that. Besides, throughout his Sicilian mission he had never quite
given up considering it as a prelude to greater things to come
in Italy. Now    the curtain was up, and time pressed. Italy’s
independence—possibly her unification—was in the air. Elisa
Bonaparte in Tuscany, Melzi in Lombardy, Caulaincourt and
Napoleon himself, all talked of ‘cette corde 4 laquelle répondent
tous les voeux’; so did Murat, for his own purposes; so did the
Austrian generals, though to be sure their proclamations were
addressed to the peoples of Italy, Bentinck’s to the people. Even
Castlereagh, in a more general way, had a little earlier described
the war, for Metternich’s benefit, as a “war of national inde-
pendence’ in which ‘the people are now the only barrier’.* The
difference between these pronouncements and Bentinck’s was
that Bentinck meant what he said. So much did he desire Italian
independence that he jeopardised his career in a reckless and
