RE                    BENTINCK       AND    SICILY
do this of her own accord or that she would not be too happy to get rid
of Sicily and all its troubles. . . Lord Castlereagh had said to Lamb when
is all this interference to cease—It was needless to fancy how it should
be—I was fully convinced of the policy of England maintaining her
influence in Sicily, but how did the fact really stand and had England this
interest upon the subject—No—
   Bentinck had to throw his weight into the scales after all: he
reminded the Prince that the Constitution must be safeguarded
as the ‘great engine of destruction’ against French despotism in
Italy. At length, after much dickering between the Prince and the
Ministers, the desired Note was handed to Bentinck on February
23rd. He was agreeably surprised at its contents, for it gave as
reasons for the need of continued British protection in peacetime
not only the security of Sicily, but that of her independence and
constitution as well.*
   But if the ‘engine of destruction’ was about as safe in its
homeland as fore-thought could make it, the prospect of putting
it to good use on the Continent was discouraging. Before the
armistice with Murat, indeed right up to January 18th, when the
arrival of Aberdeen’s despatch forced him to swallow the armis-
tice, Bentinck had considered various moves which would not
have suited either Austria or Murat in the least. On January 6th
he had urged the King to issue a proclamation full of such
constitutional sentiments as would rally the Neapolitans round
the Bourbons—and perhaps not only the Neapolitans, for, said
Bentinck, other Italians might join them and ‘I for one should be
sorry to see Italy parcelled out among its ancient petty sover-
eigns.. The King, however,         would have no part of it, and
Bentinck went off feeling that ‘there was only one way of treat-
ing them all from top to bottom without any exception il
Bastone’. Bentinck had also thought of leaving Murat and the
Austrians to fight it out with the Viceroy Eugéne in Lombardy
while he, on his own account, raised an insurrection against the
French by invading first Corsica, then Tuscany and Liguria.*
But the armistice sent all these plans up in smoke. Bentinck now
found himself in complete agreement with the King on the
question of Naples; in the course of their frequent and ‘lugubri-
ous conversations’ they commiserated with one another on the
folly of the Allies and especially Austria in backing Murat; and
