              DICTATORSHIP       AND THE ‘DREAM’                   135
getting out of the difficulties in which his Whig principles had
involved both himself and us’.*
   The despatch Castlereagh wrote to Bentinck when he heard
of this was, however, regretful in tone rather than reproachful;
William A’Court, who was with him at the time, reported to
Lady William Bentinck that ‘the Correspondence, which was
considered as so important in England, is thought of no conse-
quence here, and there does not appear to be the slightest idea
of complying with Castelcicala’s request’. Bentinck thanked
Castlereagh for his ‘kindness and consideration’, and that was
the last of the business. But although Castlereagh never made
the ‘dream’ one of his chief grievances against Bentinck another
grain of official discontent had gone into an accumulating store.*
  In February, however, all this was yet to come. At Palermo
Bentinck was casting about for means of securing the Sicilian
protectorate if Castlereagh and the British Government, as he
had reason to fear, should prove indifferent. The Prince, he
thought, had better be induced to make an official request for
a British garrison after the peace; but after the ‘dream’ incident
the Ministers, and not Bentinck himself, must take the initiative.
All he could do was to rub in Murat’s great military power.
In spite of this neither the Prince nor the Ministers proved easy
to manage. The Prince, though frightened at the prospect of
having Murat for a neighbour after the war, was reluctant to
saddle himself with a permanent British force until he was quite
sure that there was no other way out. As for the Ministers,
Bentinck told Belmonte, Castelnuovo and Settimo in confidence
of the ‘dream’ and explained the present situation fully, with
all its uncertainties and dangers. Here they were on the eve of
great changes in Italy which threatened not to go the way they
had hoped; if peace came swiftly England might decide to
clear out and then where would they be? But Belmonte ‘went
into a long harangue upon what he supposed to be the policy
of England without attending to the real state of the question’,
and Bentinck ‘could not fix his attention to the subject’. In his
annoyance he begged Orleans to remind Belmonte of

‘the necessity of their interfering with the British Government to keep
a force in Sicily and not to let him deceive himself that England would
