               THE   END   OF   THE   PROTECTORATE                Isl
tionalism.* The likeliest explanation is that in writing to Castle-
reagh, whom he knew to be unsympathetic, he wished to put
as good a face as possible on his personal disappointment. But
it may be that Bentinck was still trying not to admit his own
misgivings, even to himself and even so late in the day as this.
If so he was soon undeceived. Of the drastic changes made in
the Government he complained to the King and Circello that
they betrayed ‘too much aigreur and prevention .. . towards
the actual system’ and belied the King’s promise to ‘reunite all
parties’; but he met with the bland rejoinder that the King was
‘the most constitutional of all’: the new Ministry was in fact
the old and, Circello implied, the only constitutional Ministry.
He was also depressed to find in A’Court, who had landed at
Palermo at the end of June, a self-confessed Voltairean cynic,
hostile to all popular assemblies, confident of Castlereagh’s
sympathy, and armed ‘with the worst opinion (not very much
undeserved) of the Sicilians and with a deep conviction
amounting almost to an irritable determination that the Consti-
tution cannot and shall not succeed’.* Bentinck could do no
more. According to one report, he did once contemplate
taking some drastic step against the King, but thought better
of it; he got A’Court to write a rather futile statement half-
promising to defend the ‘system’ in Bentinck’s absence; shortly
before his departure he was seen wandering in dejection through
the countryside near Palermo. On July 16th Bentinck sailed
from Palermo for the last time.”
   Bentinck was allowed to keep the military command in Italy
until April 1815, when yet another ill-timed display of consti-
tutionalism—this time in Piedmont—brought about his sum-
mary   recall. But Liverpool already thought him ‘mad’, and
Castlereagh was at one with Metternich in wishing to keep him
away from the Mediterranean; he had already fallen into that
official disfavour which kept him out of the government service
for the next thirteen years.* Looking back on his Italian and
Sicilian career, Bentinck was unrepentant:
   ‘Like Cassandra’ (he wrote to Hamilton in January 1815) ‘I preached
in vain. I always thought that Italy alone could have decided the war
against Bonaparte. I was very much gratified in hearing the other day
that Bonaparte himself had said... that the British Government had
