I§2                     BENTINCK       AND, SICILY

never seemed to know its own importance in Italy. He added that we
were held in the greatest veneration. True it is that there is no part of
the world where the British name is equally respected. It is love and
admiration without alloy. They look upon us as the natural friends of
independence... who from policy and feeling cannot but be always
inclined to protect them from internal and external oppression. You
can have no idea how rapidly the spirit of discontent and union is spreading
throughout Italy. Murat cannot now in my opinion be driven out....
Every Italian would join him ...I confess I should be glad to see the
attempt made as far as regards Italy, because I think its independence
would be established and besides the interest I take in the Italian people,
I am convinced that there can be no other effectual barrier against either
France or Austria...I assure you it grieves me to the heart to see our
reputation and interests so unnecessarily thrown away....It seems as
if we were anxious and in a hurry, as if it was entirely our own act to
sacrifice and disregard all national feeling and supposed national rights. . . .
Pardon this political digression. . . .”*
  As for Sicily, ‘if the whole Sicilian business were published
from one end to the other,’ he wrote, ‘I should be rather glad
than sorry ...’. He could not rid himself of his concern with
Sicily, and he still corresponded with the few Sicilians who had
remained his friends. He was furious, he wrote to Castelnuovo,
when he thought of the golden chances Sicily had missed ‘faute
de courage, de vertu, et de patriotisme. .. . Je vous jure que je
suis dégotité de votre pays. S’il n’y avait pas des hommes comme
vous et votre digne ami Ruggiero [Settimo], et quelques autres
en fort petit nombre, je douterais presque si la Sicile pourrait
produire quelque chose de bon. Espérons que ceux-ci serviront
d’exemple 4 une meilleure postérité.’*
  In truth both the protectorate and the Patriotic movement
had run their course, though outwardly their collapse dragged
on until December 1816. Shortly after Bentinck’s departure,
the King dissolved the Constitutionalists Commons which
Bonanno’s ‘management’ had got together; by another general
election he acquired a new Parliament, virtually a replica of
that of 1813, both in its membership and in the irresponsible
conduct it kept up throughout the winter and spring of 1814-15.
In effect the King gave the Sicilians rope enough to hang them-
selves. He could not afford a drastic change while his return to
Naples remained uncertain; and he was shrewd enough to know
