              THE   END   OF THE   PROTECTORATE                  I45
   The situation he found was unpromising but not hopeless.
Even if Bentinck had returned with his powers intact he would
have faced a difficult task. For the almost irreparable break-up
of the Patriotic movement had only been suspended during his
dictatorship; now, with a new Parliament and a resumption of
constitutional government in the offing, the dissensions of 1813
reappeared, still unhealed. The general election, held in May,
had produced—thanks to Bonanno’s energetic and unscrupulous
‘management’—a House of Commons irreproachably consti-
tutionalist.* But it also raised new difficulties: for the incorrup-
tible Castelnuovo, objecting to Bonanno’s high-handed methods,
signified his disagreement in the usual way, by withdrawing to
his tent and refusing to attend Council meetings. More im-
portant, the conservatives or King’s Friends still swayed the
Peers: a complete deadlock between the two Houses was to
be expected.*                                .
   In such circumstances Bentinck had formerly threatened to
abolish or at any rate coerce the Upper House; that was now
out of the question. But the very change in the political situation
of Sicily which made impossible such bludgeoning methods
also offered the chance of a compromise. For the end of the war
had raised new anxieties in the minds of some of the leading
King’s Friends: if the King were to regain Naples—they now
saw—not only those parts of the new Constitution which they
disliked, but the privileges of their order and the independence
of their country, which they really cared about, would be in
danger. They, as the King’s intimates, may well have known
that his disposition was anything but reassuring. True, the news
of Louis XVIII’s Charte had come as a shock to his absolutist
convictions. But at the end of May he was still writing to
Castelcicala that if, as he hoped, he managed to recover Naples
‘in Paris’ —that is, by diplomatic action—he might then ‘recover’
Sicily from Naples.* At all events some of these conservative
nobles—San Marco, Trabia, Campofranco—were fearful enough
to approach Castelnuovo and Settimo secretly in April and
propose a coalition in defence of the constitutional principle and
of Sicilian independence. These were essential points on which
all could agree; apparently the two groups of men did not even
discuss their old differences over the abolition of feudalism,
