I44                   BENTINCK      AND SICILY
  With most of this Bentinck could agree; but he was aware of
one crucial fact which the instructions did not convey: as he had
long foretold, the British Government had lost interest in their
protectorate over Sicily. They had acquired it almost by acci-
dent during the war; now they prepared to cast it off with, it
seems, the same imperial carelessness. If they weighed the pros
and cons of the matter at all they looked not at the island itself
but at the whole new balance of power in Europe. Sicily,
Liverpool had said apropos of the ‘dream’, would anyhow be
very difficult to manage through the new             Constitution; but
what mattered was that
‘the continental states are more jealous of our obtaining power in the
Mediterranean than in any other quarter. Circumstances have induced
them to make no difficulty about our retaining Malta, but the idea of
our possessing Sicily by an act, which in its most favourable light must
be considered as a douce violence, could not fail greatly to revolt them.”*
  Merely to carry on the protectorate, without questioning
Sicily’s independence, would no doubt have been more douce a
violence than the original ‘dream’. But with the war over it was
too embarrassing to be worth while: that at least seems to have
been the reasoning which the Government followed even if they
did not put it into words. Just how Britain would disentangle
herself from her Sicilian commitment was not yet clear. But
Bentinck could see that his dictatorship had been a desperate
and, as it now     turned out, a pointless remedy: in trying to
salvage the ‘system’ he had acted independently from rather
than in opposition to his Government, for they had given him
neither check nor encouragement. Even now they did not so
much reject what he had done as ignore it; in practice their new
policy meant that they wished to let the whole matter drop.
  Even before he knew of his fall from official favour, Bentinck
had written to Castelnuovo of his disgust at what he had found
in Italy, and his one remaining hope that he might yet ‘rendre
quelque petit service’ to Sicily—‘et je prie le bon Dieu avec tout
mon cceur de la rendre heureuse’. On 8 June he landed at
Palermo. By all accounts the heyday of his recklessness was over;
he came back chastened and dejected. None the less he now
embarked on a last attempt to save what could be saved of the
constitutional system.*
