148                  BENTINCK      AND*   SICILY

‘as anxious for the establishment of the Sicilian Constitution as any
of its warmest patriots—not from any diminished affection for principles
of the purest despotism, or from diminished hatred for the system or
authors of Sicilian liberty; but he has been convinced that it is only by
the adoption of more liberal principles that he can regain the throne of
Naples: whether from the favourable disposition of the Allied Sovereigns
at the approaching Congress, or from the good will of his people.”
   The King had various reasons for this change of front. He
felt the need to compete with Murat, who had lately promised a
Constitution. Then, should he later recover Naples, the Sicilians
might raise fewer obstacles to reunion if they could look forward
toa joint constitution for both kingdoms. Probably most im-
portant, on June 20th the King heard from Orleans—who had
gone to Paris—that the Allied Sovereigns, and especially
Alexander, disapproved of his past conduct and thought his
return to Naples wholly dependent on the will of the people;
they therefore advised him to emulate Louis XVIII’s liberal
policy. “These gentlemen are very ready to give me advice,’ the
King grumbled, ‘but not at all disposed to follow it in their own
case.’ Still he was, it seems, convinced for a time that he had
better put up a front of unimpeachable constitutionalism in the
eyes of Europe; and the best way to do so was to begin at home
in Sicily.*
   This new attitude of the King’s may help to explain the
peculiar way in which the Sicilian political crisis was resolved
on June 23rd. On that date the constitutionalist leaders met at
Bentinck’s house to decide finally whether they should form a
coalition with the King’s Friends. There was a long and heated
discussion which led nowhere. Then Belmonte, to everyone’s
astonishment, proposed that instead of uniting with the King’s
Friends they should ‘amalgamate with the King’: that is, they
should ask him either to support the Constitution or to resume
the government, and they should offer for the sake of unity to
alter the make-up of the Government according to his wishes.
Nobody knew what to say to this proposal; somehow it was
adopted.*
   It is still hard to tell what made Belmonte and the Council
act as they did. Belmonte may well have taken the King’s new
professions of constitutionalism at their face value. Perhaps, too,
