146                BENTINCK    AND SICILY
though if they were to come together that would mean that
the Patriotic movement would from then on relapse into a
purely aristocratic opposition to royal power. In the present
emergency, it seems, Castelnuovo was ready to sacrifice such
hopes as he still had of social reform for the sake of achieving
political unity and avoiding ‘faction’. Men not measures stood
in the way of the proposed coalition: the conservatives wished
to throw out the Belmontists, whom they accused of jobbery;
Castelnuovo, though willing enough to be rid of the Belmontist
ministers—Bonanno and Carini—still refused to act without
Belmonte himself; and the Belmontists, of course, had no wish
to sacrifice themselves. There the matter stood when Bentinck
returned to Palermo.*
   He found his friends in typically contrasted moods—Castel-
nuovo so despondent that, he said, only loyalty to Bentinck kept
him from giving up politics altogether;* Belmonte so absurdly
confident of British protection that he saw no danger at all.
Bentinck told all the constitutionalist leaders plainly that he
could no longer direct the government or prevent the King
from resuming if he wished; all Britain would undertake was
to protect her friends from persecution. The Ministers must
now ‘march by themselves’. Though ‘it was no longer my
concern’, he agreed with Castelnuovo that the proposed coalition
was necessary if not palatable; the King’s Friends, he thought,
‘all wished the Constitution—they wished more for place—but
place with a Constitution they would prefer to place without
it’. The arrangement would probably not last longer than three
months, but that would suffice to get through the parliamentary
session and secure the Constitution once and for all. Bentinck
therefore entered into negotiations with San Marco and his
friends. They made difficulties; they complained of great irregu-
larities in the recent general election and demanded a new one.
Bentinck admitted the irregularities, but, he said, they were to
be expected given the present state of Sicily. The government
must go on and make it its business in future to “discourage that
system of prepotenza by which the country had so long been
oppressed—from the Sovereign downwards by every agent of
every Baron and by all the agents of every Government’. Taking
a longer view, he told them that though the Constitution was
