              THE   END   OF THE   PROTECTORATE               I49
he wished at all costs to forestall the coalition—which would
have left his party no more than a subordinate place—and
fancied that he could recover, with the King’s favour, the po-
sition of Prime Minister which Bentinck had taken away from
him in 1813. Yet there is also evidence that nobody thought the
King would have the energy or the desire to resume the cares
of government: so the approach to the King may originally
have been a gesture: if approached he would have had to come
out into the open and, perhaps, call off the Peers’ opposition. It
may also be that neither Belmonte not the others acted from
motives capable of logical explanation, but that, tired of argu-
ment and unable to break the deadlock, they simply took the
first way out that offered. As for Bentinck, he would certainly
have preferred a coalition, and Belmonte’s move seems to have
irritated him even more than usual. But by now he could no
longer impose his own solution: indeed, he most likely felt like
washing his hands of the whole business.”
  The Prince, after he had got over his initial surprise, drew up
a memorandum telling his father of the Council’s proposal.
But he did not merely give him the alternative of supporting or
resuming the government;      instead he seized the opportunity
to urge the King to resume: in this way the King would prove
‘your adherence to those liberal ideas which, as you well know,
are the spring that can move the Allies in your favour... your
present conduct will be the best guarantee of what you mean
to do at Naples’. Bentinck countenanced the Prince’s memo-
randum, though he refused to sign it himself, since—he said—
judging from past experience he could scarcely advise the King
to resume. He was right. The King surprised nearly everybody
by hastening to take his son’s advice. Before resuming, however,
he asked Bentinck to release him from the promise he had made
in March 1813 not to do so without British consent. Bentinck
acquiesced; but since Circello, who acted as go-between, kept
proclaiming that his master was now ‘furieux constitutionelliste’,
Bentinck seized his opportunity too; he dissolved the engage-
ment, he stated, because the King had declared that he meant
‘to cherish the Constitution’ and to adopt the liberal conduct
‘so strongly recommended by the advice and enforced by the
example of the highest and most august authorities’. By this
