Iso                   BENTINCK       AND, SICILY

last act Bentinck thought to provide his Government with an
excuse for intervening in defence of the Constitution if they
should ever be minded to do so.”
   OnJuly 4th the events of March 1813 recurred with an ironical
difference. The King drove through Palermo amid cheering
crowds; next day he resumed the government. At the same
time, and once again unexpectedly, he accepted the Ministers’
resignations. Then—as if to shew that Bentinck’s dictatorship
had been no more than an unconstitutional interregnum—he
brought back to power all the men whose dismissal Bentinck
had previously forced on the Prince: that is, Ferreri and the other
puppet Ministers who had gone out in October 1813; and the
 Court officialh—one of them Cassaro—whom Bentinck had
deprived of their posts in April 1813. The festivities attending
the King’s return went on for three nights. “The people shewed
very great satisfaction’, and already the outgoing constitution-
alists were being hissed in the streets.*
   Bentinck, in the official despatch he wrote to Castlereagh
just after the King’s return—his last despatch from Sicily—spoke
of his seemingly unreserved pleasure at ‘this happy termination
of the long and embarrassing relation which has existed for so
many years between the two governments’. In a private letter
of the same date he gave a curious account of his feelings:
   ‘The return of the King to power, under all the circumstances, I
consider to be one of the best pieces of good luck that ever happened
to me; and offers a pont d’or, over which I shall be most happy to make
my retreat from Sicilian affairs. My private feelings have long made me
desirous of leaving a situation which has materially interfered with my
military views.—I however determined to sacrifice every view of my
own (and for this reason did ask you to allow me to remain in Sicily)
as long as I thought that my presence could contribute to the happiness
of the Sicilians—I feel no longer any obligation on this score—the Sicilian
Government has again resumed its independence; and agreeing, as all
seem to do, in the desire to establish the Constitution and a fixed order
of things. I should hope it will be able to go on by itself—At any rate
our interference is no longer a matter of necessity.’
   This is at first sight puzzling, since in fact Bentinck saw
clearly enough—as we know from his journal—that ‘no depend-
ence [was] to be placed’ in the King’s professions of constitu-
