                 THE    END    OF   THE   PROTECTORATE                       147
certainly in very bad straits, yet he did not altogether despair of
its ultimate success; what Sicily needed above all was such a
programme of practical reform as he had tried to launch:
    ‘Institutions made men good or bad. Administration of Justice had
the most influence as well upon national character as upon the tranquillity
and good order of society—It was this which alone could rectify the
evils of which all complained—Before we could say that the Constitu-
tion would not succeed we must see the effect of such new institutions
and of time—If in the new Parliament—a good judicial system—roads
for commerce and a modification of landed possession so as to disperse
landed property more generally—could be settled—more would be done
for Sicily in one session than by all its Kings together for the last two or
three centuries. I had considered the question of the state of Sicily in all
its bearings. If the King should return to Naples, he might if England
chose it destroy the Constitution... but . . . Ireally thought that as it was
difficult for it to go on, so it wasinfinitely more difficult for it to go back.’

   It was not, however, in the conservative camp that the real
difficulties arose, but among Bentinck’s own friends. Belmonte
would not budge: he still objected to a coalition and fancied that
the government could secure a majority in the Peers without
one. ‘Nobody but himself thought so’, Bentinck told him;
exasperated at this wilful blindness he complained bitterly to
Villafranca that
‘it was all our own fault—we had to accuse nobody but our own
littleness—folly—and mismanagement—I knew at first that the Ministry
could not go on—Belmonte and Villarmosa I knew would not agree...
I was heartily disgusted and should be glad to go away. I saw no chance
of success but by mixing the Ministry.”*

   The Belmontists’ refrain was that the King—by common
consent the real menace to the Constitution—‘must be made
either nul or friendly’. Bentinck’s and Castelnuovo’s solution
was to make him ‘nul’ by detaching his supporters from him.
This the Belmontists disliked, and they accordingly began to
think of making the King ‘friendly’ instead.
   There were signs that such an attempt might succeed better
than past experience suggested. For at that very moment the
King had changed his tune. Suddenly and unexpectedly—Ben-
tinck reported—he had become
