       WILLIAM     DRUMMOND’S        MISSION TO SICILY          159
‘with proper delicacy and caution’, reforms in financial and
military administration. As for Naples, the British Government
could give no absolute pledge that its recovery would be made
a condition sine qua non of a peace, but they undertook to do
their best to secure it.*
   Drummond arrived at Palermo in December 1806 to find
the Court in even greater turmoil than usual. The aged favourite
Sir John Acton had been ‘wormed out’ of the government three
months earlier by the Queen’s Franco-Neapolitan faction, who
now held undisputed control. Acton’s and Elliot’s advice had
been to consolidate the defence of Sicily before embarking on
an attempt against Naples; but the Queen wished, as she said,
‘d’entamer la chose, de faire une explosion générale’, and she
encouraged indiscriminate risings by the masse (brigands) in
Calabria. She was furious at the British generals’ refusal to fall
in with her plans, though by her own admission the Sicilian
army was in a deplorable state, and could have given little help.
Moreover, Drummond found convincing though not conclusive
evidence that she had been intriguing with Russia for a strong
force to be sent to Sicily, and was even then negotiating secretly
with France. “The reason for this detestable treachery’, he wrote,
‘arises partly from the abhorrence of the Queen and her minions
for everything English; and partly from the belief that France
is stronger than England, and that sooner or later France will
become masters of Sicily. ... We must remember the enemies
with whom we have to contend both without and within the
island of Sicily.’ The British Commander-in-Chief at Messina,
Gen. Henry Fox, was a sick and elderly man, and in his disgust
with the Court he scarcely troubled to keep up relations with
them. Sir John Moore, his second-in-command, thought the
inhabitants were ripe for revolt against their hated government:
‘if we do not, as they wish, rescue them from it, they will throw
themselves into the arms of France. By what means we are to
do this I shall not say, but the possession of Sicily is a most im-
portant object, whether as a military post or as a valuable colony.
If the Court of Palermo and the present government continue...
I doubt if we shall hold it. Were they removed and the island
declared English we should, with the hearts of the people and
the energy which I think they could still be brought to display
