                THE   END    OF   THE   PROTECTORATE                    JESS
in fact, a military occupation . . . with the exception of having guaranteed
to the Sicilian people, not to form a constitution, but to protect that
part of the dominions of the King of the Two Sicilies, this government
had entered into no arrangements of an express nature with them. ...
It was true that while the British troops were in the country it was found
necessary that a strong interposition should take place on the part of the
British power, for the purpose of impressing on the mind of the Sicilian
Government the propriety of supporting a constitution. If this had not
been done, the government could not have gone on, and the place would
not have been fit for a military station. The consequence of this inter-
position was, that the noble lord [Bentinck] was “mixed up” in a great
variety of remonstrances [a laugh]... but he certainly never did feel
that in resorting to those remonstrances, the noble lord was doing any-
thing more than what was necessary for his military occupation of the
island. He never supposed that the noble lord was entering into any
arrangements with respect to the Sicilian constitution.’
   Any new interference by the British Government would
therefore be ‘unjustifiable and impracticable’. The House sup-
ported him by 69 votes to 35.*
   Castlereagh was of course right in one sense—perhaps the
only sense that Governments can safely understand or attend to,
though we may wonder. Given his broad European policy
from 1814 onward, he could not possibly have gone on main-
taining a protectorate or shoring up a constitution that nowhere
fitted in with that policy. To the greater end of European
balance and peace he had to sacrifice not only Sicily’s half-
formed aspirations, which doubtless he cared little about, but
some small part also of Britain’s name. For if morality enters at
all into the history of international affairs—and keep it out
though we may at the door it flies in at the skylight—a great
Power is surely at once unwise and wrong if it fails to ‘connect’:
if, that is, it assumes like Castlereagh that it can interfere in the
affairs of a small Power, alter by its weight the course of events,
and then withdraw and discard responsibility as though nothing
had happened. Something does happen, and something did
happen in Sicily. No doubt the reforming movement was weak
and weakly rooted; but it was there, and the British intervention,
by carrying it to deceptive heights which it could probably not
have measured by its own strength alone, made sure that the
ensuing fall would seem all the deeper. True, ifs and ans are no
