160                 BENTINCK     AND   SICILY
in a cause they approved, be able to maintain it against the
world’. To cap the crisis, the Sicilian Government rejected the
draft treaty in language which Drummond found evasive and
even ‘apparently hostile’. Faced with this situation, he stopped
payment of the subsidy and wrote home for instructions.
  Howick, after consultation with other Ministers, drafted a
reply instructing Drummond to achieve four main objects: ‘rst.
The conclusion of the treaty according to the original projet;
2ndly: The removal of obnoxious and suspicious persons from
the Councils of the Court; 3rdly. The admission of Sicilians to
places of trust and confidence, or in other words, a Sicilian
administration; 4thly. The enlargement of the powers of the
British Commander in Chief over the Sicilian Army.’ The
fourth point was ‘indispensable’. As for the second, Drummond
was if possible to obtain for himself a discretionary power to
remove undesirable foreigners from Palermo. The Court must
be induced to pay attention to the Sicilians’ needs ‘and even to
their wishes’; if necessary they should be persuaded to call an
extraordinary Parliament, for ‘without the exertions of the
Sicilians, His Majesty [George III] was aware that his efforts to
preserve Sicily must prove fruitless’. Drummond was allowed
considerable latitude as to the means of carrying out his instruc-
tions. Amicable methods were best: he might remonstrate with
the Government, advise the King, and engage in talks with the
Sicilian nobles—Belmonte was suggested as a likely man. If
need be Drummond could go on withholding the subsidy: and
if any danger immediately threatened Sicily’s independence, he
and the British commanders were to decide on measures to
save it. ‘Sicily’, Howick wrote, ‘must not directly or indirectly
fall under the control of France.’*
  Howick’s draft is dated March 1807. The Ministry of All the
Talents fell on the 25th of that month, and the instructions were
never sent out. Canning reversed Howick’s policy completely.
He removed from the draft treaty, as ‘unseasonable’, the clauses
giving Britain commercial privileges and a peacetime garrison:
in his instructions to Drummond he confined himself to saying
that Britain had a claim on the King of Sicily’s confidence and on
his cooperation in the war.*
   Meanwhile Drummond had anticipated his government’s
