        WILLIAM      DRUMMOND’S       MISSION    TO SICILY       I6I
change of policy by a change of heart of his own. He was by
way of being a student of political philosophy; he knew the
Court from his residence as Minister at Naples from 1801 to
1803; and he had come to Palermo ‘most strongly prejudiced
against the Sicilian government, and not without the intention,
if I found my opinions confirmed by experience, of proposing
measures which would have in fact rendered Sicily a province
of Great Britain’.    Now, however, he found that there was not
one patriotic party, but any number of factions, jealous of each
other, though ‘all united in desiring to maintain those feudal
rights, those instruments of tyranny by which they oppressed
the peasantry’. Corruption and superstition reigned everywhere;
of political vision he found very little. “So many reports were
spread concerning the fate of the island, so many fine projects
of change were suggested, so many splendid plans of reform
were imagined, and so many little half-developed embryos of
revolution began to shew themselves, that neither the nobles nor
the people seemed to know very well to what government they
were to belong. Every man who had the leisure built his political
system according to his own fancy, and to suit his own conve-
nience.... The Sicilians desired to receive laws from others, rather
than to make laws for themselves. Some wished the French, and
some the English to govern here, for men who are not for their
country may be for anybody.’ Only unequivocal proofs of the
Court’s ‘treachery’ would have justified him in overthrowing
it; but such a revolution, besides being distasteful to him, could
only succeed with the cooperation of the Sicilian people. Any
reform of this “Constitution seven hundred years old in every
species of political malady’ must therefore attack feudal privilege
as well as Court misrule; it was bound to be difficult and
dangerous; above all it must be carried out by the Sicilians them-
selves without foreign interference. “The seat of legislature
should rather be a Sicilian Parliament than a British camp.”
   Drummond therefore decided to come to an understanding
with the Court, even before he had received fresh instructions.
He agreed to changes in the draft treaty; and he resumed pay-
ment of the subsidy on receiving the King’s promise that the
Queen and the French émigrés would no longer have any share
igoven the rnment, and that all important business would be
