162                BENTINCK      AND   SICILY
transacted among the King, Circello, and himself. The Queen
seemed at first to acquiesce in this arrangement. ‘She even
promised that if Iwould shew her any degree of confidence she
would endeavour to introduce the English Constitution into
Sicily. I will undertake to do this without Her Majesty’s assist-
ance, which I am not particularly disposed to require.”
   Drummond’s assurances that ‘the Queen’s faction rules no
longer, either in appearance or in reality’, met with derision
from the staff officers at Messina, who thought the Court had
merely hoodwinked him. Moore continued to protest that the
Court was interested in Naples only and cared nothing for
Sicily, and that an invasion of Italy would be useless ‘unless we
had command of the King’s person, and unless the Queen and
all her emissaries were removed, and we had the complete
direction of the government. Nothing short of this would give
confidence to the people or induce them to join us, and without
the people it was vain to hope for permanent success in Italy.’
He talked of expelling the Queen to Trieste: ‘this was never
proposed to be adopted’, he admitted,        “... but only men-
tioned . . . if possible to be done, it would be the surest way to
quiet Sicily.’ Even when after a few months the King again
eclipsed himself, and the Queen openly returned to the Council,
Drummond went on asserting that her influence was exagger-
ated: she herself, he said, was a mere dupe of the French party;
the King was a firm friend of England, and would remain one
if he was not frightened by the revolutionary chatter among
the officers at Messina; and he, Drummond, had good hopes of
persuading him presently to effect a gradual reform through
Parliament, and to remove the Queen once more from the
government. Belmonte he dismissed as a “Gallicised smatterer’,
and he complained that the ‘speculators’ and advocates of whole-
sale reform made his mission of persuasion difficult. After Moore
had been recalled, partly as a result of his obstreperous conduct,
Drummond claimed that ‘perfect union’ now prevailed among
the Court, the commanders, and himself: he expected great
things of the Court’s decision to raise a Sicilian militia of 40,000
men, and declared that Sicily was at last coming out of her
lethargy. Yet his optimism was punctured again and again by un-
pleasant discoveries. He found that the ‘infatuated Queen... with
