154                  BENTINCK       AND SICILY

  The Sicilian adventure was over. Already in 1815 the British
garrison had been withdrawn and A’Court had left Palermo
for Naples.
  Belmonte had died in Paris in 1814; he had gone there, it
seems, in the hope of winning Castlereagh’s support for the
Constitution. He was mourned by the two men—Bentinck and
Castelnuovo—whom in his life he had most often exasperated.
As for Castelnuovo, he tried for a while longer to salvage
something of the ‘system’ by cooperating with the King. But
after May 1815 he withdrew into private life, steadily refusing
to pay taxes to an unconstitutional government except under
duress, and bequeathing, at his death in 1822, £25,000 to anyone
who should induce the King to restore the Constitution.”
Ruggiero Settimo, indeed, lived to see it briefly restored in 1848,
and Sicily herself united with the rest of Italy in 1860.
  But if Britain’s Sicilian adventure was over, could it be quite
undone? Castlereagh apparently thought it could. InJune 1821,
after Laibach, Bentinck presented a motion in the House of
Commons calling on the Government to intervene in defence
of Sicilian liberties. The point he—and later Sir James Mac-
kintosh—made was that by her intervention in 1811-14 Britain
had pledged her “good faith and national honour’ in support of
those liberties: she ought at the very least to see that the Sicilians
kept the liberties they had enjoyed before that intervention,
instead of leaving them infinitely worse off than she had found
them. Castlereagh’s reply was that in any case it was a mere
‘oratorical flourish’ to talk of a Sicilian Constitution, old or
new; that of 1812 was one of the most unsuitable ever devised,
and he ridiculed its makers for having tried to ape British
institutions—why, they had even, he believed, sent for the
measurements of the table he was leaning upon. As for the
union with Naples, he “felt some lurking impression’ that Sicily,
far from feeling aggrieved, ‘would be happier in consequence...
that union was calculated to raise her to whatever importance
Naples might be supposed to possess’. The heart of his argument
concerned ‘the nature of the connexion of England and Sicily’:
   “Although Government had always felt a strong esteem and affection
for that country, yet it was not merely on that account, or to secure the
happiness of the people, that British troops were stationed there. It was,
