                           APPENDIX(CG

      BENTINGRS-GONDU                       GC    IVATEGENOA

By the middle of April 1814 Bentinck’s army had reached the
outskirts of Genoa after a short campaign up the Riviera by way
of Sarzana and Nervi. On the 18th the Genoa garrison sur-
rendered; two days earlier the armistice of Schiarino Rizzino
had brought to an end the Viceroy Eugéne’s able defence of
Lombardy against the Austrians and Murat. Paris had fallen,
but the war in France was not yet over officially.” On April
26th Bentinck issued a proclamation in which he declared that,
in accordance with the wishes of the people, and with the prin-
ciple—‘recognised by the High Allied Powers’—of restoring the
old sovereigns, the Constitution of the Genoese Republic was
re-established as it had stood in 1797, ‘with those modifications
which the general wish, the public good, and the spirit of the origi-
nal Constitution of 1576, seem to require’. The Austrian generals
had been proclaiming the return of the old sovereigns all over
Northern Italy; but Bentinck had been enjoined by Castlereagh
on March 30th not to commit himself to the restoration of any
of them except the King of Piedmont and the Grand-Duke of
Tuscany. The result of Bentinck’s act was, of course, that Britain
had to repudiate it and, by endorsing the annexation of Genoa to
Piedmont, to confirm her reputation as Perfidious Albion.*
  Bentinck, when he came to justify himself, told Bathurst
that it was all very well to settle the fate of Genoa at a peace, but
   ‘Thad to provide for a state of war. My duty commanded me to ensure
the success of the war in Italy, which the weakness of the Austrian army,
and the treachery of Murat, might at any time bring to a conclusion the
most unfavourable to the Allied arms... .. The fact that Genoa as a mili-
tary place was untenable without more troops than Bentinck disposed
of made it ‘indispensable for me to secure the tranquillity and cordial
cooperation of the Genoese. Without these the further advance of the
British force became hazardous and in case of reverse, the preservation
of what I had, precarious.—No other measure as I thought but the one
I adopted could have effected these objects. . . . cannot but still continue
to think that the form of the Provisional Government was not only
advisable but necessary.”*
