172                        BENTINCK          AND      SICILY
   PAGE 2                                              .
landlords’ agents or chief tenants. Michele Amari estimated that the Third Estate was at
   this period no larger, or very slightly larger, than the nobility: preface to N. Palmeri,
   Saggio storico-politico sulla costituzione del Regno di Sicilia (Lausanne, 1847), Xxxi.

   PAGE 3
a constitutional conflict between Crown and Parliament. The power of the nobility may be
  judged by the fact that, numbering as they did about 2,300 out of a population of
   about 1,500,000, they held under their jurisdiction (according to the latest, and in-
  complete, survey, that of 1747-8) 282 towns and lands (feudi) as against 85 in the Royal
  Domain, and 780,688 inhabitants as against 395,967 (Palermo, then the second city
  of Italy, with 180,000 inhabitants, was not included in the survey). There was no up-
  to-date register of fiefs, duties, boundaries etc.; taxes had therefore to be assessed on
  the basis of riveli, i.e. declarations of value by the occupiers. One of the most important
  points in Caracciolo’s programme of reform was the carrying out of a thorough
  Catasto (survey) of all lands; it was also, for obvious reasons, the point over which the
  Viceroy and the barons in Parliament had their most serious clash: E. Pontieri, II
  Tramonto del Baronaggio Siciliano (Florence, 1943), 92 ff., 222 ff. (This work gives
  (pp. 195-283) the most up-to-date and elaborate account of Caracciolo’s Viceroyalty;
  cf. also B. Croce, ‘Il Marchese Caracciolo’, in Uomini e Cose della vecchia Italia (Bari,
  1927); F. De Stefano, Storia della Sicilia (Bari, 1948), 274-7; R. Romeo, II Risorgimento
  in Sicilia (Bari, 1950), 50-65.)
those rights were still unquestioned. The Sicilian Parliament was made up of three Estates
   (Braccia), the Militare (barons), Ecclesiastico, and Demaniale (communes of the Royal
   Domain). Of the great powers it had held under the Aragonese, it had by the 18th
   century lost the legislative and judicial; but it kept those of voting donativi (i.e. taxes
   designed to supplement the revenue the Crown enjoyed of its own right from customs,
   dues, etc.; there were ordinary donativi—a variety of taxes making up a fixed revenue,
   voted as a matter of course by successive Parliaments—and extraordinary donativi pro-
   vided for emergencies) ;of petitioning the Crown; and of electing the Deputation of the
   Realm—a delegate body supposed to supervise the collection and administration of
   the revenue, and the enforcement of laws, during the four-year interval between
   Parliaments. Actually, until the 1780’s these powers had been accepted as merely
   formal. The Deputation was in practice nominated by the Crown, as was the Braccio
   Demaniale itself. It was never suggested that conditions should be attached to votes of
   supply. Voting in the first two Braccia was by fiefs, so that their numbers were not
   large; the Demaniale was smaller still. Voting by proxy was allowed. In 1810, the
   Militare had 277 members, the Ecclesiastico 60 to 66, the Demaniale 44: Pontieri,
  op. cit., 127-45; G. Bianco, La Sicilia durante I’occupazione inglese (Palermo, 1902), 32-6.
lately been pointed out. By Romeo,     op. cit., 19-26. The   recent   works   of Romeo   and.
  Pontieri have thrown much light on the economic background of the patriotic
  movement.

  PAGE 4
later and ‘unnatural’ growths. Gregorio combated the interpretation of the Norman
   Conquest according to which Roger had been no more than primus inter pares, as:
   well as the prevailing interpretation of the Aragonese capitularies Si aliquem and
   Volentes, which allowed almost unlimited alienation of, and succession to, fiefs. He
  held that fiefs were historically precarious and their enjoyment dependent on services.
  rendered to the Crown: in default of a (restricted) succession, they reverted to the
  Crown, and they could not be alienated. This contention was embodied by the Viceregal
   Government in a Pragmatic of 1788 which, however, does not seem to have had
   much effect. Gregorio also contended that Parliament was no more than the Norman.
