 166                   BENTINCK      AND, SICILY
 Office files (FO 70/63) shews a number of variant readings. Most of
 these are insignificant and seem to have been introduced by the copyist
 (Andrew Douglas, Bentinck’s Secretary of Legation) in order to improve
 the French. It is interesting, however, that in this copy the sentence ‘Je
 voudrais que l’exécution puisse commencer avec le rétablissement du
 Roi dans le Royaume de Naples’ is omitted. In February 1814, when
 this copy was sent to Castlereagh, the armistice with Murat had already
 been signed, and such an expression of legitimist feeling might have
 seemed inappropriate.

                                    II
       GRAHAM'S       ACCOUNT       OF   HIS   CONVERSATION
                       WiLHVCAS
                            LER BAGH


‘... We then discussed the subject of your private letter, and
I detailed to His Lordship your plan for the permanent occu-
pation of Sicily as a British Territory: he said in the case where
it was built on the restoration of Ferdinand to the Crown of
Naples, our engagements with Murat were decisive: he himself
had no idea, neither did he desire, that those engagements should
be violated: if however Murat still refused to cooperate and
remained unsatisfied with the explanation Your Lordship was
directed to give him, then, if we could recover Naples, your
plan became feasible and worthy of consideration.
  In the case of an indemnity, he feared it was not practicable;
for no State we could give as compensation for Naples and no
sum of money we could offer would, he conceived, be sufficient
temptation for the relinquishment of such an island as Sicily.
   I then insisted at great length on the extreme impolicy of
evacuating it at a peace, and urged the Treaty with Murat as
an imperative reason why Sicily never could be safe without
a British garrison.
   Iam happy to say His Lordship coincided most entirely in
your opinion; he saw no difficulty in obtaining the consent of
the King of Sicily to the arrangement; and the Allies would
readily allow us to act in this respect as we chose. France at any
other moment would have been an insurmountable obstacle;
but humbled as she was, no objection of hers would avail, and
ina peace he would particularly guard against any compromise
of the question.
