                                      NOTES                                       211
  leaving, Bentinck suspended the subsidy in an attempt to coerce the King once more:
  but in fact he suspended it before the King’s resumption, and only to remind the
  Sicilian government of their outstanding debts to Britain: Bentinck to Villafranca,
  30 June, to Castlereagh, 4 July, FO 70/64. A’Court’s statement said that despite the
  difference of opinion between them, he would take no step ‘tending to overthrow the
  arrangements made by Lord William Bentinck’; as Bentinck seemed to think that non-
  intervention on England’s part was tantamount to active opposition to the ‘system’,
  A’Court promised to support it by every means short of violence. All this, however,
  he undertook only because Bentinck’s absence and his own tenure were still officially
  temporary; and it was subject to the Government’s instructions: A’Court’s Memo-
  randum to Bentinck, 15 July, B.P. In fact A’Court was almost certain that Bentinck
  would not return: to Hamilton (private) 3 July, FO 70/6s.
out of the government service for the next thirteen years. Liverpool to Bathurst, 12 Sep.
   1814, Bathurst MSS., 286. In October Castlereagh asked Bathurst to stop Bentinck
   (who had spent the summer in England) from going out to Italy again: ‘the dread
   of his Whiggish and revolutionary politics in Italy would add to the alarms of
   Austria. . . . Ihave had an express representation from Metternich on this subject, and
   I am sure, if his Lordship’s appearance in this quarter can ever be wise or useful (of
   which I entertain considerable doubts), it can only be in the event of hostile measures
   being actually decided on, and being on the point of execution’: to Bathurst (private)
  4 Oct. 1814, ibid., 295. To which Bentinck, who was already in Paris, replied that
  he would rather resign his command than ‘sanction an imputation ... not less
  unfavourable to my honour than to my judgment. . . . If Florence is thought too near
  the Austrian States, I can as easily remove to Rome, and I will answer for His Holiness
 not objecting either to my religion or my politics, tout heretick et revolutionnaire as
 I may be’: Bentinck to Bathurst (private) 23 Oct., ibid., 301. (Bentinck had made a
 friend of the Pope by giving him aid and comfort while he was making his way
 from Northern Italy to Rome at the end of the war.) The occasion that precipitated
 Bentinck’s final recall was an approach which he and William Hill, the Minister at
 Turin, made to the Piedmontese Minister Vallaise, urging that the King of Piedmont
 should grant a constitution and so raise Northern Italy against Murat: Bathurst to
 Bentinck (private) 26 Apr. 1815, B.P.; cf. F. Lemmi, ‘La Restaurazione dello Stato
 Sardo nel 1814-15’, in Universita di Torino, Méiscellanee della Facolta di Lettere e
 Filosofia, ser. 2 (1938). Bentinck’s protest against his recall (to Bathurst, 18 June
 1815—see p. 168 and note) defended his conduct since 1811: by his exertions, he said,
 Sicily, which had never before contributed to the Allied cause, had been enabled to
 send 12,000 men to Spain in 1812, and a further 12,000 to Italy in 1814; his hostility
  to Murat had been justified by later events; his explanation of the Genoa episode
 appears in Appendix C. He accordingly asked either ‘to be told in what my crime
 has consisted, and to be heard in my defence’, or else to be allowed to stay in the
 government service. Bathurst’s reply (20 June 1815) was formal and non-committal
  (B.P.). Already, when the news of Bentinck’s recall had first come out, his friend
 Pellew (now Lord Exmouth), who shared all his views on Italy, had written to him:
 ‘I can perceive the evil finger of Lord C... gh throughout. . . . It is possible you may
 trace the noble Lord’s disinclination towards you to causes more remote when he
 was not so popular as he is now with Canning under his thumb’: to Bentinck, 23 Apr.
 1815, B.P. Bentinck was not employed again until 1828, when he became Governor
 of Bengal. As late as 1824 his notoriety had not faded: ‘They are in the greatest fuss
 now for fear Lord William Bentinck should be appointed ... High Commissioner
 of the Ionian Islands. Metternich said all the Italian Sovereigns, and first among them
 the Emperor himself, would protest loudly against it. They have a greater horror of
 Lord William than of any other radical in Europe and last year, when Lady William
 was in Italy, they never allowed her to get a single letter from Lord William’:
