                                        _ NOTES                                          209
   instructions’: Italian Campaign Diary, 26 Apr., B.P. But even this ‘guarded’ measure
   was enough to arouse great and mistaken hopes at Milan.
Sovereigns we can trust. Castlereagh to Bentinck, 3 Apr. (no. 3), Castlereagh Corr. ix,
  427 ff.
it is most absurd. Castlereagh to Liverpool,     5 May, W.S.D. ix, 65 (part of the text is
   omitted in Castlereagh Corr. x, 9).

  PAGE 143
we can converse on this subject. C. A. A’Court to Lady Wm. Bentinck, Paris 5 May, in
  Gallavresi, ‘Rivoluzione lombarda’, 130; Castlereagh to Bentinck, 7 May, Castlereagh
   Corr. x, 17. It was in this letter that Castlereagh told Bentinck that ‘It is impossible
   not to perceive a great moral change coming on in Europe... the principles of
   freedom are in full operation. The danger is, that the transition may be too sudden
   to ripen into anything likely to make the world better or happier. We have new
   constitutions launched in France, Spain, Holland and Sicily. Let us see the result
   before we encourage farther attempts. The attempts may be made, and we must
   abide the consequences; but I am sure it is better to retard than accelerate the operation
   of this most hazardous principle which is abroad. In Italy, it is now the more necessary
   to abstain, if we wish to act in concert with Austria and Sardinia. Whilst we had to
   drive the French out of Italy, we were justified in running all risks; but the present state
   of Europe requires no such expedient; and, with a view to general peace and tran-
   quillity, I should prefer seeing the Italians await the insensible influence of what is
   going on elsewhere, than hazard their own internal quiet by an effort at this moment.’
his last visit to Sicily. When A’Court was first appointed in January 1814, he understood
  that he was going out as, officially, Bentinck’s locum tenens, but that he would succeed
  to the mission if Bentinck gave it up: Hamilton to Castlereagh, 14 Jan., 8 Feb.,
  Castlereagh Corr. ix, 159, 253; A’Court to Hamilton, 26 Jan., 8 Feb., FO 70/68. By
  May, however, it was tolerably clear that Bentinck would have to give up the mission
  whether he liked it or not.
which alone could make it work. Castelcicala to Ferdinand (Jan. 1814?), in Capograssi,
  168-9; A’Court’s Memorandum to Hamilton, 20 Feb., FO 70/68.
on the part of the Crown. Secret Memorandum to A’Court, 9 Mar., FO 70/65 (Bentinck’s
   copy is endorsed ‘given by H.M. Ministers at home’: B.P.).

   PAGE I44
could not fail greatly to revolt them. Liverpool to Castlereagh, 11 Mar., in Webster, i, 526.
what could be saved of the constitutional system. Bentinck to Castelnuovo, Leghorn, 7 Apr.,
  in Bianco, 371; Balsamo, 168-9.

   PAGE 145
irreproachably constitutionalist. Cf.a great many instances of interference by the Capitani
  Giustizieri (Sheriffs) with the Councils, lists of electors, etc., in a whole volume of
  documents concerning these transactions: Arch. Stato Palermo, Real Segreteria Incart.
  5430. These were got together to indict the Constitutionalist Government, but the
  evidence seems plausible enough.
was to be expected. Balsamo, 162-4, 166-7.
‘recover’ Sicily from Naples. The King to Castelcicala, 23 May, in Maturi, i, 32.

  PAGE      146
Bentinck returned to Palermo. Castelnuovo to Bentinck, ..., 26 Apr., in Bianco, 372-3;
  Balsamo, 172-3. San Marco and the other King’s Friends sometimes maintained as
  a theoretical proposition that Sicily could not be independent, in the sense that if
