208                         BENTINCK          AND     SICILY
   PAGE I40                                         .
in Italy was anchored to Austria’s. On landing at Leghorn Bentinck received letters from
   Graham which left him in no doubt that Castlereagh wanted him to cooperate with
   Murat: Graham to Bentinck, 7, 8 Mar. 1814, endorsed as received 13 Mar., B.P.
   Frederick Lamb, Bentinck’s former Secretary, now attached to the Vienna Embassy,
   wrote to him that ‘In Italy your views have never been at all adopted by the British
   Government, nor our evidence held to be worth anything—this is the real ground
   of the system which has been adopted there—if England had wished it I think Austria
   could have been induced to take another line. ... Discard the fancy which I see you
   still have that the Italian game may be thrown into your hands, it never will, and so
   you may e’en content yourself’: Lamb to Bentinck, 19 Mar., B.P.
to throw Murat out of the coalition altogether. Weil, iv, passim. This quarrel originated
   partly in a convention signed by Bentinck and Neipperg at Naples on 6 Feb., in
   which they agreed that the British expedition should have a base of operations in
   Tuscany: Neipperg increased the confusion by failing to inform either Murat or the
   Austrian commander Bellegarde of what he had done: Bentinck to Castlereagh,
   6 Feb., FO 70/63; Weil, iii, 515-8, iv, 165ff.
more like Maria Carolina than anyone he had ever seen. Bentinck to Castelnuovo, 7 Apr.,
   in Bianco, 371; to Castlereagh, 19 Apr., Castlereagh Corr., ix, 476.
a reversal of British policy towards Naples. Bellegarde to the Emperor, 28 Feb., Metternich
  to Mier, 8 Mar.: Weil, iv, 271, 356 (two instances out of many of Austrian distrust
  of Murat); Castlereagh to Bathurst, 27 Apr., Hist. MSS. Comm. Bathurst MSS.,
  274 (the words quoted are omitted from the letter as printed in Castlereagh Corr.,
  ix, 512); Castlereagh to Liverpool, 18 Dec. 1814, W.S.D. ix, 485.

  PAGE I4I
a good chance of succeeding. Graham to Bentinck (private) 7 Jan. 1814, Bentinck to Adm.
  Hallowell, 25 Jan., B.P. There is a little evidence that Bentinck once or twice thought
  of backing Murat as the likeliest champion of Italian independence, but it is highly
  dubious: see Maturi, i, 34; Capograssi, 213.
other patriotic societies. See for this evidence Valente, 94-8; Capograssi, chs. xi, xii.
   Nothing is to be found among the Bentinck papers concerning the secret societies,
   beyond one anonymous and merely descriptive ‘Memoria sopra l’unione Carbonica’.
   Bentinck, however, described Alessandro Turri (an emissary of the Italian secret
   societies—cf. page 102 n.) as having drafted the proclamation which was to be issued
   at Leghorn: Journal, 18 Feb. But there is no telling whether the proclamation as
   issued was in fact identical with Turri’s draft.
whether they needed it or not. Capograssi, 213; Ferdinand to Castelcicala, 25 May, in
  Maturi, i, 40-1.

  PAGE 142
whatever arrangement they pleased. For a more detailed account of Bentinck’s conduct
  at Genoa see Appendix C.
hoped to force a constitution on Murat. G. Gallavresi, ‘La Rivoluzione Lombarda del 1814
  e la politica inglese’, in Arch, Stor. Lombardo (1909); Bentinck to Castlereagh, 17 Apr.,
  10, 25, May, FO 70/63; Castlereagh to Liverpool,       5 May, W.S.D. ix, 65. Bentinck
  did tell the Milanese agents who came to see him that ‘their act came too late...
  they could do nothing now... they must depend upon the Allies... it was a pity
  they had not begun this before when the British cooperation could have been given
  and the fate of Italy decided—At present I was too distant and in the impossibility
  of aiding them . . . the most I could do was to give them countenance, by sending to
  Milan General MacFarlane....I sent him accordingly with the most guarded
