240               Ulbe Bosma & Jonathan Curry-Machado


There has been an abundance of studies on Cuba and Java each in their own
right, but none systematically examines their parallel trajectories. Situated
as they are in opposite hemispheres, Cuba has always been studied in the
context of Latin American and Caribbean Studies and Java in that of Asian
Studies. As a result, they have been analyzed as part of two entirely different
worlds; and two distinct imperial blocks (the Spanish and Dutch). Yet the
question arises as to how sugar came to dominate the agriculture, industry,
and trade of these two islands; and how these two islands in particular, in two
different colonial systems and parts of the world, should rise to sugar pre-
eminence in the way they did and when they did. Are there connections and
similarities between the two that help explain this phenomenon?
    The article seeks to analyze the conditions that led Java and Cuba to
become the prime cane-sugar exporters of the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. It starts by suggesting that in both Cuba and Java, the initiative for
developing the sugar industry originated in the close link that connected their
dominant elites not just to their respective imperial networks, but importantly
to transnational, transimperial trade and capital. Of particular importance was
the way in which this stimulated technological and scientific innovation in
both, catapulting the sugar industry of the two islands to global prominence.
This was enabled not only through the introduction of the latest advances in
machinery and method, but also the immigration of skilled technical workers
from Europe and North America. New sugar frontiers were opened on both
islands that offered room for expansion at a time of rapidly growing demand
for sugar in Europe, which could not be met by the smaller, long-established
plantation islands that suffered from environmental degradation and an
absence of available space. But for this to occur, radical changes needed
to be made to the system of land ownership and use. At the same time, on
both fertile islands the sugar industries each had their own way of finding a
solution for mobilizing and ensuring sufficient labor without jeopardizing
the colonial order. This question eventually came to dominate the political
system through which social control could be ensured, particularly because
Cuba and Java came to be ever more closely tied to global capital and trade;
and both islands became dominated by sugar while at the same time coming
to dominate global sugar production.


      Local Plantocracy, Transnational Networks, and the Rise of
                      Cuban and Javanese Sugar

Since the sixteenth century, commodity crops played a key role in the Euro­
pean colonization of Asia and the Americas. European demand for sugar
increasingl­y outstripped the limited cultivation of cane in the Mediterranean
and Atlantic islands, and so was introduced early on as a colonial plantation
