                   Cuba, Java, and the Global Sugar Trade                   243


attempts by the British to enforce the anti-slave trade treaty signed by Spain
in 1817, then by concertedly turning a blind eye – with the sugar industry in
particular dependent upon captive labor.
    But migrant planters and merchants from throughout the North Atlantic
area also arrived, tying Cuba to transnational, transimperial commercial net-
works (Ely 2001). Following the Haitian Revolution many of the French
colonists displaced from that neigboring island established themselves in
Cuba, bringing with them their expertise in the sugar and coffee industries,
commercial connections, and capital (Portuondo 1996). When Britain was in
the process of abolishing slavery in the 1830s, British West Indian planters
came to the island accompanied by the slaves they would otherwise have
been forced to set free (Curry-Machado 2004). From Europe and North
America, merchants brought with them innovative trading methods and
links with banking capital, which along with the advanced technology that
began to be imported, led to a modernization of the Cuban economy despite
its continuing dependence upon slavery (Curry-Machado 2009). However,
while this could be seen as the start of a process that would gradually lead to
the replacement of Spanish colonial overlords with a more economy-driven
form of foreign domination, the initial period of expanding sugar production
may be seen more as a collaboration between these new actors, and the local
planting elite whose ranks many of them joined.
    From the 1790s, institutions dedicated to the promotion of the island’s
agriculture, industry, and progress (such as the Sociedad Económica de la
Habana) were founded, with official sponsorship but led by prominent repre-
sentatives of the colonial plantocracy. While turning their attention to a wide
range of modernizing activities, there was from the start a clear bias in favor
of sugar interests. This continued to intensify through the early nineteenth
century, as abolition of the slave trade by the British in 1807 followed by
emancipation in Britain’s sugar-producing colonies in the 1830s gave Cuba
– where slave labor continued to increase – an additional market advantage
facilitating development of its sugar industry (although the social and politi-
cal contradictions that this fostered would increasingly take their toll).
    The Cuban plantocracy’s links to Spain continued to be an important fac-
tor in favoring the growth of the island’s sugar industry, by gradually allowing
liberalization of Cuba’s economic relations and ensuring a level of social and
political control that slowed and weakened the development of independence
and Afro-Cuban struggles. However, the Spanish state contributed little to
actual infrastructural, agricultural, and industrial development. Instead, the
Cuban plantocracy were obliged to seek sources of capital investment else-
where; and they were particularly proactive and successful in doing this.
Partly through their own contacts established through foreign travel and
European-based kinship and business networks, but also through the presence
of a number of key diasporic merchants of non-Spanish origin, they were able
