244               Ulbe Bosma & Jonathan Curry-Machado


to develop their industry and trade through transnational financial and com-
mercial networks. This relative freedom from imperial bounds did much to
enable the rapid growth of the island’s sugar industry (Curry-Machado 2011).
    The Dutch likewise found there to be a considerable incentive to increase
the amount of land planted with cane. In the first decades of the nineteenth
century attempts were made to revive the Chinese-dominated sugar planta-
tions in West Java. In addition British merchant houses that had bought large
estates on Java imported West Indies equipment. However, this combination
of mainly Chinese and British sugar business did not produce the desired
increase in sugar output, which was an important reason for Governor-
General Johannes van den Bosch (1830-1834) to introduce his Cultivation
System (1830-1870) (Knight 1980). Though under the Cultivation System
the colonial government took care of the supplies of cane to the manu-
facturers who were obliged to sell their sugar to the semi-governmental
Netherlands Trading Society, the input of private entrepreneurs, the major-
ity of whom were either Chinese, British, French, or German, was essential
(Bosma 2007). This was reinforced by the presence and key involvement of
migrants from elsewhere in Europe and North America backed up by British
and North American investors and local Chinese capital.


                 Technological and Scientific Innovation

Both Spain and the Netherlands were late industrializers, significantly behind
in the spread of steam-based technology in the early nineteenth century. As a
result, neither was capable of equipping the emerging sugar industries with
the necessary technology, leading both Cuba and Java to become heavily
reliant on British, French, and (in the case of the former) North American
engineering. This was facilitated by the same transnational networks that
were channeling investment in, and trade out.
    In Cuba, prominent creoles with fortunes largely accumulated from sugar
went out of their way to facilitate the introduction of the latest advances in
steam technology and sugar-milling machinery from the foundries of the
United States, Britain, and France. These sugar planters became students of
milling and refining technology, eagerly learning from all these developments
and exploring how to apply them to their own industry, traveling extensively
to ensure that they remained on the cutting edge. As a result of their initiatives,
during the mid-nineteenth century the application of steam in Cuba’s sugar
mills became generalized (Bergad 1990:90, Martínez-Fernández 1994:98),
with 70 percent using steam engines by 1860 from just 20 percent in 1846
(Marrero 1973-86:159). The advances that were introduced in all aspects of
sugar production enabled the improvement in quality for which Cuban sugar
became renowned (Curry-Machado 2011, Dye 1998, Moreno 1978); and
