                    Cuba, Java, and the Global Sugar Trade                      241


crop. Cuba had significant strategic importance for the Spanish empire due to
its geographical location, with Havana in particular operating as a key Atlantic
port city, first for Spain’s bullion armadas, and by the eighteenth century for
tobacco trade. Although sugar cane was cultivated on the island in only small,
relatively insignificant quantities, it began to play an important role in the local
economy.
    Java likewise acquired an early strategic value for the Dutch empire,
ever since Batavia, present-day Jakarta, was founded in 1619 to act as the
hub for Dutch East India Company (Verenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie,
VOC) operations. After the VOC had lost Taiwan with its sugar plantations
to the Chinese in 1662 and its attempts to turn Mauritius into a flourishing
sugar island had failed, it concentrated its sugar production on Java where it
imposed a monopoly on this crop. The center of gravity was around Batavia
where VOC officials owned private lands, which they rented out to Chinese
millers, who produced under a VOC monopoly. In the course of the eighteenth
century sugar production was spreading along the north coast of Java. Sugar
was an important commodity for the VOC’s intra-Asian trade, mostly taken
as ballast since it was only under exceptional circumstances profitable as a
primary commodity. In the second half of the eighteenth century most of the
VOC sugar was sold in Surat (India), and somewhat less was sold in Malabar
(India) and Japan (Reesse 1908:89, 168, 182-83). Java was a sugar exporter of
some consequence but its prospects for further expansion were bleak. By the
end of the eighteenth century sugar production around Batavia had reached
its ecological limits. The soil was exhausted, forests providing wood for fuel
had disappeared, and there was a shortage of buffalo to grind and transport
cane (Teisseire 1785). After the French Revolution and the revolution in Saint
Domingue sugar prices rose and the colonial authorities in Batavia considered
various plans to reinvigorate sugar production on Java (Leidelmeijer 1997).
Around 1800 there were various investigations into how the sugar produc-
tion around Batavia could be revived through the application of West Indies
furnaces and mills. Private planters were encouraged by the VOC to solve
the problem of a lack of fuel by importing the sugar-boiling equipment that
was in use at that time in Mauritius and the West Indies. Moreover, British
and French planters came to Java shortly after 1800 to introduce West Indies
equipment, and a steam-driven mill was brought to Java by a British-Danish
house accompanied by eight British technicians (Bosma 2005:24).
    Sugar cane originated in Asia, and did not reach the Americas until
Spanish conquest in the sixteenth century, with the first sample brought from
the Canary Islands by Christopher Columbus to the island of Hispaniola in
1493 (Deerr 1949:v.1). Despite being well suited to the Caribbean climate,
the cultivation of sugar cane spread slowly in Cuba. However, although it
remained small-scale, it began to develop as an important local economi­c
activity, in particular around Havana, Bayamo, and Santiago de Cuba, stimu­
