242               Ulbe Bosma & Jonathan Curry-Machado


lating the influx of African slaves (Aimes 1907, Le Riverend 1974:72).
By the mid-seventeenth century, small plantations were being established
throughout the island wherever there was some human settlement – though
sugar manufacturing remained rather primitive and overshadowed by the
region’s leading sugar-producing colonies (Barbados, Jamaica, Guadaloupe,
and above all Saint Domingue). By 1778, Cuba continued to export less
than ten thousand tons a year, compared to the 163,403 tons exported by the
neighboring French colony of Saint Domingue.3
    The early Cuban sugar industry, although small in scale and producing
largely for local consumption, also supplemented the supply in Spain (where
the demand was increasingly hard to meet through the ailing Mediterranean
sugar industry) and found an outlet in the regional contraband trade. As a result
it contributed to the gradual accumulation of wealth by Cuban landowners. As
the eighteenth century proceeded, sugar became a more dynamic alternative
to the hitherto dominant cattle-ranching activities of much of this creole elite.
Although slowed in their ambitions by the strict restrictions on the clearing of
forestland, this sugar-related plantocracy had, by the late eighteenth century,
become highly influential and self-confident (Funes 2008, García Rodríguez
2007). As a result they were well placed to capitalize quickly upon the revolu-
tion in Saint Domingue in 1791, which removed from the world market what
was the epoch’s leading sugar producer, thereby providing an opportunity
for expansion elsewhere. Cuba, with its extensive tracts of unexploited land,
offered considerable scope to absorb much of this demand, at a time when
many of the smaller Caribbean islands – which had dominated sugar produc-
tion since the seventeenth century – were already experiencing soil exhaus-
tion due to earlier over-cultivation of cane (Galloway 1989).
    It was primarily through the initiative of these creole planters that this
expansion took place – though the wealth-generation possibilities also
brought the arrival of new settlers. Most of these came from Spain itself,
encouraged by the increasingly evident prospects offered by the island’s
growing export agriculture – be it coffee, tobacco, or sugar; and this fur-
ther enabled Cuban planters to exploit their familial, cultural, and political
ties to the imperial metropole. This they did very effectively. While else-
where in Hispanic America local elites (themselves also mainly descendants
of Spanish settlers) were organizing to seize independence for their newly
forming nations, in Cuba an effective compromise was brokered between
the imperial state (keen not to lose this strategically and fiscally important
colony) and the local oligarchy (keen to exploit the economic benefits that
they were reaping). It was this that contributed to the persistence of slavery
on the island until the 1880s – if not with official blessing in the face of

3. Benitez 1977:136-38, Black 2002:60, Ely 2001:47-86, Le Riverend 1974:72, 161,
Moreno Fraginals 1978:34-35, Watts 1987:301.
