248                 Ulbe Bosma & Jonathan Curry-Machado


farmers of Havana being pushed westwards toward Pinar del Río to make way
for the ambitions of sugar planters jealous of the fertile, cleared lands occu-
pied by tobacco vegas. As the sugar frontiers spread during the nineteenth
century (east from Havana into Matanzas and beyond; west from Trinidad to
Cienfuegos; within the central region, around Sagua la Grande, San Juan de
los Remedios, and Sancti-Spíritus; and spilling over from Santiago de Cuba
in the east into the district of Guantánamo), this process increased. Although
during the initial expansion smallholdings producing food or other commodi-
ties burgeoned alongside the sugar plantations that were driving the rearrange-
ment of land control and enabling the clearing of forests, from the 1880s the
establishment of sugar centrals resulted in most farmland in sugar-producing
regions succumbing to cane (Curry-Machado 2010).
    In Java, the sugar factories’ room for expansion was created via another
mechanism.4 The sugar industry was immersed in irrigated rice (sawah) agri-
culture, where cultivators were forced to grow sugar on assigned plots; while
the limited availability of appropriate land made it necessary to develop from
an early date the agricultural science that would maximize production from
the irrigated land in which the industry had immersed itself. The central idea
of what became known as the “Cultivation System” was that each household
had to perform 66 days of compulsory work per year for a household to grow
cash crops for the world market.5
    From 1870 onward, the sugar factories were allowed to lease land directly
from the Javanese peasantry, which reinforced the power of wealthy Javanese
farmers over the poorer villagers. The expansion of the sugar factories was
thus facilitated on the expansion of sawah agriculture, which in turn was a
direct consequence of rapid demographic growth. Whereas the Cultivation
System initially had relied on the indigenous nobility – allowing them to
share in its profits – the sugar sector could increasingly count on the support
of the wealthier rural strata, the village elites, to mobilize labor and land.
These large farmers quite often acted as “absentees” using the advance pay-
ments of the sugar industry to rent it out to debt-ridden, petty, and marginal
cultivators, becoming the major creditors in the village. In this respect the
report of the Sugar Enquiry Committee (1921:172) spoke of the “inlandsche
capitalist” (native capitalist) (Knight 1992:76).
4. In the Netherlands Indies Europeans, Chinese, and foreign Orientals were not
allowed to own land, but with the enactment of the Agrarian Law of 1870 plantations
could obtain large tracts of land under long-term lease (75 years). However, this was not
of direct relevance to the sugar industry, which had inserted itself in sawah agriculture,
with the tremendous advantage that through alternation with rice the exhaustion of sugar
lands could be prevented.
5. Exempted from the Cultivation System were the semi-independent Principalities (the
Regencies of Surakarta and Yogyakarta). Here extensive plantation agriculture was devel-
oped by creole planters who leased their lands from the apanageholders of courts.
