                   Cuba, Java, and the Global Sugar Trade                   249


    Hence a consequence of the burgeoning plantation complexes in Cuba
and Java was that in spite of their completely different points of departure in
terms of land ownership, more and more land ended up in the hands or under
the control of fewer people. In both islands, agrarian societies that they were,
control over the land was a key to political power. With much of the best land
claimed by those who drove the plantation economy, and with expansion
of sugar production tying Java and Cuba ever more firmly into commodity
dependency, this resulted in the marginalization of smaller farmers cultivat-
ing food crops, or else their absorption into the plantation complex.
    This resulted in the development of the food-security problems that both
countries continue to suffer from. However, conflicts between cash-crop and
food production were of a different character in the two islands. In densely
populated Java, food production by the peasantry was considered to be so
essential that it was allowed to curb the expansion of the plantation economy
in terms of its demand for land. Meanwhile, as the nineteenth century pro-
gressed Cuba was increasingly unable to meet its food needs even though the
plantation economy increased the demand for foods and led to the large-scale
cultivation of some staple food crops.
    There was a tendency to abandon other crops in favor of the more lucra-
tive sugar cane (Moreno 1978:v.1, 96); and by the early nineteenth century
it was clear that the island was not self-sufficient in many staples. Food
commodities were imported from early on: in particular beans (a central
part of the Spanish diet) and rice (which became a Cuban staple during the
nineteenth centur­y). The general lack of subsistence crops was something
remarked upon by Alexander von Humboldt (1856), following his visit to
the island; and attempts at introducing some form of crop rotation, either by
alternating harvests or interspersing cane with food crops such as corn, were
opposed by leading planters, who believed that “it prejudices the increase
and duration of the cane, since this first fruit and the grass that occupied the
land in the period between the harvest of one crop and the sowing of the
other wastes part of the earth’s fertility” (O’Farrill 1793:122). The number
of food-cultivating farms grew during the nineteenth century, yet they were
incapable of fully meeting the food needs of the island’s growing popula-
tion, and the tendency for smallholdings to fall under the sway of the sugar
plantation system increased in the aftermath of catastrophic hurricanes in the
1840s, absence of rural banking and credit facilities, and three devastating
independence wars between 1868 to 1898, in which the rural poor were the
worst hit, losing land, crops, and livelihood (Iglesias 2005:23). The expand-
ing sugar estates were quick to capitalize upon this, to consolidate their hold
over large tracts of land by the early twentieth century.
