246               Ulbe Bosma & Jonathan Curry-Machado


Cuba and Java capital found abundant investment opportunities in railways
and factory installations. Technological development in the Java and Cuba
sugar industry was incremental and went by fits and starts, but the overall
picture is one of rapidly increasing capital intensity of the sugar industry
from the early decades of the nineteenth century onward.
     Not only did the introduction of technological advances play an important
part in the development of the Cuban and Javanese sugar industries. As the
nineteenth century progressed, advances aimed at improving agriculture were
made in scientific investigation. In 1862, the Cuban scientist Álvaro Reynoso
published a key text that argued for the need to introduce scientific principles
into the cultivation of sugar cane. His system recommended improved tilling,
fertilization, and irrigation, along with annual planting at measured intervals
(Reynoso 1862). His ideas were largely ignored in Cuba until several decades
later, but his book was quickly translated into Dutch and proved highly influen-
tial in the development of Java’s sugar industry. The need to maximize soil pro-
ductivity due to the limit on the land available to expand into, led to the early
introduction in Java of more scientific agricultural methods – in particular with
regards to cane strains, irrigation, fertilization, and the treatment of crop pests.
This was facilitated by the active role that the Dutch state (in contrast with the
Spanish) played in the promotion of the Java industry, bringing official spon-
sorship of scientific research and its application. The role of the government
was taken over by the Java sugar factories themselves, once they established
and funded three Experimental Stations in the 1880s.
     Rather more tentative attempts were made to place Cuban agriculture on a
more scientific footing during the late nineteenth century. Organizations such
as the Círculo de Hacendados, and the publication of scientific agricultural
treatises, handbooks, and journals, sought to instil the principles of fertiliza-
tion, irrigation, and rational use of land. These were further promoted by the
establishment of scientific agronomic stations (Fernández 2005). However,
the continuing availability of underutilized land restricted the adoption of
many scientific advances, since it continued to be easier for most planters to
simply exhaust their soil and move on, or in the early twentieth century for
large tracts of land to be brought under the sway of sugar corporations who
saw more urgency in maximizing immediate profits than in rationalizing the
agricultural method. In the long term this has led to extensive soil exhaustion
throughout the island, and the incursion and generalized spread of opportu-
nistic invading plants.


                     Changing Land Ownership and Use

For the sugar industry to expand in both Cuba and Java, it was not only neces-
sary to improve the speed and capacity of production, and the quality of culti-
vation. Sugar factories required cane to grind, and mechanisms had to be found
