                    Cuba, Java, and the Global Sugar Trade                     245


increased sugar production led to, and was itself the result of, the develop-
ment of an extensive rail network (Zanetti & García 1987), as well as steam-
ship routes. Rather than being initiated by the unequal exchange of imperial
imposition, it emerged from “the equal interchange between Cuban plant-
ers and foreign machine manufacturers, in a process that sidelined Spanish
imperial control over the island” (Curry-Machado 2009:40). However, as the
nineteenth century progressed the balance gradually tipped in favor of the
foreign manufacturers (as advances in machinery continued apace) and the
bankers and merchants who facilitated the necessary capital investment, and
thereby obtained increasing control of the island’s sugar industry and trade.
By the twentieth century this had resulted in the island falling under the sway
of North American interests in particular. Nevertheless, during the early to
mid-nineteenth century the free engagement of the Cuban plantocracy with
transnational trading networks and the cutting edge of industrial advances
gave to Cuba’s sugar industry a commercial and technological dynamism that
owed little if anything to the Spanish state.
     The sugar industry in Java was also able to position itself within the globa­l
technological vanguard, and just as Cuba led the Western hemisphere in its
introduction of steam technology to sugar mills, so too did Java within Asia
by the mid-nineteenth century. Although railways were slower to develo­p
(not until the 1870s), steam was quickly introduced to sugar manufacture.
By 1860, most of Java’s sugar factories employed steam engines for at least
part of their processes.
     In both Java and Cuba, this technological advancement was made possible
not only through the introduction of machinery, but also the presence of skilled
migrants from the key industrial centers of Europe and North America. The
number of mostly non-Dutch technicians and engineers for the sugar factories
has been estimated at 36 for 1820-29, 78 for 1830-39, 115 for 1840-49, and
204 for 1850-59 (Bosma 2005:26). In Cuba, there were more than six hundred
by the early 1850s, and in excess of eight hundred in the 1860s. Although
this was a relatively small group, their strategic positioning at the heart of the
industry that was driving both islands’ development, and their contribution to
its technological advancement, gave them a significance that belied their num-
bers (Curry-Machado 2011:67). Though both the Spanish and Dutch metropol-
itan governments were anxious to preserve these colonies as loyal parts of their
empires, they were flexible enough to allow foreign technological skills and
capital to contribute to the emerging sugar industries; and such technicians,
merchants, and planters made up an important share of the foreign residents of
Cuba and Java (Bosma 2005:9-11, Curry-Machado 2011:69).
     The mid-nineteenth century was a time of growing markets and secu-
lar declining prices, and Cuba and Java were able to increase their share in
world exports, whereas other Caribbean and Asian producers lost their mar-
kets. Capital goes to places where it can be made most profitable and both in
