                    Cuba, Java, and the Global Sugar Trade                   247


to enable an extension of plantations. This was complicated in both islands,
though for different reasons; but in both, solutions were found and enacted that
directly contributed to the growing dominance of this single commodity.
    Land occupation in colonial Cuba was, until the nineteenth century, based
upon the division of the land into circular haciendas, mainly devoted to live-
stock ranching, with considerable restrictions placed upon the clearing of for-
ests and therefore crop cultivation. Although formally all land continued ulti-
mately to remain the property of the Spanish crown, effective ownership over
the haciendas was granted to prominent settlers. In some parts of the island
(in particular in the proximity of Havana) the larger estates became gradu-
ally subdivided into a range of different kinds of smaller farms – in particular
as inroads were made into the crown-protected forests: vegas, cultivating the
tobacco that was the island’s principal commodity crop in the eighteenth cen-
tury; livestock-rearing potreros; and sitos de labor, along with smaller estan-
cias, on which food crops were cultivated. There were also the ingenios, larger
plots devoted primarily to sugar-cane cultivation and grinding. Over much of
the island, though, shared inheritance over the generations, marriage alliances,
and the sale of land rights resulted in many haciendas being communally con-
troled by several landowners, who were often in conflict; while the tendency
for haciendas to effectively overlap resulted in considerable imprecision in
the establishment of boundaries. This had a serious effect on the possibility of
effectively cultivating the land, and in many parts of Cuba this only became
possible following the gradual and piecemeal process of breaking up the old
haciendas, and setting formal boundaries (Funes 2008, García Rodríguez
2007, Le Riverend 1974). While by the mid-nineteenth century, most of the
land in the western part of the island had been freed in this way, the process
took longer in the central region, and in the east much land was still not demar-
cated until the early twentieth century, which the North American-owned sugar
trusts were able to exploit to their advantage in the establishment of control
over extensive territorial expanses (Zanetti et al. 1977).
    Far from eroding the creole elite’s control over land, the earlier break-up
of the old haciendas in fact consolidated it by enabling them to enclose the
most fertile tracts, and provided them with the means to establish the burgeon-
ing sugar plantations of the nineteenth century. In those areas where this was
achieved in the early and mid-nineteenth century, it enabled them to establish
their landowning rights prior to the influx of powerful foreign interests by the
early twentieth century. At the same time, it weakened the position of poorer
peasant farmers, who for generations had occupied land – either on haciendas
or in the crown-owned realengos that existed in the gaps between these and
along the riverbanks. The formalization of land ownership in the nineteenth
century resulted in many of these peasant farmers’ – lacking the means and
influence to assert their ancestral claims – becoming displaced. In the eigh-
teenth century this process had already resulted in the smallholding tobacco
