252                Ulbe Bosma & Jonathan Curry-Machado


would be temporarily employed (with sugar factories and cane farms compet-
ing for their labor), alongside the smaller numbers with permanent positions in
the mills or tending to the crops. As the Cuban sugar industry rapidly expanded
in the early twentieth century, it again became particularly urgent for cheap
labor to be acquired: and large numbers of seasonal laborers were recruited
from elsewhere in the Caribbean, in particular neighboring Jamaica and Haiti
(Giovannetti 2001, Guerra 1970).
    While Cuba imported 780,000 slaves between 1790 and 1868, the Dutch
colonizers brought about 700,000-800,000 households (about 35-40 percent
of the households of Java under direct government rule) under the sway of
the forced Cultivation System.7 The burden put on the population by the
Cultivation System in practice varied widely according to region and crop.
Resistance was widespread, hunger and deprivation occurred in a number
of Residencies (administrative departments) of Java and corporal punish-
ment to enforce the system was widely reported. In regions where the bur-
dens were unbearable, extensive migration occurred. In the course of the
1850s, forced labor was gradually replaced by wage labor in the sugar sec-
tor, and by smallholder and plantation growing in the tobacco sector, but in
the cultivation of coffee – a crucial source of direct income for the colonial
government – forced labor lingered on during the entire nineteenth century.
All in all the Cultivation System in combination with demographic growth
created a massive semi-proletarian rural workforce that was dependent upon
by-employment to make ends meet (Bosma 2011, Elson 1986, Knight 1988).
    Thus the plantation sector in both Java and Cuba underwent an important,
though different, evolution in labor relations from the middle of the nine-
teenth century. The technological developments and investments in infra-
structure in the early nineteenth century allowed Cuba to open up new fertile
areas for sugar production and in the short term made slave labor “more
efficient in terms of the income produced by each slave” (Bergad 1989:97).
In Java an opposite tendency was seen, precisely because the colonial gov-
ernment successfully created a semi-proletarianized workforce, a process
that was further engendered by rapid demographic growth. Moreover, since
sugar cultivation was inserted into irrigated rice cultivation, a balance had to
be struck between cash crop and food production. There was a premium on

7. The share of the households involved in the Cultivation System declined over time,
but 35-40 percent is reasonable estimate for the 1840s (Fasseur 1992:17). Java in 1850
had a population of about 12,500,000 and the average size of a household was 4.7. Not
all parts of Java were under the sway of the Cultivation System however. The semi-
autonomous Principalities (i.e. the Residencies of Surakarta and Yogyakarta) as well as
private-owned land were exempted. The population of the Principalities, Batavia, and
Buitenzorg and other private domains must have been about 3 million, which means that
there were 2.0 million households available for the Cultivation System.
