250               Ulbe Bosma & Jonathan Curry-Machado


                             Labor Exploitation

If from the early decades of the nineteenth century Java and Cuba belonged to
the technologically and agriculturally most advanced tropical cash-crop pro-
ducers and were enabled in this through the willingness of their elites to change
the rules governing land ownership and use, much of their industrial and com-
mercial success was the result of a ruthless approach to labor mobilization and
control. In an age of spreading liberalism, they both appeared to go against the
tide in terms of labor relations: with corvée labor in Java, and slave and inden-
tured labor in Cuba until the late-nineteenth century. The two islands both dem-
onstrated that, far from being incommensurable with forced labor, advanced
modes of production could flourish despite the apparent incongruity of the
relations of production employed (Bergad 1989; Bosma & Knight 2004:9).
Even as their reliance upon forced labor waned, and they moved to the use of
wage labor, the “unfree” labor regime culture – of which highly effective use
had been made by the sugar industry in particular, albeit with the concomitant
social and political problems that it entailed – was maintained, and continued
to contribute greatly both to sugar cane plantations increasingly dominating
each island, and their produce dominating global trade.
    Despite the apparent geographical similarities between Cuba and Java,
demographically the two islands were very different. In the late eighteenth
century Cuba was still very thinly populated, with the island’s total popu-
lation standing at 170,000, whereas Java at that time counted 4.5 million
inhabitants; and the population density of Java remained approximately ten
times higher than that of Cuba throughout the nineteenth and twentieth cen-
turies (see Figure 3). This led to a crucial distinction between the two islands:
in Cuba, a surplus of land enabled expanding cultivation, but a shortage of
labor limited the capability to exploit this; while in Java, the opposite was
true. Thus while in Cuba it was necessary to secure the immigration of labor-
ers and tie these to the sugar plantations in sufficient numbers to fill the
needs of the industry – with labor shortage being a continual problem – in
Java, the problem was how to extract labor from the indigenous population.
    As the British West Indian colonies began to move toward emancipa-
tion, in Cuba the growing sugar industry continued to generate a demand
for labor, of which there was a chronic shortage in the island (Guerra 1970,
Knight 1970, Moreno 1978). As a result of this, far from seeing a reduction
in the slave trade following the signing of the Treaty for the Suppression of
the Slave Trade by Spain and Britain in 1817, the period saw an extension of
slave-trading practices. In the fifty years following the Treaty, 573,200 slaves
arrived, either surviving the brutal transatlantic crossing or traded within the
region – at times even kidnapped from islands where they had already been
declared free (Curry-Machado 2004, Eltis 1987).
