256                Ulbe Bosma & Jonathan Curry-Machado


Javanese industry invested in machinery that could do the groundwork, such
as digging the Reynoso trenches.12 Only with the introduction of wage labor
in the Java sugar industry, as well as coffee and tobacco, did female and child
labor become visible in the statistics. Much more work needs to be done study-
ing and comparing the composition of the labor forces of the Cuba and Java
plantation economies – and this needs to be done for the nineteenth century in
particular, when the conditions were shaped that would give these islands their
unique position in global commodity production.


               Two Islands, One Crop, and a Global Market

The sugar industries of Java and Cuba dealt with the issues of labor mobiliza-
tion and control in their own distinctive ways, but within the parameters of
preserving white domination for which they relied on an increasingly capital
intensive mode of production as well as increasing control of a relatively
small number of sugar factories over an ever-expanding area under cane.
In Cuba, the abundant availability of land meant that planters felt able to
overexploit their soil, since they could move on to new terrain when needed:
scarcity of labor resulted in an extensive use of land. However, this unused
land was by no means immediately available. Remote and inaccessible with
little pre-existing agriculture away from the few population centers, it not
only increased the demand for manual labor to clear it (thereby stimulat-
ing the need to maintain an influx of captive workers), it also stimulated
technological development, particularly in the form of steam-driven railways
and boats, in order both to reach and equip the mills, and then to transport
the produce to the principal ports. At the same time, it required a change in
land-ownership forms to facilitate the formation of plantations and further
advances of the sugar industry. For Java the system of forced crop deliveries
under the Cultivation System was gradually replaced by wage labor and by
direct contracting between factories and holders of sawah land. The colonial
government, however, set limits on the acreage of land that could be set
under cane in order to safeguard the production of sufficient food crops.
There was a premium on raising the output per acre, which made botany the
key science for the Java sugar industry. Whereas labor-saving methods were
employed in haulage and also the ploughing of the land, ratooning was taboo


12. The Reynoso system consisted of digging furrows to a depth of two feet, piling up
the soil in between the trenches. The cane cuttings were planted in the furrows, which
were then filled with soil again when the growth of the cane had progressed. This method
ensured a deeper rooting of the cane, which enhanced its growth, and made it less vulner-
able to strong winds.
