                    Cuba, Java, and the Global Sugar Trade                    257


in Java and hundreds of thousands of female and child laborers took care of
the planting of and tending to the cane.
    Although Java and Cuba display a number of topographical similarities,
since they are located in opposite hemispheres little thought was previously
given to the interconnections between them, or the comparison of the historical
trajectories that launched both to the forefront of global sugar production in the
nineteenth century. Studies into what factors contributed to their rise to promi-
nence so far are wanting in global perspective. Sugar was already being culti-
vated in both islands before they rose to global prominence, but on a relatively
small, undeveloped scale, overshadowed by the principal sugar producers of
the eighteenth century. However, the revolution in Saint Domingue in 1791
quickly revealed how interconnected the world economy had already become:
while it might have been predicted that neighboring Cuba would benefit from
this, the Dutch were also quick to grasp the opportunity to push Java into the
forefront of industrialized sugar production. Although the initiative in the for-
mer appeared to come from local forces, and in the latter from metropolitan
forces, what was key in both was the presence of a dynamic bourgeoisie with
close links to transnational, even transimperial, commercial networks willing
to take the necessary steps to advance their respective sugar industries in terms
of land cultivated, scale of production, and the introduction of the latest tech-
nological and scientific advances. The transfer of crops brought great wealth
and power to creole planters’ families in Cuba and Java and their entrepre-
neurship modernized sugar production through the introduction of advanced
technology, such as vacuum pans and centrifuges, resulting in an extensive
infrastructure to support commodity production. However, while this began
through local initiative, the need to make the increasingly large investments
required for such technology resulted in the islands’ commodity agriculture
falling under the control of metropolitan capital by the twentieth century,
though with the continuing involvement and complicity of local elites.
    In the process, both islands underwent significant changes in how land
was controled and cultivated and at the same time experienced substantial
demographic change, as the sugar industry demanded ever greater mobili-
zation of and control over labor. Here there does seem to have been a sig-
nificant difference between Cuba and Java, which contributed to the specific
development of each: put simply, Cuba had a shortage of labor coupled with
a surplus of land; Java a surplus of labor concomitant with a growing short-
age of land. However, it can be seen that far from separating their paths, this
apparent dichotomy was possibly the two interconnected sides of a single
dynamic. It was a dynamic that was brought about by a unique combination
of global capital and technology flows and the right local political conditions
for massive appropriation of land and control over the labor supplies. This
eventually led to cane becoming the dominant crop on both islands, and to
them dominating its global supply for such a protracted period.
