                      Cuba, Java, and the Global Sugar Trade                           255


    In both cases the preservation of racialized colonial order complicated
the labor issues. In early-nineteenth century Java, the colonial government
decided against any large landownership by Europeans and white creoles
for fear the island might be lost in the same way as Latin America had to
be relinquished by the Spanish (Ottow1937:238). Since the colonial gov-
ernment had explicitly rejected a hacienda economy in Java, other means
to re-channel the existing labor force toward the emerging sugar industry
force was necessary; and it was precisely for this reason that the Cultivation
System was established. In the absence of a large existing population, par-
ticularly the expansion of sugar production in Cuba required the influx of
workers – and most of these were forcibly abstracted from Africa as slaves.
An estimated 780,000 slaves were brought to Cuba between 1790 and 1867,
despite the outlawing of the slave trade by the British after 1807. Throughout
the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries Cuban whites were concerned
about becoming a minority;11 and this led to the intensification of racial fears
on the part of the white creole elite in particular – very conscious of the
proximity of the black republic of Haiti. Although this resulted in a series of
schemes during the nineteenth century to encourage white (or at least non-
black) immigration, Cuba nevertheless remained dependent upon the con-
tinuing influx of African slaves in the nineteenth century, and of Caribbean
migrant labor in the early twentieth, to meet their labor needs.
    That the sugar industry in Cuba could survive in the context of a perma-
nent shortage of labor was thanks to the island’s fertility and the possibility of
expanding into previously under-exploited land, which enabled the plantations
to economize drastically on their agricultural work. This was not possible to
the same degree for tobacco and coffee cultivation. Yet the burgeoning sugar
sector created a growing demand during the harvest: since cane mowers were
not available in colonial times, cane cutting was laborious and arduous. In
contrast with the sugar industry in Cuba, in Java female and child labor were
massively employed from the beginning of the Cultivation System, and the
colonial government in Java could afford to experiment with a variety of labor-
intensive crops and to apply immense amounts of labor on the cultivation of
coffee in spite of the diminishing returns on land because of exhaustion of
the soil. However, it would be misleading to suggest that an unlimited sup-
ply of labor existed in Java. During the heyday of the Java sugar industry in
the 1920s, labor shortages emerged, particularly in East Java. As a result, the

11. In fact, they never formed less than 40 percent of the population (in the early 1840s),
and generally outnumbered the non-white population throughout most of the history. By
1862, 60 percent of the population was white (600,000 Cubans, 116,000 Spanish, and
45,000 assorted foreigners) (Toledo 1864). In comparison, Java – whose population of
12.5 million in 1850 was about ten times that of Cuba – had a radically different racial
composition, with only 23,000 creoles and Europeans.
