

fossil record over two billion years.” As a result of this vigorous research
program, many scientists argue that a once highly speculative counterfactual
conjecture is now better viewed as a quite-probable fact of natural history—
yet another illustration of how blurry the boundary between factual and
counterfactual can be (Chapter 6, Herrmann and Fisherkeller).

There are no idiographic-nomothetic syntheses of comparable scope and
sweep in world politics. But there are some elegant demonstrations of how
‘one can weave together idiographic and nomothetic objectives—in particu-
lar, by the game theorists in this volume. Bueno de Mesquita and Weingast
both use game-theoretic models to enhance our understanding of particular
historical episodes (Philip Augustus versus the Pope; medieval merchants
versus towns; federal bureaucrats versus Congress), to identify intriguing
cross-case regularities, and to make predictions about how behavior will
change as a lawful function of alterations in the probabilities or payoffs
attached to courses of action. In so doing, the game theorists remind us that
social scientists are not the only creatures roaming this planet capable of
thinking counterfactually. Policy makers do it all the time, constructing
‘mental representations of how others would respond to one or another move
and making decisions on the basis of those mental models. Policy makers
can identify equilibrium solutions (solutions in which no one stands to gain
from unilateral defection) only by computing off-the-path behavioral
(OTPB) expectations concerning what would happen if they or the other side
acted differently in response to a given move. Assuming both sides act ratio-
nally and stay on the equilibrium path, these OTPB expectations eventually
become counterfactual assertions about what would have happened under
this or that contingency (Chapter 9, Bueno de Mesquita; Chapter 10,
Weingast). The mental representations of these now-counterfactual worlds
were once, however, causally consequential; they constrained rational deci-
sion makers to go down particular branches of the game-tree.

Game theorists integrate the idiographic and nomothetic by applying
“strong theory”—expected utility maximization and criteria for identifying
equilibrium strategies—to complex historical situations that can then be un-
derstood by modeling the options available to each side and the expected
payoffs associated with all logically possible combinations of moves. In
judging what else could plausibly have happened, game theorists use
nomothetic laws to answer the idiographic question: How much history do I
have to rewrite to “undo” a particular policy? If the counterfactual simply
shifts us from one equilibrium path to another (as is possible in games with
multiple equilibria), the counterfactual does no violence to the rational-actor
axioms of the underlying theory and may be quite acceptable. But if the
counterfactual requires us to imagine a world in which, for stochastic rea~
sons (“trembling hand”) or psychological reasons (“bounded rationality,”