10 P. E, TEFLOCK AND A. BELKIN

mere observations of covariation and to stipulate the causal mechanisms un-
derlying the democratic peace and to derive a host of testable predictions
from these hypothesized mechanisms. For instance, if heightened accoun-
tability constraints on leaders are responsible for the democratic peace, what
independent evidence do we have of the workings of this hypothesized
cause? Are democratic leaders who advocate war against fellow democracies
more likely to fail than their less bellicose colleagues? Do we see more
references to accountability constraints in the private deliberations of demo-
cratic than nondemocratic leaders? The more elaborate the network of cor-
roborative correlational evidence, including time-lagged and partial correla-
tions, the greater our justifiable confidence in the nomothetic counterfactual

3. Idiographic-Nomothetic Synthesis,

‘The tension between idiographic disciplines (history and area studies) and
nomothetic disciplines (general social science) is well known and need not be
belabored. A not uncommon way of proceeding is to acknowledge that the
idiographic and nomothetic represent complementary “ways of knowing” that
may in the fullness of time be conceptually integrated, but do not hold your
breath. It is worth noting, however, that such conceptual integration is the norm in
natural history, where there is much less controversy than in the social sciences
over what counts as a well-established statistical or theoretical generalization.

Our favorite example of idiographic-nomothetic symbiosis is the manner
in which biological and physical scientists have gone about deriving and
testing rival hypotheses concerning the extinction of dinosaurs. Perhaps the
‘most influential hypothesis is the doomsday-asteroid conjecture which, in
counterfactual form, runs as follows: “If a six- to twelve-mile-wide asteroid
had struck the Earth at a velocity of approximately 44,000 miles per hour
sixty-five million years ago, then a host of predictions would follow (includ-
ing the size of the crater, the effects on the atmosphere and climate, the
distribution of various trace elements in particular geological strata, antipo-
dal volcanism, . . . ).” This line of work captures the best in both the id-
iographic and nomothetic traditions. Investigators focus on a well-defined
“conceivable” cause (meteors and asteroids hit our planet frequently over
long stretches of time) but rely heavily upon deductive theory, empirical
observations, and computer simulations to assess the soundness of the con-
necting principles that permit us to deduce empirical consequences such as
climate change of sufficient magnitude to wipe out the dinosaurs. Investiga-
tors also try to tease apart testable predictions from rival hypotheses such as
“endogenous volcanism alone is sufficient to account not only for this spe-
cific mass extinction but for nine of the ten other mass extinctions in the

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS. u