Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  thaï  was  prcscrvod  for  générations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  bocks  discoverablc  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  légal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  présent  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journcy  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  hâve  taken  steps  to 
prcvcnt  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  lechnical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  thèse  files  for 
Personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  nol  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  System:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  récognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  laige  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  thèse  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogX'S  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is essential  for  informingpcoplcabout  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  légal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  lesponsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  légal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countiies.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can'l  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  spécifie  use  of 
any  spécifie  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 