in the capital were deluged with passionate and determined volunteers.
In general, the men who came forward in 1792 were younger than the volunteers of the previous year. As might be expected, the band of eighteen year
olds, men who were technically ineligible in 1791, was particularly prominent.
Jean-Paul Bertaud has demonstrated that of the new recruits three-quarters were
twenty-five years old or younger and that of these some 15 percent were under-
24 / Conscripts and Deserters
age, being fifteen, sixteen or seventeen years old when they enrolled (17). They
were often very raw recruits especially in rural France where they were generally
lacking in the most basic education or literacy. At Cayrols in the Massif, not a
single one of the new volunteers could sign his name, the communal register
sporting only the crude crosses of the illiterate (18). Many were there for the
signing-on bounties that were frequently held out as bait. Sums of 80 livres for
infantrymen and 120 livres for the cavalry were quite customary as towns and
villages encourgaed their young men to fill the local quotas. With admirable
pragmatism the department of the Aude noted in February 1792 that "Finteret
fut toujours le mobile des actions des hommes," that primes should therefore be
paid as a matter of course, and that they would have much greater impact on
men's minds if they could be paid in hard currency rather than in the distrusted
and seriously devalued assignats (19). In communes where it proved impossible
to find volunteers by any other means some form of balloting was used to designate those who should serve, a technique that was to become universal in later
recruitments but which clashed jarringly with the rhetoric about the freedom of
each citizen to choose for himself, especially where it became evident that the
richer inhabitants were hiding behind the tirage to designate others for the honor
of representing their community in the armies (20). Even in 1792 many of the
problems that would dog military recruitment throughout the Revolution and
the Empire were becoming apparent. Men who volunteered in a fit of enthusiasm began to have second thoughts when the implications of their decision
became clear. One volunteer from Saint-Flour, Chazal, grew sufficiently disenchanted with the idea of service in the weeks that followed his inscription and
he lost patience and accepted a post as commis to the receveur du district (21).
Another, from Mauriac, asked to be excused on the grounds that he had signed
on in a flush of patriotic excess, overlooking the fact that he was only fourteen
years old and therefore ineligible (22). A third, and he was typical of many in
the villages of the southern Massif, complained that he had never signed the
register of volunteers, that he had found his name added to the list without his
knowing by an "ennemi personnel" whose uncle fortuitously worked in the
mairie and had access to the document (23). This loss of enthusiasm, associated
in some instances with charges of forgery and corruption, had the inevitable
effect of draining the resources on which the armies were dependent, and cynicism spread among the volunteers with damaging rapidity. By May the volunteers from Aurillac and Murat were sufficiently alarmed by the trend they
observed to request that the department put aside funds to finance a propaganda
campaign to fill the gaps in the First Battalion and to "rechauffer et revifier le
patriotisme qui semble expirant" (24). Just as serious for the government was
the widespread belief among the young men who volunteered in the spring of
1792 that French victories at Valmy and Jemmapes had dispersed the foreign
threat, so that they could, in the time-honored fashion, return to their homes
once the campaigning season was over. Because volunteers signed on for one
year only, they were technically in the right, and the Convention could only
appeal to their patriotism to break with custom and remain at their posts (25).
The appeal had little effect. At the end of the 1791 campaigning season there had
been between 400,000 and 460,000 men under arms; by the beginning of 1793
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 25
fewer than 350,000 remained. For many of the volunteers, their sense of duy
was appeased, their soldiering over, and they returned with ill-concealed relief
to life on the farm or in the atelier (26).
The ideal of a volunteer army had therefore to be abandoned, but with the
greatest reluctance. Faced with the reality of war and with the likelihood that
that war would both persist indefinitely and be extended in scope, the government could not allow France to stand undefended. The internal troubles of the
spring and summer of 1793, from counterrevolution in Brittany to the threat of
open revolt from the federalist towns of the South and West, merely added to
the sense of military urgency. If they refused to step forward voluntarily, then
young men would have to be persuaded to serve by other means if the Republic
were to be secured. The summer of 1792 was already witnessing a move towards
some form of compulsion as more and more communes failed to fill their levies
by voluntary means. Somewhat plaintively, the district of Saint-Flour expressed
the ambiguity that many felt when it asked in August whether those nominated
as volunteers had the right to refuse that nomination, "si les volontaires
nommes aux assemblies du 30 aout pourront refuser d'accepter purement et
simplement ou seront obliges de motiver leur refus, dont sera juge chacune des
assemblies" (27). The question was neatly turned, for the government continued
to use the term "volontaire" long after inscription into the armies had ceased to
be in any sense voluntary. The Republic shared the dislike felt by many of its
citizens for any form of recruitment that smacked of compulsion, of bureaucratic selection, of the abuses associated in the public mind with the old milice.
Communes expressed deep shock when they learned that they were obliged to
fill their quotas even when volunteers failed to materialize, that they might have
to resort to some form of direct nomination or election, for the belief was widespread that the introduction of any form of compulsion would turn public opinion against soldiering and kill such patriotic feeling as remained. The idea of
drawing lots, protested the Breton town of Ploermel, aroused a particular sense
of repugnance among people who had only recently thrown off the chains of the
Ancien Regime (28). So the fiction was meticulously cultivated that Revolutionary soldiers were indeed volunteers, and throughout the 1790s communes were
first asked to encourage voluntary enlistment before any form of compulsion
was used. In practice, however, this was little more than fiction, since after 1792
the numbers coming forward voluntarily seldom rose above derisory levels.
Only the most dedicated or the most militaristic would still volunteer rather
than simply submit to some form of chance or selection with the rest of their
peers, or those so poor and desperate that they wanted to escape from their present lot and saw in the army a form of shelter and a source of nourishment. Even
in the district of Versailles, despite centuries of tradition, the numbers decreased
dramatically once compulsory levies were introduced. If the district produced
286 volunteers in 1792, there were only 15 in 1793, 25 in 1794 (when Jacobin
nationalism did win a few hearts), 11 in 1795, 7 in 1796, 11 in 1797, and 7 again
in 1798 (29). Individual volunteers often told poignant tales of the circumstances that had led them to sign on. Jean Constant from Jouy-en-Josas claimed
that he had volunteered only because he had been drunk at the time of the appel
and had been "seduit par un de ses camarades" (30). Joseph Langlois from Cour-
26 / Conscripts and Deserters
gent in the Seine-et-Oise protested that only the fact that he was momentarily
"pris de vin" could have induced him to offer to abandon his wife and child by
volunteering for the army. His commune supported his plea, adding for good
measure that "comme il n'est pas accoutume a boire, nous savons qu'une bouteille de vin lui met la tete au champ, lui fait oublier toutes ses affaires domestiques, et ne le fait penser qu'a la guerre" (31). Family quarrels, like drink, could
lead unhappy youngsters to volunteer in moments of despair. Such was the case
of two lads from Saint-Prain in Year V, who agreed that they had volunteered
knowingly, without the false courage supplied by alcohol, but less through a
sense of military vocation than as a result of "quelques desagrements qu'ils
avaient essuyes de leurs parents" (32). By the end of the decade genuine volunteers had become so rare that individual inscriptions were sometimes notified
to Paris as local events worthy of remark; when one eighteen year old from
Fours in the Nievre presented himself for the army in Year VII his grateful fellow citizens signed a public statement of their appreciation for his patriotism
and selflessness (33).
Only very locally did recruiting-officers have the satisfaction of finding that
men continued to come forward voluntarily in worthwhile numbers. The
national register of enroles volontaires for Year XI indicates the full extent to
which first the revolutionary levees and then full-blooded measures of conscription had drained away any desire for service that might previously have existed
in the population, and it underlines the degree to which Saint-Just's much
vaunted elan had been dissipated in the course of a decade of war. The cities of
Paris and Lyon, it is true, still made more than a token effort. The departments
of the Seine and the Rhone still responded to the nation's call to arms with,
respectively, 620 and 277 volunteers. But only one other department, the Calvados, provided more than 100 volunteers, and only a handful of areas, generally the stalwarts of the eastern frontier, exceeded 50. In striking contrast were
the thirty-six departments that offered 4 or fewer volunteers to the nation,
including sixteen that did not produce a single soldier. They provide a fitting
epitaph to the original dream of an army composed of patriots throwing themselves into battle for nation and liberty (34).
In the spring of 1793 the government's answer to its urgent need for manpower was the levee des 300,000. Three hundred thousand additional troops
were required for the summer campaign season, and each department was held
responsible for raising a portion of the total allocated to it by central government. In principle, the levee was fixed in accordance with population, although
areas that had proved recalcitrant in the raising of volunteers were more heavily
assessed. All men between eighteen and forty years of age who were unmarried
or widowers without children were placed in a state of permanent requisition;
replacement was permitted and certain professional categories were expressly
exempted. Each department had its assigned quota, which was then subdivided
according to population among its component districts; the districts in turn
assigned quotas to their various cantons. Beyond this, however, the decree was
deliberately vague. The government still encouraged voluntary enrollment, but
insisted that any deficit be made good by the recruitment of those requisitioned,
without giving any instruction as to how this might be achieved. In the words
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 27
of the decree, "les citoyens seront tenus de le completer sans desemparer, et pour
cet effet ils employeront le mode qu'ils trouveront le plus convenable, a la pluralite des voix" (35). In other words, the government wanted only to fill its regiments, and beyond a shallow continuing commitment to the ideal of voluntarism it was not prepared to lay down any binding guidelines. The first major
