exercise in compulsion was left to local opinion and to local elected officers; and
inevitably the complaints soon came flowing in from all over France. They
stemmed partly from incomprehension, confusion, and lack of experience; more
generally, they alleged unfairness and inequality of sacrifice.
The administrative problems were enormous. In fact it is surprising that the
levee raised as many soldiers as it did for the service of the Republic. For mayors, especially in rural areas, were often themselves semiliterate and unschooled
in matters of this kind. They were being asked to force members of their village
communities to march off to the army generally against their will, and they had
neither the bureaucratic information nor the coercive power with which to
accomplish the task. Even regions where enthusiasm ran relatively high experienced considerable problems because they did not know exactly who was available to serve. As the District of Cambrai complained in March 1793, there were
no tableaux of recruits, and therefore no accurate records that could act as the
basis for an efficient recruitment (36). Just as serious was the fact that the military failed to keep their civilian colleagues abreast of their movements and
requirements, which made the policing of recruitment unnecessarily difficult.
Mayors frequently did not even know to which battalions to send their men,
such was the general administrative chaos of these early months. The district of
Lille expressed understandable frustration in August 1792 that although its
recruitment seemed to be progressing well, disorder and confusion were threatening the entire enterprise: "C'est qu'on ignore absolument quels sont les regiments complets et quels sont ceux qui ne le sont pas; un homme s'engage pour
un regiment et on le renvoie sous pretexte que ce regiment est plus qu'au complet" (37). The Ministry of War accused mayors and civilian officials of a lack
of determination in the field of recruitment, but the fault was not theirs alone.
The habit of regular and thorough communication between different levels of
administration had not yet had an opportunity to develop. And local authorities
were often left without instructions and uncertain of the powers at their disposal.
In the Gironde, for example, the district of Bazas was already complaining that
it could employ only the weakest armory of measures, "les exhortations, la persuasion," to force men to leave for the armies (38). And the army itself was
criticized for neglecting its part of the process. How could local administrators
get men into uniform when commissaires were turning them away from their
battalions and chirurgiens were failing to turn up for medical examinations (39)?
Just as serious was the widespread suspicion that the levee was inequitable
and that others were escaping scot-free. Rural France was only too prone to
believe that the entire burden of recruitment was falling on the peasantry while
the inhabitants of towns and gros bourgs stood back from the recruitment proceedings and watched the countrymen march off to die. At Tasse in the Sarthe
it was whispered that "dans les gros endroits on ne satisfaisait plus," and in
nearby Vernie the local people refused to take any part in the recruitment until
28 / Conscripts and Deserters
others had demonstrated their good will; "il faut attendre," they reasoned, "a
voir comment les autres communes feront et ne pas se presser" (40). The power
of the rich to buy their way out was deeply resented by ordinary Frenchmen,
and in many communities there remained a profound suspicion, well expressed
in a letter from Saint-Flour in May 1793, that "les municipalites se coalisent
avec les riches proprietaires et se concertent pour designer ou les pauvres ou
leurs ennemis personnels" with the result that "en general le recrutement ne se
porte que sur les pauvres" (41). For some the answer was obvious: the richer
citizens should take the lead in offering themselves for the army and those who
had benefited most from the Revolution should make the greatest sacrifice for
its survival. In the villages of the Sarthe in 1793 popular animosity focused especially on those wealthy peasants who had further enriched themselves by the
purchase of biens nationaux. The young men of the area, for fear that they be
forced to leave for the front, tended to see in the local acquereurs a class of men
who had gained everything and given nothing for the Revolution, and their seditious mutterings spread through the country inns of the department. "II vaudrait
beaucoup mieux," Jean Livache told the juge de paix at Fresnay," que ceux qui
ont achete des biens nationaux, ainsi que tout le monde de la campagne le dit,
aillent les defendre; ceux qui n'en ont point achete n'iraient qu'apres les autres"
(42). On frequent occasions recruitment officials came into conflict with village
sentiment and solidarity, and rioting often ensued. At Ploermel the first attempt
at a recruitment meeting ended in uproar, with the officials jeered by an angry
crowd that insisted that everyone be treated alike. The young men of the town
declared that they would march to the front and were as patriotic as the youth
of other parts of France, but they would do so only when their administrators
and those favored by exemptions marched at their side (43). At Hesdin in the
Pas-de-Calais, where again the sense of popular egalitarianism was strong, the
recruitment procedures had to be hastily abandoned because of the danger that
the military commissaire, Darthe, might be lynched by an infuriated mob (44).
In many towns and villages the local people felt that they had right on their side,
and that the new recruitment laws were an outrage to the precious ideals of egalite that the Revolution had promised them. In consequence the law was frequently flouted, generally with impunity. At Marcoles in the Cantal, where again
rioting forced the abandonment of the recruitment meeting, the municipal council felt obliged to recommend a pardon for the young men involved on the
grounds that public opinion in the community was so unanimous in their support (45).
Popular suspicion of the new recruitment was increased by the fear that it
was being unfairly implemented by corrupt officials. In particular, the extensive
powers conferred on local mayors gave rise to lengthy recriminations from villagers who believed that the notables of the local community were again taking
advantage of their status to turn the law to their own profit. The mayor was,
after all, one of them, in most cases a peasant or small landowner who would be
more prosperous than the average villager, owning perhaps a few acres of farm
or small vineyard. He would have been chosen by his peers back in 1790 for
what all assumed to be a largely honorific post as representative of the village
community. Yet for both the levee des 300,000 and the levee en masse that fol-
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 29
lowed, the government placed on the mayor's shoulders all the onus of responsibility for ensuring that the communal quotas were filled. Inevitably jealousies
and internecine tensions became unleashed, especially because it was the mayor
who had to decide on the method of selection that was to be used, which could
not but be the most unpopular of tasks (46). The choice before him was usually
between some form of ballot (tirage au sort) and selection by nomination or
scrutin, whereby the entire community was invited to assemble on the village
green or in front of the church to choose patriotic young soldiers who would
represent them in the national cause. Neither method was popular. Left to themselves, many communes would have preferred to raise money to buy recruits to
serve in their stead. At Bollene in the Drome, for instance, the local people
opened a registre civique and tried to buy the services of volunteers by means of
a public subscription. When this failed to raise sufficient funds, they talked of
imposing a local tax to meet the costs incurred (47). At Saint-Mamet in the Cantal volunteers obviated the need for balloting, but to encourage them to come
forward the commune had promised payments equal to one quarter of the entire
land tax paid by the village (48). And at Thiezac in the same department, when
the possibility of holding a ballot was mooted, angry, murmuring, threats and
menaces persuaded the mayor to abandon the meeting. The local people made
no secret of their preference:
Us ont d'une unanime voix repondu qu'ils ne voulaient point tirer, mais qu'ils
voulaient que tous les paysans de la paroisse contribuassent au marc la livre
pour acheter les vingt hommes qu'ils devaient fournir, et apres leur avoir
represente qu'ils agiraient contre la loi de se comporter ainsi et qu'ils se compromettraient, les murmures et menaces qui ont ete faites dans ladite assemblee ont oblige le maire et officiers municipaux de dire qu'ils allaient se retirer
pour la surete de leurs jours. (49)
This may have been an extreme response, but it illustrates the hostility which
the very idea of recruitment evoked in many parts of rural France.
Both tirage and scrutin were frequently cited as causes of disaffection and
riot. Tirage was widely recognized to be the fairer of the two methods, the one
less open to fraud and abuse, and by the time of the levee en masse it was insisted
on by central government. Yet it was widely disliked in rural areas where the
very concept of a ballot was controversial and seemed to resurrect the practice
of the old milice which they had believed to be buried along with the rest of the
Ancien Regime (50). At Oust in the Pyrenean foothills there was serious trouble
as soon as the villagers were asked to draw lots, and the meeting disintegrated
into an angry wrangle over whether or not the cure should be obliged to submit
himself to the tirage with the other young men of the village (51). In the Morbihan, too, it was the procedure of the tirage that was most hotly contested. In
the commune of Treal, for example, ten of the young men of the locality replied
to their summons with a blank refusal to take part in the ceremony to decide
which of them must serve as a cavalier in the army, taking refuge instead in a
series of bloodcurdling threats against the members of the local council (52).
Although the government might try to insist that all ten be made to serve as an
30 / Conscripts and Deserters
example to the rest of the villagers, that scarcely resolved the problem for the
local mayor. To effect the tirage he was obliged to call a mass meeting of all the
jeunes gens of the commune, and that in turn raised a problem of public order
and police. "Comment Peffectuer," he demanded, "comment nous exposer a
rassembler des hommes indisposes et recalcitrans dans notre ville sans force
repressive, sans moyens actifs de police?" (53). Faced with such difficulties, communes were sorely tempted to resort to tricks and subterfuges to prevent the
danger and public humiliation that the tirage might easily incur. In Chaudesaigues they adopted the expedient of nominating men who were conveniently
absent from the commune when the ballot was to be held (54); Le Quesnoy
(Nord) chose to avoid a ballot altogether by signing on volunteers of 60 years or
older (55). Guesnain, in the same department, asked six of its veterans to continue serving for three extra months so that balloting could be avoided, a procedure that was totally illegal but which had the virtue of delaying a decision
that was likely to cause rioting in the village (56).
The other method, that of scrutin, led to endless quarrels and complaints by
those who felt, often rightly, that they had been abusively treated by their fellow
