increasingly held this view, the popular classes of society held on longer to the
feudal vision that respected those offering protection to the rest of society
through "le metier des armes" (8). Examining Parisian recruitment in the years
after 1763, Jean Chagniot notes that many of the recruits lied about their origins
and their profession, implying that they were joining the armies in an attempt
to conceal their past and to seek anonymity elsewhere. Only 14 percent of the
men in his sample were born in Paris, and the majority he classes as "de pauvres
provinciaux venus a Paris, parfois avec leurs parents, mais plus souvent isoles,
et dont 1'activite declaree ne revele aucune qualification" (9). Often the eighteenth-century soldier would seem to have drifted into soldiering through boredom or misfortune rather than to have chosen the army in any positive sense as
a career. Poverty was more likely to have driven him to volunteer than any
burning military zeal. The occasional glimpse into army life that we can glean
from the memoirs of serving soldiers tends to confirm this rather dejected and
fatalistic impression. Army life was hard and often brutal. One diarist, describing the pestilential conditions that reigned in a French field-hospital during the
War of the Austrian Succession, tells of the horror he felt when he looked at his
wounded comrades, three-quarters of whom died within three days of admis-
The Problem audits Context / 1
sion. It is the everyday banality of his words, the brutal and matter-of-fact style
of his presentation that make his account of death and dying so moving and so
deeply harrowing (10).
Degrading conditions of service and long years of physical suffering undoubtedly played their part in stimulating desertion during the Ancien Regime, even
among men who had signed on voluntarily. Exact statistics for desertion are
difficult to determine, in part because there was still a substantial element of
seasonal campaigning in the eighteenth century, with soldiers slipping off home
to their farms and villages at the end of each campaign, but in part also because
generals did not want to draw attention to the extent of the problem in their own
ranks. During the 1780s Jean-Paul Bertaud suggests that in an average year there
were approximately 3,000 desertions from the French armies, though in times
of war these figures would increase dramatically (11). By the end of the Hundred
Years' War, for instance, the figure for desertion had increased to more than
10,000 annually, a reflection both of the size of the armies compared to peacetime and of the degree of demoralization in the ranks (12). Despondency could
spread rapidly in a force in which there was little bond of sympathy or camaraderie between officers and infantrymen, and in which the physical contact
between them was deliberately kept to the very minimum. The fact that France
had what was effectively a peasant army only added to the problem of indiscipline, as men were lured home by simple homesickness or by the call of the
harvest. Many had lived on the margin of civilian society, earning the barest
subsistence as seasonal harvesters or migrant workers; the extent of seasonal
migration in the population at large provided protection for soldiers on the run
or seeking refuge from the marechanssee or constabulary. Eighteenth-century
generals were well-briefed on the favored refuges of soldiers under their command: the Comtat Venaissin in the early part of the century, until the French
government reached an understanding with the Pope; Catalonia and the Spanish
side of the Pyrenees, especially favored by the men of the Southwest who knew
every inch of the smugglers' trails across the mountains; the Dutch coastline, a
natural hiding-place for deserters from the northern regiments of Artois and
Picardy because of its marshy topography; and, above all, the territory of the
Holy Roman Empire, where they could breathe freely without fear of capture or
extradition to France (13). To contemporaries desertion seemed more a necessary corollary to an army than a form of independent criminal activity; officials
talked of deserters without any marked rancor. Desertion was seen as being
timeless and even inevitable, as constituting a natural and necessary part of
French rural life (14).
This casualness of approach was, of course, deceptive, although even the
army was not blind to the seasonal needs of agriculture and the short-term
demand for labor in a peasant economy. During the Ancien Regime the apparently casual attitude to service was further exaggerated by the widespread practice of billardage, whereby men would leave their regiment with the express aim
of joining another either to be with their friends or, more commonly, to pocket
a second signing-on bounty (15). Desertion was so common that amnesties had
to be used at regular intervals to lure former soldiers back into uniform; yet,
with no guarantee that he would be released from service after the fixed term for
8 / Conscripts and Deserters
which he had enlisted, the deserter would require a considerable inducement if
he were to be attracted back voluntarily (16). It is perhaps indicative of the scale
of the problem that the marechaussee, whose responsibility was otherwise
restricted to patrolling highways and chasing vagabonds, was also periodically
given the task of recapturing men on the run from their regiment. Choiseul's
definition of the work of the force was quite explicit. They were constituted "for
the capture of deserters, the safety of travellers, and the transport of the tax
receipts," but as Iain Cameron has shown in his study of the Auvergne and the
Guyenne, these were not functions that necessarily endeared the marechaussee
to the local community (17). There is little evidence that villagers viewed deserters with any particular fear or hatred. Occasional denunciations were reserved
for those who passed from simple desertion to brigandage or banditry, crimes
that harmed local people and posed a threat to their domestic well-being. The
military, of course, saw things very differently. The eighteenth-century army laid
great store by the standard and the thoroughness of its training, and every man
who deserted represented a considerable loss of investment. Generals therefore
went to great lengths to lure deserters back to their posts and to secure the
prompt release of any who were taken prisoner by the enemy in time of war. In
1758 Belle-Isle was more than happy to pay the Prussians a ransom of eleven
livres for every additional French soldier in Prussian hands after an exchange of
prisoners had been concluded; their battle experience was too valuable to be
lightly cast aside (18).
If there were continuities between the pattern of the Ancien Regime and that
imposed by the Revolution, there were also substantial differences. Most importantly, the majority of young Frenchmen were not threatened with the reality of
military service as they would be in the later years of the Napoleonic campaigns.
The scale of soldiering was much more discreet. Whereas the Revolution would
set out to create an army of three-quarters of a million men, the entire period
from 1700 to 1763, encompassing the great European wars of the eighteenth century, used only 2 million, and they included a substantial force of around
300,000 foreign mercenaries (19). At the time of the Seven Years' War the total
numbers incorporated in the regular army amounted to 200,000; yet France at
that time had 3,800,000 men between sixteen and forty years old on whose energies she could have called (20). So in all, not more than 1 in 20 of those eligible
was actually called on to make the very real sacrifice of serving in person in the
regiments of Louis XV. Just as important was the fact that service was different
in kind from the national recruitment of the Revolution or the annual conscriptions of the Empire. Men were recruited locally to serve in regiments commanded by local nobles. The recruiting-officers would in many cases be personally known to them, and the whole aspect of recruitment seemed more
acceptable because of a personal contract between seigneur and commoner. As
Corvisier has observed, such recruitment, once account is taken of the seigneurial nature of Ancien Regime society, made sense to local people in a way
that the national appeals after 1792 could not hope to do. For "ce recrutement
direct par les recruteurs naturels du regiment, eu egard a son caractere de
recrutement local, voire seigneurial, donne a chaque regiment un aspect bien
particulier, principalement en temps de paix" (21). It is true that in times of war
The Problem and Its Context / 9
and national emergency this rather gentlemanly way of proceeding proved inadequate to the King's needs, and they often resorted to the use of professional
racoleurs, to embaucheurs and recruitment agencies, to the hated and feared marchands d'hommes who would set up their stalls at the local fair or market or
battre la caisse in village squares, lying, cheating, and bribing until the requisite
number of recruits had been assembled (22). But the normal peacetime methods
of recruitment would have aroused little sustained complaint.
What did arouse widespread anger in the eighteenth-century countryside was
the complementary force to the regular battalions, the milice royale. This was
intended to be a reserve force that could be raised at short notice to protect the
local community or to help cope with some national emergency; it had been first
introduced in 1688 by Louvois to fill gaps in regular recruitment (23). As originally conceived, its military role was not to include active fighting, which was
the preserve of the line army, but was confined to ancillary duties such as the
guarding of baggage, the garrison of frontier towns, or the defense of the rear of
fighting columns (24). Unlike the regular regiments, the militia's recruitment
involved elements of both chance and compulsion. It was highly unequal in its
demands on the population, and this perceived unfairness lay at the root of its
unpopularity. In coastal regions, for instance, the inhabitants were often totally
exempt from service with the armies; instead, they would be called upon to act
as coastguards and give warning of enemy attack from the sea (25). Individual
towns might enjoy total exemptions—like Saint-Ybars near Pamiers, which was
never called on to supply a single militiaman in the course of the century, to the
visible anger of other towns and villages in the surrounding area (26). Or again,
whole provinces might at one time or another be exempted or specially
favored—the pays de Gex, for instance, was privileged in this way until 1726,
when it was suddenly ordered to provide fifteen men; and the province of Roussillon was allowed in the early years to raise its own militia and opt out of the
national scheme (27). But for those who did have to serve, that service could be
time-consuming and onerous. In peacetime there was generally little reason for
grievance. The militiaman might be expected to undergo training for two weeks
each year—at Pezenas this program was reduced to nine days—and he might
have to perform some services in the community. In return he could expect to
enjoy a rather privileged position if he were seeking employment (28). In times
of crisis, however, miliciens were used in active combat in lieu of volunteer regiments, and the period of incorporation was often arbitrarily extended to suit
the convenience of the military (29). The extent of militia service was in any
case becoming more grueling as the century progressed. Claude Achard has
shown that between 1740 and 1788 the period of service in Pezenas was doubled
from three to six years. And the numbers demanded increased threateningly in
wartime. Pezenas was a community of approximately 8,000 persons, which in
