the last decades of the Ancien Regime. Generals were concerned about the
extent of desertions, intendants anxious about the incidence of disturbance and
riot at recruitment meetings. But this dissatisfaction was not uniformly spread
across France, with the consequence that it is difficult to generalize at national
level on matters of attitude and mentality. France in the eighteenth century was
still in many ways little more than a political unity, in which regional traditions
and regional loyalties remained deeply entrenched. In part differences of
response may be ascribed to geography, differences of mentality between town
and country, pasture and agricultural land, agglomerated bourgs and dispersed
habitation (48). In part they also reflect the kind of rural autarky that exists
where market networks and administrative practice have had little impact. It is
no accident that much of the most deeply rooted opposition to the military was
to be found in remote and mountainous areas where modern government and
the assumptions on which it is based had had little opportunity to penetrate.
Describing Haute-Provence in the sixteenth century, Fernand Braudel remarked
that there was neither powerful noble nor affluent cleric to impose order on the
local population; furthermore,
there was no tight urban network, so no administration, no towns in the
proper sense of the word, and no gendarmes either, we might add. It is only
in the lowlands that one finds closely knit, stifling society, a prebendal clergy,
a haughty aristocracy, and an efficient system of justice. The hills were the
refuge of liberty, democracy, and peasant "republics." (49)
These remarks were just as true in 1800, or in 1851. Recruitment laws that were
respected in Paris Basin and that were devised for a single nation could easily
incur opposition in the village communities of the South. It is not unexpected,
therefore, that the highest desertion rates in the eighteenth-century armies were
recorded in areas of difficult terrain far removed from the influence of central
government: the peripheral areas of the country like the Pyrenees, the Alpine
foothills in the Southeast, and the Flemish-speaking regions along the northern
frontier (50).
14 / Conscripts and Deserters
These regional diversities were well-known to contemporaries, including the
deputies of the National Assembly who addressed themselves to the problem of
how best to reform the army that they had inherited. The chevalier des Pommelles, who wrote about the subject in 1789, noted that the taste for soldiering
was a concept that was hard to define but one which should not for that reason
be dismissed from consideration by the legislators. "Le gout," he warned, "tient
a 1'education, a 1'habitude, aux circonstances et aux prejuges de chaque pays, au
sejour des troupes; mais surtout il parait subordonne d'une maniere constante a
Finfluence du climat" (51). His explanation was principally a climatic one, with
extremes of hot and cold apparently making the South of France exceptionally
unpromising country for the recruiting-officer. He noted the evidence of the
widely divergent figures for military service in the various provinces of the country: whereas in Alsace there was 1 soldier for every 61 members of the population, in Lorraine 1 for every 72, and in the Franche-Comte 1 for every 76, refractory areas of the Southwest produced relatively few volunteers—in the
generalite of Auch a miserable 1 for each 628 of the population (52). Corvisier,
analyzing the regimental records for 1716 in an attempt to construct a map of
regional recruitment patterns, provides statistical corroboration for Pommelles'
claims. The manpower provided by different regions was glaringly unequal, with
Midi generally the least forthcoming part of the country, but Corvisier's detailed
evidence suggests a much more subtle analysis than a simple north-south division. Using as his source the intendants' enquete of 1700, he shows that the three
most willing areas of recruitment were indeed in the north and east—the generalites of Besancon, Chalons-sur-Marne, and Flandre-Artois-Cambraisis—but
the region around Grenoble also came high on the list, and, even more surprisingly, the generalite of Montpellier was the fourth most cooperative in the entire
country. In contrast generalites like Pau and Perpignan provided only a fraction
of the men asked of them, while Rennes produced the lowest return of all,
emphasizing Corvisier's conclusion that recruitment problems were in no sense
a southern monopoly (53). Interestingly, the distaste of Bretons would seem to
have been directed at service with regular battalions, since their response to militia service was noticeably more enthusiastic (54). The milice cannot, however,
be seen as a general means of equalizing regional burdens, because here again
the numbers of men demanded of local communities would appear to have
borne only the slightest relationship to their population or their ability to answer
the state's appeal. Pommelles, campaigning vigorously for some reform of the
existing system, produced figures to demonstrate how absurd the levies often
were. In Poitou, for instance, the milice in an average year took 1 young man in
11, whereas in neighboring Aunis it contented itself with 1 in every 48 (55). Even
neighboring communes might be treated with outrageous inequity. In the province of Aunis he showed how the village of Jonsac had to produce 1 milicien of
11 possible candidates, while Saint-Amand-de-Noere, just down the road,
escaped with 1 man in a population of 126. The Ancien Regime recruiting system worked in the sense that sufficient men were found to fill the battalions, but
Pommelles was not alone in seeing the methods used as constituting an aifront
to the ideal of equality in the new era that was dawning in 1789.
The Problem and Its Context / 15
The early years of the Revolution brought entirely new changes, not just to
recruitment practices, but to the nature and structure of the French armies. A
government that claimed to act in the name of the people of France could not
but listen to the expressed grievances that made up the cahiers. A government
that legislated for equality of all its citizens before the law could not continue to
depend on an army in which all the officers were nobles and where office was
venal. A government that fought wars against the monarchies of Europe in the
name of liberty could scarcely use as its instrument of liberation an army in
which morale was low, discipline was imposed by savage corporal penalties, and
the ordinary soldier was himself deprived of all his civil rights and privileges.
More practically, once the Revolution turned its attentions to reforming the
monarchy and to ending feudal privilege, it faced a major challenge from large
sections of the aristocracy, who shut up their chateaux and chose to emigrate
rather than accept the new political and social order in France. Since, under the
terms of the Segur Ordinance of 1781, all army officers had to boast four quarterings of nobility, the line army was commanded by men whose sympathies
with the new political order could not be relied on, and relations between the
politicians and the military in the early months of the Revolution were understandably strained. Many high-ranking officers were among the first Frenchmen
to emigrate, abandoning their posts and their responsibilities rather than betray
their king or their church. And the flood of emigration did not stop in 1789. Sam
Scott has calculated that in the months between September 1791 and December
1792 the line army may have lost one-third or more of its officers through resignation, illegal absence, or political emigration (56). The yawning gaps in the
officer ranks were just one reason why the Revolutionaries had to turn with
some urgency to the problem of reforming the military and of moulding the
Ancien Regime army into a force capable of beating off the attacks of the Austrians and their monarchist allies.
Army reforms were also the result of pressure from the soldiers themselves.
The libertarian message that the Revolution encapsulated inevitably excited
those of its citizens who served the government most directly, those who bore
arms in the service of the revolutionary state. In 1788 and 1789 units returning
to France from abroad had already shown a marked tendency to support the
peasantry against the government, sympathize with complaints about shortages
and riots over food prices, and fraternize with the people when they drew up
their cahiers de doleances (57). The policing of the popular demonstrations in
Paris in the summer of 1789 placed another strain on the loyalty of the troops,
and when they were ordered to defend the Bastille against popular attack and
turn their arms on the angry Parisian crowd, the crisis in the ranks became glaringly obvious. Some 760 soldiers deserted in the days around 14 July, some
joined the new National Guard and fought for the rights of the populace, while
the majority played a vitally significant passive role by their refusal to take any
part in the repression of the people. The result was an endemic crisis of confidence in the French army, with soldiers deserting on a large scale and joining in
civilian demonstrations. Disobedience and insubordination generally followed
the use of troops to perform a policing role that brought them into confrontation
16 / Conscripts and Deserters
with ordinary Frenchmen and forced them to establish their principal loyalties
(58). It was here that the essence of the problem lay. Were they, first and foremost, soldiers whose duty was to obey the orders of their officers—the armee de
metier of Ancien Regime France—or a new kind of army composed of men who
saw themselves primarily as citizens, enjoying the privileges that citizenship
conferred and proud to exercise their authority in the defence of the rights and
privileges of their fellows? By 1790 it was clear that their new self-awareness and
consciousness of what citizenship meant, was undermining traditional army discipline, and the demands of the troops were felt in a series of risings and mutinies against their superiors—at Perpignan, Saint-Servan, Epinal, Brest, Longwy,
Sarrelouis, Hesdin, Compiegne, and elsewhere (59)—before the movement culminated in a major act of mutiny at Nancy. Three regiments of troops were
involved in the "affaire de Nancy," two French and one Swiss, and the main
aim of the mutineers was to put right wrongs within the army itself, to obtain
satisfaction on pay and a series of grievances concerning political rights and disciplinary arrangements in the battalions. The men confidently claimed what
they saw as the ordinary rights of Frenchmen, locking up their officers until these
rights were granted to them, and preventing any correspondence between Nancy
and the National Assembly, a move that was seen as a threat to essential lines
of military communication and to the very security of the state (60). The mutiny
was savagely repressed by 4,500 loyal troops led by the Marquis de Bouille. The
two French regiments involved were disbanded, the Nancy Jacobin Club, held
responsible for the spread of egalitarian sentiments among the soldiers, was
closed, and all troops were moved out of the city. The most brutal punishment
was reserved for the Swiss. One soldier was condemned to be broken on the
wheel, 22 were hanged, and 41 others condemned to 30 years in the galleys (61).
The extent of the repression reflected the anxiety of those in power that the
entire army could be a prey to egalitarian political ideals and to the perils of
anarchy. But equally, they realized that the old established structures of the
Ancien Regime army were increasingly untenable and that reform was a practical as well as a political necessity.
The extent of the reform that was introduced was without precedent in
