---
source_url: "https://rodrigomorenog.files.wordpress.com/2019/01/forrest-conscripts-and-deserters_-the-army-and-french-society-during-the-revolution-and-empire-oxford-1989.pdf"
final_url: "https://rodrigomorenog.files.wordpress.com/2019/01/forrest-conscripts-and-deserters_-the-army-and-french-society-during-the-revolution-and-empire-oxford-1989.pdf"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "f83e37321b1955f04a3cad8ab4bcfd7db35eddfc5ce7627bfec796bb09be3ce3"
title: ""
content_kind: "page_text"
---

CONSCRIPTS

DESERTERS

THE ARMY AND

FRENCH SOCIETY
DURING THE
REVOLUTION
AND EMPIRE

ALAN FORREST

CONSCRIPTS
AND

DESERTERS

This page intentionally left blank

CONSCRIPTS
A ND
DESER TERS
THE ARMY AND FRENCH SOCIETY
DURING THE REVOLUTION
AND EMPIRE
Alan Forrest
New York Oxford
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
1989
Oxford University Press
Oxford New York Toronto
Delhi Bombay Calcutta Madras Karachi
Petaling Jaya Singapore Hong Kong Tokyo
Nairobi Dar es Salaam Cape Town
Melbourne Auckland
and associated companies in
Berlin Ibadan
Original title of French Edition
Deserteurs et Insoumis sous la Revolution et 1'Empire
Copyright © Librairie Academique Perrin 1988
English edition copyright © 1989 by Oxford University Press, Inc.
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.,
200 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Forrest, Alan I.
Conscripts and deserters.
Translation of: Deserteurs et insoumis sous
la Revolution et 1'Empire.
Bibliography: p.
Includes index.
1. France—History, Military—1789-1815.
2. France. Armee—History—Revolution, 1789-1799.
3. France. Armee—History—Napoleonic Wars, 1800-1815.
4. Napoleonic Wars, 1800-1814—Desertions—France.
5. France. Armee—Recruiting, enlistment, etc.
6. France—History—Napoleonic Wars, 1800-1815—
Draft resisters. I. Title.
DC151.F6713 1989 944.04 88-34568
ISBN 0-19-505937-9
24689753 1
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
Acknowledgments
I CAME to the study of desertion and draft-dodging by a somewhat oblique route,
almost as a by-product of work on charity and Revolutionary social policy. That
it has now grown into a full-length study is due in no small measure to the
insights and encouragement of others. Financial assistance with archival
research was provided by the British Academy, by the Sir Ernest Cassell Educational Trust, and by the University of Manchester. Academic assistance came
from many different sources. I owe much to the help unstintingly given by archivists in whose depots I worked, both at the Archives Nationales and in the cluster of departmental archives whose holdings form the basis of this study—in
Aurillac, Bordeaux, Epinal, Foix, Lille, Valence, Vannes, and Versailles. In my
"home" department of the Hauts-de-Seine, the archive staff were generous in
bringing much-needed documentation from far-flung corners of the country.
Their interest and assistance is greatly appreciated. So, too, is the constructive
criticism offered by colleagues at various seminars and colloquia where I have
had the opportunity to present some of the ideas contained in the present book.
In particular I should like to thank Roger Dupuy and Francois Lebrun at
Rennes, Jean Nicholas at Paris-VII, Alison Patrick at Melbourne, Steve Kaplan
at Cornell, and John Merriman at Yale.
Fellow historians have rallied round with ideas and inspiration. Clive
Emsley of the Open University advised me on the eighteenth-century police;
Colin Jones of Exeter University and Peter Jones of Birmingham passed me
valuable references to military sources. In France, Louis Berges let me read his
excellent thesis on conscription problems in the Southwest, and Frederic Rousseau, at the University of Montpellier, entered into a lengthy and illuminating
correspondence on his work on the Herault. Jonathan Dalby on the Cantal and
Michael Broers on Piedmont provided insights into the problem of recruitment
in a local context, and helped convince me that there really was a subject there
worth studying at all. Jean-Paul Bertaud of the Sorbonne and Isser Woloch of
Columbia shared with me their vast experience of the Revolutionary and Napo-
vi / Acknowledgments
Iconic armies. Back in Manchester I have benefited from the comparative
insights shed by various of my colleagues in Modern History, and have been
fortunate in the succession of research students—Godfrey Rogers, Simon Reeve,
Martin Stocker, Piers Willson, and Jon Skinner—with whom I have had the
opportunity to work. Historical research is in so many ways a collaborative
enterprise, and their contribution to the writing of this book has been
considerable.
On the publishing side, my warmest thanks are due to Nancy Lane and her
colleagues at Oxford University Press in New York who have seen the English
version of this book through the press.
Three final words of thanks are due. To Richard Cobb, for ideas and inspiration over two decades of research in Revolutionary history: the very subject
matter of this book owes much to his influence and to his unwavering belief that
history belongs as much to those who suffer from it as to the politicians and
policy-makers. To Mireille Marchant, whose kindness, hospitality and unfailing
cheerfulness have been a source of support on repeated visits to Paris. And, most
of all, to my wife, Rosemary Morris, who must rather too often have felt herself
the victim of desertion and insoumission during the ingestion period of the present work.
Preface
THIS BOOK is not about military history, at least not in the conventional sense of
that term. Rather it is an examination of the varied responses to the massive
militarization that France underwent in the revolutionary and Napoleonic
years—responses that divided Frenchmen against Frenchmen and often created
conflict between local communities and the ambitions of the centralist state. The
scale of that militarization had no precedent in France's previous history; nor
was there to be anything remotely comparable during the remainder of the nineteenth century, when the numbers forcibly recruited for the armies remained
generally modest and when disaffection was in consequence contained. Between
1791 and 1814 the government's appetite for recruits seemed insatiable, especially in the last years of the Empire when no sacrifice seemed too great in the
quest for military glory. In all some two to three million men were incorporated
into the revolutionary and Napoleonic battalions, many of them against their
will and without regard to the long-established traditions of their local communities. With the introduction of annual conscriptions under the Loi Jourdan
in Year VI, the draft became for nineteen- and twenty-year-old peasant boys a
part of the routine of growing up, a sort of rite de passage that marked their
adolescence. For many the routine quality of conscription was to end their resistance and guarantee their smooth incorporation in the ranks. For others,
however, it merely added to the difficulties they incurred in avoiding the recruiting-sergeant and remaining with their families in their native villages. Their
resentment directed against the army, the Emperor, or the village mayor was to
remain a fact of political life throughout the long years of war.
This resentment was demonstrated in a number of different ways, but especially in consistently high rates of desertion and in the deliberate and stubborn
avoidance of service by hundreds of thousands of young men for whom the military lifestyle held few charms. This book is about these unwilling soldiers and
the lengths to which they were forced to go to escape the clutches of their regiments. It is also about the many side-effects of their defiance—their impact on
viii / Preface
the military and the morale of the armies, on political opinion at home, the
social fabric of local villages, and the Napoleonic dream of bringing about a
coherent and centralist state. The arrival on French soil of a whole army of fugitives could only add to the problem of crime and lawlessness and threaten the
judicial order on which the government was so dependent. Their presence in
villages where royalists and chouans were actively recruiting for their counterrevolutionary crusades necessarily added further strains to political loyalties.
More generally, the fact that thousands of young men were in hiding in or near
to their native communities supplied so many others with an immediate problem of conscience and of loyalty—parents and younger brothers, their peergroup in the community, local farmers in desperate need of casual labor, mayors
and other officials who were charged with law enforcement in the countryside.
Indirectly as well as directly, the refractory conscript soon threw down a formidable challenge to the pretensions of the state.
The state responded increasingly by turning the full panoply of its powers
against deserters and insoumis and the communities that offered them protection. Policing was increased; garrisons were imposed on the homes of anyone
suspected of harboring fugitives; fines were levied on entire villages in an
attempt to break local loyalties; and mobile columns of soldiers swept across the
countryside in a search for the young and able-bodied. Over conscription, as
over no other single issue, the interests of the state and the local community
were seen to come into open conflict, and the state had no other recourse but to
repression. Ordinary Frenchmen were increasingly forced to face up to their
responsibilities and to take sides in a conflict of loyalties that pitted the interests
of the nation against those of the community. Desertion, in other words, soon
ceased to be solely or even primarily a military issue, and it is its wider ramifications that are the principal concern of this study. The conscriptions of the
Imperial years were imposed with increasing success on a demoralized population, but the cost—in ill-will, resentment, and covert defiance—was there for all
to see. The demands of the state were not accepted without protest, and the
military demands were those that were most sullenly contested. For conscription
threatened the rural economy, the integrity of the family, the traditional autarchy of the village. It created an open clash between the archaic and the modern,
and though in the long term the modern undoubtedly triumphed, in the short
term it antagonized public opinion and put the governability of the state at risk.
In a recent article the American historian Isser Woloch depicts conscription as
a battleground between "individual and local communities on the one hand and
a distant impersonal state on the other," and he calls for a substantial examination of the problem to throw light on the essential nature of the Napoleonic
regime and its relationship with those it administered. (1) This gap in current
historiography seems a serious one, and one that is as puzzling for the revolutionary period as for the Empire. It is hoped that this text will provide an answer.
Manchester, U.K. A. F.
October 1988
Contents
1 The Problem and Its Context 3
2 The Weight of Military Recruitment 20
3 The Extent of Evasion 43
4 The Roots of Resistance 74
5 The Deserter and Civilian Society 98
6 Desertion and Criminality 118
7 Desertion and Counterrevolution 146
8 Desertion and the French Armies 169
9 The Build-up of State Repression 187
10 Desertion, the State, and the People 219
Notes 239
Bibliography 279
Index 291
This page intentionally left blank