normal circumstances was called on to provide 7 miliciens each year. But war
or national panic increased these demands to 15 men in 1745, 33 in 1743, and
50 in 1689 (30). For this reason militia service posed a real and unpredictable
threat to the young males in the community, and they would go to considerable
lengths to extricate themselves from any possibility of having to perform service
in person. Replacements were allowed for those with the necessary funds to pro-
10 / Conscripts and Deserters
vide an able-bodied villager to serve in their stead—an economic criterion that
caused widespread anger among the poor—with the result that few bourgeois or
notables ever ran the risk of being incorporated. Intendants were generally left
with considerable latitude in determining how widely exemptions should run,
but there was no thought that the wealthy should be expected to submit themselves to ballot. In 1743, for instance, "il y cut exemption pour les gros laboureurs, les gros fermiers, leurs fils ou valets, les garcons ayant charrue ou exploitant une ferme de 300 livres, les bergers d'au moins cent betes, les marchands et
artisans payant au moins 30 livres de capitation, les procureurs, greffiers,
notaires, commis, employes, medecins, chirurgiens, apothicaires, les proprietaires d'un office d'au moins 4000 livres ..." (31). The fact that servants and
lackeys did not have to serve explains the desperate scramble for posts as
"domestique, garde-chasse ou rnaitre-valet" in the service of a local noble or
public official whenever recruitment was imminent (32). In their bid to escape
the milice, some young men went much further, and we hear regular reports in
the 1760s and 1770s of voluntary self-mutilation among countrymen fearful that
they would be chosen to serve. In 1766 the subdelegue at Remiremont complained that in his area such abuses were widespread, that peasants frequently
tried to destroy their health by rubbing herbs into their eyes to induce blindness
or by injecting open wounds with "mouches cantarides" to help turn them septic
(33). Fear of the milice was capable of driving French peasant boys to the most
extreme measures.
Statistically their fears appear grossly exaggerated, since an average of only
about 100,000 men (or 1 in 40 of those eligible to serve) were called on to perform militia duty at any one time (34); however, for those incorporated the burden only seemed the greater. Their anger and resentment became focused on the
recruitment process itself, the ceremony of the tirage a sort that determined
which villagers were taken and which were allowed to go calmly about their
everyday lives. This process was relatively simple to administer and would form
the prototype of the recruitment principle adopted by the revolutionaries in
1793: all the young men of the commune between eighteen and forty years old,
unmarried or married without children, would assemble on the village green and
draw tickets from a hat—the billet blanc which gave them their liberty, or the
billet noir which condemned them to serve. The intendant had overall charge of
the operation. It was he who received from the bureau de guerre the demand for
a fixed number of men from his area and who divided that number among the
parishes he administered. It was a highly unpopular role, as was witnessed by
the riots and outbreaks of popular violence that frequently accompanied the tirage (35). Around Lille, indeed, the government came to accept that such was the
hatred of the militia in the local community that there was little point in insisting on the drawing of lots, since the unlucky men who drew the mauvais numeros would simply slip across the frontier and be lost to the French economy as
well as to French arms (36). Public anger only increased as the century passed,
for, although the numbers demanded oscillated wildly from year to year, it was
clear that the milice was becoming a permanent part of the King's army, not a
reserve arm in moments of crisis, and that the burden imposed on the people
was increasing. Only for two brief periods was the force wholly disbanded—
between 1715 and 1719 and again from 1721 to 1726(37)—and over the century
The Problem and Its Context / 11
the proportion of the army that was composed of militiamen increased rapidly,
until by 1789 there were five militiamen for every eight soldiers of the line (38).
The extent of popular outcry against militia service is faithfully reflected in
the cahiers de doleances of 1789, especially in the parish cahiers that came closest to recording the true voice of local anger. Village communities throughout
France seemed united in the belief that the raising of the milice was at best an
unacceptable burden, at worst an outrage that ran counter to natural law and
justice. One village, Saint-Vincent-Rive-d'Olt in the Quercy, suggested that the
fundamental freedoms of the French peasant were at issue because "la milice a
laquelle le cultivateur est assujetti est une servitude entierement contraire aux
lois constitutionnelles de 1'Etat" (39). Agriculture suffered unnecessary deprivations and the whole balance of the local economy was put at risk, as those
liable to be incorporated took every available precaution to avoid service. Again
and again we hear the claim that the most common implication of the tirage was
the lemminglike rush of youngsters seeking an escape through marriage or emigration. The parish cahier of Nouans was one of many that emphasized the damage that this could cause both to the lives of the individuals involved and to the
communities to which they belonged. Precipitate marriages, it warned, led irreparably to misery and impoverishment, to families reduced to charity and to meager expedients if they were to avoid sinking into rootlessness and vagabondage.
The milice compounded the problem by forcing the hand of the young; it "determine a se marier des garcons qui n'ont pas seulement gagne de quoi s'habiller;
de la nait une famille de pauvres, a qui les parents montrent a mendier, sitot
qu'ils sont en etat de marcher" (40). Or again, the impending threat of military
service might suffice to drive young men to leave their villages altogether, with
the consequent risk of rural decay. Generally they drifted to the towns in search
of work, often, as we have seen, as valets and footmen. As the cahier of the tiers
etat de Troyes noted, it was scarcely satisfactory, either from the point of view
of agricultural production or from that of human dignity, that
un garcon robuste, d'une taille riche et avantageuse, approche-t-il de Fage fixe
pour subir le sort, sa famille s'empresse pour 1'y soustraire de decouvrir dans
la ville voisine, dans la capitale, la condition de quelque riche privilegie qui
croit rehausser son eclat en s'escortant de la livree fastueuse dont il couvre
ces hommes de la plus riche taille, hommes robustes, dont les forces sont perdues a jamais pour la terre qu'ils desertent. (41)
This last cry was repeated in one form or another all over the countryside, fearful
lest the loss of vigorous young workers result in the undercultivation and even
the premature abandonment of the land. The parishioners of Drugeac in the
southern Massif regretted that rural depopulation would surely follow in the
wake of the tirage. It was, they insisted, the King's job to provide for the defense
of the realm with the regular soldiers who were recruited in the normal fashion
to serve in his regiments:
La nation payant au Roy un subside pour entretenir, soulager, et recruter ses
troupes, les milices ne doivent point avoir lieu, cette levee de miliciens qui
sont presque toujours sans fonction et sans presque aucune solde ni entretien
12 / Conscripts and Deserters
desolent les families des laboureurs, causent 1'emigration et en consequence
Pinculture des biens. (42)
Driven by such considerations, some rural cahiers went so far as to suggest that
those engaged in agriculture should be exempted from service, and that the tirage should be restricted to "la classe des artistes et des domestiques non occupes
a la culture des terres." (43)
Of course, even in bad years, not all those whose numbers were drawn at the
tirage actually served in the militia. Money counted for a great deal, and the
right to buy oneself out by providing another man to serve in one's stead effectively guaranteed, as it would for much of the Revolution, that the richer farmers, the bourgeois in the towns, and the astute and the nantis, were never to be
found wasting years of their lives in the force. In many local communities the
obligation of local boys to serve was effectively removed by the simple device
of raising a bourse, levying an agreed sum of money from every household in
the village. Those who contributed would be exempted from participating in the
tirage and the money used to pay an indemnity to those unlucky enough to be
designated. In practice, however, this kind of arrangement was regarded with
intense dislike as an unjustified supplementary tax on local families, especially
on those families with adolescent boys. The parish of Tasse protested in its
cahier in 1789 that the scheme constituted a serious and unnecessary drain on
limited resources:
On a tolere cet usage et on ne pourrait avec justice I'empecher; chacun
est libre de faire de son argent Femploi qu'il juge a propos. Cependant cet
usage coute a chaque paroisse, chaque annee, environ 300 livres.... Ce
n'est pas trop que de porter a 20 millions par an la somme de cet impot
indirect. (44)
Furthermore, with the coming of the Revolution and the encouragement of
ideas of liberty and equality, the whole imposition that the militia had come to
represent was intensely resented, especially in the rural areas. Even in peacetime,
when the men chosen would not have to leave their villages or don their uniforms for war, their civil liberties were being infringed and a deep shadow was
cast across their lives for a six-year period. This sentiment is admirably
expressed by the tiers etat de Troyes:
Nous savons que celui que le sort de la milice a frappe ne quitte pas pour cela
ses foyers en temps de paix, et qu'il continue, presque sans interruption, a
vaquer aux travaux de 1'agriculture. Mais est-il libre? Espece de serf attache a
la glebe, il ne peut plus s'absenter sans permission, soumis a des inspections,
a des revues; il est prive, pendant six ans, du plus precieux de tous ses droits,
celui de s'associer une compagne de son choix. (45)
Opposition to the milice was soon caught up in the generalized claim of Frenchmen for the restitution of their civil liberties.
That opposition expressed itself as much through desertion and draft dodging as it did through protest and petition. In particular, the distaste of local peo-
The Problem and Its Context / 13
pie for militia service was demonstrated in the high rates of absenteeism with
which communities responded to the tirage. At Pezenas, Claude Achard relates,
the normal rate of insoumission expressed by absence on the day of the tirage
was between 2 and 8 percent; but when the local community was angered by the
extent of the army's demands, peasant boys would stay away in droves—32 percent in 1752, for example, and 41 percent in 1755 (46). In many parts of France
the idea of performing an act of personal military service was still very foreign
to the peasant mentality, which continued to believe that only voluntary enlistment was acceptable as the basis for a national army. The concept of personal
service, as Corvisier notes, found approval with none outside the ranks of the
bourgeoisie and the Enlightened reformers. In the countryside it proved especially unpopular, because there "il rencontre aussi bien Fopposition de ce qui
reste de 1'esprit feodal, que de la nouvelle conception de la vie fondee sur
Peconomie et Putilite publique" (47).
The rejection of militia service was just part of a growing dissatisfaction in
