French history and shocked European military opinion. The officer corps, based
on rank and privilege, had to be dismantled and replaced by a system of promotion that respected military and strategic ability. Some system of recruitment
had to be found that would end the humiliation of press-ganging and would
restore a measure of dignity and honor to the individual infrantryman. Given
the intense nationalism of the revolutionary cause, France had to end its high
dependence on foreign mercenaries, an obligation that became even more pressing after the King's Swiss Guards fired on the Paris crowd at the Tuileries in
1792. The army, in short, had to be transformed into an instrument of the state;
it was, of necessity, politicized by the very experience of revolution. By 1793 the
main elements of the new military strategy were largely in place, culminating in
the amalgame of the old line regiments with new volunteer units in DuboisCrance's demi-brigades of February of that year (62). The milicewas, predictably, abandoned in response to public opinion, and it was decreed 'hat France
should have an army of volunteers, of men burning with patriotic fervor who
The Problem and Its Context / 17
would willingly sacrifice themselves for liberty and the defense of the patrie. Officers whose loyalty was suspect were dismissed or retired, and new principles
were adopted for the selection of their successors. For sous-officiers or NCOs the
principle of election was enthusiastically adopted. In a revolutionary army it was
the men, the soldiers in the ranks, who would choose their own petty officers for
their patriotic commitment and their powers of leadership. As for the generals
and commanding officers, they would henceforth be directly chosen by the government, so that the Revolution could be assured that it was defended by men
who shared its ideals and who would be prepared to give their all in an ideological war against the monarchies of Europe. Politics, indeed, was assumed to be
an important element in the creation of military enthusiasm, a contribution to
the success of French arms in the early years of the revolutionary period. Soldiers were encouraged to discuss revolutionary strategy and to join revolutionary clubs; such was their right as free men. It was deemed that involvement in
the activity of clubs or popular sections would also contribute to the creation of
a determination and pride in their calling that had been noticeably lacking in
the regiments of the Ancien Regime. Political idealism could take over where
traditional discipline had been abandoned, for the cruel physical punishments
that had characterized the eighteenth-century army were also early casualties of
the reformers' attentions. The soldier of the Revolution enjoyed status and political freedoms denied to his Ancien Regime predecessor. He could hope to be
rewarded with a higher rate of pay and in return the state assumed that it could
depend on his loyalty in the difficult times that lay ahead.
These early reforms reflected the optimistic mood of France in 1792 and
1793, the zeal and legislative idealism of the early years of the Revolution. It
was an impressive achievement, and one which, it was hoped, would sweep
away the demoralized image of soldiering under the monarchy. For, idealism
aside, the principal aim of these measures was to create a dependable and effective army, to end the crisis of military discipline that had greeted the Revolution
in 1789, and to restore the country's faith in its soldiers. In 1791 the government
even agreed to grant amnesty to all those indicted for military offences since
1789—a measure that was seen as necessary if army morale were to be restored
and the damaging drain of desertion ended. In the words of Sam Scott,
Despite the problems of implementation, the National Assembly had legislated an impressive array of military reforms in the first two years of the Revolution. It had established full constitutional control over the Army. It had
dramatically improved conditions by increasing pay, reforming military justice, and changing the bases for promotion. It had carried out a major transformation of the organisational framework and tactics of the line army. (63)
In doing so, it should be added, whatever the derogatory responses that it
attracted from politicians and army officers in London and Vienna, it had laid
the foundations of the great victories of revolutionary arms at Valmy, Jemmapes, and beyond, and had changed the nature of European warfare irreversibly. The defense of France was now assigned not to the small, well-trained units
of the Ancien Regime regiments, but to massed armies that necessarily lacked
18 / Conscripts and Deserters
the skill of their predecessors in precise tactics and military formations. For this
reason the armies of 1793 and the Year II talked much of the value of patriotism
and elan (64). They could scarcely have done otherwise. The courage and bravura of the young volunteers were as much a product of ignorance in the ways
of war as they were a reflection of their patriotic fervor.
In the short term, in the heady days of 1792 and 1793 when they were fighting to defend la patrie en danger, there is little doubt that the soldiers were
inspired by the promise of new freedoms and encouraged by the heroic rhetoric
of the commissaires and deputies-on-mission sent to motivate them on the eve
of battle. Fetes civiques and patriotic ceremonials helped give visual substance
to the words of ministers and generals as the government made strenuous efforts
to politicize the military to create in the French battalions what Jean-Paul Bertaud has termed an "ecole du jacobinisme" (65). Enthusiasm in short staccato
bursts could provide a substitute for training and discipline. But as the war
dragged on and extended into new fronts and new campaigns, in particular when
it became clear to all that its purpose was aggressive and expansionist, that la
patrie was no longer en danger, patriotic enthusiasm began to wane and the need
for traditional military qualities became evident once more. The new officers
promoted through the ranks of the armies of 1793 and Year II combined political commitment with technical expertise: they were literate, skilled in military
tactics and maneuvers, and capable of detecting merit in others. In other words,
there was already a move away from the amateurish elitism of the old officer
corps, based on birth and status rather than on ability, and the beginning of a
drive to achieve professional excellence (66). Under the Directory professionalism was the clear winner, as the government relaxed its political control over
the armies and left effective decision making to its generals. For officers the army
was once more a source of status and profit, where promotion could be very
rapid, talent quickly rewarded, and the pickings very considerable. The soldiers
of Year VII were no longer the "defenseurs de la patrie et de la Republique" to
whom the Jacobins had appealed in the summer of Year II; instead they had
assumed a much more straightforward, professional role. The French army had
changed markedly since the time of the first volontaires and the nation en armes;
and in Albert Meynier's terse and diplomatic judgment, the difference was in
kind rather than in military effectiveness. Comparing the army that Napoleon
inherited with the battalions of the Year II, he notes that "elle ne lui etait pas
inferieure en qualite, mais elle etait autre" (67).
This is not to say that the army became wholly apolitical, or that youthful
patriotism ceased to play a part in the success of the Directorial or Napoleonic
campaigns. In fact, political cells remained active inside the armies long after
their civilian counterparts had been rooted out in France itself, and various former Jacobins made new careers for themselves in the service of the Emperor.
Marc-Antoine Jullien, for instance, who had carried out missions on Robespierre's behalf to Nantes and to Bordeaux during the Terror, followed Bonaparte's army to Italy in 1796 when anti-Jacobin repression made it inadvisable
for him to remain in metropolitan France, and he continued his radical career
in journalism by editing the Courrier de I'Armee d'ltalie from the relative safety
of Milan (68). But if political activism of this kind was tolerated in the armies,
The Problem and Its Context / 19
it no longer played any part in promotion or in military strategy; these matters
were left increasingly to professional soldiers, whose influence and status
increased as the wars became ever more extended. In the same way political
idealism played relatively little part in the motivation of the ordinary infantryman who served in Russia or the Peninsula. They saw themselves with increasing resignation in the role of mercenaries doing a job in return for pay. Nationalism, the dream of "la grande nation" so dear to historians of the First Empire,
had little appeal to those who were called on to fight in its name, and Jean
Tulard has remarked that this loss of faith and commitment on the part of the
French occurred at almost exactly the time (the opening up of the Spanish front)
when the war was beginning to excite popular nationalism elsewhere in Europe
(69). Military service in the Imperial armies was widely regarded as a corvee to
be endured, only rarely as an honor or a privilege, and Napoleon's apparently
insatiable appetite for conquest did nothing to dispel traditional distrust of the
recruiting-sergeant. The selfless idealism of Year II was soon squandered in the
long years of attrition that followed.
By the last years of the Empire there were few illusions. Even Napoleon himself seemed to realize the full extent of the change in attitude that had taken
place, and despite the quite remarkable rapport that he was able to establish with
those serving in his name, he seemed almost to share it. Manpower, after all,
was a commodity like any other, especially in wartime, and Napoleon's comments on his needs and his losses can seem shockingly callous. In 1805, after
annexing Liguria, he wrote in outraged tones to the new governor, rebuking him
for thinking of delaying or reducing the incidence of recruitment in his territory.
Without the bonus of extra bodies for the army and navy, he declared, there
would have been no point in moving into Liguria in the first place: "Je n'ai reuni
Genes que pour avoir des marins" (70). The need for additional troops became
one of the key driving forces behind Napoleon's expansionist policies as an
increasing proportion of the men serving in the armies were recruited from the
states he had already conquered. And soldiers were always replaceable. "J'ai cent
mille hommes de rente," boasted the Emperor after a costly reverse. Even more
chillingly, in a letter to Metternich in 1813, he expressed in a famous passage
his contempt for the detail of warfare, for the inevitable accompaniment of
human losses. "Un homme comme moi," he wrote, "ne regarde pas a un million
demorts"(71).
2
The Weight of Military Recruitment
IF FIGHTING a revolutionary war implied a new approach to army organization,
the sheer scale of the conflict demanded the recruitment of vast numbers of soldiers. The new tactics adopted, the use of massed infantry battalions on a grand
scale, and the rejection of foreign mercenaries as a means of pursuing a national
crusade all had the effect of creating an unparalleled demand for manpower. The
revolutionaries deliberately set out to create an army that represented the whole
people of France, an army that would more clearly mirror the idealism and egalitarian spirit of the revolutionary state. They believed that citizenship carried
with it duties and obligations as well as palpable benefits, and that the bearing
of arms for France was just such a duty, incumbent on every young Frenchman
