whose service the state might require. In consequence the demands of the
recruiting-officer were represented not as an intolerable burden (as they had been
in the aristocratic atmosphere of the Ancien Regime) but as an opportunity for
the young to play their part in establishing the revolution and in defending the
patrie from its ideological enemies. The result was a quite astonishing level of
militarization. During the revolutionary decade itself nearly one and one quarter
million Frenchmen were incorporated in the battalions. The levee en masse of
Year II created an army three-quarters of a million strong, and it was to restore
this strength that Jourdan recommended the systematic institution of conscription in Year VI (1). During the Empire the state's demands for soldiers became
more insatiable as Napoleon's armies stretched across Europe. Though exact statistics are unavailable, it is clear that between the introduction of conscription
in Year VII and the last desperate levies in November 1813 more than 2 million
men were recruited into the armies. Roger Darquenne has suggested a figure of
2,150,000; Jacques Houdaille more cautiously estimates it at 2,025,000. Of
young men born between 1790 and 1795, Houdaille calculates that 42.5 percent,
a staggeringly high figure, served in the rapacious armies of Napoleon's last years
(2). Over the whole period of the Revolution and Empire we must conclude that
between 3 and 3.5 million Frenchmen were incorporated in the military, and
20
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 21
that first-hand experience of soldiering became familiar to every family in
France.
The genuine idealism that lay behind the reforms to the army structure was
reflected in the insistence of the early years that all forms of compulsion were
unnecessary and a betrayal of revolutionary principle. There was general agreement that only voluntary inscription could produce the national army that
France required, and it was assumed that volunteers would be found to defend
France's frontiers just as volunteers had rushed to present themselves for service
in the National Guard in response to the various decrees passed in 1790 (3). This
assumption was rapidly put to the test. Both 1791 and 1792 saw appeals to the
young to volunteer to save the country from the threat that faced her, and not
surprisingly it was in 1791 that the response was more convincing, with department after department reporting that its battalions had been filled without difficulty and that its jeunes gens were burning with patriotic zeal. This was the
period when enthusiasm ran highest, especially in the weeks after the King's
flight to Varennes when popular anxiety was at its peak. But even Albert Soboul,
the most enthusiastic believer in the power of such political commitment, rightly
counsels caution. It was no accident that, at the very moment when the new
volunteer battalions were full to overflowing, the recruiting-officers for the line
regiments were complaining of a shortfall of 50,000 men, or that the volunteers
knew, or thought they knew, that their period of service was limited to a single
compaigning season, after which they fully expected to be restored to the routine
of village life (4). The rush to arms could just as easily be explained by hunger
as by patriotism (5). For many there was still a sort of innocence about volunteering that would soon vanish once hostilities were declared. There was still
something unreal about the idea of fighting, and few of the new recruits had any
notion of the realities of warfare. Like young Philippe-Rene Girault, who volunteered as a musician in 1791, the inspiration to leave home and offer himself
to the armies might have had little to do with politics or with soldiering. As he
explains in his campaign memoirs, chance and boredom played the largest part
in his decision:
Entre au chapitre de Sainte-Radegonde de Poitiers, comme enfant de choeur,
a Fage de quatre ans et demi, j'y restai pendant plus de dix ans. La revolution
vint, et comme les chapitres etaient supprimes, on me renvoya. Mon pere,
qui etait tailleur de pierre, me fit travailler avec lui. Le metier ne me plut pas,
et je resolus bientot de quitter ma famille et de me faire soldat. Mais, ayant
communique mon dessein a mes parents, ils me deciderent a rester encore
quelque temps au milieu d'eux. Cependant, au bout de quelques jours,
comme je m'ennuyais beaucoup, je pris la resolution de partir sans rien dire.
Un matin, me trouvant seul, je prends mon paquet, quelque argent, et je me
mets en route pour La Rochelle. (6)
Others again rushed to embark on what they assumed would be a brief and glorious adventure, and their inscription, offered in the first flush of revolutionary
liberty, was not a little tinged with the spirit of a village fete.
The volunteer battalions that were recruited in 1791 represent the clearest
instance of enthusiasm and popular involvement in the military effort. In some
22 / Conscripts and Deserters
areas officials were themselves surprised by the large numbers of recruits who
presented themselves and by the patriotism that they demonstrated. The ideal
of a citizen army seemed to be in the process of taking a practical shape. As yet
enthusiasm was not confined to any single class or section of the population,
although it was in the towns that the response was most gratifying and among
the peasantry that resistance was most prevalent. In general, the recruits came
from the artisan groups in society rather than from the ranks of the farmers and
farm laborers, from what Bertaud terms "le monde de 1'echoppe et de la boutique" (7). But urban France was still widely represented with bourgeois and
professional men figuring among the new recruits as well as tradesmen and shopkeepers. At Aurillac, for instance, among the tailleurs, cordonniers, and chaudronniers, trades that had a fairly consistent patriotic record, were a sprinkling of
recruits from commerce and the liberal professions: an homme de lot, a bourgeois, a chirurgien, and four of the clerks working at the Palais de Justice (8).
Mayors were entitled to feel encouraged by the names they found inscribed once
the lists were opened in town halls and sectional offices up and down France.
Yet even in 1791 there were already certain unhappy signs that even in the first
flush of revolutionary enthusiasm the voluntary principle was not proving quite
equal to the country's military needs. The response was far from being evenly
spread across the country, and the old distinctions between areas of military
tradition and areas of insoumission were making themselves felt. Paris, always
the most patriotic of cities, responded with predictable conviction as did the
frontier departments of the East, like the Meurthe and the Marne. But elsewhere
the response was less encouraging. If the Meurthe provided five battalions, the
Indre-et-Loire and the Vienne managed only one each; certain inland departments of the Massif Central and Aquitaine were exempted altogether; and a few
areas of which there were high expectations, especially in Alsace and in the
Breton departments of Finistere and the C6tes-du-Nord, failed to come close to
their agreed targets (9). Even parts of the traditionally militarized Ile-de-France
could prove intractable. Annie Crepin, in her study of the Seine-et-Marne, notes
that enthusiasm tended to fade in cantons farther removed from the great urban
centers where regular contact with Paris was assured. Hamlets like Lizy-surOurcq and La Ferte-Gaucher, for example, were already showing in 1791 a
marked reluctance to volunteer, their inscription lists remaining open for several
weeks before names could be found. And in many cantons the concept of volunteers was already somewhat imprecise, with mayors eagerly accepting the
names of men who had only recently moved into the area, vagrants and petty
criminals, and men who did not enjoy sound health or who had physical disabilities, or those who could not hope to meet the basic height requirements (10).
More significantly, not all the volunteers showed any disposition to march with
the army; some of the municipal councils were themselves still under the
impression that the young men who came forward were volunteering not for real
soldiering but for service in the community with the National Guard (11).
When the government tried to repeat the process in the spring of 1792 and
called on men's patriotism a second time, the shortcomings of the voluntary
principle became sadly evident. The reported rush of young men toward their
mairies or town halls in 1791 was seldom repeated. In part this may be explained
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 23
by a greater professionalism among the recruiters, by a refusal to accept boys of
fifteen or old men of sixty five years of age for military service, as had occurred
in the Meurthe the previous year (12). In general, however, it reflected a decline
in enthusiasm and a drying-up of the supply of politically committed men who
could be relied on to respond. This should have surprised nobody since the
majority of those eligible to serve in 1792 had been equally eligible a year earlier
and the patriots among them were already on the frontiers. Areas with strong
military traditions, like Versailles, were still able to find men willing to serve,
among them former professional soldiers from the Ancien Regime regiments
and Swiss Guards anxious to continue in the only profession they knew. But
even here it was remarkable how many of the new volunteers were outsiders to
the area, men who had drifted to the Seine-et-Oise in the recent past in search
of work and who were now drifting rather aimlessly into service with the armies.
Among the 286 volunteers who signed on in the district of Versailles, for
instance, were men from more than half the departments of the hexagone,
besides a handful of immigrants from abroad (13). Need rather than patriotism
may be assumed to lie at the root of many decisions to serve, and regions of the
country where there was no established tradition of soldiering might not even
be able to rely on the force of need. The Cantal was one department where by
1792 the opening of a communal register for volunteers provided no guarantee
that anyone would step forward, and in village after village mayors were forced
to admit that they had failed to find a single soldier. This was the case in Lascelles and Laroquevieille, Salers and Saignes, Apchon and Les Arbres (14).
Where men were found, a high proportion came from the main town and relatively few from the outlying hamlets. Of the 600 volunteers who were formed
into the First Battalion of the Cantal in July, well over half were provided by
the towns, a curious record for one of the most rural areas of the country. The
pattern was remarkably consistent. In the district of Aurillac, 170 of the 250
volunteers came from Aurillac itself and a further 43 from the town of Maurs;
in the district of Mauriac 28 of the 58 recruits were from the chef-lieu; and in
the district of Saint-Flour 97 of 156 came from Saint-Flour (15). At Montsalvy
in March of 1792 the demand for volunteers was already creating the sort of
response that would become familiar later in the Revolution, with rioting by the
local population and the seizure of communal papers relating to the previous
year's recruitment. As a result, the mayor could only report rather weakly that
not a single volunteer had been found, and that, in the circumstances, he thought
it extremely unlikely that any would. In his own words, "nous voyons avec peine
que notre ville soit hors d'etat de donner des plus grandes marques de patriotisme, surtout dans le moment qui semble Fexiger le plus" (16). It would be hard
to imagine a response more unlike the enthusiasm shown by the people of Paris
when the patrie was declared to be "en danger" and when the recruiting-officers
