

CONSCRIPTS
AND

DESERTERS

Deserters and insoumis as a percentage of persons conscripted from 
Year VII to Year XIII (according to Hargenviller's figures).
1
The Problem and Its Context
BETWEEN THE DECLARATION of hostilities against Austria in 1792 and Napoleon's
final debacle in 1814 France remained almost continuously at war, frequently
standing alone against coalitions of the other great powers of Europe. Nor were
these ordinary wars to be compared with those of the eighteenth century. For
the French in this period were impelled not merely by the desire for limited
conquest but by new and more ideological impulses. Nationalism and revolutionary zeal mingled in the 1790s to form a heady and dangerous cocktail.
France believed, and her leaders preached in the incessant propaganda of the
Revolutionary years, that this war was about absolutes of good and evil, that the
people were fighting a war for liberty and against tyranny, for their revolution
against the reimposition of monarchical absolutism. The conflict was not just
between two armies but between two political systems, and such a war could not
be settled amicably by the agreed exchange of plots of territory or by the cession
of colonial possessions. It was widely believed that it could end only in the
defeat of one political system by its enemies, in the spread of revolution across
the whole of Europe, or in the forcible reimposition of the Bourbons on the
French people by the victorious monarchies. The evidence of contemporaries
makes it very clear that this vision of an ideological war between two irreconcilable systems is not the invention of historians and political scientists looking
back on the period from the vantage point of the twentieth century. Brissot was
perhaps the most voluble of the many members of the Convention who believed
that the Revolution had the choice between being expansionist and being
destroyed. The Declaration of Pillnitz and the Brunswick Manifesto left little
doubt that the Austrians would push home the advantage of any victory by
reimposing the absolute rule of Louis XVI on a defeated France. The carnage of
the September Massacres bears tragic witness to the level of fear in Paris that
such threats were on the point of being implemented. Under Napoleon the messianic idealism of the early years of the Revolution had certainly faded, and the
thirst for liberty had given way to more traditional, imperialistic ambition; how3
4 / Conscripts and Deserters
ever, the extent of that ambition posed a threat to the stability and security of
the rest of Europe, and the Allied powers were unlikely to be satisfied by a victory that did not also overthrow France's internal political institutions. Napoleon's prestige, too, was so tightly bound up in the successes of French arms
abroad that foreign conquest became the consuming goal of his reign. However
awesome the cost in men and materials, winning the war remained the principal
aim of the state throughout the Revolutionary and Napoleonic years.
It also demanded the build-up of state power and pretension to a degree
unparalleled in the previous history of modern Europe. The scale of the war had
the ineluctable effect of increasing the role that the state had to play in the lives
of the French people: organizing billets, policing the passage of troops, requisitioning foodstuffs, ordering carters and wheelwrights into the service of the
armies, organizing the collection of saltpetre and the manufacture of guns, finding uniforms to clothe the troops, directing the distribution of supplies, and persuading farmers to part with mules and horses. All these tasks were essential to
the success of the military effort, yet all required innovation and change in the
traditional role of the state and the traditional expectations of the people. All
were liable to be resented as unwarranted intrusions into the accepted balance
of local society. Yet they all paled into relative insignificance compared to the
problems implicit in recruiting millions of young Frenchmen for military service—a level of recruitment unknown to previous generations and widely
resented as an attack on the liberties of local communities. Military demands on
this scale brought with them a sharp increase in the policing and regimentation
of civilian society. They also brought to a head the opposition of local people to
the demands of the center, sparking off revolts and resistance on an unprecedented scale. Especially after the introduction of annual conscription in Year
VII, the issue of recruitment divided French opinion like no other, moulding
attitudes and mentalities in provincial France and going far to explain the reaction of Frenchmen to the new order of the Napoleonic regime.
For this reason, the scope of this book is not limited to the relatively narrow
field of military recruitment and of the resistance that it caused, but looks at the
implications of that resistance for government and administration, especially in
the villages and hamlets of rural France where opposition to the draft was often
most intense. It was not just the success of the armies that was at stake, but the
credibility of the nation-state. Reports from government commissaires and prefects expressed constant anxiety that the entire fabric of French society would
be eroded and saw in the recruitment issue a dangerous lever by which enemies
of France might hope to destroy confidence and undermine public order. The
majority of the population was in no sense counterrevolutionary by instinct;
rather they were portrayed as being easily swayed by temptation and seduction,
poorly educated and politically naive, a ready prey to the cunning insinuations
of men better informed and more ruthless than themselves. But the military
question exposed them to such approaches, since for many Frenchmen the service demanded by the government quickly assumed the guise of a new and
unwelcome corvee, a tax in blood to a distant and impersonal master, imposed
in the name of a national cause that they understood only in the dimmest terms
(1). In Year IV the Directory's commissaire in Pau summed up the feelings of
The Problem and Its Context / 5
many of his colleagues when he reported that the main danger facing the government lay in the apathy and the lack of political concern that was widespread
in the countryside of the Southwest. It was this which made the majority such
easy game for extremists:
L'esprit public se compose de quatre parties plus ou moins opposes. Le plus
nombreux et le moins puissant est forme de ces hommes faibles de moyens,
faibles de caractere, toujours irresolus, toujours tremblants. Us aiment la Constitution mais ne peuvent encore croire a leur bonheur: ils ne peuvent croire
a la stabilite et au maintien de cette liberte douce et aimable qu'elle leur procure, et leur imagination pusillanime leur fait sans cesse redouter la sanglante
reaction de la royaute ou de 1'anarchie. (2)
In rural France especially, public opinion often consisted of such people, confused by politics, reassured by their traditional ways, fearful that these traditions
would be disrupted by the ambitions of the government in Paris. And for many
nothing in those tumultuous years seemed as unsettling and disruptive as the
fear that they would be removed from their communities by government order
and forced to serve as soldiers in the revolutionary or Napoleonic armies.
Such was the context that most commonly produced a problem of resistance,
which would in turn lead to conflict between civil and military society and
between the local community and the state. Of course it could be pointed out,
and with some justice, that there was much in this context that was in no way
novel, that was taken for granted by the state and the citizenry alike. Michel
Auvray, in his book on desertion and conscientious objection, is right to stress
that the refusal of military service is an age-old problem that affected the Roman
Empire as it did the European armies of the two world wars. In World War I,
indeed, the French army was more prone than its neighbors to shoot deserters
as an example to others. Faced with mutinies and mass desertions, especially in
1917, the military turned to repression to reimpose the authority of the officers
and, through them, the authority of the state (3). Where Auvray's interpretation
is less relevant for the eighteenth century is in the importance he attaches to the
role of objecteurs, of those who, through a commitment to pacifism or a principled rejection of killing, refused to become soldiers and accepted whatever consequences the state might reserve for them with apparent equanimity. The objecteur, the man of conscience, emerged in the nineteenth rather than the
eighteenth century, in the English armies of the Boer War and throughout the
continent between 1914 and 1918 (4). In the period that concerns us, those
rejecting military obligation would seem to have acted from more prosaic
motives, for there is no evidence that pacifism had taken a hold on the French
peasant mind of the Ancien Regime or had been inculcated by the belligerent
nationalism of the Revolution. In the hundreds of depositions made to tribunals
and the numerous interrogations that accompanied the trials of deserters and
insoumis, there is nothing to suggest a resistance rooted in a principled opposition to war. Rather the eighteenth-century deserter acted out of traditionalism,
from a well-founded suspicison of the effects of the war on his conservative rural
lifestyle. In no sense can he be called a radical for his act of rebellion or defiance.
6 / Conscripts and Deserters
To this extent the role of the refractory after 1790 was little different from
that of his counterpart under the Ancien Regime. Eighteenth-century generals
complained continually of the losses of manpower that they suffered as a result
of desertion, and not even the threat of the most savage punishments, including
running the gauntlet and lengthy terms in the galleys, provided a real deterrent
(5). In periods of war the death sentence had been imposed as a routine penalty,
and even in peacetime anxious governments had resorted to capital sentences.
As recently as 1716 a royal ordonnance had attempted to stave off a crisis in the
army by reinstituting the death penalty, generally by hanging, for men convicted
of desertion. In accordance with the terms of this ordinance, those found guilty
of deserting in foreign countries were to be pendus et etrangles, while men deserting inside France who had not, in consequence, placed their fellows at risk were
to be given some hope of survival. Where one soldier had deserted on his own,
the court had the discretion to impose a death sentence or not, as it might elect;
where several men were involved in the same incident, they were made to draw
lots in groups of three to determine which of the three must die (6). If such
measures were intended to deter, there is little evidence that they bore fruit.
Indeed, it is arguable that the very severity of army life in the Ancien Regime
and the callous disregard shown by officers for the welfare of their men contributed significantly to the desertion rate. Soldiering was poorly esteemed by the
population at large, and enlightened opinion treated the individual fantassin,
infantryman, with open contempt. In Candide Voltaire drew a picture of the
massed armies of Europe as being composed of the dregs of their respective societies, of "un million d'assassins enregimentes courant d'un bout a Fautre de
PEurope," assuaging their appetite for pillage and banditry. In the pages of the
Encyclopedic the infantryman of the French royal armies is similarly
maligned—an object of scorn and pity to be compared only to the lowest rabble,
"la canaille, parce qu'elle est a meilleur marche" (7). This is overharsh, and
Andre Corvisier concludes that whereas the bourgeoisie and the intelligentsia
