numero in the ballot could purchase the services of others to serve in their stead.
Again there was nothing new about this practice which dated from 1758, but it
seemed to many Jacobins in particular to constitute a dangerous breach of the
most fundamental principles of citizenship. Carnot, for instance, on mission to
the Nord in 1793, argued cogently against it on the grounds that it encouraged
a squalid "commerce d'hommes" and that it had "decompose, decomplete les
bataillons" and put the safety of the Republic at risk (86). Yet the practice was
accepted with only a brief intermission at the time of the levee en masse throughout the revolutionary decade, with the proviso that replacements were allowed
58 / Conscripts and Deserters
on an individual basis only and for those who provided them before the tirage.
The Loi Jourdan made no provision for replacement with the result that the first
recruits of Year VII were denied this option, but the omission did not last for
more than a few months and some form of replacement was available for conscripts throughout virtually the entire Napoleonic period. From Year VII men
of the second and third classes of the conscription were allowed to offer replacements; from the following year the practice was again generalized. Subsequent
legislation alternated between a liberal system of replacement whereby anyone
with the money could buy himself out by finding a man to serve in his place,
without restriction beyond the requirement that he be of sound health and military age and a much more restrictive system known as substitution, which
insisted that the man hired to serve had to come from the same commune and
even from the same classe. The government was groping toward a compromise
formula that would allow the rich to buy their sons out of active service while
protecting the army from the ill effects of a vulgar trafficking in men (87). The
Law of 8 fructidor XIII finally offered a definitive ruling on the matter, laying
down the principle that replacement was a right and not a personal favor. It was
enshrined in a highly bureaucratized legal framework, however. The suppleant
had to be found locally and from within the department, and had to provide
evidence of physical fitness, conform to the army's height qualification, and be
the bearer of a conge absolu, since the administration had to be assured that
replacement did not involve the double service of men already conscripted (88).
Once these conditions were satisfied, the government saw no reason to interfere
in a simple commercial arrangement between two of its citizens. From Year VIII
the form of the contract was standardized, with the two parties obliged to draw
up an acte devant notaire in front of the local lawyer (89). In addition, after 1809
the scope of replacements was extended further when men posted to the reserve
were allowed to sell their services to those of their comrades marked down for
active service (90).
The most persistent criticism leveled against the whole system of replacements was that it was, yet again, a device that favored the rich. By the later
Empire the moneyed classes were more and more desperate to buy their sons
out of the army, and there was bitter resentment that the poor were increasingly
denied this option, that their fate was determined by the number they drew at
the ballot, and by the sums of money dangled before them as inducements to
serve. The cost of a replacement was, of course, fixed by the market, and Jean
Vidalenc suggests that it represented the equivalent of between eighteen months'
and ten years' income for a poor peasant or agricultural laborer (91). The extent
of price fluctuations from one year to another is well illustrated by the figures
that Alain Maureau has extracted from the notarial records of one provincial
city, Avignon (92). The widespread belief that the end of fighting was in sight
was clearly the major factor explaining the exceptional decrease in prices
between Year VIII and Year X, while the pessimism that accompanied the massive extension of the war effort is reflected in the spiraling cost of remplacement
after Year XIV. Against that backcloth the demand for remplagants proved insatiable, and if the rich could buy themselves out almost as a matter of course,
even families of more modest means were sometimes prepared to make massive
sacrifices to keep their sons on the farm. In some country regions, indeed, it was
The Extent of Evasion / 59
Cost of Remplac.ants in Avignon from Year VIII to 1814
Year
Year VIII
Year IX
YearX
Year XI
Year XII
Year XIII
Year XIV
1806
1807
1808
1809
1810
1811
1812
1813
1814
Average Price
548 francs
416
192
541
1,074
2,050
2,100
2,880
3,110
4,100
5,167
(two contracts only,
4,437
4,181
4,900
4,509
Highest Price
800 francs
650
-
800
1,920
2,200
2,500
4,000
3,950
6,300
10,000
at 5,600 francs and 600
6,500
6,100
8,000
6,500
Lowest Price
432 francs
100
-
380
336
1,800
1,450
1,500
1,000
3,000
3,800
francs)
1,200
1,200
2,400
2,000
not always possible to detect a wide divergence of income between the man seeking a replacement and the man he equipped for service. In Avignon Maureau
found 115 cultivateurs among those buying replacements and 146 among the
replacements they bought; he also cites one man who bought a replacement in
1811 for 1,400 francs, then after some difficult economic setbacks allowed himself to be bought in his turn in 1813 for the inflated sum of 5,550 francs (93). In
the Drome the pregnant wife of a conscript from the village of Lens-Lestang,
afraid that the loss of her husband would reduce her to penury, signed away her
entire property to a young man from the Isere who was willing to leave for the
regiment (94). Police records show how often traveling artisans found the money
needed to buy themselves out of the army before they set out on their seasonal
circuit; and such was the desire of parents to secure the freedom of their children
that even the very young might be encouraged to make prudent provision for
their future:
C'est ainsi que dans la Mayenne les enfants mettaient des leur jeune age les
menus profits que leur rapportait la cueillette des fruits sauvages, des fleurs
ou des champignons, pour se constituer les filles une dot, les garcons de quoi
payer un remplacant. (95)
The degree of dependence on remplacement naturally varied dramatically
from one part of France to another, reflecting both the enthusiasm for soldiering
among potential mercenaries and the level of prosperity in the area. A department like the Moselle or the Pas-de-Calais, where the economy was relatively
robust and the habit of soldiering solidly engrained, predictably produced a sizable quota of remplagants. In Year VIII when the practice was again officially
condoned, the army's lists of soldiers sent out from Arras to join their regiments
show that there was often a majority of remplagants among them (96). In such
areas the appetite for liberal legislation was considerable, and replacement on
60 / Conscripts and Deserters
the most untrammeled basis was seen to be in the interests of the community.
Thus the subprefect of Saint-Jean-d'Angely arguing against any narrow definition of a substitut painted a bleak picture of its likely social effects. Affluent farmers useful to their communities would be forced to abandon the land, whereas
the law would maintain in their villages "des oisifs, des gens sans ressources et
sans famille qui chercheront des moyens de subsistance dans Fescroquerie, le
bringandage" (97); however, such an image of remplacement could apply only
in relatively wealthy towns and villages. In poorer areas there was little opportunity to seek replacements and for many peasants, especially in remote mountain communes, desertion might seem a more obvious course. It is significant
that two of the most troublesome departments for the recruiting-officer, the Cantal and the Ariege, produced two of the lowest rates of replacement, even compared with relatively dutiful areas like the Seine-et-Oise or the Vosges. Where
deserters were left relatively undisturbed in their villages, there was little incentive to pay for a remplagant. At Crest in the Drome, another conscription blackspot, the issue of replacement was not even mentioned when the recruitment
meetings were held (98).
What sort of men agreed to sell themselves to the army as replacements for
their more fortunate compatriots? It might seem likely that they would be
among the most vulnerable members of society, drawn from the ranks of the
unemployed and the more marginal peasants, but this was not always the case.
In fact, where we know the occupations of these men it is striking how accurately
they reflected the occupational range of the community as a whole. In the Vosges
during 1813, the only year for which the register is complete, we discover that
of 109 remplafants figuring in notarial contracts, 35 were laborers (manoeuvres)
and 19, rather imprecisely, cultivateurs; along with 6 vignerons they were the
only ones to be specifically engaged in farming activity. On the other hand, the
list includes a rich mixture of artisanal jobs from tailors and shoemakers to sawyers and stonemasons. Two were former soldiers, 2 blacksmiths, weavers and
locksmiths and clockmakers, and, adding a touch of local color, 2 luthiers from
the violin-making capital of Mirecourt (99). Between October 1813 and March
1814 the 82 replacements provided in the district of Aurillac also included a
wide range of craftsmen as well as peasants and laborers. Again nonagricultural
occupations were in the majority, but it is the breadth of occupational range not
its narrowness that is striking—the poellier and verrier, chaudronnier and vinaigrier who offered their services alongside the more predictable cultivateurs, journaliers, and tisserands. Former soldiers who had not settled easily into civilian
life seemed keen to rejoin. In this sample, 6 retired soldiers and 1 who had been
granted his reforme came forward a second time. Just as noteworthy is the geographical range on which Aurillac could draw, for the insistence on local origins
had long been abandoned. Of the 82 men in the sample, 35 came from outside
the Cantal, 15 from the Lot, 7 from the Puy-de-D6me, 6 from the Correze, and
1 each from the Aveyron, Lozere, Rhone, Saone-et-Loire, and, remarkably, the
C6tes-du-Nord (100). While the lure of very substantial sums of money provided their primary motive, adventurism and the desire to escape from the boredom of village life would also seem to have driven some of these young men to
offer themselves to the army. By 1812 and 1813 so many of their friends were
The Extent of Evasion / 61
in uniform that for many youngsters there seemed little point in staying behind.
After twenty years all they knew was war, and the annual conscription had
become part of the routine of growing up. For them, even after the horrors of
the Moscow campaign or of the Peninsula, the armies would seem to have lost
their terror; soldiering, for some at least of that generation born in 1793 and
Year II, must have seemed a natural outlet for the enthusiasms of adolescence.
Therefore even in these most tragic last years of the war, some young Frenchmen
could still be found as remplaqants, at a price.
In a country where so many people were weary of war and where large numbers of conscripts marched unwillingly to their battalions, the enthusiasm of
some at least of the remplagants could only be welcome to the government. The
acceptance of remplacement and its subsequent extension was a pragmatic step
to improving the caliber of an army in which any pretence of voluntarism had
long since died. Many communes, fearful of the effects of continuing conscription on public opinion, had argued in favor of replacement either as a small step
