causing particular alarm in view of the proximity of the Swiss frontier (92).
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 37
There is considerable evidence, moreover, that towns and villages that had been
noted for the level of their resistance to the levees of 1793 often greeted the new
conscription with undisguised hostility. The total level of violence in Year VII
came nowhere close to that of 1793, but there was still violence. At Quinsac in
the Gironde, which had earned a certain local notoriety by its previous conduct,
the young men of the canton banded together and defied the government commissaire to force them to leave. They took oaths among themselves, vowing that
not one of them would serve, and promising that they would add strength to
their cause by seeking support from neighboring communes (93). More seriously, the troublesome village of Escalquens in the Haute-Garonne staged a
major clash between villagers and gendarmes over the new conscription laws, a
clash that saw some 400 or 500 young men (if police estimates are to be believed)
united by a common determination to resist the new law and prepared to go to
any lengths to protect their liberty. In the ensuing battle the lieutenant in charge
of the gendarmes was shot dead and five of his men were seriously wounded,
leading to an intensive police search of the surrounding woodlands and to the
forcible disarming of the villagers (94). Trouble on this scale was exceptional,
but Escalquens was one of a number of communes that gave evidence in Year
VII of a deeply engrained tradition of insubordination over matters of military
recruitment, a tradition that was not to be dissipated by the alleged virtues of
the system of conscription.
These virtues were not, in any case, immediately evident. The implementation of the Loi Jourdan depended essentially on the drawing-up of accurate, upto-date tableaux of those liable for service, which was a new and daunting task
for an administration still understaffed and uncertain of its responsibilities. In
the Herault, for instance, ten months passed between the date of the promulgation of the decree and that when the last of the fifty-eight cantons had sent in its
returns; in the following year, when the process was more familiar, there were
still long and damaging delays (95). Throughout the Empire there were continued reports of administrative failure and bureaucratic incompetence, often
caused by overlapping jurisdictions and inadequate records. The correction of
errors in the conscription lists remained an important part of the recruitment
process, and one which caused local officials hours of research and formfilling.
Simple mistakes had to be corrected and changes of address notified before the
conscription could proceed. At Salers in the Cantal, the tableau for the classe of
1806 was found to contain twenty-eight errors of various kinds, and the canton
was obliged to provide as much information as it could obtain from both official
sources and local gossip. Four of the twenty-eight were dead—one, unsurprisingly for a lad from this part of the Auvergne, while doing seasonal work in
Madrid six years previously; an illegitimate boy had disappeared from the commune and no one knew anything of his whereabouts; three had moved away
from the area after the death of their parents; one had spent four years in the
dragoons, and another worked for the naval administration in Brest; twenty had
moved with their families to other villages and were no longer liable to conscription in Salers (96). These cases were highly typical and illustrate the Pandora's
box of confusion that was opened up for local officials by the new law. There
were clear instances of mistaken identity that passed unnoticed, like Guillaume
38 / Conscripts and Deserters
Toueilles from Penne in the Lot-et-Garonne, condemned for being refractory
though he had already drawn the previous year; or poor Antoine Martinet,
arrested for desertion in 1806 when he had not been drafted in the first place. In
this case the prefect was forced to admit that such confusions did arise from time
to time, given that so many people in local villages had the same names (97).
The sources of potential confusion were manifold. Men absent from their homes
to find work would have two possible addresses and faced the possibility of being
called up twice (98). Careless spelling on death certificates or the noting of the
wrong Christian name on marriage records provided mayors and commissaires
with added problems in identifying those liable to serve (99). The constant
movement of the sick and wounded from one hospital to another behind the
war fronts made administrative errors the more likely (100). Men sometimes
changed regiment (101) and less frequently went through the legal procedure of
changing their name (102). The inevitable result was confusion, wrongful arrest,
and considerable frustration both on the part of the hapless officials and of the
public at large. Their frustration was only increased by the fact that in several
areas civilian and military officials were using very different figures as the basis
of their calculations, and departments found their honest efforts rewarded by
stinging rebukes from the generals and the Minister of War (103).
If conscription did not solve the considerable administrative problems of
earlier recruitments, nor did it dissolve fears of discriminatory treatment and
allegations of unfairness. Throughout the period there were few more powerful
stimuli to popular anger than the belief that the burden of service was not
equally shared. Resentment of conscription could be so easily confused with
envy of others on whom the demands of the state fell more lightly. And though
the conscription law was devised to reduce to the minimum the element of favor
in the selection of the troops, exemptions and replacement remained major
sources of grievance. A poor conscript who could not contemplate the purchase
of a remplagant, Bernard Coton wrote angrily in Year VII about an abuse that
he saw as a betrayal of the entire principle of the revolutionary army. He was,
he said, proud to serve his country, so much so that he intended to enroll voluntarily rather than submit to the ballot, and yet he was bitter about those who
quite legally hid in the safety of their homes:
Je vais verser mon sang pour la liberte et Fegalite: rentrant vainquant dans
mes foyers, avec quel plaisir verrai-je en place cette classe privilegiee de conscrits auxquels il a etc permis de se faire remplacer avec de 1'argent. Dans un
etat republicain il ne doit pas y avoir deux poids et deux mesures ... (104)
Similarly those enjoying exemptions because of the offices they held were often
envied by their fellow villagers, especially those who had deliberately sought the
safety of reserved occupations to avoid being conscripted. The number of these
positions itself occasioned anger, and in isolated instances that anger turned into
popular protest. Such was the opportunity for the well-to-do, those able to read
and write and those with influential connections to gain employment in local
government service, that the poor could still be persuaded that only they were
being expected to serve. In the rural canton of Feignies in the Nord, for instance,
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 39
the commissaire noted that conscription was being hampered and good will lost
because "les citoyens aises restent dans leurs foyers sans etre inquietes ni meme
portes sur aucun etat de requisition ni de conscription" (105). In the HauteGaronne a minor conscription riot in Year VII was blamed on the favors showered on the wealthier conscripts, on the discouragement of the others by "tant
de preferences accordees a de plus fortunes qu'eux, qui ont su se soustraire aux
coups en se placant dans les bureaux et en faisant la service aupres d'un bon feu
et de la bonne chair" (106). In the first year of the new law there were even
occasional hints from far-flung rural communes that they were being penalized
to the advantage of more urban areas. Gif in the Seine-et-Oise felt especially
aggrieved when several of its young men were denounced by the canton of Jouy
for failing to sign on when they were called and were subsequently placed "en
tete du tableau." The mayor pointed out that it was hardly their fault, as they
had turned up on the alloted day and declared their names at the mairie, before
returning home thinking that they had done all that was required of them (107).
But Jouy was pressing home its advantage in the hope of filling its conscription
obligations with ignorant and ill-informed countrymen, and to the people of Gif
this was a clear instance of the local town pulling rank and insisting on a high
level of sacrifice from those less educated than themselves. Suspicions of those
with money, with influence, close to administrative channels and in towns, these
were not just anachronistic throwbacks to the early recruitment experiments of
1793 but were ineradicable elements in village psychology. It is a tribute to the
men who enforced the Loi Jourdan in the districts and cantons that these complaints were few and that they tended to die out as the conscription procedures
became better known and understood.
What did remain a source of grievance throughout the Empire was the belief
that conscription was geographically unequal and that some communities were
expected to provide a disproportionately large number of men. In theory, of
course, the weight of conscription was equally distributed across the country,
divided by department in accordance with official population statistics; nothing
could have been more equitable. For the conscription of Year VIII, for instance,
when the needs of the government were light, the quota from each department
was found by dividing its population by 805 to provide the number of conscripts; in other years the number would be much higher (108). But in practice
the levels of sacrifice seemed very different, and there were constant complaints
that these aggregate population statistics were much too crude an instrument for
the calculations being built on them. Two prefects, in Bordeaux and in Vannes,
explained in some detail why their departments were especially resentful. The
prefect of the Gironde believed that the population base applied to his department was about one-third higher than it ought to be; while his colleague in the
Morbihan claimed that the assessment of 425,485 used by the ministry should
be reduced to 393,665 for conscription purposes. Their reasoning was clear and
convincing. Until Year XIII no allowance was made in the calculations for the
fact that coastal departments and those with substantial river trade were also
providing men for the navy. Yet the numbers involved could be considerable.
In the Gironde in Year XII 30,000 men were reserved for naval service, many
of them signing on before their twentieth birthday, directly reducing the pool
40 / Conscripts and Deserters
from which the department's military conscription was drawn. Even after Year
XIII, when account was taken of this naval contribution, the prefect of the Morbihan could complain that the Minister of War was underestimating the numbers savagely, by merely taking the naval classement and multiplying it by four
to obtain the quota for the army. The population of the Morbihan, he protested,
did not conform to such a crassly mechanistic law. Given the large size of rural
families in the Basse-Bretagne, a factor of six would be more accurate, while in
time of war the manning of warships consumed almost all the men classes in
the area and made coastguard service onerous and time-consuming (109). This
was only one variable among many of which no account seemed to be taken in
Paris. There were, claimed the prefect of the Gironde, 145 (of 583) communes
in his department where men were congenitally small and feeble, "une race
