back towards an army of volunteers or as a means of exempting citizens illsuited to the military life and valuable to the economy of the local community.
The village of Fontaine-au-Bois near Landrecies made exactly this point when
petitioning for greater freedom in arranging replacements, urging the government to accept that there was such a thing as "degout" for military service and
suggeting that too much energy was being devoted to policing those who did not
cooperate. They insisted that unwilling soldiers would not be effective soldiers:
"il y a tres peu a pretendre de ceux qu'il faut conduire enchaines aux bataillons"
(101). Seen in this light, replacement assumes the role of the most important of
the outlets available to those eager to escape, outlets that include medicals and
reserved occupations and naval classement. It had the supreme advantage of
being within the law at least during the Empire and relatively unambivalent;
once the expense of finding another man to fight had been incurred, the conscript could feel secure in his civilian role. Only if the remplayant failed to perform the service demanded of him, if he deserted the ranks or was absent without leave, only then was there a danger that the original conscript would be
called on to make another sacrifice. For this reason it was always a popular
option with the richer members of the community, many of whom preferred to
pay their contribution to the war in francs than to pay their impot de sang. But
it was also divisive. It drew the attention of others to the legalized evasion that
was available to those with wealth, and government ministers were not alone in
fearing that if it became too pervasive the loyalty of the mass of conscripts might
be sorely strained. And that in turn could open the floodgates to the alternative,
illegal forms of evasion that were open to them.
In essence, these illegal forms of resistance can be summarized in two words:
desertion and insoumission. To the modern legal mind they may seem to be
quite distinct offenses. The deserter was a soldier. He had taken the apparently
positive step of allowing himself to be recruited, of joining his unit, or at least
of setting out with his fellows with the express intention of joining it armed with
his feuille de route and, in all likelihood, with traveling expenses and a bounty
from his grateful village. In contrast the insoumis was a draft dodger. He was
not and had never been a soldier. He had failed to respond to the call to arms,
62 / Conscripts and Deserters
had refused to take part in the tirage, or had gone into hiding as soon as he had
drawn the fateful number that condemned him to serve. His crime in that sense
was more one of omission than of commission, of failing to carry out the duties
prescribed for him by law. But to contemporaries that distinction was anything
but clear, especially because so many deserters chose to desert in the first days
or even hours of their life in uniform. Desertion in battle or to the enemy was,
of course, recognized as the serious military offense it was and it was generally
punished by death; however, this was a remarkably rare crime when compared
with the more innocuous desertion a I'interieur, which by Year II was so
endemic that it was accepted almost fatalistically by the authorities as an inevitable by-product of foreign war (102). The law itself remained unclear on the
distinction between this sort of desertion and draft dodging. The decreee of 19
fructidor VI, for instance, talked of the need to pursue "les consents refractaires
... comme des deserteurs," and only in Year XII did the law try to draw an
official distinction between the two categories of offense (103). As late as 1806,
when Hargenvilliers collected statistics for the Emperor on the problems besetting his armies, his calculations were marred by the same confusion, and he was
forced to note, rather weakly, that "les mots deserteur et refractaire se prennent
ici dans le meme sens" (104). Even prefects and Imperial administrators admitted to uncertainty on the question, and in 1809 the prefect in Aurillac felt bound
to ask for official guidance. The reply he received from Paris reveals the full
degree of legal complexity and confusion that had grown around the definition
in law. Refractaires, explained the Minister, included those who were late in
presenting themselves for service or who failed to come forward within the prescribed period; excluded were those who had left their department and who subsequently detached themselves from their units, those who were captured with
their arms and equipment, and those who committed some other criminal
offense while on the run. Deserters included not only those who abandoned their
battalions, but men who had received conges to undergo medical treatment and
who had not returned once their conges expired, those arrested as refractories
who subsequently escaped from custody, and those volunteers and remplaqants
who failed to join their units as instructed (105). Not surprisingly, such niceties
were only imperfectly understood by the young and by the public at large.
The insoumis were for the most part the ordinary young men of the locality,
subject to the same pressures as the community as a whole. Where their occupations are known to us, they represent a cross section of local people: of the
seventy-four consents refractaires in the Charente-Inferieure in Year XIV, for
instance, exactly half were agricultural workers or peasants, and the other half
belonged to associated trades integral to the economic well-being of the countryside as day laborers or vineyard workers, servants or millers, carpenters, coopers, tailors (106). As local lads belonging to local families, they presented no
immediate threat to the community, and enjoyed a large measure of protection
and support from their fellow villagers, who would warn them of the approach
of the gendarmes, prime them on the movements of local garrisons, supply them
with food when they were on the run, and welcome them back into the community when the danger was past. The young men were, after all, able to make
a substantial contribution to the local economy, whether as peasants on their
The Extent of Evasion / 63
own account or, more probably given their youth, in the service of others. It was
not in the interests of the villagers as a whole to see their lifeblood drained away
into the ranks of the Armee du Nord. In any case, not all those officially listed
were necessarily hiding in the village. Some were ill or wounded, others were
artisans working for the armies in an ancillary capacity. Two of the men from
the Seine-et-Oise in Year XIII were already doing work as a gargon boucher and
a conducteur de guimbarde (107); others again had left the area in search of work.
The local reality was rarely as clearcut as the clinical lists of insoumis sternly
posted at the local mairies would suggest. And where the authorities had been
so rash as to distribute money and items of clothing—their "petit equipement"—to conscripts in advance, there need be little surprise that some at least
among them chose to stay in their village and profit from their unexpected windfall. In the Drome in Year VII this would seem to have been standard practice.
A sum of thirty-five francs was handed over to the conscripts so that they could
buy their own clothing before marching off to their units. They turned up eagerly
for the money, but at Valdrome only nine of nineteen subsequently presented
themselves for service, and at Saint-Nazaire-le-Desert only six of twenty (108).
The local cantons through their inexperience were creating a problem of insoumission by placing before their young soldiers an almost irresistible temptation.
That insoumission remained a problem even under the Empire is a reflection
of the wide gamut of personal experience that the term could embrace and the
loopholes that still existed in the policing system. Occupations, places of residence, even names could change in a conscript's quest for freedom, and the gendarmerie never attained that degree of sophistication that would have been
required if determined draft dodgers were to be successfully tracked down. In
the Gironde in 1806, for instance, few draft dodgers were even brought to justice,
such was the confused state of police records and the lack of help forthcoming
from the local population. Suspects were lost between different communes
where they were reported to have lived at some time or another. Arnaud Durand
was sought in his native Barsac, where all that the mayor could provide was a
vague story that he had moved to Bordeaux twenty years previously to an
address in the Chartrons. Philippe Reynaud from Bordeaux was recorded as
having taken a passport to Perigueux, where his brother lived. There the trail
petered out, and the police were left empty-handed, the more so in that both his
parents were now dead. Others had taken advantage of Bordeaux's position as
a major colonial port to make a more permanent getaway. Guillaume Nion had
left for the colonies and a new life overseas. He had died in Santo-Domingo even
as the authorities in Bordeaux were hunting him as a refractory. Another Bordelais, Nicholas Lelorin, had received a passport for Philadelphia, settled in the
United States, and married a girl from New Jersey. Tracing the whereabouts of
such men was frequently a lengthy and fruitless task that only served to underline the inadequacy of the information on which the prefecture and the gendarmerie were working. Of the refractories listed, several had died in the intervening years, several had actually served in some other capacity, and a number were
seamen who had slipped out of the official records when they embarked on their
first voyage. Jean Coche from Cauderan was listed as a refractory when he was
64 / Conscripts and Deserters
serving in the naval artillery under the assumed name of Jean Cazeau. Etienne
Bojat from Bordeaux was condemned to a fine of 1,500 francs when in fact he
had been captured by the British navy on board a French corsair and was languishing in an English jail. Seven years after their classement, the bulk of these
men remained suspects, often condemned in their absence for crimes that they
might or might not have committed. Their personal case histories, typical of
many, are a pertinent reminder of the imprecision of official statistics on
insoumission; for the state bureaucracy it was a category of offense that remained
irritatingly elusive (109).
In contrast to the insoumis, the deserter was a serving soldier at the moment
when he took the decisive step of resisting military service. His might therefore
appear the more conscious act of rebellion, the more specific rejection of the
obligations imposed on him by the state. Yet there is little evidence that public
opinion made any such distinction, preferring as in so many different circumstances, to judge people by their character and utility to local society than by the
technical nature of the offense they were supposed to have committed. The individual act of desertion often seemed to be quite remarkably casual, totally lacking in any element of guile or premeditation. In Year IV, for instance, several
soldiers deserted from their unit in the outskirts of Sarrelibre and set out for
their homes in the Paris Basin. They made no attempt to disguise their uniforms
or conceal their identity, had neither conges nor valid papers, and walked quite
openly along the highways, yet they got within ten miles of Melun before being
stopped or questioned (110). Even more blatant was the behavior of a deserter
at Bourg-de-Peage in the Drome, who wandered the streets of the town trying to
sell stolen goods still dressed in his army uniform and accompanied by the girl
with whom he was living. Both were strangers to the local community, they were
