for the levy (75). And although they were far less frequent than before, there were
still instances of rioting in August and September 1793 that indicated that not
everyone was appeased by the language of equality. The village of Montreal in
the Aude saw its most bitter insurrection in August when the tirage was
announced. The young men of the village shouted down their elected officials,
sang the carmagnole in a rousing act of collective defiance, and threatened the
mayor with physical violence. Far from submitting to the recruitment, they
showed the utmost defiance for the government and its policies, "se jeterent sur
le bureau, se saisirent de la plupart des lois et arretes relatifs au recrutement, les
foulerent sous leurs pieds apres les avoir dechires en mille morceaux" (76). After
another riot, at Saint-Die in the Vosges, the prosecutor talked in alarmist tones
of 5,000 or 6,000 rioters who had come from all over the surrounding country-
34 / Conscripts and Deserters
side to break up the recruitment meeting. His figure is certainly exaggerated, but
it remains true that when they dispersed, 2 people were dead and 75 were
charged with public order offenses (77).
The army created by the levee en masse remained the principal fighting
strength of the Republic throughout the 1790s. By a curious anomaly no provision was made in the law for the young men recruited in 1793 to be released
from service after a fixed period of years, and no further systematic recruitment
took place until the very end of the decade. Those drafted in the levee des
300,000 and the levee en masse were to serve until the end of hostilities. As
Gustave Vallee remarks in his study of the Charente, it was the greatest of injustices that one generation, those unlucky enough to be between eighteen and
twenty-five years of age in 1793, should thus have been "chargee a elle seule
d'acquitter integralement 1'impot du sang" (78). Such perfunctory attempts as
there were to organize additional levies during the intervening years achieved
little, and the numbers of volunteers continued to decrease. Levees extraordinaires were especially resented and seldom produced worthwhile results. In Year
III in the Ariege municipal councils were so disheartened that they scarcely
dared to summon the young to village meetings (79). Popular fear of sudden
calls to arms resulted in damaging and unfounded rumors sweeping the countryside, sending young men into hiding and arousing the anger of their parents
against the state. In the region around Quimper in Year IV it was widely
believed that the local commissaire, without any legal authority, was about to
conscript any young man he found between fifteen and thirty years of age during
his tournee of local villages (80). Such incidents served only to increase fear and
resentment at a time when the actual strength of the armies continued to decline
at an alarming pace. For if there were 750,000 men in arms in September of
1794, that number had decreased to less than half a million byfructidor III, to
401,749 in thermidor IV, and to only 326,729 by the end of Year VI (81).
Through losses in battle and decimation by disease, but also because of largescale desertion, the much vaunted army of three quarters of a million launched
by the levee en masse progressively wasted away until its strength fell to only
half its initial complement. The continuing state of war meant that new recruits
were urgently needed to swell the ranks, though the fact that those already in
uniform were mostly experienced soldiers with at least four years' service behind
them guaranteed a solid framework of veteran units into which new blood could
be quickly integrated (82). The time was ripe for a new initiative to provide the
basis for a permanent, more professional army, consistent with the needs of a
prolonged war yet loyal to the overall principles of Year II.
That initiative was the loi Jourdan of \9fructidor VI, which introduced conscription on a systematic basis for the first time. The law aimed at providing for
a regular, smooth regeneration of the army, with new recruits available every
year as and when they were required. Those affected were young men twenty to
twenty-five years old on the first day of vendemiaire each year, who had to sign
on one of the five tableaux corresponding to their age. The maximum length of
service prescribed was five years, which meant that the young were no longer
deterred by the awesome prospect of unlimited military service that had hung
over their elders. And since the youngest would in principle march first, the
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 35
twenty year olds who formed the premiere classe, this also implied that any conscript who reached his twenty-fifth birthday, who had worked his way through
to the fifth classe without being mobilized, would automatically receive his
conge absolu and enjoy total peace of mind. If all young men in that age range
had to present themselves, not all had to serve. The exact numbers required by
the army would vary with the fortunes of war, and Jourdan himself was convinced that relatively few would actually see service: "Beaucoup sont destines a
servir, vraisemblablement peu serviront ... La classe des citoyens de 22 ans
marchera rarement, et celle d'un age au-dessus ne marcheront jamais" (83). In
fact, in Jourdan's eyes, that was precisely the beauty and the originality of his
reform, that a distinction could be made between obligatory conscription and
possible incorporation in the armies (84). Not only was Jourdan's proposal
accepted, but his concept of conscription, of a roulement between classes as and
when the needs of war dictated it, remained the basis of French recruitment
throughout the rest of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. What did vary
dramatically from year to year was the degree to which the government called
up the young men on the tableaux; again, some generations were much less
lucky than others. After the first conscription in Year VII remplacement was
again allowed, thus terminating the brief experiment with democratization; and
the order of service within each classe was, as with the recruitments of 1793, to
be decided by balloting. From Year XI any vestige of municipal autonomy in
selecting the means of determining who would march first was abolished by law;
tirage au sort became, for the first time, mandatory for all (85).
The extension of centralized control and the erosion of local discretion were
the guiding principles that underlay most of the subsequent legislation on conscription. Control was taken out of the hands of municipal councils and passed
first to conseils de recmtement (in Year X), then to the sous-prefets, who from
Year XIII had overall responsibility for drawing up the recruitment lists (86).
Sailors and river workers in maritime departments.were conscripted for active
service from Year IX and placed at the disposal of the navy. Infloreal X further
legislation placed reservists in the army in a state of readiness should the minister wish to avail himself of their services. From 1806 gardes nationales in turn
found themselves drafted into the army, first on coastguard duty, later to defend
France's frontiers against invasion. Each successive measure played its part in
the government's campaign to organize manpower in such a way that it could
at short notice send as many men as possible to fight a war that was extending
into an increasing number of fresh theaters. Napoleon's regime was increasingly
geared to achieving military success whatever the social cost, and the priorities
of the state are well reflected in the steady stream of legislation amending and
tightening the government's control of the conscription process.
The needs of that state oscillated wildly from year to year, but from the outset it became apparent that Jourdan's optimistic prediction would rarely be fulfilled. Given the enervating rundown of the battalions in the previous years and
the demands of war in Year VII itself, the first levies were particularly heavy
and deeply shocking to French public opinion. Yet the conscription of Year VII
was soon overtaken by the deteriorating fortunes of the armies, with the result
that it was rapidly followed by a supplementary levy of 200,000 men and by a
36 / Conscripts and Deserters
further levee generate from all five classes. It was one of the harshest conscriptions of the entire period, and men from all five classes were called on to march.
At Belesta in the Ariege, for instance, of the four twenty-four year olds listed, all
unskilled agricultural laborers (brassiers), three left to join the army (87). In contrast, if the conscription of Year VII reached maximal proportions, that of Year
VIII was light, and no men at all were taken in Year IX, the year when peace
was beckoning and Napoleon could even afford to demobilize approximately
one-eighth of those currently in uniform. From Year X, however, with campaigning resumed in earnest, there was again a wholesale commitment to conscription; Year XII saw reservists called up for the campaign against England;
and Year XIV heralded the exhaustive levees that were to follow with the proclamation of a mobilisation generate. In that year the reserve was called up as
well as the armee active. Reporting on the demands being made of his department, the prefect of the Rhone pointed out that he now had no reservists for the
previous five years, since all were on active service, while the reserve was composed of men from the depot, those whose family responsibilities would normally have ensured that they could remain in their homes. The economy of the
region would be threatened if this practice continued, but already it was clear
that the use of the reserve was becoming just another implication of Napoleon's
total dedication to the pursuit of victory (88). The government's insistence that
men who died or deserted be replaced by their fellows in the reserve further
stretched the resources of communities, and must have sown bitter dissensions
within local society (89). Between 1806 and 1813 the government demanded
levee after levee with monotonous regularity, the weight of the demands reflecting fairly accurately the desperation of the generals and the fortunes of the war.
When, as in 1809 to 1810, prospects for peace seemed bright, the conscription
machine was allowed to run down, but once the defeats in the Peninsula began
to pose a threat to the Pyrenean frontier, Napoleon again instituted exhaustive
levels of recruitment. From 1811 conscription was universally heavy, reflecting
the increasing desperation of France's military situation. By 1813 the former
classes were arbitrarily forgotten in the quest for able-bodied recruits, and the
rules governing conscription were cavalierly ignored, with conscripts of four feet
eight inches being sent to the battalions and men of thirty-eight years of age
included in the reserve. Desperation seemed to justify any illegality on the part
of the government (90). In the words of Roger Darquenne, commenting on the
situation in the department of Jemmapes, conscription had progressively been
transformed into "une institution inhumaine, centralisee a 1'exces, draconienne
jusqu'al'illegalite"(91).
The success of conscription cannot be called into question because it was by
this means that soldiers were found, year after year, to replenish the battalions
of Napoleon's Grande Armee. But the Loi Jourdan did not achieve overnight
acceptance, nor did it instantly remove the feelings of grievance that had been
aroused by the various initiatives of the 1790s. French society was still unaccustomed to compulsory service in Year VII, and in some parts of the country
the new conscription law was greeted with angry rioting. In the Jura a spirit of
rebelliousness spread from village to village when the law was promulgated,
