tres modique pension. De plusieurs cotes il m'arrive des avis d'alliances de
cette nature. (43)
Some women could even aspire after the role of professional wives for village
boys facing the draft, marrying conscripts on two or even three separate occasions, the marriages punctuated by timely divorces (44). The authorities were
understandably anxious that such marriages would reach epidemic proportions,
since already there were marriage brokers established in business seeking out
wives for reluctant soldiers. Information on their activities was often rather
shadowy given that they operated in bars and cafes in the proximity of large
towns where peasant boys had to come to present themselves to the conseil. One
suspect from Avesnes in the Nord was denounced as a "grand fabricateur de
mariages" between conscripts and "vieilles femmes," but there was insufficient
evidence to mount a charge (45). Generally such men operated just within the
bounds of legality, to the great frustration of local officials who were powerless
to halt their enterprise. Prefects were often reluctant to give too much publicity
to their activities in case word spread to other villages and recruitment suffered
still more damage. The prefect of the Calvados, for instance, refused to issue a
decree on the matter and preferred to work indirectly through the Church
authorities by asking the bishop of Bayeux to discourage his parish clergy from
condoning this abuse of the marriage vows (46).
Contemporary opinion was that military recruitment was being seriously
impeded by a suspiciously high rate of marriage and by a tendency to marry
young. The municipal council of Gorze in the Moselle found the trend very
alarming. Youngsters of seventeen and eighteen years of age, knowing that early
marriage would dispense them from service, were rushing headlong into wedlock with results that the council stigmatized as "rien moins que Pabatardissement de 1'espece et la destruction prochaine de nos armees" (47). The bridegrooms, it adjudged, were too young to accept the responsibilities of marriage
having neither the maturity of temperament nor the physical strength of grown
men. They were innocents deprived of their youth in a lemminglike quest for
security. The language used by Gorze was exaggerated and alarmist, but there is
no doubt that the fear that conscripts were marrying in increasing numbers to
escape the draft was widely held. Letters home from older brothers on the frontiers urged matrimony in preference to service. There was little ambiguity in the
advice of men like Louis Goddos, from Larchamp in the Mayenne, when he
wrote in 1813: "Je vous dirais a notre frere qu'il se maris pour son mieux" (48).
Nor was there any doubt in the minds of the young men of Mantes who, at the
52 / Conscripts and Deserters
time of the levee des 300,000, seized the board posted outside the town hall
announcing forthcoming marriages and paraded through the town streets mockingly bearing it aloft. They did so, said the mayor, with good patriotic intent
"pour empecher les manages de leurs concitoyens qu'ils supposent prendre ce
parti pour se dispenser de voler a la defense de leur patrie" (49). By 1809 the
seriousness of the issue was being discussed at the very highest level, with the
Minister of War reporting to the Emperor that the scale of "manages disproportionnes," in particular, made it desirable to re-examine the blanket exemptions that had previously been granted to married conscripts (50). Two years
later Duplantier, the prefect in Douai, went further, issuing a decree on his own
initiative demanding that all marriages of conscripts to women aged fifty years
and older should be carefully scrutinized before an exemption was issued (51).
In the Loir-et-Cher the authorities could cite human tragedy in support of their
plea for greater controls after a conscript of 1810, Pierre Labbe was found
hanged from a beam in his loft in the village of Vineuil. Village gossip was unanimous; the unfortunate Pierre, whose parents had arranged a civil marriage for
him with the express aim of preserving him from the armies had committed
suicide which stemmed directly from his ill-advised marriage. Pierre had not
previously seemed blighted by depression, yet "depuis ce mariage ce malheureux
jeune homme a etc constamment plonge dans une sombre reverie, il a refuse
pendant plusieurs jours a prendre aucun aliment, et avait meme tente de se
noyer" (52). The lesson was clear that forced marriages of this kind could be as
damaging to the individual as they were to the interests of the state.
Demographers and local historians, while acknowledging that matrimony
did provide a loophole that was seized on by reluctant recruits, are rather less
impressed than were contemporaries by its global impact on the Revolutionary
and Imperial armies. Roger Darquenne, writing on the annexed Belgian department of Jemmapes, observes that marriage rates oscillated considerably, with
marked increases in 1801 to 1803 but also with a significant retrenchment in
1805 and 1806. Economic as well as political and military considerations were
affecting the propensity of people in his area to rush into marriage. But there
were two exceptional upsurges in the marriage rate that did relate directly to the
progress of the war. In 1796 the increase reflected the number of marriages that
had been deferred as a result of the Belgian Campaign and the near famine conditions of the previous two years, and what he terms a wedding fever or "fievre"
swept the department in 1813, the year of the most massive levies for Napoleon's armies (53). Even more telling is the evidence by Gustave Vallee from his
exhaustive research on the Charente. Like Darquenne, he is cautious about making any generalization for the earlier period when there were regular complaints
about the implications of individual marriages but no huge increase that would
suggest a coherent trend. A discernible increase did occur from 1807, however,
when heavier conscription levels for the Peninsular War began to cause panic,
and in these later years the relationship between war and marriage rates was
both consistent and logical. In 1810 a year of relative peace and optimism, the
level of marriages decreased. Thereafter it increased steadily from 1811 through
to the peak year of 1813 when the demands of the recruiting-officers were so
great that even the sons of rich families found themselves pressed into service.
The Extent of Evasion / 53
The result, say Vallee, was a staggering increase in the number of marriages
among the sons of economically secure families seeking an outlet from the
Grande Armee. He isolates the figures for young men of conscription age from
families aisees in one provincial town, Angouleme, and finds that the rate of
marriage in this group increased from 5 percent in 1811 to 12.6 percent in 1812
and a remarkable 19 percent in the crisis year of 1813. In the following year,
once the danger was seen to have passed, the rate resumed its normal moderate
tenor. The exceptionally high rates were always short-lived with three significant
peaks—in Year XII, 1809, and especially 1813—and with equally high birth
rates following in Year XIII, 1810, and 1814 (54). For this reason, Vallee concludes, the crise de population in the Empire was perhaps less extreme than one
might have expected; and the losses to the armies resulting from early or
arranged marriages, though a perpetual irritant to the authorities, had serious
implications for recruitment only in short staccato bursts.
Exemptions from active service were granted on other grounds too, especially before the Loi Jourdan and the introduction of conscription. Throughout
the 1790s certain occupations deemed essential for the furtherance of the war
effort were systematically reserved, with the result that certain categories of
"citoyens utiles" were exempted from service. From March 1793 the Convention specifically exempted for the duration of the war all bakers, carters and drivers who could provide evidence that they were engaged in servicing or provisioning the armies. And in the following month the same privilege was extended
to various categories of munitions workers—to those "attaches a la fabrication
des armes, aux fonderies de canons, aux grandes forges et aux mines de fer"—
whose skills were needed if the army was to have the wherewithall to continue
fighting (55). In the Year II such was the fear of famine and grain shortage that
the government offered exemptions to peasants and farmworkers with a generosity that was denied those living and working in the towns (56). Discretion was
generally left to the municipal authorities in these early years, and they were
predictably deluged with petitions from soldiers and parents anxious to bend the
regulations to their own advantage. Education was frequently used as a justification for seeking favored treatment: notaires were apt to claim exemptions for
themselves and their clerks (57); continuing study might be used as a welcome
escape hatch (58); and several cases where local school teachers obtained the
conges they sought (59). From Year IV, however, the level of discretion left to
local authorities was drastically reduced as the government ruled that exemptions should be restricted to agricultural occupations and to artistes, to specialist
artisan crafts that were sorely needed by the community if food production and
the servicing of the armies were to proceed apace. Paris felt obliged to intervene
in the interests of equity in an area where local practice varied widely and where
the rather arbitrary treatment of individual claimants could cause outrage and
a sense of searing injustice.
Defining the categories for which exemptions could be given was difficult
enough. Persuading semiliterate villagers of these distinctions proved a hard and
thankless task, especially in the early years of the Revolutionary levees when the
vagueness of the law encouraged a rash of optimism. Petitions flooded in to district officials mostly from farmers or peasants asking on grounds of personal
54 / Conscripts and Deserters
misfortune or agricultural efficiency that their son or brother or farmservant be
granted a special dispensation. Where piles of these petitions still exist, for
example for the Morbihan at the time of the levee des 300,000, the extent of the
confusion becomes apparent. The majority of them have no real grounds for
preferential treatment. Most come from the wealthier members of the farming
community who seem to believe that they have some grounds for exemption on
the basis of their wealth. They tend to list their land holdings and their head of
livestock as though in these figures might lie their or their sons' salvation. Marie
Horau, a widow from near Ploermel, in pleading that her only son be left to work
the farm, lists his responsibilities in support of her case: "Je vous demande que
mon dit fils me soil accorde, ayant deux boeufs, deux chevaux, trois vaches, une
genisse, cinquante-huit moutons et brebis, ce sera justice ..." (60). Mathurin
Morice, a laboureur at Taupon, again listed his livestock, this time to protect his
only farmservant from the army. Without him, said Morice, he would be forced
to give up the holding with a serious consequent loss to the nation (61). After
Year IV, in contrast, the law was so precise in its definition of those eligible that
the swarm of petitioners receded. The lists of men exempted in that year illustrate the kinds of circumstances that the authorities deemed deserving of exemption, and it is clear that there is a moral element as well as a purely functional
one in their decisions. The canton of Hellimer in the Moselle restricted exemptions almost entirely to those who were carters and voituriers engaged in provisioning the armies, who used their engineering skills in the pare d'artillerie, or
