d'hommes si chetive, si abatardie que la taille ordinaire n'y excede point quatre
pieds dix pouces," and where conscription was virtually excluded in consequence. Nor did the government take into consideration the fact that many of
the names included on the tableaux were those of foreign or migrant workers
who came to the Bordelais for the vendange but moved on before the conscription was held. Paris, he protested, had promised justice and equity, but when he
put a reasoned case he was being fobbed oif with generalizations and irrelevancies(HO).
The extent of the inequality between one department and another was recognized at the time by Hargenvilliers in his careful statistical reports (111) to
the Minister of War. In 1808, discussing the impact of the five previous classes,
he pointed out that the theoretical basis of these levies was an equitable distribution between all departments in a proportion of 1 conscript for every 138
inhabitants. But if the tableaux were drawn up with that norm fixedly in mind,
the numbers of men incorporated, a much more real index of sacrifice, told a
very different story. There were in fact wide variations between departments.
The highest contribution came from departments like the Puy-de-D6me (1 for
every 114 inhabitants), the Haute-Loire (1 in 108), the Alpes-maritimes (1 in
105), and the Yonne (the worst afflicted, with a ratio of 1 in 97). At the other
extreme the Hautes-Pyrenees provided 1 for every 171 inhabitants, the BassesPyrenees 1 in 179, the Seine 1 in 209, and the Rhone 1 in 212. The lack of precise
statistics, even at this period when Napoleonic administration had become relatively sophisticated, makes reliable calculation difficult. But Hargenvilliers'
estimates do allow for an appreciation of the relative weight of conscription in
different areas of France and help to put the prefects' complaints into some
perspective.
Such discrepancies were not entirely a matter of chance. As the government
became more and more desperate in its quest for able-bodied men for the battalions, it showed less concern for equity and geographical spread. By 1807 the
tone of ministerial correspondence on the subject was visibly changing, as the
perceived problem became the simple one of finding enough soldiers at any
price. Lacuee realized the constraints of height and health that the law placed
on him, but beyond that he was no longer interested in explaining the particular
problems of recruitment in individual regions or departments. Instead, his letters were increasingly addressed to the companies and battalions of the army
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 41
and directed to the immediate requirements of individual commanders (112).
There was even an advantage in turning to those areas of the country where
recruitment was traditionally easy, where military enthusiasm and a sense of
duty ran high. Fairness and social justice were concepts that could be sacrificed
to victory and military efficiency. Jean-Pierre Bois, analyzing the figures for
recruitment in the Maine-et-Loire, shows how the years that demanded the
greatest sacrifice were 1808 and 1813, especially the latter, when the classe de
1814 was supplemented by several exceptional levies. And even within that one
department he finds glaring discrepancies in the numbers demanded, from town
to town, from region to region (113). The Directeur-general de la Conscription
admitted as much when he told the prefect in Foix that the ability of an area to
produce soldiers and past records of recruitment were being used as much as
simple population statistics as the basis for this last, desperate levy (114). There
was, of course, a price to be paid, even if by the end of the Empire there were
few flickers of open revolt. The cost was measured in less dramatic terms, in the
dreadful demoralization that was setting in and the continuous drain on manpower and resources. In September 1813 the prefect of the Ariege protested at
the weight of yet another levee announced in his department, not because of any
threat to order, for there was none, but because of the permanent harm that he
saw being perpetrated around him:
J'enleve tout. II ne restera des annees 1813 et 1814 personne capable de procreer si je puis le dire. Cette mesure est desastreuse. Elle s'execute, mais il est
de mon devoir de vous le dire, ces deux annees sont privees par ce moyen de
tous les hommes capables de travailler ou de se marier. (115)
His is a chilling epitaph on the social and demographic effects of twenty-five
years of virtually unbroken war.
There was, it is worth repeating, little threat to public order by the last years
of the Napoleonic era. French public opinion was too exhausted and French
resources too battered for violence to erupt on any major scale. The army desperately took anyone who was capable of bearing arms and the economic effects
of conscription on local communities were increasingly ignored as the war fronts
closed in on France's own territory. Even social distinction so dear to the
Emperor in happier days was firmly cast aside in the national emergency. The
gardes d'honneur who had been raised in 1808 to perform ceremonial functions
and to provide escorts for the Emperor were suddenly reduced to the ordinary
tasks of soldiering as the need for manpower became ever more pressing. As has
recently been demonstrated in the case of Beziers these gardes were drawn from
the cream of local society; they had volunteered for what was seen as a privileged
and honorific role:
C'etait pour les jeunes gens de la classe aisee de la societe bitteroise 1'occasion
de montrer leur superiorite, leur fortune, leur bonne education; en meme
temps, peut-etre, esperaient-ils etre remarques par Napoleon, qui pouvait toujours les proteger dans leur carriere. (116)
42 / Conscripts and Deserters
Yet by 1813 they were being prepared for the battlefields of Leipzig, a contribution to filling the yawning gaps left in the French cavalry regiments after the
disasters of the Moscow campaign. Like the millions before them, they accepted
their destiny and left for the front without protest. Unlike the 1790s and the
early years of conscription, the later years were relatively untroubled by violence. There were, of course, exceptions, like the series of village riots that broke
out in the Landes in 1814 when the levee was held for the garde nationale, or
the more serious rioting involving 1,200 to 1,500 conscripts that resulted in looting and pillaging, attacks on the subprefect, and the burning of official records
at Hazebrouck in the Nord in 1813 (117). But generally recruitment remained
calm. Effective policing, a more professional approach to bureaucracy, and the
sheer habit of annual conscription helped ensure that the vast majority of twenty
year olds turned up for medical inspection and submitted to the supplice of the
ballot. Even in formerly troubled departments reports on these later conscriptions were often surprisingly bland, assuring Paris in self-satisfied terms that the
conscripts were proving to be docile and obedient. By 1811 the prefect of the
Cantal could boast that his department was now "entierement regenere" to the
degree that it was now one of the departments filling its annual quota with the
greatest exactitude (118). The casual reader, skimming such reports in the Ministry of the Interior, could have been forgiven for concluding that there was no
longer a recruitment problem in France, that Napoleon's wars had succeeded in
altering the habits of generations, and that for the young of the First Empire
military service had come to be part of an accepted and largely unquestioned
lifestyle.
3
The Extent of Evasion
THE TRUTH was rather less flattering to the government, less gratifying to those
who believed that France had at last rediscovered her military instincts. For
though the armies were consistently renewed and expanded through the period
of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, though new recruits continued to
be conjured out of the most unlikely milieux, these successes barely concealed
the great underbelly of resentment and evasion stimulated by such regular levies.
Patriotic fervor could be whipped up by the onset of crisis, the fall of a vital
frontier, or an insult to national pride such as the murder of the French deputies
sent as plenipotentiaries to Rastadt in Year VII (1). The effect of such incidents,
however, was inevitably short-lived. To maintain any impetus of enthusiasm the
government required an atmosphere of constant crisis, endless outrages, and an
unstauched flow of adrenolin. The normal pace of war was considerably less
heady, and if the generals could take pride in those heroes who stepped forward
to share in the Emperor's glory, equally they were somewhat sobered by the
degree of animosity that their recruiters encountered, and by the extent of fear,
incomprehension, and popular resistance. The extension of the scale of the war
brought little rejoicing, especially in rural France where war weariness was wellestablished by the end of the 1790s. In the Gironde it was noted that men and
women sickened by years of war "ne sont pas les chaleureux amis de la Revolution" (2); in the Vosges the impatience of the people for peace had combined
with the new ideas of liberty to create a dangerously subversive spirit because
"la fausse idee que les gens sans education se sont faite de 1'egalite" had helped
turn them against the state (3). For many families the only consolation was that
for much of the period the majority of youngsters could still hope to escape the
clutches of the armies or at worst to be placed in the reserve. But with the Peninsula and the Russian campaign Napoleon's demands became ever more taxing, until by 1814 the entire classe of those eligible was being sent off to fight.
Those seeking to avoid the army at almost any price could no longer realistically
count on the fortune of the ballot.
43
44 / Conscripts and Deserters
In desperation, the young sought refuge in any means that presented itself
whether within the law or in defiance of it. They were not innovators nor
endowed with particular resources of imagination, and the ruses they turned
to—like the measures employed against them by the recruiting-officers—were
largely those that had been tried and tested throughout the long wars of the
Ancien Regime. Ironically, one of the principal routes for escape lay in the framing of the recruitment law itself, since at no time in these years were all young
males equally liable to service. A certain height, for instance, was a prerequisite
for incorporation throughout the period, though the requirements became looser
and more flexible with the passage of time. From an insistence that all troops
should be at least five feet tall in the 1790s, the law was progressively changed
until, during the last levies of the Empire, Napoleon was eagerly snatching men
of four feet eight inches for active service (4). What made the height restriction
so galling for the government was that it had such contrasting effects in different
areas of the country, given the widely varied physiques of Flemings and Auvergnats, Bretons and Catalans. In their computer analysis of the extent ofdefaut de
faille during the Restoration period, Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie and Paul
Dumont found wide divergences between one department and another, with the
numbers of men rejected because of their small stature oscillating between only
6.5 percent in the Doubs and nearly 30 percent in the Haute-Vienne (5). Yet no
allowance for height was made in the quotas demanded of each department for
the annual conscription and prefects were apt to plead, not unreasonably, that
the chance factor of the physique of their people merited some adjustment to
quotas if lasting damage were not to be done to the local economy. In the Landes
the prefect was sufficiently alarmed by the numbers pleading height as a reason
