villagers. For it was naive to believe that villagers would select the most ablebodied or the most patriotic to serve in the armies; much more plausible explanations were the interests of their families and friends, or the economic loss if
their cowman or metayer were selected. It should be no surprise that cabales
quickly formed, or that self-interest was paramount. In fact, it is significant that
many of the most refractory communes in the mountain regions of the Ariege
figure among those that stated a preference for scrutin, presumably on the
grounds that they could manipulate it to their own advantage (57). Social envy
and personal rancor could be satisfyingly assuaged, and the government rightly
concluded that the system constituted an outrage to the reputation of the army
and to the ideal of equality. There were numerous instances of blatant discrimination. The farming community of La Bastide-de-Besplas insisted on nominating a lawyer to march on its behalf, despite the fact that the man involved, JeanPaul-Antoine Trinque, had not lived in the village for over two years and had
already submitted to a ballot in his adoptive commune (58). Another village to
choose scrutin was Coudequerque, near Bergues, which had first tried to raise a
subscription to buy soldiers for its quota but had failed to find men of sufficient
height. Forced to look to its own people, Coudequerque nominated a local
farmer, Landschoote, and ordered him to leave; yet Landschoote protested that
he was the victim of jealousy and personal hatred, a wealthy farmer who had
already found himself "en butte a quelques individus de la commune" to the
extent that both he and his brother had been compelled by public harassment
to leave the village and take up residence in a nearby town. Unpopularity, he
alleged, not patriotism or physical strength, was the basis of his designation for
service (59). In the Cantal villagers often conspired to send recruits from outlying hamlets and isolated farmsteads to avoid serving themselves. At Junhac
ten young men from the farthest corners of the commune complained that the
isolation of their homes had prevented them from attending the recruitment
meeting, and for that reason they had been unfairly chosen by the others (60).
Cowherds leading solitary lives on remote hillsides would seem to have been
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 31
particularly highly regarded by village meetings anxious to protect their own
interests. In March 1793 thirteen bouviers from La Besserette petitioned that the
village boys had conspired to send only outsiders like themselves, that "il s'est
forme une coalition entre les garcons natifs de laditte paroisse pour nommer
tous les garcons etrangers" (61). Such examples tell a poignant story of pettiness
and interfamily feuding. It is not difficult to see why the system was so unpopular among sharecroppers and farmworkers (62), or why so many communes
rejected it as a method of recruitment. The district of Cambrai noted pertinently
that "le scrutin dont on a use dans un certain nombre de municipalites nous a
demontre tant de cabales et tant d'inconvenients que nous n'avons pas cru pouvoir hesiter de prescrire un autre mode d'election" (63). And in a reply to the
commune of Laroquebrou about its intended scrutin the department of Cantal
went so far as to question the fairness of the whole system. Designation, especially where all the citizens were not expressly consulted, constituted a breach
of the spirit, if not of the letter, of the law (64).
Though bitterly contested, the levee des 300,000 served its primary purpose
of getting a large number of men into uniform in a very short period of time. It
had broken with the voluntary principle without returning to the professional
army of the Ancien Regime. It had made use of the new departmental and district divisions and the different layers of civilian administration to recruit for
the military. It had reestablished the practice of remplacement in the recruitment process. What it had not done was to introduce conscription in the full
sense of the term, because there was not as yet any obligation placed methodically on the jeunes gens of a particular classe to present themselves for service.
The army recruited in 1793 contained men of all ages from eighteen to forty
years old, exactly as the recruitment law stated that it should, even if there was
a marked tendency to take those at the younger end of that spectrum. The district of Romans (Drome) provides as good a case study as any. The district provided a total of 330 recruits for the army, ranging in age from forty to sixteen
years old, the last named being a young tailleur d'habits from Le Peage-les-Pisancon whose youthful high spirits had induced him to sign on as a volunteer
even though he was substantially underage. Of the 330 men, 185 fell into the age
range between eighteen and twenty-two years old, 250 into that between eighteen
and twenty-six. Yet as many as 39 of them were aged thirty years and older (65).
The recruitment had produced problems of noncooperation, but these tended to
be regionalized; more generally the difficulties encountered stemmed from
administrative confusion, inexperience, and the failure of the government to
explain the law to its officials. In the Vosges, for instance, where there was
scarcely a flicker of revolt, legal exemptions took a heavy toll of the manpower
due to the armies, since many of those recruited worked in arms factories,
foundries, forges, and ironworks (66). The law on exemptions, as the district of
Crest discovered, could be utterly bewildering for those called on to enforce it:
Les vicaires, les ex-chanoines, les assesseurs des juges de paix, les chefs de
manufacture exempts par une loi du mois d'aout dernier, notre archiviste, les
chefs at commis de nos bureaux, les cures enfin qui ne sont plus envisages
comme fonctionnaires publics, les notables qui par une decision du departe-
32 / Conscripts and Deserters
ment furent reconnus exempts lors du tirage des grenadiers et qui pourraient
se pretendre tels a cause de la permanence, tous ces personnages sont-ils dans
le cas ou non? Nous ne partageons pas tous ces doutes; mais il en est dont la
decision prealable est necessaire. (67)
Nor were the results of the levee always what the government had intended. In
the Drome, Kellermann noted sourly, undersized soldiers were being sent to the
battalions without scruples, and on inspecting new recruits at Briancon in March
1793 he found that they included both "beaucoup de vieillards" and at least
eighty children no more than thirteen or fourteen years old (68). In some areas
of recruitment law ambiguities still remained that cried out for clearer
definition.
There would be ample opportunity to provide that definition, since 1793 was
to witness a heavy succession of recruitment drives by an increasingly harassed
government. Following the levee des 300,000 in February and March, there was
a supplementary levy, then another for the Vendee, before the major recruitment of the autumn of that year, the levee en masse. This time there was to be
no remplacement, one of only two occasions throughout the entire period of the
Revolution and Empire when the rich were unable to buy themselves out of
military service, and personal sacrifice was demanded from all young Frenchmen in the cause of the Republic. The levee was proclaimed in a nationalistic
tone of high moral fervor, demanding equality of sacrifice from all. The spirit of
Jacobin democracy ran through the text of the new law, and deputies-on-mission
in the departments were instructed to ensure that its terms were fully understood
in village mairies, since Paris was determined to learn from the troubles of the
previous February. What the Jacobins envisaged was a national crusade against
the forces of reaction that were threatening the Republic from all sides: the
decree of 23 August established that:
Des ce moment jusqu'a celui ou les ennemis auront etc chasses du territoire
de la Republique, tous les Francais sont en requisition permanente pour le
service des armees. Les jeunes gens iront au combat; les hommes maries forgeront les armes et transporteront les subsistances; les femmes feront des
tentes, des habits, et serviront dans les hopitaux; les enfants mettront le vieux
linge en charpie; les vieillards se feront porter sur les places publiques pour
exciter le courage des guerriers, precher la haine des rois et 1'unite de la
Republique. (69)
In practice military recruitment was confined to those between eighteen and
twenty-five years of age who were bachelors or widowers without family responsibilities. But it was also by far the most equitable draft of the Revolutionary
years, and it is significant that it gave rise to fewer protests and caused less hostility than either the levees that preceded it or the conscription to which it gave
way. The underlying sense of injustice that was present in previous recruitments
had been largely alleviated.
The levee en masse aimed to create a massive army three quarters of a million strong to defeat France's enemies abroad and to guarantee the internal secu-
The Weight of Military Recruitment / 33
rity of the Republic. The recruitment process was supervised closely in the
departments by the local Jacobin clubs and by deputies-on-mission sent out
from the Convention. Democratic rhetoric mingled with the early manifestations of Terror to ensure that this levy was much more successful than its predecessors. The government had learned from the administrative mistakes of
February, and the filling of the army quotas assumed the very highest priority
among the affairs of state. The rhetoric was valuable in that it made the recruitment and the tirage seem more palatable, although Jean-Paul Bertaud rightly
comments that the Jacobins were not really interested in democracy and that
what really occurred in August 1793 was the subtle transformation of the levee
en masse into a straightforward requisition (70). The East of France was, as
usual, especially responsive. The department of the Marne, for example, obediently sent eight full battalions complete with arms and equipment before the
end of September (71). But even areas not noted for their patriotic fervor often
responded with surprising alacrity. In the Morbihan, where the levee des 300,000
a few months before had been fraught with problems, district after district
reported after only a few days that their contingents were ready to depart. In this
part of France, the only real problem arose from the attempt to requisition
horses and cavaliers because horses played a minimal role in the local economy
and were in scarce supply (72). In large measure this enthusiasm did reflect the
new element of politicization that had been injected into the recruitment process. Ruamps and Milhaud, on mission to the Alsatian departments, noted with
some wonderment that the peasants of Wissembourg responded to the ringing
of the tocsin by arming themselves with whatever implements were at hand,
pikes and scythes and hunting rifles, and launching themselves fearlessly against
the enemy (73). But it was also a tribute to honest and painstaking administration, and it would be wise not to be carried along too willingly on the billowing
clouds of Republican rhetoric. At La Bastide-de-Besplas there was little sign of
the unbounded zeal that had impressed Ruamps and Milhaud. Rather, their battalions were composed of laboureurs and gens de travail from the surrounding
hamlets whose hearts were still on their farms and who were likely to desert at
any moment (74). In the Seine-et-Marne, far from the most troublesome region
of the country, the designated recruits had left their communes obediently
enough, though showing every sign of reluctance, accepting their lot only
because of the strict and public egalitarianism that provided some justification
