who could provide overwhelming social reasons for their indispensibility at
home on the farm (62). The lists for various communes in the rural Cantal in
Year VI confirm this impression. The men exempted at Pleaux, for example,
were artisans adjudged to be needed by local agriculture: "charpentier et tres
utile au public," "marechal et necessaire au public," "charron et utile au public."
Or their work and income were recognized as being necessary to the welfare of
a large and vulnerable family, to the continued independence of elderly parents,
or, exceptionally, to the culture of a smallholding. In this final case it was noted
that the young man's parents had both been killed by lightning and that there
was no one else in the family to keep the land under cultivation (63). In nearby
Pierrefort, though some were simple tradesmen and artisans, the majority again
had already proved their worth to the Republic: one looking after his blind
father; another the son of a widow who had already been with the army as a
carter; a third, again responsible for his elderly father's welfare, had lost a
brother on the frontiers and had taken the precaution of providing another man
in his stead (64).
The policy of granting exemptions of this kind did have the serious defect
that it quickly led to allegations of unfair discrimination and of favoritism. Certain religious groups, most notably the Anabaptists, had a conscientious objection to war that was recognized by both their deputy to the Convention and by
the district of Colmar where they were particularly numerous. The district,
accepting that their "caractere doux et paisible" made them unsuitable for bearing arms, ordered that they be used for military convoys and that they and their
animals be requisitioned for that purpose (65). But it was more difficult to persuade their fellow villagers of the justice of their case when the communes were
forced to conscript others in their place, and local disturbances were reported.
The Extent of Evasion / 55
At Sembach in Mont-Tonnerre the refusal of Jewish parents to let their sons
march with the other conscripts—a refusal that was quite illegal but which had
been left unpunished by the very sensitive administration—led to anger among
the Catholic population who viewed their behavior as "un luxe insultant pour
leurs concitoyens," and matters reached a head when the other villagers arrested
the two Jewish fathers who were giving protection to their sons (66). The anger
caused by localized religious groups and by the de facto exemptions that they
were granted was nothing compared to the fury aroused by the exemption of
officials and clerks serving in municipal and departmental bureaucracies. For
such instances were not confined to limited areas nor did they cease with the
introduction of conscription. In law there was no justification for them, but
municipalities found themselves under pressure from friends and business associates to employ their sons in office jobs, and in many parts of France, especially
in country areas where literacy rates were low, intelligent young men were at a
premium for the rapidly mushrooming tasks that fell to the councils to perform.
The department of the Indre-et-Loire attempted to intercede with the Minister
of War in Year IV to maintain five requisitionnaires at their posts, arguing that
their loss would lead to damaging chaos in its operations (67). In German-speaking areas of Alsace the fact that much of the day-to-day work had to be conducted in German added further conviction to municipal appeals for the exemptions they desired (68). In the Meurthe the commissaire du Directoire in one of
the districts was himself liable to be requisitioned (69). The fact that young men
were finding refuge from the armies in the offices of the government itself was a
particular source of embarrassment. Often the administrations would use as an
excuse the fact that in 1793 such exemptions had been allowed, if only briefly,
to provide infant organizations with a certain aptitude. But by Year IV such
excuses were tame and smacked of corruption. How could the government persuade other young men to join their regiments without trouble when their comrades were being offered protection in the offices of the navy or the Armee des
Alpes and in the service of the commissaire-ordonnateur for military supplies
(70)? Resentment was soon fanned by rumor and disruption followed. In the
Nievre, where the district authorities were experiencing considerable difficulty
in enforcing the law, popular anger focused on the fact that all levels of government still seemed to be employing young men of the requisition in their own
administrations (71). At Sabarat in the Ariege the local youth turned out in force
to the tirage in Year III but adamantly refused to draw unless all public officials
were included in the ballot. Not even the news that Puycerda had been taken by
the Spanish and the implied threat to their homes could change their minds (72).
Behind such protests was, once again, a sense of injustice, a feeling that while
peasants and working men were being sent to the front, the sons of the rich and
the educated were finding comfortable niches in civilian life. This feeling was
well expressed by five self-styled "Republicans de Dijon" who petitioned the
Cinq-Cents in Year VII about the exemptions that allowed the sons of the bourgeoisie to spend their war behind office desks or in hospital wards:
Par quelle fatalite se fait-il que le sang de nos enfants coule abandamment
pendant que celui des riches est menage? Pourquoi, malgre toutes les lois, ces
petits messieurs trouvent-ils toujours le moyen d'encombrer les bureaux et
56 / Conscripts and Deserters
les hopitaux et de tenir la plume ou le bistouri tandis que leurs camarades
font le coup de fusil? (73)
The sense of class outrage was never far removed.
If these forms of exemption were seen as being damaging to recruitment and
to the morale of the armies, there was another category of exemption that was
specifically devised to improve France's fighting strength—the exemption of
men from maritime areas to serve in the navy. Those eligible for naval classement were strictly defined by law because it was not the intention of the government to starve the army of recruits or to cause unnecessary confusion in the
departments. The "loi sur les classes des gens de mer" passed in January 1791
restricted naval service to regions with a coastline or a tradition of river navigation and to those men who had experience of relevant trades and skills—officers and men on naval and merchant shipping, of course, but also fishermen,
bargers, ferrymen, and a limited number of maritime crafts like ropemaking,
sailmaking, barrelmaking, and carpentry. The attraction was that once a man
had been classe, he could be called up only for service at sea, but the government
insisted that all those applying for naval service must be fully apprenticed or
able to pass an examination in their trade or skill (74). Under the Empire the
departments defined as "littoraux" and therefore liable to naval levies were limited to thirty, twenty-three of them in metropolitan France with the heaviest
levies imposed on the Seine-Inferieure, Finistere, Gironde, and Manche (75).
Even departments with poor records of recruitment for the army could sometimes point to a robust recruitment of sailors and port workers; because the law
encouraged them to opt for naval classement before their nineteenth birthday,
the result was a correspondingly high number ofreformes when the military levies came to be held (76). In some coastal areas where the seafaring tradition was
strong, the numbers taking advantage of naval classement during their teens
were so high that their communes became drained of manpower and the military conscription failed miserably to produce the necessary quotas of men. Such
was the case in Lorient in Year XI when the municipal council noted rather
plaintively that along the Morbihan coast "dans les ports de mer tout est a peu
pres marin" (77); and in the maritime regions of the Nord around Dunkerque
and Gravelines where persistent conscription and service on corsairs in the
Channel had by 1812 drained the local community of both sailors and craftsmen
(78). In a region where coastal and river traffic was vital to the economy, overconscription of seamen and bargers also put trade and industry at risk; the mines
at Anzin were among the enterprises affected when they could no longer find
commercial shipping to transport their coal stocks (79).
Although the practice of exempting gens de mer from military recruitment
had a long and honorable pedigree (80), the system of classement attracted a
great deal of criticism. On the one hand, it was alleged that the practice did nothing to improve the caliber of the navy, especially as the conscription included
ouvriers marins who had never previously set foot on board a ship. At Dunkerque the sous-commissaire de la marine was believed to be incorporating anyone with the least nautical background in his bid to fill the required quotas,
regardless of the effect that this might have on morale (81). Indeed, the minister
The Extent of Evasion / 57
for the navy became convinced by Year XII that artisanal skills had little relevance to the quality of young sailors, for their craft always remained their primary interest and seafaring took a poor second place. He complained to the
Emperor that the ouvriers marins whom he was being forced to accept made the
worst of seamen, lacking both experience and commitment, and made an impassioned plea for unsophisticated ignorance for men with experience of life at sea
without any pretensions to craft status:
Les bons matelots sont ceux qui sont les plus ignorants, ceux qui n'ayant
point de metier qui leur donne a vivre pendant qu'ils sont a terre sont obliges
de se rembarquer continuellement, ceux enfin qui n'ayant pas a tirer vanite
d'une Industrie etrangere au greement et a la manoeuvre placent la leur a 1'avance dans cette partie. (82)
On the other hand, the critics could point to the fact that naval classement
was increasingly seen as a way by which able-bodied conscripts could escape the
rigors of the armies, especially during the Empire when the navy was little used
by comparison with the military. In the Pyrenees-Orientales it was observed that
naval inscription was almost the equivalent of total evasion of military responsibilities (83). In the Landes there was little question of really competent boatmen serving in the navy, because they were receiving open protection from local
officials who were in most cases themselves the captains of merchant ships desperate for experienced crews (84). Hence local recruitment offices were forced to
twist the rules and accept men for the navy who had no right to be classes, men
who should in law have been balloted for the armies. Such a man was PierreFrancois Loton, one of many ill-qualified sailors signed on in hard-pressed
Lorient. Whereas in theory all candidates for classement in his age group had to
prove their prowess by two years' apprenticeship, eighteen months at sea, or
experience of two long voyages or two seasons of fishing, Loton seems never to
have been on a ship but to have spent his youth in study at the college in Vendome and the law school at Rennes. It could only follow that he, along with
many of his fellows, had obtained his certificate of competence by fraudulent
means to escape from the regiments. This suspicion was futher strengthened
when Loton's younger brother followed his example and produced a false certificate attesting to his naval classement. It was finally revealed that the boys'
father was employed as a commis de marine in Lorient (85).
Similar criticism was leveled against that other form of legalized inequality,
the system of remplacement whereby those unlucky enough to draw a mauvais
