for a conge that he ordered all those excused service on these grounds to present
themselves at their town halls to be officially measured in the presence of those
of their fellows who had been designated to march (6). In the Vosges, consistently among the most obedient of areas, there was little difficulty in finding men
for the ordinary foot regiments during the Empire, but height was increasingly
a stumbling block to recruitment into the artillery, where the stipulations were
more severe: in 1808, of 122 men called, only 17 were accepted (7). Confusion
reigned as to whether those below the minimal height should take part in the
ballot. Undersized soldiers were dispatched to the front by well-intentioned and
bamboozled mayors; country lads prayed that they would not grow too quickly
before their nineteenth birthday. They were helped by Napoleon's impatience
for cannonfodder that resulted in their being examined at this younger age, for
the effect was the granting of larger numbers of reformes. The prefect of the
Vendee spelled this out to the Minister in 1807 when he commented on the
larger numbers being sent away by the conseils de revision. No fraud was
involved nor yet were young men becoming more stunted in their growth. It was
simply that many of them were not fully developed physically by the time they
presented themselves for their medical "de sorte qu'il en est, j'en suis persuade,
qui ont ete renvoyes par defaut de taille et pour faible constitution qui tres certainement auront a 1'expiration de leur vingtieme annee toutes les conditions
exigees pour le service militaire" (8).
The law further stipulated that a conscript had to be of a certain standard of
The Extent of Evasion / 45
physical strength and fitness if he was to be of any use to the army. Given the
general poverty and the unhealthy conditions in which so many Frenchmen
lived, it is hardly surprising that their health was frequently poor and that large
numbers failed even the most basic medical examination. For the majority of
peasant boys farming was not a healthy way of life, and it was country areas that
consistently reported the highest numbers of exemptions on grounds of health
and disability. Scrofula and hernias were very numerous in agricultural regions
like the Aisne, and ulcers were being continually diagnosed (9). The state of
physical condition varied with lifestyle and topography even within very localized areas so that recognizable patterns could be discerned in the kinds of
reformes granted. In the Seine-et-Oise, for example, the prefect categorized the
various cantons under his jurisdiction according to the prevalence of their ailments, for there was nothing homogeneous about his department. At Mantes,
he reported, men were very strong and hardy, but because they worked from
early childhood on steep escarpments they tended to suffer from severe curviture
of the spine. In Etampes and Corbeil they were often of very weak constitution.
Near Versailles there were frequent cases of shortsightedness and at Pontoise a
large number were infected with ringworm (10). Often local patterns of disability
were connected with a particular trade, as in the Oise, where the prefect had no
hesitation in linking the high incidence of hernias and constitutional diseases to
the occupational structure of his department, "pays des eventails, lunetiers et
frotteurs de verre a Songeons et dans les communes voisines, faiseurs de bas,
fileurs de laine" (11). The variety of ailments diagnosed and accepted as the
basis for exemption gives a frightening insight into the standards of health at the
time. At Vic-sur-Cere in the Cantal, for instance, fifty-seven young men underwent a basic medical in Year VII and only three were considered fit for military
service. And however cynically one may view the judgments of the jury in an
area not renowned for its enthusiasm for soldiering, many of those examined
were seriously ill. Deafness, epilepsy, wounds that had turned septic, respiratory
troubles and the spitting of blood, ulcers, tumors, unexplained lumps, and
untreated fractures were all present. Some had deformities that made walking
difficult and painful, several suffered from chest diseases and lung failure, in a
few cases the ailments were hereditary, and one man had apparently been bitten
by a rabid dog (12). In mountainous areas like Vicfaiblesse de constitution complemented defaut de faille as a major impediment to efficient recruitment.
As with exemptions for height, so exemptions on health grounds were very
unevenly spread across France. In the five classes up to and including Year XIII,
some 35 percent of all conscripts were exempted following their appearance
before a conseil de revision. Yet in two departments, the Meurthe and the Puyde-D6me, only 10 percent of recruits were excused, whereas in twenty-seven
others the figure was 40 percent or higher, and in a few it exceeded half of the
youngsters on the tableaux. The Charente and the Creuse both exempted 51 percent of their conscripts, the Cher 54 percent, and the Eure an astonishing 63
percent (13). The prefect of the Seine-Inferieure was himself sufficiently shocked
by the high number of men in the conscription of 1813 who were physically
weak or deformed that he offered the Minister the explanation that he had been
given by local doctors—that the poor state of health of the conscripts resulted
46 / Conscripts and Deserters
from the conditions in which they had grown up and the deprivations they had
suffered; "Les medecins s'accordent a croire que la faiblesse de leur constitution
peut tenir a Pepoque a laquelle ils sont nes, et ne doutent pas que la disette et
les doutes politiques de 1793 n'aient influe d'une maniere tres puissante sur leur
organisation physique" (14). While this might seem politically acceptable, it
scarcely justified the enormous variations from town to town. In 1811, noting
these discrepancies, the Minister complained that far too many reformes were
being handed out and implied that very high proportions (the deparment of
Mont-Blanc exempted 58 percent of its conscripts) could only mean feeble or
even corrupt local administration (15). The government put increasing pressure
on local officials to use medical exemptions sparingly and took a detailed interest
in the workings of the conseils that granted them.
The mechanism for granting these exemptions was always likely to be
fraught with suspicion because local people were involved and interest and influence never far away. In the 1790s, when municipal councils still retained a large
measure of discretion in determining who was fit for service, allegations of malpractice were especially prevalent, with Paris tending to interpret large numbers
of exemptions as further evidence of lax administration and poor esprit public.
Men with relatively minor ailments, it was claimed, were getting themselves
exempted by benevolent councils, and even those who had obviously inflicted
their wounds themselves were being excused service without as much as a
rebuke. Throughout the period, it was a constant theme of ministerial correspondence that local men were necessarily venal and open to pressure, and that
the sons of the rich and influential were always the most likely to receive the
coveted reforme. From the Sarthe came the forthright statement that equality
was being outraged, that those with money could always succeed in being
exempted leaving the poor to fight: "II n'y a que les pauvres a soutenir la Republique, ceux-la seuls sont contraints de rejoindre les armees, parce qu'ils ne peuvent, faute d'argent, se procurer des exemptions" (16). Even in 1813 the general
in charge of recruitment in the Gironde wrote angrily to the prefect that the sons
of rich Bordeaux families were still managing to secure the most improbable
exemptions on medical grounds. Latour, of the paper firm, had been excused
"quoiqu'il soit un des plus beaux hommes de la ville". The son of another merchant, Graves atne, had been rejected on the spurious grounds that he had one
arm shorter than the other, although this had never before been noticed in the
town. "Le Juif Gradis," found fit at his first medical, had mysteriously developed a hernia by the time of his second, "quoique Finfirmite alleguee n'existe
pas" (17). The general added that it might not be entirely coincidental that these
rich families offered handsome presents to the captain in charge of recruitment,
who had amassed a sizable fortune through his display of discreet generosity.
Such instances made a laughingstock of the principles on which conscription
was constructed and constituted a dangerous example to others. The large number of exemptions granted in the Nord was seen as a direct incentive to desert
(18). The social imbalance often evident in the dispensing of reformes also added
to the intensity of feeling against conscription in many areas of the country (19).
That is not to suggest that all mayors were corrupt or to impugn the workings
of the system as a whole. But there were enough cases of graft and favor in the
The Extent of Evasion / 47
course of the decade to make ministers seek to tighten up the procedures for
granting reformes, and the introduction of conscription was accompanied by the
establishment of departmental juries to perform this delicate task. Their composition was fixed by law, each jury consisting of three military officers, assisted
by three doctors who could offer expert opinion (20). As conscription became
more and more pressing, so the control of the conseil de revision grew more
centralized, under the chairmanship of the subprefect and finally of the prefect
himself. The guidelines issued were equally restrictive, laying down precisely
what kinds of disability should be regarded as grounds for exemption. Some the
jury could determine on the spot. They were to look, said the prefect of the
Seine-et-Oise, for the loss of an eye, the atrophying of a limb, the mutilation of
some essential organ, the curviture of the vertical column, or the total loss of
teeth. Others might be less immediately apparent, but in the interests of public
order they should assure themselves that the grounds for a reforme were always
such as were generally accepted in the community and unlikely to cause uproar
among the other conscripts (21). These criteria are interesting, for they throw
light on the more fundamental interests of the government, both in maintaining
public order and in guaranteeing a general sense of fairness in the conscription
process.
Evidence from the registers of the conseils de revision bears witness to the
painstaking thoroughness that was usually displayed in coming to a decision.
Conscripts would appear before the jury and ask for some ailment to be considered or some deformity to exclude them from the ballot. Solemnly they shuffled
forward, parading their bent left toe, their lameness, their "cuisse beaucoup plus
courte," their limp and useless right arm, and the jury would pass judgment. If
the conscript still felt he had a grievance he had the right to represent himself
and provide new evidence with some prospect that his appeal would be successful (22). Sometimes the appearance would involve a detailed and intimate medical examination, as in the case of Laurent Choi who declared to the conseil at
Bordeaux in Year VII that an axe had sliced through his left testicle. The jury
noted solemnly that Choi had indeed suffered this terrible accident,
que cette position du testicule doit faire eprouver des douleurs vives qui se
propagent dans la region lombaire lorsque cette partie eprouve la plus legere
pression des que le malade fait quelque exercice un peu penible ou qu'il se
tient longtemps debout, que cette affection ne presente point de grands moyens curatifs a moins une operation qui serait tres douloureuse et douteuse,
que ce citoyen serait plus onereux qu'utile a la Republique dans les armees.
(23)
