But there were other disabilities that were less easy to detect with any confidence
in the course of a short medical, blindness, and epilepsy being two of the most
common examples. Doctors asked to make rapid diagnoses found it impossible
to rule with any certainty, and in such cases the testimony of other villagers and
a sworn statement by the mayor were still accepted as binding evidence (24).
This was not done without considerable misgiving because there was little confidence in the truthfulness of friends and neighbors when asked to provide evi-
48 / Conscripts and Deserters
dence that would allow one of their own to escape the draft. By 1806 even doctors' notes were being treated with open scorn. The prefect of the Gironde
reported maliciously in that year that all but 200 or 300 of his conscripts had
turned up with the regulation medical note, adding that if they were to be
believed "tout le departement ne serait qu'un immense hopital" (25). Even less
receptive was the prefect of the Somme, who informed his mayors that conscripts seeking a reforme should not bother to collect petitions or medical certificates before coming to Amiens, since the conseil had clear instructions to
ignore all of them; only official letters from mayors would have any effect. The
conseil, he added flamboyantly, was there to examine men's bodies not their
papers (26). But the success of the conseils in avoiding abuse varied considerably, not least because some of them were accepting bribes and according favors
to their friends. Some 7,000 or 8,000 exemptions were handed out by the conseil
de revision in Aurillac between 1806 and 1810, the majority of them purchased
for approximately 1,000 francs apiece, a scandal that implicated the prefect himself and which led to his dismissal (27). The young Cantalien might view the
medical examination as a proper moment to buy his freedom, whereas for his
counterpart in the Seine-et-Oise, faced with a steely integrity and a reluctance to
exempt any but the most glaring cases, no such opportunity existed (28). By the
end of the war the law on the composition and conduct of the councils had been
tightened to such a degree that they offered little hope of honest escape from the
regiment. The able-bodied recruit could expect little of them composed as they
were of army men and propertied notables who had already seen their own sons
incorporated into the battalions. The odds were so stacked against the conscript
that in the Ariege, an area where few young men were eager to sacrifice themselves in the nation's service, only those whose disabilities were quite patent and
who were therefore confident of obtaining a reforme were presenting themselves
for examination (29).
Since for the greater part of the war it was single men who were subjected to
military service, another legal route to freedom lay in timely matrimony. All the
recruitment laws of the 1790s and the early years of conscription specifically
exempted or placed en fin de depot those young men who had married before
twenty years of age, and no government could make marriage illegal in the interests of its military. Nevertheless, successive ministers viewed with a jaundiced
eye the lines of young men presenting themselves for marriage during the spring
months, the months that also marked the recruiting season before the new campaigns began. Progressively the government tried to prevent any last minute
rush to the mairie by designating in the recruitment law a precise date, usually
some weeks earlier, by which a conscript must have been married if he were to
benefit from military exemption (30). Further restrictions were added in 1809
when the demands of the army reached a new peak. From that year it became
necessary in practice to have children as well as a wife to be sure of exemption;
such was the weight of that year's conscription that married men without
dependents were being taken, while the death of his wife would render a conscript immediately liable to service unless he had taken the precaution of starting a family (31). This was merely the last turn of the screw since the marriages
of potential conscripts had been increasingly circumscribed by regulations and
The Extent of Evasion / 49
prohibitions since the first conscription law in Year VII. The effect was, of
course, an increase in policing in an area that most villagers regarded as
intensely private and in which state meddling was bitterly resented. For mayors
and prefects the application of such a law was fraught with difficulties and ambiguities. When the department of the Rhone asked for a ruling in Year VII on
the circumstances in which marriage could actually be refused, the Minister of
the Interior was suitably cautious. It was not the government's wish to discourage matrimony, far less procreation, he explained, and agents municipaux
should not refuse to marry those conscripts who had legal exemptions or who
were not called for active service. But too many of those presenting themselves
were using their married status to avoid their obligations, and in these cases their
requests must be refused. Any officials marrying conscripts who had no exemption from service would, indeed, be commiting a criminal offense by becoming
the accomplices of soldiers intent on defrauding the state, and they risked being
punished accordingly (32).
Though the aim of this legislation was universally understood, its effects
were not always welcomed by the administrators who had to enforce it. The
prefect of the Gironde was particularly outspoken in Year IX in condemning
what he saw as the damaging implications of a law that had seriously reduced
the number of marriages in many villages in his department. The region was
already suffering from a shortage of labor that was putting agriculture at risk,
and any decrease in the number of marriages could only lead to a subsequent
decrease in the birthrate at a time when it was imperative to expand the population to aid the nation's recovery from a long and costly war. The implications,
he added, extended beyond the demographic field because the effect on morals
was a corrupting one with a new casualness in attitudes to cohabitation and illegitimacy (33). But more galling for the army were the many marriages that were
celebrated and which, even when within the letter of the law, showed incontrovertibly the degree of hostility to soldiering that was prevalent in the community. Small villages in the Basses-Pyrenees were deluged with "une foule de mariages," some legal, others fraudulent, as young men rushed to cover themselves
with the most accessible alibi (34). Desperate conscripts on finding themselves
drafted tried to escape by rushing into marriage. We learn, for instance, that
following the publication of the conscription lists on 11 January 1813 in the
canton of Meulan, one of the lads affected got married on 13 January and a
second on the following day (35). Public opinion would generally seem to have
favored fugitives, especially if their conduct could be portrayed as "honorable."
Grellier, a conscript of the Year IX from Lausun in the Lot-et-Garonne, is a case
in point. He was a refractory and therefore ineligible for marriage, but he succeeded in persuading the mayor of La Reole to marry him to a local girl whom
he had got pregnant. It is difficult not to sympathize with the hapless mayor in
such a case. Grellier was a plausible enough young man, a coutelierby trade who
would have every reason to travel to other towns in search of work, who had
lived in La Reole for only a few months. Had the mayor undertaken the checks
that the law demanded, a local family would have been unnecessarily embarrassed. He therefore married the young couple and betrayed his trust as a magistrate (36).
50 / Conscripts and Deserters
What particularly worried the authorities was the growing number of marriages of the kind that they termed "abusifs" or "disproportionnes," those of
twenty- or twenty-one-year old conscripts to women very much older than
themselves. The cases are legion, especially in rural villages where marriageable
young girls were at a premium and lads found themselves in need of wives at a
few days' notice. In such circumstances a young man could not always afford to
be selective. The village of Maucourt in Picardy produced in 1808 a galaxy of
rare matches, with young conscripts selecting brides of 72, 74, 77, even 87 years
old to win the privilege of staying on their farms, undisturbed by the recruitingofficer (37). Similarly in the Drome in 1813, the prefect was angered by a rash
of rather curious weddings, uniting conscripts to women of 75, 77, and 82 years
old, widows from farming communities who had accepted to save young, ablebodied men from the battalions. One of the four conscripts involved had even
gone to see the sous-prefet in Valence to convince himself that his intended marriage was valid in the eyes of the law. Another, the son of the mayor of Larnage
who had married a woman of 55 years old, could point out that the marriage
was not conceived of as a means of draft dodging but as a step, in no way
unusual in a peasant village, aimed at the accumulation of wealth. His father
added that he saw nothing reprehensible in the union because at 55 years of age
"une femme n'est point encore une piece de debris, elle est encore bien en etat
de gouverner une maison, elle peut se promettre encore plusieurs annees de travail" (38). The mayor of Erome, defending his decision to conduct two of the
offending ceremonies, added that mayors were not appointed to investigate
whether marriages were devised "par aisance" or "par amitie" (39). It is, perhaps, significant that the sous-prefet of Nyons rushed to their defenses, adding
that the mayors who had permitted these marriages had nothing to answer for
because they had acted in good faith and had not broken any law or ministerial
instruction (40).
If the subprefect was right in believing that the strict letter of the law was
being respected, its spirit was being broken on a disturbing scale. Even the oldest
of village women could be escorted to the mairie by young men suddenly alerted
to the benefits of matrimony. Paul Viard, in his discussion of the abuse in the
Nord, has unearthed one improbable marriage between a lad of eighteen years
and a widow of ninety-nine years, and the case may not be unique (41). Recruiting-officers were understandably irate that no action could be taken against the
conscripts involved, for, as the prefect of the Aisne pointed out, there was little
moral difference between a recruit who mutilated himself to avoid service and
his counterpart who by entering a solemn marriage ceremony with an octogenerian "repugne a la fois aux bonnes moeurs et outrage la nature" (42). The
Revolution had even facilitated the process by instituting divorce since the
young recruit who married for reasons of short-term convenience was not committed to his bride for longer than was strictly necessary and she would generally
be discarded once the threat of conscription receded. For the women the attraction was usually financial. They were suddenly in desperate demand and were
able to profit accordingly. In the Calvados, the jeunes gens entering into such
contracts were almost always from reasonably comfortable homes and the
The Extent of Evasion / 51
women were predictably the impoverished inmates of the local poorhouse. The
arrangement could be portrayed as a kind of rescue operation for them as well:
C'est parmi des septuagenaires, des octogenaires que ces insenses choisissent
des compagnes qu'ils abandonnent ensuite en leur accordant quelques secours
journaliers. Ces jours-ci un jeune homme de Farrondissement de Pont 1'Eveque, riche de 1500 francs de rentes, a donne son nom a une miserable femme
d'un age tres avance, vivant d'aumones et a qui il se contente de faire une
