desert or to avoid the draft were closely linked, although the nature of the connection is not a straightforward linear one. It is certainly not the case that in
normal years the poorer members of society were eager to serve as conscript
soldiers, even if they might be attracted to serve for profit so as to rescue their
92 / Conscripts and Deserters
families from distress. In Year II, for instance, it was noted that a very large part
of the troops provided by the district of Hennebont in the Morbihan "sont des
mercenaries et charges de famille, qui n'ont d'autres subsistances que le fruit de
leurs travaux et de leurs peines" (108). The willingness of men to offer themselves as remplagants reflects the same economic motive, a preparedness to fight
and if necessary die, but for money, as mercenaries, in the time-honored fashion
of the poor. Conscription was a very different matter, especially for the peasantry, who without substantial hope of financial gain had every reason to stay
on their farms. Poverty was in no sense a catalyst to obedience, at least for as
long as poverty did not become out-and-out starvation and the hope of security
did not fade utterly. In an ironic way, the poorer peasant might be the least likely
to feel threatened by the Imperial police, since the principal sanction that could
be used against him, the imposition of a heavy fine on his family, was so obviously beyond his means as to be uncollectable. Officials found themselves
thwarted by their inability to take any effective reprisals against deserters from
poor families, and the offender might hope to escape scot-free while his more
affluent counterpart would be deterred from desertion by the certain knowledge
that his property would be sequestrated (109). The subprefect of Bethune even
suggested, quite plausibly, that the reason for his lack of success in bringing conscripts to book was the social chance that "le sort est tombe sur une foule de
malheureux" (110). In his frustration he equated poverty with resistance, and in
normal years during the Consulate and Empire he was probably right. Napoleon
did, after all, ensure that the peasantry generally enjoyed a much more secure
return than that to which they and their forebears had been accustomed. But if
that relative prosperity meant that even poor peasants could hope to establish
some sort of patrimoine and thus accentuated the reluctance of rural communities to serve in the armies, the crisis years after 1810 came as a cruel and unexpected shock. Grinding misery and the inability to find food for their families
effectively reduced many poorer peasants to seek the traditional outlets that had
been their lot for so much of the eighteenth century. For many this meant the
end of any dream of independence and swiftly undermined the collective
instincts that had sustained peasant villages. Real hardship drove men to find
what sources of sustenance they could and, just as they had always done, the
poor were forced to consider soldiering as a simple means of staying alive. The
army, after all, reduced the number of mouths to be fed in the starving village
community, provided food, shelter, and a modicum of pay. Even children of
fourteen years of age were begging to be admitted to a military career as an alternative to a life without hope, as the prefect of the Nord rather harrowingly
reported in October of 1811:
II se presente journellement a la Prefecture, a la mairie de Lille et des autres
villes, des enfants de 14 a 16 ans qui demandent a servir dans la marine ou
dans le regiment des pupilles de la garde. Ces enfants, sans travail par suite
de la suspension de plusieurs ateliers, appartenant a des families pauvres, fatiguent autant la surveillance de la police que les administrations de secours. 11
est a craindre que pendant la saison de 1'hiver le besoin ne les porte a commettre des desordres. (Ill)
The Roots of Resistance / 93
In the years after 1810 the downturn in the economy combined with sustained
police activity to persuade the mass of the population to accept their military
obligations and submit to the law.
If the economic climate played a significant part in forming the attitudes of
the civilian population, those who deserted from their regiments were often
swayed by their firsthand experience of what soldiering really meant. For as
much as the government of the period might strive to make the welfare and
supply of the army their very highest priority (112), there were persistent complaints from the ranks that the reality of army life was itself a major factor in
swelling the numbers of those opting for the insecurity and ignominy of desertion. Their misery began in many cases during the long and lonely march to join
their battalions, a march that they were frequently forced to make without company and in the greatest discomfort, like those men from the Morbihan who
were reported by an outraged district council at La Roche-Sauveur to be walking
"isolement" and "nu-pieds" in messidor Year III (113). In later years such solitary marches were increasingly replaced by a more regimented approach, with
groups of raw recruits escorted to their destinations by gendarmes or military
conducteurs, whose task it was to ensure that they did not slip away during the
journey. Yet in many cases these drivers contributed to the high rate of desertion, for they rapidly acquired a rather unsavory reputation for deceit, cupidity,
and physical brutality. In the Southeast many recruits complained that they were
systematically starved during their journey so that the conducteur could pocket
their rations (114). In Brittany drivers seldom had any knowledge of the Breton
language or of Breton customs, with the result that they mocked their young
charges mercilessly for their dress, their manners, even their style of eating (115).
It was scarcely a propitious initiation into the strange and rather terrifying rites
of military life. Nor did the frequent allegations that these drivers were brutal
men, given to bouts of heavy drinking and a rather macho bravado, do much to
allay the fears of the fainthearted. Those employed were often former soldiers
or too old to serve, men with a grudge to bear and an unreassuring tendency to
physical violence. Cases abound of reported beatings and outbursts of violent
anger. Neither man nor beast was safe at their hands. In the Ariege in Year IV
it was alleged that many of the drivers were not of the quality that the job
required, and that their lack of compassion and understanding of others was a
major cause of the mass desertions that the area had witnessed. Even the official
in charge of the depot des chevaux was roused to protest at the treatment his
horses received at their hands:
Ce n'a pas etc sans indignation que nous avons vu maltraiter de gaiete de
coeur des chevaux attaches au pied d'un arbre, et les frapper jusqu'a leur faire
mordre la poussiere. II n'est pas surprenant s'ils deperissent tous les jours, car
bien loin de les soigner suivant que leur etat 1'exige, on ne cherche que leur
perte en les assommant de coups. (116)
Too often, it seems, their treatment of their fellow human beings followed the
same pattern, and denunciations of conducteurs seen abusing young conscripts
make unpleasant reading. One such, in Year VIII, got as far as the Minister of
94 / Conscripts and Deserters
War, who was moved to take the allegation seriously. The revolutionary rhetoric
only serves to deepen the impression that the incident must have made on the
young minds of those involved:
Hier une quarantaine de recrues destinees pour la marine marchaient dans la
rue du Faubourg Antoine, la plupart pieds-nus; il tombait une averse, et ces
enfants de la patrie avancaient gaiement sous des flots de pluie, en chantant
des hymnes Republicaines. Deux ou trois d'entr'eux s'ecartent un peu des
rangs; aussitot leur conducteur tombe dessus a grands coups de sabre et les
repousse ainsi dans les rangs. Sont-ce des Russes ou des Francais qui traitent
de cette affreuse maniere les jeunes Republicans qu'ils sont charges de conduire? La justice et la politique exigent egalement que cette coupable brutalite
ne reste pas impunie. (117)
For many conscripts the first weeks in their regiments only compounded the
feelings of resentment and misery that had beset them ever since the day of the
ballot. Of course any army, and especially a conscript army, will produce its list
of complaints and grievances, but as the years passed and the scale of French
war aims widened, it became more and more obvious that finance and administration were frequently inadequate to the armies' needs and that the men in
the regiments were suffering very real privations. Even for volunteers who had
joined up with a real and passionate enthusiasm the disappointment could be
sobering; for the average, rather reluctant conscript the conditions he encountered could easily be transformed into thoughts of desertion. Food was often in
short supply and of very poor quality; the gangrenous bread supplied to troops
at Ax in thermidor III aroused fears of contagious and debilitating illness (118)
and the rotting meat distributed to soldiers at Epinal four years later sparked off
a minor insurrection among normally passive conscripts (119). For many the
lack of fresh clothing was a more serious deprivation than the inadequacy of
rations. Long months of marching through mud or bivouacking in the mountains of Piedmont could only be borne if warm and dependable uniforms were
supplied and in many cases they were not. Letters home told doleful tales of
months spent in the same spot waiting for the enemy, running a serious risk of
fever through having to wear the same damp clothes (120). Soldiers from the
Nord serving in the Armee de la Moselle in 1792 were forced to march through
frost and snow for two weeks without even the elementary protection of a tent,
such was the failure of military supply (121). And the level of deprivation suffered by the men of the Drome, again on the Moselle, is eloquently described by
one of their number in frimaire II. He notes that his battalion "se trouve dans
le plus grand denuement possible, enfin de vray sans-culottes, puisque nous
sommes du premier au dernier sans souliers, ronge de la galle, et mange par la
vermine" (122). Physical hardship on this scale was not easy to bear with equanimity and contributed significantly to the general sapping of morale that
encouraged desertion.
There seems, indeed, to have been general agreement among all the parties
involved, civilian as well as military, that conditions in the French army were
actively contributing to the problem of desertion. The army may have been
The Roots of Resistance / 95
reformed and spared the abuses of the Ancien Regime, but shortages and temptations remained that were beyond the powers of the legislator, and at times
even the generals accepted that their troops were suffering misery and degradation on an intolerable scale. Money for the soldiers' pay failed to come through
from the treasury, and starvation threatened. Soldiers in the Marseille battalions
were reduced in 1793 to eating roots if they were not to die of hunger (123); and
in the Var in Year VIII the men of the local regiments had to beg for alms to
feed themselves (124). Low pay, postal costs if they were to communicate with
their families, the lack of proper weapons for soldiers in righting regiments were
cited as contributory causes of anger and demoralization. So in turn were boredom, the dreadful, wasting boredom of soldiers who had no war to fight and
were kept in readiness for months on end, and physical exhaustion, generally
exacerbated by the cramped and disease-ridden conditions into which the conscripts were herded in barracks and camps. So bad were these conditions in one
depot at Digne in the Basses-Alpes that the local departmental administrators
