wrote to Paris in protest, insisting that "des esclaves trouveroient moins de
rigueur chez un peuple barbare qu'on en faisait eprouver a nos conscrits." How
could their troops display their patriotic fervor," they demanded, when "outre
les menaces, les paroles outrageantes qu'on leur prodiguait, ils etaient consignes
dans les lieux les plus malsains, couches sur le fumier, manquant de tout" (125)?
What made such conditions even less bearable for many soldiers was the news
that their dependents at home were also being neglected despite the promises
and the undoubted good intentions of the revolutionary governments. Soldiers
serving in the Vendee in the Year II, for instance, were appalled to learn that
pension payments to their wives had been arbitrarily suspended in the interest
of economy (126); and an angry infantryman in Year IV was driven to protest
that while part of the population was making fortunes out of biens nationaux,
the dependents of soldiers were reduced to such misery by an ungrateful government that they had to beg for food and officers' wives were compelled to sleep
with Jews to keep themselves and their children alive (127).
Behind many of these complaints lay an implicit sense of betrayal. Men who
had been recruited to protect la patrie en danger, who had been lulled into a
sense of security by the brave words of the Revolution's reforms, discovered by
bitter experience that the realities of soldiering were still brutal and demeaning,
and they blamed the government for abandoning them and failing to honor its
promises. Often the fault did lie with the government, with its administrative
failings and its financial collapse, but on other occasions the best-laid plans of
generals and ministers foundered on personal greed and deceit on the part of
officials and middlemen. It was frequently alleged that those in charge of supply
were corrupt and were deliberately holding back essential foodstuffs for their
own profit (128). Elsewhere it was bedding that was fraudulently sold off while
the soldiers suffered from lice and vermin. At Fruges in the Nord, for example,
profiteering by military suppliers resulted in a total lack of straw for the troops,
which meant that the same filthy straw had to be used for four successive detachments of men (129). Cynicism came quite easily to soldiers suffering from such
dilapidations, who saw their comrades dying of fever in fetid hospital beds while
speculators appeared to escape unpunished, or who found themselves encour-
96 / Conscripts and Deserters
aged by their officers to indulge in pillage to avert starvation in the regiment.
And that cynicism, as the officer who reported the incident at Fruges readily
acknowledged, was a major factor in loosening the bonds that tied an individual
to the army, in spreading disillusionment, and in explaining the disturbingly
high desertion rate prevalent among his troops.
Any discussion of the problem by contemporaries soon returned, however,
to the question of nostalgia, of the mal du pays that the eighteenth-century
armies feared so deeply (130). Nostalgia was more than severe homesickness, a
longing to see fields and animals, family and friends. It was, as Marcel Reinhard
showed in his classic piece on the subject, a genuine illness, though it was never
quite clear what proportion of that illness was physical and what proportion
psychological (131). What is evident from military reports throughout the Revolutionary and Napoleonic period is that armies continued to be destroyed by
melancholic and by the debilitating fevers that accompanied it. It was recognized by leading medical specialists of the day that even if nostalgic was difficult
to diagnose in terms of physical symptoms, it gravely weakened the patient's
level of resistance to other illnesses and could often make relatively minor ailments serious or even mortal. On several occasions its incidence reached almost
epidemic levels. Reinhard cites the Armee de la Moselle in Year II, the Egyptian
campaign of Year VII, the Armee des Alpes in Year VIII, and the various armies
at Mainz in 1813 and 1814 as particularly deadly instances of widespread melancholia (132). It was also accepted by doctors at the time that the conscription
laws and the farflung reaches of French military ambition in these years did
much to worsen the problem, sending young men hundreds of miles from their
homes for very long periods and condemning them to the boredom of interminable inaction, long waits for new orders, and endless uncertainty about where
they would be sent next. Those lacking willpower and determination, those
unable to read or write, country boys who did not really know how to entertain
themselves during the long months in army encampments, these were the groups
most at risk and most likely to decline into lassitude and poor health or most
likely to desert. The armies tried all kinds of remedies, from purgings and bleedings by regimental doctors to the prescription of games and amusements, even
of drink and female company, to overcome these symptoms. It was the high
incidence of melancholy that led to the abandonment of the universalist ideals
of the revolutionary amalgame and to the institution of units recruited regionally, so that boys from the same villages could defuse severe attacks of homesickness in one another's presence. And when, in 1793, Jourdeuil ended all permissions de convalescence in the Armee du Nord in an attempt to stamp out
desertion, it is significant that he made one important exception: those suffering
from nostalgic were still to be allowed to return to their pays, since there was no
other known cure for their medical condition (133).
The individual circumstances that drove men to desert varied widely as with
any army. Among French deserters were men repelled by the conditions of regimental life, blinded by feelings of guilt and responsibility, and saddled with
debts in their units which they could never hope to discharge (134). There were
those among them who deserted every year for the harvest or once the campaigning season was over who could never be persuaded that soldiering was now
The Roots of Resistance / 97
a full-time occupation. Some continued to plead in mitigation that they had
never had the regulations explained to them and that they assumed it was their
right to slip offhome when the work of the year was over (135). A few even tried
to turn this to their profit, leaving their units not to return home but to sign on
with another regiment and pick up a second bounty, a refinement on the custom
of billardage that had been so common in the Ancien Regime (136). Others
abandoned everything for a love affair left unfinished in their pays, like Guerin,
from Soullans in the Vendee, who was persuaded to desert by his mistress with
whom he withdrew into the treacherous marshes that surrounded her village
"d'ou il continua ses assiduites aupres d'elle" (137). Others again were little different from criminals, men suspected of theft or murder in the armies whose
desertions were a means of escaping the consequences of their actions. For four
young conscripts from Romans desertion seemed the only means of escape in
Year III when they were discovered selling off army stores to a local innkeeper
(138). In the Morbihan, Jean Valois and Francois Soval stole some liquor from
a bar and got involved in drunken horseplay; for them, too, desertion presented
itself as a logical alternative to a spell in prison (139). But if the decision to desert
might be a highly personal one influenced by circumstances that had little to do
with the conduct of the wars, the overall phenomenon of desertion and insoumission, affecting, as we have seen, hundreds of thousands of soldiers cannot be
dismissed simply as the aggregate of these individual crises. In large measure
those electing to desert or to avoid service did so in a climate that favored their
actions, where they could be assured of a degree of support or at least of understanding from their own communities. If the government was ever to break local
strongholds of resistance to recruitment, it was not just individual conscripts
that it would have to convert to the cause of the patrie, but whole families, entire
communities. Until that happened the option of life on the run outside the law
would always seem worthwhile to a wide spectrum of reluctant soldiers.
5
The Deserter and Civilian Society
WHEN THE unwilling soldier knew that he would receive a warm welcome from
his family and friends, desertion and insoumission could appear to provide easy
options. But did they? Was the decision to desert one that a conscript could ever
make with any degree of assurance or equanimity? The powerful image left to
us last century by Emile Erckmann and Louis Chatrian of Joseph Bertha, a
young conscript from Dagsbourg in Alsace, learning that every hoped-for
exemption had been refused and that he must leave for the front, but unwilling
to leave his village and his fiancee, being pulled this way and that by the conflicting advice of relatives and friends, is a difficult one to erase (1). In this fictitious scene, duty conflicts with sentiment, nation with family; his aunt in particular is open in her advocacy of flight as the only sensible course to follow,
promising that his family will offer him every support and even join him in
hiding or exile should circumstances make it necessary. In her mind there is
nothing shameful about refusing to serve. Many of the other lads of the village
were doing the same with apparent impunity. "You shall not go," she tells him.
"You shall go and hide in the forest with Jean Kraft, Louis Berne, and all the
bravest lads in the place. You shall cross the hills and go to Switzerland, and
Catherine and I will come and join you there, and wait until this work of extermination is finished" (2). It is all made to sound beguilingly easy, a natural path
to follow in such unhappy circumstances. Only Joseph's employer, the watchmaker Melchior Goulden, counsels against this view, pointing to the disadvantages that might pursue him in later life. Speaking as an ex-soldier of the Republic, Goulden urges young Joseph to think carefully before placing himself outside
the law because in Alsace there would be a social cost to pay:
Joseph would then be a deserter, and after playing such a trick no man would
be respected anywhere. He could no longer have father, mother, church, or
country, having shown himself unable to fulfil the first of all duties—that of
defending his own country, even if that country be in the wrong. (3)
98
The Deserter and Civilian Society / 99
In Erckmann and Chatrian's account, Joseph does indeed allow himself to be
persuaded by these patriotic arguments and he duly leaves for Germany. But
hundreds of thousands of young men faced with a similar choice elected to break
the law and risk the consequences. They did so in the full knowledge that a
deserter's lot could be lonely and brutalizing and that everyday life on the run
could not hope to be easy. They understood the risks and the deprivations that
lay ahead; but they considered them well worth facing in order to escape from
the military and the miseries that service implied.
The risks were clearly greater for the army deserter than for the refractory, if
only because he faced greater isolation and unfamiliar environment. The refractory would generally be able to live in or near his native village and mix with
his family and friends during those hours when police activity was slight, but
the deserter might have to cover hundreds of miles before he reached his pays
and to cope with strange dialects, unknown terrain, and an uncertain welcome
in villages and hamlets where he had no contacts and where his very presence
might seem to pose something of a threat. Especially after the introduction of
annual conscription, he would seem dreadfully visible and vulnerable in the
