traditions and the opportunities that each region of the country jealously maintained. The differences could be quite startlingly wide. In Hargenvilliers' carefully assembled report on the first conscriptions between Year VII and Year
XIII, he supplied a breakdown by department of the entire problem of desertion
and insoumission that dramatically demonstrated the contrasting reactions of
different areas of the country. In some departments there was scarcely a problem
at all: the Aisne, the Haute-Marne, and the Meurthe produced a rate of desertion
of only 8 percent across these years, the Cote d'Or 6 percent, the Doubs 5 percent. Altogether, seven departments in metropolitan France produced desertion
rates below 10 percent in this, the period of the greatest incidence of resistance
to the new conscription law. In contrast, there were sixteen departments where
the rate of resistance was in excess of 40 percent, and in four of these more than
half the young men called to the colors either refused to respond or signed on
only to desert once the conscription process was complete (157). The returns for
the following years, from 1806 to 1811, point to a similar picture; although on
this occasion Hargenvilliers did attempt to distinguish refractories from deserters, and although the overall numbers declared had decreased significantly, there
was no common decrease or shared level of dissidence. Whereas in 1810 some
departments were admitting to only a handful of deserters on their territory,
others made returns that numbered their problem at 1,000 or more with the
Aveyron topping the list at 2,530 (158). And in 1813, when both the Gironde
and the Haute-Garonne accepted that they had more than 2,000 deserters and
insoumis, there were twenty-three departments that claimed to have fewer than
100. In numerical terms desertion remained at the time of Leipzig what it had
been back in 1793, a regional rather than a national phenomenon that can be
understood only in terms of its local backdrop (159).
Ministerial correspondence throughout the period pointed to four areas of
France where conscription problems were endemic, all areas where the nature
of the terrain came to the assistance of men on the run. Jean Waquet, in one of
a series of articles on popular responses to conscription, has aptly identified
these as being the West of France, "depuis la Normandie et le Maine"; the Massif Central; the departments of the North close to the Belgian frontier; and the
Southwest, particularly Aquitaine rather than Languedoc (160). These were the
areas where the problem continued even after it had all but evaporated elsewhere. In stark contrast, the plains of the East and the Paris region were models
of obedience and patriotic devotion. Reports from the various prefects in Year
XII underline just how easy conscription had become in the eastern departments: in the Doubs "la desertion est rare"; in the Cote d'Or it was "presque
nulle"; the Aube was declared to be "presqu'exempt du fleau de la desertion";
in the Ardennes desertion had never appeared "d'une maniere allarmante"; in
the Haute-Saone "la conscription s'execute facilement" (161). In the Vosges the
prefect could allow himself a certain degree of self-congratulation. In the Year
VII the Vosges had acquitted itself well though perhaps not quite as well as the
commissaire in Epinal liked to believe. He reported, rather rhetorically, that he
had inspected the conscripts as they left and seen "la serenite et la gaiete peintes
72 / Conscripts and Deserters
sur tous les visages de la jeunesse des Vosges" (162). Throughout the Empire the
department continued to record excellent conscription figures even in the most
difficult years. And where there were defaulters, the prefect seemed to be
informed of their every movement. In 1807 he could boast that of the classe of
1808, numbered at 549 men, only 5 had not left for their regiments. Of these, 1
was finishing his education in a lycee and a second training for the priesthood,
2 were already in the service of the army as carters, since they had been requisitioned at the end of Year XIII, and the fifth was temporarily absent from the
department (only in this one case was there any reason to refer the question to
the conseil de recrutement) (163). It was a record of achievement that would
have been the envy of many of his colleagues in the Midi or, indeed, of Imperial
administrators in the departements reunis where desertion rates remained stubbornly high throughout the Empire (164).
There is, of course, something very artificial about a map of desertion by
department in this way. Departments were purely administrative divisions,
determined for largely political reasons in 1790 by revolutionaries determined
to break down the old provincial loyalties of the Ancien Regime. They did not
represent any common tradition or political experience, nor did they necessarily
present any geographical or economic coherence. The success of the recruitment
process varied hugely not only between departments but also within departments, from mountain to plain, from village to village. In the Drome the problem was heavily concentrated in the wooded, mountainous southern part of the
department around Montelimar, Pierrelatte, and Saint-Paul-Trois-Chateaux;
the more northerly reaches of the department and the valleys of the Rhone and
Isere were relatively untroubled (165). In the Cantal, too, there were glaring contrasts between the recruitment records of different communes, to the extent that
there were villages like Tournemire where desertion was an almost universal
response in the 1790s (166). Some villages presented the authorities with few
problems, whereas their neighbors developed an unenviable reputation as hotbeds of resistance. The very detailed returns made in Year VI in the Cantal illustrate this quite dramatically. In the canton of Chaudesaigues, for instance, some
communes were fairly obedient, with one or two refractories apiece; yet SaintUrcize had thirty-four refractories, and the tiny commune of Lieutades had
thirty-eight. The picture was very similar elsewhere, with marked pockets of
resistance forming in remote rural communities. Boisset, in the canton of
Maurs, had thirty-seven deserters and insoumis, a tally more than double that
of the chef-lieu de canton itself. And in the particularly refractory canton of
Montsalvy, which was continually to provide the authorities with conscription
problems, resistance was again concentrated in a few small, tightly knit rural
communities. Montsalvy itself had only eighteen refractory soldiers, an honorable record when compared with certain smaller communes under its administration like Junhac (with forty-six), Marcales (forty-eight), Senezergues (fortynine), or Cassaniouze (sixty-six) (167). In their varying responses to military
service localities could be very localized indeed.
These varying responses puzzled and irritated ministers throughout the
period and were the subject of numerous reports and enquiries. Why should
men from one part of France have served with the minimum of complaint,
The Extent of Evasion / 73
whereas those from another region responded with a continuous barrage of
opposition and resistance? There was nothing markedly special about deserters.
Like the insoumis, the average deserter represented faithfully the social structure
of his local community (168). They were villagers like the others, and they often
seemed to enjoy a degree of tacit support and approval from their fellows. The
problem therefore came increasingly to be seen in terms of the responses of communities as much as those of individuals. Why did certain communities produce
such a high proportion of deserters and refractories? Why were these communities so willing to provide them with shelter and protection? It was to such
questions as these that ministers and prefects increasingly turned in an attempt
to identify the character of the resistance that they faced and to diagnose its
essential causes.
4
The Roots of Resistance
IF DIFFERENT AREAS of the country responded to the call to arms in such markedly
different ways, how are these differences to be explained? Given the innate preference of the revolutionaries for narrowly political explanations, it is understandable that contemporary analysis placed heavy stress on the part played by
counterrevolutionaries and royalist agents, who, it was widely believed, whipped
up opposition among otherwise placid citizens to confound the Revolution and
its works. In Year VII, for instance, the authorities in the Calvados convinced
themselves that royalists were responsible for encouraging insoumission by infiltrating village conscription meetings, "leurs mains pleines de 1'or de FAngleterre" (1). In the Cher the story was similar. Not only were royalists spreading
dangerous propaganda, but they were lying in wait for recruits as they made their
way to their battalions, stationing themselves at key points along the highways
"afin de les detourner de leurs devoirs par des promesses et meme de 1'argent"
(2). The same obsessive fears led the authorities in the Lozere to claim that
recruitment was being undermined, even in 1793, by royalist embaucheurs who
sought to seduce the young men from their duty and persuade them to throw in
their lot with the forces of counterrevolution. The damage that was inflicted on
the Republic was magnified, it was alleged, by the unwelcome novelty of the
whole recruitment process, since for many local families the royal army in the
hills offered a valid alternative to the service of the Revolution (3). These reports
and scores like them were based on more than casual gossip. There were royalist
recruiters at work in many parts of the French countryside, and they had their
successes; however, they do not provide a real explanation for the incidence of
desertion. They merely point to royalism as a form of seduction, as yet another
opportunity for the young to avoid a draft for which they had no stomach and
as an offer of shelter that seemed less awesome than the long march to an unfamiliar lifestyle in an unknown country. In this sense the offers of royalist agents
should be seen as just another of the temptations that beset conscripts on their
first days on the road.
74
The Roots of Resistance / 75
The fundamental reasons for a high rate of desertion or insoumission must
be sought elsewhere, for royalism was no more than a catalyst stimulating a discontent that was already deeply embedded. Nor can desertion be satisfactorily
explained in terms of the progress of French arms, the ups and downs that
marked two decades of foreign war. In the short term, it is true, reports of victory
could bring welcome relief from anxiety and act as a temporary fillip to flagging
morale. They provided a valid excuse for celebration that allowed the authorities
to divert attention from local miseries and political setbacks and to wallow in
reflected glory. In the Vosges in Year VIII festivities were held to mark French
successes in Switzerland, the Netherlands, and Egypt, festivities that involved
the whole community in revelry and jollification. To the government commissaire in Epinal victory seemed the sweeter in that it dispelled so many of his
problems. Public support for the war increased dramatically, complaints and
petitions fell away, "chaque commune, chaque citoyen a pris part a la joie generale; on oublierait tous les maux passes" (4). Hard-pressed officials, like the prefect of the Lot in Year VIII, could use the welcome news to stimulate one last
effort, one final sacrifice, calling on recruits to offer themselves willingly for what
would be the last great push before the war was won: "Requisitionnaires, jeunes
consents de toutes les classes, 1'heure des combats et de la gloire sonne pour la
