towns through which they passed in the course of their migrations, bitter disputes of this kind were impossible to avoid and feuds between rival communities were kindled anew. Yet to incorporate them into the units from their own
villages could be administratively cumbersome, with the onus of making contact
with their sons often left to harassed parents uncertain of their exact whereabouts (93). One father from Mirepoix in the Ariege had to trace his son's movements in Year X to save him from an unjust condemnation as a deserter. The
son was an apprentice locksmith away from home on his tour de France when
he was called up for a supplementary levy, and his father's enquiries followed
his progress through lodgings and love affairs from Pont Saint-Esprit, through
Avignon and Montelimar, until he had found work in Lyon. It was a laborious
piece of detective work (94). When conscripts were traced, moreover, their
return could be equally laborious, a forced march of several weeks across half of
France, so that in extreme cases men might submit to their medical examination
on the spot rather than trudge back from their migration. Jean Comte, a conscript from the Charente, was such a man. He was working in Rambervillers in
the Vosges when he learned of his luck at the ballot of 1806 and petitioned the
The Roots of Resistance / 89
authorities to examine him locally in Epinal (95). Even those migrants who were
in no way recalcitrant could cause the army great expense and confusion.
Migration, in short, affected recruitment in several distinct ways: in creating
administrative complexity, in providing opportunity and cover of a type so natural as to be almost instinctive, and in shaping the outlook and mentality of
whole communities. In the process it could add to the sharp contrasts of tradition that already existed between neighboring villages and create additional
bones of contention between them. Where such rivalries and animosities were
deep-seated they could only thwart the conscription process, as communes jealously guarded their own youngsters at home and tried to shift the brunt of the
sacrifice on to their age-old rivals. Revolutionary recruitment did not create
such rivalries, which owed more to popular tradition and religious atavisms, to
memories of slights and wrongs perpetuated in a thousand veillees. The division
of France into communes and cantons had, however, the effect of resurrecting
half-forgotten causes and giving localism a new lease on life. Typical of its effects
were the events that rent the canton of Montbrun in the Drome during the levee
des 300,000, when each commune attempted to manipulate the scrutin to the
disadvantage of its traditional enemies. Men who should have been serving the
national cause came close to blows in the poisoned atmosphere that prevailed;
in the words of the commissaire despatched somewhat anxiously from Nyons,
"les plaintes se multipliaient, les troubles se propageaient, les esprits de part et
d'autre etaient fort agites, les habitants enfin de ce canton etaient a la veille d'en
venir aux prises" (96). In this respect recruitment was no more than a further
catalyst to a well-established tradition of intervillage feuding, an integral part of
the popular culture of rural adolescents who picked quarrels with the youth of
neighboring communities with all the excitement and clan loyalty of present day
football supporters. On one level it was simple fun, but it was fun that could
rapidly turn sour. The fair at Foix in Year XI was the scene of a particularly
bloody encounter between the young men of two rival communes, Serres and
Brassac, in which their traditional antagonism about grazing rights was quickly
revived by quarrels over recruitment quotas (97). Such encounters were always
variations on the same theme, that the other party was escaping too lightly, that
the burden of one's own village was palpably unfair, that the others were deliberately cheating in order to send them away to be killed. Flimsy rumors soon
assumed the authority of proven fact as families eagerly clutched at them to
justify their wishes and their apprehensions. In the recrimination that followed
the national interest suffered.
Rivalries of this sort were generally between rural communes, and migration
was overwhelmingly of the rural poor, seeking an extension to their traditional
economy. In these as in other respects resistance to the draft was seen to be an
archetypically rural response. More precisely, it was a response by agricultural
and pastoral communities that could claim that the loss of vigorous young workers inflicted grievous damage on the economic base of their traditional way of
life. Cultural remoteness may have contributed to this attitude, but so does the
simple fact that farming in the eighteenth century was highly labor-intensive,
especially in the pays de petite culture, and that the effect of recruitment was to
90 / Conscripts and Deserters
deprive the countryside of the labor it needed to remain viable. An artisan could,
in principle, return from the war and resume his old place at the lathe or in the
printshop; the peasant feared that his land would be lost to cultivation forever.
And there is no doubt that in many parts of France the farming economy was
put at risk. In the Ain the success of the grain harvest was jeopardized by the
combined effects of recruitment and requisition, the loss of labor being compounded by the seizure of horses for military duty (98). Near Narbonne the
shortage of harvesters had risen wages to such a point that peasants could no
longer afford to employ them and the crops were being left to rot in the fields
(99). In the Ariege lands were being left fallow for want of the labor needed to
maintain them in cultivation (100). Not surprisingly such disasters had their
effect on the enthusiasm of local men for military campaigning, and desertion
frequently assumed a distinctly seasonal profile. In the Basses-Pyrenees the
desertion rate increased violently when it became clear that the harvest was
threatened (101). In the Nord recruits were reported to be abandoning their units
in droves to return home to help sow the new season's crop (102). Even amid
the relative calm of the Vosges it was observed that both conscription offenses
and instances of petty theft increased in July and August, the months when the
countryside hummed with activity and when labor was at a premium. Begging
and vagabondage were widespread in the same months, which also saw a predictable increase in the number of reported fights and barroom brawls (103).
Desertion and insoumission were merely one aspect of a pattern of economic
activity and rural sociability.
It was in agricultural and pastoral regions that the personal motivation to
desert was most pronounced, the personal loss that service involved most exaggerated. In mountain communes in the Pyrenees the shepherd or rural artisan
could find his business destroyed or his flocks dispersed by the loss of a son to
guarantee a continuity of labor (104). Especially in the South, with its smallholdings and tradition of metayage, the fear was prevalent among peasant boys
that if they remained absent from their village for more than a very limited
period, it was their future, their security and ability to build up a small family
farm that would be placed at risk. The sacrifice they were being asked to make
seemed so open-ended; there was no firm time limit placed on service, and once
a young soldier had reached his battalion, it seemed that the generals had a
vested interest to keep him there. When the lists were drawn up in 1814 of those
soldiers who abandoned their corps in the chaos of the final rout, the extent of
their sacrifice often became clear. Among the men listed for the district of Rambouillet in the Seine-et-Oise, for example, were conscripts of every classe since
Year VII, as well as a few unfortunate individuals from the levees of 1793, who
had accepted the inevitability of a lifetime in uniform before finally deserting in
the confused final days of the Empire (105). Countrymen who might have been
prepared to serve for a summer campaign and then return home for the harvest
were repelled by the thought of signing away their lives in the service of France.
They knew only too well the lot that befell soldiers once they became too old to
fight. Every village had its veterans, old soldiers without farm or family, thrown
back on charity, public sympathy, or the local poorhouse. Peasants understood
with unerring clarity that for them security meant the investment of years of
The Roots of Resistance / 91
back-breaking labor, first in working as a farmservant for someone else while
savings were painstakingly accumulated, then in laboring for themselves in
building up their own sparse metairie. Denied the best years of their lives
through military service, they feared for their independence, their capacity to
find a wife and start a family, especially for their old age. A young man needed
credit if he were to succeed in farming or any other kind of business venture, he
needed to establish himself in the community, and again military service could
put all his hopes and ambitions at risk. Jean Pechaud from Chavagnac in the
Cantal expressed the feelings of many when he protested at his selection to serve
in his absence in 1792. He was, he submitted, "jeune encore, il est peu fortune,
il a par consequent besoin de maintenir sa reputation et son credit, ces deux
choses influenceraient trop sur le reste de sa vie pour qu'il en fit le sacrifice"
(106). Military service could condemn a young peasant to a lifetime of labor for
the account of someone else, and with it to a position of marginality in the village community. The degree of the sacrifice involved explains the extent of
insoumission and desertion in many of the poorer areas of the country, where
infertile soil and fragmented holdings conspired to make families even more
loath to see their sons depart.
In many small farming communities opposition to conscription and the
determined defense of local youngsters threatened by the recruiting-officer
seemed almost to become second nature by the early years of the Empire, a central element in the collective psychology of village society. What is more difficult
to explain is the change, sometimes quite drastic, that appeared in these attitudes over time, to the extent that villages that had openly defied the government's commands in 1793 or Year VII were by 1810 and 1811 filling their military quotas with only the minimum of protest. Why? In part government
persistence had been rewarded and the habit of soldiering had penetrated into
the most defiant rural communities; obedience had been shaped by two decades
of continual friction. In large measure, too, the new found cooperation reflected
the more determined and professional approach of the state to policing the problem, a subject to which we shall return in some detail (107). Conscripts, in other
words, came forward not out of any love of France or respect for the Emperor,
but one of simple fear. That is a significant part of any explanation, though the
demoralization of the final conscriptions of 1813 and 1814 and the increased
incidence of refusal that demoralization entailed might seem to give the lie to
any notion that France had been successfully educated or subjugated into obedience. If Years VII and VIII stand out as particularly critical years in the
recruitment process, perhaps 1810 and 1811 should be regarded as exceptionally
and untypically good years for the government rather than as the natural outcome of years of patient politicization. They were also the years of the worst
economic crisis of the Napoleonic era, when harvests failed on an unparalleled
scale and misery became a tragic reality for thousands of peasant families.
There is little doubt that the state of the economy and the propensity to
