off undetected on one of the many timber trains that followed the rivers Yonne
and Seine downstream to Paris (46). Throughout the South and Southwest vineyard country provided excellent and inviting cover from the searches of the
police and army (47). In the Gironde conscripts could hide in the coastal
marshes around Queyrac or benefit from the close secrecy and protective hospitality of the little fishing villages that lined the shores of the Bassin d'Arcachon
(48). Every administrator seemed to suffer uniquely from the special properties
and characteristics of his local area, its particular gift for furnishing succor and
concealment.
Three areas illustrate as well as any the kinds of difficulty posed by geographic conditions for those in authority. The mountainous region around
Saint-Girons in the Ariege gave Paris unremitting trouble throughout the war
years, trouble that was largely attributed to its shear remoteness from the main
axes of communication and from the principal theaters of war. The villages and
hamlets around Saint-Girons had never developed any sense of involvement in
France or French causes, and in consequence no sense of military urgency could
be fostered (49). The wild, uncharted mountainsides covered in snow for
months on end supplied natural protection for men whose "morosite" made
them particularly prone to defy conscription. Indeed, as the subprefect tellingly
remarked, the wonder was that any conscripts were ever induced to serve in a
landscape so ideally suited to resistance, dominated by obscure hill tracks, by
"les habitations disseminees, les granges escarpees qui servent d'asyle aux
fuyards" (50). In parts of the Cantal the poverty of the soil and the difficulty of
communications combined to create a generalized suspicion of the outside
world that further impeded recruitment. Isolation restricted social intercourse
and reduced any sense of national identity or civic responsibility. Conscription
would always pose difficulties, said the prefect, in "un pais ou la culture est peu
de chose, ou il n'y a pas une seule manufacture, et dont la plus grande partie,
herissee de montagnes et de rochers, est presque inaccessible pendant neuf mois
de Fannee" (51). In stark contrast to both the Pyrenees and the massif Central,
the Nord was a region almost wholly bereft of mountain ranges; yet here too
topography played into the hands of refractories and vitiated the efforts of the
government. Here the fugitive conscripts sought the safety of the coast, where
the gendarmes were frustrated by marshes and peat bogs, by "un terrain coupe
de fosses" that became treacherous and impassable in the rainy season (52).
Tracks between ditches, canals and abandoned mineworkings became obscured,
the closed, self-sufficient nature of the people accentuated. One of the commissaires sent into the area in Year VII to revitalize the conscription effort reported
that the local population was thinly dispersed across the landscape in isolated
farms and cottages sprinkled across the fields, that fugitives were being assisted
by local people wary of any interference from the state, and that there was little
he could do to change their mentality. In several communes "les maisons sont
tellement disseminees que les agents connaissent a peine leurs administres" (53).
The Roots of Resistance / 83
Yet again, topography could be directly linked to levels of desertion and
insaumission.
If local geography made the task of enforcing the levees particularly difficult
in certain parts of France, it was significantly aided by adverse weather conditions. Recruitment was consistently frustrated by snows and rains, frosts and
mountain torrents, all of which could cut essential lines of communication and
isolate villages for days or even weeks on end. In departments like the Ardeche
snowfalls and drifting snow could interrupt normal communications at any time
during the winter months, with the result that the tirage could not be held or
decrees promulgated (54). In the Alps, the Pyrenees, and the massif Central,
whole communities were abandoned every winter to their traditional autarchic
ways. But it was not only in creating excuses and opportunities for resistance
that climate adversely affected military recruitment. Unhealthy climatic conditions were a major source of illness and physical disability, contributing significantly to the large tallies of medical reformes in particular localities. Respiratory
diseases and gastric complaints in low-lying parts of the Ain reached almost epidemic proportions, a product of local climatic patterns and especially of the fetid
ponds that littered the landscape (55). Just as important was the effect that climate often linked to a mountainous terrain could have on the mentality of the
local people, breeding an exaggerated sense of isolation and of alienation from
the affairs of the nation. The Lozere was a case in point, where the snows and
swollen rivers of the southern Massif could be expected to cut off hamlets and
sweep away cottages during six months of the year. In the prefect's view these
extreme conditions lay at the root of the refractory political behavior of the
inhabitants, with the most outlandish regions producing the most backward attitudes. In contrast, he claimed, in the south of his department, where both the
contours and the climate were gentler, the people were less sullen, more amenable to reason and to persuasion (56).
Frontier regions presented a rather special problem. For the deserter or
refractory conscript there was the alluring prospect of safety and total anonymity, remote from the persecutions of the gendarmerie or the prying attentions of
the village notables. For the young man on the run foreign soil assumed the
charms of the Promised Land. Conscripts from the Haute-Garonne were sufficiently familiar with the Pyrenean topography and the tracks which crisscrossed
the mountain passes to be able to take full advantage of their proximity to Spain,
and in Year VII they were reportedly leaving "en foule" as soon as the outcome
of the conscription was known (57). In those communes close to the Spanish
frontier where there was a tradition of spending part of every year in Spain either
to find laboring work or to pasture flocks, the exodus was even more pronounced, with the result that the district of Saint-Gaudens witnessed an "emigration en masse" every year of young men threatened with the draft (58). The
level of policing in the more remote frontier areas was still very primitive.
Although there were occasional dramatic and spectacular police operations
along the tortuous Spanish border—like the massive ambush arranged in the
Vallee d'Aran in Year VII in an attempt to surround whole units of French
deserters returning from the front to bring in their harvest—these were few and
84 / Conscripts and Deserters
far between and were often thwarted by lack of manpower (59). The gendarmes
in a frontier region had so many different threats to counter, from spies and
foreign deserters, refractory priests and emigres, that blanket policing was
impossible and the odds became heavily stacked in favor of the fugitive (60). In
any case, France's land frontiers, to say nothing of her coastline, were too extensive to patrol thoroughly without deflecting men and materials from the war
itself, and in many departments any systematic policing of the frontier would
have meant the effective abandonment of inland districts to crime and banditry
(61). Although the Pyrenees proved particularly popular with French conscripts,
every frontier presented the authorities with intractable policing problems.
From the east of France insoumis slipped across the border into Switzerland and
the Valais (62). In the north conscripts were reported crossing into the Belgian
departments and taking up permanent residence there to lose themselves from
the civil records (63). Ironically, the same idea was popular with Belgian
recruits, and men from the Lys often migrated in considerable numbers in the
opposite direction (64). From the Italian front the prefect of Taro in Parma
explained his high desertion rate by pointing to the ease with which conscripts
could obtain river crossings into the Kingdom of Italy (65). All frontiers, it
would seem, presented deserters with irresistible opportunities.
Desertion across national frontiers could often blend inconspicuously into
long-established migration trends that traditionally uprooted thousands of
young men each year. In some parts of the country migration had come to be
regarded as a necessity if rural communities were to stave off famine and starvation. Only if the able-bodied members of the community left to find seasonal
work elsewhere could the village survive throughout the agricultural year.
Migration for several months of the year had become an essential part of what
Olwen Hufton has termed the "economy of makeshifts" of the rural poor (66).
As such it was welcomed as an escape route from misery, an acceptable alternative to the woefully inadequate charity available in the village; and it was recognized that its value lay not only in the earnings that were brought back at the
end of the long months on the road, but also in the reduced requirements of the
remaining villagers during the harsh winter. So few would condemn the habit of
migration at the end of the eighteenth century, even in time of war, since few
could envisage a rural economy that did not depend in part on income from
elsewhere. When the prefect of the Cantal was asked to report on the value of
migration to his department in 1812, he estimated that the annual income of
migrant workers might be approximately 1,425,000 francs. Some of that money
was brought back safely to the southern Auvergne where it helped to lubricate
the local economy and provided employment and a modest prosperity for others
(67). But the government was increasingly alarmed by other possible implications of large-scale migrations, of the regular crisscrossing of the French countryside by young men following their instinct and their elders along well-trodden
paths to Paris and the Ile-de-France or from the mountains of the Centre and
the Gausses to the Mediterranean littoral. Much of the migration was southward,
to the richer plains of the Midi or across the Pyrenees into Catalonia, to a farming economy where the harvests were more varied and the agricultural year
more extended than on the bare uplands of the Massif Central; that was the
The Roots of Resistance / 85
essence of the appeal of the south, of the dream that Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie
has termed "le mirage du Midi" (68). By the height of the Napoleonic Wars,
however, anxious prefects believed that the attraction was connected with the
opportunities that it presented to reluctant conscripts. In an attempt to reduce
these opportunities the government ordered a full-scale survey of the extent of
seasonal migration in every department in France, the prefectoral enquete drawn
up between 1807 and 1813 that has become the standard statistical tool for
demographic historians of the subject (69).
If the quantitative value of the evidence provided by the enquete is strictly
limited, the observations of local officials that it contains allow us to gain a very
acute qualitative impression of overall trends and of regional contrasts (70). In
all, there were perhaps 170,000 seasonal migrants each year setting out from
their homes to find work as harvesters or in service, to pursue their craft skills
or to sell their wares around the countryside (71). Most were peasants or fils
d'agriculteurs seeking alternative sources of income when they were not
engrossed with work on the farm, although the pattern varied with local craft
traditions and the vagaries of the rural economy. Seasonal migration in the Pyrenees involved primarily agricultural workers and the poorer peasants, who
