traveled south to the Aude or crossed the frontier into Spain to sell their limited
range of services to anyone who might buy, as laborers in the meadows, olive
groves and vineyards of the Midi, or as bucherons and charbonniers on the
wooded slopes of the Pyrenees. Mostly their migration and self-imposed exile
were timed for the late summer, once their own farmwork was complete for the
season; but the Pyrenean frontier also produced a notable winter migration of
bergers, shepherds who accompanied their flocks on their winter transhumance
to the plains of the Roussillon (72). Frequently the journey across into Spain
was so unremarkable that local peasants would not bother to obtain the legal
passes they required; for some frontier families it was not even certain where
the frontier lay, and neither the war nor the Revolution could dislodge age-old
traditions. In the Ariege, for instance, emigration to Spain was highly concentrated in certain frontier cantons like Oust and Seix; the inhabitants of communes farther north such as Sainte-Croix and Saint-Lizier had no such tradition
and, in the prefect's words, "n'emigrent pas" (73). Once war broke out on the
Spanish frontier, the traditional migration became fraught with dangers of which
many local people seemed quite oblivious. In Year II, for instance, three farmworkers from Seix who had crossed into Spain in the usual way found themselves prisoners in Spanish hands and obliged to join a Spanish army if they had
any hope of survival. They joined the Spaniards in the hope of finding an opportunity to desert, and duly returned to the French frontier. But they were then
tried for emigration and sentenced to death by a revolutionary court. This was
a harsh sentence that was finally commuted by the deputy of mission in Toulouse, Paganel, who was moved by their appeal and by their ignorance because
the three were all illiterate and had gone to Spain automatically in accordance
with custom, quite unaware of the dangers that awaited them. They "n'ont eu
d'autres vues que de gagner leur vie en fauchant des pres suivant leur usage
ordinaire qui paraissent avoir ete dans une ignorance absolue des loix sur les
emigres" (74). For Catalans and Basques especially the frontier presented no
86 / Conscripts and Deserters
comprehensible cultural landmark, and it was almost impossible to persuade
them to recognize its existence. Among the Basques of the Basses-Pyrenees it
was established practice to cross into Spain during Lent to attend mass and confession celebrated by Spanish priests, a dictate stronger than any law from Paris
(75).
The other area of France that regularly dispatched large contingents of
migrant workers across the Spanish border was the southern Massif and especially the Cantal. Again, the tradition was long-established, especially in the
mountain communes where upland pasture was the only source of income and
where winters were long and unyielding. In the south of the department there
was some variety, with chestnuts and fruit trees in the cantons of Maurs, Montsalvy, and Massiac, but even there poverty was endemic and the strong were
encouraged to leave for a part of each year. Unlike the Ariege, the Cantal did
not have such dominant emphasis on agricultural work. Its sons migrated for a
variety of reasons, from sawing wood to selling cattle, from cutting hay to scouring the rural villages of surrounding departments as peddlars and tinkers (76).
And unlike the seasonal harvesters, these peddlars—chaudronniers, ferblantiers,
colporteurs—often stayed away for longer periods, for fifteen or eighteen months
or even two years, until their supplies were exhausted or their rounds complete.
Others were apprenticed to a trade and were away from the department on their
traditional tour de France, their whereabouts uncertain and the date of their
return unknown (77). Within the Cantal traditions were highly regionalized, the
young men setting out on long, reassuringly familiar journeys in the footsteps of
their fathers and fellow villagers. The commune of Lugarde near Condat was
one of several where almost all the young men were colporteurs (78). Chaudesaigues, in contrast, cherished its long tradition of producing skilled and powerful sawyers (79). Pleaux produced a steady stream of young men attracted by
the town's reputation for chaudronniers, who set out willingly to mend the pots
and pans of the nation. In 1806 chaudronniers from Pleaux were to be found in
departments from the Somme to the Lot-et-Garonne, with particular concentrations in the Charentes, in the East (especially the Ardennes and the Moselle),
and in the Ile-de-France; they had also made their way to foreign destinations
like Holland and especially Spain (80). They were carrying on a village tradition
every bit as strong as if they had been farming the ancestral land in their native
hamlet. But for the recruitment-officer their migration was a source of extreme
difficulty because it was natural for the young, the most robust to be away from
home during the winter months returning only in the late spring. There were
communes in the Cantal where every single man included in the year's conscription was away from home on business. Overall, in the rural areas of that predominantly rural department approximately one conscript in three was absent,
a legitimate migrant in search of work elsewhere (81). The prefect, anxious to
exonerate himself from the charge of conspiracy at insoumission, could point
out that in any year the Cantal sent some 40,000 workers to jobs in other parts
of France and some 3,000 or 4,000 across the Pyrenees into Spain (82). Fully
aware of the difficulties in attempting to persuade these migrants to return for
the tirage, he even suggested using Auvergnat merchants and commercial agents
in Spain as supplementary organizers of his departmental levies (83).
The Roots of Resistance / 87
Although the pattern of migration was heavily regionalized, most areas of
France exported or imported some labor for seasonal tasks, and only ten departments claimed that they had no movements of population in the course of an
average year (84). Even the Cantal was an importer of labor on a modest scale,
since the mass emigrations southward left the countryside denuded of hands at
harvest time and placed the crops at risk. The prefect reported with obvious
distaste that while his administres were leaving home to sell their wares elsewhere living lives of ivrognerie and libertinage, local farmers were dependent on
seasonal harvesters from the surrounding departments—the Lot, the Correze,
and the Haute-Loire—at considerable cost to the local economy (85). In consequence those wishing to avoid military service were frequently exposed to the
temptation of joining an established exodus across a national frontier or departmental border to the security of exile. Migration provided what seemed a marvelous opportunity to escape from a local officialdom that already knew too
much about one's whereabouts and civic obligations. The habit of migration in
a community provided even more: a sense of self-preservation on long route
marches, an empathy with the terrain and understanding of the lie of the land
that could assist escape, above all a collective mentality among migrant workers
and travelers that created a mutual bond among them, particularly in the face
of local hostility. No amount of political education or patriotic propaganda
could undermine this protective instinct. If the procureur in Aurillac was blaming emigration for his poor recruitment figures in 1792, the prefect in 1820 was
still telling much the same story: that emigration took its annual toll among
young men aged fourteen years and older, that for some it was an annual expedition that they would undertake for the rest of their lives, and that the habit of
migration was largely responsible for the widespread antimilitarism that characterized his department (86). Many, of course, returned from Spain or the Mediterranean at the customary time and found themselves conscripted into their
local battalion. But many more took advantage of the migration experience to
evade service altogether, using forged papers and assumed names in a bid to
sublimate their identity in the anonymity of their itinerant lifestyle. Denis Verrier from Marcenat was unlucky enough to get caught while moving around the
villages of the Nievre peddling his paltry wares, and the authorities duly
returned him to his native village (87). Others, especially those who had crossed
national frontiers, might enjoy better fortune and escape the recruiting-officer by
simple attrition. Where emigration had previously been seasonal following a
strictly observed timetable, it was prone to become more open ended, even
semipermanent, as young men stayed on in their adoptive surroundings until
all danger of being conscripted had passed. It was, in the opinion of the prefect
of the Haute-Vienne, an abuse of confidence and tradition that enjoyed the conspiracy of the community at large (88).
More generally, the absence of large numbers of young workers during the
recruitment season combined with poor communications to sow confusion and
acrimony in the communities they left behind. Could a village include in its
quota men who might be hundreds of miles away and not immediately available
for service? Were host communities entitled to include seasonal workers in their
own listes de tirage? How could contact be established with wandering colpor-
88 / Conscripts and Deserters
teurs who were probably illiterate and whose lifestyle was little different from
that of rootless vagabonds? The ambiguities were most troublesome during the
revolutionary levies, before the Loi Jourdan clarified and bureaucratized the
individual's obligations to the army. In 1793 the communes of rural Cantal were
particularly exercised by the problem of absentee workers, pleading to be
allowed to include them in their quotas, and protesting that if they were given
exemption the villages would be quite unable to meet their obligations. Injustice
there was, injustice to those unfortunate enough to be at home during the
recruiting season. But how could injustice be avoided? If absentees were
included in the communal quota of their village, they could hardly be guaranteed fair treatment, especially where selection was by means ofscrutin (89). Yet
any alternative system was even more open to abuse since the suspicion
remained strong that migrant workers were always likely to be poached by the
districts through which they had to pass for inclusion in their quotas. Seasonal
laborers, indeed, were often forced to submit to the ballot twice, in two separate
villages, an outrage against the whole spirit of revolutionary law. Protests flowed
in, like that of the Prunet brothers, cowherds at Thiezac in Cantal, who survived
the tirage in their own commune only to find themselves designated for service
at Saint-Cirgues in the Lot (90). Migrant communes ever vigilant in such matters added their voices to the protest. Saint-Bonnet in the district of Murat
expressed the outrage of its peers when it learned that three men from the village, although supplied with certificates allowing them to pursue their trade as
marchands forains in the Champagne, had nonetheless been arrested at Clermont and compelled to submit to the scrutin. It came as no surprise when they
were selected to serve because Clermont had a reputation in the Auvergne for
recruiting those passing through to form part of its contingent (91). Communes
in the Aveyron were equally suspect, for it was widely believed that they specialized in the incorporation in their quotas of unsuspecting Cantaliens on their
annual journey back home (92). While conscripts could be monopolized by
