post for more papers and further instructions. Generally, therefore, they were
journeying not to nearby towns but to important military centers like Lyon or
Grenoble or Nimes, distances that ranged from seventy to more than 100 miles
(136). Furnished with quite substantial sums of drinking money, they could not
all be expected to reach their assigned destinations.
The army was further hampered by the fact that there was as yet no clear
realization in the community of what soldiering entailed. In 1792 the law on
military service was still phrased in terms of duty and of individual honor. One
department, the Calvados, expressed itself "surpris et afflige" to learn that its
youth was deserting in large numbers and reminded mayors that what was at
68 / Conscripts and Deserters
stake was the honor and reputation of their communities (137). There was a
marked tendency to equate service with virtue, desertion with a lack of moral
commitment. Yet the population at large still thought of soldiering in terms of
short, staccato campaigns at the end of which those involved would quite naturally return home to their normal agricultural pursuits. Several municipal
councils passed resolutions in Year III urging their men to come home for the
harvest. There were many deserters that autumn who, told of their communes'
plight and anxious to help their families, wandered off from their units without
any form of conge, yet fully convinced that they were entitled to take an unofficial leave (138). Military campaigning remained largely seasonal, and many
recruits preferred to believe that their personal commitment was likewise seasonal and that they had a perfect right to return home once the year's activity
was over (139). In some of the armies they were assisted by the attitude of generals and commanders who took a very liberal stance once the campaigning was
over to the granting of conges both on health grounds and for humanitarian
reasons. Looking after aged parents was frequently regarded as an adequate basis
for a period of weeks or even months at home. In Year V conges were granted
both to serving soldiers and to returned prisoners of war so that they could help
bring in the harvest (140). All sorts of family turmoil and catastrophe might
serve as the basis for compassionate leave in this early period; for example,
Pierre Guillemot from Cauderan was allowed home in Year III when his father
attempted suicide (141). In addition a prolonged period of service might be
rewarded with an automatic conge, like that granted to soldiers returning from
the Italian front in Year VI. When it became clear that the men from the Drome
almost all took advantage of this liberation to desert, the army, rather surprisingly, took their side, pointing out that some of the soldiers had been in the army
for six long years and that the very shortness of the permission could have
explained their reluctance to return to the ranks (142). And yet the damage
inflicted on military strength by such desertion was clear to all. In the Bataillon
de La Reole in Year III, men with expired conges constituted the largest single
category of deserters (143); and General Michaud wrote angrily in the same year
from the Army of the Rhine that the wholesale distribution of hospital passes
was creating habitual desertion and draining the strength of his battalions (144).
The question of desertion during the 1790s may therefore be seen as
enshrouded in a certain official confusion. Military permissions were easily confused with exemptions granted to certain categories of recruit, and the conditions under which conges applied were constantly changing. The government
might wish to institute the concept of a revolutionary army dedicated to the
cause of victory, yet the generals themselves showed indulgence to those slipping
home during the winter lull in the campaign, and official correspondence implies
that desertion during the winter months did not truly constitute a criminal
offense (145). The law might appear increasingly specific in its definition of
desertion, but local opinion remained thoroughly confused both by rapid
changes in the legal requirements and by the contradictory dictates of custom
and tradition. From Montivilliers in the Seine-Inferieure Clement could report
to the Directory in Year IV that a month after the promulgation of the new law
on desertion nothing had been done by local officials and the population
The Extent of Evasion / 69
remained in total ignorance (146). In Year VII the Seine-et-Oise was still happily
granting permissions to entire categories of conscripts who had ceased to benefit
from exemption more than a year before (147). Legal distinctions were still
blurred in the minds of local people, both because of the sheer weight of legislation and because of the unfamiliarity of the distinctions that the law was
attempting to create. For many of those who technically deserted were not clearcut cases, easily identified and diagnosed by local officials. The highly subjective
return made by the commune of La Bassee in the Nord in Year VI illustrates
the sorts of problem cases that faced rural mayors. Philippe Leleux had been
"dragon du 6e regiment, employe ensuite dans les charrois, il a un conge de trois
mois pour cause des infirmites, il est marie depuis le ler germinal." Desmazieres
confused them even more since "il a fixe son domicile dans le Pas-de-Calais, a
quitte son corps depuis environ deux ans, et s'est engage avant la requisition
dont il a depasse 1'age." Louis Laloi who had come home from the Sixth Dragoons to have treatment for his wounds but who had long overstayed his permission, was justified in the commune's eyes inasfar as "sa mere infirme est hors
d'etat de conduire sa labour et son moulin" (148). The ambiguities of revolutionary recruitment provided a wealth of loopholes and communal officials usually connived at their exploitation.
These ambiguities largely disappeared with the institution of conscription in
Year VI and the much tighter system of annual classes militaires. Traditions of
desertion and evasion had, of course, developed during the 1790s, but it is from
the Loi Jourdan onward that deserters came to be perceived as a major problem
on a national scale. The new anxiety is clear in the tone of the quarterly reports
sent to Paris from the departments under the Directory and the early years of
the Consulate. Until Year VI, for instance, reports from the Drome retained a
generally optimistic approach, implying that the only cause for alarm was the
failure to implement the forest laws in some parts of the region because of a
shortage of gardes-champetres. Desertion was not mentioned as a problem
before thermidor of Year VII when the compte decadaire on public opinion suddenly became more cautious. Rumors had spread about defeats abroad and
about the shortages suffered by the armies, men were being discouraged from
serving, and banditry was assuming antimilitary and even royalist connotations
in the mountains around Saint-Paul-Trois-Chateaux in the South (149). In the
Lot-et-Garonne the commissaire became almost fatalistic in his comments in
Year VII, seeing desertion as part of a continuous and insoluble problem. Soldiers from his department, he reported, viewed desertion almost as a part of
their everyday routine, "ils partent, desertent, rentrent, et repartent de nouveau"
(150). Neither their desertion nor their reappearance seemed to cause any scandal or outrage in the community. It was the view of the prefect of the Landes
three years later that the system of annual conscriptions itself was responsible
for this attitude because it united all the twenty year olds in the local community
in their common defense and common hatred of the recruitment law that threatened them. The prefect was blunt in his criticisms:
Appeler une classe entiere, c'est former de tous ceux qui la composent une
coalition dont tous les membres sont prets sans cesse a se secourir et a se
70 / Conscripts and Deserters
proteger mutuellement. C'est frapper toutes les families et les interesser a la
meme cause. De la la facilite donnee a la desertion a I'mterieur; de la les nombreuses retraites qui lui sont offertes. (151)
Desertion statistics would appear to offer him some support since, as with
insoumission, it is in Year VII and succeeding years that desertion reached its
peak.
The Revolution and Empire drove hundreds of thousands of Frenchmen to
seek their salvation from the armies in either desertion or insoumission. Of that
we can be sure, although any detailed statistical breakdown is fraught with problems. There are figures in abundance such was the alarm that the problem caused
to contemporaries; it is their accuracy that is highly debatable. Thus Hargenvilliers produced detailed statistics in 1808, outlining the number of deserters still
at large from the various conscriptions between Year VII and 1806 and showing
that over a quarter of a million men had successfully evaded capture (152). Six
years earlier the Minister of War had reported to the Consuls on the success of
the amnesty of 1800. There were, he had said, some 175,000 men seeking to
benefit from the generous terms offered, 175,000 who would otherwise continue
to live in hiding and defiance of the law (153). In January 1813, after determined
police campaigns and selective amnesties, the government admitted to some
50,000 rebels, mostly army deserters, in France and the departements reunis, the
hard core of resistance after years of systematic persecution (154). But even the
administrators warned that figures like these had to be treated with caution.
Many prefects accepted that exact numbers were impossible to obtain and
stressed that amnesty laws merely made the collection of accurate statistics more
difficult. The Drome suggested that men of the annual classe were being widely
confused with those for supplementary levies; the Aude confessed that its figure
was something of a guess and that amnesties might have the effect of halving it;
and the Isere advised the Minister that the statistics collected from the mairies
and those provided by the conseils de guerre were contradictory (155). What
every department could provide was a list of condemnations, but some at least
were honest enough to recognize that such a list was more valuable as a guide
to police activity than as a measure of public opinion. The distinction between
desertion and insoumission was similarly imprecise, and if to a harassed administration it often seemed that desertion was the more pressing problem, this may
have been because desertion had a more immediate and harmful effect on army
morale. Numerically it is likely that it was insoumission that posed the greater
threat. In his study of conscription in the Maine-et-Loire, Jean-Pierre Bois concludes that the number of refractories remained stubbornly high throughout the
war, and that the percentage ofinsoumis always exceeded that of deserters (156).
All would agree that though police raids and military campaigns under the
Empire did succeed in breaking the back of the problem of resistance, Napoleon
never totally succeeded in stamping out this form of opposition to his rule.
Desertion and insoumission ebbed and flowed with government policy, especially with the weight of repression. Hence the last years of the war were marked
by relative quiescence and submission, broken only in the confusion of defeat
in the scenes of anarchic abandon that scattered defeated regiments on their
return to French soil in 1814.
The Extent of Evasion / 71
If the rate of desertion varied sharply over time, so it oscillated wildly
between one part of France and another. There was no unitary response to the
national call to arms; rather the response was a regional one tied in with the
