encountered little resistance among prospective conscripts. The only exceptions
came from that small group of men who had been called up before their twentieth birthday, who were often absent from their homes and going about their
everyday business in blissful ignorance of the recruiting procedures (24). So in
the Vosges most of the problems encountered stemmed from the inadequacies
of the bureaucratic machine rather than from the willfulness of the population
(25). Again, areas regularly exposed to the passage of troops and accustomed to
periodic billeting and requisition might take the fact of service very much for
granted. Such was the case of the valley of the Rhone, constantly crisscrossed by
battalions marching to and from active service with the Armee des Alpes (26).
The Roots of Resistance / 79
The close proximity of an important military center or garrison town could do
much to concentrate the minds of the local citizenry. Yet even in Versailles,
perhaps the town in France with the longest tradition of regimental honor, conscription did not necessarily pass without incident. In fact, in Year VIII it was
noted that the very strength of military tradition in the city and its environs was
posing a special kind of problem. Such was the enthusiasm for army life among
some of the young men of the area, and so deeply rooted were the traditions of
individual regiments, that some who would otherwise have been available for
conscription were being recruited directly by army officers into their own regiments, thus reducing drastically the size of the depot. Of the classe of Year VIII,
more than 100 had enrolled as volunteers in prestige units, generally "dans des
regimens de hussards ou de chasseurs", to avoid what they saw as the humiliating treatment that ordinary conscripts received (27).
Resistance to recruitment was generally characterized as a product of rural
society rather than of urban centers, and it was in the countryside that the government's repressive efforts were concentrated. Revulsion was almost invariably
described as a village response, the collective rejection of the army by rural
rather than urban communities. In his report on conscription in Year VI the
commissaire in the Pas-de-Calais made a brutal distinction between the enthusiasms of urban areas and the extreme reluctance shown by peasants when the
recruiting season began. Rather than try to sum up the esprit public of the whole
department, he wrote, he found it more realistic to divide it in two, sketching in
"d'un cote Fesprit public des villes, de 1'autre Fesprit public des campagnes"
(28). The Vosges, too, illustrated this town-country dichotomy, for though it
seldom presented real problems to the authorities, its obedience was subtly variegated. Even in 1792 when the department proudly sent its quota of volunteers
to the front, it was the towns that rushed to conform and the villages and hamlets that had to rely on harassment, bullying and the ultimate resort to tirage
(29). The implications of peasant resistance were not lost on urban opinion, and
towns frequently protested that their sons were marching to the defense of the
patrie while the peasantry continued to farm their lands undisturbed. Le Faouet
in the Morbihan was one such town. In June 1793 it scornfully dismissed claims
that the countryside was playing its part in the war effort and drew attention to
the malveillance shown by farming communities when the recruitment decree
was posted:
Us voulaient marcher tous, pour ne marcher aucun; quand nous avons vu les
dispositions dictees par la malveillance, nous les avons engages a rester dans
leurs foyers, qu'ils n'avaient pas le moindre desir de quitter. (30)
Even the smallest urban centers, little more than local markets for the surrounding countryside, could point to a significantly better recruitment record than the
villages and hamlets that they served. The commune of Laroquebrou, for
instance, boasted that there had been no trouble from its. own people wixen the
levee des 300,000 was raised; they had obediently turned up for the recruitment
meeting, whereas the inhabitants of the outlying hamlets had responded by rioting (31). And although it is true that in this instance the rural population may
80 / Conscripts and Deserters
have had good cause to riot, believing as they did that the whole operation was
being callously rigged in favor of Laroquebrou, the same picture of urban docility and rural resistance was reported all over the country.
Yet it would be misleading to make too crisp a distinction between town and
country or to imply that urban enthusiasm was universal. In the Nord, where
the commissaire's report in Year VI had emphasized that recruitment presented
no problems in towns, satisfaction proved to be short-lived. In fructidor of the
same year he modified this opinion, cautiously remarking that even in the larger
centers, like Dunkerque and Valenciennes, patriotism was less deeply rooted
than might be wished, that it was a shallow facade, and that "on y leve le masque
audacieusement depuis le depart des garnisons" (32). And if it was the rural
backwaters that caused the most anxiety for government officials in the Cantal,
they did not have a monopoly of intransigence. Even Arpajon, the town that
had distinguished itself by its Jacobin loyalities, showed a conspicuous reluctance to provide soldiers for the revolutionary battalions (33). Towns offered
refractory soldiers so much opportunity for escape and shelter. Their sheer anonymity offered valuable cover to young men on the run. This was especially true
in the east of France and in regions near to military fronts where fugitives were
frequently men from other parts of the country, strangers who would be easily
spotted in country villages and who gratefully sought out the tightly packed
rooming houses of the cities' poorer quartiers. Thus in the Ardennes it was the
urban centers that were most suspect, towns like Rethel where deserters were
known to be concentrated in considerable numbers, forming "conciliabules,"
seeking reassurance in one another's company, and causing outrage to the more
patriotic elements in the local community (34). Strasbourg was another city
where young men returning home without permission would seek shelter before
setting out on their long and often hazardous overland trek. The authorities
noted with some anger that policing in Strasbourg was dangerously lax, that few
deserters were ever arrested in the town's inns or chambrees, and that fugitives
flocked there because they knew that they could walk about in relative safety.
Although few of the deserters at large in Strasbourg actually originated in the
city, the municipal council was sufficiently alarmed by their reputation to
appoint a commissaire to advise on policing measures (35). Other strategically
placed towns and cities suffered in the same way. In Lille, for example, deserters
from the Armee du Nord were reported to be living "fort tranquillement," mingling freely with the artisans and journeymen in the town's workshops (36). Paris
through its sheer size and its richly diverse population proved an irresistible
magnet for those fleeing the law. A list of those arrested in the capital in 1806
reveals that the deserters and insoumis among them came from a total of eightysix departments of France and its appendages (37). Desertion in Paris was in no
sense a Parisian affair.
It was generally the case that people deserted to cities rather than deserted
in them. The high numbers of refractories and deserters in towns like Paris and
Strasbourg do not imply a high level of disaffection in these cities and do nothing
to dispel the image of desertion as a predominantly rural response. Only in the
Southwest is that image forcibly questioned, where Bordeaux compounded its
already unsavory reputation for royalism and a lack of patriotism by providing
The Roots of Resistance / 81
far fewer recruits for the armies than did most of the rural districts of its hinterland. The city's attitude was widely condemned throughout the rural Southwest,
where it was suspected that the Bordeaux authorities were shirking their more
unpleasant duties in the face of an ill-concealed popular hostility. The municipality did little to counter these charges, hiding behind a strictly literal interpretation of their powers and resorting to the argument that Bordeaux was already
serving the Republic well through its prosperity and its overseas commerce.
Prestige in trade could not substitute for service on the battlefield, however, and
the city's casuistical arguments for special favors were greeted with scorn and
anger in Paris (38). It is true that the regional economy offered encouragement
to draft dodgers since the vineyards and the docks were havens of shelter and
casual labor (39). The fact that the city was a great Atlantic seaport also magnified the problem by attracting runaways from all over the region. A typical
case was that of a young man from Blaye, Sinsirgue fils, who fled to Bordeaux
in Year III to lose himself in the demi-monde thai frequented the lodging houses
and hotels de passe of the waterfront; it was in such a hotel that he was uncovered, living a calm and peaceable existence with the country girl who was his
petite amie (40). He was only one of many lads from the smaller towns and
villages of the Gironde who sought the anonymity of Bordeaux, the comforting
security of a port town with a sizeable floating population, the safety net of a
possible job on board ship if the police closed in too menacingly (41). Bordeaux,
in short, both attracted outsiders and bred large numbers of refractories within
its walls. It was the unchallenged capital of desertion in the Southwest of France.
And yet, to the intense anger of its more obedient neighbors, policing was more
active and repression more savage in the rural communities than in the city. The
suspicion was darkly harbored that Bordeaux, not for the first time, was looking
after its own interests at their expense (42).
Like all aspects of life in the countryside, rural desertion reflected very
closely on local topography and the nature of the terrain. Mountains, dispersed
habitation, upland pasture, rocks and caves, treacherous marshlands familiar
only to the local population, smugglers' hill tracks that were part of a very private village connaissance all offered escape and evasion. Commissaires and prefects, reduced to near despair by the demands of Paris and by the inadequacy of
their policing resources, placed the blame on all kinds of local circumstance, but
again and again they turned to geography as the main impediment to their
endeavors. Only the detail varied. In the Hautes-Pyrenees and the Puy-de-D6me
the gendarmes were thwarted by the high mountain ranges that dominated their
departments, in the Mayenne by the natural protection that was offered by the
bocage, in the Seine-et-Oise by the ease of access to Paris (43). The prefect in
Mont-de-Marsan was appalled by the lack of modern communications across
the wild wastes of the Landes, an untamed expanse of some 475 square miles
that had been abandoned to nature, "sans chemins, sans routes frayees dans la
plus grande partie de son etendue" (44). Deserters sheltering in the wooded and
mountainous landscape of the southern Drome found protection in caves and
grottoes, and those threatened by starvation might be lured toward the main
Lyon-Marseille road near Pierrelatte or in the Foret des Blaches, where the regular passage of mail coaches seemed to offer rich pickings from the deniers de la
82 / Conscripts and Deserters
Republique (45). Farther north in the Nievre they were concealed by the dense
forests that covered one-third of the surface area of the department, "des forets
immenses, impenetrables aux recherches de la gendarmerie," or they could slip
