staying in a house known locally for its criminal associations, yet it was the suspect merchandise and not the sight of the uniform that led to his arrest (111).
Deserters were not so rare or so threatening that they aroused much interest in
the villages through which they passed. They were taken very much for granted
by local people, a fact that did much to undermine the entire recruitment
exercise.
The lure of home was, of course, especially strong on the first days of military
service when the young conscript had just left the bosom of his family and was
setting out to join his regiment. It was then that the doubts and the regrets took
over and the careful indoctrination of the recruitment officer might so easily be
brushed aside. It was in these first days, too, that desertion was most feared,
while home remained an attainable goal and before the army had the opportunity to impose its own values and discipline. The problem for the government
often lay not in the recruitment process itself but in relaying the new conscripts
to their units. Like the prefect of the Nord in Year IX, they managed to find
their full quota or even numbers in excess of that quota but then lost hundreds
of men on their journey to join their regiments in Douai, Metz, or Valenciennes
(112). In the Rhone, it was desertion en route that placed in jeopardy the entire
conscription exercise with the result that the reserves from previous years were
being consumed to fill the department's obligations. Between Year IX and Year
XII, the prefect's records showed that 1,100 men had duly left for the army; but
subsequent returns from the army indicated that of these 1,100 only half, 550
The Extent of Evasion / 65
men, had ever been incorporated into their units (113). Where a long and arduous journey lay ahead of them, even the most resolute of recruits were liable to
be discouraged, as happened in northern Italy, where the conscripts, Italians dragooned into the cause of France, had set out with every appearance of enthusiasm in 1811, only to desert as they faced the long, unending march across Tuscany (114). Enthusiasm was often short-lived. Faced with the prospect of a long
trudge to Lille to join their regiment, two young soldiers from Libourne in the
Gironde got as far as Angouleme before making the decision to desert. They
were heading for the anonymity of Bordeaux when they were arrested on the
high road at Saint-Andre-de-Cubzac in April 1793 (115). The route itself was a
deterrent. In similar circumstances in 1807 twenty conscripts from the Seine-etOise were dispatched with their comrades to join their units at Bayonne. They
made an overnight stop at Arpajon, abandoned their equipment, and disappeared into the reassuring countryside of the Ile-de-France (116). Theirs was a
typical case of desertion, effected before new habits could be formed or new loyalities moulded. The prefect of the Drome went so far as to claim that desertion
generally took place at the very outset of a man's service, "avant le depart"
(117); more commonly it was agreed that the first nights of the march constituted the period of maximal danger. In the Morbihan desertion was concentrated in "les premiers jours" of service, while the deserters could slip off easily
to their homes (118). More specifically, a report from the Cantal suggested that
most desertions took place on the first night of the march, once the conscripts
had been issued with their uniforms (119); another, from the Tarn, was convinced that the temptation was even greater "au second logement" once the novelty and the initial fear had worn off (120).
The military were prone to blame the new liberalism of the Revolution
toward its soldiers for the scale of desertion that followed, and there is a degree
of truth in their claims. In particular, the signing-on bounties that were paid to
recruits in the revolutionary years were open to the grossest forms of abuse
because half the money had to be paid in advance along with an allowance to
cover the cost of the journey to the battalions. It was an open invitation to those
who sought to take advantage by signing on, taking the money, and deserting at
the first convenient opportunity. In the Somme, the commissaire angrily
denounced the frequency of such frauds, often perpetrated on two or three different municipal authorities across a wide geographical area (121). And until
policing was stepped up under the Empire, many fraudeurs enjoyed rich pickings. Officials expressed their anxiety that the revolutionary authorities were so
eager to sign volunteers that they were easily duped by those unlikely recruits
who presented themselves for service, asked to leave immediately for the frontiers, and disappeared without a trace clutching the precious bounty that the
local community had painstakingly assembled (122). Francois Vergnes from
Monteau in the Aveyron was such a man. He presented himself to the authorities in the village of Pauliac near Saint-Flour who paid him a bounty of 695 livres
on the understanding that he would form part of the village quota; however, he
never turned up at his regiment. Instead, he was arrested on the public highway
as a deserter, vainly claiming that he was traveling to Villefranche to inquire
about his military obligations and complaining that the sum he had received was
insufficient to justify personal service in the armies (123). Or take the case of
66 / Conscripts and Deserters
Francois Vergoin from Saint-Loup in the Rhone who collected his bounty but
before traveling to his regiment he made a short detour to the village of Tarare
to bid farewell to his parents. On the way, he claimed, he was attacked and
robbed, a misfortune that made it impossible for him to continue on his journey
(124). There was no way in which such a story could be checked, although fraud
was obviously suspected. Some were caught and brought to justice and the
extent of their deviousness became apparent. Joseph Boussard from Mont SaintPierre in the Aisne was technically a deserter several times over. He had by the
time of his arrest in 1810 wandered the Midi defrauding local communes who
were eager to use his services. He had been condemned for desertion twice, in
the Aisne and the Seine-et-Marne, but his frauds were concentrated in southern
departments where he was less likely to be discovered (125). Whole families
were prone to such corruption. In Year III conscripts from several villages near
Valenciennes deserted their regiments and took refuge on Belgian soil, yet "les
peres et meres de ces laches fuyards se font comprendre dans le tableau des
secours que la bienfaisance nationale accorde aux parents des defenseurs de la
Patrie" (126).
Desertion en route to the regiments enjoyed such overall popularity precisely
because of the opportunities that were offered. For most of the Revolutionary
decade new recruits were generally expected to make their own way to their
units, often spending long weeks on the road with little policing or supervision.
They were issued with their feuille de route, outlining the roads they should follow and the towns where they should make overnight stops and they were paid
a fixed allowance per mile to cover their basic expenses. Technically, these
should have been issued only by commissaires des guerres or by the hospitals
that had treated injured or fevered soldiers, which would have provided some
guarantee of supervision, but by Year IV districts and municipal councils were
cavalierly issuing feuilles on a lavish scale (127). Two years later the Minister of
War reproached local officials for the general terms in which many of these
feuilles were worded, often lacking even the name of the town where the unit
was stationed, which resulted in men setting out on vague and unsupervised
wanderings around the countryside armed with papers that could be valid more
or less anywhere (128). The feuille de route, in short, could rapidly become a
passport to desertion, and recruits were not slow to take advantage of the
bureaucratic deficiencies of the system. Soldiers with a proven record of desertion were issued with simple papers instructing them to find their way to their
new regiment (129). Others were provided with a blank printed sheet that could
be easily stolen or transferred, and widespread abuse followed. In the Gironde
feuilles were forged by the troops themselves (130). In the Ariege they were persistently reissued to the same conscripts even after it had become clear that they
were hardened deserters (131). Everywhere, complained one officier de sante,
would-be deserters knew exactly how to turn the system to their own advantage.
They obtained printed feuilles from complaisant officials or had them printed in
their local town, feigning that they had lost their papers and needed temporary
documents until their conge arrived. Thereafter it was all too easy:
Us remplissent les dites routes et sc donnent la destination que bon leur semble, avec laquelle ils passent a la commune dont ils connaissent les officiers
The Extent of Evasion / 67
municipaux pour etre peu scrupuleux sur 1'ecriture et la signature empruntee
du commissaire. Us feignent la perdre, et ils obtiennent leur attestation,
comme quoi elle a ete enregistree avec la destination, avec laquelle ils en
obtiennent une bonne au commissariat le plus voisin. (132)
For the gendarmerie such men became a problem of nightmarish proportions
and an added source of anxiety for the local population.
Attempts by the military authorities to force their recruits to keep to agreed
routes were doomed to failure, and both conscripts on their way to join their
units and those bearing the coveted conge d'hdpital were liable to stray far from
their approved itineraries. The temptations that beset them were legion, and
their carefully allotted allowances soon spent, usually on drink in the many
roadside inns that they passed. It is surely no accident that the gendarmerie
when instructed to trace deserters unfailingly began by ordering a thorough
search of local hostelries. The law, indeed, became increasingly specific in the
controls it imposed on cafetiers and aubergistes in the course of the 1790s. They
were obliged to keep a register of all travelers who spent a night on their premises; they were forbidden to entertain anyone armed with a gun who was not
known to them and resident in the commune; and they were prevented from
receiving into their inn any stranger, armed or unarmed, after nightfall without
first making a report to the local mayor (133). Once they had spent their money,
conscripts were invariably reduced to begging or to crime to stay alive with the
result that many soldiers came to be seen as part of the wider problem of begging
and mendicite, wandering from village to village along their route, demanding
alms, issuing threats, and posing a particular problem because they were in
almost every case armed with their army-issue rifle (134). Desertion, in short,
rapidly assumed the guise of a major social malaise as well as that of a purely
military problem, though it was seriously aggravated by the lack of strict policing
and by the habit of sending new recurits unescorted over extraordinarily long
distances. Of the men of the classe of 1809 in the Morbihan who left Vannes in
groups for their regiments, not one faced a short journey: 100 were bound for
Lille, 13 for Bruges, and the rest for various destinations in the Southwest (Toulouse, Auch, and Bayonne), ready to begin campaigning against the Spaniards
(135). Even more astonishing is the evidence of the register of militaires voyageant isolement from Valence in Year IX, of those men who were simply handed
the fixed allowance of 15 centimes per lieue and ordered to find their own way
to their destination. All were on their way to join or rejoin their regiment, or
were traveling from home or from hospital to the next military administration
