derniere fois ..." (5). Public opinion was fickle, however, and the sense of jubilation soon passed. If victory could unleash immediate enthusiasms, so defeat
could demoralize entire communities. In 1793 the approach of the Austrians
was given as the principal reason for the reluctance of the young men of Cambrai
to present themselves at the tirage (6). Defeats in Italy some years later had a
similar effect causing, in the words of the prefect of the Herault, both "decouragement" and "repugnance" in the villages of his department (7). In frontier
regions such discouragement could give way to outright panic, like that which
ensued in 1793 when Spanish forces overran the French at Montalba, Fort Real,
and Corneillan and the remnants of the defeated French army spread fear and
consternation in the villages of the Pyrenees-Orientales (8). Nothing undermined confidence as much as the tales brought back by soldiers of defeat and
butchery on the battlefield. At Orchies in the Nord the local commissaire
became highly agitated in Year V when he heard that five or six deserters from
the cavalry were telling the local people exaggerated stories of the humiliations
they had suffered. His fears were, quite naturally, for public order and for the
future success of recruitment (9). That these fears were soundly based was demonstrated in 1814 amid the debris of the final collapse when panic spread uncontrollably from town to town and demoralization attacked even the gendarmerie
(10). But again, such panics were short-term responses to bad news from the
front. Across the twenty-year period of war the profound differences of response
from one area to another cannot be explained by anything as ephemeral as the
level of public confidence in the conduct of the war.
Many contemporaries concluded that the answer must run much deeper in
the mentality of the people, in village tradition and popular psychology rather
than in short-term bursts of optimisim or pessimism. Of course the introduction
of revolutionary recruitment had amplified the fears of local people, but those
fears were already there to be amplified (11). In rural Flanders Georges Lefebvre
76 / Conscripts and Deserters
found that the old milice had been provided only as a result of extensive remplacement, and that opposition to the new demands of the Revolution reflected
a repugnance at the idea of widespread personal service in the armies. The Revolution, in other words, was striking at the core of long-established village custom and "se heurtait tout simplement a des habitudes singulierement fortifiees
par le souci de la conservation personnelle" (12). Such traditions were closely
tied to the ethnology of local communities. They were not limited to the question of military service, although the impact of the Loi Jourdan tended to place
conscription in the very forefront of local grievances; often the attitude to military obligations was paralleled by that to taxation and to the extension of the
role of the state in general. The theme of tradition is a recurring one in the
reports that commissaires and prefects sent to Paris to explain the shortcomings
of recruitment in their departments, one to which they returned when more
immediate or tangible explanations failed them. In 1806 the prefect of the Lozere put tradition at the top of his list of explanations for a consistently high
desertion rate, observing that the old Gevaudan had never supplied many troops
for the royal armies of the eighteenth century and that those men whom it had
furnished had generally been following local officers for reasons of tradition and
family loyalty (13). His colleague at Privas, commenting on the recent arrest of
twenty deserters for acts of banditry, went further, denouncing the "habitudes
sauvages" of the country that he had been given to administer and lamenting
that desertion was just one part of a long-established tradition of local anarchy
based on family pride and vendetta. In the Ardeche, he said, Paris must not
expect the rapid implantation of the rule of law "dans un pays ou de tout temps
chacun s'est fait justice a sa fantaisie et sans consequences funestes." Change
could only come slowly and result from an acceptance of new traditions, from
"une longue habitude d'un gouvernement doux et ferme" (14).
In many regions of France tradition militated against the success of the
recruitment eifort. There were parts of the country, most notably in the Southwest, where not a single conscript was raised in Year VII in answer to the Loi
Jourdan, and where apathy was so deeply engrained that even government officials became disheartened (15). In Corsica the new prefect of the Liamone
admitted that unless he took exceptional and extreme measures the conscription
exercise would have to be abandoned just as it had been abandoned by his predecessor. In view of the sullen resentment he encountered, he believed that he
had no alternative but to use force, since he could not appeal to the sense of
responsibility of the local community when every tradition in Corsican village
life was against him (16). Tradition could cause far more than apathy or mild
connivance at desertion. In the Midi especially local communities were repeatedly shown to view military service and its accompanying sacrifices with a mixture of disgust and incomprehension. In Year XI the prefect of the Bouches-duRhone reported gloomily that in some villages he had encountered a generalized
revulsion at the very idea of serving in the army, a "degout bien caracterise de
la part des jeunes gens pour le service" that rendered recruitment virtually
impossible (17). In many upland villages in the Var the response was equally
uncompromising, and recruitment was reviled by local people as running
counter to every instinct in their community, as constituting an intolerable cor-
The Roots of Resistance / 77
vee de sang imposed by a distant government for a cause for which they understood little and cared less (18). Religion and village custom often strengthened
the power of local intransigence. Bonds of family loyalty and an almost superstitious faith could prove more enduring than ties of citizenship and public duty.
In some Breton villages the departure of conscripts was solemnly marked by a
ceremony of an almost primeval symbolism as the anguished parents accompanied their son to the end of the village, where they would "ouvrir un cercueil
et demander aux jeunes consents de se couper les cheveux pour les y jeter" (19).
In others, as the prefect of the Finistere reported in 1807, the ritual was more
specifically religious:
La maniere dont la plupart des bons habitants des campagnes du Finistere
quittent leurs enfants appeles a la defense de la patrie est touchante et digne
de remarque. Us vont les conduire jusqu'a une certaine distance. La ils les
embrassent en leur disant un eternel adieu, puis, apres les avoir quittes, ils
retournent chez eux en recitant des prieres, quelques-uns le de Profundis.
Quoi de plus penetrant que cette recitation religieuse ... (20)
Such men might be driven to their regiments by a strong deployment of force,
but they were unlikely to be converted into enthusiastic or committed soldiers.
The Cantal and the Drome provide excellent illustrations of the kinds of
problems that tradition could pose in matters of recruitment. In the Drome
resistance was largely localized in the mountains of the south and east, but in
these regions tradition proved sufficiently tenacious to vitiate the army's most
stringent efforts. The area around Die gave the authorities unending trouble, not
because of any counterrevolutionary impulse or lack of loyalty to the administration, but because of an almost universal repugnance for soldiering, deeply
engrained in the population and passed on undiluted from one generation to the
next. The subprefect of Die commented that this repugnance had continued
unabated during the thirty years in which he had been following local affairs,
and noted that local people were still gripped by terror at the thought of serving
in the armies even though conditions had so greatly improved and military victories had focused on the glory and success of the revolutionary cause. Attempting to explain this tradition, he emphasized the general economic condition of
the population and the lack of real poverty that might encourage lads to seek a
military career. He mentioned the anger felt at the payment of large sums by the
rich to secure replacements and exemption from personal sacrifice; and he
referred to the scandalous and depressing pictures of army life that were spread
by deserters, whether real or fraudulent, who sought to "inspirer la compassion
ou Pinteret de tous les peres de famille dans les campagnes" (21). In short, the
authorities were faced with a rooted popular conception of soldiering that no
amount of logical argument could hope to dispel. In the Cantal as well there was
a long-standing lack of respect for the military that undermined the efforts of a
succession of prefects to meet their obligations. In part this was again a reflection
of the pays and its economy: a country of mountain and upland grazing, of
unyielding soil and sparse cereal cultivation, at least beyond the planeze of
Saint-Flour and the hinterland of Aurillac. Life was hard and returns generally
78 / Conscripts and Deserters
poor, and a large proportion of the able-bodied and the young had to emigrate
each year if even the most basic subsistence were to be guaranteed. In many
villages the only people remaining were the old, the sick, the women, and children too young to make the long and arduous journey (22). In such circumstances recruitment could never be easy, but in Cantal the harsh economic realities were compounded by the traditions that they had moulded in the people.
Local administrators convinced themselves that the root of the problem lay in
the mentality of villagers whose pastoral lifestyle, dispersed, remote from markets or modern communications for months on end, distanced them from both
military considerations and civic responsibility. Their recalcitrance stemmed as
much from psychological as from economic causes, with the result that the government could not rely on help from public opinion or village respectability.
Moreover, the prefect was almost fatalistic in his dismal diagnoses of the problem, lamenting that it was his lot to be stationed in a region where he was struggling not only with the economy and the landscape, but with centuries of ill will
and a country too poor to provide replacements. In the rolling plains of the
north of France, he claimed, men were born soldiers and brought up with a conception of military honor, something that was beyond the comprehension of the
people of the southern Massif. For him the North became almost an ideal, a
world where the young marched cheerfully to war and where prefects could bask
in their reflected glory. He dreamed of a posting there in
une de ces heureuses contrees de la Picardie ou de la Lorraine, ou toute la
jeunesse est occupee a cultiver son propre pa'is, ou le metier des armes est
honore, cheri, ou le jeune homme qui n'a pas defendu sa patrie est souvent
rebute quand il cherche une epouse, ou le fils de famille se presente gaiement
au tirage, marche avec empressement ou trouve avec facilite un remplacant
... (23)
A spell in Arras or Douai would rapidly have disabused him of his more romantic views, but his point that the existence of some habit of soldiering was the
most important single element in the success or failure of recruitment remains
beyond dispute.
For there were parts of the country where tradition came to the aid of the
recruiting-officer, where soldiering had long been regarded as an honorable profession, and where conscription posed no general problems of public order. In
the Bas-Rhin, for example, the prefect observed in Year XIV that he had
