others en marge de la societe were glad to profit from it. Often, of course, such
activities attracted the prying interest of neighbors, and the anonymity was
breached. Women of uncertain morality were kept under police surveillance and
subjected to police threats precisely because of the men with whom they associated; women like Jeanne Manset, a widow from a small village in the Lot-etGaronne, who "menne une conduite immorale" (in itself not a primary matter
of concern to the authorities), "sa maison etant le refuge nocturne des gens sans
aveu et des conscrits refractaires" (56). A happier solution for the deserter was
to establish a more lasting relationship with some local woman in the pays who
would offer him protection and a permanent home, would arouse none of the
suspicions and animosities that rained down on the prostitute, yet would satisfy
his frustrated sexuality and bring to an end, at least temporarily, his endless
travels. Francois Eynard, a young deserter from Tournon in the Ardeche, found
just such a companion in Erome (Drome), a widow who took a fancy to him,
"qui le recelait et avec laquelle il vivait." Yet even his illicit idyll was shortlived, ending in arrest in the summer of 1809 (57).
The most immediate need of the thousands of young men on the run was
much more basic than companionship or entertainment, however. Their first
thought was of how to stay alive, how to find the food they needed to maintain
themselves for another day. If they were to attain that goal legally without antagonizing the local community through theft and deceit, this implied that they
would have to earn money by taking some sort of employment to finance their
flight. For refractories hiding in the immediate environs of their village, this
posed relatively few problems since they could generally be assured some casual
or seasonal work on their parents' holding or on lands farmed by one of the
village notables. They benefited from the protection of the extended family, and
the fact that village culture was close-knit and defensive and could be generally
relied on to defend "les notres" against the incursions of the outside world. In
the area around Bazas in the Gironde, police enquiries found that the majority
of their draft dodgers were living quite openly in the community, either doing
farmwork for their own fathers or being hired by others as metayers, journaliers,
cultivateurs (58). Parents accepted the risks involved in sheltering outlaws readily enough. Neighbors and friends gave their own reasons when they were interrogated, but they are reasons that underline the cohesiveness of village society:
"C'est parce qu'il etait voisin de ce conscrit et un des principaux habitants de la
commune"; "c'est un oncle de ce conscrit, et de plus un des principaux habitants." These reasons were quite sufficient in a Pyrenean community where there
110 / Conscripts and Deserters
was no stigma attached to desertion, where the majority of the young men were
hiding out in cabanes on the mountain slopes, and where it was accepted that
brothers and sisters brought them food at times when they were unable to come
down into the village to work (59). Assistance was not limited to lads with established connections in the village, however. Deserters passing through could also
hope to gain temporary employment, especially in agricultural areas drained of
manpower by the continual levees for the armies. Deserters might be regarded
with a certain suspicion, as would all young men unknown to local people, who
might steal or attack them and who in many instances would be armed; but they
had the virtue of being physically robust, and their desperate circumstances and
lack of civil status meant that they provided a welcome source of cheap labor at
times when it was in high demand. However much they might cloak their
actions in the language of charity, the farmers and artisans who offered employment to deserters and refractory conscripts did so with an acute sense of their
own self-interest.
Much of the temporary work available in rural France was of necessity agricultural, helping out on the farm in labor-intensive seasonal tasks like sowing or
harvesting. In one sense it was work that was particularly well-suited to the
needs of the conscript because it did not require any special skills and was geared
to the basic connaissance of any country lad. He would welcome work by the
week or even by the day since he would be under pressure to move on to maintain his anonymity. It was in his own interests to change commune and
employer at fairly regular intervals to avoid detection. Furthermore, agriculture
was an occupation of an essentially seasonal nature in which everyone was in
the habit of employing day-laborers or taking men on for the duration of the
harvest. Since many such laborers were migrant workers or itinerant beggars
even in normal times, it was a milieu into which the deserter could merge without attracting too much attention or scrutiny. And since the law insisted that
proof be provided that an employee was hired on a permanent basis (a serviteur
a gages properly contracted) before he became his employer's responsibility, relatively few prosecutions were brought for the hire of deserters on farms, and the
agricultural community continued to make use of whatever labor was available
without making too detailed enquiries about its exact provenance. Yves Calvez,
a smallholder from Kergos in the Morbihan, was one of the few farmers to be
convicted for employing a deserter in this way, but he was unwise enough to
admit that the man had been employed "pour la recolte" for a period of four or
five weeks, and the court decided that that constituted a contract of employment
(60). In contrast, Pierre Nuc, who farmed a smallholding at Le Bosquet near
Marcoles (Cantal), succeeded in persuading the local tribunal that he was innocent of any crime when he hired a deserter as a casual laborer despite the fact
that the gendarmes had unearthed the young man's army rifle and had discovered his bedding in a barn on Nuc's land. The case might seem to have been cut
and dried, but witnesses were produced to say that the harvester was well-known
and trusted in the area, that no one realized that he was a deserter, that he oifered
his services freely to anyone who had need of them on a daily basis, and that he
walked about the village quite openly, going to mass on Sundays and frequenting
the local bars and inns (61). He was, in short, sufficiently well-integrated into
The Deserter and Civilian Society /111
village life that Nuc was justified in hiring him without making any special
investigations about his past, and the fact that he was employed by the day
absolved the farmer of any moral or legal responsibility. Courts were notably
reluctant to convict in such cases, which in turn meant that farmwork continued
to provide a rich seam of employment for conscripts on the run.
On farms and in the countryside casual labor might be very casual indeed,
payment in kind of food and shelter for small tasks or services rendered. Bergers
might take on a conscript to help them look after their animals during the transhumance or peasants make use of the cheap labor that deserters provided to
carry out odd jobs of construction or maintenance around the farmyard. Pierre
Lamblin, a journalier from Marchiennes in the Nord, employed a deserter to
help him with building work on his house, but again the court acquitted him on
the grounds that the man had been paid by the day and that the work involved
was rather trifling: "il s'agissait de la reparation d'un mur, consequemment d'un
travail momentane et de circonstances" (62). Neighbors and farmworkers were
forever performing little services for one another and helping with jobs on other
people's farms to the extent that in rural society the definition of employment
could become rather blurred. In the Southwest the vendanges provided excellent
opportunity for temporary labor in an activity that had always been highly
dependent on migrant workers from the surrounding departments. Therefore
the same migration patterns that provided young men with a means of easy passage from their own villages also supplied them with employment once they
arrived at their destination (63). Similarly in sheepraising country, there was
work to be found in cleaning and combing the wool or in helping with sheepshearing. In the Drome, for instance, deserters were employed both to tend the
flocks on the mountainside—an occupation that allowed them to earn a little
money without renouncing their hiding-places or their clandestine lifestyle—
and to card the wool after it had been cut. The small scale of the rural woollen
industry again worked to the deserter's advantage. When Jean-Pierre Champon
was eventually challenged in 1808, it emerged that he had been living quite
openly in the village of Allex because "il est cardeur de laine et parait s'etre
soustrait jusqu'a present aux recherches de la force armee en travaillant de son
metier chez divers particuliers" (64).
Local industries were also well-placed to benefit from the traditional skills
that many of the deserters practiced and from the windfall of cheap labor that
they constituted. In the Saone-et-Loire some fifty refractories and deserters had
formed themselves into a band of woodcutters, and the local economy had
become dependent on their labor, with the result that both the entrepreneurs and
the acheteurs de la coupe had become their protectors (65). Stonecutting was
another trade in which masters frequently found themselves tempted to employ
conscript labor. At Coulours in the Yonne considerable numbers found jobs in
the small masons' yards that proliferated in the woods around the commune
(66). In the Seine-et-Oise refractories were welcomed by quarrymasters desperate for able-bodied masons and quarrymen, mostly in centers like Chatillon that
served the lucrative Paris building trades (67). Iron-foundries, too, were often
glad to use conscript workers, especially because so many country boys had
some primitive knowledge of the trade, and the fact that many forges were small,
112 / Conscripts and Deserters
rural enterprises hidden in the forests made regular patroling by the gendarmerie
improbable. Deserters were regularly employed in the small forges of the Ariege
and the Vosges (68), and even in major enterprises like Le Creusot where, in the
words of the departmental administration, "une multitude d'individus sans
passeports, de requisitionnaires, de consents trouvent asile" (69). Any rural area
with difficult terrain and a wealth of small industrial enterprises was ideally
suited to the young man on the run from the armies, since it could provide him
not only with a means of concealment but with the regular source of income
that deserters generally lacked. The Nievre, well-endowed with rural industry
and blessed with a river network that allowed wood to be floated directly to the
Seine and Paris, emerged as a deserter's paradise:
Ceux des jeunes gens qui cultivent les terres trouvent dans les vastes forets
qui les avoisinent des asiles impenetrables aux gendarmes qui ont ordre de
les chercher: ceux qui font flotter le bois exploite se refugient, a la faveur des
trains, dans les villes situees sur tout le cours de la riviere d'Yonne; et ceux
qui travaillent aux forges et fourneaux sont les soutiens de families ordinairement indigentes, et que la crainte de les abandonner a la misere porte a se
cacher ou ils peuvent lorsqu'il est question d'une levee ou qu'ils sentent 1'approche de la gendarmerie qui, d'ailleurs, n'y va peut-etre pas avec trop d'assurance. (70)
In these circumstances it is hardly surprising that men of conscriptable age often
sought to acquire the necessary skills for jobs in trades like metalworking, and
