the years of general lawlessness that followed the dismantling of revolutionary
government, such crimes became commonplace in many parts of the country,
sparking off a rash of alarmist accounts and denunciations. Even when the thefts
were restricted to the basic necessities that the men required for their survival,
like those committed by a band of six to eight deserters in the mountains around
Chatillon, alarm spread rapidly at the very thought of bandits, "armes jusqu'aux
dents," and the sous-prefet at Die admitted that with such offenses "la peur peut
etre pour quelque chose" (24). Fear was essential to the successful operation of
such bands; without it they would have been reduced to impotence. Near Bourganeuf in the Creuse groups of between fifteen and twenty stalwart conscripts,
"des plus beaux hommes," were sighted roaming the countryside, begging for
food at remote farms with abundant use of threats and menaces (25). They
would hide in the woods during the day and emerge only at night, secure in the
knowledge that the whole community lived in fear of their ravages. In many
cases they did receive a degree of protection or at least of mute tolerance from
the local community, which made them very difficult to hunt down. Around
Sainte-Foy in the Gironde, for instance, bands of deserters were reported to be
playing on the emotions of local farmers, using the requisition laws as a lever to
excite the anger of young cultivateurs and to build up a spirit of opposition (26).
Generally, however, they relied on simple terror. After one attack near Castelmoron, the authorities noted that breaking down the wall of silence in the local
community was the greatest single obstacle they encountered in pursuing the
band responsible. Rougier, the adjoint du maire in the village of Rimons, had
been the victim of this crime, and the whole community shared his terror:
La plupart de ces brigands se tinrent postes en dehors du logis. Ceux qui y
entrerent avaient le visage barbouille de rouge, et aucun ne fut connu. Us se
firent indiquer par le citoyen Rougier le lieu ou etait son argent. Us visiterent
ses meubles et ne prirent que le numeraire qui s'y trouva. Leur proie fut de
450 francs, avec une certaine quantite de pain et d'autres comestibles dont ils
dirent avoir besoin pour bouffer. Ils affecterent, en se retirant, de mener le
citoyen Rougier au milieu d'eux pour lui faire remarquer en quel nombre il
etait et le menacer de venir le tuer s'il osait parler de leur visite. (27)
Since the villagers believed that the band contained between forty and forty-five
brigands, these were threats that they took very seriously indeed.
124 / Conscripts and Deserters
Bands of deserters were frequently indistinguishable from the ordinary brigand bands that caused so much havoc in the French provinces during the Thermidorian and Directorial years. In several notable instances deserters merged
with civilians in such formidable groupings as the "bande de Salembier," which
ravaged the Nord, the Pas-de-Calais, and wide tracts of the departements reunis
in Year IV and Year V, using the frontier as a welcome means of escape when
they felt themselves threatened (28). Salembier's enterprise was on a considerable scale with approximately sixty brigands, men and women, at his beck and
call. The charges against them related to twenty-six different crimes, from ordinary thefts to "vols avec des circonstances atroces," from attacks on passers-by
to "assassinats horribles"; targets included farms, mills, lock-keepers' houses by
the canals, and churches in lonely villages. The band roamed the northern
plains, striking generally by night in groups of ten, twelve, or fifteen, heavily
disguised to avoid detection (29). Salembier was not alone in realizing that
deserters were by sheer force of circumstance ideal fodder for inclusion in brigand bands. In the Sarthe eyewitnesses spoke of up to forty deserters organized
in large rassemblements, spreading terror in the countryside, where they "se font
livrer des armes, des subsistances, et meme de Fargent" (30). Along the northern
frontier "brigands travestis et armes" who tied up the inhabitants of a lonely
cottage and ransacked the house in search of money "pourraient bien etre des
consents et requisitionnaires refugies dans les bois" (31). The same kind of identification between deserters and brigands was made by officials across the whole
of France. In the Ardeche in Year VIII the commissaire reported glumly that
"les bandes de brigands qui nous desolent" consisted primarily of "consents et
requisitionnaires" who ought to be incorporated in the armies as a measure of
public safety (32). In the Drome in 1809 the authorities convinced themselves
that the very considerable problem of lawlessness in the department could be
effectively stamped out if desertion were eliminated, and the dossiers of captured brigands would seern to bear out their judgment. They referred repeatedly
to their military service and to the circumstances in which they left the army as
being at the root of their drift into crime: "Repond qu'il a servi pendant six ans
dans la lOOe demi-brigade; il s'est retire avec son conge"; "repond qu'il n'a servi
que quatre mois il ya sept ou huit mois, dans un bataillon auxiliaire qui fut
ensuite licencie"; "repond qu'il a servi neuf mois dans le lie Bataillon de la
Drome, qu'il vint a son pays en convalescence, et qu'il s'est marie depuis" (33).
In the same year the prefect of the Mayenne offered his rather perceptive explanation as to why refractories and deserters should be so prone to serious crimes
of brigandage. In hiding, he suggested, many of them became tired and bored,
unable to work or to socialize because of the activity of the local gendarmerie.
They came together into bands for company. The first thefts were timid, almost
desultory affairs, but their success led to further and more ambitious plans.
Quelques-uns d'entr'eux se reunirent en petites troupes, armes d'abord de
batons et de menaces, ils s'introduisirent dans les maisons isolees, se firent
donner des subsistances; bientot ils enleverent les fusils; leur audace s'accroissant insensiblement, ils formerent de plus grands rassemblements, imprimercnt la tcrreur dans les campagnes, et finircnt par attaqucr la gendarmerie et
Desertion and Criminality / 125
par lui enlever leurs camarades qui avaient pu etre arretes. Enfin ouvertement
rebelles aux lois, il pretendaient forcer les jeunes gens, disposes a s'y soumettre, a partager leur rebellion. (34)
So tight was the link between brigands and deserters that in the countryside
around Nyons thieves and highway robbers sought anonymity by passing themselves off as deserters. The sous-prefet observed in frimaire X that by means of
this disguise "les brigands ont trouve un abri dans les montagnes de cet arrondissement, sans faire naitre la mefiance ou le soupcon" (35).
Brigandage is a somewhat indiscriminate term used by the authorities to
cover a confused multiplicity of crimes ranging from political murders of republican officials to the most banal kind of highway robbery with no motive beyond
that of enriching the perpetrators. In the South and the West particularly, armed
attacks in the period after thermidor often did conceal political or counterrevolutionary aims, and deserters from the Republic's armies were quite prominently involved (36). In the West they frequently wore the uniform of the
Republic when engaged in their murderous attacks (37). And though in that area
the uniform may have had political connotations, elsewhere brigands might
mount their night raids in military uniform out of a kind of bravado, surrounding themselves with an element of military pomp. In the Drome, for example,
the prefect reported in Year XIII that after some years of calm the problem of
brigandage had resurfaced in the mountainous terrain between Die and Montelimar where "des vols de mulets, des vols de divers effets dans des maisons
ecartees" had once again become widespread. There was no question of these
being political attacks since the aim was clearly gain rather than reprisals and
the objects chosen had no political or symbolic significance. A police spy had
provided helpful details of their lifestyle and their current activities. There were
in all some fifteen members of the bande although only four had as yet taken
part in raids. Of these four, three were army deserters and they wore uniforms
for their exploits, a carmagnole and a pantalon de velours. According to the spy,
they were armed with "une carbine, deux pistolets, et un poignard"; they had
several known hiding places, generally in uninhabited barns and they posted a
lookout to warn them of the approach of the gendarmerie (38). Even in their
new and rather hazardous experience of civilian life, they preferred to retain
certain elements of their old military organization and swagger. Stripped of its
political significance, it was a powerful way of impressing and overawing the
local population.
The extent to which local people were cowed by such bands reflected the
extent to which they felt threatened. Where brigands restricted themselves to
fairly precise political targets, like republican mail coaches or treasury deliveries,
the local peasants were relatively unperturbed and might continue offering them
their protection. Similarly, large sections of the population would experience little fear where brigands were wreaking retribution on former Jacobin officials, or
on those villagers who had rushed to buy biens nationaux back in the Year II.
In fact, when they attacked a symbol of authority that was the object of widespread popular loathing—like the octroi posts at Bourg-les-Valence in 1808,
which were smashed up by a gang of men armed with sticks, pikes and pitch-
126 / Conscripts and Deserters
forks—local citizens even joined in (39). Attacks on arms stores or powder magazines did little to upset the mass of local people (40). Even when bands indulged
in robbery, they might choose their victims with care so as not to antagonize the
country communities on which they depended for shelter. Attacks on strangers,
complete outsiders passing through the area, were viewed differently from those
that placed local lives in jeopardy. Hence merchants might appear to present
ideal targets for brigands. They were outsiders from a different social milieu and
they could generally be depended on to carry worthwhile sums of money on their
person. In Year IX a band of brigands attacked a Swiss merchant on the road
from Cambrai to Bapaume, seizing his horse, his wallet, and his moneybelt, and
leaving him by the roadside with "les mains liees, les yeux bandes, laisse par
terre avec un baillon dans la bouche." It was without question a cruel attack on
a foreign businessman, but one that had no very dire consequences for the local
community, who might even hope to share in part of the spoils (41). It was very
different when the livelihood of local people was put at risk. Deserters in the
Aisne ravaged grain supplies in Year III, particularly in the area around Chauny.
They inspired fear among local farmers, giving themselves chilling noms de
guerre drawn from the annals of war and banditry (Dumouriez, Cartouche,
Lafayette, Mandrin) and warning the peasantry that they would not require any
hired labor for the harvest since they would find their crops harvested for them
(42). Then the gendarmes did get a degree of cooperation from the farmers, anxious to avoid a year of enforced dearth. There were, it is true, larger-than-life
figures among bandit leaders who so terrified local populations that they commanded respect despite the damage they caused. Jean-Pierre Bouisson, known
in the southern Cantal as the "voleur d'Alpuech", could depend on the warmest
reception and the best food and drink whenever he came visiting. He, however,
