obtained certificates from their mayors to vouch for the level of their attainment. Work in a quarry or a forge became suddenly prized, and ideas of social
promotion were rapidly transformed. In the Nord, among other regions of
France, "on a vu tout a coup le fils de cultivateur, le commis, le marchand, le
rentier devenir forgerons" (71). Given the country's appetite for weapons in the
war years, it was a trade in which opportunity seemed limitless.
Larger firms could be just as tempted as small ones to capitalize on cheap
available labor, and coalmines were among the industrial enterprises where
deserters found refuge in considerable numbers. At Aniche in the Nord, one of
several mines to be raided by the gendarmerie, the owners angrily denied all
knowledge of their workforce and insisted that no law could prevent them from
taking on labor wherever it could be found. If there were conscripts working
underground, they implied, the responsibility lay with the chefd'atelier in whom
was vested the power to hire and fire. In any event, after careful study of military
files, the gendarmes made seven arrests, but it was clear to them that the employment of strong, powerful miners would continue regardless of their origin, protected by the industrial muscle of the mining companies (72). The government
could never escape the fact that at a time of acute labor shortage refractory conscripts provided an unparalleled black market in diverse skills. By the age of
twenty or twenty-one years many of these young men had completed their tour
de France and were fully fledged craftsmen eager for the opportunity to exercise
their trade. Some were even away from home on their tour at the moment of
their conscription, and returned to find that their names had already been
The Deserter and Civilian Society / 113
included in the lists of refractories. Such was the case of young Alibert, a locksmith from Mirepoix, who had carefully waited until after the levee in messidor
X before setting out to Pont Saint-Esprit to begin his apprenticeship. Then the
government announced a levee supplemental™, and Alibert was shocked to find
himself sentenced to five years' imprisonment in his absence (73). He was
forced, like many others, into hiding armed with his trade and a saleable commodity to any employer. In towns, especially, there was a lively demand for
skilled craftsmen, from tailors to bakers, metalworkers to carpenters, and they
soon found work if they looked for it. In Bordeaux deserters and refractories
were to be found in shipbuilding and in all the river trades (74). In Caen it was
noted that while the unskilled drifted toward farmwork, those with skills were
earning their living "chez des fabricants ou des maitres ouvriers" (75). Blessed
with literacy, a deserter could hope to find a clerical job in a country starved of
clerks and administrators, sometimes even in the public service. Henry Reynier
was a Swiss who had deserted from the army in Piedmont; yet by Year IV he
was firmly ensconced working for a local notaire at Aouste in the Drome valley,
a pillar of local society lodging in the same house as the cure (76).
Reynier lived in a comfort and a degree of security that were in no way typical. His circumstances would make very bad caselaw; however, he is a salutary
reminder that for many hard-working and otherwise law-abiding citizens, refractories and deserters were real people with whom they came into contact on a
fairly regular basis and whom they did not think of denouncing to the authorities. Conscripts lucky enough to find jobs would generally work openly in the
fields or in the atelier in front of neighbors and fellow villagers, and there is little
evidence that they felt in danger or that the rest of the village regarded their
presence as in any sense criminal. Everyone knew that their neighbor had a son
in the mountains, that he came to see them under cover of darkness, that food
was being left for him in a shepherd's hut or in a ditch by the roadside. Refractory conscripts were not pariahs. If they evoked any emotion it was likely to be
one of sympathy and fellowship. This does not mean, of course, that long
months spent hiding in the caves of the Drome or in the snowy wastes of the
Massif Central were any less miserable or the Piedmontese wolves any less ferocious for the young man on the run. But it did mean that if he was utterly starving or overcome by fever, he would be more likely to throw himself on the mercy
of local people with some measure of hope that he would not be turned over to
the gendarmes. A tale of misfortune might, with a bit of luck, elicit assistance.
When a deserter turned up on his doorstep at Aulnay in the Seine-et-Oise,
Etienne Robillaird, the village miller, listened patiently to his story, invited him
in, and was finally persuaded to cut his chains. His motive, it seems, was pure
compassion:
Un homme inconnu s'est presente vers les huit heures du soir a la porte de
son moulin demandant le chemin de Roissy. Luy ayant ouvert sa porte pour
lui indiquer ledit chemin, il s'est introduit chez lui. S'etant apercu qu'il etait
enchaine, il 1'a invite de se retirer; mais apres ses instances reiterees, s'etant
dit deserteur et declarant n'avoir quitte son corps qui etait en marche que
pour aller voir sa femme et ses enfants, qui etaient audit Roissy, et se pro-
114 / Conscripts and Deserters
posant (suivant son dire) de rejoindre ensuite son dit corps qui devait passer
sous huitaine a Meaux ... (77)
Like beggars and others who had to throw themselves on the mercy of their
fellow men, deserters no doubt learned to polish up their tales of misfortune.
But in every village there were men and women who would shelter them or offer
assistance despite the penalties prescribed by the law. Nor was the answer to be
found in increasing these penalties or securing exemplary convictions since, in
the words of the commissaire du Directoire in Epinal in Year V, "les loix penales
trop rudes sont toujours eludees" and juries would simply refuse to convict (78).
In extreme cases where refractories enjoyed the sympathy and confidence of
the entire community, they could conduct themselves in public virtually as they
chose, secure in the knowledge that they were among friends. In Pamiers in Year
III deserters were reported to be disporting themselves freely in the city streets,
chatting peaceably with their friends, and even meeting for a friendly drink with
those of their companions who were in uniform (79). There would seem, indeed,
to have been surprisingly little friction between those who had been compelled
to serve and those remaining in their homes. In one incident in the Drome in
1792, connivance went so far that a troop of local soldiers participated in a
prison break by four men incarcerated at Crest for desertion (80). Even later in
the Revolution when attitudes had hardened considerably, incidents were
reported that revealed the relative ease of movement enjoyed by those on the
run from the law. Cases of open fraternization between deserters and gendarmes
were not unknown, and they were not always the prelude to an attempted arrest.
The agent municipal in Foix complained in Year IV that "si la gendarmerie a
Fair de poursuivre vivement ces deserteurs, elle n'a reellement que Fair, et il
parait certain que plusieurs fois depuis leur arrivee plusieurs d'entr'eux ont bu
et mange avec ces individus." There was no real attempt to arrest them, or even
to restrict their liberty: "Tous ces deserteurs etaient a la derniere foire de Tarascon, et c'etait de notoriete publique. Quelqu'un d'entr'eux jouait du violon
dans un bal de societe. Quelles demarches a fait la gendarmerie ce jour-la?" (81).
It was a reasonable question, one asked again by the Minister of Police in 1813
when he taxed the gendarmerie in the Seine-et-Oise with willful inaction over
deserters who were known to be working in the quarries at Chatillon. Significantly, he suggested that the only solution would be to bring in gendarmes from
elsewhere to arrest one known deserter, Edme Colas, who was working at the
quarry and living in the inn run by Courtaz at La Croix d'Arcueil. His reason
was his lack of confidence in the local men "qui sont journellement avec ledit
Colas et qui lui depensent son argent avec promesse de ne pas 1'arreter et de lui
donner avis des ordres qu'ils pourraient recevoir a son egard" (82). Such cases
of open collusion were rare perhaps, but they undermined effective policing,
caused the authorities grave embarrassment, and demonstrated for all to see that
refractories and deserters could socialize freely without fear of arrest or
denunciation.
It is interesting that when deserters were denounced to the authorities, an
element of personal grievance often lay behind the denunciation. The government could usually count on village squabbles to produce a rash of denuncia-
The Deserter and Civilian Society / 115
tions and counterdenunciations. At Genat in the Ariege the garde-forestier was
sufficiently jealous of the mayor, Vincent Viguerie, that he built up a systematic
dossier against him revealing that a conscript who had never left for the armies
was not only known to the mayor but had visited him, eaten at his table, and
worked on his property (83). At Lesparre in the Gironde the Imperial procureur
himself was denounced for not sufficiently prosecuting deserters but again the
act of denunciation was shown to be malicious, the work of an instituteur in the
town embittered by an imagined slight and looking for advancement in the community (84). Another case in the Meurthe in which a village mayor was accused
of harboring deserters had its roots in an act of private vengeance. The denonciateur had previously been convicted of the self-same offense, and was rather
crudely trying to take revenge on the mayor (85). Sometimes denunciation was
spurred on by intercommunal jealousies, like that which divided Aurillac and
Saint-Flour (86). More commonly the origin of the grievance was to be found in
personal circumstance, in a sense of outrage that others were avoiding service
while one's own family was paying an unreasonable price. In Year V, indeed,
peres defamille were explicitly invited by the government's commissaire in Colmar to denounce deserters, suggesting that their desertion was directly responsible for their own sons' presence in the armies (87). Serving soldiers sometimes
shared the resentment felt by their parents when they heard that their fellows
were living peaceably at home while they suffered the torments of life on the
Italian or Spanish front. A number of conscripts from the Vosges were sufficiently angered by the fact that their friends were still working happily on the
farm and that "ils ont toujours etc tranquil" that they petitioned the commissaire in Epinal to do something about it. They described what they themselves
had felt when they had had to return to their units after a conge, and bitterly
resented those of their peers who had failed to do so (88). There were individual
cases too where men who tried to avoid service by procuring medical certificates
that were obviously false found themselves denounced by fellow villagers, especially by those whose sons and nephews had been forced to leave in their stead.
The unfortunate Antoine Lambaut, who got himself exempted by the conseil de
revision at Pauillac, was the victim of just such a denunciation, in his case by
the other conscripts from Lesparre who had found no loophole and resented his
fraud. Perhaps his leg was too badly injured to allow him to march, they said,
but it had always been strong enough when it came to dancing, as the whole of
Lesparre was well aware:
Non seulement nous, mais tous les habitants de Lesparre pourraient vous le
prouver, il a danse avec nous presque tout le carnaval, il etait membre d'une
societe que nous avions forme pour danser, il s'est absente au moment qu'il
