communities through which he passed—a young man, obviously of the age for
military service, with the accent and manners of another part of the country,
uncertain of his way, and without any means of support and sustenance. It is
hardly surprising that the gendarmerie were always more confident about arresting conscripts outside their native villages than on home soil (4). If stopped on
the highway, he would have no papers, no passport, no plausible reason for making his journey. In other words he would be a prime candidate for arrest and
further investigation (5). Since such investigation would almost certainly reveal
inconsistencies in the young man's story or bring to light such incrimating evidence as forged passports or hospital permissions, few deserters arrested far from
their native province could expect to prove their innocence or to be acquitted
by the courts.
Many of those arrested were indeed discovered far from home, crisscrossing
France along the same trajectories as were used by new recruits in the opposite
direction, or by vagrants and migrant workers in whose company they might
seek anonymity. This was especially true in eastern departments and those close
to war fronts where the deserters reflected less the pattern of local conscription
than that of army movements, with the composition of the waves offuyards
subtly changing from one year to another as different regiments took up duty in
the Alps or in Germany. In contrast, departments of the interior and those that
were protected from the passage of regular battalions on their way to and from
the front showed a more markedly regional character. The Lot-et-Garonne is a
case in point: in Year XI, before the flurry of excitement in the Peninsula
brought thousands of men through the Southwest, those arrested in the department were for the most part lads from the immediate region or migrant workers
from the Auvergne; besides those from the Lot-et-Garonne itself, who were in a
large majority, the largest contingents came from the Pyrenean departments: the
Lot, the Gers, and the Haute-Garonne (6). Similarly in the Midi, there was relatively little through traffic, and this is faithfully reflected in the arrest figures.
In the Herault, for instance, more than 700 local men were arrested for desertion
100 / Conscripts and Deserters
between Year XIII and 1814; the next largest figures related to other southern
departments, both neighbors like the Gard (which supplied 45 names) and the
departments of the causses and southern Massif: the Aveyron (62), the Tarn
(26), and the Lozere (21). Those deserting from foreign armies were more
numerous than those from the northern half of metropolitan France (7). Departments in the North and East presented a very different picture. In the Doubs, a
very typical eastern department, men arrested as deserters came from the widest
possible geographical catchment. Besides local boys, they included conscripts
from seventy of the eight-five departments of the hexagone and from seventeen
of those annexed by Napoleon; and their number was swollen (and the gendarmes' task complicated) by considerable numbers of foreign soldiers: Spaniards and Italians, Russians and Austrians, Hungarians and Poles as well as
Swiss from across the border (8).
The Vosges, too, had a pattern of arrests that reflected its status as an eastern
department. The captives came from fifty-five of France's metropolitan departments and from nineteen of the departements reunis. In a few cases they were
stopped by the gendarmes when they were discovered wandering in the woods
on their own, their willpower broken and with terrible tales of misfortune to
relate. The only deserter from the Calvados to figure on these arrest sheets had
stayed with his regiment until he had to seek medical care for his swollen feet at
Neufchateau. Once he recovered he gave up the attempt to rejoin his fellows
and set out for home. Another from even further afield (as a native of Perpignan
he could hardly have chosen a less convenient spot to fall ill) deserted after hospital treatment for fever, and was found alone on the highway. But it was exceptional for deserters to tackle such long journeys without some companionship,
and usually the decision to desert was taken collectively by a group of friends
from the same unit. Not infrequently their quest for freedom was to end collectively too. In April 1806 thirteen soldiers from the Basses-Pyrenees, all from the
same regiment, were arrested in the same bar at Dogneville; in the same month
ten conscripts from the Haute-Garonne were caught as they hid from the gendarmes in two groups near Chatel-sur-Moselle and Mirecourt. Similarly, in 1811
a frightened group of nine young deserters from the Ariege was disturbed in the
village of Relanges. With their Mediterranean appearance and their heavy
southern accents they stood little chance of escaping the attention of the gendarmerie, and their rather unrealistic dream of traveling together back to their
villages along the Pyrenean frontier came to a predictably premature end (9).
Those deserters who remained at liberty were condemned to lives of fear and
deprivation for months or even years on end. They were outlaws who could not
have recourse to the authorities when they suffered attack or theft at the hands
of others; they had no civil status, hence no civil rights at law. For other desperate travelers on the highways of rural France deserters could therefore seem
an easy prey, and there were cases where they became the victims of men more
ruthless or more cynical than themselves. They were often forced back on their
own society and formed themselves into bands, groups of hungry and frightened
men roaming the hills in search of food and shelter. They might be tempted to
turn to crime to keep themselves alive, and some bandes did acquire an unsavory reputation for terrorizing lonely farmsteads. But the fact that others were
The Deserter and Civilian Society / 101
threatening the local population only made the task of the bona fide deserter,
the simple peasant whose criminal imagination stretched no further than the
avoidance of the gendarmes and a safe passage to his native village, more difficult. Most of these deserter bands posed little threat to society, living peaceably
in the woods or passing through rural villages without doing harm to anyone.
Their aims in banding together were more social than criminal, a quest for
mutual support and companionship in their long and arduous travels (10). Like
the maquisards of the Resistance, army deserters were marginalized by their
very desertion. They could not risk being seen walking openly along country
roads in daylight hours, and with few exceptions they traveled by night, taking
advantage of the hours of darkness to pass through villages and hamlets while
spending the daytime hiding in foresters' huts or shepherds' mountain retreats
or more commonly in thickets and ditches or caves on remote hillsides (11).
They were often intensely hungry, except where friendly local people could be
persuaded to come to their aid, and like all vagrants and marginaux they thieved
and begged to survive. In winter the intense cold of the upland regions of France
presented them with yet another danger, especially since it was the hills and
mountains that provided the best cover and were particularly favored by men
on the run. The snows could be long and unyielding, blocking roads and tracks
for five or six months of every year in parts of the Pyrenees and the massif Central. In one sense, as the prefect of the Puy-de-D6me recognized in 1808, these
conditions favored the deserter because police patrols had to be called off and
the intense misery that the cold created could evoke the sympathy of local people; however, such conditions—"la grande quantite de neiges et 1'aprete du
froid, surtout pendant la nuit" (12)—could also kill.
The combination of undernourishment and cold could be as lethal for conscripts on the run as it was for those of their colleagues who were still in uniform.
Like them, they had to forego most of the restorative benefits of dry beds and
fresh linen, hot meals and human understanding. One young man, Jean Marmies from Montignac in the Lot-et-Garonne, got no further than the Drome on
his abortive journey home from the army. He died in a local peasant's kitchen
the victim of simple weariness and neglect. He told the mayor, who came to
interrogate him the evening before he died, that he had been starving and that
for the previous three days he had been desperately begging from farm to farm
in a bid to stay alive (13). Another, Pierre-Joseph Copin, died in a wood not far
from his home at Saint-Amand in the Nord. He was being sought by the gendarmerie for a murder committed in the vicinity, and he had been in hiding for
some days, unable to show himself in public for fear of arrest. His father, a
smallholder in the village, was asked to identify the body which had been discovered a few days earlier "sur le chemin de la Croisette a la taille des anchois"
where he had died from weakness and exhaustion (14). They were not alone;
exposure, fever and hunger took a heavy toll. So did physical violence, which of
necessity dogged the lifestyle of the deserter. The people among whom they lived
and with whom they sought shelter in woodland huts and on mountain
sheepruns were often prone to violence, and young deserters naturally figured
among their victims. The case of Frangois Renaud, whose body was found in a
ditch near Saint-Ciers-de-la-Lande in the Gironde, demonstrates in a grimly
102 / Conscripts and Deserters
bloodthirsty way the risks run by many young men forced to experience the marginal society of woodcutters and charcoalburners:
II etait etendu sur le ventre, la tete dans 1'eau, les pieds sur les bords du fosse.
II etait depouille de tous ses habits qui etaient etendus sur lui. Plusieurs
empreintes de pieds d'hommes qui se remarquaient autour de lui ont fait
presumer qu'il avail etc retenu de force dans cette position, jusqu'a ce qu'il
futetouffe. (15)
Whether from cold or hunger, the cupidity of local criminals or the ever-increasing vigilance of the gendarmes, la vie en marge could be a dangerous and highly
uncomfortable existence. It is hardly surprising that considerable numbers of
deserters changed their minds and voluntarily turned themselves over to the
police. Deserters, like soldiers, frequently had second thoughts when they came
face to face with the implications of their action. In 1806, for instance, the Minister was able to report to Napoleon that of sixty-four deserters that year in the
Morbihan, thirty-nine had surrendered voluntarily to the authorities (16).
Others deserted persistently throughout the war years undeterred by the risks
and deprivations implicit in their chosen lifestyle. Louis Isnard from Merindol
in the Drome was one such man. When he was taken prisoner in Year II, it was
suggested by the military authorities that because this was his third arrest for
desertion, a punitive example might be made of him so as to discourage others
of like mind. He had already enjoyed a permission because of poor health, and
on his return to his regiment had stayed for only 2 days before heading for the
hills. With visible irritation, his commanding officer listed his previous offenses:
"II etait 1'annee derniere grenadier dans le bataillon qui etait en garnison a
Romans, il en deserta. Avant cette epoque il etait engage dans le regiment cidevant Boulonnais, il en deserta aussi, et il est d'autant plus coupable d'avoir
quitte sa compagnie qu'il y etait en remplacement apres avoir touche une forte
somme" (17). Recidivism of this kind could easily become habit-forming. In the
Nord it was noted that year after year the same names appeared on the lists of
deserters, men who continued to slip off home to see their parents or to tend the
