stemming from youthful revelry were common to both deserters and refractories, robberies, housebreaking, and arson—actions that threatened local people
and undermined their meager welfare—were far more likely to be the preserve
of deserters from elsewhere, passing through the community, without roots or
connaissances, and without the work from which the refractory could hope to
extract a small but invaluable income. Of course, insoumis got involved in
fights, in barroom brawls and drunken assaults on third parties, in intervillage
rixes at fairs and markets. But these were incidents that caused the village little
trouble. These draft dodgers were in no way a class apart, but were behaving like
all young villagers of their age, unmarried males without family responsibilities
who had always caused affrays at bats champetres and expended their youthful
energy in colorful charivaris. Village society was well accustomed to such
excesses.
Similarly, conscripts might become involved in the ordinary criminal activities of the village without arousing any anger on the part of the local population.
This is especially true in the case of poaching, of the delits forestiers that were
commonplace in every rural community, even the most law-abiding (7). That
deserters sleeping out of doors on cold nights should steal firewood from local
forests seemed quite natural to villagers who not infrequently made nocturnal
visits to the communal woods with an identical purpose (8). The forest laws
were in any case very difficult to enforce. Relatively few villagers were ever
brought to justice, and those who were could hope to escape with the very lightest sentence, especially if the case were heard before the local juge de paix. In
the Seine-et-Oise the Minister noted angrily that one juge had treated the offense
so lightly that he was insulting the gardes-forestiers and making their task quite
impossible. Men found carrying away faggots of wood from the foret nationale
at Saint-Germain had been allowed to leave the court freely after paying a paltry
fine, "une somme modique, dont ils sont rembourses, et au-dela, par la vente
d'un seul fagot" (9). Insoumis were particularly prone to involvement in delits
forestiers because they knew instinctively where to go and had an invaluable
local knowledge of trout streams and rabbit runs; as local lads they were doing
neither more nor less than they might have been expected to do had there been
no question of military service. On occasion their offenses were committed
jointly with civilian friends from the village itself, a final proof, if any is needed,
that poaching was seen as an acceptable economic and social activity in which
any villager might become involved. In one instance, in the Ariege, conscription
offenses were neatly linked to breaches of the forest laws. A father and his two
sons, both consents refractaires, were arrested in 1808 after gendarmes had
stumbled on their illegal enterprise close to the Spanish frontier. The father was
accused of protecting his sons and of flouting the law on communal woodland
since "il les entretenait sur la frontiere d'Espagne chez un marechal ferrant, ces
jeunes gens venaient parfois couper du bois sur les montagnes, le pere le vendait
ensuite, soit a Seix, soit ailleurs" (10).
Smuggling was also a form of criminal enterprise that came easily to countrymen, especially those near national frontiers or the old boundaries between
pays d'etat and pays d'election. The population in these regions was generally
well-schooled in the art of contraband. There was no stigma attached to the
Desertion and Criminality / 121
crime, nor any antipathy toward those involved; hence it was a lucrative pursuit
in which a young fugitive could involve himself without risking the ire of local
people. Even when the smuggling involved the passing of goods from France to
a country with which France was at war, the villagers seemed to view smuggling
bands with a nagging respect, in part, of course, because they themselves often
benefited from the trade and shared directly or indirectly in the prosperity that
the smugglers created. In brumaire Year III, for instance, the Haute-Garonne
reported that villagers from the frontier commune of Aspet near Saint-Gaudens
were passing mules across the Pyrenees into Spain under cover of darkness—
"qu'il existait des hommes assez ennemis de leur patrie pour faire passer des
mules et des mulcts au tiran de Castille," in the official language of the time—
but the department's sense of outrage was not shared in the settlements in the
mountains (11). Where customsmen did try to intervene and make arrests, there
was every likelihood that the local population would riot or impede them, as
happened in the villages of Sue and Lavelanet in the Ariege in 1810, where the
douaniers were sufficiently foolhardy that they tried to intercept bands of smugglers more than one hundred strong (12). What Paris never adequately appreciated was that in many of these frontier communities smuggling was a fundamental part of local culture involving the domestic economy of every family.
Whole villages took part, from the most humble to the wealthiest farmers, the
notables of local society (13). Often these richer farmers were the natural leaders
of the smuggling rings in the same way that they were the natural leaders of the
community, and there are instances where officials themselves were involved
and where locally recruited regiments reverted to their traditional nocturnal pursuits (14). Contraband was symptomatic of a more general lawlessness and contempt for officialdom that was common in remote mountain areas where the
writ of central government did not run. In the more inaccessible villages of the
department of Taro in northern Italy, smuggling, highway robbery, and desertion were natural bedfellows, reflections of the extreme misery and deprivation
of the inhabitants. At Monchio "une miserable cabane, quelques chevres, et
quelques chataigniers—voila toute leur fortune: aux approches de 1'hiver ils se
rendent en Toscane et campent dans les campagnes." At Morfasso crime and
smuggling were even more endemic, with the inhabitants branded as "contrebandiers avant que ce pays fut passe sous le regime francais, et voleurs de grand
chemin depuis." In Carpaneto smuggling was the mainstay of the village economy in a region where the peole were "presque tous des muletiers: ils se rendent
souvent dans la Ligurie, et sur le territoire de Bobbio; c'est la que se refugient
nos consents" (15). In the Pyrenees conditions were very little different, and
again the economy of whole districts was dependent on contraband. Smuggling
in the Andorra valley was believed to involve eighty or more men on a regular
basis, exporting French grain and importing coffee and colonial produce. It was
a lucrative trade centered on most of the major mountain settlements along the
frontier such as L'Hospitalet, Siguer, Auzat, Conflans, Aulos, Ustou, Sentein,
and Bonac, a map that corresponds quite tantalizingly with that of insoumission
in the region. The customsmen did not know the terrain sufficiently to identify
the passing places in the mountains where trading was done, and a veil of secrecy
was successfully maintained over the identity of those involved. What was
122 / Conscripts and Deserters
known with some certainty, however, was that smugglers consorted with deserters and refractories in their mountain fastnesses, used their services during their
journey, and devoted part of the profits of the trade to providing them with food
and clothing (16).
Poaching, stealing firewood, smuggling grain through mountain passes did
not constitute crimes in the eyes of local communities where everyone, even the
most law-abiding, might do the same from time to time. A refractory conscript
who tried to keep himself alive by such means would merely underline the fact
that he was well-integrated into the mores of the village or hamlet where he was
hiding. He might be seen as an unwelcome competitor by the local braconniers,
but in no sense could he be construed as threatening the welfare of local people.
Because of his misery and desperation, the deserter was far more likely than the
refractory to indulge in criminal activity that harmed the interests of villagers
and thus overstepped the bounds of local tolerance. The majority of these crimes
were crimes against property, thefts involving an element of violence or destruction, vols avec effraction. Throughout the period of the wars, indeed, there were
regular complaints from all corners of France that the number of thefts and burglaries was increasing alarmingly, largely because of the social disruption caused
by war, with thousands of people on the move or in hiding from the authorities,
removed from the calming influence of their families and communities and
hence more likely to flout social convention (17). Often the offenses seem trifling
enough, acts of petty pilfering to keep body and soul together. At Dunkerque it
was noted that thefts of food were particularly numerous, committed generally
on impulse by men who had no idea where the next meal was coming from, "le
tout pour parvenir a se derober aux poursuites qu'on faisait apres eux" (18).
Sometimes they would steal small objects and items of clothing from stallholders or from houses in the villages they passed through in the hope of selling them
again at the first opportunity. Often their victims were poor and vulnerable.
When two naval deserters were arrested at La Brede in the Gironde, "on les a
trouves nantis d'effets voles, notamment de treize mouchoirs enleves a une
pauvre famine de Cadaujac," a rash theft that persuaded local mayors to look
out for the two fugitives (19). Deserters could, of course, set their sights on more
ambitious targets, like those in the commune of Arsac who burgled homes, waylaid one of the richest farmers in the district, and drove away two flocks of sheep
in one brief orgy of criminal activity (20). Those eager to make a quick getaway
might attempt to steal horses from stables or from fields, a crime that caused
fury in the farming community. Yet to country boys the theft of livestock could
seem a very obvious way of making the money needed to stay alive because
horses not only guaranteed instant mobility but were always saleable commodities at the many horsefairs and markets held in nearby towns (21). Lonely farmhouses and isolated cottages were favored targets for thieves, although in parts
of the Nord they turned their attentions to parish churches generally left
unlocked and unguarded even after nightfall. Again they seemed to provide easy
and guaranteed pickings. At Oost-Capel near Dunkerque, three men were
reported as having broken into the church and stolen "deux calices et un
ciboire," one of the chalices being pure silver (22). Yet because of the nature of
the crime, it was twenty-four hours before the gendarmerie were alerted, and the
Desertion and Criminality / 123
thieves were safely out of the vicinity. Of the three men, one was a deserter,
another an echappe aux galeres, an interesting alliance between the fugitive and
the hardened criminal. Their thieving was in no way casual pilfering, but highly
organized crime involving churches in a score of villages and small towns. They
had all the attributes of a professional gang who, in the words of the magistrates
in Dunkerque, "a 1'aide d'une patente de marchand, rodent de commune en
commune et ont des relations avec des juifs qui achetent tout" (23).
If individual thefts could be tolerated, acts of collective banditry were perceived as posing a much more serious threat to rural communities. Although the
deserters often grouped together for their own protection, they could seem very
menacing to local people, and their criminal activity risked spreading panic
from farm to farm, rather as had happened during the Grande Peur of 1789. In
