106 / Conscripts and Deserters
young, vigorous, sexually active, gregarious, living out the years of their youth
in total isolation. They needed contact with others, whether to help them on
their journey or to relieve the grinding boredom of their enforced lifestyle. Many
deserters were grateful to shepherds and cowherds for advice on the most discreet route across the mountains, avoiding major settlements. Shepherds in the
Pyrenees, taking their flocks on the annual transhumance into Catalonia, were
especially appreciated as guides and companions for young men seeking to elude
the gendarmes and the border guards. Along coastlines and where major rivers
cut their proposed route, it was to boatmen and ferrymen that deserters were
forced to turn. Boatmen on the Rhone were particularly open to temptation,
given the large numbers of men eager to return to their homes from the armies
in the East and in northern Italy. One battelier who was caught had charged two
deserters six francs for the short journey from La-Roche-de-Glun across to the
other bank (38); and the government commissaire at Loriol was sufficiently
alarmed at the extent of this traffic that he urged in Year VI the institution of
systematic identity checks for all those crossing the river by bacs (39). Along the
Channel coast fishingboats played a similar role for men escaping from Belgium
and the armies in the North. At Dunkerque, local fishermen and ferrymen plied
the town's canal system inside the military fortifications, seeking out deserters
from the garrison and ferrying them to freedom (40).
Even once they had returned to their pays, refractories and deserters yearned
for the everyday sociability that was denied them while they were in hiding.
They longed for simple fun, the atmosphere of a bar or cabaret, music and dancing, and the company of friends and relatives. Those living close to their own
farm or village would emerge from hiding whenever they thought the coast was
clear to return home, and it was rare for parents to turn them away. Many,
indeed, continued to live at home more or less openly, depending on village
gossip and warnings from neighbors and well-wishers for the intelligence they
required about the approach of the gendarmes. The information collected by the
gendarmerie about the whereabouts of deserters and the evidence turned up during police raids both confirmed an evident truth: that very large numbers of
conscripts were in fact being harbored by their own families for considerable
periods of their supposed disappearance (41). When questioned, of course, the
parents would plead their innocence or their helplessness. Joseph Pothevin from
Saint-Ybars, whose son was known to be roaming the district with conspicuous
ease, protested that he had done everything possible to persuade him to serve,
even taking him to the prefecture in Foix and pressing his feuille de route into
his hand; it was not his fault if his son had subsequently changed his mind (42).
But was it? Conscripts knew very well that they would be welcome around the
family hearth, given a hot meal and a change of clothing, and might even be
expected to do some work on the farm before they returned to hiding. They
knew, too, that at certain times, notably after nightfall and on Sundays (43), it
was relatively safe to emerge from hiding. The gendarmerie were continually
frustrated in their work by the open connivance of most parents in the insoumission of their sons, and could only take action when a conscript was surprised
at home en flagrant delit or when, to the intense embarrassment of the parents,
a refractory soldier died at home while staying there without permission. When
The Deserter and Civilian Society / 107
Pierre Carrette died of fever at his father's home in Tourcoing in 1811, for example, his name was taken off the list of local refractories, but his death in turn
exposed his father to legal action (44).
The young conscript also longed for the company of his friends and contemporaries, the peer group within the village that formed the basis of adolescent
sociability. In the regiments he deeply missed his friends, the young males of the
community who formed his natural social milieu. In letters home he was forever
asking after them, their exploits, the jobs they had obtained, their fortune in the
tirage (45). During his lonely night marches and days in hiding, the joys of
youthful laughter and drink and merriment seemed all the more pressing and,
like any young man from a remote settlement or any stranger passing through a
village, he was drawn to the atmosphere and instant affability of the auberge or
estaminet. The gendarmes, too, understood the value of bars as social centers
for the lonely, resorts of criminals, and centers of antirecruitment propaganda
where the refractory would be guaranteed a warm reception (46). They knew that
many aubergistes, responsive to local opinion on the matter, favored the cause
of young deserters and offered them whatever protection they could. They therefore took a particular interest in wayside bars, the natural focal points for the
surrounding countryside, places where fugitives could meet by arrangement
before returning to another week of discomfort and hunger. At one such establishment, Craywick in the Nord, the brigadier noted on entry that a hush fell
over the room and that "il y avail de 1'embarras dans les manieres d'agir du
cabaretier et de la cabaretiere"; he ordered the search of the premises and three
young men of the previous levee were discovered hiding in an attic (47). They
were unlucky. In many parts of the country bars came to be regarded by refractories as safe houses where they could enjoy a drink with their friends free from
disturbance. In strongly refractory areas like the Ariege, it was in fact the gendarmes who might have difficulty being served. Police enquiries in 1809 established that at Couflens, a hamlet in the borderlands around Seix, the landlord
and his son-in-law "non contents de refuser le logement a un militaire sur un
billet du maire, se sont permis les injures les plus grossieres centre Fautorite
locale." At Merigon Francois Berge received in his bar "a toute heure de la nuit
des jeunes gens de famille" and especially refractory conscripts. At Erce, another
cabaretier, Paul Merniguet, "donne a boire, a manger et a jouer a toute heure de
la nuit et recoit dans son cabaret les consents refractaires qui s'y reunissent pour
commettre ensuite des desordres et meme des delits dans la commune" (48).
Elsewhere aubergistes allowed their premises to be used by those who sought to
sell remplagants to young conscripts or by fraudulent means to impede the workings of the conscription law (49).
It was but a short step from visiting the local cabaret to attending one of the
highpoints of country sociability, the village fair or bal champetre. For the young
of the village these foires were the principal occasions when they could let off
steam, get drunk, participate in wild ritualistic dancing, and, most importantly,
make conquests among the village girls. They were occasions when the jeunes
gens established their own values and challenged outsiders. At foires long-standing jealousies and intervillage rivalries often became inflamed into pitched battles between the young men of neighboring communes. For all these reasons they
108 / Conscripts and Deserters
were occasions that the young country lad did not want to miss, and deserters
and refractories often took a calculated risk in attending a village dance or local
fair, mixing with the dense crowds of revelers in the hope that the sheer numbers
present would mask them with a certain anonymity. At Le Roussay in the Seineet-Oise a refractory was spotted enjoying some wine with his friends in the winetent seemingly unconcerned by the presence of the local gendarmerie (50). At
another local foire at Chalabre near Limoux the police tried to intervene when
they identified a number of deserters and insoumis mingling with the crowd, but
were insulted and ill-treated by other revelers much to the indignation of the
Minister of the Interior, who was sensitive to the impact on public opinion of
an incident where his men had been humiliated in so public a place (51). Deserters would come a long way to enjoy a village dance in relative security, to meet
their friends and plot future coups. A bal champetre in the next department
could seem even more attractive to men on the run and anxious to avoid their
local mayor or local gendarme. At Sainte-Colombe in the Lot-et-Garonne, for
instance, a local dance in 1811 attracted an enthusiastic crowd, among them
"des refractaires des communes voisines, presque toutes etrangeres au Departement" (52). Not all, of course, came for innocent enjoyment. For some, as in so
many aspects of youth culture, the main attraction lay in the possibilities for
fighting and disruption. Take the case of Pierre Carnelle, nicknamed "Langeac"
after his native village in the Haute-Loire, who toured the village fetes for miles
around looking for trouble. He was a seasoned deserter who had already been
condemned to death for the murder of a shepherd, and he was eventually killed
in a shoot-out with the gendarmerie in a bar near Saint-Flour. As the sous-prefet
reported with obvious relief, "son caractere petulant et emporte etait connu
tellement que dans toutes les fetes de ces environs, ou il y avait des querelles et
emeutes de la jeunesse, il en etait toujours 1'auteur" (53). For others the major
reason for attending a village fair lay in the pickings it might offer. Jean Lavigne,
another deserter, attended the fair at Calvinet in the Cantal so that he could rob
one of the colporteurs with a stall there and thus obtain money for food (54).
Whatever the individual motivation, the presence of refractories at foires and
country bals in significant numbers helped to reduce their sense of isolation and
to provide some contact with the rest of rural society.
That sense of isolation could, of course, be dramatically reduced if the
deserter were lucky enough to find some amenable female company. One of the
principal attractions of returning to his village was, quite naturally, that of meeting once again his former fiancee or girlfriend, abandoned when he had been
forced to leave for his regiment or for the protection of the hills. But for most
fuyards, that was an Elysian solution, consigned firmly to the realm of dreams
and fantasies. In more practical terms, any woman would do, and the risks
accepted in attending foires and village dances reflected not only a craving for
sociability and drunken revelry, but also a strong desire for female conversation
and sexual relationships. In the more established bandes of deserters, just as in
their criminal counterparts like the Bande d'Orgeres, the womenfolk were an
integral part of the community (55). They were the exceptions, however, and for
most the company of women had to be a casual affair. Like any group of men
deprived for weeks on end of the pleasures of civilization, deserters would turn
The Deserter and Civilian Society / 109
eagerly to prostitutes whenever they had money to spare, or more generally to
those village women who were prepared to sleep around fairly indiscriminately
and who were attracted by the element of daring, and the slightly exotic appeal
of a young fugitive who would slip away in the morning for the safety of the
wilds. There was a sense, indeed, in which the prostitute offered an element of
security to the deserter on the run. He would have a roof over his head, secure
until dawn from the attentions of the gendarmerie, without any of the police
surveillance and registration that a night in a hotel or lodging house necessarily
entailed. The prostitute, quite apart from any sexual charms, offered the relief
of anonymity akin to the turkish bath in the cities, and deserters, criminals and
