enjoyed the reputation of being a local Mandrin, carrying several pistols on his
belt wherever he went, and telling of his adventures to anyone who would listen,
including the time when he had got the length of the scaffold in Orleans but had
leapt into the crowd and escaped (43). He did have as his audience a relatively
gullible mountain people who were ready to transform him into a folkhero.
More commonly the attitudes of local people to brigand bands were intensely
pragmatic, and were well-summed up by the prefect of the Lot-et-Garonne in
Year VIII:
Quand les brigands n'attaquaient que les diligences ... les citoyens mettaient
moins d'ensemble et d'activite dans leur surveillance et leurs perquisitions;
depuis que les proprietes particulieres ont etc menacees, leur zele pour ecarter
et detruire le brigandage est plus general et plus efficace: la crainte de provoquer la vengeance des malfaiteurs les retenait, la necessite de se mettre a Fabri
de leurs entreprises les excite. (44)
If deserters were particularly prone to commit crimes against property to
stave off hunger, their loneliness and deprivation could drive them to other
excesses that did more to antagonize the local population. Men on the run, far
from their own village and thus cloaked in a certain anonymity and without the
company of a wife or copine were perhaps more liable than others to resort to
Desertion and Criminality / 127
rape or harassment in a bid to satisfy their sexual desires. Certainly village opinion tended to place the blame for unexplained attacks on those without social
obligations, driven to desperation by long months in hiding, and village opinion
could be unforgiving on this matter. When the daughter of an innkeeper, Catherine Claudel from the commune of Ainvelle in the Vosges, was found raped
and murdered in a wood in 1810, the local community was quite naturally outraged. She had been savagely attacked with blows to her stomach before being
strangled with "une ficelle" with such violence that the gendarmes were at first
inclined to believe that more than one man had been responsible. They revised
their opinion only after the arrest six weeks later of a deserter from La Folie in
the Haute-Loire "refuse dans les auberges et arrete sur la route par des charretiers a cause de son travestissement en fille ... Les habits qui formaient son
deguisement ont etc reconnus etre ceux de ladite Claudel" (45). Of course, soldiers did not have to have deserted to commit rape, and popular distrust
extended to garrisons and passing regiments as well as to those on the run. In
the same department, for example, a twelve-year-old girl from Nomexy was the
victim of an assault by the fencingmaster from the local regiment (46). As with
any crime, the fact that the assailant did not belong and came from outside the
commune helped to seal the impression of a community that had been violated,
and feelings ran very high. As Jean-Pierre Gutton has shown, girls were still
regarded as being in some sense the property of the village, of the "groupe de la
jeunesse," a traditional concept that was reaffirmed at every bal champetre and
symbolized in the "multiples rites de mariage" (47). The rape of any village girl
by a man from elsewhere was therefore doubly offensive to village mores and
gave rise to a widespread desire for retribution and vengeance.
The psychological pressures that turned men to rape could also lead to more
generalized violence, and the presence in a commune of deserters or refractories
was always liable to result in an increase in the number of assaults and killings
committed on its territory. Therefore when murders were reported in small
towns or villages, or when bodies were discovered in ditches by lonely roadsides,
the gendarmerie and the villagers were united in believing that conscripts were
probably to blame. When an obscure individual was murdered on a lonely road
near the departmental boundary between the Cantal and the Puy-de-D6me in
Year XI, le bruit public was quite adamant that deserters were responsible, and
such exaggerated rumors were circulating that "on ne voyageait plus dans cette
contree qu'en caravane." The sous-prefet at Murat was sufficiently alarmed to
order an immediate search of the woods, mountains, and burons (the huts occupied by shepherds on the higher slopes) to assuage local fears, but with no success (48). In that case it was the sheer randomness of the killing that most
alarmed the local population, the fact that any traveler was placed at risk. In
other instances the victim had been chosen with care and the murder executed
with clinical calculation. When a garde-champetre was found dead in a wood at
Haumont in the Nord, there were few doubts in anyone's mind that the murder
was the work of deserters because the garde had a reputation for severity and
punctiliousness and had been responsible for the arrest of numerous consents
refractaires. What shocked public sensibilities was less the fact of his killing than
the manner of it. "Sa tete etait fracassee, ses yeux creves, et son corps etait tran-
128 / Conscripts and Deserters
sperce a Fendroit du nombril par un baton de noisetier" (49). Particularly
vicious attacks could only have the effect of exacerbating ill-feeling towards
deserters. At Galgon near Libourne an old lady living alone was bludgeoned to
death by her domestique, a deserter from a neighboring village whom she had
taken in and protected. The motive was presumably gain and there was evidence
of premeditation, but it was the excessive violence of the attack that horrified
opinion: "On lui avail fracasse le crane a coups de massue, et sa poitrine etait
frappee de plusieurs coups de couteau" (50). News of such crimes only increased
the sense of insecurity that was already rife in many areas of the French countryside. Faced with the miseries and tribulations of months and sometimes years
on the run, conscripts might, it seemed, be driven to almost any outrage. No one
in remote areas of the country could consider themselves truly safe. One young
deserter living in the woods near his home village in the Cantal uttered wild
threats against his father and his stepmother whom he accused of harboring prejudice against him and making his life intolerable. On 26 July 1809 he could take
no more. He entered the family house and "a frappe sa belle-mere de cinq coups
de couteau, dont quatre ont porte sur la tete et un sur le bras gauche; on craint
beaucoup pour les jours de cette femme qui etait enceinte" (51). Of course this
attack was the kind that followed many a family quarrel in rural France, often
about inheritance and the division of land; it did not necessarily follow from the
fact of desertion. Nevertheless the strains placed on frightened, often rather
immature young men by their life in clandestinity accentuated existing family
tensions, and public opinion was not slow to connect such attacks with the rough
and violent lifestyle of their fugitive existence.
As with any fait divers, public outrage could generally be measured by the
brutality and callousness of the crime. When two women and a baby were found
battered to death in an isolated farmhouse at Sainte-Croix near Die in Year XI,
the thirst for vengeance was understandable. The killers were both deserters,
cultivateurs from Die, who had called at the farm claiming that they were looking for two remplagants to whom they had paid considerable sums the previous
Sunday and who, they had good reason to believe, had since gone into hiding.
This was, however, no more than a pretext to gain admission to the house. On
asking whether there were no young men around the farm buildings, they were
told that the women were alone, the husband and uncle being away at the fair
in Saillans and the brother-in-law out in the woods collecting firewood. Reassured, the two murderers set about their gory task, clubbing the occupants with
their freshly hewn batons and leaving them for dead before setting fire to the
farm to destroy any evidence of their crime. The story sent a frisson of horror
through the locality, and large crowds turned out to watch the execution of the
two killers on the main square of Valence (52). Deserters already condemned in
their absence faced severe military penalties if they were recaptured, and some
of them responded as men with nothing to lose, killing and robbing with carefree
abandon. But few can have been as indiscriminate as Pierre-Francois Fautrel,
who had deserted from several regiments in and around Lille, and who on the
eve of his execution for murder confessed to a whole series of killings over the
previous few years. A Norwegian soldier, an Italian whom he had met on
the road, the mayor of a Belgian town through which he had passed and a
Desertion and Criminality / 129
woman in whose company he had staged one of his escapes all figured on his
list of victims, usually for purposes of theft. There was something chilling about
Fautrel's casual approach to the deaths of others. The woman, for instance, who
had helped him to desert, simply outlived her usefulness, whereupon he pushed
her into the Rhine near Nijmegen on the grounds that she had become a burden
to him, "dont il ne savit plus que faire." Even more horrifying, if his rather
cavalier deathbed confession is to be believed, was his admission that for two of
his crimes others had been convicted and executed. While serving in the
Twenty-fifth Light Infantry he had killed a fellow soldier "a coups de baton et a
coups de sabre" in the citadel at Verdun. He was, he said, charged with the crime
along with a tambour in the same regiment, but whereas he had been acquitted
by the conseil de guerre, Thomassin, his alleged accomplice, "qui n'avait nullement participe a son crime, fut fusille." Again, he alleged that he alone had been
responsible for the murder of the mayor, near Berg-op-Zoom, having held him
up on a lonely road to steal his money. He had deserted his regiment along with
another soldier, and he had since heard that this man "le nomme Jouvinot de
Lille, qui etait deserte avec lui mais qui 1'avait quitte quelque temps avant cet
assassinat, fut arrete et condamne ainsi que lui Fautrel a la peine de mort par
un conseil de guerre, qu'il sait que ledit Jouvinot, quoique innocent, fut execute
et que lui il avait le bonheur de se sauver entre Berg-op-Zoom et Breda" (53).
Many of the killings ascribed to deserters were not of local people, however,
but were rather incestuous affairs within the twilight world of the fugitives themselves. Conscripts leaving home to make the long and often hazardous journey
to join their regiments could generally be counted on to have a certain amount
of money on their person, usually in the form of the prime they had received
from the recruiting-officer, supplemented by gifts from parents and relatives on
the eve of their departure. They therefore made obvious targets for theft, especially by those who knew the timetable and habits of new recruits, and the periodic discovery of their bodies on public highways caused considerable anger
among government officials (54). Young conscripts could be terribly naive and
trusting, lured into a false sense of security by their uniform and by the comradeship of the journey. At Asnieres-sur-Oise (Seine-et-Oise) in 1806 the body
of a conscript was found, hurriedly concealed in a communal wood. On investigation it was revealed that he had been persuaded by another recruit to take a
shortcut away from the main road shortly before his disappearance, that the two
men had been discussing money in a bar before the murder, and that the victim
had revealed to his companion that his father had given him several gold coins
before he set out on his long tramp from Mende to join his battalion at Boulogne. His loose, excited conversation and open, trusting nature were sufficient
to ensure that he would never again see the wilds of his native Gevaudan (55).
