harvest and who would not be deterred by the threat of severe punishments like
a spell in a depot colonial (18). Sometimes the habit was so implanted that the
conscript's time with his regiment never exceeded a few days, each period of
incorporation punctuated by spells of freedom in his home village and by terms
of imprisonment for past crimes. The recurrent pattern of freedom, capture, and
sentence was accepted, like the rigors of the escape itself, as the price that had
to be paid for the normality of civilian existence (19). To the army persistent
deserters of this kind were more than simply a source of passing irritation. Their
very presence in the battalions could serve as an example to others and, though
increasingly as the wars continued the first priority was to get deserters back in
uniform, seasoned officers knew that they were not solving the fundamental
problem. The district of Montelimar put this very succinctly when discussing
the course of action they should take with unreformed recidivists. "Vous sentez,
citoyen," they wrote to the Minister of War, "le danger qu'il y a que ces hommes
en soient arretes et ramenes de suite a leur corps dans un instant surtout ou Ton
The Deserter and Civilian Society / 103
leve de nouveaux corps pour se porter en masse contre les ennemis coalises de
la Republique" (20).
It was the army's goal to isolate the deserter from the rest of French society,
to make his lifestyle intolerable and his arrest and punishment more certain. To
this end a wave of laws and decrees was introduced throughout the war years,
prescribing punishments not only for deserters themselves but for those who
offered them any form of help or protection (21). Draft dodgers, too, were more
systematically tracked down. The gendarmes and columns of regular troops sent
into rural villages had instructions to root out all those found of military age,
whether they had ever been incorporated or not. Repression became more effective and as a consequence the refractory's lifestyle became significantly less
secure. Whereas in the 1790s he could have hoped to spend most of his time at
home or with relatives living a life indistinguishable from that of his friends and
contemporaries in the village, he was increasingly forced into the surrounding
countryside, searching out caves and hiding-places that would offer protection
until the forces of law and order had passed through. Increasingly he, too, was
being forced into clandestinity, spending months on end in the mountains, living rough in a manner already familiar to the deserter, coming down into the
village for food or to perform some casual laboring, maintaining his links with
his community, but condemned to increasingly long periods of isolation and
hunger en marge of ordinary society. It is true that unlike the deserter the
insoumis might hope to benefit from the concern and friendship of his fellow
villagers, a level of support and sympathy that ensured that he was unlikely to
be betrayed and that information about troop movements would be passed on
to him (22). Increasingly he might have to share much of the physical deprivation of the deserter, to seek the anonymity of remote countryside, even to form
bands for mutual self-defense.
Throughout the war years bands of deserters and refractories became commonplace in many areas of the country, especially in the vicinity of national
frontiers or in border regions between departments where policing was less coordinated and where the young fugitive recognized that he had a better chance of
survival. The crossing of a departmental boundary came almost to acquire a
symbolic significance for many conscripts, a conscious act of breaking out from
familiar ties and obligations. Often it had provided the occasion for the original
desertion, for many young soldiers innocently believed that they stood a much
better chance of escaping detection if they stayed away from the territory of their
own departement. Hence we find that conscripts from the Ariege frequently
deserted the moment they crossed into the Aude (23); those from the Cantal
when they encountered the welcoming terrain of the Aveyron (24); or men from
the Nord when they crossed into Belgium or on to the plains of the Somme (25).
The same logic led bands of deserters and insoumis to position themselves in
areas from which a quick escape across an administrative boundary was available because they knew that the gendarmerie had a very limited geographical
brief and that a change of department would bring a temporary respite from
pursuit. Prefects noted wearily that such tactics made the task of policing much
more difficult, especially where the deserters had an intimate connaissance of
the locality and knew every stream and sheeptrack for miles around. Deserters
104 / Conscripts and Deserters
in the Lozere could pillage government funds and steal firearms with impunity
in the knowledge that they could then slip swiftly through the mountains into
the Ardeche or the Haute-Loire (26). Troubles in the frontier regions of the
Southwest led to active consultation among the prefects of the Landes, the Gers,
the Gironde, and the Basses- and Hautes-Pyrenees, where it was accepted that
the authorities were powerless to combat highly mobile bands of armed men
(27). And many departments, like the Rhone, were given to blaming the extent
of freedom enjoyed by deserters in their areas on the proximity of other departments to which they could readily abscond after committing some outrage or act
of bravado (28). For the same reason certain communes, handily placed near
frontiers, became favored spots for deserters to congregate. Saint-Urcize in the
Cantal was one such town, situated on the very extremity of the department and
adjacent to both the Lozere and the Aveyron; it was ideal for deserters' purposes,
being, in the words of the prefect, "une commune ... dont la population, qui
s'eleve a environ 1700 habitants, est disseminee sur une vaste etendue et cultive
un sol montagneux et tres infertile" (29). Similar benefits existed on the boundaries of almost every rural department, and help to explain the continued presence of deserter bands in selected towns and villages like Saint-Girons in the
Ariege or La Charite in the Nievre (30).
If refractories were less likely to form permanent bands in this way, they too
developed the collective psychology of the fugitive during the years of their
ordeal, avoiding habitations by day, setting lookouts to warn them of the
approach of the gendarmes, eking out a precarious living as best they could. For
many experience of life as an outlaw would be protracted, since the period of
service for men in the battalions was not fixed and only amnesty was likely to
allow the fugitive to breathe freely again. The arrest reports tell a poignant tale
of men captured after long years of fear and running. Louis Berges, from his
experience of the problem in the Southwest, cites some random instances: Jean
Austrandie from Agen, a conscript of Year VIII, finally caught at Marmande in
January 1808; Joseph Colonges from Auch, who deserted shortly after his incorporation in Year XI and stayed at large for twelve years; or Pierre Bayssac,
another young Agenais, who remained on the run from his desertion in Italy in
Year VII until his arrest in April 1812 (31). Many long-term deserters had, of
course, returned to their home villages long before their arrest where they lived
lives that were in no sense different from those of their fellows who had never
consented to be conscripted in the first place. At one level village society
regarded deserters and insoumis through very different eyes. The refractory was
their own son or nephew or farmservant, someone who had a right to be in the
village and on whose behalf risks had to be taken, whereas the deserter might be
a stranger to whom they had no responsibilities and about whom they knew
nothing. At another level, however, their lot and circumstances were very similar. Both were poor generally to the point of beggary and near starvation; both
were actively pursued by the authorities, especially under the Empire; and both
were in various ways highly dependent on local people for their safety and their
basic everyday needs.
Poverty and destitution were almost universal. In the case of deserters, their
circumstances often explained the degree of their deprivation, a lifestyle neces-
The Deserter and Civilian Society / 105
sarily based on temporary expedients and palliatives. They would be very
unlikely to bring any reserves with them because the armies were poorly paid,
often months in arrears, and men serving in the French battalions were generally
dependent on pillage and on the generosity of their families if they were to avoid
severe hardship (32). The refractaire, however, would be very little better off
despite the contacts he could hope to maintain with his fellow villagers. As we
have seen, the belief prevailed in many country districts that it was the poor
who were being asked to make all the sacrifices through military service, and the
resentments that this caused among the poorer sections of the community were
often translated into sullen defiance and insoumission. Once the government
tried to prevent draft dodging by seizing the land and property of the parents,
an approach much favored during the Empire, officials frequently reported that
it was those without property and with nothing to sequestrate who were taking
to the mountains and defying the law. The position in the Cantal was typical in
this respect. The lists of fines drawn up by the bureau in Aurillac in Year XII
recorded, time after time, that the family of refractory conscripts could not be
prosecuted because they lived in total penury and had already been granted a
certificat d'indigence (33). At Le Cateau in the Nord officials were similarly
forced to accept defeat when of the first sixty-four individuals they managed to
identify, fifty-four came from families that were patently unable to pay anything,
and the fines had simply to be written off (34). Prefects referred to the same
theme in their reports to the Minister of the Interior. It was the poorer sections
of the community that were defying the law and not only the conscripts themselves but their entire families united in an act of family solidarity. In the Pyrenees ariegeoises, "les peres et les meres des insoumis ont encore plus mauvaise
volonte que les enfants, la plupart sans propriete ou n'ont qu'un champ, un pre,
une grange, une chaumiere sans meubles, quelquefois un peu de betail qu'ils
tiennent caches ou qu'ils laissent errer sur des paturages communs" (35). In such
cases their marginality in the community could reinforce their determination to
resist. Groups like the bordiers in the Pyrenees who did casual labor on other
people's farms, proved particularly recalcitrant:
Les mutations presque annuelles qui ont lieu parmi les bordiers de ce pays,
gens sans proprietes et ne tenant a rien, sont la cause la plus ordinaire de
1'insoumission, et il est tres difficile de les atteindre parce que, habitant toujours des campagnes isolees, ils y sont souvent ignores et ont beaucoup plus
de moyens que les autres de rendre inutiles les perquisitions. (36).
As early as Year II it was noted that in the Morbihan it was those families who
had no fixed abode that were most actively encouraging their sons to avoid the
draft on the grounds that because they had no stake in the community they
therefore owed that community no sacrifice (37).
Impoverished, probably hungry and cold, tracked like wild animals by the
gendarmerie, and forced into a mutual dependence is the picture of everyday
life, both for the deserter and, for long periods, for the refractory, which is
ineluctably emerging. But it is a picture that implies also a considerable measure
of collusion from the local community. It is unrealistic to think of these men,
