In the Midi there was sometimes reason to believe that soldiers killed by gangs
of deserters were political victims of White Terror rather than the targets for
simple theft, since young conscripts were frequently expected to make long and
solitary journeys in the uniform of the Republic across countryside where Royalist brigands roamed unchecked (56). Usually, however, there was a sad, mundane predictability about such killings. At Autreville in the Vosges, passers-by
found a young soldier dying in a derelict baraque by the roadside. Again, he had
130 / Conscripts and Deserters
been robbed of all his cash by his two compagnons de route to whom he had
vouchsafed the information that he had received 300 francs from his father, a
huge sum in the eyes of the majority of twenty year olds, to help him on his long
journey to the front. Almost clinically they had steered him toward the shed and
"a portee d'un coup de fusil et a coups de sabre le laisserent pour mort, le deshabillerent et repandirent ses habits pour oter la trace qu'il fut un militaire" (57).
In this case the gendarmes seem to have known exactly what to do because they
ordered the search of all local bars and the dilapidated and disreputable inns
that were known to shelter criminals, where they quickly arrested one of the
murderers. Once again, it soon became evident that this was a murder among
soldiers because all three had come from hospital in Nancy and were on their
way to rejoin their unit. The killers even knew their victim. They set up the
robbery in a quiet spot, did their utmost to remove any signs of his identity, and
took to the woods leaving behind any thoughts of rejoining their regiment. It
was the second killing of its type on the same lonely stretch of road within six
months; on the previous occasion a militaire reforme had attacked another
young recruit in almost identical circumstances.
Much of the crime for which deserters and refractories were responsible was
crude and ill-considered, the quickest means to the very simple end of laying
their hands on a little money to ease the hardship of their lot. The victims were
often chance acquaintances, those whom they encountered on the road, in a bar,
or whom village gossip suggested were rich. But it would be a mistake to dismiss
all the criminal activity of these men as falling into such predictable categories,
or to imply that they were incapable of planning and premeditation. Frequently
attacks were made less from a quest for gain than from a burning desire for
revenge on those who were held responsible for reducing them to the straits in
which they found themselves. This was especially true where large bands of fugitives lived in close proximity to their own village, most probably insoumis who
maintained contact with the other villagers and who knew which of the local
people were cooperating with the authorities. Public officeholders were especially at risk from attacks of this kind, men whose position in local society
seemed to justify the belief that they were traitors to their own people, mouchards, collabos whose attempts at ingratiating themselves with the prefect or
the gendarmerie had condemned the young men of the area to their current very
marginal existence. Village mayors, compelled by law to organize the tirage and
supervise the recruitment process, could find that their land or their livestock
had been the target of a night attack. Being country boys themselves, the majority of deserters knew only too well how to wreak the maximal amount of damage. At Poujols in the Herault, for instance, the vineyards of the agent municipal
were seriously damaged in just such a surreptitious night raid. All the buds were
chopped off his vines over an area of three ares, and young plants on another
part of the farm were systematically uprooted (58). The rich vines of the Gironde
would appear to have been especially at risk, and mayors throughout the Bordelais were made to pay for their zeal in denouncing offenders to the prefect.
After one particularly severe attack at Mouliets in 1811, the procureur-general
in Bordeaux explained that the department had been subjected to such outrages
for years and that the devastation was the work of "des individus qu'on croit
Desertion and Criminality / 131
etre des consents refractaires ou insoumis. II parait que ceux-ci ont voulu se
venger du maire qui a donne des renseignements a la colonne mobile sur le lieu
de leur retraite" (59).
Millers, too, might find their moulins destroyed by arsonists as acts of
revenge or warning to the rest of the community. There was no question that
such fires were accidental, and blame for them was generally placed on the shoulders of the young, of "consents fuyards qui s'y livrent au brigandage," as in the
case of one fire at Sainte-Croix-du-Mont, near Cadillac:
Le bois, la charpente, le bled, tout a etc la proie des flammes, a 1'exception
des meules qui se sont brisees dans leur chute. Les debris n'ont pu engloutir
un rase de terre dans lequel on a trouve du soufre en fleur et des javelles
seches que 1'incendiaire avail apportes, sachant bien que personne ne couchait dans le moulin. (60)
In many communities mills were numbered among the most profitable of local
enterprises, and the miller would be a leading figure in village society—rich,
linked by ties of family with the other village notables, a possible aspirant for
mayoral office in his own right. Just as significant in the eyes of refractories was
the fact that he was often a highly unpopular figure with local people, suspected
of accumulating his wealth by cheating and by every form of perfidy, holding
back flour and siphoning off grain, and overcharging and abusing his monopoly
position at the expense of the poor and needy. As Steven Kaplan has demonstrated in his study of the granary areas supplying Paris in the eighteenth century, the very word "miller" developed shameful connotations in the popular
mind, and millers suffered a bad reputation that came with their job, which they
did not in any sense have to earn (61). By attacking mills and their owners, therefore, the insoumis knew that they risked little obloquy in the community, and
they could strike a warning note to others who might be tempted to betray them.
As with the vines, they knew the best moments for mounting their attacks. In
the Nord in Year XIII, for instance, they struck with great precision so as to
make the most indelible impression. It had been a good year, grain supplies were
plentiful, and "1'incendie d'une meule est un objet important. Voila plusieurs
incendies de ces meules depuis peu de temps" (62). The local notables were
being made to suffer as an example to others.
Acts of revenge of this kind ranged widely across the whole gamut of rural
life. Deserters caught committing offenses against the forest laws turned against
gendarmes and gardes-champetres. At Haverskerque in the Nord a garde-forestier who had brought charges against conscripts found on his return from Lille
that his home and his various outbuildings had been razed to the ground. The
house had been built of paillotin, of straw and mud, and the roof had been
thatched, with the result that it burned like a torch (63). Juges de paix rash
enough to press charges were also liable to attack, and in one incident at Landrecies, a horse belonging to the local justice of the peace was killed by deserters
as it was grazing in a field, a symbolically powerful reminder to a rural community that could never quite make the necessary distinction between law
enforcement and personal interest that it was deserter bands that effectively held
132 / Conscripts and Deserters
sway across large tracts of peasant France (64). In the Nord, indeed, terrorization
of this sort was especially widespread, with deserters adapting to their own
requirements the terror tactics already used by local bandits, the device of the
sommation minatoire. The sommeurs would leave a chilling note with their chosen victim, generally a farmer in the heart of rural Picardy, instructing him to
place a designated sum of money at a selected spot "sous differentes menaces et
particulierement sous celle d'incendie"; those refusing to answer this summons
would find their barns, outhouses, and hayricks destroyed in an unexplained
blaze. The crime in this form was almost unknown outside the North where
governments had been grappling with it throughout the eighteenth century. In
1722 the Parlement of Douai had attempted to force farmers to declare any billets they received from sommeurs. In 1763 it had been noted that the crime was
reaching epidemic proportions despite the most severe punishments (sommation had been regularly punished by breaking on the wheel). In 1812, in response
to public anxiety at the frequency of attacks, mostly by deserter bands in the
Nord and the Pas-de-Calais, a Cour Speciale Extraordinaire was established at
Douai with exceptional powers (65). In its new form sommation was particularly
used as a device to deter overzealous public officials, a means of personal intimidation rather than of revenue-raising (66). Its full potential is illustrated by the
multiple attacks and threats made on the commissaire du Directoire in the canton of Berlaimont, an official known for his outspoken comments on the execution of the conscription laws. The commissaire was given to understand in a
very forthright manner the likely consequences of further action on his part:
Le 17 vendemiaire dernier il revenait de la commune de Locquignol, ou il
etait alle faire la lecture d'une circulaire concernant le depart des jeunes gens
de la premiere requisition; en passant dans la foret de Mormal, il fut arrete
par deux de ces jeunes gens qui lui dechirerent ses habits et qui se disposaient
a rassommer, s'il n'avait fait une resistance vigoureuse et s'il ne fut parvenu
a s'echapper de leurs mains.
Le quatre de ce mois on ravagea ses proprietes, on becha son champ avesti
de bled, et on fit au milieu une fosse de la longueur, de la profondeur ordinaire
des fosses sepulcrales, comme pour le prevenir que Ton venait de creuser son
tombeau. (67)
The Minister of the Interior suspected that his commissaire had indeed been
effectively silenced, since the campaign against draft dodging in Berlaimont
came to a suspiciously sudden end.
Berlaimont was not the only rural commune where the government's recruitment efforts were effectively undermined by the criminal activities of deserters
and refractories. Mayors were frequently dissuaded from carrying out their
duties too punctiliously by a timely reminder of the power still exercised by
those of their citizens living in clandestinity. In the Ariege attention is frequently
drawn to their lack of cooperation with the government in conscription matters;
in the Cantal, to their unhelpful attitude and "esprit municipal"; in the Dordogne to the sheer apathy that they displayed (68). Almost everywhere mayors
showed increased reluctance to enforce the law or to interpret their duties legal-
Desertion and Criminality / 133
istically, since to have done so would have resulted in their increasing alienation
from important sections of village society. Insoumis were, through their presence in the community, forming themselves into a considerable pressure group
over local opinion. Similarly, the gendarmes could not ignore the threat that
deserters and refractories posed. They also became discouraged by their isolation from the community, and by the fact that when they did succeed in capturing a deserter in the woods or in a mountain cave, they often found themselves
ambushed by other deserters as they attempted to steer their prey down a lonely
hillside. Often they were compelled to release their captive, and their standing
in the community suffered accordingly. There were many cases of this. In the
Deux-Sevres two gendarmes were killed when a band of deserters discharged
