a su qu'il fallait tirer au sort pour mieux jouer son rolle. (89)
Lambaut made the mistake of openly reveling in the deception he had perpetrated, which contributed to the resentment that the others felt.
Despite the government's obvious interest in encouraging denunciation of
this kind, it enjoyed only a very limited success, usually in cases of extreme
unhappiness or exaggerated resentment. A father, distracted by the life of "agi-
116 / Conscripts and Deserters
otage" and "libertinage" that his deserter son was leading in the fleshpots of
Paris, requested that the authorities save the family a great deal of anguish by
arresting the young man and compelling him to serve (90). A widow, embittered
by her experience a decade earlier, when a deserter to whom she had offered
protection had repaid her by seducing her daughter, went to considerable lengths
to get her revenge. She not only indicated to the gendarmerie the whereabouts
of every deserter currently hiding in the village where she lived, Saint-Quintin
in the Ariege, but submitted a very specific dossier accusing those who were sheltering them, and especially the mayor against whom she harbored a particularly
corrosive grudge (91). On occasion social envy might play its part, and the
authorities from time to time received allegations, generally unsigned, that rich
and privileged members of the community were being shown undue partiality
or protection (92). The gendarmerie, of course, did what it could to foster such
malcontents, especially where they showed signs of crusading zeal. There would
always be some individuals—a fact of which we were reminded all too dramatically by the collaborateurs and collaboratrices of the Vichy period—who took
a certain perverted delight in making trouble for others. At Hesdin in the Pasde-Calais, for example, one young man who had neatly avoided service by a
timely marriage, a "requisitionnaire marie avant le premier germinal" as he
described himself in his letter, discussed the problem of insoumission in his
locality with all the gleeful enthusiasm of a seasoned police spy, claiming that
local lads were "determines a ne point partir," that they "ont achete de la
poudre, des balles, et qu'ils sont pourvus de munitions," and that "c'est dans les
cabarets, les jours de dimanche, que les requisitionnaires et les conscrits se rassemblent et forment leurs complots." For good measure he promised to find out
more and to pass on any new information that he uncovered (93). But it is worth
stressing that such instances are very few, even in the period of greatest revolutionary fervor. Moral outrage and wounded patriotism played little part in the
denunciation of deserters and refractories.
Except in relatively rare circumstances, the young man on the run could
depend on village solidarity and on the uncertain rapport of many villages with
the gendarmerie to offer him a degree of protection. Local people had no reason
to denounce him unless their own domestic interests were affected deleteriously
by the deserter's presence in their midst. They had no desire to bring the gendarmes into the village, to involve them in private village matters that they were
accustomed to settling without outside interference. Besides, the intrusion of the
police into their private world could prove dreadfully embarrassing for everyone, unearthing the many irregularities and petty offenses which were an
unquestioned part of their daily routine and which made significant contributions to the economy of the community. It was the mission of the gendarmerie,
as we shall see in a later chapter, to interrupt this cozy self-sufficiency and to
prove to country people that consorting with outlaws was not compatible with
their own self-interest (94). In the case of refractories, generally their own flesh
and blood, men who had an acknowledged role to play in the life of the community, that mission would never be easy to accomplish. With deserters, men
from outside their community to whom the villagers felt less of a bond and no
direct obligation, collective opinion was less firmly united. Deserters were tol-
The Deserter and Civilian Society / 117
crated, given work, and provided with food and straw for bedding partly through
sympathy on the part of people who were in many cases themselves the parents
of requisitionnaires, and partly through blatant self-interest. That tolerance was
always brittle and might snap in those cases where the deserter failed to fit in
with the established ways of the local community, or where his presence came
to be seen as a threat to their property or their personal security. A deserter who
had no job, did not work, or was not useful to local people, above all one who
affronted their established morality or put their family life at risk, might find
himself rebuffed by the community or even denounced to the authorities. Guy
Fleuriot, a requisitionnaire hiding in one Norman village in Year VII, placed
rather too much strain on the tolerance and generosity of his involuntary hosts
with the result that he was virtually handed over to the local gendarmes:
Fleuriot n'a jamais joint son bataillon, il a toujours elude la loi. II est sans
profession. II n'occupe aucune place. II n'a pas craint de porter le trouble et
la desolation dans un menage, en determinant une jeune femme qui a deux
enfants en bas age a provoquer un divorce dans 1'espoir de Fespouser. Ces
fails sont constants. En consequence nous avons lieu d'esperer que vous ferez
usage des moyens qui sont en votre pouvoir pour faire joindre a ce jeune
homme les drapeaux de la Republique dont jusqu'a ce jour il s'est aussi lachement eloigne: en satisfaisant a la loi vous retablirez en meme temps 1'union
dans une famille divisee. (95)
Patriotism did not enter into this denunciation. The author was the girl's uncle,
anxious to protect his family's honor, not the state's. But there can be little doubt
that he spoke not just for himself but for the general consensus of opinion in the
village.
6
Desertion and Criminality
ONE ASPECT of the deserter's lifestyle that could materially affect the attitude of
local people toward him was the extent of his participation in criminal activity,
especially where his crimes caused actual harm to the local community (1). It
was only to be expected that young men on the run, often miles from home and
desperately hungry, would from time to time resort to crime to satisfy their most
pressing needs, not out of any desire to hurt other people but from a simple
primeval urge to keep themselves alive. Their lifestyle in so many ways resembled that of the errants and vagabonds who infested the roads and villages of
eighteenth-century France, and who had come to be regarded with less and less
charity as the century progressed. Even the courts did not always find it possible
to distinguish clearly between them. The tribunal correctionnel at Valence, for
example, found itself faced with the case of a vagabond called Brochier in Year
V. The tribunal knew that he came from Granne in the district of Die, and his
offense was that of simple vagabondage, but there was no means of telling
whether his lifestyle concealed the more serious crime of desertion. After substantial enquiries, they were left with little hard evidence. His municipality duly
provided the information that "ce particulier est en effet originaire de Granne,
qu'il n'y a point d'immeubles, qu'il y a plus de vingt ans qu'il n'y reside plus,
qu'on ignore ou il demeure habituellement, qu'on on a dit qu'il a deserte de
plusieurs regiments, que c'est peut-etre la raison pour laquelle il n'a pas de passeport" (2). Like many deserters and others deprived of a regular means of earning
their livelihood, Brochier had been marginalized and compelled to adopt a way
of life that depended on the fruits of petty crime.
The authorities were in no doubt that crime and desertion were inextricably
linked, that where a region suffered a perceptible increase in its crime rate, young
men, footloose and without responsibilities to local people, were almost certainly to blame. In Year VII the government's commissaire in the Lot-etGaronne specifically linked desertion to the spate of crimes against property and
the person that he had encountered in the department. Forty deserters had taken
118
Desertion and Criminality / 119
over a country inn and were creating havoc on neighboring farms. Elsewhere
they were responsible for antigovernment slogans. In a cluster of villages around
Monclar they had wreaked a dreadful vengeance on the local community, "ils
ont pille trois maisons, incendie une grange, assassine un citoyen, viole une
jeune fille" (3). Similarly in the Sarthe, both civilian and military authorities
recognized that deserters were increasing the levels of lawlessness in rural areas
where brigandages were becoming ever more frequent and where "il n'est que
trop reconnu que les bandes vagabondes et nocturnes qui se portent a ces exces
sont en partie composees de deserteurs" (4). Petty crime, thefts from barns and
isolated farmhouses, in some instances of corn still growing in the fields, constituted the major part of this increase, and the assumption that men on the run
were responsible was one that not only officialdom, but whole rural communities, readily drew (5). The government did not view these developments with
equanimity. In 1813 a report from the Minister of Police pinpointed the increase
in the crime rate over the previous few months, and was in no doubt about the
underlying cause. For in that period, "le nombre de deserteurs et de refractaires
s'est accru avec une rapidite et dans une proportion inconnue jusqu'a ce jour."
Surveying the crime figures for 1810 when there had been, officially at least,
164,770 deserteurs and refractaires at large on the territory of France, the report
stressed that each and every one of them was liable to resort to crime. For
164,770 deserters meant that
164,770 individus obliges de se cacher, de se soustraire aux regards de Fadministration, ne pouvant se livrer avec securite a aucune Industrie, a aucun
projet d'etablissement, obliges d'errer sans asyle et sans etat, conduits par le
besoin a tous les crimes et livres par 1'habitude du mal a la mercie du premier
factieux qui pouvait les reunir sous les etendards du brigandage arme. (6)
As we have seen, this analysis is facile in the extreme, a propagandist picture of
the deserter and refractory as an enemy of the people, painted in all the strident
and unsubtle colors of an image d'Epinal. Yet there was clearly a considerable
correlation between the presence offuyards in an area and the increase in that
area's crime rate. How valid is the image of the deserter and refractory as a cynical criminal? What crimes did they commit? And in what measure did these
crimes impinge on the everyday lives of those in whose midst they lived?
Again, it is perhaps timely to draw a clear distinction between the crimes
committed by deserters and those that were the work of village boys hiding in
the surrounding woods and thickets. Inevitably, local communities were liable
to view the offenders differently, and to show far more indulgence toward their
own sons; but the distinction is not entirely one of favoritism. The insoumis
were seldom as desperate or abandoned as the deserters, they knew which farms
they could approach for food or shelter, and they had no reason to rob or plunder to stay alive. Indeed, they would be very unwise to do so since their continued liberty depended on their ability to work with the peasant community of
the area in their shared opposition to the state and its officials. The deserter, on
the other hand, might be left with no choice but to risk antagonizing the villagers
if he were not to die of cold or malnutrition. Therefore, while crimes of violence
120 / Conscripts and Deserters
