Dans la commune de Saint-Paul aucunes fetes republicaines ne sont celebrees, on ne veut point les reconnaitre. On n'a point fait la fete de la reconnaissance et des victoires le 10 prairial, il n'en a pas meme etc question; le
commissaire du directoire n'ose pas publier 1'arrete qui prescrit Tusage du
calendrier republicain, 1'agent de la commune et le president de 1'administration sont d'une criminelle insouciance, et depuis 1'etablissement du chef-lieu
du canton a Saint-Paul, Fadministration ne marche plus. (46)
In such circumstances opposition and non-cooperation were at every level of
society, and it was deemed dangerous to think of raising an armed force from
the local community to tackle the problem of brigandage. Administrators did
not have trust in their own officials, and even local notables seemed suspect;
furthermore, arms were so widely available in the badlands of the southern
Drome that almost any initiative was fraught with possible danger. The sousprefet of Montelimar was sufficiently anxious to advise against the formation of
colonnes mobiles to police royalists in Year VIII since they would almost certainly be infiltrated by the bandes themselves. Saint-Paul was not a place where
such authority should be given to local people, for the brigands enjoyed support
"dans toutes les classes des citoyens. Us en ont partout: ils en auront dans les
colonnes mobiles; et je suis tres embarrasse par la crainte de donner une portion
d'autorite militaire a des hommes qui peuvent en abuser" (47).
Where the political loyalty of the village at large was so feeble, it is hardly
surprising that enthusiasm among the young for military service was rarely to
be found. Villages opposed to the Republic produced very few conscripts, and
insoumission, with the full approval of parents and local notables, was generalized. It is therefore quite natural that those who turned instead to fight for the
egorgeurs in the Southeast or for the chouans in the West should have been
refractaires more than deserters. In such villages so few youngsters were incorporated in battalions that the rate of actual desertion could be very low. In Brittany, for instance, military deserters, as opposed to draft dodgers, played only a
marginal role in chouannerie: of 81 men who surrendered at Dol in 1796, only
5 were deserters; of 602 in the Morbihan, only 9; and of the thousands of royalists captured at Quiberon Bay in 1795, only 12 were designated as deserters
from the republican armies. In contrast, because they were young and vigorous,
158 / Conscripts and Deserters
a very high proportion of them had been subject to conscription, and the fact of
being a draft dodger and hiding from the authorities provided the opportunity
and a certain impetus to take part in a more positive form of resistance (48). In
the bands of the Southeast and Southwest, deserters played a more prominent
part than in the Vendee and Brittany, though again it is insoumission that holds
the key to the size and ready availability of the royalist units. The deserter, once
back in his native village, would blend spontaneously into the brigand bands
that controlled the local countryside, rejoining in their ranks those of his friends
who had resisted the blandishments of the recruiting-sergeant. He had not abandoned his regiment out of any deeply held royalist faith or opposition to republicanism as a political ideal; such principles lay well outside the collective consciousness of peasant communities. Rather he had deserted for the usual,
mundane reasons that drove hundreds of thousands to desert across the length
and breadth of Europe: because he was cold and miserable, or hungry, or simply
bored; because he felt abused by the military or had a grudge against his officers;
above all because he listened to the familiar sound of his local patois and felt
smitten by homesickness and simply left. But once he was back in his village,
he would naturally resume the role that was expected of the young, that of
defending, and if necessary fighting for, the freedoms and traditions of the
community.
Royalism as a question of faith was very rare among the deserters and
insoumis who took up arms in its name. Yet royalist shouts and songs, used as
rallying cries or as symbols of collective defiance, were widespread and gave the
Republican authorities some reason for panic and pessimism. In Year VIII, for
instance, when conscripts from the village of Ouaine in the Yonne arrived at
Auxerre to be prepared for departure to join their battalion, it was noted with
alarm that they uttered cries of "Vive le Roi!" in the city streets. The incident
went no further, and there is no evidence that the cries constituted a threat to
the Republic, although the department almost as a matter of course expressed
its feelings of outrage and asked that exemplary punishment be meted out to
those identified and convicted (49). More threatening to authority were outbursts of royalist singing and chanting in towns and bourgs where antirepublican
sympathies were known to be strong. Royalist chants could so easily be transformed into expressions of generalized opposition to everything that the government was trying to achieve, and there were occasions where mayors and town
councilors demonstrated their solidarity with the young conscripts by joining in
their defiance or by refusing to take any action against them. At Donzere in the
southern Drome, for example, the jeunes gens had little to fear from a complaisant local authority, and they took advantage by persecuting the local gendarme
for whom they showed the most ostentatious contempt. The unfortunate officer,
isolated by public opinion, could only report to his superiors of the humiliation
he had suffered, when, on the night of 3 vendemiaire VI,
il vit, sur les neuf heures du soir, une trouppe de jeunes gens rassembles avec
des batons, qui chanterent pendant la nuit, dans presque toutes les rues de
Donzere, le Reveil du peuple; qu'a environ minuit, ils se rendirent a la maison
ou il etait couche dans son lit, qu'ils le forcerent a boire, quoique son hotesse
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 159
ne voulut pas leur donner du vin a une telle heure; qu'il a bu avec eux centre
la force n'y ayant point de resistance. (50)
At Mauriac in the Cantal, the identification of some of the town council with
refractory conscripts (they appeared in public in a rassemblement in the center
of the town, joining in their rendition of the Reveil du peuple) assumed an even
more destabilizing aspect, since the same councilors had been agitating against
the acquereurs de biens nationaux in the area and had remained unmoved when
sacred objects were stolen from the constitutional church for the use of nonjurors (51). In such cases the singing of royalist songs had been transformed into
a deliberate device to undermine legal authority. When the commander of a
detachment of soldiers sent to Pierrelatte in Drome to arrest deserters heard
some of them singing the royalist anthem, he ordered their immediate arrest;
but to no avail since "le citoyen Theoule, adjoint municipal, arrive et de son
autorite il les fit mettre en liberte" (52). Where a dissident community rallied
round its conscripts, as in Pierrelatte, there was little that the military or police
officials could do. The Reveil du peuple had been used to taunt them, to poke
fun at their impotence, and to underline the solidarity of local people in their
opposition to state intrusion.
If Paris consistently exaggerated the part played by royalism in stimulating
desertion, it was justified in fearing the effects of desertion and insoumission in
regions where royalists already had a hold on public opinion. There is little
doubt that the simple fact that a man had refused to serve the Republic or had,
after experience of the armies, elected to desert aroused the interest of the
chouan and royalist leaders. A deserter or an insoumis could not turn to the legal
authorities for help, and this in itself made him somewhat vulnerable to such
pressures as might be brought to bear on him. Moreover, his rejection of the
Republic served to win faith among the community of outlaws and bandits that
encompassed rural royalism. The deserter especially enjoyed a certain prestige
in their eyes as a man who had undergone a kind of rite de passage and who had
not been found wanting. His military experience limited as it was could appear
invaluable to the rebels because he would know how to use a rifle, would probably bring with him his arms and ammunition, and would retain some residue
of his former military discipline. It is therefore in no way surprising that royalist
recruiters worked relentlessly to win over refractories and deserters to their
cause. Besides all other considerations, the fact that they were young and living
in local villages made them the natural recruitment fodder, arguably the only
recruitment fodder, for the forces of Catholic royalism in the South and for the
chouan bands of the West.
Royalist embaucheurs were generally local men who understood very well
the temperament of the villagers, their fears and their traditional loyalties, and
they often showed great skill and patience in wooing them to the counterrevolutionary cause. At first their actions might consist of nothing more than spreading "mauvaises insinuations" to the young men affected by the requisition that
they could with total impunity stay in their village rather than leave for the front
(53), or they might ring the church bells in a succession of villages at the moment
chosen for the selection of conscripts, a device that conspired to spread panic
160 / Conscripts and Deserters
and rumors that the countryside was overrun by troops (54). In the cities royalists distributed pamphlets stirring up hatred of the government; in the countryside word of mouth was far more effective. In Bordeaux in Year VI two men,
a medical student and a printer, both of known royalist sympathies, were
arrested for writing and selling a tract entitled Aux Jeunes Gens, which specifically urged them to resist conscription and which tried to whip up their animosity toward the colonne mobile whose job it was to police conscription in the
city. Those who joined the colonne, readers were informed, were recruited from
the dregs of Bordeaux society, from among "tout ce qu'il y avait de plus vil et
de plus abject" in the city (55). More commonly, the embaucheur, like the foreign agent, worked surreptitiously, talking to men looking dejected after the conseil de revision and hanging around local bars on the day of the tirage. His part
was little more than a whispered conversation, which made it difficult to secure
convictions, but those engaging soldiers in friendly chat in the auberges and cabarets of garrison towns, or accosting them during their march to join their regiments, were particularly suspect. Julien Quentin was probably a typical embaucheur, a traveling salesman who bought and sold livestock, who frequented the
bars around fairs and markets, and who was denounced at Saint-Cloud in Year
IV by three soldiers whom he had sought out and to whom he had offered a
drink (56). At times the scale of the subversion was rather more spectacular, and
the charges more serious. In Year VII at Lille two men were arrested and charged
with trying to instigate rebellion among the conscripts from the Cher and Loiret-Cher who were making their way to their regiment. According to the troops,
who on this occasion remained loyal, these two men, well-dressed, claiming to
come from Paris and Lyon, had approached them between Gien and Nogent
while their company was resting,
"parcourant les differents groupes des consents, leur conseillant d'abandonner la cause de la liberte, de deserter meme en masse, en se defaisant de leurs
chefs, leur promettant le secours des honnetes gens, leur disant (grossiere
