do not need to be repeated here. They are already well known and discussed by
every historian of chouannerie, of the Vendean revolt, or of southern royalism.
Religion, like conscription, constituted an area of activity where the involvement of the state was resented and frequently rejected; worship and religious
observance were private matters for the village communities themselves (30).
The constitutional priest who was imposed on unwilling villagers was often
treated as an intrus, a man whose interests and outlook were those of another
culture, that of the Jacobin clubs and of the towns. It is therefore no accident
that those communities that defended their identity against one form of intrusion should have resisted just as strongly other forms of imposition, no accident
that areas with problems of insoumission frequently coincided with those where
the government encountered religious dissent. When they demanded the return
of their parish priests, Breton peasants were indirectly "asking for the return of
an institution which affirmed their consciousness of themselves as men and as
a community" (31). Moreover, the defense of the cure, like the defense of the
village economy or of the village honor against the imposition of change from
outside, would naturally fall on the young, those same young men who on a
personal level so bitterly resented the imposition of conscription (32). In communities that remained loyal to the Catholic church, the bond of mutual reliance
established between the priest and his young parishioners could become one of
the mainstays of communal politics, and the cure might be drawn into offering
them his protection in return. This he could do through all sorts of small but
significant gestures: by providing casual work for insoumis who had stayed
behind in the village, by forging certificates or falsifying registers, and by agreeing to marry conscripts religiously without first checking that they were eligible
for marriage in the eyes of the civil authority (33). The priest, in short, might
assume the role of their ally against the Republic and its laws, and his approval
might extend to more open acts of defiance and rebellion. So extensive was the
problem that in Year XIV the Archbishop of Toulouse was forced to take action
against those of his priests who were caught protecting draft dodgers (34). In the
Ariege the assistance of the clergy could take an openly political character. In
one case in Year VIII the cure of Aulus was denounced for whipping up anger
and resentment against the state, urging on the young men of his parish when
they armed themselves with rifles and attacked the property of a prominent local
Republican, Jean-Pierre Souquet. Souquet suffered considerably when they pillaged his sawmill, removed the millstones from his flourmill, and finally
returned to burn the flourmill to the ground. All this occurred immediately after
they had attended the cure's somewhat inflammatory version of mass, and
because the properties in question were all national lands acquired at the
expense of local emigres, it was reasonable to assume that the attack had been
politically inspired and that the priest's role had been openly provocative (35).
Some priests took their antirepublican principles to even greater lengths,
schooling the young men of their parish in royalism and encouraging them to
commit acts of brigandage against the agents of the state. In one parish near Lille
the cure led regular counterrevolutionary choir practices with the sixteen to
twenty year olds of the locality, joining in lusty renderings of the "Reveil du
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 155
peuple" and spreading scurrilous rumors about conditions in the republican battalions (36). And there is ample evidence from other areas that some at least
among the clergy took an active part in their own underground war against the
French Revolution, pitting what they believed to be God's law against the law
of the country. In Year VI, for instance, priests and local draft dodgers were held
jointly responsible for a series of thefts and murders along the road from Hesdin
to Arras that had all the hallmarks of those brigand attacks which were more
common in the Midi. Their victims included a brigadier de gendarmerie nationale intercepted as he was conducting captured deserters to prison in Arras, a
merchant who had the misfortune to be mistaken for a man from Saint-Pol traveling to the chef-lieu on government business, and a constitutional priest who
was savagely attacked by requisitionnaires on the same stretch of road between
Saint-Pol and Arras (37). If such cases are to be found in the relative security of
the Pas-de-Calais, how much more did disillusioned clergy become involved in
royalist bands in the counterrevolutionary heartlands of the West, the Midi, and
Languedoc. In the Ariege, at the height of the insurrection of Year VII, local
authorities complied with clerical demands and trees of liberty were rapidly
replaced by croix de mission, while one of the first initiatives taken by the royalists at Mirepoix was to recall the orders of penitents (38). In Brittany priests
not only acted as correspondents for Puisaye's royalist network, some even spied
for the royalist cause, recruited its soldiers, took charge of arms dumps, and
served as chaplains when the chouans mounted an attack (39). Catholic royalism
in the Gard, where revolutionary politics could not escape the influence of the
long-standing religious tension between Catholics and Protestants, gave the
clergy an even more prominent role. Many of the brigand leaders had long antistate pedigrees, having served their counterrevolutionary apprenticeship in the
royalist camps de Jales between 1790 and 1792. The bonds between the Church
and the egorgeurs were strong and enduring, and to many there seemed surprisingly little contradiction in exchanging the cure of souls for the leadership of a
terrorist band, avenging the sufferings of their church through acts of savage
butchery and political murder. Francois Froment, for example, belonged to a
devout family from Nimes, supposedly of noble stock, and was sufficiently
favored by the bishop to have been granted the post of receiver of the revenues
of the cathedral chapter. He and his family were even given rooms in the episcopal palace, a rare and much cherished honor. Several of the other gang leaders
who devastated the countryside around Nimes were also the products of seminaries and holy orders. Among them were such prominent egorgeurs as the abbe
Solier, who was guillotined at Le Vigan in 1801 for his career in terrorism and
revenge killing, and Claude Allier, the brother of Dominique, who was executed
in 1793 for his part in the federalist revolt in Lyon (40).
For many in the southern half of the country the intrusion of the state in
matters of military recruitment and religious belief only paralleled another form
of intrusion—the Revolution's concern for individual property rights and
apparent contempt for custom and communal land. To smallholders in the pays
de petite culture the whole question ofpartage seemed both irrelevant and potentially damaging because in areas of poor soil or upland pasture the division and
allocation of the commons was never an economically realistic option. It is true
156 / Conscripts and Deserters
that under the Jacobin Republic there was no legal obligation to disperse the
commons in this way, as the law on partage remained a piece of permissive
legislation, to be enforced only if one-third of the male inhabitants of the commune voted in favor of the change. But the debate on partage was often divisive
and acrimonious, pitting the interests of the richer farmers and landowners
against those of the poor and landless. Communes frequently intervened to prevent division of their lands, and those owning property threw themselves into a
bitter struggle to prevent the kind of egalitarian division that the law prescribed.
At Salers the societe populaire protested in germinal II that "L'egoisme et la
cupidite portent (les riches) a chasser de leurs maisons les locataires, croyant par
la les priver de leur droit dans le partage des communaux" (41). In fact, throughout the South, there is little evidence that the law achieved widespread enactment, and the customary practice of the area, which alone provided the basis for
the long-established emphasis on vaine pdture and droit de parcours, emerged
largely unscathed. Custom yet again proved more powerful than statute (42).
Yet, however muted the impact of legislation in this domain, and however limited the practical advance of agrarian individualism, this law and those that succeeded it after thermidor were widely perceived in the southern and more mountainous regions of the country as another instance of government interference
in the most intimate affairs of the rural community. In departments like the
Drome, the Gard or the Ariege, the new communes rallied in defense of their
traditional rights and defended them as essential contributors to their economic
welfare. In the granary belt of the North, partage may have made economic
sense—Florence Gauthier talks of it as offering "le debut d'une solution radicale
... de la crise agraire" (43)—but it could have no such application to southern
metayers. For them individualism was an irrelevancy, and a most damaging
irrelevancy, which demonstrated once again the distance that separated them
from the Parisian legislators. The decree of 25 thermidor III served only to
accentuate this feeling of alienation because it stressed once again the rights of
the proprietor over the entire produce of his harvest by excluding villagers from
their traditional gleaning rights after the first reaping of the crop (44). Faced with
this legislation and with the stricter application of the codeforestier, the southern
villager was driven into more and more frequent clashes with the law, and these
experiences could only serve to alienate him further from the Republic. In
Gwynne Lewis's opinion, there is little doubt that the success of Catholic royalist
brigandage in parts of the Southeast "was linked to the offensive launched
by the journalier with his lopin de terre, the cultivateur with his small herd
of sheep or goats, the small vigneron, the bucheron and the charbonnier,
indeed, by all those who depended on the rights of access to the forests and
the fields" (45).
Opposition to republican officials and suspicion of republican laws could, in
other words, drive whole communities into a rejection of the Republic itself. In
such communities royalism often provided a logical alternative, especially to
those who dreamed nostalgically of a world in which they had been left alone,
undisturbed by Paris and its interminable legislation. Whole communities might
be won over to the cause of the King, not through any deep-seated belief in the
institution of monarchy but because of an ineradicable attachment to old ways
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 157
and traditional freedoms. In such communities, often remote villages in the pays
depetite culture where tradition was loath to die, nonjuring priests found shelter,
republican festivals remained uncelebrated, and mayors committed frauds in
favor of refractory conscripts secure in the knowledge that they enjoyed a wide
measure of local support. Saint-Paul-Trois-Chateaux in the Drome was a typical
instance of a southern community where conscription was always difficult and
where the state was never able to supplant the dictates of local tradition. SaintPaul lacked any instinct for the Revolution or the Republic; it provided ideal
cover for deserters, brigands, and royalist chefs alike. On the state of public opinion in the commune, General Merck could only report in Year VI that no progress whatever had been made, to the point where the local council was not even
capable of mounting a simple republican festival:
