their club or popular section during 1793 and the Year II. Those suspected of
aiding and abetting the terrorist authorities or those especially who were known
to have informed on their fellow citizens became prime targets for retribution
once Robespierre had been overthrown and the principles he represented had
been denounced and vilified. Networks of counterterror were established across
the countryside where the Paris government seemed no longer to retain any
degree of police control; and courts proved quite unable to enforce the law in
face of a public opinion that united against the homines de sang of the previous
regime. In many parts of the Southeast and the Rhone valley justice became the
preserve of armed gangs of royalist youths, and it was administered by callous,
self-righteous killers who identified their chosen target, often over the counter
of the local cabaret, before setting oif into the Provencal night to despatch him
with a clinically aimed bullet on the threshhold of his cottage or farmstead (3).
In the South, as in Paris, such political violence was the privileged sphere of the
jeunesse doree, the gangs of young thugs masquerading under such fanciful titles
as compagnies dejesus or compagnies du soleil, who spread hatred and sedition
from village to village and who rushed to answer Freron's call that they should
mobilize to root out every last vestige of Jacobinism and "exterminer les egorgeurs" (4). In Paris the assault on former republican officials was paralleled by
the more blatantly social attack on those members of the classes populaires who
could reasonably be identified with the now scorned sans-culottisme of the early
part of the decade, and those who blamed the Jacobins for the drabness of their
lives and the loss of their youth hurled themselves mercilessly into the boisterous pleasures of the "guerre des theatres" (5). Even more serious for the government was the renewal ofchouan activity in the West and the outbreak of royalist
insurrections in the Southeast and Southwest of the country, insurrections that
enjoyed a large measure of support from the peasantry of their respective areas
and that threatened France with another taste of civil war and the self-destruction of a second Vendee (6). By Year VII lawlessness was endemic in many of
148 / Conscripts and Deserters
the more peripheral regions of the country, and this lawlessness seemed increasingly to be legitimized by its association with the banners of Christ and King.
But how political was such lawlessness, how clearly distinguishable from the
banal, generalized violence and criminality with which it so often merged? There
was little doubt about the political pedigree of the leaders of such revolts, who
included counterrevolutionary nobles and returned emigres committed to
avenge the wrongs and indignities that their families had suffered during their
enforced absence from France. In the case of the insurrection in Languedoc in
the last years of the decade, for instance, a movement that was largely concentrated in the two departments of the Haute-Garonne and the Gers, the leaders
were committed royalists, and the successes and failures of the insurgents were
followed with the greatest interest by royalists in Bordeaux, the Landes, and
throughout the Southwest. Associated with its organization was the royalist
Institut Philanthropique, and among those who threw in their lot with the rebels
were committed royalists like Mailhos and Dupont-Constant, leaders of the
Institut in their respective departments of the Gers and the Gironde (7). But if
the leaders were committed to the restoration of the monarchy and the overthrow of much that had been instituted since 1789, the same cannot be said with
any confidence about the thousands of villagers who were persuaded to join in
their revolt. Nor can it be assumed in these highly political times that everyone
using the language of politics was necessarily dedicated to a political cause. The
language of counterrevolution might easily be used to give a degree of respectability to simple self-aggrandizement. Those thieving and murdering in the
name of the King were not always clearly distinguishable from common bandits.
The atmosphere of fear and suspicion that reigned in many parts of the Southeast and Southwest after thermidor gave encouragement to the greedy and the
self-seeking as well as to those who harbored political principles or ambitions
for vengeance. This was especially true in the Midi, that territory denned by
Colin Lucas as stretching from the Bas-Languedoc eastward to Provence, including the Comtat and the Vivarais, and stretching northward into the Velay and
the Gevaudan and up the Rhone valley as far as the perpetually turbulent city
of Lyon. This was in the eyes of many contemporaries the natural home of a
politics of violence, where the Revolution stirred up hatreds and a thirst for
revenge, and where political killing was always ambivalent, part of a muddled
tradition of counterrevolution, personal vendetta, criminality, and communal
violence. The Midi, says Lucas, had a distinct character during the revolutionary
years. It was "the unquiet land of the Revolution, where parish-pump politics
merged into national issues, activating beneath a revolutionary language longstanding personal issues, communal and confessional animosities into a polarisation towards extremes, distinctive patterns of collective action and the frequent rejection of national norms" (8). In such parts the national discourse of
Revolution made relatively little impact on people's minds or their behavior.
What was frequently resented was not so much the specific policies of the Jacobins as the fact that they presumed to intrude into the private realm of communal affairs. Tim Le Golf, discussing the attitudes of local people in the Vannetais, emphasizes the importance of such resentments, the collective
opposition of whole communities to the "offence to local lifestyle" that revolu-
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 149
tionary decrees increasingly represented (9). Peter Jones, studying the response
of rural communities in the southern massif Central, relates the extent of politicization to landscape and habitat, suggesting most convincingly that the impact
of the revolutionaries became increasingly irrelevant in the pays de petite culture
of the Gausses (10). Precise explanations for this sense of alienation differ from
area to area. In the West, for example, Paul Bois and Charles Tilly have both
suggested in their differing models of peasant counterrevolution that towncountry divisions lie at the heart of the problem, with rural communities resisting the encroachment of urbanization and a market economy (11). Elsewhere,
scholars have warned against any simple monocausal explanation, preferring to
point to the opposition aroused by any form of intrusion by the state into communal affairs (12). It is the sheer extent of the rejection of such intrusion, and
with it of the Republic itself, that leaves its mark on the historian of rural violence. As Le Goff and Sutherland remark with reference to counterrevolution in
Brittany:
By 1795-96 a majority of French citizens were probably in some sort of revolt
against the Republic, a regime founded, ironically, on the basis of popular
sovereignty. Draft-dodging, vendettas, stagecoach robberies, tax evasion and
religious recusancy became the customary manifestations of this resentment
almost everywhere. (13)
Suspicion of outsiders, the taxes and impositions of the state, and the laws
and justice of the Revolution had the effect of encouraging widespread support
for those who openly held the outside world in contempt. In this regard it made
little difference whether the aim of local brigands was the overthrow of the
Republic or the lining of their own pockets. Provided that they did not turn their
threats and their violence against the villagers themselves, brigands were likely
to maintain a strong bond of local support in their home communities. A campaign that was perceived by local people as a crusade directed against the taxman, the urban merchant, the usurer, or the landlord, did not lose any of its
charm whether or not it was being conducted in the name of the King or of the
Catholic church. Since in the Revolutionary period it was primarily the state
that was attempting to extend its control over the countryside, to bring even the
remotest of communities within the rule of law, it was only logical that the state
and its agents should appear as prime targets for community anger. Therefore
there was nothing very harmful or damaging about armed attacks launched by
bands of local men against stagecoaches carrying the state's mails or the government's tax revenue, two of the principal forms of brigandage engaged in by those
who claimed to be fighting against the French Republic. Counterrevolutionaries
needed the product of such raids to buy arms and to finance their political campaigns; common criminals were equally relieved to land on such an attractive
haul, especially in times of grinding hardship such as the Year IV or Year V. In
the Bordelais in this period the bands of supposed royalists who infested the
main roads around Bordeaux and Libourne were indistinguishable from bandits, tying up their victims and resorting to torture in the traditional manner of
the chauffeur (14). In the Gard, one of the southern departments where royalist
150 / Conscripts and Deserters
bands wreaked havoc at the expense of republican officials and the republican
mails, political terrorization was by 1800 giving way to open criminality. Even
when the bands holding up government stagecoaches went through the motions
of shouting royalist greetings to identify themselves to their victims, they had in
reality crossed the line from political activity to simple banditry, robbing to stay
alive and pursuing a lifestyle that was little different from that of vagrant beggars
(15). Yet this change in role made little difference as far as the local community
was concerned, and villagers continued to offer them shelter and protection just
as they had done at the height of the royalist revolt in the region.
Nor is there any reason to believe that deserters or insoumis, driven by fear
into hiding and dependent on the local community for food and protection,
would necessarily be deterred from joining a brigand gang simply because it
affected royalist sympathies or attacked republican targets. Refractories generally shared the sympathies and outlook of the community at large, and in areas
of the country where republican propaganda had made little impact the young
men of the villages would have little reason to oppose the counterrevolutionaries
on ideological grounds. As for deserters, they had quite deliberately abandoned
the armies of the Republic, for which they had little affection. For many the
difference between the service of the Republic and the service of the King
amounted to the simple contrast between serving the nation and serving their
local community, and the local community understandably won. There is, of
course, a certain irony in a situation in which men who had taken great risks
and faced enormous deprivations to avoid service in one army promptly
allowed themselves to be incorporated in another, even in some cases wearing
the distinctive uniform of the muscadins and accepting a rival military discipline. In the South, the royalist bandes generally fitted out their men in the
bright, ostentatious colors of military units, referring to themselves as chasseurs
or hussards and exploiting the reflected glamour of their uniforms to impress
and sometimes intimidate the local peasantry. This was far more than youthful
bravado. The muscadins were faithfully re-enacting the customary ritual of a
southern youth movement and, given the local character of their cause and the
