forty or fifty shots at them in the course of freeing two of their comrades (69).
Near Saint-Remy in the Cantal the gendarmes escorting Jacques Chaussau to
prison were forced to turn him loose by the appearance on the mountainside of
a menacing band of his friends, "dix-neuf hommes masques et armes de fusils
a deux coups" (70). Near the commune of Blessy in the Pas-de-Calais, deserters
again freed one of their number from police custody as the gendarmes were picking their way along a path, hidden from the village by high hedgerows. Again,
fifteen or twenty men were supposedly involved in the attack "armes de fusils,
fourches et autres instruments aratoires" (71). On occasion, the ultimate humiliation for those escorting them, deserters captured and bound by gendarmes succeeded in making their own escape. Near Cannes, for instance, seven prisoners,
among them deserters under arrest, turned on their escorts in a lonely gorge,
breaking their chains and hurling themselves on the astonished gendarmes. "Us
se jettent sur leurs conducteurs, mettent le gendarme Barbe hors de combat par
trois coups de stilet, et apres une demie-heure de lutte arrachent leurs armes
qu'ils cassent sur des pierres, brisent les fers de leurs camarades, et se sauvent
tous dans une foret voisine" (72). Police reports of such incidents always tend
to exaggerate the danger, the ferocity of the conscripts, the numbers in a gang,
and the odds against which the gendarmes were struggling. The fact remains,
however, that there were scores of incidents like these, and that local people did
nothing to assist the officers who found themselves under attack. For the gendarmerie the arrest and escort of conscripts was not only a dangerous and
unpopular assignment, it was an activity that lost them much of the local good
will on which even the most basic policing was dependent.
The reluctance of mayors to report the presence of deserters in their communes, combined with the ineffectiveness of the local gendarmes in the face of
organized resistance from conscripts at large in their areas, had the effect of
throwing open the countryside to terrorization by the deserters themselves. Village notables might bear the brunt of vengeance killings and attacks on crops,
but few isolated farmsteads could consider themselves truly safe. The sheer violence of such attacks and the gratuitous destruction that accompanied them
helped generate panic in the community. In the Lozere in Year VI, for instance,
fear spread from hamlet to hamlet as rumors of the approach of brigand bands
reached a petrified local population (73). When the conscripts struck the effect
on a peacful household could be quite shattering. At one farmhouse near Remiremont in the Vosges, the full fury of a band of some fifteen deserters hit the
134 / Conscripts and Deserters
building, and the effect was like that of a minor hurricane. The men smashed
down the front door and indulged in an orgy of destruction in the kitchen, before
settling down to enjoy the fruits of their victory. They "y ont brise toute la vaisselle de terre et de faience, les verres et les bouteilles; y ont fait cuire un fromage,
avec trois douzaines d'oeufs qu'ils ont pris, avec deux a trois livres de boeure
(sic) frais et recuit, s'en sont regale, en se rendant maitres de la maison; ensuite
ont fracasse toutes les vitres" (74). Yet, at five o'clock in the afternoon, there
was no resistance; no one moved against them. Nor did the community rush to
react, since attacks of this kind did recur from time to time, and the population
was hushed into silence by the fear that united them all. The farmer and his
family did not dare to denounce the assailants, their neighbors would take no
part in the affair through fear of reprisals, and even the public officials whose
job it was to keep the peace showed little inclination to press charges. The juge
depaix was apparently unperturbed by the incident, preferring to take no action
"dans la crainte encore d'encourir la haine des malveillants." Fear, in short, had
taken over the whole community, and the forces of order were unable to combat
it. In such circumstances it was even doubted whether the arrest of any individual deserter or band of deserters could have any impact on the sagging morale
of local people (75).
Of course the main purpose of all the criminal activity of both deserters and
refractories was to remain at large and to avoid the threat of military service;
other aims were no more than ancillary. Therefore it is only logical that some
of the most spectacular crimes of these years were those perpetrated to destroy
the evidence on which recruitment was based, the dossiers of the etat a'v/7 that
designated the dates of birth and marriage and that, after the introduction of
conscription in Year VI, were the principal documents used to condemn twenty
year olds to army life. Criminal damage to these documents was common in
rural areas, often with the abetment of mayors and municipal officials, but the
most organized attacks were those mounted against the duplicate copies that
were held in the districts and departments. At Murat in Cantal, for example,
only the alertness of a twelve-year-old boy playing near the stables of the sousprefecture averted a serious disaster. He stumbled on a lighted wick placed near
some piles of straw and fodder and raised the alarm. The subprefect was in no
doubt that deserters had lit it and that the conscription records were their target
(76). In one department, the Ariege, a series of fires effectively rendered conscription impossible to administer. In Year VII conscripts were assumed to be
responsible for a blaze that swept through the maison commune in Saint-Girons,
destroying not only the etat civil for the entire district, but also the local prison,
making it impossible for the gendarmerie to take effective action against such
deserters that they surprised in the surrounding hills (77). The destruction of the
records was enthusiastically greeted by the lads of the local villages, and their
joy was only increased in Year XII when another suspicious fire destroyed the
duplicate records held at Foix, burning down the entire prefecture at the same
time. All the administrative dossiers were consumed in the blaze, which had
been started by setting light to a pile of firewood directly below the library. Witnesses reported smelling traces of sulphur in the debris, and the delighted reac-
Desertion and Criminality / 135
tions of local people left the authorities in little doubt that the fire was an act of
deliberate malveillance. One witness recorded that
au moment ou les flammes se manifesterent, il entendit plusieurs personnes
parler, sur la place publique, et dire voild le joly feu. Un autre avoir aussy
entendu dire, ca va et ca ira. Un troisieme avoir ouy dire a un individu
inconnu, rencontre sur le chemin de Foix a Pamiers le matin de 1'incendie,
que la Prefecture de Foix avail etc incendiee et que malheureusement on
n'avait pu y bruler les oizeaux. (78)
The consequences, especially in the rural areas of the district of Saint-Girons,
were extremely grave because the only records still extant were those held by
individual mayors and were often kept in chaotic disorder and constantly open
to fraud and forgery. Although the law was explicit that items of the etat civil
destroyed or lost during the Revolution must be made good, in practice very
little was done because there was very little that the authorities could do (79).
Rumors spread unchecked, given that any hint of relief from conscription was
avidly welcomed by local people. When a lawyer in Querigut spread the rumor
that to be eligible for an exemption a young man did not have to be married at
all, merely to have lived with his wife before the date of the conscription law, a
whole generation of country boys breathed a sigh of relief and refused to turn
up for the tirage (80). After Year XII, for all practical purposes, the government
was no longer able to maintain even a pretense of orderly recruitment in the
villages along the Spanish border (81).
In their bid to remain at liberty, by their actions and by their very presence
in a community, deserters and insoumis increasingly involved third parties in
their crimes and unleashed a whole gamut of secondary criminality. Parents,
friends, mayors, and public officials, all those who offered them help or who
condoned their activities, became increasingly enmeshed in the web of complicity to which desertion gave rise. We have already seen the extent to which life
in hiding depended on the good will of local people, and frequently on their open
assistance: the provision of food, the passing on of warnings about police movements, the hiring of labor. All these activities were illegal, and those caught offering such assistance were liable to severe sanctions from the courts. To constitute
a criminal offense, harboring a conscript had to be entered into consciously,
"sciemment" in the words of the decree, which did have the effect of providing
numerous loopholes and which gave juries opportunities for considering acquittal. Rural juries in particular were often ready to listen to the most implausible
excuses as suspects denied that they had consciously taken part in any act of
concealment. A farmer in the Gironde, faced with the indisputable fact of a
deserter's presence on his land, tried to argue that his crime was inadvertent,
that his children had offered the man protection while he was out harvesting.
The tribunal gave him a hearing but in that case it did not believe him (82).
More fortunate was a farmer from Charmes in the Vosges accused of hiding two
requisitionnaires on his farm and tried by the tribunal correctionnel in Mirecourt
in Year VII. When the gendarmes had raided the farm at daybreak, they had
136 / Conscripts and Deserters
overheard the farmer banging on his windowpane and shouting a warning that
they took to be a prearranged signal because almost immediately two young men
had raced naked out of a neighboring barn, pulling on their trousers as they ran.
Yet the court refused to believe that the conscripts were employed on the farm,
or that the farmer knew of their presence there, and he was acquitted (83). All
kinds of personal and sentimental attachments could lead individuals to take
the risk of offering protection to a deserter or insoumis, quite apart from the
possible economic interest of having an able-bodied young man on the premises.
But again, public sympathy was easily aroused, especially when the gendarmerie
tried to prosecute mothers for harboring their own sons or wives for harboring
their husbands (84). The government persisted in the belief that exemplary punishment of receleurs would solve the problem, and even the periodic amnesties
offered to conscripts were never extended to include those aiding and abetting
their crimes (85). Yet in so many cases judges and juries were able to find mitigating circumstances. A widow who sheltered a refractory was deemed to be
frail and therefore worthy of a degree of leniency when she appeared before the
tribunal in Vannes: "si 1'amende a etc reduite au minimum, c'est que cette
veuve, fermiere d'une assez forte metairie, a sept enfants, une mere octogenaire,
et deux freres fous, tout cela chez elle et a sa charge" (86). When a peasant from
Haspres (Nord) was caught harboring his two sons and one of their friends
"caches dans un souterrain dont 1'entree etait masquee par des fourneaux," the
fact that he was moved to break the law by strong family loyalties helped keep
his sentence to a minimum (87). Similarly with the mayor of the village of Anor
(again in the Nord) who could show that the deserter whom he had been sheltering had been living with his daughter and had got her pregnant, this too
moved the tribunal to leniency (88). Local people, in other words, were well
