carnaval" and that the cash involved was only drinking money (115). Similarly
when a gendarme from Laroquebrou (Cantal) allowed the two prisoners whom
he had under escort to break free, a jury had little hesitation in deciding that he
had taken a bribe. The conscripts had been bound and handcuffed at the time
when they escaped, and the gendarme's account of events was less than convincing. "Je crois que c'est avec les dents qu'ils ont brise la corde qui etait
attachee aux menottes; et la corde ainsi brisee, ils ont pris la fuite a toutes
140 / Conscripts and Deserters
jambes..." (116). What is interesting in such cases is the underlying assumption
that conscripts were different from other criminals, that they were fellow human
beings with whom officials might strike a deal or from whom gendarmes might
think of accepting money. In some instances the corruption spread right into the
ranks of the prefectoral staff itself. In the so-called "affaire du Cantal" a plot was
uncovered involving the corruption of 104 different people, all engaged in the
process of selling exemptions and false papers (117). And in 1812 the prefect of
the Rhone, in commenting with favor on the sentences recently passed on three
gendarmes convicted of conscription offenses, added that examples were sorely
needed since in the Rhone "la plus grande partie des gendarmes s'immiscaient
indument dans les affaires de la conscription" (118).
More than any other single group, village mayors and their adjoints were
open to temptation and influence in matters of conscription. It was mayors, after
all, to whom the recruitment procedure was entrusted at communal level, and
it was on them that pressure from the local community bore most heavily. As
has already been shown, mayors were often suspected of partiality during the
levees, of favoritism toward their friends and relatives; and as early as 1792 there
were isolated instances of village mayors being accused of fraud or concealment,
either to avoid serving themselves or to offer protection to their sons (119). The
etat civil remained throughout the period the key to any young man's salvation,
and the fact that the mayor kept and referred to it on behalf of the community
opened the door to frauds and forgeries. The dates of births and marriages could
be deliberately falsified; the papers of younger brothers might be mistaken for
those of the designated conscript so that he could be excused on grounds of
height; and dead relatives might be exhumed from their administrative graves
to help provide reformes for the living (120). Pages were removed from the communal records without anyone apparently knowing when it had happened or
who had been responsible; collusion in cases of this kind was very hard to break
(121). There were communes where by some freak of nature only girls were
being born so that, twenty years afterwards, no one from the village would find
himself faced with the need to serve (122). Sometimes mayors became known
as specialists in arranging marriages for those in pressing need of a wife. At
Breaugis in the Nord, a commune which, according to Expilly, contained no
more than ten feux in the eighteenth century, the mayor masterminded a marriage industry during the Napoleonic Wars, spreading his favors far beyond the
commune itself and implicating in all some forty-eight different people (123).
Colombier-le-Vieux in Ardeche was another village where the authorities felt
bound to intervene when they received complaints that the mayor had made
"un trafic honteux de son ministere" during the period from Year III to Year
VI and that he had even consented to the marriage of a conscript to a woman
who had been dead for twenty years; however, the enquiry was inconclusive
because of the chaotic state of the records and the refusal of local people to offer
the slightest assistance with the investigation:
Cette longue serie de manages, leur rapprochement et 1'etat des jeunes gens
qui les ont contractes en font soupconner fortement la legitimite et donnent
a penser qu'ils ont etc intercalles longtemps apres dans les registres par 1'of-
Desertion and Criminality / 141
ficier public dans les vues de dispenser les jeunes gens de la conscription ou
de la requisition; mais comment en prouver la simulation, ni qu'ils ont etc
antidates, si ceux qui y ont figure comme parties contractantes ainsi que les
temoins en soutiennent la sincerite? (124)
Therein was the primary problem in investigating allegations of fraud by mayors
and their associates. Many villages saw nothing harmful or criminal in such
manipulation and had no interest in bringing it to an end.
Whereas some of these frauds were isolated personal favors to friends or
omissions made for the minimum of personal gain—one mayor in the Cantal
forged papers out of straightforward friendship, lubricated by a few bottles of
wine (125)—forgery could also be big business, with the mayors working as part
of a larger syndicate. Sizable sums of money changed hands, and the degree of
damage inflicted on local administration was often considerable. In one commune in the Ariege the former mayor and his adjoint had secretly set fire to the
etat civil for a forty-year period from 1751 to 1790, thus erasing any evidence of
a young man's date of birth and making the conscription laws unenforceable
(126). Particularly damaging to the government's credibility were those cases of
fraud where members of the prefect's staff were involved in orchestrating activities, where a dozen or a score of mayors were falsifying their village records with
the full connivance of the prefect or subprefect. At Bazas, for instance, substantial payments in cash to the sous-prefet or his secretary were sufficient to ensure
that one's name would be removed from the list of those condemned to serve.
The ring, orchestrated by the sous-prefet, involved two of his employees, a commissaire du gouvernement, a local clergyman, and a handful of mayors (127).
Similarly at Cambrai in the Nord the sous-prefet was found guilty in 1812 of
frauds involving the mayors and adjoints of various towns and villages in his
area, encouraging them to seek out trade from the families of conscripts, and
issuing reformes in exchange for money. The sous-prefecture was the center of a
complex plot and the sous-prefet'^ own involvement was assumed to be considerable; however, the man convicted of organizing the crime syndicate was his
former personal secretary who had corrupted local mayors and brought the
administration into contempt, and for this he was sentenced to eight years'
imprisonment and to being branded as afaussaire(l28). Not surprisingly, it was
in the Pyrenees, always one of the least patriotic areas of France and one where
the conscription laws were treated with scant respect, that some of the most
wide-ranging forgery rings were operating. In the Ariege the problem was
endemic. The sous-prefet at Saint-Girons was himself implicated in the crimes,
and mayors and their adjoints were involved in the majority of communes
within his jurisdiction. In all, reports sent to the Minister of the Interior listed
fifty-one communes where crimes of faux, recel, or escroquerie involved public
officials, and sixteen where armed attacks had been mounted on the gendarmerie
in denfese of deserters or refractories (129). Between Year XI and 1806 the prosecutor in Saint-Girons produced evidence of 379 forgeries, which involved the
complicity of at least 160 people. The social damage that had been done in the
area was, he said, incalculable. One of the mayors most deeply implicated, Borret from the village of Lacave, not only forged documents and sold them for a
142 / Conscripts and Deserters
standard fee (between twelve and twenty-four francs for a marriage act and
between thirty and sixty francs for a passport), but even hawked them around
local fairs and markets in search of custom. Throughout the mountain villages,
mayors and their accomplices were committing every known form of forgery.
Darmaing, the fanatical judge on the Cour de Justice Criminelle Speciale established at Foix to examine these allegations, found that "les faux consistent en
une foule d'alterations commises sur les actes, ils presentent des noms denatures, des prenoms substitues aux veritables, des garcons designes comme filles,
des deces supposes, de faux actes, de fausses dates, des actes rediges en doubles,
ou portes apres coup sur des feuilles deja batonnees comme nulle" (130). Darmaing and the government were right to be concerned because in places like
Saint-Girons it was the governance of the area that was at stake.
The majority of these frauds resulted from willing collusion between conscripts desperate for a device that would let them escape the army and officials
who, through sympathy or greed or both, found themselves in a position to dispense an administrative favor. They went largely unchecked for lengthy periods
because no one within the local community was directly harmed or prejudiced,
even if the families of the men nominated to replace those reprieved might subsequently see things rather differently. Neither party to the fraud could feel
aggrieved. The only overt loser from the deal was the rather opaque, impersonal
interest of the state. Not everyone, however, was so scrupulous, and the desperation of those conscripted was an element that could be played on and abused.
After all, to many gullible families overcome with grief by the news that their
son was included in the next levee, the only important goal was to get hold of a
piece of paper that would liberate them from their misery. In such circumstances
any piece of paper with a semi-official appearance would seem convincing, and
there were those who were all too eager to capitalize on their innocence. It was
a terrain tailor-made for tricksters and conmen. Many of the passports produced
by deserters were no more professional than that clutched by Louis Bourguignon, who had deserted from the 56e Regiment de Ligne in 1808 and who had
bought a crudely amateurish document from another young man he encountered on the road. The gendarmerie were not deceived:
On le trouva porteur d'un papier imprime a 1'usage de passeport et qui sans
doute avait etc enleve a quelque municipality on 1'avait garni de maniere a
ce qu'il ne pouvait servir a celui qui en etait porteur, puisque le nom de la
commune de Crepol d'ou il semblait qu'on aurait voulu le delivrer n'etait
ecrit qu'a moitie: qu'il ne s'y trouvait aucun nom de porteur, que le nom du
maire de la commune avait ete remplace par un nom suppose, enfin que toute
sa contexture le rendait evidemment inutile a quiconque cut voulu s'en servir,
puisqu'il ne se ressemblait a un passeport que par la qualite du papier qu'on
avait employe. (131)
Elsewhere the market for false papers was so buoyant that their forgery grew
into a lucrative enterprise, with papers copied, signatures forged, even seals
appended in an attempt to deceive the authorities. One firm in Bordeaux had
established a commercial business in such forgeries before their printshop was
Desertion and Criminality / 143
discovered. What surprised the prefect was their concern for detail, the professionalism of their approach, especially in copying the subprefect's seal, which
indicated that the forgery was the work of an artist (132). Another forger, who
had already escaped from prison after a previous conviction, was surprised in
his workshop in 1808 surrounded by the specialist tools of his highly profitable
trade. He obtained blank passport paper by forging the signatures of various
mayors from around his department, the Nord. At the time of his arrest he was
equipped with "quatre sceaux a Faigle imperiale ayant la legende, 1'un de la commune, le second de la sous-prefecture d'Hazebrouck, le troisieme de la prefecture du Nord; 1'espace de la legende du quatrieme etait en blanc" (133).
