absurdite) qu'ils ne peuvent se rendre a Lille ou est Fennemi, ainsi qu'a
Lyon, a Grenoble, que la Republique est perdue et que les defenseurs seront
perdus ..." (57). The military authorities took the allegation very seriously,
and the two strangers were handed over to the juge de paix.
In refractory villages recruitment for the royalist cause was often crowned
with success and posed a major threat to the government. The royalists held
trump cards that were denied to the Republic, openly playing on the fears and
resentments of local people against the imposition of bureaucracy. While the
Republic might offer signing-on bounties to stimulate recruitment, it was obliged
to pay such bounties in assignats, even though the paper notes were dismissed
as worthless by the peasantry. Royalist embaucheurs suffered from no such constraints. At Valence, for example, they recruited fifteen young men in Year IV
by the promise of payment in coin, while "a Donzere, Montelimar, Pierrelatte
et Voulte Ton engage secretement pour une armee qui se forme dans FArdeche,
frontiere de la Lozere, Fon pretend qu'il y a deja un fort noyau de forme, qu'une
caisse considerable est deja etablie, que tous les frais se payent especes son-
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 161
nantes, que la le soldat est autant paye en numeraire que la republique paye en
assignats, ce qui fait beaucoup de proselytes" (58). The success of such tactics
was all the more resounding in that men serving in the Republic's armies were
often paid months late in devalued assignats or found increasingly that they
received no payment at all. Royalists might also put their local knowledge and
familiarity with local custom to good use, turning up at fetes and bals publics
and converting them into demonstrations of political strength. At Puymirol in
Lot-et-Garonne they showed their anger at the inclusion of republican propaganda in the village carnival by taking it over and using it as their own private
stage. Suddenly, in the midst of the gaiety and dancing, "on voit les cadenettes
et costumes ridicules se multiplier, puis deux masques de ce meme parti travestis en roi et en reine, precedes de deux postilions qui faisaient claquer le fouet,
paroissent tout a coup sur la place publique" (59). It was not simply a daring
jest that was certain to grab the attention of all present; it was a powerful
reminder that even at a carnival, the central social point of the municipal calendar, the new authorities lacked the muscle needed to keep them away. The
timing, the sense of occasion, the style and swagger of the demonstrators were
guaranteed to capture the maximal attention and to convert a popular social
gathering into a moment of political triumph. Bribes and inducements were vital
to the success of royalist agents, but their impact was increased by skillful public
relations and a talent for impressing simple folk in ways to which they could
relate. When for example two embaucheurs entered a bar in Rambouillet to try
to subvert soldiers garrisoned in the town and win them over to the Vendean
cause, they did not content themselves with offers of cash. Rather they sought
to leave an indelible impression on the minds of their audience. While one of
them created a distraction in another corner of the bar, his accomplice dropped
hints about the huge sums he had to distribute in bounties and tried to dazzle
the prospective recruit with his credentials. He was subsequently accused
"d'avoir offert 6000 livres d'engagements a ce citoyen, de lui avoir montre differents papiers qu'il lui a dit etre des lettres du comte d'Artois et de Charette, et
qu'il deserterait sous deux jours" (60). The fact that they frequently used deserters and refractories as recruiting agents only emphasized their identity of interest
with the young men they were seeking to win over; again, a clever ploy that
helped to convince peasant boys who were confused and flattered by such attention (61).
In such instances the act of recruitment was planned and deliberate, an integral part of the royalist war effort in areas where loyalties were uncertain.
Around frontiers and near seacoasts such campaigns were traditional, and they
were only accelerated by the political nature of the revolutionary wars and by
the scope they presented for ideological subversion. Foreign armies also benefited from campaigns conducted in border regions, offering bounties far beyond
the dreams of French conscripts and bribing individual recruits into service as
mercenaries. Rumor spread rapidly about the activities of English, Austrian, and
Prussian embaucheurs in towns and villages along France's frontiers. Refractories were the usual target for such agents, and their presence was noted with
consternation in virtually all the outlying areas of the hexagone: in the streets of
Foix, along the Swiss border, among troops in the Doubs, and in the farms and
162 / Conscripts and Deserters
hamlets of the Breton countryside (62). Many of these recruiters were involved
in what was really a form of criminal conspiracy, making substantial sums of
money for themselves by passing young men to their foreign paymasters and
involving entire rings of conspirators in the cause of subversion. Felix Lamy was
one such embaucheur, working out of the bar he owned in Dunkerque and
devoting himself to the corruption of sailors from the Nord and surrounding
departments. When he was arrested, police found thirteen different passports on
his premises which, he claimed, had been supplied to him by the "commissaire
des relations commerciales du royaume de Hollande a Dunkerque," a rather
shadowy individual who was eventually tracked down and questioned. What
emerged was a mesh of intrigue and corruption. Lamy bribed the young seamen
to abandon the republican navy and serve instead on corsairs, in private
employment. The so-called commissaire, Casteleyer, directed them to Dutch
ships and seacaptains which another conspirator, Sophie Labbe, was paid to provide the seamen with accommodation undeclared to the authorities at her
Dunkerque lodging house (63). Lamy and his accomplices worked for foreign
interests, and their main concern was gain through commerce in human beings.
More dangerous to the French government was the organized trade in men for
the Austrian army or the chouan forces in the West. The department of the Morbihan, for instance, proved a happy hunting ground for rebel armies in their
quest for recruits, since large areas of the department were beyond the means of
the gendarmerie to police. The government's commissaire in Hennebont was
convinced by Year V that many communities had in practice been abandoned
by the Republic to the attentions of the chouans, whose leaders were only too
ready to take full advantage of this surprise windfall. Reports from all over the
region repeated the same allegation, that the rebels had a recruiting agency in
Hennebont whose sole aim was to subvert republican troops by the offer of
bribes, often of English money. As they passed from mouth to mouth, the
rumors gained shape and substance. "C'est, dit-on, un negociant de Lorient qui
fournit les fonds pour le recrutement des deserteurs, les deserteurs s'apercoivent
dans les campagnes par bandes nombreuses, le bagne de Brest, mal garde suivant
les apparences, fournit grand nombre de ces scelerats ..." (64). The republicans
would build these individual rumors into a conspiracy of colossal proportions
organized around a highly efficient and well-financed counterrevolutionary
administration. Yet everything that we know about the counterrevolution, especially in regard to chouannerie, suggests that such powers of organization were
far beyond the capabilities of what was a very fractured movement, often living
precariously from hand to mouth (65).
Chance and muddle were just as likely to have been responsible for the
recruitment of a republican soldier, especially where counterrevolutionary
forces held the upper hand and could bully or coerce the local population. Joining the chouans, for instance, might be less the result of a deliberate act of persuasion than the consequence of a lack of policing or of a temporary loss of
control by the Republic. The members of a passing royalist contingent could so
easily exert a direct pressure on their peers, especially on those requisitionnaires
who lived in fear of capture or who had already been condemned par contumace
for their act of rebellion. In addition, by taking a young man prisoner, they could
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 163
effectively transform him into a chouan rebel. Whether he fought actively
against the Republic or not, he was likely to be denounced and condemned for
his association with the enemy (66). Among those tried for royalism in the
Southwest in Years VII and VIII were many whose counterrevolutionary careers
had begun when their village was invaded by the royalist armies and when the
peace of their everyday lives was rudely shattered. They were seldom committed
antirepublicans, but local boys whose youth and physique made them useful
soldiers and attracted the interest of the rebel battalions. Again and again we are
told that their involvement with the rebellion had been a chance affair, the result
of an unfortunate encounter with royalist soldiers. Until then they had shown
no taste for any form of political action beyond that of refusing to be drafted,
"s'etant assez bien conduit jusques a Fepoque du passage de Farmee royale," or
"ayant etc fait prisonnier par les royaux a Faffaire de Carbonne et entraine par
eux jusques a Saint-Gaudens" (67). Although it was obviously in their interest
to minimize their commitment to the enemy, the evidence of many of these socalled rebel soldiers appeared to ring true, and in some instances even the republican tribunals before which they appeared accepted that their brief flirtation
with royalism was not of their own volition. At Blagnac in the Haute-Garonne
the royalists sent in more seasoned troops, themselves refractaires from the
republican armies, to spread panic among the villagers and to seize all the young
men of military age. Their captures were the result of simple terrorization: "ils
arreterent des patriotes, devasterent la commune, et brulerent les papiers publics" (68). They disarmed the local farmers and threatened death to those who
refused to follow them in their crusade against the Republic, just as all over the
Southwest threats and menaces were part of the standard armoury of royalist
embaucheurs sent into the local community (69). In the face of brutality and
strong-arm tactics of this sort, resistance could appear somewhat futile, with the
result that in many villages all the strong and healthy males were systematically
rounded up in dawn raids and incorporated in the rebel armies. For some, of
course, service in the royalist cause had few charms, and those incorporated by
force often tended to desert as soon as an opportunity presented itself. There
were royalist "soldiers" who stayed with their new units for no more than a few
days or hours. There were others who, with greater calculation, made use of the
royalists to escape from republican custody but gave little in return. One young
man from Aurignac (Haute-Garonne) found the arrival of the brigands happily
fortuitous but who was in no sense himself a royalist: "lorsque Farmee des brigands y entra," reported the government commissaire, "il fut delivre et retourna
dans ses foyers, d'ou il n'a pas bouge depuis" (70). In countryside in the grip of
civil war where counterrevolutionary forces were in charge, joining them, however briefly, could be the only means of escape, the only way of staying at liberty
or of continuing one's journey uninterrupted. Simple expediency might dictate
that it was the only feasible path to follow, the latest of that long series of expedients to which the deserter or refractory was condemned by the exigencies of
