his life outside the law of the Republic.
Nowhere was this more true than in the West, where chouan bands and Vendean armies controlled large areas of the countryside for lengthy periods, and
where the border between republican and rebel-held territory shifted remorse-
164 / Conscripts and Deserters
lessly back and forth. For young refractory conscripts this presented an endless
series of risks, but it also furnished opportunities for escape as they learned to
play off the competing aims of both sides to retain their precious liberty.
C7?OMfl«-controlled communes had the huge advantage for those seeking to
escape conscription that the Republic's officials were powerless to execute the
government's decrees, and it was reported throughout the West that young men
of the premiere requisition, instead of joining their designated units, were making long overland journeys to find shelter in the deepest recesses of rebel Brittany. In the Calvados, it was even suggested that the fathers and mothers of these
youngsters were encouraging them to do so since, in the words of the commissaire in Caen, "1'esprit de centre-revolution leur fait preferer pour leurs enfants
le service des brigands a celui de la Republique" (71). Such claims aroused feelings of panic among local republicans, who often believed that the problem of
chouannerie was simply a dangerous politicization of the problem of insoumission. Between 1793 and the Year III when chouannerie was posing a major
threat in large areas of the West, all those arrested for desertion or for draft dodging were automatically assumed to be in collusion with the chouans, to be their
spies or agents, or to have vital information about their organization (72). This
belief was often proved to contain some substance, since the interrogation of
men suspected of being insoumis provided the authorities with a wealth of valuable information about chouan activities, stock piles of weapons, the movement
of units, and the hiding-places used by their soldiers (73). In fact, the two categories, insoumis and brigands, proved impossible to distinguish with any precision. When the chouans entered a village, their first action was generally to
order all the young men to march behind their banners. At Le Faouet in Year
VIII, for example, "les jeunes gens ont recu de la part des chefs des rebelles
1'ordre formel de se tenir prets a marcher sous peu de jours" (74). Equally, when
the authorities attempted to round up local chouans by means of a military operation, a battue generate of the outlying hamlets and all the known hiding-places
on the surrounding bocage, they were likely, as occurred around Josselin in Year
II, to find only a substantial haul of refractory conscripts (75). So close was the
identification of insoumis and rebels in the minds of the departmental officials
that every draft dodger became automatically a potential counterrevolutionary
and every recalcitrant republican soldier an assumed royalist recruit. And the
real, often unspoken fear of the authorities was that throughout the West the old
chefs de chouans would seek to restore their power and influence by calling on
every deserter and refractory to mobilize behind the cause. The very thought of
this eventuality drove otherwise moderate men to consider the most extreme
solutions, even the total evacuation of villages where royalist sympathies were
known to be strong. How else, asked the commissaire in Le Mans rhetorically,
could the chouans be deprived of a regular source of manpower in their war of
attrition against the Republic? He proposed, somewhat desperately, the deployment of the army against recalcitrant villages since "il faudrait enlever tous ceux
qui habitent les communes connues par leur complicite avec les Brigands royaux
... pour les embarquer et les transplanter dans les armees employees hors du
territoire de la Republique" (76).
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 165
The evidence provided by trial records and by individual interrogations
amply confirms this impression that it was random circumstance that generally
transformed a refractory conscript into a chouan or royalist, seldom a hardened
political conviction. Under the right leadership acts of simple pillage and banditry in response to need and hunger could easily drift into counterrevolution
(77). Or the ringing of church bells could spread panic among the village population and send the young men scuttling off in defense of their community
against an imagined enemy. At Belz in the district of Auray, for instance, it was
the tocsin, the traditional ringing of the bells to signify an emergency, that called
the villagers to arms and launched them on an attack against the republican
soldiers. Suspects were questioned about the meaning of the tocsin, about the
interpretation placed on it by local peasants as they tilled their fields, and about
the identity of the men who had given the order that the bells be rung. But such
questioning achieved very little. Like Rene Maho, a twenty-four-year-old laboureur suspected of taking part in the rising, those questioned denied all knowledge
of the perpetrators, saying simply that "a son retour on lui dit que c'etaient des
enfants de dix, douze et treize ans environ" who were responsible (78). In country areas where fanatisme provided a support for tradition and superstition, the
ringing of the church bells had always been a signal for alarm, for the approach
of a storm, or for the urgent convocation of a village meeting. During the periods
of active conscription, it could easily be turned into a warning signal to all the
young men of serviceable age that troops or gendarmes were approaching, and
many village mayors and councils were dismissed by the Minister after breaches
of this kind (79). But the meaning could not always be clearly defined. At Moulis
in the Ariege, for example, the bells started ringing in Year VII at the very
moment when the recruitment was getting under way; but it was admitted that
mauvaise volonte was very difficult to prove, that "le son des cloches a 1'approche des troupes de la commune coincidait avec le vieux prejuge du fanatisme
de sonner les cloches pour dissiper 1'orage, qui a la verite grondait sur leur tete
avec impetuosite" (80). The recruiting officers were left with little more than
their suspicions that the church and the commune were seeking to raise the standard of revolt in Moulis.
Throughout the West suspects consistently denied that they joined the
chouan revolt out of well-defined political conviction, placing the responsibility
on an impulse of the moment, misunderstanding, or rumor. When the jeunes
gens de la requisition marched on Vannes from rural communities in the Morbihan in Year II, they did so for religious rather than political motives, responding to an appeal to "tous les fideles catholiques" of the pays to march to save
their faith and make way for the return of their "bons pretres" (81). If this is to
be taken at face value, and there is little reason to believe that the courts were
more generous in their treatment offanatiques than of royalists, it would imply
once again that the young were acting as representatives of their communities,
angered by urban intrusion into their religious lives and matters of traditional
conscience. Others insisted that their commitment to the royalist armies had
been brief and forced, originating not in counterrevolutionary ideas but in simple compulsion. This was a more natural form of defense, a desperate attempt
166 / Conscripts and Deserters
to slough off any element of personal responsibility and to place the blame on
the faceless, unnamed fanatics who served in the royalist recruiting units. In turn
they stressed that they were wholly apolitical, just ordinary villagers caught up
in events that were beyond their comprehension and outside their control. And
they called other villagers as witnesses to the fact that their service with the enemies of the Republic had been the result of constraint. Joseph Daigny was caught
as he slipped home from the royalist army after its defeat at Montrejeau. Captured red-handed, he could not deny his service in the King's cause, but played
down his importance, insisting that
il n'a etc que simple fusilier, que lors de 1'organisation qui se fit a Saint-Gaudens il refusa le grade de capitaine qu'on lui offroit. Ajoutant que machinalement il portoit son fusil, et qu'il ne brulla point une amorce et qu'il ne s'est
jamais mele de rien organiser, ny de donner aucuns ordres. (82)
Jean Raimond, a thirty-four-year-old tisserand from Miramont, agreed that he
had been forced to join the rebels when they invaded the town, but claimed that
he had stayed with them for no more than one week, the period when they were
in Miramont, finding the first possible occasion to desert. Interrogated about his
role during that week, he accepted that he had been opportunistic and had
played along with the group that was in control at the time; as a consequence he
was rebuked by the court and given the lightest of prison sentences. Raimond
scarcely appeared a convincing man of principle, in anyone's cause:
Interroge s'il n'a crie Vive le Roy, prete et exige le serment de fidelite pour
luy et pour la religion.
Repond ne 1'avoir fait preter a personne, mais qu'il 1'a prete avec la troupe
parce qu'il fut force.
Interroge si depuis longtemps il n'engageait les gens de sa connaissance a
entrer dans son parti en leur faisant entendre que c'etait pour soutenir la religion et pour avoir un Roi. Repond et nie, ajoutant que quand on le lui a
propose, il a repondu qu'il voulait rester du cote du parti le plus fort. (83)
One after another of those accused of taking part in the revolt of Year VII in the
Haute-Garonne and the Ariege repeated the same story, insisting that they had
been forced to march, to swear an oath of loyalty to the King in front of the
assembled royalist forces, even to wear the enemy's white cocarde. Like Arnaud
Latour from Miramont, they persisted in their claim that theirs had been no
more than an auxiliary role, that of mounting guard at night or of preparing
meals for the rebels. In no circumstances would they admit to the more serious
charge of taking up arms against the Republic (84).
The testimony of royalist commanders and brigand leaders who were
brought to trial lent support to these claims. Louis Maury, the "fameux chef de
bande" from Pamiers who was tried and executed in Year VI for brigandage
and murder, made it clear in a deathbed confession that the royalist units under
his command were composed of just such footloose young conscripts, generally
alienated from the Republic by the simple fact that they had been conscripted.
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 167
In the Ariege, he claimed, he could command a rebel army of 1,500 jeunes gens,
almost all army deserters and insoumis, but he added that they were not generally men marked by any form of political ideology. The vast majority of them
were royalists of circumstance, young men who had been temporarily misled
and who could easily be won back to republicanism. He had forced them to
swear an oath to the King to fashion them into an effective fighting unit, the
"serment des chouans" of his own Breton youth which "se pretait la main sur
1'Evangile place sous les poignards" (85). Even if his statement supplied the
authorities with no new information there is no reason to call into question this
part of Maury's testimony since none of his friends or accomplices was directly
implicated. Furthermore, his claim was endorsed by two other bandits who were
due to be guillotined with him on the main square of Foix. There is evidence
that brigands not only relied on deserters and refractories for manpower in their
bands, but had frequently themselves served in the republican armies in their
youth. This was true, for instance, of many of the most prominent brigands who
