fact that they saw themselves as the defenders of their traditional community
against outside aggression, what could be more natural than for the young men
of the area, strong and proud of their physical prowess, to rush to its defense
(16)? Seen in this light, the organization of local terrorist bands falls squarely
into the tradition of communal rivalries and of the squabbles, fights and vendettas that had from time immemorial marked the encounters of the young at
fairs, carnivals, and village dances.
Joining a royalist bande or lending support to local chouans might, in other
words, have little to do with political conviction. The deserter in particular was
already condemned to a marginal existence during the months or even years that
he spent returning to his native region, and banditry could seem attractive when
the alternative was the constant threat of starvation. Counterrevolutionary
bands offered much the same comfort and assurance as ordinary criminal gangs:
food, clothing, a share in the spoils, and an end to the desperate loneliness that
was the deserter's lot. They drank and laughed and swore and damned the consequences, reveling in their shared conquests and enjoying a sense of compan-
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 151
ionship that contrasted with the solitude of life in hiding or the dreary predictability of another night's trudge once darkness had fallen. Evading the
gendarmerie might be hazardous, but holding up republican mails added a certain zest to their existence, and celebrating their triumphs, often publicly and
with carefree generosity, could provide an unaccustomed injection of fun. Royalist leaders like Saint-Christol or Froment or Dominique Allier assumed all the
stature of the great bandit chieftains of the past, and were worshipped by their
followers with the same fervor. In some cases, in fact, their leadership was essential to the band's continued existence, as is witnessed by the collapse of several
royalist units once their chefs had finally been captured and executed (17).
Involvement with such bandes allowed a young man to regain a certain selfrespect, at least in the eyes of his peers and frequently in the community at large.
He was, after all, at the stage in his life when fighting and military swagger would
come naturally to him, however reluctant he might have been to accept conscription into a formal national army. Most important of all, the royalist presence provided him with an opportunity to use his youthful strength in the furtherance of interests that he could identify as his own. He was a soldier, trained
in the use of weapons; in all likelihood, he still had his army rifle along with the
rest of his kit. It was a temptation that many were unable to resist. Joining a
band of royalist brigands might provide the only tangible means of escape from
hunger and economic distress. In the Drome in Years VII, VIII, and IX, the
incidence of brigand attacks increased significantly during the winter months
when more young men were tempted to throw in their lot with the local outlaws
in their quest for survival (18). Royalists also suffered from desertion, and when
spring came some members of these bands were slipping away to continue their
journey home.
But equally, there were good reasons why in areas where royalism already
enjoyed a measure of popular support, deserters and insoumis should have been
drawn into alliance with them. For if popular opposition to the state had its
origins in the perceived intrusion of the outside world into essentially local matters, there was no field of activity where that intrusion was more brutal or more
stark than that of military recruitment. The deserter who had been forced to
leave his village and the refractory whose lifestyle had been disrupted by the
state's demands were, more than any other members of village society, the victims of that intrusion. In many instances their political consciousness was awakened by the fact of having to pass before the conseil de recrutement and to accept
the reality of military service. From the time of the first tirages there was always
a pool of dissident youth in hiding or protected by the local population, a society
en marge that demonstrated that there was an alternative to obedience and
whose existence encouraged a spirit of rebellion in others. Moreover, from 1793
any attempt to round up these refractories or to repress their insubordination
was bound to attract sympathy from their fathers and mothers, brothers and
friends, with the result that punitive action by the government could easily play
into the hands of their opponents. Royalists, in particular, were ready to profit
from any rash move by the gendarmerie or the republican armies in areas like
the West and the Southeast. They could with considerable ease assume the mantle of localism, winning sympathy from the ranks of the young and from those
152 / Conscripts and Deserters
who felt themselves unjustly prejudiced by the new recruitment laws (19). It was
a battle for men's minds that the state found very difficult to win since by definition it was the state, in the guise of the communes and districts, that had
responsibility for the recruitment procedures, and the state, through the army
and the gendarmerie, that attempted to enforce them (20). In the eyes of rural
communities, military service was, par excellence, the preserve of the state and
its agents. The bandes, consisting overwhelmingly of men from the immediate
neighborhood, were thus able to score important propaganda points in the psychological war between the local population and the Revolution's new secular
officials (21).
In this campaign royalism might be almost incidental. The enemy was what
mattered, and the enemy was clear to all—the Republic and its officials, with
their insistence on over-government and their imposition, often in the most
crass and unsympathetic way, of urban values and urban administration on the
French countryside. The formation of semipermanent bandes in revolt against
the state began in 1793, when recruitment first alienated a sizable segment of the
community from the government in Paris. But these bandes soon became
involved in a struggle with much wider implications, in the defense of traditional values against the representatives of the new authority. In March 1793
peasant bands attacked the towns in Brittany that symbolized their new oppression, occupying La Roche-Bernard and Rochefort and attempting to lay siege to
Auray, Pontivy, Redon, Fougeres, Vannes, and Vitre. This was done in the context of anticonscription riots, and it was certainly the promulgation of the new
recruitment law that sparked off the violence. But, as Donald Sutherland
explains, the implications of this anti-urban attack was far wider, bringing into
question the republican administration itself:
The attack on the towns in March 1793 took place within this context of
changed governmental relations between town and country. The peasants
were conscious that they were attacking not the towns per se or even a particular social class which inhabited them, but centres of republicanism. That is,
the particular enemies were the Districts and their administrators. (22)
It was a context that the royalists and their supporters were uniquely placed to
exploit.
Royalists might also hope to win converts in areas where the peasant dislike
of revolutionary government was reinforced by a strong and resilient religious
faith. Of course, the revolutionaries were always quick to seek out religious interference and to blame any form of dissent on the pernicious influence of refractory priests, but in the process of recruiting royalist bandes that influence cannot
be wholly disregarded. Refractory priests who enjoyed the trust and confidence
of local people could play their part in obstructing the recruitment effort and in
turning the young conscripts to other causes. Fanatisme, stated the commissaire
at Villcfranche-sur-Saone in Year III with typical dogmatism, was at the root of
the disobedience that he was encountering in the more mountainous parts of his
district, engendering in the inhabitants a spirit of resistance that discouraged
service, spread lawlessness and political dissent, and brought the assignat into
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 153
disrepute (23). His colleague in Vannes in Year V was more specific in his allegations. Attempts to round up deserters and refractories in the western departments, he warned the minister, risked causing rioting and a renewal of civil war
in the region. And refractory priests were waiting for just such an opportunity
to stir up sedition among the rural population:
Les pretres refractaires qui rentrent en foule alimentent dans les chambres,
les granges, la ou ils celebrent leurs cultes, Pesprit de sedition et de revolte
centre le gouvernement republicain. Vous sentez que les predictions sanguinaires sont encore plus chaudes dans les confessionaux. Ces incendiaires sont
parfaitement secondes par les anciens chefs de chouans, leur bien digne milice. Je sais qu'ils parcourent en armes les cantons, s'y rassemblent, y tiennent
des conferences, et ressement Falarme dans les campagnes. (24)
Abolishing refractory influence in the countryside was a formidable task because
the returned priests could generally depend on a certain lingering good will in
their former parishes, while the sheer harshness of the law made the uncommitted disinclined to turn them over to the authorities. They were frequently offered
protection from their friends and families. Sometimes mayors and public officials were themselves discovered harboring or encouraging them in their antirepublican activity. The mayor of Penestin in the Morbihan was suspended in
Year X when it was revealed that he had been paying a salary to a nonjuror out
of communal funds (25). At Narnhac (Cantal) it was the adjoint who found himself dismissed in Year VI for offering hospitality to men hostile to the Republic,
"pour avoir fait celebrer la messe chez lui par des pretres refractaires, leur avoir
donne asile, entendu leur messe dans tous les lieux ou elle se dit, et les avoir
invites a manger" (26). These were far from being isolated instances, and in the
counterrevolutionary heartlands of the Midi the influence of refractory clergy
was rightly feared by local and national officials alike. By the mid-1790s they
were slipping back into France with the express aim of stirring up strife, and
some of those who had previously sworn their loyalty to the government and
accepted the Civil Constitution were withdrawing their commitment and urging
the peasants to rebel. At Lavelanet in the Ariege these were deemed to be the
most dangerous of all, "ceux qui, ayant prete le serment, 1'ont retracte devant
un delegue du pape, ont annonce a leurs fideles brebis que tout ce qu'ils avaient
fait auparavant etait nul, qu'il leur fallait deux mois de penitence au bout desquels ils pourraient seulement reprendre leurs fonctions" (27). Throughout large
tracts of Catholic countryside the spiritual prompting of these nonjurors posed
a constant threat to the Republic, especially in areas of open counterrevolution
where they could profitably throw in their lot with the chouans or emigre nobles.
The respect which their office commanded in Catholic villages ensured their
safety and guaranteed that their views would get a fair hearing. In the Drome, it
was reported, they counted insoumis and deserters among their congregations
(28). In the Cantal, the arrest of a nonjuring priest caused an immediate riot at
Chaudesaigues, a community that the government commissaire described as "et
fanatise et chouanne" (29). As in other parts of the French provinces, these were
characteristics that went hand in hand.
154 / Conscripts and Deserters
The connections between the refractory clergy and rural counterrevolution
