aware of the pressures that were brought to bear on parents and neighbors, and
were reluctant to antagonize important sections of the population. These penalties could not be effectively enforced because, in the words of the government
commissaire in Epinal in Year V, "les loix penales trop rudes sont toujours eludees," and juries would simply refuse to convict when they thought the penalty
out of all proportion to the offense (89). The sheltering of refractory conscripts
was one area where the threshold of tolerance was clearly very wide indeed.
It was never really regarded by public opinion as a criminal activity; the
same can be said for the employment of refractories and deserters, which, as we
have seen, was so vital to their everyday existence (90). A more positive act of
collusion, and one which more clearly crossed the thinly drawn line between
lawful and unlawful pursuits, was the conspiracy that often accompanied the
frauds and deceits employed by conscripts to avoid service. Even though many
of these frauds were purely individual acts by the young men themselves, everyone in the village knew what had happened and the vast majority offered their
mute approval. Self-mutilation is a case in point. Because the conscription law
insisted that those liable to serve should be strong and healthy, and because it
was common knowledge among village boys that no one could be considered for
the army who lacked either the trigger finger of his right hand or the front teeth
required to reload a musket, one possible if a very painful road to salvation was
known to all, and from all over France came the same familiar reports of drastic
Desertion and Criminality / 137
acts of homespun surgery. A report by the Minister of War in Year VII lamented
the alarming increase in such incidents, regretting that "des pusillanimes incapables de vouloir contribuer au succes de nos armees ont neanmoins le lache
courage de s'abattre un pouce ou un doigt de la main droite pour se soustraire
au service militaire" (91). The two young men of the classe of 1810 against
whom the conseil de recmtement of the Dordogne initiated proceedings for this
kind of fraud were textbook stereotypes of the art: "Fun s'etait coupe ou fait
couper la premiere phalange de 1'index de la main droite, et 1'autre s'etait fait
arracher les dents incisives de la machoire superieure" (92). To make doubly
sure of his reforme a conscript from the Saone-et-Loire, uncertain perhaps which
finger would obtain his release, unflinchingly severed three (93). In one village
in the Gers, four young men turned up on the same day to present their bleeding
stumps to the recruitment-officer (94). The anger of government officials is easy
to understand, and there were various attempts to establish enquetes to assign
responsibility for such injuries. But the stubbornness and recalcitrance of villagers made such a task nearly impossible. Every incident had its accomplices,
its willing or unwilling aides: the parents who helped nurse their son back to
health, the chirurgien who might advise on the best method to adopt, the aubergiste who kept watch for the gendarmes, the brother or family friend who administered the blow or helped to anaesthetize the victim before the blow was struck.
Even when there were no witnesses, no active participants in the incident, villagers would suppress embarrassing rumors or they would repeat the same
unlikely tale in answer to the gendarmes' questions. When Baptiste Sauzeil cut
off his index finger in 1807, he was working alone in the communal wood at
Vicdessos (Ariege) and claimed that because of rheumatic pains he had been
obliged on that day to saw left-handed. It was an implausible story but no one
could be found to deny it, and various villagers agreed that they had indeed
observed him using his left hand or noted that they had heard that he was suffering from rheumatism (95). In their lack of cooperation with the gendarmes
they too were being drawn into the web of complicity.
For those who lacked the courage or who were endowed with too much imagination to think of chopping off their fingers, other routes to a medical reforme
could seem less agonizing. It was altogether easier, for instance, to pretend to be
epileptic because no verifiable signs of the disease were demanded. What the
conscript had to provide was sworn testimony by ten fellow villagers that he was
subject to occasional epileptic fits. And the "evidence" of sympathetic friends
and neighbors was not very difficult to collect, particularly since there was no
way of making the witnesses answerable by law for the truth of their testimony
(96). Deafness was also impossible to verify with any accuracy during the army
medical, with the result that once again the authorities depended on sworn testimony. But so unsatisfactory was this procedure that the Imperial administration intervened to make the mayor personally responsible, forcing him to provide testimony that he knew that one conscript had been deaf since birth, or that
another was given to seizures or fits (97). Drugs, caustic substances, ointments
and lotions were all tried, either swallowed or rubbed into wounds, in an attempt
to appear ill or maimed. In the Creuse in Year IV, for example, there were complaints that conscripts were swallowing harmful concoctions that affected their
138 / Conscripts and Deserters
pulse (98). The prefect of the Seine-Inferieure described in graphic detail the
range of "maladies simulees" feigned by conscripts in his department during the
war years.
Us s'etaient fait arracher toutes les dents pour ne point servir, d'autres etaient
parvenus a les carier presque toutes en employant des acides ou en machant
de 1'encens, quelques-uns s'etaient fait des plaies aux bras ou aux jambes par
1'application de vesicatoires, et pour rendre ces plaies pour ainsi dire incurables, ils les ont pansees avec de 1'eau impregnee d'arsenic. Beaucoup se sont
fait donner des hernies soufflees, quelques-uns appliquerent sur les parties de
la generation des caustiques tellement violents que les medecins doutent
qu'ils puissent echapper a la mort. (99)
Not all these ruses, of course, deceived the authorities; nor did all the young men
who placed their hopes in such remedies survive their self-induced illnesses. An
inquest on one young conscript, Jean Gizolme from Laveissenet (Cantal),
showed the tragic results of his ill-advised medication. He had died painfully
and unnecessarily, "a la suite d'une plaie faite a la partie interne de la jambe
droite avec du poison corrosif, qui apres avoir corrode cette partie s'est insinue
dans la masse du sang et a occasionne la mort de Findividu" (100).
Those who sought fraudulent medical treatment of this kind usually
involved others in their frauds. Families and friends shared in the secrets of
those lucky enough to succeed in their deception, and faked injuries were imitated long afterwards by others hopeful of gaining a reforme. Jacques Biralleau,
a strong, healthy lad from Saint-Andre-de-Cubzac, managed to convince the
capitaine de recrutement that the ugly swellings on his right leg made him unfit
for service. When his younger brother duly attained the age of eighteen years, he
merely passed on the necessary advice. In consequence, the recruiting-officers
found themselves faced with the second member of the same family to sport
identical injuries, since the young man "s'est fait venir du mal, comme son frere,
a la jambe droite, de maniere qu'il se trouve etre a Phopital de Bordeaux, en
croyant de se sortir comme son frere a fait" (101). Or again, the fact of having
been injured in a genuine accident, like Pierre Holland from Clavieres (Cantal)
whose foot was gored by an ox, could be turned to the young man's advantage,
if necessary with the aid of a fraudulent substitution (102). Doctors and medical
orderlies were notoriously easy to bribe or convince into complaisance, and
minor ailments would frequently be sufficient to justify a reforme. Individual
hospitals developed a local reputation as places where exemptions were easily
obtained, in the Somme, for example, the hopital militaire in Amiens was much
favored by the young (103). Even the doctors employed to examine conscripts
at the conseil de revision came under suspicion. In 1806 the prefect of the Vienne
drew attention to the "friponneries" committed by the medical staff on whom
the army relied. "Je les change a chaque conseil," he explained in some anguish;
"Je les prends dans toute Fetendue de mon departement, je ne previens de mon
choix que la veille, et j'ai toujours lieu de craindre qu'ils ne se laissent gagner"
(104). In the Gironde in the same year the measures taken were even more exacting, the prefect explaining that the name of the chirurgien was announced only
Desertion and Criminality / 139
fifteen minutes before the hearing, and that the doctors were always changed
daily since "celui de la veille est immediatement accable de visites et de lettres"
(105). Some doctors were themselves becoming alarmed by their new found reputation for fraud and deceit, and they accepted that the ease with which conscripts could arm themselves with conges was a reflection on the lack of scruples
being shown by their colleagues (106). There were those among them who would
agree to produce fraudulent medical certificates in return for cash payments
(107), who would distribute drugs and caustiques that could be used for enflaming open wounds (108), or whose services were so warmly appreciated by the
conscripts they examined that they could build up a wide clientele and still
charge six francs for every visit (109). Whether out of sympathy or cupidity,
doctors could always be found to conspire in frauds or help create the symptoms
of serious illnesses, and those desperate for a reforme or a conge knew that they
could enlist their aid as willing accomplices. Some conscripts even had the
effrontery to wander from medecin to medecin, systematically seeking out the
one expert opinion that would allow him to remain in the safety of his village
(110).
It was not only doctors and medical orderlies who were open to corruption.
The presence of deserters or refractories in a commune placed at risk any person
who was in an official position or who enjoyed some level of jurisdiction in matters of conscription. Money did not always change hands, although favors generally did, sometimes in kind. A huissier in Bordeaux was rash enough to accept
a case of wine in part payment for his assistance, though he later discovered that
he could not deliver his part of the deal and was driven to suicide by the shame
of threatened exposure (111). Rank favoritism could also arouse suspicions of
fraud, as when two mayors' sons in the Loire-Inferieure were both given exemptions by the conseil de revision. In such cases had not local deals been unofficially
struck among the notables (112)? Generally, however, exemptions were being
bought in the same way as medical certificates, with corruption spreading like a
cancer through some parts of the administration. No one was above suspicion,
and the courts in these years heard cases involving the bribery of army officials,
recruiting-officers, and jurymen and members of the conseil de revision (113). In
the Morbihan the syndic des marins at Locmariaquer was condemned for taking
money from the families of conscripts, "soit pour les dispenser du service, soit
pour faire cesser les poursuites contre des deserteurs" (114). The gendarmerie
were also under constant surveillance by a government that feared, often rightly,
that they were not above taking bribes in conscription cases. In Year XIII, for
instance, two conscripts who had been taken prisoner by the gendarmes in the
village of La Bastide-de-Bouzignac (Ariege) were subsequently released in return
for payment; in the men's defense it was pointed out that it was "la semaine du
