Many of the frauds committed by those claiming to befriend the conscripts
and their families were cruel and costly confidence tricks. One gang in the
Vosges peddled false papers as a lucrative sideline to their principal activities of
theft and highway robberies. For them the traffic in faux was simply another
opportunity for gain thrown up by the years of annual conscriptions (134). In
the Nord gang members scoured the countryside looking for young men of the
age and build to provide remplacements, and an almost professional trade in
remplafants was rapidly organized (135). In Aurillac swindlers were touting for
business among the country lads who had just arrived to present themselves for
their medical (136), and in Bordeaux they were waiting like vultures on the
quayside for young recruits to disembark (137). At conscription time the roads
of France were crawling with innocent and frightened young men often away
from home for the first time in their lives, fearful of the fate that lay in store for
them, and easy game for the fraudeur. In many cases the replacements they
offered failed to meet the army's specifications, or slipped away leaving the conscript to serve in person; but by then the escrocs had also disappeared, having
duped the despairing cultivateur out of his savings or his son out of his signingon bounty (138). Bars were their favorite haunts and innkeepers their frequent
accomplices. They would note the arrival of new customers, gauge the nervous
looks and youthful depression of each in turn, and allow their premises to be
used by the gangs, whose profits they would generally share in recompense. No
fraud was too unscrupulous, no victim too vulnerable. Antoine Caillet, though
physically disabled and mentally retarded, was anxious that he would be forced
to serve, and was defrauded of 1,500 livres in Valence in 1807 as the price of a
conge to which he was already entitled (139). The fact that Caillet was known to
be simple-minded merely made him a more attractive victim for deception.
If frauds of this kind were concentrated in country areas, it is because of the
desperation of peasant families to extract their sons from the draft, but also
because of the gullibility and superstition that still characterized much of eighteenth-century rural society. The fraudeur knew very well that he could play on
that gullible nature, that the innocence of country people in the affairs of the
wider world would help him trick and cheat them as he saw fit. Jean Lavigne
was one fraudeur who exploited rural credulity to the full. Armed with a forged
certificate, he toured the more remote villages and hamlets of the Aude and the
Haute-Garonne raising money for the ransom of French soldiers who were, he
revealed, being held and tortured by Algerian captors. He described their imaginary calvary in the most moving terms, appealing to "les ames sensibles" to
144 / Conscripts and Deserters
come to his, and their, assistance (140). His plea did not go unheeded. Similarly,
money might be sought in return for a magic intervention to prevent a son or
husband from drawing a low number in the tirage, for sorcery and black magic
were still a potent force in the lives of many peasant families and conscription
offered an excellent opportunity to exploit their simplicity. Nicolas Lecomte,
described as a "charpentier et marchand de vin" at Asnieres-sur-Oise, was one
trickster condemned for sorcery of this kind. A mother from the rural area
behind Asnieres complained to the authorities that she had given Lecomte 100
francs "a titre de magie pour lui faire tirer un bon numero." Unfortunately the
young conscript had drawn twenty-six and found himself in uniform, and the
embittered mother denounced the supposed sorcier for fraud despite the fact
that he had shamefacedly returned her money, and, most interestingly, despite
the violent opposition of other members of her family to any such denunciation
(141). In rural areas where tales of ghosts and devils still enjoyed wide credence,
escroquerie of this kind was legion. If the victim so desperately wanted to believe
in the cure, any story might seem persuasive. Yves Vauban, an artisan from
Saint-Amand in the Nord, swindled peasant families of some 5,000 francs over
a period of years by building up false hopes, "a 1'aide de Fesperance chimerique
qu'il leur donnait de les exempter de la conscription, leur persuadant de porter
pour cet effet une bouteille pleine d'eau et de suif et leur en faisant boire" (142).
The case of three sorciers operating in the rural Gironde illustrates the full extent
of peasant gullibility. They played mercilessly on local superstition and turned
it systematically to their profit. Two of them were former priests, itself an
undoubted advantage when they claimed magical powers of healing since the
faithful needed no further conviction. The remoter parts of the department,
noted the prefect, were full of such men, "medecins empiriques," known for
their powers to cure sterility between man and wife, or revered because they
cured "hommes et betes avec des prieres et des signes de croix." Palais, the principal accused in this case, was arrested after offering to provide conscripts with
the false symptoms of a disease that he would subsequently return to cure. His
reputation in the countryside, however, was already solidly established because
he was known as a devin with magical powers: "Pour se mettre en reputation, il
fit enlever sa femme par le diable. Elle criait de toute sa force que le diable 1'enlevait: tout le quartier accourut" (143). Village culture and popular superstition
were powerful allies forfraudeurs preying on the fears and anxieties of peasant
families.
Crimes of violence committed by deserters on the run; crimes against property by men starving and desperate; crimes of collusion perpetrated by local people who, for whatever motive, came to their aid; crimes committed at the conscripts' expense by those to whom the opportunity for personal gain seemed too
attractive to resist were all contrasting ways in which the crime rate increased
as a consequence of desertion and insoumission, especially in the countryside.
There is little doubt that thousands of crimes, mostly of a petty kind, were committed that never came to the attention of the gendarmerie. Of those that did,
many were never solved or did not lead to conviction, in large measure because
throughout the revolutionary and Napoleonic period popular sympathies
remained ambivalent, with many Frenchmen blaming the army and the politi-
Desertion and Criminality / 145
cians rather than the unfortunate young men who were enmeshed by the recruitment laws. The bulk of these crimes were, in any case, minor matters like poaching and petty pilfering which could easily be contained by the village community
itself. For the most part, therefore, the increase in criminality did little to
estrange deserters (and even less insoumis) from rural society and little to promote the cause of the army in villages lacking any esprit militaire. There were
crimes, of course, that did frighten and anger local people—rape, brutal assault,
murder or banditry that spread fear through their communities—but these were
relatively infrequent and were not the sole reserve of deserters from the armies.
The most menacing of these crimes, that of brigandage, of armed and ruthless
gangs thieving and maurauding across wide tracts of countryside, was not immediately associated in the public mind with desertion or insoumission, even
though deserters and refractories were frequently involved. In many instances,
indeed, its motive could be political as much as criminal, especially during the
White Terror that ravaged much of the Midi after thermidor and in the counterrevolutionary areas of Brittany and the West. There, religion, antirepublican
fanaticism, or simple vengeance were the most common motives for robbery
and murder. Any link with desertion might seem to be almost incidental. But
was it? It is an appropriate point to turn from the role of deserters in ordinary
criminality and to examine the part they played in the kindred activities of
chouannerie and counterrevolution.
7
Desertion and Counterrevolution
THROUGHOUT the revolutionary period republican politicians continued to
regard desertion and counterrevolution as twin manifestations of a common
mentality. Although their suspicions were absurdly exaggerated—the majority
of deserters and refractories quite manifestly had no political axe to grind—they
cannot be dismissed out of hand as nothing more than opportunist propaganda.
For the language of royalism was too often used in these years, and the white
flag of the Bourbons too persistently raised, for charges of political counterrevolution to be ignored or minimized. Besides, recent experience served as a powerful reminder of the damage that royalist loyalties could inflict on the revolutionary armies. If the line army inherited from the Ancien Regime had become
seriously depleted and demoralized by 1791, the reason was primarily political.
In the highly charged atmosphere of these early years desertions were frequently
motivated by political idealism and by attitudes to the new political order.
Among ordinary soldiers, it is true, desertion had generally reflected a reluctance
to serve under noble or counterrevolutionary officers, and the rash of mutinies
and desertions in 1789 and 1790 had more to do with patriotic or republican
loyalties than with counterrevolution. Frequently the former soldiers of the line
deserted to re-engage in the more politically committed units of the National
Guard (1). But among the officer class desertion could often be ascribed to political conservatism and to the rejection of the constitutional regime that they were
now called on to serve. Both the timing and the circumstances of their departure
imply a highly political motivation. The majority of the officers who left their
posts or who resigned their commissions did so in the months after the King's
flight to Varennes, when they were forced to take a new oath of loyalty to the
nation which made no mention of the person of the monarch. Moreover, the
King had already given them an example, and it was a route that thousands of
officers would follow in the ensuing months. Sam Scott has calculated that by
the end of 1791 some 6,000 officers had emigrated from France, often without
any formal resignation, in some instances leaving entire units without any com146
Desertion and Counterrevolution / 147
mand structure (2). Their dereliction of duty caused distrust and mutiny among
the ranks of the armies they had led, expedited a fundamental reform of the
military, and left an indelible suspicion in the minds of the political leadership.
Causes celebres like the Dumouriez affair served only to convince Republicans
that their instincts in this regard were soundly based. When counterrevolutionary movements erupted in Brittany and the West, or after thermidor in large
tracts of the Southeast and Southwest, it was only natural that they would see
in refractories and army deserters a rich vein of potential support for the insurgent cause.
The intelligence that they collected helped substantiate their suspicions and
focus their attention on the political dangers inherent in desertion and in draft
dodging. For much of the disorder and brigandage in country areas, especially
in the years that followed the dismantling of the Terror, did seem to be integrally
linked to counterrevolution and to the politics of vengeance. Armed gangs
roamed the villages and hamlets of the South of France searching out political
victims, terrifying, maiming and murdering those who had rashly agreed to
serve on the local revolutionary tribunals or committees, join battalions of the
armee revolutionnaire, or make a name for themselves as advocates of Terror at
