local auberge as the likely haunt of brigands, criminals, and men on the run from
the law. They recognized only too clearly that deserters remained at large
because of the complicity of innkeepers who failed to carry out the precise and
detailed prescriptions of the police regulations: to enter in an official register "les
noms, prenoms, qualites, domicile habituel, dates d'entree et de sortie de tous
ceux qui coucheront chez eux, meme une seule nuit." And, noted the prefect of
the Cantal rather savagely in 1808, that regulation did not apply only to innkeepers, but to anyone who offered a room to a stranger or passer-by, to those
landowners, peasants, artisans, merchants and metayers who hired labor and
who received into their own homes "comme commis, employes, ouvriers, ou
domestiques, des individus qui n'y ont pas leur domicile habituel" (42). One
result of such regulation was to give innkeepers and logeurs a responsibility that
was beyond their means to honor, since they could not always be in the bar
watching customers come and go, and had no means of checking the identity of
every stranger who entered their premises. Jean Laroussinie, an aubergiste at
Arpajon near Aurillac, was charged with recel when a deserter was found in his
bar; however, he successfully defended himself by pointing out that when the
man had arrived, only his servante was present and his wife had been away visiting a sick relative, while he himself was in another room negotiating with a
local farmer about the purchase of some corn (43). Equally, strict police surveillance of bars and inns had another effect. For aubergistes, often in breach of
the law in some other regard, could be pressured by the gendarmes into providing the information they required until they became, for all practical purposes,
police spies or informants. In frontier areas like the Nord they were a particularly valuable contact for the policing of emigres as well as army deserters, and
the local administrators deliberately put pressure on them to cooperate (44). In
this respect they were only building on well-established patterns of behavior. In
Richard Cobb's telling phrase, "the police had what no historian can acquire
unless he is working on a near-contemporary movement: experience" (45).
The systematic use of civilian informants such as logeurs and aubergistes was
one aspect of a wider approach to the policing of desertion. For throughout the
Revolutionary and Imperial period local administrators and lieutenants de gendarmerie turned increasingly to spies and agents in the local population to identify draft dodgers and those offering them protection. Their employment was
essential, it was argued, if deserters and refractories were ever to be brought to
justice, otherwise they would have every opportunity to slip off into the dense
undergrowth undetected or to seek shelter in one of the many safe houses that
existed outside the law. The prefect of the Nord put the case for espionage very
bluntly mfructidor XIII, after finding his conventional methods of policing frustrated at every turn. Policing would never produce results, he said "a moins
qu'elle ne rut puissamment secondee par des personnes apostees pour leur indiquer les traces, Fasile des delinquants, et le moment de les arreter." That in turn
196 / Conscripts and Deserters
implied the existence of a secret fund to offer payment to those who proved
helpful because assistance would not be forthcoming otherwise. The spies were
helping the government at considerable risk to themselves only in return for
cash bribes, and there was no point in pretending that the government could
appeal to their patriotic sentiment. In the prefect's words,
J'observais que Femploi de ces personnes exigeait que des fonds fussent
alloues pour les pai'er, attendu qu'elles ne passeraient pas leur temps a epier
les demarches des consents sans 1'expectative d'une indemnite. (46)
There was little self-deception on the part of the authorities. They realized that
they were appealing to the basest of motives, and the Minister was rightly cautious lest the use of espionage had the effect of turning communities against
themselves and encouraging acts of vengeance (47). For what the government
was asking was that villagers betray one another and hand over members of their
own communities to the forces of order. The failure of conventional police
methods to break the solidarity of rural society meant that deceit and treachery
were needed if recruitment policy was to have any chance of success. As the
prefect of the Mayenne admitted, it was the only means at his disposal if the law
were to be other than a complete travesty:
Ce n'est que par des intelligences secretes que je suis parvenu a mettre les plus
criminels sous la main de la justice. Us n'ont etc arretes que parce qu'ils m'ont
etc en quelque sorte livres par des habitants animes de 1'amour de la chose
publique ou excites par des recompenses. (48)
The fact that the conscripts' families were frequently at the center of the conspiracy to protect them against the law made the use of informers seem all the
more indispensable (49).
Once the principle was accepted, the reliance on spies became increasingly
extensive, and considerable sums were earmarked for undercover work of this
kind. By 1814 in the Nord it had become standard practice to allocate moneys
for secret policing in all villages where there had been evidence of sedition or
instances of rioting against the enforcement of conscription, "pour dissiper les
mouvemens seditieux" by the quickest possible means (50). Money was paid to
villagers in the Seine-et-Oise in return for what was little more than suggestive
gossip about the whereabouts of men suspected of insoumission (51). In the
Ariege, local people from the valley of Andorra were being recruited to cross into
Spain and report back to the authorities on the activities of their fellow Frenchmen, particularly those who were rumored to be sheltering on the other side of
the frontier to avoid the army (52). Where the opportunity presented itself,
deserters themselves could be most effective agents to report on other fugitives.
A battue generate in and around the commune of La Plume (Lot-et-Garonne) in
1806 achieved only a moderate degree of success, with a few arrests recorded in
an area infamous for concealing refractories. Rather than admit to failure, the
authorities changed their tactics and granted immunity to two of the young men
they had captured in return for information about the movements of their
friends (53). In another case the fact that a deserter chose to give himself up
The Build-up of State Repression / 197
voluntarily was seized on by the prefecture as evidence of his willingness to
cooperate. Philippe Duhem from Sedequin fully expected that he would be put
in prison or sent back to his regiment. He was only too eager to accept the offer
made to him, and agreed that "s'il pouvait obtenir d'etre renvoye dans ses foyers
avec un conge, il ferait arreter des conscrits refractaires" (54). It was an important breakthrough for the harassed officials, even if it also constituted a serious
breach of established police practice. In extreme circumstances military agents
were sent into the community with the express intention of winning the confidence of local people and obtaining information about the activities of army
deserters. This was most prevalent in areas of brigandage and counterrevolution
where the villagers might be too frightened to entrust their safety to gendarmes
or government officials. But the activities of men like Gely, a rather shadowy
figure used by the army in Year IV to extract news of deserters and refractories
hiding in the badlands of the Drome and the Ardeche, show the extent to which
the authorities were prepared to go to infiltrate the local community. Gely was
busily employed passing back to his military masters snippets of information
about the spots where deserters were likely to be hiding so that the divisional
commander in the Drome could take the appropriate action against them (55).
After the Concordat of 1801 ended the open rift between Church and State
that had deprived the governments of the Revolution of any assistance from the
pulpit, the Catholic church was once again available to government as a channel
of influence and information. And there is ample evidence that it was a channel
that was extensively used in the cause of bringing insoumission, in particular,
under control. This was a two-way process, with the Church once again providing spiritual guidance to the faithful on what were essentially political matters,
while certain clerics went so far as to cooperate with the authorities by furnishing
valuable information about their parishioners and their response to the law. A
compliant Church could be useful to the civil administration in so many ways,
especially where the refractory conscripts came from devout Catholic homes and
where the sensibilities of parents could be cynically played on. The clergy, moreover, were a privileged group under the Empire. Not only could the government
expect a degree of gratitude from men whose right to preach and to minister to
their congregations derived from a political decision by Napoleon, but they were
themselves exempt from military service by an Imperial decree of 1806 (56).
Portalis, as Minister for Religious Affairs (Ministre des Cultes) had no qualms
about profiting from the moral capital that this gave the state, issuing circular
letters to his bishops to remind them of their civic responsibilities. The bishops
frequently complied, using, or arguably abusing, their episcopal authority in the
interests of the Empire.
Examples abound of episcopal letters from politically committed bishops
that went far beyond their religious sphere. Writing to the cures of his diocese
in 1803, the bishop of Saint-Flour stressed that military service was a civic obligation that they should encourage families to accept if family life itself was not
to suffer. He called on the priests to make use of the special influence that they
alone could exert:
C'est a vous, que la confiance appelle si souvent dans les conseils de famille,
a faire entendre le langage de la raison et de la religion. C'est a vous a epargner
198 / Conscripts and Deserters
aux paisibles habitants des campagnes les maux incalculables qui peuvent
resulter du refus que font plusieurs jeunes gens d'obeir a la loi qui les appelle
a la defense de la patrie.
And he added, as if to seal the bond of obligation between Church and State, the
following little homily:
Et en effet nous nous devons a la patrie, c'est une verite que la raison a reconnue et que la religion consacre: nous ne saurions trop Finculquer aux fideles.
Cette patrie a le droit d'appeler ceux que leur age, leur sante et leurs forces
rendent propres a la defendre; et il est d'une stricte et rigoureuse obligation
pour tous de se rendre a cet appel. (57)
This was the kind of active cooperation that the Minister had in mind, although
sometimes the political involvement of bishops could verge on the slavish and
become almost embarrassing. The bishop of Vannes had so drilled his clergy in
communicating the policies of the government that, in the Minister's words,
"jamais je n'avais vu un concert plus unanime entre tous les ecclesiastiques"
(58). The bishop of Besangon's pastoral letters could become indistinguishable
from eulogies of the Emperor, effusive to the point of idolatry:
II en est de notre Empereur comme du soleil. Sa presence echauffe, anime tout
dans son Empire. Son eloignement y est suivi d'un certain rafroidissement.
C'est 1'hyver de certains coeurs. (59)
Individual bishops, bullied and persuaded by overanxious prefects, could exceed
their powers by threatening those members of the Church who failed to obey the
law on recruitment with spiritual as well as temporal retribution. The bishop of
