roamed the sparsely policed border area between the Drome and the Vaucluse
during the 1790s. Among them were men like Dumaine, dit Montauban, one of
Saint-Christol's chief lieutenants and a much-feared egorgeur in his own right.
His previous career makes interesting reading. In brumaire Year VI, shortly
after his death in a shoot-out with the local gendarmes, his father tried to explain
his son's involvement in political terrorism by recalling details of his childhood
and adolescence:
que jusqu'a 1'age de 16 ans il a fait tout son possible pour corriger les fautes
de son fils, qu'il n'a pas pu malheureusement en venir a bout, qu'ensuite il
s'engagea dans le regiment de Chartres... qu'a la formation des bataillons de
volontaires il se mit dans un bataillon de Vaucluse ... qu'il y a environ deux
ans il revint dans sa maison, que deux ou trois mois apres il fut arrete comme
deserteur ... qu'il desertait de Milan deux ou trois mois apres et revint chez
lui ou il ne voulait pas le souffrir... et qu'il y a environ deux mois il ne faisait
que courir d'un endroit a un autre, que depuis 1'attroupement de Saint-Christol il n'a paru que deux ou trois fois chez lui, et que toutes les fois qu'il le
voyait il le reprimandait... et s'il est mort il ne regrette pas. (86)
Yet another military career had ended in desertion, and that act of desertion had
facilitated Dumaine's relentless drift into a life of crime and antirepublican
banditry.
During the years when royalism flourished in the wilder parts of the West
and South of the country, there were few who doubted that refractories and
returned deserters played a major role in the rebel bands. In the Lozere deserters
were flocking to join bands led by royalists already under sentence of death (87);
in the Haute-Loire it was feared that as many as 1,500 jeunes gens were
involved, wandering the mountains around Monistrol "comme des chouans."
In the view of Bonnet, on mission to the area, they presented an equal threat,
given that "ils insultent et desarment les republicains; ils crient vivent les royalistes; ils maltraitent les pretres assermentes; ils ont abattu les arbres de la liberte dans Montfaucon; dans cette derniere ville un pretre a eu une oreille cou-
168 / Conscripts and Deserters
pee" (88). There were some communes where all the men listed as being
suspected of royalism were, without exception, on the run from the republican
armies. Such was the case in the village of Brax in the Haute-Garonne, where
all nine known insurges were either requisitionnaires or refractory conscripts,
including some who had held office as offiders municipaux, quite illegally, since
the time when they had avoided the draft (89). In the canton of Leguevin, whose
territory included Brax, many of those implicated in the royalist cause had previously been conscripted. Some, indeed, appeared to have divided their time
between the service of the Republic and that of the rebels, a conflict of roles that
caused them and their community little unease. The two leaders of the rebellion
were both nobles who gathered around them the refractory and malcontent
youth of the surrounding district; one was noted as "ayant garde chez lui pendant plusieurs mois des requisitionnaires et des conscrits," the other as "vivant
dans le ci-devant chateau avec ses camarades conscrits ou requisitionnaires."
Their closest helpers had had similarly checkered careers, one having held the
rank of captain in the national guard, while another had played a devious double
game while still nominally in the service of the Republic. His loyalties were
already doubtful, and "etant sentinelle a un poste avance il reconnut les royalistes et sans mot dire il les conduisit au corps de garde, qu'il n'avertit pas: ainsi
il fit prendre les patriotes et leurs armes" (90). To villagers the contradiction
implicit in such careers would have seemed unremarkable, and few would have
passed moralistic judgments on their relatives and close friends. After all, desertion and insoumission were themselves widely tolerated without reproach and
were recognized as part of the same tangled web of resistance to the government
as were royalism and brigandage and the assertion of communal traditions.
Concepts of national identity and treason were still only dimly understood.
Throughout the Revolution and for much of the Napoleonic period this was to
remain a simple fact of life in many parts of rural France that governments in
Paris seemed singularly reluctant to accept.
8
Desertion and the French Armies
THE EFFECTS of desertion and insoumission were felt most keenly by the armies
themselves. Generals and military commissaires were unanimous in their
assessment of the damage inflicted on French fighting strength by what they
termed the scourge or "fleau" of desertion. For although individual acts of disobedience might seem unspectacular, their total effect was to impose a constant
and enervating drain on military resources and to place at risk the success of
French military ambitions. By the later years of the Revolution, when desertions
were particularly endemic, the armies were both embarrassed and depleted. It
was this, not any commitment to the principle of conscription, that led to the
acceptance of the loi Jourdan in Year VI and the abandonment of any pretence
that France had a national force based on voluntary recruitment (1). Military
tactics were seriously undermined by the loss of manpower. The revolutionary
demi-brigades were supposed to be flexible and highly maneuverable forces that
could hurl themselves at the enemy and take full advantage of surprise and
speed. Yet desertions were running at such a level that, even at the height of the
Jacobin Revolution, some commanders had to admit that they had not the
resources that the tactic demanded (2). By the beginning of the Consulate
the problem had become so serious that it was costing the military, by their own
admission, some 200,000 men, many of whom were technically inscribed in
their units even though they had never left their villages. Desertion on this scale
could scarcely be tolerated year after year, conscription after conscription; it
posed a massive threat to Napoleon's soaring military ambitions. There was in
any case an increasingly serious shortage of young men, both for the armies and
for agriculture. By 1812 nearly 80 percent of young Frenchmen of conscription
age were being trawled into the military, and the total losses in dead and
wounded had reached nearly one million (3). In such circumstances desertion
and resistance became luxuries that the armies could no longer afford.
The effect on the military varied from regiment to regiment and from one
army to another. It was particularly severe in the infantry and in certain artillery
169
170 / Conscripts and Deserters
units, but relatively mild in the elite cavalry regiments (4). But in those sectors
where the habit of desertion became widely practiced, the damage done to both
military capacity and morale was acute. It was no longer a case of occasional
individual decisions to desert, but rather of collective refusals, of units that
threatened to melt away without ever firing a shot in battle. The trickle had
quickly turned into a major flow, affecting not just the soldiers themselves but
many of those engaged in ancillary services. Andre Real, on mission to the
Armee des Alpes in Year III and Year IV, reported bleakly that in some units
the majority of the men had already disappeared; desertion, he added, "a fait
des ravages effrayants dans Farmee des Alpes, soit parmi les volontaires, soit
parmi les conducteurs et charretiers des transports militaires" (5). Similarly in
the navy those workers who were drafted to serve as ropemakers and ships' carpenters joined the sailors in mass desertion, generally taking advantage of those
propitious moments when their ships had docked in other ports to make their
escape (6). Among men in the infantry regiments desertion often spread quite
uncontrollably. Of seventy-one soldiers from Aurillac despatched to Saint-Flour
in the spring of 1793, only nineteen were still at their posts by mid-August (7).
In Year II thirty-one men of the Compagnie Borel from Crest in the Drome took
a collective decision to escape and mutinied to gain their freedom. Their officers
found them in a determined mood, prepared for their long journey home with
their packs and weapons on their backs, uttering defiant threats and bloodcurdling menaces, their leaders "ayant le sabre nu a la main" (8). From the South
and Southwest in particular the stories reaching Paris were alarming and dreadfully repetitious. By the end of the decade whole armies were disappearing and
supplementary levies were made necessary because of the erosion caused by
desertion. Of the 1,300 men conscripted in the Creuse in Year VIII, for example,
only 300 found their way to their regiments (9). In the Haute-Loire nearly 1,100
members of the first auxiliary battalion deserted out of a total strength of 1,400
(10). In the Landes in Year VII, of 1,200 men who left for their units, only 60
were still in uniform after a single day on the road (11). In the following year
333 left their native Ardeche to join their assigned regiment at Dijon, but a meager 6 managed to complete the journey (12). Desertion, in other words, was no
longer the response of a small minority but was decimating the forces at the
generals' disposal. For unhappy or unwilling soldiers it had come to seem one
of the most natural courses to follow, at least for as long as the government took
no effective action to stop it. Ministers like Petiet and Scherer saw one of their
principal tasks to be the provision of palliatives, of measures that would help
the army retain its effectifs in time of war and reduce the damaging incidence of
desertion (13).
Not all desertion was as spectacular and not all was premeditated or preplanned. Men might return to their homes to say goodbye to their families or
collect personal possessions for the journey and be distracted from their duty by
the "perfides conseils" of relatives and friends (14). Or they might learn of others
who had deserted with impunity and be tempted to follow in their footsteps; but
everywhere desertion was highly infectious, spreading by the power of example.
In the words of the prefect of the Seine-et-Oise, "il ne faut que la vue d'un militaire rentre impunement dans ses foyers, sans permission, pour que tous les
Desertion and the French Armies / 171
autres se croyent autorises a en faire autant" (15). As early as 1793 some recruits
in the Drome were refusing to leave or were deserting after only a few days'
service on the somewhat spurious grounds that others had deserted before them
and that it would be an outrage to equality if they were forced to serve (16). The
military were particularly sensitive to the danger posed by the existence of so
many deserters on French territory because their mere presence helped to give
resistance an air of security and even respectability. Those already at liberty
encouraged others by their example. Frequently lads from the same village
deserted on the first or second night of the march, and once it became standard
practice to send boys from the same towns to the same units, the army was
appalled by the large-scale mass desertions that ensued. As a policy it was better
geared to curing nostalgic than to preventing desertion (17). Just as village solidarity had helped ensure that the young men left their pays in cheerful spirits,
so it allowed unhappy conscripts a degree of companionship and shared experience in their long days and nights of clandestinity. The presence of others created hope among their peers just as the departure of friends created despondency
in the regiments they left behind. In the Meuse lads from the neighboring frontier departments were wandering from village to village disguised as colporteurs,
