claimed that they were rooting out brigandage and punishing the families who
sheltered the perpetrators (81). And in the Vendee the self-righteous assumption
that all Vendeens had lent their support to counterrevolution meant that army
units felt at liberty to pillage and loot as they would in enemy territory. The
soldiers believed that they had every right to punish people whose sympathies
they condemned, and they cited the authority of the Committee of Public Safety
in their defense. The result was almost total destruction in selected areas, like
Cholet. Animals were seized, fodder looted, buildings set alight. "Le domicile
du patriote," complained the municipal council of Challans, "est pille, incendie,
comme le repaire des brigands ... rien n'a ete epargne par les militaires qui
etaient envoyes pour proteger les proprietes des bons republicans" (82).
As the war continued it is not difficult to appreciate why relations between
soldiers and civilians could become somewhat fragile, or why towns that had
not been officially designated to receive troops objected loudly when soldiers
Desertion and the French Armies / 185
were allocated to them (83). In this climate of distrust and suspicion that had
been created, deserters could rely on added sympathy, refractories shelter more
securely in the bosom of their community; and they did not hesitate to take
advantage of this new found confidence to stir up further animosity toward the
military. As for the army itself, it was well aware of the dangers that such complicity posed both for its reputation and for future recruitment. It tended to shelter behind the myth that the youth of France was naturally brave and patriotic,
and that the antimilitarism that had grown up in much of the country was the
work of malveillants. There were, in the view of one divisional commander, no
limits to the intrigues and seductions to which local communities were a prey.
False rumors were being spread to cool the ardor of the young, scare stories
about the reality of life in the regiments, lies about the imminence of peace and
the disbandment of the armies. Pity and humanity might lie at the heart of such
stories, but they did incalculable damage: "Dans quelque communes on s'apitoye sur leur sort, et pour les degouter du metier des armes on leur assure
qu'arrives aux depots generaux ils seront enchaines" (84). Sometimes the damage was more subtle and more deliberate. Villages in the Finistere where conscripts were billeted on their way to join their units were accused of abusing their
trust by attempting to spread revulsion among their young guests. Far from honoring them as the nation's heroes, they were putting temptations in their path,
"on les isole dans des fermes ou sont apostes des embaucheurs et autres gens
contre-revolutionnaires, et on les met a contribution pour leur procurer un gite
que la loi leur accorde sans retribution" (85).
The military saw it as their duty to protect young conscripts as far as was
possible from the contaminating influences of civilian society, and stressed to
the troops the perils that could result from too ready fraternization with the local
communities through which they passed. Regulations were deliberately devised
to prevent men on garrison duty from mixing too freely with the day-to-day life
of the inhabitants. Civilians found hanging around army barracks were assumed
to be up to no good. Women offering to sleep with conscripts in the towns and
villages that lay in their path were suspected of seducing them away from their
duty (86). Letters from the outside world were likewise regarded as a possible
source of contamination. The Minister of War was alarmed in Year XII to find
that men who had returned from army service to enjoy a peaceful, undisturbed
existence with their families, including many who had deserted, were corresponding with their friends in their old regiments, urging that they too should
desert, and assuring them that they had nothing to fear once they were back in
their pays (87). Letters from parents to their sons in the armies were sometimes
intercepted when it was suspected that they could be inciting disobedience, letters like those written to two young men stationed with their infantry regiment
at Blaye in the Gironde in 1814, which specifically pleaded with them to desert
and come home to help on the farm (88). The implication was quite clear that
army discipline was carefully constructed around the myth that desertion was
rare and would be severely punished, and that the puncturing of this myth, from
whatever source, would undermine morale and the strength of the armies. The
logic of this was that men should be kept as far from the contaminating effects
of civilian society as was reasonably possible so as to keep the myth intact and
186 / Conscripts and Deserters
to maintain tight control over information and propaganda. The danger of mal
du pays meant that the military tried to keep men from the same area together
in the same unit; but they were equally keen to avoid letting units remain too
close to their native village lest the temptation to desert prove overwhelming.
In Year III General Perrin expressed regret that a battalion from the Drome
would have to spend a substantial period of time on garrison duty in Avignon,
since the proximity of their homes "les engage peut-etre a s'y rendre sans s'inquieter des regies de la subordination" (89). Those local administrations on
whom responsibility fell for ensuring that their units did not desert were equally
uneasy when they were posted too close to home. Pamiers, for instance, wrote
to the military authorities in Year III to complain that volunteers from the
Ariege were being incorporated in the Armee des Pyrenees-Orientales at Perpignan instead of being sent farther afield. "La proximite de leurs foyers," they
wrote, "est la principale cause de leur desertion. II serait tres a propos de les faire
passer dans des armees plus eloignees de leurs families" (90). There seemed to
be a rare shaft of unanimity in this regard. Everyone agreed that if desertion were
not to continue to ravage the armies of the Republic and Empire, civilian and
military society must be kept rigorously separate.
As long as desertion did maintain its ravages, as long as the state failed to
convince civilian society of its military duties, the French armies necessarily
remained weakened, both numerically and morally. The lack of harmony
between civilian and military administrations was a persistent cancer in revolutionary France and one that lasted well into the Empire. And the army's image
remained to that degree tarnished in the eyes of the population at large. This in
turn had serious implications for successive levies and conscriptions and was
clearly a matter of concern to central government. It was impossible to divorce
the army from its image. Soldiering was about elan and style, a certain swagger
and bravado, and a successful army was made by more than laws and decrees.
The first volunteers back in 1791 realized this only too well. As the men of the
First Battalion of the Cantal reminded their political masters, it would take more
than the promulgation of a recruitment law to excite patriotic sentiment in the
young men of the southern Auvergne. In their words, it took fetes andfamndoles
and a certain gaiety of spirit: "Quelques volontaires, avec un tambour, des
cocardes tricolores, et la bouteille a la main, feraient plus de proselytes pour
defendre la patrie que tous les discours et lectures possibles" (91). It was a message that Paris was forced to take to heart. The image of the military had somehow to be improved, and the damage inflicted by deserters on that image to be
undone. The threat to the success of the armies was too grave and too immediate
to be borne with equanimity.
9
The Build-up of State Repression
FOR THE STATE, desertion and insoumission posed a double threat: to civil order
that emanated from the widespread defiance of the recruitment laws and the
subsequent increase in crime and counterrevolutionary activity, and to military
order that resulted from the refusal of large numbers of soldiers to serve in their
designated units. Given the scope of governmental ambitions, these were threats
that had to be taken seriously, and tolerance for deserters or respect for their
freedom of conscience were never marked characteristics of the period. The concern for the individual rights of the soldier that were so loudly vaunted in the
early months of the Revolution soon gave way to an insistence on more traditional virtues, like obedience and military discipline. In Year II Baudot might
proclaim that it was Jacobin philosophy that officers should henceforth be held
responsible for errors, not ordinary soldiers: "La democratic," he insisted,
"commande Phumanite pour le soldat et reserve la terreur pour les generaux"
(1). But if there was ever much humanity shown toward the soldier, it was shortlived. Such was governmental alarm at the rate of defiance in the ranks of the
army that the crushing of desertion and insoumission were soon counted among
the very highest objectives of the state. By Year III the "discipline consentie" of
the Jacobin years had already given way to what Albert Meynier has termed a
"discipline imposee" (2). A new disciplinary code introduced harsher penalties,
including the death sentence for a whole cluster of military offenses, such as
desertion to the enemy, abandon de paste, or the surrender of a garrison position
before it had been militarily breached (3). Desertion within the frontiers of
France generally earned five years in the hulks; desertion abroad, especially in
those cases where soldiers allowed themselves to be seduced by foreign embaucheurs, could mean a sentence of death. In Year VI alone there were 349 such
executions, with the condemned man publicly humiliated before the massed
ranks of his comrades before being handed over to the firing squad (4). Ministers
were unanimous in seeking a penalty that would deter others, so as to keep the
maximum number of soldiers at their post.
187
188 / Conscripts and Deserters
Under Napoleon penalties were stepped up further and military law was
firmly imposed, but always with that same aim of deterring waverers and supplying the generals with the largest number of active troops. Napoleon's military
code was severe, but it was not intended to repel French opinion and remained
far removed from the barbarism of the Ancien Regime. The framework of Napoleonic repression was established by the decree of 19 vendemiaire XII, which set
up eleven depots militaires for those convicted of insoumission and which established mandatory fixed penalties for both refractories and army deserters.
Refractories were given a fixed sentence of five years in one of the depots, along
with a fine of 1,500 francs; for deserters the fine was double that figure, and the
prison sentence varied according to the circumstances of the individual offense.
Recidivists, those deserting with their equipment, and those deserting on foreign
soil were condemned to ten years' boulet in the hulks, while the offense of simple
desertion incurred a two-year detention with hard labor on a public works
scheme. The death sentence was prescribed for the most serious categories of
desertion only: desertion to the enemy, desertion abroad with subsequent incorporation in an enemy unit, the leadership of a band of deserters where it could
be demonstrated that the leader induced the others to revolt, and acts of violent
insurrection by those already sentenced to the boulet against their guards or
overseers. Whereas refractories were judged by ordinary courts, special conseils
de guerre passed sentence on those charged with desertion. The distinction
between the two categories, the one defined as civilian offenders, the other as in
