breach of military law, was now quite clearly drawn. The refractories had a rigorous regime in the depots, being organized in military companies and receiving
the same bread supply and the same pay as ordinary soldiers, but deprived of
pocket money, billeted in a barracks apart from the rest of the army, denied the
right to leave their barracks except by special permission and in the company of
a sous-officier, and condemned to live on half-rations. They wore a special uniform and wore their hair especially short, performed the normal fatigues and
exercises required of other soldiers, but were required to exercise with rifles
without bayonettes for reasons of security. The convicted deserters, in contrast,
were expected to perform their military exercise and their labor without pay;
they were no longer considered to be active soldiers during the period of their
sentence (5). These penalties remained in force until 1808, when they were
increased once more, especially for the considerable number of deserters convicted for the second or third time. And in 1811 the death penalty was further
extended to cover those men who benefited from an amnesty for their crimes of
insoumission or desertion, and who subsequently deserted a second time (6). As
the armies became more and more embroiled in Russia and in the Peninsula,
Napoleon became increasingly impatient with those who left their units or who
persistently refused to perform their military service.
How effective was this legislation in persuading the public of the seriousness
of the state's resolve? Much depended, of course, on the willingness of the courts
to convict and to impose sentences that many in the local community regarded
as too severe. Since refractories were tried throughout this period before ordinary district tribunals, it was generally against them and those who had offered
them assistance that the government found it most difficult to secure convic-
The Build-up of State Repression / 189
tions. In many parts of France courts seemed less than enthusiastic in their
approach to such cases, and even when the charge involved acts of violence and
armed rebellion, local tribunals were apt to regard the outcome with supreme
indifference (7). In the Gironde there was complaints that those accused were
being acquitted because of "la funeste indulgence du jury" (8). More serious for
the government was the overall lack of cooperation in chouan country, where it
was sometimes impossible to assemble a jury of any kind, given the fear that the
journey to attend the court inspired in most potential jurors (9). Cases of
insoumission, even when aggravated by brigandage, were foundering in the
Drome because once again courts were refusing to support the government's
cause. In Year V the commissaireoflhe Directory in Pierrelatte, one of the most
lawless areas of the Southeast, protested angrily that his job had become impossible because of the protection offered by the district tribunal to those criminals
who enjoyed a measure of local sympathy. The courts, he suggested, "autorisent
les citoyens dans le refus qu'ils font de payer les impots ou d'obeir aux requisitions" (10). The irritation of officials thwarted in their attempts to secure propaganda triumphs was often evident as they lashed out angrily at the laxity with
which justice was administered. In the Pyrenees it was noted that a successful
prosecution in recruitment cases often depended on the social standing of the
family of the accused, and that in some instances the local procureurwas making
minimal efforts to bring cases to court (11). Even where the evidence against a
refractory or deserter seemed quite overwhelming, it did not necessarily follow
that he was prosecuted. Take, for instance, the case of Thelot, a requisitionnaire
deserteur arrested in the Eure in Year VIII on what looked like substantial
grounds for suspicion. For Thelot "a ete trouve saisi de trois pistolets en bon
etat et d'un poignard. II avait cinquante cartouches de calibre et une assez forte
provision de poudre. II a declare hautement qu'il etait royaliste, de la compagnie
de Huigaud et Frotte, dont il esperait de prompts secours. II a menace les citoyens qui 1'ont arrete de les assassiner s'il recouvrait sa liberte ..." (12). Yet there
seemed a real danger that he would never be put on trial, given the strength of
local sympathy and the significant fact that the director of the jury chanced to
be his father. It is little wonder that some prefects felt that their efforts were
blocked by the influence of the families of the accused, or that, in the words of
the prefect of the Cantal, "faction des tribunaux" often risked being "neutralisee"(13).
The general unpopularity of conscription ensured that local opinion could
seldom be relied on to add weight to the government's cause. Often the pressures
on local tribunals blatantly favored the accused, and there are numerous cases
in which administrators could only stand by while the spirit of the law was
flouted. Humanitarian reasons could so often be found to justify a reduced penalty or to provide grounds for acquittal, with the result, for example, that mayors
who had shown indulgence to refractories were being acquitted to the Drome on
the somewhat spurious grounds that they had done so out of pity for the accused
and not for personal gain (14). To the prosecutor such decisions constituted a
travesty of justice, with local officials and judges destroying months of careful
preparation and police work. At Douai, for instance, the civilian court had
refused to impose the death sentence that a conseil de guerre had passed five
190 / Conscripts and Deserters
years previously on a deserter who had been arrested for his part in a "rassemblement seditieux et arme" near Arras. The judges argued that that sentence had
been passed en contumace, before the accused had been captured, and that the
judgment had been given under a law that had since been repealed. But to the
military authorities it seemed like just another instance of the weakness and
indecisiveness of criminal justice where desertion was concerned (15). Such
accusations were especially prevalent in the West, where courts were reluctant
to arouse the locals by imposing harsh sentences on men who enjoyed a wide
measure of popular support. Even the prefect in Vannes was willing to reduce
the fine levied by the court on men who had deserted on their way to join their
units, "attendu que tous sont enfants de cultivateurs, fermiers, artisans, ou manoeuvres" (16). Yet by this time the courts were supposed to be imposing fixed
penalties, with crushing fines of 1,500 francs on all parents of refractaires,
regardless of their personal circumstances. In practice in the Morbihan, and perhaps elsewhere, courts were choosing to ignore that law and were allowing themselves the luxury of discriminatory sentencing. In January of 1806 no consistent
policy was being pursued by the four district tribunals in the department, for if
three of them, at Vannes, Lorient, and Napoleonville, were applying the full fine
to all those they convicted, the fourth, at Ploermel, was systematically showing
greater sympathy to its conscripts by cutting their fines to 500 francs (17).
The suspicions and anger of officialdom alighted especially on the most local
of all jurisdictions, that of the juge de paix. For he was invariably a local man,
elected by the people of his canton, and answerable to them in the exercise of
his functions. If civil courts in the districts were suspected of laxity, how much
more vulnerable to pressure and influence was the juge de paix, often isolated
among his rural community and cut off from the influence of the prefect and the
departmental administration. In some areas their elections were subject to fraud
and manipulation, and at Saint-Lizier (Ariege) it was remarked that even deserters on the run in the surrounding mountains somehow managed to cast their
votes (18). Ignorance of the law and cowardice in the face of local opinion were
the two charges most commonly leveled against the justices. In the West, where
that local opinion was frequently counterrevolutionary, this could mean that the
application of the law was being left to enemies of the revolutionary cause. The
result was highly prejudicial to the implementation of law and order, as the prosecutor at the Tribunal Criminel in Vannes explained in uncompromising terms:
Dans les campagnes la majeure partie des juges de paix est composee de
laboureurs qui en general ont ete choisis par le credit des ennemis de la Revolution. Ces juges de paix sont sans connaissance: quelques-uns savent a peine
lire et ecrire; ils ne sont pas en etat de se diriger par eux-memes. La plupart
ont ete eleves par des pretres qui ont refuse de se soumettre; ils en ont contracte les prejuges, ils se laissent diriger par 1'influence de leurs premiers
instructeurs, ils ne repondent point a ce que la loi exige d'eux. (19)
Individual cases illustrate graphically the dangers of leaving the policing of
desertion in the hands of men whose first loyalty was to their peers and to their
own community. What hope had the state of imposing fines on the parents of
The Build-up of State Repression / 191
deserters when the juge depaix himself had a son who had deserted, as occurred
at Meze in the Herault in Year IV (20)? What chance had the army of winning
public support for military justice when ajuge depaix felt free to appeal against
its rigors, attempting to overthrow a ten-year sentence on a local deserter on the
somewhat spurious grounds that he was already an experienced horseman: "II
est naturel a un excellent homme de cheval de ne pouvoir s'accoutumer aux
apprentissages durs et penibles de l'artillerie" (21)? In the Vosges one rural juge
de paix was denounced for refusing to take action against local deserters when
it was revealed that several of his close relatives were members of a deserter
band that was terrorizing the surrounding countryside (22). Another, at Marly
in the Seine-et-Oise, not only refused to charge a young man arrested in his canton without a passport, claiming to come from the depot at Courbevoie, and
bearing a certificate from a Paris hospital in the name of another conscript (all
reasons for suspicion of desertion), but went so far as to raise a collection from
local people to help him on his way (23). Ignorance, corruption, fear, and sympathy were all faults imputed by government administrators to the humble justices of the peace, all reasons why they had little confidence in their abilities and
regarded them as the weak link in the chain of judicial authority.
Suspicion of influence by the community on local justices, combined with
an increasing distrust of juries in trials involving recruitment offenses, led the
governments of the Revolution and Empire to demand greater use of military
courts and special tribunals to try major cases without recourse to a jury. The
use of the conseil de guerre to judge army deserters and those whose crimes were
committed while they were technically serving soldiers was intended to guarantee a severe and consistent sentencing policy and to avoid the intercession of
public opinion. And where conscription frauds reached epidemic proportions or
where rioting in support of deserters posed a major threat to public order—as
occurred in the Ariege in 1806 and the Nord in 1813—exceptional measures
might be taken to remove jurisdiction from ordinary criminal courts and to
establish special courts entrusted with the single goal of rooting out the cause of
disobedience (24). Punishments were intended to be severe, as a deterrent to
those in the community who were tempted to desert or to offer assistance to men
on the run. For those forging documents to deceive the authorities or offering
physical resistance to the gendarmerie, sentences often or even sixteen years of
