often placid, fatalistic and bitter. Desertion to many soldiers had the character
of an everyday incident, not a criminal act implying wickedness or the desire to
inflict harm. One young conscript, writing home from Italy in 1813, described
the shooting of one of his friends for desertion in tones of pity:
Nous avons fusille un de nos camarades et cela m'a fait beaucoup de peine,
parce qu'il n'avait pas fait du mal, il n'avait que deserte. (46)
In those few plaintive words he gave vent to the feelings of many of the men
who served the Emperor in Italy and Spain—an understanding of the plight of
deserters and of the strains that had led them to desert, a complete lack of censure or anger that they had abandoned their colors and their comrades, and a
hint of realization that the man on the peloton d'execution could so easily have
been themselves.
Desertion put military discipline at risk as well as the morale of the troops.
The cohesiveness of the units was undermined as was the authority of the officers. But, more seriously in the revolutionary period, any breach of military discipline could easily be translated into a slight or a deliberate insult directed at
the Revolution itself. The war had become by the Year II a political war, a propaganda war as well as a purely military engagement, and the political education
of the troops was one of its fundamental aspects. Addresses from the ministries
in Paris, patriotic bulletins and newspapers directed specifically at the soldiers,
and visitations from deputies on mission whose rhetoric was always political
before it was military were all reminders of the educational role that recruitment
was seen to be performing (47). Indiscipline and insubordination therefore had
implications that extended far beyond those in an ordinary army. The soldier,
after all, had rights as well as obligations; to defy military authority was a more
comprehensive act, a more deliberate political statement, when his political liberties were guaranteed by law. Saint-Just was merciless in his treatment of those
who defiled their status as soldiers of the Republic. For him the strength of the
French armies lay precisely in their political character, in "une loyaute envers
la nation ... alliee au metier de soldat de carriere" (48). He saw desertion as the
refusal, the betrayal of that loyalty to the nation, to the Republic, and to France
itself. For Robespierre the soldier's obligations were those defined by military
law. He had no right to question or to overturn military regulations or to disobey
the orders of his superior officers unless these officers strayed from the purely
military arena and tried to deprive him of his basic political rights, the rights
that were bestowed on him by his French citizenship:
Le soldat a le droit de faire tout ce que la loi militaire ne defend pas. Ainsi
qu'un soldat manque a 1'appel, a la revue, a quelque exercice, qu'il deserte un
poste ou refuse d'obeir aux ordres que ses chefs lui donnent dans 1'ordre du
service militaire, il viole la discipline, il doit etre puni selon les lois. Mais si
ces memes chefs etendent plus loin leur empire, veulent lui interdire 1'exercice
des droits qui appartiennent a tout citoyen, si un officier par exemple s'avisc
de vouloir lui defendre de visiter ses amis, de frequenter dcs societes autori-
Desertion and the French Armies / 179
sees par la loi, s'il voulait se meler de ses lectures, de sa correspondance, pourrait-il invoquer la discipline et exiger 1'obeissance? (49)
In military matters Robespierre, like any other political leader, could only lend
support to the authority of his generals and insist on the maintenance of discipline within the armies. In his own words discipline was 'Tame des armees"
without which they would be reduced to utter impotence. The denial of discipline, the encouragement of individual decision making among the soldiery or
the condoning of desertion could lead only to anarchy, mutiny or to the sorts of
problems that the Revolution had suffered at Nancy in the early days of 1790.
Desertion was perceived as a many-headed monster, attacking the armies in
various ways: depriving them of manpower, deplenishing their already overstretched stocks of arms and equipment, threatening military discipline, and
placing a strain on the continued loyalty of their troops. Just as importantly,
desertion and insoumission on the massive scale of these years put at risk the
sympathy of the civilian population for the new military institutions of the Revolution and Empire. And if the volunteer and conscript armies were dependent
on a certain goodwill from the adolescents who became their fighting strength,
so they relied on a measure of empathy from the population at large. The nation
en armes lost much of its moral authority if it was fighting against the instincts
and loyalties of its own population. Yet in many parts of the country the military
had indeed forfeited public support by the end of the 1790s, not only through
the deep-seated horror of recruitment that colored attitudes in much of the countryside, but also in response to their experience of the armies in their own communities. After ten years of war civilians knew so much more about the armies,
or at least had mental images of army life created by their own experiences or
by those of sons and brothers at the front. Men returned to their villages on sick
leave, or returned wounded and maimed as a result of military action. Others
sent searing descriptions of army life in long and self-pitying letters to parents
whom they never expected to see again. But for many Frenchmen their mental
picture of the army was that provided by the young men they met in the village
or on the farm on a daily basis, the insoumis and army deserters who had every
reason to spread tales of woe and rumors of cruelty and deprivation. The presence of hundreds of thousands of these youngsters, each with an axe to grind
against the military, was a powerful agent of antimilitary propaganda throughout the years of conscription and war.
Carefully planted rumors helped to foment these impressions, of course, and
the enemies of the government were well aware of the strength of antimilitarism
as a stick with which to beat the authorities. In the Drome in Year VII, for
instance, it was noted that "les bruits exageres" were being avidly listened to in
the villages and hamlets, especially in the pre-Alpes. These rumors centered on
the fate and poor condition of the armies, "sur le denuement absolu de nos
armees, sur Fimpunite des dilapidateurs, sur les succes de nos ennemis, sur la
penurie des bras et du numeraire" (50). Public opinion was particularly susceptible to rumors of this kind, and it was ready to believe that recruits were starved
and ill-treated by their officers, because deserters in their own communities had
done ample groundwork in preparing them for such revelations. The mayor of
180 / Conscripts and Deserters
Saint-Girons reported in July 1793 that recruitment had become impossible in
his commune after rumors had spread like wildfire about the miserable conditions of men fighting on the Spanish front (51). The local people, here as elsewhere, sympathized with the plight of their own brothers and sons and were
prepared to believe the worst of army regimentation and army discipline. Moreover, some instances of cruelty and brutality were damningly public, leaving a
damaging scar on civilian attitudes to the military. At Langon in 1808 an officer
ordered that corporal punishment be meted out to a soldier of the reserve in the
course of the periodic review of the troops, an occasion that was watched by
hundreds of local people. When they saw the unfortunate victim being beaten
with the flat edge of a sword, they reacted angrily, adjudging the treatment "avilissant" and degrading. Violence broke out between the troops and the villagers,
with blows exchanged and stones thrown (52). Similarly in 1813 a display of
brutality by officers of the Fifty-fifth Regiment in Dunkerque aroused the local
population to fury. In this instance firm discipline would seem to have merged
into ill-treatment and torture. On a public square in the town, reported the procureur, near the theater,
des officiers du 55e Regiment se sont permis pendant Fexercice de leur troupe
d'y attacher a un arbre deux consents et de torturer Fun d'eux sur le pretexte
de lui redresser la jambe gauche. Ce revoltant spectacle fixa 1'attention des
passants et attroupa les habitants du quartier et les femmes du voisinage. On
s'indigna de ces mauvais traitements, les femmes meres de famille se demandaient si leurs enfants au service de Fetat etaient traites de la meme maniere.
Plusieurs officiers se respectaient assez peu pour repondre a ces propos par de
grossieres injures, une femme fut frappee et une autre arbitrairement arretee.
II n'en fallait pas davantage pour exciter beaucoup de tumulte dans un rassemblement aussi nombreux. (53)
Officers in the new mass army could not disregard popular unease with the same
equanimity as their predecessors in the Ancien Regime had done, for public
opinion now affected the army, and incidents of this kind only served to
strengthen the bonds that shielded deserters from arrest and denunciation. Too
often isolated cases of abuse or tales of cruelty took their toll on public sympathy
and undid much of the effect of revolutionary and Napoleonic propaganda
about the national interest and military heroism. When the body of a young
soldier was found hanging from a tree near Bordeaux in 1811, his fellow villagers
shared in his despair and immediately assumed that he had been repelled by
army life and driven by the army to seek escape in suicide (54). They did not
stop to question this assumption. To them it was glaringly obvious that the degradation of life in the camps and the savage discipline of the officers bore total
responsibility for his untimely death.
Deserters did not single-handedly create a crisis for the armies or turn
domestic opinion against the military. Rather they were one ingredient in a complex potpourri of attitudes and experiences. Relations between the army and the
civilian population of France were always fluid and uncertain. Like all armies,
the men in the colors of the Revolution and the Empire could both stimulate
Desertion and the French Armies / 181
pride and patriotic enthusiasm and cause untold misery and grief among those
they met. They were young, buoyant, and often belligerent; they became drunk
and violent; they left trails of human devastation in the form of broken hearts
and unwanted infants. The relationship between the military and the towns in
which soldiers are billeted is never an easy one, and the points of maximal tension were usually to be found in garrison towns along the frontier and in the
various villes etape that they used along their route. Local people were quick to
complain when they felt that their interests were being affected adversely. At
Montelimar it was noted rather sourly that the regular passage of men on their
way to the Armee d'ltalie put intolerable pressure on meat supplies and forced
local people to go hungry (55). In rural parts of the Drome soldiers were held
responsible for an alleged deterioration in moral standards. After two decades
of exposure to troop movements, the women of the area were turning to prostitution in alarming numbers, assured of a welcome supplement to their meager
income whenever a new regiment was passing. There was, it seemed, little that
could be done to check the spread of this trade, for the "filles et femmes de
mauvaise vie" had become by 1811 "comme des insectes que la saison enfante
par milliers"; even the local cures had declared themselves unable to suggest a
solution (56). It is true that the army could be terribly insensitive in its relations
