Mende, for example, at the bidding of the prefect, urged his clergy to refuse the
sacraments to any family that contained refractory conscripts and that failed to
hand them over to the civil authority. In 1813 the prefect reported to the Minister of the Interior that the bishop was wholly devoted to the government's
cause, that: "J'ai trouve dans Monseigneur PEveque et son clerge le veritable
esprit que la Religion commande, 1'amour du Souverain et le desir que les loix
soient executees" (60). Fortunately, perhaps, Paris did not share his enthusiasm
and ordered him to restrict himself to measures sanctioned by the law. To withhold holy communion might only serve to stir up hatred of the regime, and if
the bishop's instruction were followed to the letter, it would undermine the purpose and authority of the priesthood (61).
The government sought to take advantage of the trust in which the cure was
generally held, at least in strongly Catholic communities, to harness public support for the recruitment effort and to root out families who were supporting
refractories. Cures could and did help in a number of different ways. In country
areas their literacy and level of education commanded a degree of respect which
in turn gave their words an added element of leverage (62). Their prestige
stemmed also from the almost superstitious acceptance by many peasants that
the priest and he alone held the key to their salvation; it was not for them, there-
The Build-up of State Repression / 199
fore, to challenge his wisdom or judgment. Consequently the involvement of the
cure with every stage of the recruitment process, from the initial conscription
meeting to the police activity against the recalcitrant, gave a moral authority to
the interest of the state. In the diocese of Vannes the priest had, at the bishop's
prompting, assumed the symbolic role of officiating at the tirage and accompanying each of his parishioners to the cantonal meeting that would determine his
fate (63). The clerical presence was equally strong in other parts of Brittany,
notably in the villages around Rennes, where the priests would again identify
with the conscripts and their families by saying mass early in the morning of the
recruitment meeting, "une messe de tres grand matin qu'ils ont appelee la messe
de la reunion" (64). In this way the whole process of conscription was sealed
within the Christian symbolism and familiar ritual of Breton village life. Pastoral visits were organized in such a way as to alert the clergy to the ways in
which they could give active assistance to recruitment. The efforts of the archbishop of Bordeaux in the rural areas of the Southwest, for instance, were
deemed to have "bien dispose les esprits" in villages whose sympathies had previously seemed to veer in the support of refractories (65). Increasingly, indeed,
priests were urged to involve themselves and their clerical office in what
amounted to acts of policing. One cure in the Aveyron used his authority to lure
conscripts out of their hiding-places so that he could hand them over to the military (66). Another, in the Morbihan, so impressed his congregation with his
sermon on the moral perils of insoumission that one of his parishioners
approached him at the door of the church to turn in his son (67). Such behavior
endeared itself immediately both to Portalis and to the Emperor himself. In the
diocese of Vannes, the Minister told Napoleon with obvious pride, "les cures et
desservants etaient en usage de se reunir alternativement, les uns chez les autres,
pour y precher 1'amour du gouvernement, la soumission aux lois, et les devoirs
religieux" (68). One does not have to be deeply devout to find the order of priority of these goals rather interesting.
Antoine-Xavier Pancemont, the bishop of Vannes between 1802 and his
death in 1807, committed his clergy so wholeheartedly to the cause of the First
Empire that he could with some justice be described as a government agent in
the troubled West of France. One of the first bishops to be appointed after the
Concordat, he was very clearly a political nominee, in his minister's words,
"eclaire et vertueux et plein d'admiration pour le Premier Consul" (69). This
meant that he combined his episcopal duties with a policing role in the West
directed equally against deserters and refractories, chouans and the supporters
of the Petite Eglise, a role that gained him such notoriety among some at least
of his flock that he was kidnapped and held for ransom by chouans in the summer of 1806. Significantly, one of the demands of the kidnappers was that the
bishop's ring and the croix de la Legion d'Honneur which the Emperor had
bestowed on him should be surrendered to them, a gesture indicative of their
contempt for both his spiritual and his temporal activities in his diocese (70).
When his work on behalf of the government is examined, their contempt
becomes easy to understand. For the bishop was systematically supplying to Portalis, and through him to the government, detailed information about the political activities of local communities. Suspects were identified by name in his pas-
200 / Conscripts and Deserters
toral reports, and conversations overheard in bars and markets were reproduced
verbatim for the minister to read and act on (71). The haunts of deserters and
counterrevolutionaries were indicated to the Minister, with a recommendation
that they be visited or even demolished; demolition, he implies, would be a final
solution to the problem of lawlessness that they constituted and a lesson to others in the neighborhood (72). In particular, Pancemont saw it as his role to educate his people in their civic duty as regards conscription. Indeed, such was his
enthusiasm for the Imperial armies that his "excellent" pastoral letter on the
subject was published in full in the Moniteur. "Est-ce blesser la loi de Dieu de
se soustraire a la conscription militaire?" asked the bishop rhetorically; "la
reponse est 'oui' categorique" (73). He was quite aware of the value of the information he supplied, and seems to have attached no conditions to his service.
On one occasion he went so far as to offer advice on the most promising policing
tactics that might be adopted, sharing with his minister not only his intelligence
about deserters' whereabouts but also his specialist knowledge of the difficult
terrain of the rural Morbihan. Fully conscious of the fact that his reports on
supposedly spiritual matters were being passed directly from the Ministre des
Cultes to his colleague at Police generate, Pancemont offered counsel on
improvements of technique that would greatly strengthen policing in these isolated village communities along the south Breton coast. Existing practice, he
explained, was just too obvious, and suspects were able to read the gendarmes'
intentions far too readily. For
on arrive dans une commune le soir, et on ne fait les visiles que le lendemain.
On ne visite pas avec assez de soin I'interieur des maisons isolees. On met
trop de regularite dans des recherches qui devraient etre faites, coup-sur-coup,
et au moment ou on y pense le moins. On n'a pas la precaution de faire
deguiser ceux qui font ces recherches. (74)
It is not an exaggeration to describe part, at least, of the function of this bishop
as that of a police spy, working through his contacts and confidences on behalf
of the Imperial regime. He was particularly assiduous in matters of conscription,
and in several instances seemed intent on turning his cures into gendarmes in
the pursuit of refractories. In fact, he had a number of spectacular successes: the
cure of Le Faoue't encouraged thirteen conscripts to submit, the cure of Pontivy
a further sixteen, and, most triumphantly of all, the cure of Grandchamp, in the
notoriously recalcitrant landes of the Morbihan, persuaded twenty-one young
conscripts to give themselves up and accept the necessity of army service (75).
Of course Pancemont was in no sense typical of the Napoleonic episcopacy,
though others, like the bishop of Saint-Brieuc, also deemed it their duty to keep
the government intimately informed of the activities of local chouans (76). But
Pancemont's career does indicate how very valuable the restored church could
be in the policing of conscription and the supply of privileged information.
The use of spies and agents in this way might pinpoint the whereabouts of
deserters or demonstrate the existence of particularly troublesome communes.
Rarely, however, could it effect arrests or eliminate refractories. For that purpose
the state needed to have at its disposal an efficient and well-drilled police force
The Build-up of State Repression / 201
to act on information received and provide an element of repressive force. In
the eighteenth century the capture of deserters had been one of the principal
tasks allotted to the marechaussee, the uniformed force that assured such policing as there was in rural areas of the country. In terms of Choiseul's instruction
of 1767, the top priority of the cavaliers was to patrol main roads and ensure
safe communication between different parts of the kingdom. Such patrols had
three main functions: to ensure the safety of travelers and the transport of tax
receipts, but, first and foremost, to capture deserters (77). Equally, as they were
a military force subject to the control of the Minister of War, they were liable to
be called on to perform purely military functions, from running the military
postal service to disarming the civilian population in times of emergency (78).
This is not to say that they executed these tasks efficiently. The archives of the
Ancien Regime are well stocked with complaints from the provinces about the
inadequacy of the marechaussee, the effects of its venality, and the glaring contrast between what it was expected to do and what its meager resources allowed
it to achieve. In contrast to the city of Paris, widely believed to be the bestpoliced city in the eighteenth century, country areas were sadly neglected (79).
The strength of the total force from the ordonnance of 1720 until the Revolution
was seldom more than 3,500 men. Pay and conditions were just about enough
to place the average cavalier above subsistence level, and morale was generally
very low. From 1778 entry into the force was restricted to those who had already
served for at least sixteen years in the army, which had the result of excluding
many good recruits and turning the force into a sort of reward for loyal and
active service with the military (80). When the revolutionary government abolished the marechaussee in 1790 and offered to replace it with the gendarmerie
nationale, there were few tears or remonstrances. For many people it seemed as
if the problems of an undermanned and disspirited police force were finally to
be put to rest.
How far were these hopes realized? The numbers of gendarmes were certainly greatly increased, but so were the numbers of missions on which they were
sent, with the result that the problem of undermanning did not instantly disappear. Like their predecessors, the gendarmes were divided into small units of
five or six men, brigades generally under the command of a brigadier, to maintain order along highways and at markets and fairs. But the work they were
expected to cover, especially once war had been declared, multiplied out of all
proportion to their numbers. It was the gendarmes who in most cases were
expected to hunt down deserters and break up brigand bands aside from their
normal policing duties. It was a heavy load of responsibility, spelled out carefully by the Minister of the Interior to the departments of France in Year VI.
He described the "attributions de la gendarmerie" as
"la repression du vagabondage et de la mendicite, la visite des passeports, la
surveillance des routes et des campagnes, 1'escorte des deniers publics et des
