hard labor were common in 1806 and 1807, as the prefect instructed the judges
in Foix to purge the department of conscription conspiracies (25). Conseils de
guerre were also well-known for their lack of sympathy with those who deserted
from the armies, and the government could generally rely on the seasoned military men who handed out justice to view the crime with a clear perspective.
Military judges suffered none of the conflict of loyalties that marked their counterparts in civil courts, and the sentences passed reflected this single-minded
concern for the welfare of the armies and dedication to the interests of the state.
Their jurisdiction was a wide-ranging one, involving crimes of any kind committed by serving soldiers or those who worked for the armies and therefore
came under military discipline. As early as Year III the law established their
competence, so that "tout delit commis par un militaire, ou par tout autre individu attache aux armees ou employe a leur suite, sera juge a 1'avenir par un
192 / Conscripts and Deserters
conseil militaire." Accordingly, as the Minister of Justice explained, "quelque
soit la nature de delit, quelque soit le lieu ou il est commis ... il est juge par un
conseil militaire; il suffit que ce soit un militaire pour que la poursuite du delit
soit faite devant un conseil militaire, car Farticle est sans exception" (26). As a
result, where members of the same bande included both deserters and civilians,
the same crime could be pursued before very different courts, and the sentences
imposed varied considerably. Those who were judged by a conseil de guerre were
frequently given savage sentences of hard labor or even death, whereas their
fellow-accused were being lightly treated at the hands of civilian courts. Ironically, this often proved even more of an embarrassment to the army than the
leniency of local judges, since those receiving severe punishments were liable to
appeal and have their sentences quashed on the basis of parity and the dictates
of natural justice (27). In general, however, the government was well content
with the performance of the conseils, which could be depended on to carry out
national policy and apply the standard recommended penalities (28). In the eyes
of the public at large, however, they acquired a reputation for harshness and
arbitrariness, to the extent that even the threat of the conseil was sufficient to
persuade deserters to return to their units (29). Even government officials occasionally hesitated before referring cases to military justice. At Bazas in Year IV
the commissaire du Directoire executif, considering a case in which two local
lads had fired on the gendarmes to try to free a friend arrested for desertion,
conceded that the offense merited military judgment but held back from signing
the necessary order. For even he had no desire to see them shot:
Les faire juger militairement, cependant, ils ont de grands risques a courir, et
la peine de mort est la. Tout bien considere, j'aimerais mieux en faire des
soldats vifs que des soldats morts. (30)
In a letter to the department of the Gironde some weeks later he was to emphasize the same point, that on no account should soldiers be lost to the Republic
through the over-zealous demands of military law (31).
If tribunals were used by the government to punish deserters and to deter
their comrades-in-arms, they were effective only in cases where the offender had
already been arrested and could be brought to trial. Therein lay the government's biggest single problem, as is witnessed by the high percentage of judgments handed down par contumace in the absence of the accused, who must be
presumed still to have been at liberty in his village or in some mountain retreat.
The most effective method of dissuasion for the thousands of young deserters
and insoumis who risked retribution from the courts was less the example of a
few severe sentences than the near certainty that their offense would not go
unpunished. It is no accident, therefore, that the bulk of government activity
over recruitment was directed at the policing of the levies, ensuring that the
young men of each classe were informed of their duty, that they turned up for
medical inspection and for the tirage, left their village on the designated day,
and duly completed the journey prescribed in their feuille de route to reach their
regiment. This was a task that demanded keen vigilance and close policing of
The Build-up of State Repression / 193
the community and that could not be properly executed without a well-defined
administrative structure.
The recruitment procedures, as we have seen, became increasingly centralized as time passed, with authority being transferred from the individual
mayor—on whom the onus of preparing the first revolutionary levies had
rested—to the sous-prefet and the conseil du recrutement (32). Of course, there
was never any possibility of excluding the village mayor from the recruitment
process, if only because he alone could provide invaluable information about
the personal lives and circumstances of those called, and he alone kept the rolls
of the etat civil in the local community. But his part in the procedures of conscription was systematically cut back, with authority passed first to the canton,
then to the arrondissement, where the young man's fate was decided by the conseil presided over by the subprefect himself (33). In Napoleon's eyes this was a
way of eliminating the local variables that had so bedeviled the first conscriptions—the favoritism shown to certain individuals, the lack of understanding of
the height and health regulations, the refusal of individual mayors to cooperate
in the recruitment operation. In this way, too, it was believed that the multiple
opportunities for fraud that had led to so many mayors being put on trial in
some parts of the country would be ended. It is true that a few sous-prefets were
to be implicated in fraud and a number of prefects dismissed for the failure to
fill quotas (34); but the chain of administrative command was clearer, the loyalties of the officials undivided, the air of bureaucratic efficiency, and above all
of simple normality, finally achieved. If it did not end conscription problems,
the administrative centralization of the Empire certainly played a major part in
accustoming a reluctant and sometimes rather bemused population to the cold
facts of their civic obligation. It is a case where administrative reform must itself
be seen as a part of the policing process. So, indeed, must certain of the policy
decisions taken with regard to the operation of conscription. The decision, for
instance, to levy the Vendee and the rebel areas of the West at a lower rate than
the rest of France was, as Jean Tulard recognizes, in essence a simple policing
measure: "pour desarmer 1'opposition, Napoleon epargne la Vendee: le poids de
la conscription y est moins lourd que dans le reste de 1'Empire; pour la surveiller,
il decide la fondation d'une ville au coeur meme de la Vendee et choisit en 1804
le site de La Roche-sur-Yon a la limite du bocage" (35). It was, in other words,
less a question of principle or of equity than a policing device, a contribution to
the program of pacification in the West. In the same way, the decision to reintroduce remplacement in the months following the Loi Jourdan, and subsequently to extend the scope of the law on replacements and substitutes, must be
seen as a means of appeasing the wealthier sections of the community, again, as
a device to help in the policing of recruitment (36).
Effective policing of this kind was doomed to failure unless the departmental
administrations received a flow of information about the whereabouts of refractories and the people who were offering them protection. The capture of deserters was largely dependent on such help, and if insoumission were ever to be
broken, the authorities knew that they had to establish good relations with at
least sections of the local community. In part the information they required
194 / Conscripts and Deserters
could be obtained by bureaucratic means, forcing everyone to register at the
mairie and to carry official identification whenever they were away from their
village. The law of 10 vendemiaire IV laid down the terms on which strict surveillance of individuals' movements could be maintained. It stated explicitly
that "nul individu ne pourra quitter le territoire de son canton sans etre muni
et porteur d'un passeport, signe par les officiers municipaux de la commune ou
de Fadministration municipale du canton" (37). In this way the mayor and local
council were obliged to cooperate in providing the infrastructure of police activity, or opened themselves to prosecution for failing in their duties or committing
acts of forgery. Once the principle of annual conscription had been accepted, the
policing of the young became much easier, as anyone who looked as though he
might be of conscription age was liable to be stopped and interrogated as a possible suspect. Harvesters and casual workers who could not easily get their credentials checked by members of the local community were particularly prone to
arrest, though anyone who was young and male was vulnerable to police interest,
especially at those moments when Napoleon was calling up the reservists of the
previous years. Often the interest was aroused by the conscript himself and by
his behavior when the troops or gendarmes approached the village. Such was
the case of Pierre Teychenne, a deserter from the depot at Perpignan, who ran
away when he saw the gendarmes on the road from Rimont to Serres in 1808
(38). Others arrested, however, were innocent farmworkers who just happened
to be young. At Sartrouville in the Seine-et-Oise in Year VII where, in the words
of the juge de paix,
Deux jeunes gens revenant de la moisson, 1'un se disant etre Etienne Sers, age
de vingt-quatre ans, et 1'autre Maximilien Serre, age d'environ vingt ans, one
etc arretes ce matin par la garde nationale et conduits a la maison communale
ou ils resteront jusqu'a ce que vous ayez certifie que ni Fun ni Fautre n'appartiennent a un corps militaire ou ne sent pas designes par les lois pour en
faire partie. (39)
The insistence that ordinary citizens carry papers and produce them on demand
effectively placed the onus of proof on the individual and provided the authorities with a powerful channel of information about the age, commune of residence, and military record of the young.
Information could also be gleaned from people over whom the administration had some control, whose cooperation they were able to obtain by a mixture
of threats and inducements. Such people included prostitutes, always operating
outside the law and dependent on police tolerance if they were not to spend long
months in the depot de mendicite or local hopital. The police knew very well
that prostitutes flourished in periods of war, taking full advantage of the passage
of troops through previously peaceful communities and providing deserters with
both sexual favors and a safe dwelling-place for the night. Down the Rhone valley it was noted that by 1811 "les poisons de la prostitution ont gagne les campagnes ... le mal est devenu si grand que la cure en est regardee, pour ainsi dire,
comme impossible " (40). Yet what for the health of the community might seem
to pose a considerable threat provided the local police with valuable contacts in
The Build-up of State Repression / 195
their campaign against desertion and brigandage. Similarly, the authorities
could bring direct pressure to bear on innkeepers and lodging house owners
through their control of the patente that allowed them to remain in business and
to sell food and drink (41). In their quest for deserters, just as in the policing of
other marginal and itinerant groups, the police turned instinctively toward the
