deserters opened themselves to the charge that their appropriation of state property amounted almost to wholesale looting. Horses, always marketable in country areas, were particularly favored by those fleeing from their regiments because
they both helped the initial escape and raised revenue once a safe distance had
been reached. In peasant France there were few who could not be tempted by
the opportunity for a bargain where livestock was concerned, and horse fairs
were notoriously corrupt, the natural habitat of thieves and swindlers. The large
numbers of horses maintained by any regiment during this period created an
obvious focus for temptation, especially in those moments when discipline
became lax in the French ranks. In 1793, for instance, dragoons from the Third
Regiment of the Nord were known to be circulating among the fairs and markets
of the country around Avesnes offering army horses for sale, using deceit and
cunning to persuade potential purchasers of their integrity. In the words of the
departmental authorities, angered by the suggestion that their fraud was being
Desertion and the French Armies / 175
in any sense condoned by officialdom, they "ont la bassesse de vendre leurs chevaux et leurs equipages, sous le pretexte qu'ils sont desertes de 1'ennemi ou la
lache trahison de Dumouriez les avait conduits" (32). Some deserters, more brazen than others, set themselves up in trade on the basis of their thefts, apparently
using the camouflage that this gave them to avoid suspicion and possible arrest.
One man who worked in the army stables had taken full advantage of his position of trust. When he was arrested, again near Avesnes in Year II, he had three
army horses in tow and three foals that he had been in the process of training.
In addition, he had the bridles and harnesses for the animals, also a very valuable commodity, and a wide range of assorted booty plundered from military
stores:
Sur deux desquels chevaux etaient deux grands sacs, dont un contient du
houblon et 1'autre des linges, habillements de femme et d'enfant et deux tentes
que nous ignorons si elles servaient a 1'usage des Republicains francais ou des
Autrichiens. (33)
He looked, in other words, less like a deserter from the Armee du Nord than a
bona fide merchant, making his rounds of the local markets and livestock fairs.
The losses that most alarmed the military were those of firearms and ammunition, which remained in short supply throughout the greater part of the war
and which at times undermined the effectiveness of individual units and threatened the security of particular fronts. For the man on the run from authority,
the advantage that a rifle or shotgun gave him was not in doubt. He had an
immediate means of self-defense, it deterred the officious bystander who might
have been tempted to curry favor by turning him over to the gendarmes, and,
like other pieces of equipment, it had an instant market value when the need for
food or money became too great to bear. The army conscript, unless he deserted
in the first hours of his service, would have benefited from some basic training
in its use. The possession of a gun not only frightened others, it boosted his
morale and gave him a degree of status in the rather macho world of peasant
France. The law on the possession of firearms was precisely framed to limit the
potential damage to public order. In the Dordogne in Year XII, for example,
ordinary citizens could not freely carry guns and rifles around the countryside
on the pretext that they needed them for hunting; only gardes-champetres and
national guardsmen enjoyed that privilege. For others the privilege was conditional on obtaining a certificate from the local mayor, who was in turn restricted
in his largesse. He was allowed to give permits only to landowners and other
citizens who had fixed residence in his commune and were "d'une solvabilite
notoire," and before being valid these permits had to be countersigned by the
chief of the local gendarmerie (34). The authorities were well aware of the threat
to security posed by the large number of armed soldiers who had taken refuge
in the countryside, of men sufficiently desperate to use their weapons if they
were cornered or threatened with exposure. They also recognized that hunting
parties were often little more than a cover for other crimes, that "le delit de la
chasse n'est souvent que le pretexte et 1'occasion de crimes" (35); however, in
practice little was done to restrict the established freedom of the countryman to
176 / Conscripts and Deserters
carry a shotgun and defend his property. Large-scale desertion in an area simply
increased the already sizable number of firearms in circulation and opened the
countryside to greater violence and lawlessness. In parts of France close to military fronts vast arsenals of weapons were soon circulating from hand to hand,
sold by fleeing conscripts to local villagers "qui les ont metamorphosees en
armes de chasse," with an immediate effect on the level of poaching in the vicinity (36). Demand seldom slackened. As soldiers passed through villages and
hamlets they were frequently importuned by local people seeking to buy guns
and cartridges for purposes that almost certainly were not permitted by law. In
the West, indeed, it was suspected that purchases from impoverished deserters
were going straight into the armories ofchouans and royalists, even if the actual
purchaser might seem innocent of any political involvement (37). Unscrupulous
merchants quickly realized that this was a market they could turn to their advantage. When a gunsmith's shop at Nivelles in the Nord was raided by police in
1814, it was discovered to contain an Aladdin's cave of military equipment,
bought cheaply from deserters and offered for sale to the village community.
Among these trophies were an unworn gray military greatcoat and a pair of
white army trousers. The arsenal of stolen weapons included rifles of both
French and foreign manufacture, pistols and shotguns, a total of 216 firearms in
working order and suitable for the defense of France (38). Human greed ensured
that there would always be gunsmiths ready to exploit the insatiable appetite of
rural society for shotguns and other weapons. And deserters would always be
tempted to risk the higher penalty that desertion with their rifles generally
incurred.
If the general staff was concerned by the cumulative effect of all these losses
on the capacity of the army, it was equally alarmed by the implications of largescale desertion for those soldiers who were left behind. For the serious immediate effect of losing comrades through desertion was not to strengthen the determination of those still in the ranks, as army propaganda liked to pretend, but
rather to corrode what morale existed among the soldiery. The fact that others
were leaving seemingly freely for home only served to remind the men who
stayed behind that they were also homesick and wanted to see their families.
They too longed for the open road, for the smell of cut hay on their farm and
the open skies of their pays. To many young conscripts service was bearable only
because it was a shared experience first and foremost with others from the same
villages and same valleys. Companionship was the more vital in that so many
of the normal creature-comforts were denied them. In their letters home from
the front, it is striking how often it was the other lads of the village about whom
they craved news and gossip—seldom the girls (39). The army as a social unit
depended so utterly on adolescent male sociability, and when they were
deprived of their friends, either through maneuvers or death or desertion, the
crippling effect on their morale was felt. Lads from the Drome condemned to
the hostile landscape of Savoy in 1813 made their dependence on one another
very clear in their hastily written notes to their parents. Jean Chuilon made no
pretense that the soldier's life had any appeal for him. In "ce maudit pays de la
Savoie" he had been exposed with the others to an endless series of deprivations
and degradations. "Nous y avons ete loges comme des pauvres malheureux," he
Desertion and the French Armies / \ 77
wrote, "dans les ecuries avec les animaux, sans draps ni couvertures, en un mot
dans toutes sortes de saloperie." But he found solace in the company of others
from his pays, including twenty-two from his own rural canton, a fact that gave
him strength in even the most taxing conditions (40). Equally, it was when this
source of reassurance was removed that the soldier became most inconsolable,
most destructively grognard. When Louis Berton from near Crest found himself
separated from his friends from home, he was miserable and dejected. It was
then, for the first time, that he began to curse his luck in being incorporated, to
admit to his parents and anyone else who would listen that "si j'avais scu
comme il se passe dans 1'etat militaire, jamais je n'auray parti" (41). The desertion of a soldier's friends made him want to desert and certainly made him
unwilling to play the part of a dutiful and cooperative soldier. It evoked wails
of distress and self-pity from men who saw no future for themselves but drudgery, discipline, disease, and probable death far from their farms and families.
Soldiering, wrote Francois Crosnier in 1811 to his parents back in the Oise, was
"le plus triste sort que Ton puis avoir dans le monde. Car je donnerais bien la
moitie de ma vie pour en etre sorti ..." (42). Of course those with a grudge
against the Revolution could make mischief with such sentiments and could stir
up a sense of revolt; but the demoralization often ran deeper. As Claude Petitfrere has rightly noted in the context of Toulouse in 1793, "ces abandons ne
manquent pas d'avoir une consequence deplorable sur le moral des soldats
restes fideles" (43).
This in turn made it difficult for the French armies to deal effectively with
the problem of desertion in their own ranks. How severely could they afford to
repress cases of desertion a I'interieur, where the security of the troops was not
directly affected and where no charge of treason could be brought? If they
repressed too enthusiastically, there is little doubt that they would have lost the
sympathy of the majority of the men who were, even in normal circumstances,
dangerously reluctant to condemn those of their number who abandoned their
posts. It was a source of intense embarrassment to officers who had to walk a
very thin line between imposing strict discipline and antagonizing the opinion
on which they remained dependent for their success. Though attitudes became
visibly fiercer as the war continued, there was an understandable reluctance to
impose the sort of harsh sentences that would recall the hussards of the Ancien
Regime (44). In any case, it was not always easy to get such a rigid and penal
approach implemented, as the troops responsible for arresting fugitives and
bringing them to justice were themselves less than enthusiastic about the role
they were expected to play (45). Increasingly, as is well documented, deputies
on mission and conseils de guerre did attempt to deter others by meting out
exemplary justice, by ordering individual deserters to be shot in front of their
comrades as a means of encouraging the patriotism of those who remained. Terror of this kind, however, could be terribly counterproductive in a force in which
commitment and morale were so very vital to performance and self-sacrifice.
The troops lined up to witness the execution of one of their number for abandoning his unit did not necessarily cheer the firing squad or rally to a rousing
chorus of a patriotic anthem. In the eyes of many of these youngsters the penalty
exacted was out of all proportion to the crime, and while the sight of an execu-
178 / Conscripts and Deserters
tion might indeed deter others as the generals intended, their acceptance was
