offering the young men of the country areas a job and a guaranteed wage if they
would join them (18). At Douai deserters were blamed when an anticonscription
pamphlet was posted in the town outside the inn on the very day of the tirage
in 1807, warning the local population that "on fait la guerre aux peres de famille,
on mene nos enfants a la boucherie" (19). The armies were aware that desertion
had to be curbed if an example was not to be given to the next generation; in
the context of rural France especially, desertion could so easily foster more
desertion.
The loss to the military was not confined to the loss of manpower, serious
though that was. Other men could, after all, be conjured up through the unpopular device of supplementary levies, or by forcing communes to provide replacements. Under Napoleon such measures were resorted to year after year, but at
a very considerable price to local communities, to farming, and to the economy.
If the men replaced were deserters hiding in the hills or insoumis living precariously on the edge of their communities, the economic contribution that they
could make in no way compensated for the loss that the removal of others in
their place—in almost every case young, capable peres de famille who had benefited from exemption or had been placed in the reserve—necessarily implied.
There was an economic cost to be paid, and it was the local civilian population,
not the army, that had to pay it. That is not to say, of course, that the army did
not in turn suffer from this policy. As farming areas never tired of reminding the
government, it was they who produced the foodstuffs that the military relied on,
at least during their periods on French soil. Poor harvests and high prices had
the most deleterious effect on the value of the French battalions as fighting units
(20). And the replacement of the deserter with a man of similar age and physical
strength, if we assume that the law was carried out to the letter, did not compensate for the months or even years of training that had been lavished on him.
Especially as the armies became more professional and relied less on the massed
attacks of the Revolutionary years, training and tactical instruction were impor-
172 / Conscripts and Deserters
tant to their efficacy as fighting units. A man with some years' experience was
more useful to his commanders, more prepared for the ardors of warfare, and
less fearful and panic-stricken in battle than the raw recruit being blooded in his
first campaign. It was for this reason that generals were so loath to release seasoned veterans after years of service, and that the military sacrifice demanded
of young soldiers so often appeared despairingly open-ended. For this reason,
too, they continued to see the desertion of trained infantrymen as a crippling
blow to their fighting strength.
Desertion affected not only the strength and experience of an army as a fighting unit, but also the key support services that were necessary to success in the
field. If the army relied on its active combatants, it also required regular and
guaranteed supplies of food and clothing, arms and munitions. The provisioning
of a military effort on the scale of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars
demanded a level of mobilization in the community as a whole that was without
precedent. It demanded the requisitioning of carts and barges, the call-up of carters and boatmen to steer and drive them. It required horses both for fighting and
for transport duties. It demanded the mobilization of gunsmiths and millers,
seamstresses and hatters; they, too, were an essential part of the militarization
of France. When farmers refused to turn over their horses to the army, when
carters squabbled about payment and sulked in their villages, when administrative bungling or public bankruptcy prevented uniforms from being ordered or
delivered, it was the troops and their welfare that inevitably suffered. In Year II
each of France's armies was desperately short of guns and ammunition, to the
extent that one man in ten was issued with a firearm that would not fire, and
generals were even thinking of equipping some units with pikes to face the
enemy (21). The quest for powder for those guns that were in working order
meant counting on the patriotism and civic responsibility of all Frenchmen, and
especially of the sans-culottes. They were to clean out their barns and cellars
collecting saltpetre for the war effort and taking it to their sectional workshops
to be processed (22). The extent to which these support services were stretched
both by the scale of the war and by the lack of an efficient army administration
in the 1790s can scarcely be overstated. Their contribution was vital if whole
regiments were not to starve or be reduced to despondency and impotence.
Again and again deprivation is cited as the principal cause of desertion by soldiers whose tolerance had finally snapped. Supply remained tenuous throughout
most of the war and on the majority of military fronts, and the loss of wagonloads of corn or of consignments of jackets or shoes could be as serious as the
loss of the soldiers themselves.
The desertion of men in these support services, or their refusal to continue
to work for the armies without being paid—a very real problem in a period when
those on the government payroll were being made to wait weeks and even
months before receiving any remuneration, and when that remuneration finally
trickled through in the form of devalued and near-worthless assignats—
remained persistent thorns in the side of the military. So did the fraudulent disposal of army property and the pillaging of rations and supplies, both by the
soldiers themselves and by their civilian suppliers. It was this constant drain on
foodstuffs and weaponry that led many deputies on mission in Year II to turn
Desertion and the French Armies / 173
the full weight of their authority against fraudeurs and that encouraged SaintJust in the Nord to adopt as his emblem the punitive slogan, "Subsistances militaires, guerre aux fripons," accompanied by the unambiguous device of the guillotine (23). For the military authorities, the cost of desertion involved not only
the loss of trained and seasoned soldiers, but also the theft of whatever equipment they happened to be carrying at the time of their departure. Reporting
from the Armee des Pyrenees-Orientales in Year II, Soubrany and Milhaud
emphasized the importance of such losses of equipment, especially of bayonets,
and reminded the French public that persistent thefts of arms and clothing could
have an effect on the military strength of the country every bit as serious as the
loss of the recruits themselves (24). Their fears were echoed throughout the war
years, with ministers issuing appeals to areas of the country where losses were
deemed to have reached intolerable proportions (25). The law came to make
distinctions between acts of desertion, judging their gravity by various criteria,
including the question of arms and equipment. Had a man deserted his post
"avec" or "sans bagages?" By Year XII the answer to this question could make
a fundamental difference to the fate that awaited the deserter. The death sentence was prescribed for any deserter who "aura emporte ses armes ou celles de
ses camarades"; hard labor ("le boulet") for the man who "aura emporte des
vetements ou des effets appartenant a ses camarades," the same penalty as was
reserved for those who deserted on foreign soil (26). The way in which the law
was framed was an accurate guide to the level of public alarm about losses of
army tunics and military hardware. By 1808 the sale of even part of one's uniform after deserting from the armies led automatically to an appearance before
a conseil de guerre (27).
Yet the disappearance of large quantities of army equipment was not
stamped out by such Draconian legislation; it continued to anger officers and
civilian administrators throughout the Empire. This can be explained in part by
the fact that men deserted on the spur of the moment, or when a favorable
opportunity presented itself, and it was more than likely that they would be in
uniform at the time. Short of stripping naked, most soldiers had little alternative
but to take their army-issue clothing with them when they left. It could single
them out in a crowd as likely deserters and betray them to the villagers on whose
charity they were so dependent; but until they had the opportunity to sell it or
to exchange it for less distinctive raiment, they were effectively obliged to remain
in uniform. In any case, clothing was expensive, and French peasant boys were
well aware of the value of the cloth on their backs. Whatever the danger, it would
not come easily to them to throw away good material that could keep them or
others in their family warm on winter nights. One temptation, therefore, was to
disguise the uniform with ribbons or patching, or to tear off telltale indications
of its military origin. Pierre Sers and the departmental administration in the
Gironde showed a keen understanding of the care and frugality of the average
peasant when they suggested that uniforms were more frequently "denatures"
than destroyed, which should have made the policing of desertion somewhat
easier at least in rural areas (28). It was not just chance or circumstance, however, that dictated that men deserted with their equipment wherever possible.
The long weeks or months on the run would have to be financed, and their uni-
174 / Conscripts and Deserters
forms were their most immediate form of currency. Traveling merchants, second-hand dealers, forains, in fact anyone out to make a quick profit might be
expected to offer money or civilian clothing in return for a uniform in a decent
state of repair. At Languedic in the Morbihan two men were arrested in 1806
for exchanging their own rather ragged clothes for the uniforms of returning soldiers (29). At Versailles, more ominously, Pierre Lamy was charged with receiving stolen uniforms as part of a commercial racket. It was noted that he specialized in the purchase of army jackets and trousers and that his premises were
stacked with stolen military property. He was well-known to deserters in the
neighborhood as an unscrupulous dealer to whom they might hope to unload
the goods they had taken at the time of their desertion or had carried home on
their backs after making their escape (30). For the man who signed on without
any real intention of soldiering, who took his bounty and looked for his first
chance to escape, the equipment that he was issued could help supplement his
financial gain. The case of one recruit from the levee des 300,000 in 1793 is perhaps instructive. A laborer from the village of Spycker in the Nord, he got as far
as Douai before deciding that army life was much too hard and miserable, having spent most of his signing-on bounty of 250 livres by the time of his desertion.
Asked if he still had his arms and uniform, he gave an illuminating account of
the ready market for military property in the area. He told his interrogators
qu'il a vendu son habit d'uniforme au cabaret de Saint-Roch a ce qu'il croit
un des fripiers de Douay, a un homme de la maison, moyennant trente livres,
et qu'il en avail deja achete une autre couleur marron a un dragon, qu'il a
vendu son avresac sur la place dans une cave, moyennant cinq livres, a un
etranger, qu'il a laisse son fusil dans sa chambre, et n'a vendu ses effets qu'a
1'instigation de deux dragons qui 1'avaient engage ... (31)
The rest of his clothing, his trousers, two shirts, and two pairs of shoes, he had
sold to a friend who could make use of them, and he admitted that he had parceled them up and sent them off on the mailcoach to his friend's home in Wormhout. Finding a market for good clothing never presented a problem.
The traffic in army surplus was not restricted to boots and tunics, and some
