with the civilian population, sheltering behind the belief that in wartime everything must reasonably be subsumed to the cause of victory. Thus feeding the
troops must take precedence over the creature-comforts of civilians; and the diseased peasant women of the Drome had to be sacrificed to the demands of rest
and recreation. But was there any excuse for the sort of crass insensitivity shown
by the military authorities in the Nord when they simply dumped the effects of
the dead in bundles on the village greens for their families to collect without first
issuing prior warning or even informing them of their loss (57)? Or for the decision to exhume and re-bury a Protestant soldier who had died in hospital, on
the grounds that his Protestant burial amounted to intolerable fanatisme (58)?
Antics of that kind did little besides inflaming the religious passions of country
communities and turning their anger against both the army and the men who
served it.
As the scale of the war escalated and more and more troops were deployed,
the instances of conflict with the communities through which they passed
became more numerous. Soldiers gained a reputation for violence and brawling
that may have been exaggerated, which certainly was not unique to the armies
of this period, but which nonetheless did much to sour local opinion. In garrison
towns in particular everyone seemed to have their story of gross misbehavior by
the soldiery, whether at their own expense or that of other townsmen (59).
Punches and sabre cuts were doled out fairly indiscriminately. There were serious incidents between soldiers and local conscripts (60), between soldiers and
gardes-forestiers after disputes about game and hunting rights (61), and even
between soldiers and local agents de police who had a different view of what the
law stipulated (62). When a gendarme tried to break up a fight at a bal public in
Versailles frequented by velites from the garrison, he was insulted and wounded
with several sabre thrusts to the head; his colleague saved himself from injury
only by sheltering beneath a bar stool (63). Most of the violence, however,
182 / Conscripts and Deserters
stemmed from disputes and drunken arguments between soldiers and the youth
of the local community, their peer group in a sense, but with different accents,
different clan loyalties, and a resentment of the arrogance often displayed by the
military. Disputes over drink could spark off violent bagarres involving dozens
of people, and inns could be turned into battlefields by the refusal of the barman
to serve unwanted guests (64). A silly incident, like a local boy urinating too
close to a military post, could rapidly be transformed into an antimilitary riot
(65). Cultural differences and language difficulties only served to fuel the flames.
In Montelimar, where there had been a long history of bad blood between the
men of the garrison and the townspeople, a major confrontation developed in
1806 between the Ligurian troops who were at that moment on garrison duty
and the young of the city. It began innocently enough, when one group of local
lads passed comment on the harsh treatment that a soldier was meting out to a
prisoner in his charge. Tempers became frayed, the soldiers rallied around their
comrade and became abusive, and it all ended with the Ligurians, bayonets
drawn, advancing menacingly on the local population as they streamed out of
church (66). Rowdy high spirits could so easily turn into ugly incidents. At SaintCloud in Year VI troops newly returned from the Vendee went on a drinking
spree in the town's bars. All might have passed quietly had they not stumbled
on a wedding party, whereupon fighting broke out and the wedding celebrations
rapidly assumed the guise of a gangland vendetta (67). Tension was rarely absent
in the relations between communities and the military personnel imposed on
them. Their violence was resented all the more strongly because they were outsiders, people for whom the commune felt, despite the government's efforts, little responsibility or fellow-feeling. There were occasions, indeed, when the traditional battles between journeymen's confraternities, so much a part of the
eighteenth-century urban landscape, were transferred to contests between local
artisans and soldiers from elsewhere, identified as a collective interest just like
the traditional groups of gavots and devoirants. Police reports refer to battles
between soldiers and several journeymen from the same trade, pitched battles
that suggest a certain formality, certain familiar ground rules. At Chaudesaigues
in 1807 one such battle between cordonniers and soldiers ended tragically, with
one of the shoemakers left dying by the roadside (68). The locals often felt that
the authorities, whether the gendarmes or the courts, looked on soldiers with
unwonted charity after such incidents, and there were demands that military
killers should be treated like any others. Again the general feeling was that the
state tended to protect its own, and that the violent excesses of the troops were
too easily condoned. When, for instance, a dragoon killed a local coachman in
a brawl at Versailles in 1809, it was pointed out in his defense that he was one
of the finest soldiers in his regiment and that "sa rixe nocturne avec un cocher
yvre n'a ete qu'un malheur cause par les tenebres." He got off very lightly with
a year's jail sentence, and local people were entitled to ask whether the law provided them with any protection against a murderous soldiery (69).
Bullying and the use of violence were not the only habits that soldiers picked
up while serving abroad and inflicted on their countrymen once they returned
to French soil. In Germany and Italy rape was widely tolerated, and it was even
expected that local girls would provide sexual pleasure for French troops. But
Desertion and the French Armies / 183
back in France there was understandable outcry when soldiers on garrison duty
expected the same services from the local population. In Nantes in Year IV there
was an angry howl of protest against the licentious behavior of men from the
Eighth Battalion of the Seine-Inferieure, who attacked two local women, one of
them barely sixteen years old, in a night of drunken orgy. One was dragged
behind the Faubourg Saint-Clement and beaten with nettles; the other was the
victim of a gang rape and seriously hurt. "Elle eprouve," in the words of the
medical report, "dans les organes de la generation des douleurs avec chaleur et
engorgement produites par la repetition d'actes effrenees qu'ont exerces sur cette
citoyenne, avec violence, plusieurs militaires" (70). Public opinion was not easily assuaged. When a seventeen-year-old girl was attacked and repeatedly raped
in the Foret de Rambouillet in 1813 by a number of lads from the Ecole Militaire
at La Fleche, local people came to her defense and injuries were inflicted in the
fighting that ensued. But again it was alleged that the army too easily covered
its tracks and prevented the guilty parties from being brought to justice. In this
case the young men concerned were subject to military discipline only, and the
light sentences imposed—the two ringleaders were charged, and one of them was
given a month in prison—did nothing to restore confidence among local people
(71). Women, it was widely felt, were not safe in military towns; nor, only too
frequently, was property. When garrisons were short of supplies, the temptation
to steal and pillage proved hard to resist, especially for those who had just
returned from campaigns across the Rhine. On foreign territory the French
armies, like all other forces at the time, had few qualms about feeding itself by
wholesale pillage, and booty was one of the principal goals of the serving soldier
and one of the few ways in which he might hope to turn the war to his personal
advantage (72). In his memoirs Philippe-Rene Girault expresses his reservations
about the morality of the policy, but most went about the job of looting with
unbounded glee. In Girault's words, looting parties were military "expeditions"
like any other, planned and organized:
Nous partions de notre camp la nuit, ayant a notre suite une cinquantaine de
voitures, nous tombions a 1'improviste sur un village qui etait livre a la devastation. On chargeait les voitures de tout ce qu'on pouvait ramasser, de tout
ce qui pouvait etre emporte. Les paysans etaient maltraites, tues quelquefois,
les femmes violees, tout etait permis. (73)
Such habits died hard. Inns were smashed up by men desperate for drink (74);
pigs, sheep, and horses were all stolen by soldiers who were little different from
livestock rustlers (75). When a battalion of volunteers from Nyons feared that
bread rations were about to run out, their response was both violent and panicstricken. They attacked and looted local bakers' shops, stealing bread with the
same impunity they would have enjoyed in a Dutch or German town. Their
justification for looting was very simple, a justification that had long and insidious ancestry in the annals of the military, "qu'on voulait les faire mourir de
faim, que cette seule crainte les avait fait agir centre celui que leur otoit leurs
vivres" (76). Soldiers did not find it hard to convince themselves that local civilians were making fewer sacrifices than they were themselves, and that the civil-
184 / Conscripts and Deserters
ian population therefore owed them a decent standard of living. But to
civilians such acts of theft and banditry were a source of fear of abuse and violence at the hands of the very men who were supposed to be there to protect
them. It was indefensible, as the department of the Seine-et-Oise clearly recognized following a spate of thefts around Rueil, when "des hommes ... armes et
salaries pour la defense commune ne seraient que de vils brigands et d'infames
assassins" (77).
When soldiers on active service came into close contact with civilians, incidents of this kind were difficult to avoid. Although conscripts came from the
same sorts of background as the people they antagonized, army life, with its artificial restrictions on movement and its rather forced masculine sociability,
reduced their tolerance of others and sharpened their native aggression. Soldiers
too often showed their contempt for pequins and translated their contempt into
brusque words and rough treatment. At Macon men of the sixty-ninth demibrigade amused themselves during the burial service of the bishop in Year XI
by tying one of the mourning bands around a dog's tail and listening to its yelps.
This caused them great hilarity, but it deeply shocked devout Catholic opinion
in the town (78). Gratuitous physical violence was equally unwelcome. Near
Erce in the Ariege a number of soldiers were given the task of intercepting a
shepherd who was believed to have stolen a flock of sheep from someone else's
barn. Local people approved, until the men used such force on their unfortunate
victim that he died of his injuries (79). Authority and vandalism were never far
apart in garrison towns, and soldiers were prone to make themselves unwelcome
guests. The town council of Pierrelatte made it clear just why having troops billeted in a community was seen as something of a burden. The dossier of misconduct and wanton destruction was overpowering. One unit had been responsible for theft and vandalism on an epic scale, with cases of wine stolen, bills left
unpaid, houses wrecked, and the billets de logement torn up by men intent on
finding themselves more lavish accommodation. The town survived the visit,
but felt as though a plague of locusts had descended on it (80). It was where the
troops felt that they had a grudge to settle or that they were morally justified in
wreaking revenge that the worst excesses were committed. In the Vosges, for
example, the countryside around Rambervillers was laid waste by troops who
