denounced for using his office to gain favors of another kind, the mayor reporting that "j'ai recu une declaration de grossesse d'apres laquelle, s'il faut aj outer
foi a la declaration, il lui fit un enfant sous la promesse de ne pas verbaliser
contr'elle pour vol de fagots dans Mantaille" (121). Such cases lend some weight
to the caustic judgment of the conseil-general of the department in Year X that
the institution of the gardes had generally proved more harmful than useful
in matters of rural policing, since "ces gardes sont pour la plupart des faineants
qui n'embrassent cette profession que parce qu'ils ne sont propres a aucune
autre"(122).
As the scale of resistance grew, so the state extended its arsenal of repression.
Prefects became increasingly concerned at the failure of the gendarmerie to
achieve the substantial success rate that was expected of them. There were
instances where details of police actions were leaked in advance to the conscripts
they were hunting (123); others where months of supposedly thorough policing
failed to result in a single arrest (124). In consequence, by Year VII prefects were
themselves taking dramatic initiatives to try to reverse a pattern of failure, without waiting for the government to pass decrees or to grant them authority. In
particular, they turned to the use of garnisaires as a means of putting pressure
on refractories by punishing their parents, in the hope that the cost and inconvenience of having soldiers garrisoned on their property would drive a wedge
between peasant families and their recalcitrant sons and force the fugitives back
into the armies. From Year VII (around the time of the first conscriptions) this
became a common tactic in villages where recruitment had consistently proved
difficult, used first against the parents of insoumis believed to be concealed in
the community and therefore at their parents' beck and call, but later extended
to all parents whose sons had been convicted of desertion or insoumission. Only
The Build-up of State Repression / 209
in 1807 and 1808 were these measures legalized by the Conseil d'Etat (125). The
troops serving in the garrisons had to be paid a daily allowance and their food
and bedding had to be provided by the families on whom they were billeted,
either the families of deserters or frequently the richest families in the community, a device by which the authorities thought to create divisions of interest and
force the conscripts' own parents to give up their resistance to the law. By the
last years of the Empire the use of garrisoning had become standard throughout
France, and in 1811 prefects were reminded of the circumstances when they
were obliged to resort to it: when communes were known to be giving shelter to
refractories, when previous conscriptions had ended in tumult and riot, and
above all, when the proportion of retardataires in a town or village exceeded
one in eight of those called (126). The same ministerial instruction drew their
attention to the various forces whom they could incorporate into garrisons: the
gendarmerie, of course, but also the reserve company of the department, units
stationed on the territory of the department, veterans and former soldiers who
were judged capable of the duties involved.
In consequence garnisaires came to be imposed on a very wide scale and at
high cost to the local community. In December 1808 one prefect shocked the
Minister of the Interior when he revealed that in his department there were 146
communes where garrisons could profitably be used. Rather more cautiously,
the Minister advised that their use be restricted to the 23 most disobedient
instances, in the belief that other communities might be inspired by their example to carry out the letter of the law (127). He was unrealistically optimistic in
his expectations. In 1809 garnisaires had to be used in every canton of the
department, at a total cost to the inhabitants of nearly 85,000 francs (128). There
were local success stories to report. When a garrison was sent in to the village of
Rochefort in the Gard to punish the villagers for sheltering a deserter who had
escaped from police custody, the village almost immediately gave up its protege
and the deserter was taken off to the citadel at Nimes (129). But the imposition
of garnisaires was not the panacea for which the government had been hoping.
Administrative and judicial confusion arose that both impeded the work of the
troops and led to court decisions in favor of the plaintiffs (130). In many parts
of France the wealthy had already bought themselves out of service or had found
a substitute. Insoumission was increasingly a problem of the poor, and they
could not hope to pay either the heavy fines imposed by the courts or the costs
of maintaining garrisons in their homes. Conscripts whose families could pay
were well aware of the risks, as the prefect of the Loire astutely recognized,
en sorte que le consent pourra calculer d'avance les sacrifices qu'il a a faire
pour echapper a la loi; ces sacrifices, y compris 1'amende, sont loin d'equivaloir a ceux que lui necessiterait son remplacement; n'est-il pas a craindre,
alors, que celui-la meme qui jusqu'ici a cede a la consideration de la fortune
ne prenne 1'idee de speculer sur sa desobeissance? (131)
Thus the operation was being increasingly conducted against impoverished families who had little or nothing to lose, with the result that the fines imposed on
them were not a real threat to their livelihood. Of 150 refractories condemned
210 / Conscripts and Deserters
at Aurillac between Year XI and 1806, 49 were equipped with a certificat d'indigence from their mayor, and in only 36 cases did the authorities have reason
to think that they might recover part of the money owed (132). In poor communes, indeed, the use of garrisons was often regarded as counterproductive,
since the sums raised for the government were small and the long-term eifects
of the garrison could be quite ruinous. The people of Gentioux in the Creuse
went so far as to petition the government in Year VIII, complaining that "on
n'epargne ni meubles, ni gerbes, ni fourrage, ni bestiaux, meme ceux destines a
Fagriculture, en un mot on a totalement devaste et ruine ses maisons," with the
result that tax payments throughout the commune were seriously delayed (133).
In such cases where the majority of the people involved were impoverished, it
was the whole community that was obliged to pay, since the garrisons were
almost always billeted at the inn at communal expense (134). As for the conscripts, they had little reason to give themselves up, since their parents were
beyond the reach of the state through the fact of their poverty. Often the garrison
received a less than hospitable welcome from its enforced hosts. In the Tarn it
was noted that most of the parents refused to pay the soldiers or to provide them
with food, while in the more isolated hamlets the men found themselves threatened and maltreated by friends and relatives (135). More extreme still was the
uncompromising response of parents in the Bouches-du-Rhone in Year VIII,
where the arrival of the garnisaires was prompting a secondary desertion. At
Aubagne one conscript's father followed his son into hiding "emportant avec lui
le peu de meubles qui y etaient," and elsewhere it was quite common for those
threatened with garrisons to empty their houses and store their furniture with
relatives until the danger had passed (136). Local administrators were not always
keen to encourage the imposition of garrisons, for they knew what their arrival
could mean in terms of public morale. In the sober words of the prefect of the
Loire-Inferieure, "1'administration qui a ete forcee de 1'employer dans le cours
de 1809 sait quels murmures elle a occasionnes, combien elle avait exaspere et
froissee 1'opinion publique" (137).
Where the costs of the garrison were imposed on the wealthiest landowners
in the commune, the government's intention was clear—to turn the richer farmers against the poor and thus to secure the denunciations which they required.
In this way, it was felt, the solidarity of rural communities in the face of conscription could effectively be ended. The reality, again, was more clouded.
Where conscripts were pressured into giving themselves up, the cost in social
tensions within the village could be high, and the richer farmers ran a real risk
of retaliatory measures against themselves or their property. Even the legality of
punishing the notables for the sins of their fellow villagers was highly dubious,
as the sous-prefet at Cambrai tellingly pointed out in 1813. It was often uncertain
which of the landowners were liable to be taxed in this way. Was the payment
to be levied on the villager who owned the land or on the land itself? For if it
were the land, then a large number of outsiders would be involved, despite the
fact that they did not live in the village and took no hand in the crimes committed by the village. Could they be charged? Many of them, he added, were
themselves doing their military service, or had sons in the armies. Could they
be included in the contribution? There was, claimed the sous-prefet, no evidence
The Build-up of State Repression / 211
in his area that the parents of refractories were moved by the sight of their neighbors paying fines on their behalf, and no sign of the clutch of denunciations that
the government assumed would follow. And why? Because in small communes
the element of fear was far stronger than the distaste engendered by an enforced
payment toward the costs of the garrison. In the campagnes around Cambrai,
and doubtless in many other parts of rural France, "les riches payent de peur
d'etre brules. On arme contr'eux 1'interet de la multitude qui rit de les voir contribuer pour elle. II n'y a pas un seul exemple d'une denonciation" (138).
The use of garnisaires was part of a larger trend in the policing of conscription. For increasingly, that job was being given to soldiers. Troops who had
resisted the temptation to desert were set in pursuit of those who had not. In the
1790s there were attempts to mobilize the local units of the garde nationale
against deserters and insoumis, but the fact that this involved the arrest of neighbors and friends meant that results were often negligible and that the gardes were
accused of conspiring with the fugitives. The town of Nyons was one which
turned to the garde in Year III, ordering them to join the local gendarmes in a
joint operation. They never turned up, even when it became a question of putting down an armed mutiny of local conscripts (139). The sympathies of the
local guardsmen were, not surprisingly, divided, even the most patriotic among
them hesitating to use force against their childhood friends. Their use against
refractories proved dangerous and unpredictable, with the constant fear that
they might lend their support to the enemies of public order. In the Gironde it
was noted that the insistence that guardsmen operate against refractories
resulted in a cooling of their ardor for service (140). At Rabastens in the HautesPyrenees it was even suggested that they had deliberately freed prisoners left in
their care (141). Slowly but surely the authorities learned the basic lesson that it
was inadvisable to use local troops in the search for local refractories, that the
impersonal element that crept into policing when it was being carried out on
someone else's territory was indispensable to efficiency and the maintenance of
military discipline. By the same token they appreciated the value of a force of
soldiers drawn from outside the area whose task was to interrogate and arrest
all young men discovered in their path, all who could not justify their presence
in their villages by the production of a conge or reforme.
From this the notion of the colonne mobile was born. This was a military
