or forty deserters or retardataires through the streets of their towns and villages
to be publicly humiliated, "pour etre employes, sous les yeux de leurs concitoyens, a balayer les rues, a trainer des tombereaux, a nettoyer les egouts, en un mot
aux travaux les plus vils et les plus degoutants" (179). His colleague in the Lozere was angrily reprimanded when he informed the Minister that he had taken
steps on his own initiative to humiliate those conscripts who had mutilated
themselves to avoid service. "Je les ai fait tous arreter et conduire, la chaine au
col, aux depots des regiments de sapeurs," he boasted; "j'espere que cette mesure
degoutera de se mutiler ainsi" (180). The principal disgust it caused was in Paris,
where it was seen as a dangerous example of an official taking the law into his
own hands and exceeding his legal authority, when his main task was to persuade the local community to respect and obey that very law. Whatever else it
achieved, the government's recruitment policy brought the people of villages
and bourgs face to face with the law as never before. It brought the enforcers of
the law into every hamlet in the land. It was, par excellence, the area of government activity that brought the police and the people into direct contact, and
often into confrontation, over a period of nearly a quarter of a century.
10
Desertion, the State, and the People
GOVERNMENT MINISTERS saw little that was exceptionable in their commitment
to mass conscription. In their eyes it was no more than a requirement of civic
duty, like the payment of taxes or respect for the laws; it was an essential part
of the sublimation of the individual's self-interest in deference to the more
important interest of the nation. Viewed from the village square, however, it was
a demand that was widely contested, especially since it could be seen to present
an affront to local custom and tradition. The popular image of the state itself
risked being tarnished, with the role of the recruiting-sergeant overshadowing
the more bountiful image of the law-giver or the fount of justice. Recruitment,
more than any other single issue, alienated community from government in
those parts of France where central control was still eyed with confused suspicion. In Isser Woloch's phrase, conscription became "the touchstone of the relationship between the state and civil society," replacing tax collection as the most
bitter bone of contention between government and governed. With Napoleon,
says Woloch, "conscription became the battleground, the ultimate contest of
wills between individuals and local communities on the one hand and a distant
impersonal state on the other" (1). By 1814 there is no doubt that Napoleon had
succeeded in implanting habits of obedience that would have seemed inconceivable even twenty years before. The war effort and the enforced sacrifices imposed
by war had in their own way contributed greatly to the added authority of the
state (2). Yet these changes were not wrought without considerable resistance,
particularly at village level where the smooth running of the state machine was
often thwarted by a lack of popular understanding or cooperation. The extent of
such resistance could not fail to undermine in its turn the moral and political
authority of central government.
In its most basic form this popular resistance could be measured in terms of
cold indifference, a stubborn withdrawal of cooperation from the agents of the
state, and a calculated lack of interest in the tasks that they had come to perform.
Government commissaires, recruiting officers, gendarmes, the men of the
219
220 / Conscripts and Deserters
colonnes mobiles, all might seek to work closely with the local communities
where they were assigned, but there was no guarantee that they would be able to
elicit a positive response. Mayors and municipal officers often showed their loyalty to their villagers by a tightly guarded silence and pretense at ignorance
which their administres had few qualms about emulating. Whole communities
could erect a conspiratorial wall of innocence that frustrated and angered the
authorities but that they were helpless to combat. Again and again the state
found itself thwarted by the reticence of its own citizens. Mayors were
denounced for the "vil interet" that they displayed (3); for their limited education and even more limited horizons (4); and they were accused of sabotaging
the good police work of the gendarmerie through "indifference" and "faiblesse"
(5). The occasional frauds that came to light and that resulted in mayors being
arraigned before the courts were, it was implied, just the tip of a huge iceberg.
Municipal indifference and village jealousy were so deeply engrained in the mentalities of rural Frenchmen that the decrees of central government were being
treated with ill-disguised contempt. The conscription issue was simply the area
where these forces became most public and the conflicting interest of state and
locality came into the sharpest focus.
Faced with local hostility and suspicious of the men with whom they had to
deal, the gendarmerie and the military found it all too easy to place the blame
for their own failures on civil authorities. They pointed out incessantly that they
were dependent on the good will of municipal officials to an unreasonable
degree, since the law forbade them from entering private property even during
hours of daylight unless they were accompanied by the appropriate officier
municipal. As a result, they believed that their task was being impeded by local
complicity. In the Lozere, for instance, they noted that "1'appel d'un maire ou
de son adjoint entrainait des delais: que souvent meme leur eloignement ou leur
absence ferait echouer les poursuites; que cette mesure pourrait donner Feveil a
une commune, faire attrouper les jeunes gens, amener des mouvements seditieux et une rebellion armee" (6). To protect civilian consciences the whole exercise of policing deserters was being frustrated. This in turn encouraged soldiers
and gendarmes to lash out wildly at those who stood in their path, and relations
between officials who should have been cooperating closely with one another
often deteriorated into mutual recrimination. In Year XII mayors in the Pas-deCalais were being accused not only of being weak and sentimental toward draft
dodgers, but of being enemies of the state who offered protection to deserters for
political ends. They were, claimed the general de brigade in Arras, closet Jacobins, "des brigands de 93 qui promettent amnistie, qui defendent, protegent,
recelent tout deserteur, qui... ne cessent de conspirer contre le gouvernement"
(7). Mayors did not always do much to help their own cause. They could be
infuriatingly slow in executing government decrees, standing on their municipal
dignity and insisting on their petty privileges while the gendarmes could only
stand by, fuming with impotent rage. In one extreme case, at Morizecourt
(Vosges) in Year V, bureaucratic delay was such that the fugitive was effectively
presented with a head start of some six to eight months before the authorities
could give chase (8). In another, in the Gironde, a recalcitrant mayor insisted
on a literal interpretation of the law on the imposition of garrisons to such a
Desertion, the State, and the People / 221
degree that no garrison could ever be billeted on his area (9). The Minister of
War, impatient at the lack of progress in bringing recalcitrant soldiers to book,
preferred to look no further than the local town halls and tried to pass the
responsibility to the prefects and his colleague at the Interior. But mayors also
felt aggrieved by the disputes that raged over conscription and they insisted that
the blame did not rest entirely with the civil authority.
According to the civil arm of government, the army ought to share in the
general recrimination that resulted from recruitment policy. Where there were
serious breakdowns in communication between different branches of officialdom, the military were hardly blameless. Indeed, there would seem to have been
general crises of cooperation at every level which raised questions about the efficacy of the new administrations and their overlapping responsibilities. In areas
near to borders and military zones the civil authorities were especially outspoken in their criticism of the army for its surveillance of its own men. At Hazebrouck the government commissaire remarked somewhat tartly that civil
responsibility ended when refractories were arrested and handed over to the military. It was strange that the army was unable to keep them under effective
guard, and infuriating for the police to have to hunt down the same deserters
three and four times (10). Bordeaux was another town where the civil authority
refused to accept the army's accusations against mayors and municipalities.
Why was it, asked the prefect in Year XI, that when his men tried to imprison
the deserters they captured, they found that the army at once ordered their
release (11)? There was anger and incomprehension in Year XI when police control was finally taken away from the prefectures and vested in the generaux de
division, a decision which was roundly denounced by civil administrators in the
Nord, who went so far as to criticize the Emperor himself. Dismissing the new
initiatives as "des mesures vexatoires," Desmouliers, a conseiller de prefecture
at Douai, wrote that the measure "prouve que Bonaparte ne soit pas sans faiblesse, car il a dans cette circonstance caresse le bras par preference a la tete" (12).
These were rash words; however, they indicate the degree of animus that the
control and policing of desertion had created between the civil administration
and the military, an animus reflected in mutual criticism and allegations of
imcompetence.
Often the germ of the dispute lay elsewhere, and the conscription issue
merely caused old rivalries and sensibilities to flare into open conflict. At Nyons
relations between the mayor and the marechal des logis charged with the policing of the town had never been cordial. They had staged a public altercation over
the siting of the bal public to celebrate French victories in Year XIV sufficiently
bitter to recall Gabriel Chevallier's Clochemerle. They had countermanded each
other's instructions when the marechal refused to remove his dungheap in
accordance with the mayor's new public health bylaw, drawing his sword on the
municipal employees who came to sweep it away and claiming total sovereignty
over the police building and its courtyard. Therein, of course, lay the root of the
problem—the total refusal of stubborn officials to make any concessions when
they felt that their autonomy and dignity were being challenged (13). The implementation of recruitment laws, the policing of the depart, above all the questioning of suspected refractories and the arrest of young men seeking shelter in
222 / Conscripts and Deserters
a village were all areas of police activity that accentuated the clash of authority
between mayor and gendarme, community and state. What help, for instance,
was a mayor obliged to provide for gendarmes from a neighboring town who
came on to his territory to arrest one of their conscripts who had taken flight?
The mayor of Commines in the Nord interpreted his obligations very literally
when faced by this quandary in Year XI, refusing to accept gendarmes from
Armentieres in his commune, reminding them of past provocations between the
men of the two towns, and insisting that the gardes-champetres were the only
force he required to keep good order in Commines. The fugitive was not
included in his communal list of refractories and deserters; and the mayor saw
his responsibility ending there (14). Lack of cooperation of this kind was not, of
course, confined to mayors. The involvement of the gendarmerie was resented
