in the Nord, it also gave rise to blatant unfairness. Many of the men of the classes covered by the amnesties were still serving in the regiments and were being
refused conges by their superior officers. In other words, the privilege of an
amnesty was being granted only to those too recalcitrant or too cowardly to
serve, while the men who had been incorporated were condemned to sacrifice
still more years of their lives to the army (161). Again everything seemed
weighted against those who obediently performed their civic duty, and many
officials saw this as yet another obstacle to persuading refractories that it was in
their interest to submit. Fortunately, perhaps, the policy seemed to confuse the
fugitives as much as it frustrated the authorities. The extent of rumor and whisper was such that priests and mayors found themselves in positions of great
influence as interpreters of the government's intention. The result was often
doubt and deliberate obfuscation. In the Ardeche and Aveyron, for example, it
was widely believed in outlying hamlets that the amnesty of Year X should be
treated with the greatest caution since it was "un piege tendu a leur bonne foi"
(162).
A further "mesure de douceur" was employed in those frontier areas where
recruitment proved particularly recalcitrant, and again it was a traditional remedy with a long and honorable pedigree. Where men refused in large numbers
to accept incorporation, but where there was every evidence that they would
willingly accept to fight for hearth and home, the government was tempted by
the idea of creating bataillons auxiliaires for purposes of purely local defense.
The idea was tried in March 1793 with the formation of eleven companies of
chasseurs basques, small units of 150 men each, who were used after the outbreak of war with Spain for the defense of French avant-postes along the Pyrenean frontier. Because they were fighting to protect their own communities, they
performed creditably against the Spaniards, and throughout the 1790s the companies were allowed to retain their separate status and were specifically
exempted from the amalgame. In Year VIII when their incorporation into the
armies was being actively discussed, the officers of the Second Battalion of Chasseurs Basques wrote a spirited defense of their special statute and demanded that
it be retained. The men of the Basque mountains would serve loyally, they
claimed, if they were allowed to fight in their own way under their own officers,
men "qui connaissent consequemment leur langage et leurs habitudes"; the
alternative would bring chaos and mass refusal (163). Their nostalgic was
deemed to play a much more fundamental role than did simple mal du pays
elsewhere, and opinion among their officers was unanimous that Napoleon
would be ill-advised to go ahead with any plans for incorporation (164). He did,
however, creating out of the chasseurs two demi-brigades of light infantry in
pluviose IX, a move that met with the predicted protests and indiscipline on the
part of the Basques. There was similar resistance to incorporation among other
groups of chasseurs, from the chasseurs de la Vendee in the West to the barbels
in northern Italy, a sort of private army in the pay of the King of Sardinia (165).
In the eyes of the regular battalions these bataillons auxiliaires could seem an
unnecessary nuisance that ought to be swept away. General Cervoni, com-
216 / Conscripts and Deserters
mander of the Eighth Division Militaire in Marseille, pointed out in Year X that
they obstructed rather than helped army maneuvers and that along the Italian
frontier prefects were tending to use the barbets as an unofficial private army, a
rival to the military (166).
In 1808, however, the government resumed the idea of auxiliary battalions
in the Southwest specifically for the purpose of defending the Spanish frontier
now that war in the Peninsula was being pursued in earnest. The decree of 6
August 1808 established thirty-four companies of miquelets for this purpose,
eight in each of four departments (the Ariege, Basses-Pyrenees, Hautes-Pyrenees,
and Pyrenees-Orientales) and two in the neighboring Haute-Garonne. Those eligible to join were defined as refractories from these five departments, of any age
between the last conscription and forty years old; and they were bribed by the
specific promise that their service would be of limited duration, until the end of
the troubles with Spain. The prefect of the Ariege recommended it to his administres as an instance of the Emperor's generosity, since "il n'exige de vous qu'un
service momentane sur vos frontieres, pour prix de votre grace et votre conge"
(167). The recruitment was a huge success, the companies oversubscribed several times over. The sous-prefet of Saint-Girons, the most troublesome part of
the Ariege, went in person to the most remote and recalcitrant communities to
advertise the terms offered, and was delighted by the response he encountered.
With cautious optimism he reported that much could be expected of these men
if they were handled carefully by officers from their own villages who understood
their strengths and their limitations:
J'ose croire que ce seront de bons miquelets. L'avantage de n'etre employe
que sur la frontiere d'Espagne les a generalement decides, il serait peut-etre
impolitique de donner, du moins encore, une autre destination a Fexcedant
du bataillon demande. Mais lorsqu'ils seront aguerris, exerces, accoutumes a
etre ensemble, je suis persuade que les generaux pourront en disposer utilement. (168)
This optimism did not long survive the recruitment of the miquelets, for the new
service was to prove a hornet's nest for the authorities. The attractive terms
resulted in a new form of conscription fraud, as men who were not eligible for
the miquelets, including youngsters who had not yet reached conscription age,
forged documents to be admitted (169). The problem, indeed, was not one of
finding men for these companies, but rather of finding officers of sufficient caliber to provide a modicum of leadership. In the Ariege the eight original companies of miquelets had, said the prefect, "epuise la plus grande partie de ceux
capables de faire la guerre" (170). And then there were the subsequent problems
of persuading them to obey orders and of forging them into fighting units. The
fact that the overwhelming majority of the soldiers were men with an established
track record of disobedience made them impervious to military discipline. Of
the ordinary soldiers in the eight companies of the Haute-Garonne, for example,
only 15 were drawn from other units or had voluntarily enrolled; 732 were consents refractaires. In the Ariege, with much larger numbers, the pattern was sim-
The Build-up of State Repression / 217
ilar. In December 1809, of 1,200 miquelets in the First Battalion, 50 were listed
as gardes nationaux and 8 as volunteers; the rest were all refractaires (171).
Their knowledge of the difficult terrain of the frontier might make them seem
valuable to the war effort; but this was offset by their indiscipline, their reputation for theft and violence, and their tendency to drift from soldiering into the
realm of smuggling and brigandage (172). In the mountains above Auzat their
haul was symptomatic—"1400 moutons, 30 vaches, quelques chevaux et
mulcts"—and demonstrated why the chasseurs could seem a mixed blessing to
the frontier communities they were ordered to protect (173).
In any case, these battalions did not provide a solution to the most fundamental problem of all, the problem that had justified their original formation. If
they signed on with unbounded enthusiasm, so they deserted with equal commitment. Often their period of service could be counted in months or even
weeks. In the Ariege each of the new companies raised in April and May of 1808
could boast its list of deserters by the beginning of July—seventy-one men of
the Second company, sixty-six from the Fifth, and so on. All had taken advantage of the army's generous provision of arms and cartridges. Often they had
been recruited in groups from the same village, had served together, and then
deserted together to return home. Of the sixty-six men who deserted from the
Fifth company, sixteen came from the frontier village of Massat; all had been
recruited on 17 May and all chose the same day to desert, 27 June. There was
no shame attached to their action, and there was little that the army could do to
prevent it (174). Nor did amnesties serve any useful purpose, since at best the
chasseurs merely accepted the government's generosity and rejoined to desert
yet again (175). Whenever they were sent away from their home valleys to patrol
another part of the frontier, the desertion figures mounted ominously, and by
1809 the government was forced to raise another 1,000 miquelets in the Southwest to replace men who had slipped off home. On this occasion they extended
the geographic spread of recruitment, in the hope that they could tap reserves of
good will elsewhere, and the new recruits came from the more lowland areas of
the region: the Landes, Gironde, and Basses-Pyrenees. But still the result was
meager, the crumbling away of a force of 1,000 over a few months, until in
August 1810 only 466 remained (176). Their utility was further limited by the
fact that they believed they were only obliged to serve on French territory, with
the implication that it was not their responsibility to chase Spanish troops across
the frontier into Spain (177). As the fortunes of the war fluctuated, so the desertion rate ebbed and flowed, but it was clear that the miquelets could never be
molded into a fighting unit capable of playing a major part in the Peninsular
campaign. Disillusioned by the entire experiment, the Minister of War reported
to the Emperor in November 1810 that there was little point in maintaining the
chasseurs on the Pyrenean front, that further recruitment should be abandoned,
and that those who remained should be depayses and transferred to serve in
Corsica. The source of their desertion and indiscipline, he concluded, lay not in
the army, which had successively tried tactics of severity and gentleness to win
over the former insoumis, but in the character of these mountain people themselves. Further repression would serve little purpose, since "pousser plus loin la
218 / Conscripts and Deserters
rigueur, ce serait donner le spectacle affligeant d'une population presqu'entierement envoyee aux fers, sans qu'il en resultat aucun avantage" (178). The bataillons were written off as an interesting failure.
From this point on the government would rely on repressive power to
destroy the remaining kernels of resistance to its recruitment policy. Douceur
was exposed as a failure; the palpable successes of 1811 and 1812 would redound
to the credit of the colonnes mobiles and would seem to justify the abandonment
of persuasion and inducement. In general terms, of course, it had been armed
strength that had been the mainstay of policing deserters and refractories
throughout the period. In the last years of the Empire the reliance on the army
and the gendarmerie was simply more naked than previously, and the vast
majority of conscripts were for the first time cowed into submission. But it
should be emphasized that the use of repression was strictly controlled throughout the Consulate and Empire, with prefects and military commanders regularly
reminded of their obligation to remain within the law. Administrators might
cajole and hector, they might make an example of those arrested by making
them "marcher les premiers" at the next conscription, they could make full use
of the propaganda machine that was provided for them. They were not, however, encouraged to go beyond the law. The prefect of the Pas-de-Calais received
no support from central government when he proposed parading the first thirty
