their operation. They would be regarded with fear and suspicion from the first
moment of their approach, and the arrival ofapeloton of gendarmes was viewed
as a gross intrusion and abuse of state power. This was a traditional response in
many towns and villages, the one they had reserved for the marechaussee when
they had come to police desertion in the Ancien Regime. What was new was the
scale and ambition of policing, which multiplied that traditional distrust of outsiders a hundred fold. The use of garnisaires was deeply hated by local communities. The resort to ambushes and dawn raids elicited the deepest loathing,
and the imposition of severe fines on individuals and on whole communities
aroused new levels of collective anger. The sight of colonnes mobiles swarming
across the countryside like locusts, rounding up every young man unfortunate
enough to fall into their clutches, left an indelible impression on many a peasant's mind. In areas of the country where the search for deserters overlapped
with the search for counterrevolutionary insurgents, the Hostage Law of Year
VII, implemented in a cluster of the most intransigent communities, so inflamed
public opinion against the authorities that it served only to harden resistance
and to gain new recruits for the brigands (48). When the state chose to make an
example of a town or village by ordering the disarming of its entire population
(49), by reducing its civil status (50), or by laying siege to it militarily (51)—as
happened when the patience of the Minister of War finally snapped—the
response of the local inhabitants could be unforgiving. Savage policing of
recruitment might succeed in forcing more men into uniform. It might even
impress peasant society with a demonstration of state power. But it was not an
effective instrument for winning friends or inspiring admiration.
Public hostility to the gendarmerie was increased in those instances where
subterfuge and deceit were used to track down deserters and insoumis. Villagers
were quick to reject measures that used cheating and duplicity, or the use of
tactics that violated popular conceptions of fair play. In the Nord knives were
drawn on gendarmes founding stalking deserters in plain clothes, and the Minister of Justice felt dutybound to warn his men that they should even on the
most delicate operations be sure to carry some mark of their identity (52). Yet
undercover work was a necessary part of policing, and accounts of operations
against deserters and their protectors in villages along the Belgian frontier make
it clear that the Minister's instruction was routinely ignored. In sensitive frontier
regions where deserters hung out in considerable numbers and where local people were tempted to offer them assistance, stealth and subterfuge were essential
if the gendarmes were to make any significant inroads into the problem (53).
Entry into private houses at night was not permitted by law; thus the police had
to move with some alacrity if they were to make mass arrests in areas where
deserters were known to be hiding. In Bordeaux in Year VII, for instance, the
gendarmes had a list of safe houses for those on the run that they intended to
raid. Their orders were suitably terse and explicit, that the move must be coordinated and that "il est important que cette arrestation se fasse a six heures du
soir ou du matin, au meme moment dans toutes les maisons designees" (54).
Elsewhere police activity against deserters was marked by its cunning and inventiveness. In the Yonne in Year VII two gendarmes, heavily disguised, went into
230 / Conscripts and Deserters
the woods where conscripts had been reported to gather, making notes of their
observations and providing intelligence for the night raid that was to follow (55).
At Saint-Girons in 1808 the authorities made use of "trois gendarmes de Foix,
travestis"; at Riverenert, less sensationally, they were disguised as "chasseurs
sur la montagne" (56). Knowing that conscripts could not resist the attractions
of fairs and markets, the commissaire-general de police in Bordeaux arranged a
special welcoming party for them at the October foire in the city in 1808. He
constructed a baraque on the fairground where men could drink and gamble, in
the belief that this would ensnare deserters and criminals attracted by the pleasures of cards and the lure of financial gain. He was not disappointed. His haul
of thirty-four prisoners included ten army and six navy deserters (57). At times
the methods of underground policing deployed came close to encouraging crime,
so keen were the authorities to inform themselves of the networks that protected
deserters. The fruits of such policing could be rich indeed. In Year VI a number
of soldiers disguised themselves as Dutch troops from Berg-op-Zoom across the
frontier, claimed to have deserted their units, and invited talk from the local
people they encountered in bars and inns. The result was a very impressive piece
of military espionage against deserters and the rings of civilians who organized
their passage. In their own words,
Nous nous sommes deguises en soldats deserteurs, puis transportes sur les
huit heures du soir dans un cabaret sur la route de Breda, ou nous nous
sommes annonces comme deserteurs: en cette qualite nous avons demande a
la femme dudit cabaret les renseignements propres a favoriser notre evasion;
elle s'y est tres volontairement pretee. Dans le cours de la conversation, elle
a raconte que deux jours auparavant un complot de desertion de vingt-deux
hommes s'etait forme dans sa maison, d'ou ils etaient partis pour la France;
qu'il s'organisait dans ladite France une armee royale de cent mille hommes
... Elle nous donna ensuite son fils ou domestique pour nous conduire par
chemins detournes sur la route d'Anvers. (58)
The collection of intelligence of this kind made a favorable impression on the
men's military commanders. For the population at large, however, such exploits
seemed underhanded and dishonest, particularly when they themselves were the
objects of police surveillance.
Their sense of outrage was maximized in those cases in which the gendarmes
not only invaded the space of the local community and resorted to trickery or
low cunning, but also insulted their deeply held religious faith. In Catholic areas
the police were strongly tempted to take advantage of religious festivals and key
dates in the Christian calendar when they knew from experience that Catholic
families made every effort to be together and that refractories and deserters customarily came out of hiding. Perennially short of manpower and under orders
to make the arrest of conscripts a high priority, the lieutenants de gendarmerie
would have had to be singularly saintly not to take advantage of such an opportunity for a successful cull. In their eyes it was merely a question of tactical
advantage; there was no inherent moral ambiguity to be considered. In the Nord
policing was concentrated on "les jours des ci-devant dedicaces des communes,"
Desertion, the State, and the People / 231
the days when religious festivals were held in Flemish villages to celebrate the
dedication of their churches. A circular to commissaires in Year VII made it
clear that it was government policy fully supported by the authorities in Douai
to take advantage of these simple ceremonies to arrest the local boys defying the
requisition. "Quand vous savez qu'une dedicace doit avoir lieu," they were
instructed, "prevenez-en a 1'avance le lieutenant de gendarmerie de votre arrondissement, et invitez-le a reunir plusieurs brigades pour les envoyer vers le soir
dans la commune ou la fete devra se celebrer et y arreter les deserteurs" (59).
Such operations always carried an element of risk, since public reaction could
be angry and violent. Above all, military or police action was bound to center
on the church building itself, at the very moment when mass was being celebrated, which could assume the guise of an act of blasphemy as well as constituting an underhanded tactic against the villagers. The inner sanctum of the collective life of the village was being brutally violated. Moreover, some of the
police actions were very ruthless. At Saint-Laurent in the Medoc the gendarmes
surrounded the village church during the morning mass one Sunday in 1809.
Without waiting for the service to end, they entered the church, cleared the
building of women and children, and took more than fifty young men away to
Bordeaux, the majority of them completely innocent of any recruitment offense.
(60). The interruption of the mass by the entry of armed men caused fear and
outrage, and it was perhaps a disproportionate price to pay for seven recruitment
convictions.
Two instances of police action against the congregations of village churches
in the Ariege illustrate graphically the tension and disorders that they could
cause. At Segura in 1806 the gendarmerie mounted a siege of the village church
after the mayors of local communes had refused any assistance in tracking down
refractories. They suspected strongly that the young men of the area had come
down from the hills to attend midnight mass, and consequently surrounded the
church to catch those coming out after the service. It was a clinically mounted
military operation against the building, "a minuit un quart... nous avons etc
nous embusquer dans un petit bois a trois cents pas a peu pres de 1'eglise ... aim
de pouvoir y arreter quelqu'un des conscrits refractaires a la sortie de la messe."
After the mass was over, they had the mayor accompany them inside the church
building, but were met with a startled refusal and by an angry denunciation from
the cure, who proclaimed from the pulpit that the gendarmes had denied the
building and that his church had been reduced to "un rassemblement de
voleurs." In the confusion that followed the gendarmes were engulfed by an
angry mob of some 200 worshippers, and the men they had arrested were set
free (61). Even more provocative was the presence of the gendarmes at the midnight mass on Christmas Eve in the village church at Lacourt in Year XIII.
According to the mayor, a joint service was being held by the inhabitants of
several surrounding villages, candles were lit and mass was being said, when "un
grand tumulte" broke out inside the church among members of the congregation. The police had entered the building during the service and had infiltrated
the rows of worshippers, ready to swoop on the young and robust as soon as the
mass was complete. But panic broke out when it was observed that the gendarmes guarding the door had drawn their guns and swords. In the tumult that
232 / Conscripts and Deserters
followed shots were fired and the candles extinguished, plunging the church into
darkness and replacing the serenity of the office with screams and agitation (62).
In his report, Francois Dubois, the lieutenant de gendarmerie in charge of the
operation, made it clear that it was a routine police search following fruitless
enquiries in the village and surrounding fields. For the villagers of Lacourt, however, it was a deeply shocking incident that threw into sharp relief the deep gulf
that separated them and their community from the agents of the state.
There can be little doubt that relations between the police and the people
suffered grievous damage during this period because of the part played by the
gendarmes in searching for draft dodgers. Villagers had never been ecstatic
about being policed and supervised. Policing was too modern a concept, and the
role of the centralized state too little understood, for it to be welcomed as a natural safeguard against crime and abuse. There were few instances where mayors
would turn voluntarily to the gendarmerie to assist with purely local problems.
But their reaction was often one of mild hostility or bland indifference until the
conscription issue heightened the police presence in local communities and
