courriers, la translation et conduite des prisonniers, 1'assistance aux foires et
marches et autres lieux de rassemblement, la recherche et arrestation des
pretres et autres individus dans le cas de deportation, celle des emigres, des
deserteurs et requisitionnaires, celle des voleurs, des assassins et brigands..."
(81).
202 / Conscripts and Deserters
To make matters worse, since gendarmes were still technically military personnel, they could be ordered into action when the needs of the armies demanded
it, and local forces found themselves denuded of men in deference to the
demands of the battalions on the Rhine or in the Pyrenees. In Year II, the district of Saint-Girons, a comer of France where lawlessness always threatened,
found that its entire brigade of gendarmes had been despatched to fight the
Spaniards, leaving them with no police cover whatever and no alternative but
to try to raise an equal number of supplementary National Guardsmen to maintain order (82). Similarly on the eastern frontier in 1792, Remiremont was
stripped of its gendarmes to help with the war effort, and it was left to eight
citizens of the town to volunteer their services as a sort of unofficial vigilante
squad (83). It is true that the most dramatic instances of such interference with
the workings of the police occurred in the early years of the war, before the
administration became more established and proficient, but throughout the
1790s there were continued complaints that the gendarmerie was being sacrificed when military needs seemed pressing. By the end of the decade the department of the Cantal was attempting to police its difficult terrain with only forty
gendarmes (84); and reduced policing levels meant that parts of the Morbihan,
despite the chouan menace, had had to be virtually abandoned (85). In the Nord
the number of brigades had been reduced from twenty-eight to twenty-one, with
the result that they were far too dispersed to achieve efficient policing. The prefect, protesting about the reductions that he had had to accept, noted that half
the city of Lille was now unpoliced because of manpower shortages, that each
brigade in rural areas had an area of three or four cantons to cover, and that, in
consequence, "les brigades ne font de service regulier que dans les villes et les
chefs-lieux de leur residence," appearing in rural communes no more than once
every ten days. It was a recipe for the breakdown of law and order (86). In the
process the policing of desertion could not but suffer, since many commissaires
de police did not have the men to tackle the problem with any degree of seriousness. The terms governing the choice of gendarmes were openly flouted in
the Ariege in Year VII, because otherwise there would be no means of chasing
refractory conscripts (87). In the Seine-et-Oise cuts in the strength of foot patrols
resulted in cavalry being deployed against deserters, even "sur des points montueux et boises ou Femploi de brigades a pied serait plus convenable" (88). But
the problems there pale into insignificance compared with those of the Southeast, where manpower cuts left towns like Crest undefended and presented a
golden opportunity to deserters and brigands alike (89). With commendable
honesty the local authorities explained that despite national priorities, they
faced far too serious threats to order on their immediate doorstep to permit
them to release gendarmes for the pursuit of conscripts.
The effectiveness of the gendarmerie depended, of course, not only on their
numbers but also on their quality and their standing in the communities they
served. They too often lacked the support they needed from local people, and
their morale suffered accordingly. The Gironde was only one department among
many where supplies and pay failed to filter through to the local brigades and
where the gendarmes resented the fact that their services were taken for granted.
"La gendarmerie," it was noted in Year IV, "ferait son service avec exactitude
The Build-up of State Repression / 203
si elle etait sur un pied plus regulier. Beaucoup de gendarmes revenus des armees
n'ont pas de chevaux, la modique solde qu'ils retirent n'est pas suffisante pour
les faire exister, et dans la plupart des residences du departement, le commissaire
ordonnateur n'a pu encore lui faire delivrer les vivres et fourrages des magasins
de la republique" (90). Their anger was compounded by the feeling that their
work was not appreciated by the local community, a feeling substantiated by the
flood of criticism that was showered on them. In the Haute-Garonne their image
was undermined by constant attacks: "on lui reproche generalement d'etre composee d'hommes qui se sont mal conduits pendant les differents chocs de la
Revolution, et de donner chaque jour des preuves de la partialite la plus nuisible" (91). This criticism was more difficult to bear because of the lack of cooperation between the gendarmes and many local councils, who saw them as a
form of intrusion by the state and who resented their interference in what they
regarded as matters for the local community alone. At times the lack of communication amounted almost to complicity in the crimes of that community. In
Year VI, for example, the gendarmes in the Drome felt aggrieved that neither
the municipal administration nor the commissaire of the Directory offered any
support after seven of their number had been murdered by an attroupement
arme in the hamlet of Guisan (92). They were, it seemed, callously abandoned
to whatever fate might befall them. Yet the same administrators would insist
that they be consulted and informed before any police action was launched in
their area. Even a routine search for deserters had to be agreed to by the prefecture before it could legitimately go ahead (93). It is hardly surprising that the
gendarmerie sometimes felt that they were caught between the twin pincers of
the military and civilian administrations, a plaything in the political game that
was being played between the different rival authorities and in the course of
which the maintenance of order was too lightly sacrificed. Unloved and unpaid,
the gendarmes could be driven to cynicism and even to disloyalty, and the
result, as in the Pas-de-Calais in Year VI, could involve the draining of any sense
of public duty:
Sans solde depuis plus d'une annee (lors de la depreciation du papier-monnaie) les gendarmes, soit par besoin pour alimenter leurs families indigentes,
soil par propension a la seduction, ont fait un commerce infame de leur etat.
Les pretres, les deserteurs, les requisitionnaires obtenaient leur tranquillite a
prix d'argent; quand une aussi forte atteinte a etc portee a la moralite, il est
difficile de faire cesser le mal sur le champ. Autrefois on recevait des dons or
des gratifications, y etant contraint par la misere; aujourd'hui on recoit encore
par habitude. (94)
Though resentment of public indifference remained an important source of
demoralization, the efficacy of the gendarmerie did improve markedly over the
period of the Revolution and Empire through better administration and clearer
lines of demarcation. In the 1790s the force had suffered from certain inbuilt
ambiguities inherited from the marechaussee. In particular, there was a damaging ambivalence about the authority on which they carried out interrogations
and effected arrests, for though they were themselves answerable to the Minister
204 / Conscripts and Deserters
of War, they were continually being called on to act in support of the civil
authorities. It was an ambivalence that caused endless conflict and embarrassment (95). Only after the thermidorian coup in Year III was the position clarified, with the creation of a separate Ministry of Police generate and the institution of a more streamlined administration for the gendarmes. The long period
of Fouche's ministry, and the reorganization of the force in Year VIII, gave
added assurance to a body of men who required fixed and clearly understood
lines of authority if it was to operate effectively, especially in matters like conscription which impinged on both military and civil responsibilities. Local policing was also reorganized during the period, following the example of the capital
in having commissaires de police in charge of every town of 5,000 or more
inhabitants. These men, elected during the Revolution, came to be appointed
officials under the Empire, answerable to the prefect of the department (96). But
how efficient were they? Some, we know, were dismissed for dereliction of duty,
and the impression is easily created that commissaires were lazy and prone to
corruption. Daniel, from Mirecourt, for instance, was removed when it was
demonstrated that he never bothered to investigate allegations of fraud while he,
as a merchant, had accumulated unpaid debts (97). Loeuilliet-Rousseau, at
Douai, was forced to resign when it was pointed out that his position as commissaire was incompatible with his trading interest as a brewer in the town (98).
Dutour, at Montelimar, was dismissed when the Minister learned that he had
simply abandoned his post and left policing in a very sensitive district of the
Drome to the men under his command (99). There are clear examples of poor
appointments. Equally, there were parts of France, like the Ariege, where it
proved enormously difficult to find men of any caliber to fill the post in the first
place, since the number of candidates with any knowledge of the law was negligible (100). But it must be said that most of the men chosen survived in their
jobs without being denounced, at least until 1815 when the criterion for remaining in post was more a political one than one of legal competence. The men
chosen tended to combine social standing in the community with at least a modicum of legal experience; they were most commonly landowners and government administrators, lawyers and army officers (101). And some at least of the
denunciations may have reflected on local rivalries as much as on the worth of
the commissaires themselves. At Bordeaux in Year XIII both their immediate
superior, the commissaire general de police in the city, and the prefect of the
Gironde had occasion to comment on the qualities possessed by their commissaires de police. The result is most interesting. In only two instances did the two
men agree. Jean-Baptiste Boyer was to his superiors "probe, zele, et propre aux
fonctions qui lui sont attributes"; but the prefect commented acidly that "on le
dit tres ignorant, incapable de dresser un proces-verbal; on le taxe de favoriser
les maisons de prostitution." Jean-Baptiste Lamoissonniere, to the commissairegeneral, was "extrement probe, plein de zele et justement estime"; the prefect
found him "fort cupide et brutal." And whereas the commissaire-general praised
Jean-Baptiste Marie Jogan for being "probe et tres zele, meme avec devouement," the prefect ignored his present qualities to concentrate on his past career,
noting with evident disfavor that "on dit qu'il a joue un role tres actif dans les
temps de la Terreur. On cite plusieurs personnages importants qu'il a denonces
The Build-up of State Repression / 205
et qui ont peri. On le dit brutal, insolent..." (102). The evidence would seem
to suggest that even highly competent commissaires de police were vulnerable
to denunciation and to personal malice.
What emerges from an examination of the selection of commissaires de
police is the weight attached to the personal circumstances of each candidate, to
probity measured by personal sacrifice and family commitments. Of Mazois, a
candidate for the post at Bordeaux in Year XIII, it was claimed that he was a
"pere de famine tres estimable," that he had lost his fortune in the Revolution—
he was, predictably, a negotiant on the Bordeaux waterfront—"par une suite des
malheurs de la guerre maritime et des desastres des colonies," and that he had
