it is true that many of the more dismissive remarks about the quality of village
mayors betray the sense of urban superiority of prefects and their staff, the
respect in which they were held was often quite minimal. In some villages there
were no candidates for office who could demonstrate the most basic understanding of the workings of local government, which makes their subsequent apathy
and dilatoriness of conduct all the easier to understand. At Groix in the Morbihan the only candidate who could be found "qui soil capable de gerer cette
place dignement" was the parish priest, an eventuality forbidden by law (32).
Elsewhere they were frequently village cultivateurs more motivated by self-interest than by concern for the public good. The sous-prefet in Dunkerque, an area
where cooperation between the gendarmerie and local mayors had never been
strong, replied to criticism of his administration by pointing to the limited outlook and literacy of the men who accepted mayoral office in the countryside:
Les seuls renseignements qu'il me soil possible de donner, c'est qu'en general
les maires manquent de nerf et de zele, et beaucoup de Fintelligence necessaire pour remplir leurs devoirs; mais ce mal est sans remede. Les campagnes
ne sont habitees que par des cultivateurs, et on n'y trouve point de proprie-
226 / Conscripts and Deserters
taires qui, par leur education, offriraient plus de moyens de faire marcher les
choses comme il conviendrait. (33)
This rather bleak view was confirmed by the Directory's commissaire in Mau~
beuge in Year VII, who noted that local government was already being undermined by the refusal of men of property, "les gens aises," to have any part in it,
with the result that public office was left increasingly to the poor, peasants with
little land of their own, and day laborers (34).
The decline in the status of mayors and their adjoints and the refusal of suitable candidates to present themselves for election further constrained the government's freedom of political maneuver. For Paris had no means of forcing
local men to serve. In a surprisingly frank statement the prefect of the Gironde
warned the conseiller d'etat in Year XII of the frustration and impotence that
he felt when faced with public apathy and noncooperation. Mayoralties, he said,
were no longer sought after, with the result that the government had no choice
but to accept patently inadequate candidates:
II ne faut pas oublier, M. le Conseiller d'Etat, qu'on est libre de les accepter
ou de les refuser; qu'elles sont purement gratuites; qu'elles font perdre leur
temps a ceux qui les occupent; que meme elles constituent un frais. II n'y a
qu'un avantage qui contrebalance ces inconvenients, c'est la consideration
qu'elles font rejaillir dans une commune sur 1'homme qui les remplit, mais
cette espece de talisman n'a pas de puissances sur toutes les ames. (35)
In such an unreceptive climate the government's clear interest was to hold on
to the mayors it had for as long as it could; replacing or dismissing them made
little sense when candidates were so rare and public good will so lacking. If officials were local men of limited horizons, faithful representatives of local society,
any attempt to discipline them for errors or for omissions could only serve to
stir up opposition in the community at large. Hence prefects and ministers were
left in something of a quandary. Did they take action against mayors who
cheated or defrauded in matters of recruitment and risk alienating local opinion
still further, or did they continue to recognize the powers of the mayors who
were implicated and risk appearing to condone their offenses? Often they were
only too glad to accept a face-saving compromise. When the mayor of Massy
(Seine-et-Oise) was suspected of providing certificates to a known and convicted
deserter in 1810, the Minister not surprisingly insisted on his dismissal from
office; however, the prefect was so concerned that he would be unable to find a
replacement that he intervened and offered evidence in his defense (36). Concern that the public humiliation of a country mayor would stir up sympathy
against the government was a strong argument in favor of adopting a conciliatory approach. This was especially true, of course, in parts of the country where
royalism and counterrevolution were rampant, where terrorization effectively
ensured that loyal republican candidates for public office rarely stepped forward.
At Pierrelatte in the Drome not a single replacement could be found when the
municipal council was dismissed in Year V. One by one the men designated as
replacements offered their apologies and declined to serve. Yet all had given
Desertion, the State, and the People / 111
excellent service to the community in the past and were men of known and
trusted opinions. Fear clearly lay at the root of their new found intransigence,
fear for their property and the welfare of their families. As the government commissaire in Pierrelatte warned, "tant que les pretres refractaires seront proteges,
qu'ils trouvent dans le corps legislatif de chaleureux defenseurs, que les deserteurs pourront se montrer impunement, les bons citoyens, les veritables soutiens
du gouvernement, n'oseront accepter les places dans la crainte d'etre les victimes
du fanatisme, et, disons-le, du royalisme" (37). Intimidation could so easily
bring whole communities to the verge of ungovernability. When the mayor of
Saint-Urcize in the Cantal helped to arrest a conscript in the village inn, public
anger forced him to resign through fear of violent reprisals. More significantly,
perhaps, no one else would agree to replace him, and all those who were proposed for the office threatened to leave the town rather than agree to work with
the gendarmerie (38).
It can, of course, be argued that with more than 37,000 communes and local
government entrusted to the new classe politique created in 1790, isolated
instances of resistance or indifference were only to be expected. New habits and
customs could not be created overnight, and the revolutionary and Napoleonic
institutions were bound to suffer teething problems, especially at village level.
But in many parts of the country the malaise that set in over the issue of military
recruitment ran much deeper, with the result that in wide areas of France (the
rural Gironde as well as the frontier regions of the Ariege) it became increasingly
difficult to find local men of any stature willing to serve as village mayors. This
posed problems of credibility as well as of simple authority for the government.
Paris needed mayors and elected conseils municipaux if they were to retain the
sense of local involvement on which their effective rule was dependent. The
mayor, decked out in his tricolor sash and resplendent in his municipal insignia,
was a symbol of the new order of representative government, and was particularly vital to the success of unpopular policies like the annual tirage for the
armies (39). Without his symbolic involvement the intrusion of outside force
was exposed much more brutally as a naked aggression against local custom, and
all sense of government by consensus risked being lost. In the last resort, of
course, the government had alternatives, but it was loathe to make use of them.
It could depend more widely on the advice of appointed commissaires, trusting
their judgment over that of its elected officials, though this policy was not without its perils. Commissaires themselves could be subjected to local pressures or
become the victims of violence (40). The unpopularity of commissaires under
the Directory could lead to the post being left vacant for months and even years,
as happened at Auray—a particularly delicate posting in chouan country—in
Year V (41). There were even instances where a commissaire, after being dismissed for his over-sympathetic attitude to local conscripts, had to be reinstated
after a decent interval because no other candidates were available (42). Nor was
there any guarantee that the men appointed by the government would actually
carry out their duties with the required degree of efficiency. They were, after all,
no less open to corruption than elected officials, and the temptations of their
office were substantial. At Saales in the Vosges the commissaire du Directoire in
Year VI was denounced for taking bribes from the relatives of conscripts and
228 / Conscripts and Deserters
for granting illegal exemptions that were more commonly associated with village
mayors. From one requisitionnaire he received "deux livres de lin et une somme
de trois livres", from another "une livre de lin," and from a third "une livre de
lin et un boisseau de froment (43). His price, it seems, was endearingly cheap.
But the real disadvantage to Paris of trying to rule extensively through appointed
officials lay in the adverse effect that this had on public opinion. Their lack of
local responsibility left them and the government that relied on them vulnerable
to public criticism. They were too often depicted as self-important busybodies,
reveling in the power that their office bestowed, throwing their weight around
needlessly and disturbing the quiet tenor of municipal councils that were working smoothly and undemonstratively (44). Like the other authoritarian solutions
to local intransigence—the sending in of the military or the forcible amalgamation of two adjacent communes (45)—the reliance on commissaires could not
substitute for the demise of elected local government.
The anger of local people was directed not only at the process of recruitment
that brought the state into their lives, but also at the methods of policing that
were adopted. The gendarmes might complain about the lack of cooperation
that they received from local communities, but for local people it was the abuse
of power by the gendarmes that caused most outcry; and the gendarmes were
the visible, tangible representation of the state itself. The build-up of a police
presence in areas of provincial France which had been accustomed only to the
rather patchy surveillance of the marechaussee was almost bound to occasion
conflict, especially with the new municipal authorities who guarded their local
liberties jealously against real and imagined slights. The fact that deserters and
refractories sought shelter in practically all the communes of France at one time
or another opened everyone to the possibility of a visit from the gendarmerie.
And the behavior of the gendarmes, especially when they felt thwarted by a lack
of immediate help and cooperation, could itself contribute to inflaming relations
with the local population. Gendarmes could be rough and insolent and could
use their status and their uniform to badger and bully countrymen suspected of
shielding fugitives. A report from the Twenty-seventh Division Militaire in
Turin admitted as much in Year XI:
La gendarmerie n'est pas aussi bien composee qu'on pourrait le desirer pour
la tranquillite de ce pays; elle abuse souvent des pouvoirs qui lui sont confies
et aliene d'elle par cette conduite Fesprit des habitants; il y a peu de gendarmes qui mettent d'abord en usage les moyens de douceur; leur fierte mal
placee degenere souvent en brutalite, et c'est la Fune des grandes causes des
revoltes qu'elle se plaint d'exciter partout ou elle poursuit les mediants ...
(46)
As time passed it became increasingly obvious that it was the gendarmerie rather
than the recruitment process which was the principal target for popular venom;
and where violence broke out local councils were prone to defend their concitoyens and turn their anger against the police (47). Familiarity with the new
policing conventions did nothing to win public trust or understanding.
If opinion in a village favored the refractory conscript against the demands
Desertion, the State, and the People / 229
of the state, there was little that the police could do to win hearts in support of
