by local authorities who felt that their legitimate interests were being transgressed. Public wrangles over jurisdictions were embarrassingly common. The
sous-prefet and mayor of Die were just two of many officials who allowed their
rivalry to spill over into public denunciation, and the prefect felt obliged to send
a commissaire to the town to prevent the breakdown of public confidence (15).
So persistent were the demands made by Paris on the filling of conscription lists
that no level of officialdom was immune from reproach. Even prefects felt
threatened by the issue, and their anxieties could on occasion affect their judgment and their ability to cooperate with their colleagues in other departments.
In Year XIV, goaded by a rebuke from his minister, the prefect of the Gironde
tried to pass on the blame for his failures to his counterpart in the neighboring
Dordogne. For, he alleged, those from his department who left their units while
under escort rarely did so before passing into the Dordogne, and he pointed an
accusatory finger at the town of Perigueux as "le lieu ou ils abandonnent leurs
conducteurs; jamais ceux qui n'ont nulle envie de joindre leurs corps ne depassent cette ville. Ils y trouvent sans doute des facilites qui ne leur sont point
offertes ailleurs" (16). It was a vague and poorly substantiated taunt which the
prefect of the Dordogne angrily rebuffed. But, like the divisions between prefects
and the military, it did nothing to consolidate the authority of the new administrative structure on which both the Revolution and the Empire so deeply
relied.
If the day-to-day implementation of the recruitment law placed strains on
the loyalties of officials, moments of crisis could undermine them entirely. When
the police or a unit of the military descended on a community in search of refractory conscripts, or when they received a ministerial order to hand over all fugitives hiding on local farms, administrators found themselves in a dreadful quandary. Should they obey the state at the inevitable cost of alienating local
opinion? Were their loyalties as citoyens more binding than their simple, ageold loyalties to family and community? Mayors were especially vulnerable to
divided loyalties of this kind, which ran far deeper than any threats of retaliation
or bribes of favors from their fellow villagers. Those who were denounced or
dragged before the courts were generally guilty of something more tangible than
weakness or indecision. They were men who sought to turn their delicate position to their own advantage, who interfered with the documentation with which
they were entrusted, and who bought and sold men's lives through frauds and
Desertion, the State, and the People / 223
forgeries (17). Much more prevalent, however, and ultimately just as serious a
threat to the functioning of the state, was the reluctance of many village mayors
to play their part with the vigor and energy that the law demanded. In drawing
up lists of refractories they demonstrated an understandable "timidite" (18), or
they typified the attitude of those around them by showing favor to family and
friends (19). One mayor at Rothau in the Vosges threatened to resign on the spot
if the authorities did not agree to grant a conge absolu for his sick son who was
of requisition age and had just been incorporated in a regiment of hussars (20).
Local officials, and here perhaps is the root of the problem, simply did not share
the government's perception of recruitment as a problem of the first importance.
Seen from village France, it paled into insignificance when compared to the
more urgent demands of the agricultural year, to sowing and harvesting, or the
regulation of common lands. In the Nord, as in other parts of the country, what
deterred mayors and their adjoints from initiating proceedings against suspected
deserters and insoumis was less the risk of public outcry than the certainty of
long and troublesome routine. The prefect explained in Year X that their reluctance should be understood rather than simply condemned, especially that
shown by the adjoints "qui sont charges de la poursuite des delits de police pardevant les juges de paix ... Ce qui paralyse surtout le zele et Faction des
adjoints, c'est qu'ils sont obliges de faire des voyages au chef-lieu de canton pour
exercer leurs poursuites ... et qu'ils ne recoivent ni salaires ni indemnite pour
ces voyages qui les exposent a des depenses" (21). Mayors and their adjoints
were often simple cultivateurs like the majority of the community. They did not
have the leisure or the financial security needed to take time off to devote to
such time-consuming bureaucratic rituals. In the Southwest it was not realistic
to expect local officials to concentrate on the policing of desertion when they
had more pressing matters, like the vendange, on their minds. In consequence,
little was ever done in August and September, when mayors and their adjoints
were fully occupied in harvesting the grapes and preparing the new season's wine
(22).
Mayors were not, of course, full-time officials; and to the annoyance of central government they did not act with the instincts or the single-mindedness of
men whose devotion to government policy was determined by their place on the
government's payroll. Rather they were village notables, proud of the honorary
role that had been bestowed on them by their fellows in the balmy days of 1790,
but unwilling and sometimes unable to carry out the increasingly burdensome
duties that the state was demanding of them. It was one thing to ask that they
officiate at local fetes and republican ceremonies, chair council meetings, and
review the local detachment of the National Guard. These were purely honorific
functions that cost little in either time or social position; and many of the village
mayors of the early months of the Revolution clearly basked in the reflected
admiration of their constituents. But increasingly the tasks imposed on them
became onerous and even invidious, earning the animosity of other villagers and
the opprobrium of those who placed traditional village freedoms above the new
found pretensions of the state. The issue of military recruitment lay at the very
heart of this new role. Maintaining the etat civil in good order, with the names
listed in neat columns, might be no more than a formal task, reflecting the new
224 / Conscripts and Deserters
civic consciousness of the secular authorities. But making use of that document
to send one's sons and neighbors to serve in the regiments went far beyond the
purely honorific. It was an aspect of state policing, not of municipal dignity.
Furthermore, it placed unforseen pressures on mayors who had become
involved in municipal affairs in 1790 for reasons that had nothing to do with
politics. The nature of the job had changed, and disillusion frequently set in. In
the Vosges, for instance, levels of enthusiasm ebbed quickly as the new nature
of municipal responsibilities became clear. In Year VII it was recognized that
few of the department's mayors, adjoints, or agents municipaux had much stomach for the highly dirigiste role that they were being expected to play:
La plupart des agents municipaux ne regardent leurs fonctions que comme un
lourd fardeau dont ils desirent vivement de se decharger. S'ils font quelqu'usage de 1'autorite dont ils sont revetus, ils craignent toujours que ceux
qu'elle frappe ne deviennent autant d'ennemis personnels et dangereux, et
cette consideration les rend malheureusement tres faibles et negligents dans
1'exercice de leurs fonctions. (23)
As time passed, and as the mayor's role became increasingly that of exercising
regular surveillance on all the young men resident in their area of administrative
competence, so the joys of titular leadership in communal affairs became visibly
diminished. (24)
Disillusionment was frequently translated into resignation. Of course public
officials seldom hinted at differences of opinion or disagreements with state policy; they hid behind reasons of health or business pressures. Many offered a
bluntly materialist explanation, claiming that the costs involved in carrying out
municipal duties had become too onerous and that they must therefore tender
their resignation. An agent municipal at Valence excused himself from office in
Year IV on the grounds that "la modicite de mon traitement et les circonstances
malheureuses ou nous nous trouvons m'ont enfin contraint d'abandonner mes
fonctions pour aller chercher du pain ailleurs" (25). Another, at Rambervillers,
pleaded business engagements that conflicted with the demands of his office:
"L'exposant est marchand, ce sont les jours de foire et de marches ou son commerce le retient dans sa boutique, ce sont cependant ces jours-la ou les fonctions
d'adjoint 1'appelleront de toute necessite et sans interruption" (26). The submission could assume a more humanitarian guise. Tournaire aine, the government's commissaire at Chateauneuf-de-Mazene (Drome), offered a whole list of
excuses to justify his resignation, as though he believed, perhaps rightly, that no
one reason would carry sufficient weight with his political masters:
... que j'ai mon epouse malade, n'etant pas sortie de ma maison depuis plus
d'une annee; j'ai une fille aveugle, un frere estropie d'un rhumatisme, il y a
quatre ans qu'il n'est pas sorty de sa chambre, son etat exigeant des soins
penibles. Je suis eloigne de deux grands lieux de Chateauneuf, chef-lieu de
canton, des chemins mauvais, y ayant la riviere des Sabron a passer sans
aucun pont, ce qu'il rend surtout en temps d'hiver la communication presque
impossible. (27)
Desertion, the State, and the People / 225
What these men and hundreds of others like them had in common after several
years of the Republic was a conviction that they wanted quite desperately to be
relieved of their public office and of responsibilities that they found increasingly
intolerable for themselves and their families.
The government was well aware of the serious implications of such discontent for the smooth running of the governmental machine. Good men with the
sort of skills that were required to guarantee efficiency were less and less likely
to offer their services, and the image of mayoral office became tarnished in the
eyes of the general public. The prefect of the Loire admitted in his report for
1807 that the conscription laws had played a major part in creating public
demoralization and loss of confidence in local government, "en eloignant les
hommes qui y conviendraient le mieux" (28). This in turn helped to create a
climate in which the government had little trust in the abilities of its local officials. In some rural departments it was a serious problem to find men of even
the most basic literacy to fill communal offices, however explicitly the law might
define literacy as a basic requirement for mayors. In the Cantal mayors were
often incapable of reading or interpreting tax laws, which made tax collection
difficult, if not impossible. One of the men appointed as percepteurs des contributions for the department was dismissed in Year XI after being acquitted in a
fraud case in which he pleaded not guilty on grounds of total illiteracy (29). In
the Pyrenees illiterate mayors posed problems of comprehension and communication. The mayor of Loubieres (Ariege) was finally dismissed in Year XIII
for his illiteracy, or, more accurately, for his total failure to answer administrative correspondence, a direct result of his lack of reading skills (30). And in the
neighboring Roussillon it was noted that village mayors who could not read or
write were prone to hold back several young men from the annual conscription
to help them with their administration—a habit that was harmful to public
morale but was very common "dans des pays ou les citoyens propres a dresser
les rolles des contributions, en sachant bien lire, sont tres rares" (31). Although
