unit that would sweep from village to village, searching out refractories and
deserters in the fields and barns and outhouses, and spreading fear and respect
for the law by means of blanket policing. Permission to establish a special force
for the policing of recruitment was given under a law offloreal Year IV that
allowed for "la creation dans chaque canton de la Republique d'un detachement
sedentaire de garde nationale qui devrait prendre le nom de colonne mobile et
qui aurait pour but de se tenir constamment pret a voler partout ou la tranquillite publique semblerait compromise" (142). But this law was not widely implemented, largely because of the vociferous opposition that greeted it. In the Correze we learn that local opinion deemed it too severe and feared that its
implementation would simply antagonize the community (143). The first mention of widespread use ofcolonnes was in Years VII and VIII, when they seemed
to have fairly casual forces made up of whatever troops happened to be available
212 / Conscripts and Deserters
in the area at the time (144). Essentially a prefect would call in such a unit for a
short, temporary campaign against deserters when he became convinced that
there was a crisis in his area that went beyond the capacities of the local gendarmerie. It was for this reason that the prefect of the Vosges, not normally a
problem department from the point of view of conscription, resorted to a
colonne mobile at the very end of Year VIII in a determined effort to stamp out
what he saw as an incipient threat (145). These early experiments, almost always
to police the first conscriptions, were hardly unqualified successes for the authorities. In the Drome colonnes of local men were drawn up but they refused to
move against their compatriots (146). In Bordeaux, where again a force was
assembled, they had no rifles and had to be disbanded before they even saw
action (147). And in the villages of the Nord the colonne was being cold-shouldered and treated with contempt by the villagers, who ignored its questions and
refused to find food for the soldiers while they were on patrol (148). With the
less stringent demands for conscripts in the years that followed, no further use
was made of colonnes until the later years of the Empire, when the draining
campaigns to the East and in the Peninsula were forcing an increase in conscription. The grandes operations of these columns were launched from 1810 onward,
with the greatest successes achieved in the difficult conditions of 1810 and 1811.
Four columns were at work between July 1810 and February 1811, resulting in
a wave of nearly 14,000 arrests. From February a further eleven columns were
brought into action and their activity was extended to ninety-nine departments
of France and the pays reunis. By the time they were disbanded in February 1812
some 63,000 deserters and refractories had been arrested and the problem of
public order was seemingly ended (149). In particular, draft evasion no longer
seemed an attractive option in villages where the colonnes threatened to descend
at any moment. In 1811 there were only 6,600 new cases of insoumission
recorded by the Ministry of War compared with nearly 54,000 new desertions
(150).
These figures provided their own justification as delighted prefects reported
during 1811 and 1812 that the colonnes had virtually wiped out refractory
behavior in their areas of jurisdiction. Where there were complaints they were
seldom about the effectiveness of the policing, except occasionally in areas of
difficult terrain where the soldiers lacked the local connaissances needed to master the conditions they faced. At Carbon-Blanc, a notorious hiding-place for
insoumis and for criminals of all kinds, the colonne mobile was hampered by
problems of communication and lost its prey. As the prefect of the Gironde
expressed it, "le mauvais etat des chemins et la situation topographique d'un
pays coupe par des ruisseaux qui empechent les communications avaient considerablement retarde la marche de la colonne mobile et avaient donne le temps
aux insoumis de se soustraire aux recherches" (151). More often local people
protested about the brutality of the troops sent into their communities, or about
the wrongful arrests that resulted from their visits (152). Or again, the arrival of
a military force that had to cooperate with the civil authorities in the towns
through which it passed gave rise to inevitable squabbles about authority, as the
local councils resisted any possible encroachment on their powers and sometimes tried to defend their administres against outside force. In 1813 when on
The Build-up of State Repression / 213
the Emperor's instructions colonnes were again prepared to root out refractories
in key departments, the Minister of War drew attention to this problem of
authority, to the ambiguity that necessarily existed between their military and
civilian function. Soldiers for the columns should be taken, he insisted, from the
legion d'elite and senior officers should be placed in command, so that the force
could hope to command respect from locally elected officials and to impose its
will on prefects and senior administrators (153). These difficulties should not be
exaggerated, however. By this time the power of the colonnes was appreciated
throughout France, and they were recognized for what they were, the most
feared and most effective element in the armory of police measures against
desertion and insoumission.
The colonnes mobiles, like the gendarmes and the garnisaires, achieved their
goals by spreading terror and by making life for refractories and their families
too unpleasant to bear with equanimity. They forced men out of hiding; they
were certainly not in the business of winning hearts or of persuading them of the
virtues of military life. The major part of the policing of conscription during the
Revolution and Empire followed that pattern. It was repressive rather than persuasive, and if the battalions were duly filled it was with reluctant and often
resentful recruits. But repression was tempered, as it had traditionally been during the Ancien Regime, with mercy and moderation, at such moments as the
government judged appropriate to the overriding goal of getting men back into
uniform. The use of amnesties was a case in point. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries periodic amnesties had been offered to deserters, interspersed
with periods of severe repression, in an attempt to lure waverers back to their
units. So in the revolutionary wars governments turned again to this traditional
weapon against those who had escaped the clutches of the army, playing on their
fears, on the discomfort of their lives on the run, and on the promise of a free
pardon if they gave themselves up. Those who had passed a certain age could
even hope to return to their farms and workshops as free men, without either
the stigma of having deserted or the constant fear of being discovered and
arrested. The amnesty law of March 1810 spelled out the terms on offer: those
men who had deserted before 1 January 1806 were free to return to their homes
in safety, whereas for those who had left their regiments since that date meant
only that they could return to their units without fear of retribution. The
amnesty lasted for only two months, and those who continued to defy the law
knew very well that after it expired, they would be less numerous than before,
more vulnerable to arrest, and pursued with greater vigor than before (154). The
amnesty, too, was a measure of state police, however much disguised in a gloved
hand.
Amnesties were a familiar feature of the military landscape. As early as 23
thermidor II, a fortnight after the overthrow of Robespierre, those condemned
by the Tribunal Criminel for simple desertion within the territory of France
became eligible for amnesty if they accepted to return to their units (155). The
device was tried again in Year VIII and Year X, after the victory at Friedland
in 1807, and, most munificently of all, to celebrate the Emperor's marriage with
Marie-Louise in 1810. Opinions varied on their effectiveness as a measure of
police. Certainly they did lead to considerable numbers of men returning to their
214 / Conscripts and Deserters
villages to live within the law, which itself reduced the pressures on the gendarmerie and facilitated the policing process. According to official statistics, which
may be taken as an approximate guide only, the amnesty of 1810 allowed more
than 49,000 men to return to civilian life free from penalty or prosecution; but
of the 35,500 deserters and insoumis from the classes of 1806 to 1810, those who
would have had to rejoin to enjoy the benefit of the amnesty, only 6,000 came
forward (156). The comments offered by prefects in 1810 throw interesting light
on both the strengths and weaknesses of amnesties as a means of overcoming
the problem of disobedience. In the Cantal the benefits were emphasized, but
they were benefits less for the army than for agricultural life in the department,
to which hundreds of fugitives were usefully returned. Generally local administrators were reserved in their praise and conservative in their expectations. In
both the Tarn and Tarn-et-Garonne there was a suspicion that the news of an
amnistie absolue would undermine the amnistie conditionnelle, with the result
that very few soldiers would reappear in their regiments. In the Landes rumor
further destroyed the possible military advantage, since the belief had spread
from village to village that men of the last five classes would also be granted
complete immunity in celebration of the birth of an heir to the throne (157). All
seemed agreed that when a possible amnesty was mooted, the result was highly
damaging for the conscription effort, as men held back from committing themselves lest legislation provide them with a means of escape. Uncertainty was
willfully created, and this made the administration's task more difficult to
achieve (158).
It was the blatant inconsistency of a policy that condemned deserters to long
years of hard labor at one moment and granted them a total reprieve the next
which made amnesties so controversial. Many felt that the government would
do better to pursue a single-minded and intelligible campaign against refractories rather than confuse local communities with apparently contradictory
decrees. Was desertion or insoumission a serious crime to be treated with appropriate severity, or was it a minor peccadillo that could be excused come the next
Imperial amnesty? The prefect of Taro in northern Italy expressed the frustrations of many of his colleagues in 1810 when he commented that "Famnistie,
en suspendant les mesures de rigueur qui s'exercaient contre les families, va
retarder nos succes." For, he explained, "les habitants reclament la jouissance
de ce bienfait dans toute sa plenitude. Nous n'avons rien a leur opposer" (159).
It was not just administrative tidiness that motivated those who objected to the
government's seeming vaccillation. They genuinely feared for public order if
young men were given the impression that they could avoid service with impunity, if only they could remain in hiding for a sufficiently long period. It was a
challenge to their powers of resilience. In Douai the prefect was quite scathing:
En efFet, les consents appelles ont journellement sous les yeux le tableau des
communes rurales ou sont en foule des consents designes des classes amnistiees, qui ne doivent leur liberte qu'a Fopiniatrete de leurs efforts pour demeurer recalcitrans et s'etre soustrait aux poursuites des autorites judiciaires, civiles et militaires. (160)
The Build-up of State Repression / 215
Not only was the policy visibly counterproductive in the view of the authorities
