aroused latent village animosities against the state and its pretensions. It was
conscription that turned rural communities into foyers of hatred for the gendarmes and that drove them to the use offeree, lashing out often blindly against
men perceived as oppressors. In many parts of the countryside violence and
popular disturbance reached unprecedented levels in these years as a direct
result of recruitment policy, and it was turned increasingly against the government and its agents. That is not to say that it was political in any counterrevolutionary sense; however, it was political to the extent that it was used in defense
of local rights and customs against the imposition of unwelcome innovation
from outside the community. The commissaire of the Directory in the Aude,
commenting on the levels of violence he had to contend with and the air of
menace that seemed to hang over many of the communities under his administration, attributed popular animosity to custom and tradition and a dislike of
change, to inflexible attitudes "telles que 1'ignorance du peuple qui le rend inaccessible aux nouveautes, les vieilles habitudes et les prejuges de 1'enfance qui
diligent la plupart des individus, enfin le fanatisme religieux, foyer eternel de
depravation" (63). In other words, he was admitting that government action in
this sphere ran counter to the most basic political instincts of the rural
community.
The violence stimulated by recruitment and conscription fell into several
clear categories. At the moment of the tirage there was always a strong possibility of violent resistance, either on the part of the men designated, their families,
or the young men of the community acting out a collective peer group role.
When the government passed a law ordering an augmented level of service or
an exceptional levy, the agents entrusted with the decree might suffer violent
handling by an angry community. Or the day designated for the depart of the
young men of the locality might attract to the town hall a murmuring crowd of
malcontents, hurling abuse at the municipal officials and those gendarmes sent
to escort the new conscripts to their units. Sometimes, as at Elven in the Morbihan in 1809, public hostility was so evident that the gendarmerie mounted
special policing operations in a bid to prevent rioting and disorder. In this case
Desertion, the State, and the People / 233
there was a well-accredited rumor in the department that open insurrection
might ensue (64). Over time it seemed that the targets of popular anger underwent a subtle but significant change. Whereas in the early years of revolutionary
recruitment most of the violence was directed against the recruiting-sergeant and
the selection process, by 1800 it was the agents and representatives of the state
who found themselves under fire. The conscription process increasingly, as has
been demonstrated, passed without serious incident, but those who represented
the government or who symbolized the authority of the state came more and
more to have that authority called into question. The gendarmerie were particularly regarded with suspicion and open hostility when they carried out their
duties in the village community, especially when those duties involved the
search for conscripts or the arrest of young men hiding in the fields and outhouses. When they made a capture or began to lead their prisoners back to the
nearby town, popular fury often bore down on them, and violence, even murder,
could easily ensue.
What is especially significant about this violence is the general support that
it evoked across large sectors of rural society. Even when the deserters themselves attacked the gendarmerie to secure their own release, it is clear that they
did so with the absolution of their families and friends (65). The arrival of gendarmes to carry out a rafle in houses and outbuildings was nearly always met
with sullen opposition, at times interrupted by jeers and catcalls. And it took
very little for that opposition to be inflamed into physical assault. The very sight
of uniformed officers in villages that had offered their protection to deserters
could suffice to heighten tension and spark off violence. A dawn raid on a hamlet
in the Pas-de-Calais where the mayor was known to favor refractories was
greeted with threats and abuse, the suspect succeeding in attracting a small army
of villagers to his defense, armed with pitchforks and scythes. The gendarmes
could only parry the blows aimed at them and withdraw empty-handed (66). In
several other villages in the north of France the police were stoned by angry
villagers infuriated by their presence and by the purpose of their visit. At Ognies
where seventy-six men had deserted in an act of mass disobedience a few weeks
previously, gendarmes were greeted by a hail of stones and forced to abandon
their mission (67). It was this generalized collusion in violence against the police
that proved most frustrating and disspiriting for members of the force. When
they were attacked, injured, on occasion killed during these campaigns against
desertion, no one in the local community seemed to care. At Loubens (Ariege)
two officers were subjected to a barrage of abuse in the village bar while they
prepared to take their captive, a deserter from the Ninety-third Line Regiment,
back to prison. Even when the prisoner grabbed a bottle full of wine and
smashed it in the face of one of his tormentors, no one could be found to testify
against him. The court subsequently reduced the charge on the grounds that a
bottle should be seen less as an offensive weapon than as an everyday object in
a cabaret (68). In a separate incident a few miles away, several young men
attacked and disarmed the gendarmes who had arrested one of their number for
draft evasion. They were noisy and rowdy, firing pistol shots and threatening the
police, yet again not a soul in the village came forward with evidence (69). The
gendarmes were too familiar with hostility and with their best-laid plans being
234 / Conscripts and Deserters
betrayed by local people for any illusions to remain. In many parts of the hexagone they knew that anti-police violence enjoyed popular support in the local
community. They knew too that there could be no stigma attached to such violence as long as their presence was resented as an intrusion from the outside
world.
This view is strongly supported by the evidence of those involved in attacks
on the gendarmerie, the different kinds of people who might at one time or
another throw themselves into riotous assembly. The formula would seem to
have been almost infinitely variable. Maires and village notables, already implicated in the eyes of the state to the extent that they were responsible for esprit
public within their communities, often did nothing to oppose the overwhelming
sentiment of the villagers and took a leading part in riots to free deserters (70).
The immediate family of those at risk were equally likely to figure among the
rioters. In a violent incident at Le Taillan near Bordeaux the gendarmes arresting a local man for avoiding conscription found themselves suddenly assailed
by "son pere, deux de ses freres, sa soeur et plusieurs autres habitants armes de
baches," a formidable demonstration of family unity, even if in this case it failed
to secure the young man's release (71). Women as well as men and the old as
well as the young threw themselves into such attacks, and at times it was their
particular contribution that freed sons, husbands, and nephews. When a conscript was arrested by a garde-champetre near Charpey in the Drome in 1806, it
was his illegitimate daughter and two other village women who attacked the
garde and threatened him with a rich variety of weapons, from a knife to an axe
to an armory of stones and rocks (72). Village women were every bit as fierce as
their men in defending their families against arrest or forcible removal to the
armies, and their sheer, single-minded devotion to the freedom of their sons and
husbands could leave the gendarmes powerless. An incident in the village of
Courlon in the Yonne provides a good example. The two gendarmes sent to
arrest a local deserter had seized and bound him when the whole village seemed
to explode around them. Even allowing for the natural exaggeration of two very
frightened officers, their description conjures up graphic images of family
solidarity:
Us avaient effectue cette arrestation, mais qu'immediatement etaient survenus Francois Verrien, frere du deserteur, Anne Verrien, femme Bernard Leroux, la citoyenne Cheinot et la veuve Verrien, mere du deserteur, qui s'etaient
tous armes de pierres et de batons, avaient frappe les gendarmes sur les bras
et sur la tete et avaient lache sur eux un gros chien qui dechira leurs vetements; que cette scene s'est passee devant un rassemblement de soixante personnes, tant hommes que femmes, parmi lesquels plusiers criaient, 'Tuez ces
coquins-la!" (73)
In this as in so many other instances, the officers had little choice but to release
their prey. Or again, it might be the young men of the community, the friends
of the victim and those who, like him, knew what it was to undergo the supplice
of the ballot for the armies, who confronted the gendarmes and secured their
companion's freedom. In one spectacular attack, a young cowherd from the Can-
Desertion, the State, and the People / 235
tal was freed from captivity by some thirty of his friends, who abandoned their
beasts on the mountainside to ambush the police as they escorted their captives
along the main road between Aurillac and Tulle (74). Bonds of friendship among
the young men of the village community, like family bonds, could be turned to
the assistance of those on the run and could thwart the ambitions of gendarmes
and government alike.
From this it was but a short step to full-scale antigovernment rioting, sparked
off by the arrival of the gendarmes in a village or by rumors of an impending
raid to arrest draft dodgers. So many different interests were antagonized by a
police presence that the reaction against them could include the entire community. If country families were prepared to attack the police in defense of their
sons and brothers, so, too, they would risk their lives and their liberty to free
their neighbors' children, their farmservants, or those who had thrown themselves on their mercy. In the battle to defend conscripts against the authorities
a sense of loyalty and of belonging quickly developed. The gendarmes who
entered their village to seize their children or the young men who depended on
their protection had, as a matter of honor, to be repulsed; their purpose dictated
that they should be cast as the enemy of the entire community. In 1806 when
officers from Foix entered the village of Merens to arrest deserters, they encountered the armed opposition of the majority of the villagers in a bagarre of considerable violence. Not only was the raid foiled, but in the struggle the symbols
of the gendarmes' authority were sought as trophies, tangible evidence of a
famous collective victory. The villagers noisily proclaimed their anger at the violation of their community, tore free the unfortunate conscript who had been
arrested, and, in the mayor's words, "on est parvenu ... a arracher le baudrier
ainsi que le fourreau de sabre" of one of the gendarmes (75). Parents sometimes
took a leading part in such melees and their anger acted as a catalyst to others.
There were even instances where determined fathers lost their lives in clashes
with the gendarmes (76). But the conflict was usually extended far beyond the
family context, since the honor of the entire village was felt to be at stake. A
refractory conscript or a deserter had to be given some protection. He was in
their custody, and the act of handing him over to outsiders would be a gross act
