in his care "la veuve et des enfants d'un frere qui a peri a Saint-Domingue"
(103). He was, in short, a very worthy man, though these attributes did not necessarily ensure his suitability for the post. The same general criticism can be
made of the selection process for gendarmes. To be eligible, a man had to have
served in the armies for a fixed number of years, to be older than twenty-five
years of age, and to have a basic literacy. The government stressed the military
requirement, just as had been the practice with the old marechaussee, in order
that the police should not come to be seen as a valid escape route for those
wishing to avoid the attentions of the recruiting-sergeant (104). In the revolutionary years eight years' service was a normal requirement, and applications
for placement stressed the ardor and number of each candidate's campaigns.
Suffering seemed to provide its own justification: "II ne lui reste qu'une annee a
faire pour avoir seize ans de service et son conge ... dans toutes ces occasions
son regiment a etc tres maltraite, au point que de trois cents hommes il n'en est
revenu que trente ..." (105). Applicants presented themselves as though the
gendarmerie was there to provide outdoor relief for veterans, to allow men who
had worn themselves out in the national cause to be honorably employed in
their home village or close to their relatives. Sebastien Reynaud from Valence
justified his selection on just such grounds, that because "ayant fait centre les
ennemis toutes les campagnes d'Egypte et d'ltalie, s'etant comporte toujours
comme un brave et loyal soldat," he merited a place in the force (106). More
poignantly still, Charlemagne Dalle, a brigadier with the Sixth Regiment of the
Nord, had found that when he retired from the army he had neither the possibility of employment nor any source of income to feed his family. He wrote as
a professional soldier who had completed sixteen campaigns, who had subsequently commanded the garde nationale at Le Quesnoy, and who knew no other
life than that of the barracks. His appeal came close to simple begging. Now that
he could no longer fight, he explained, "il se voit maintenant dans 1'impossibilite
de pourvoir a la subsistance de ses enfants et de leur procurer les choses meme
de premiere necessite si le gouvernement ne vient a son secours" (107). His case
was given sympathetic consideration because his were the qualities that the gendarmerie was looking for. Under the Empire, indeed, the principal source of
recommendations for placement in the gendarmerie was the army itself. After
some years of service, soldiers were being specifically proposed for transfer to
the gendarmerie by their officers, and recruits were selected directly from each
regiment of infantry or cavalry, from the hussars and dragoons. The selection,
once again, was made on the grounds of merit, defined in terms of years of ser-
206 / Conscripts and Deserters
vice, number of campaigns, morality and civisme (\0%). Discipline and age were
the principal virtues; literacy, although a contributory factor, would not seem to
have been indispensible, since men were recommended whose "bonne conduite
et bonnes moeurs" were deemed to outweigh the fact that they could neither
read nor write (109).
These were not necessarily the optimal criteria for recruiting an active and
intelligent police force. Long years of war service could wear out men who were
long past their prime when they returned to their pays to become gendarmes.
The introduction of a jury system under the Directory to select from among the
available candidates and to grant reformes to those too ill or too unsuited to
serve did have the effect of forcing some retirements and improving the overall
quality of force. Their findings were scarcely reassuring. In the Nord those
retired in Year VI included some whose useful service lay far in the past: a marechal des logis from Lille who at the age of sixty-six years was "dans un etat de
decrepitude"; another, aged seventy-five years from Douai who had been seriously injured in a fall from his horse; a gendarme of sixty-one years from Cassel
who had been wounded both in his right leg and his left arm and who suffered
from deafness; or a gendarme of fifty years, again from Douai, who was "frappe
d'un coup de sabre sur la tete et atteint de douleurs rhumatismales suite de
fatigues de la guerre" (110). The list reads like the entry book to a military hospital. Others were weeded out for disciplinary reasons, which again suggest that
for some at least of the former soldiers who joined the gendarmerie, policing
seemed more like retirement than hard work. The shortcomings listed by the
jury speak for themselves: "cabaleur, insubordonne, sans tenue, sans intelligence"; "ivrogne incorrigible"; "non seulement insubordonne, mais encore
immoral" to cite just a few of the observations on the men dismissed from the
service in the reorganization of Year X in the Seine-et-Oise. Some took their pay
as gendarmes but devoted themselves to a totally different trade. One gendarme
at Ecouen spent his time at "son ancienne profession de faiseur de bas"; another,
at Montgeron, passed his days in town making shoes (111). Furthermore, the
average age of gendarmes was necessarily rather high, since it was effectively a
force of army veterans. In the Seine-et-Oise at the time of that reorganization,
there was not a single man younger than twenty-five years of age in the department; of 189 gendarmes, the highest concentration was in the thirty-five to fortyfour age range (75 men), though 25 were fifty- to fifty-four-years old, 11 fifty-five
to fifty-nine, and 6 older than sixty years old (112). During the Empire especially, much was done to improve the professionalism of the gendarmerie, and
they were much more capable than the marechaussee had been. But one is entitled to ask whether their recruitment procedures produced the most appropriate
force for the pursuit of young conscripts across the French countryside.
At various moments during the period other officers were co-opted by the
authorities for the policing of refractories to complement the hard-pressed gendarmes. Customsmen, who already encountered hostility from the local community because of their much hated role in the prevention of smuggling, were
one group who found themselves ordered to join the hunt for deserters, especially in frontier regions where their knowledge of the mountain tracks used by
smugglers and shepherds made them especially valuable to the gendarmerie. In
The Build-up of State Repression / 207
the marshy coastal region around Queyrac in the Gironde, where it was known
that deserters sought refuge, the use of gendarmes and of mounted soldiers had
produced only minimal results, and the capitaine de gendarmerie argued in 1809
that the ideal weapon would be a unit of douaniers whose local connaissance
was unrivalled (113). By the end of the Napoleonic wars they were even, in some
areas, being used as part of the garrisons imposed on refractory villages (114).
Such steps were highly controversial, as they exposed the customsmen to the
possibility of reprisals and made their routine duties all the more difficult to
fulfill. But the policing of conscription was unquestionably the higher priority,
and the douaniers were merely following in the footsteps of others who, as
gardes-champetres or gardes-forestiers, had been incorporated into the government's assault on refractories. Again, the normal duties of the gardes in protecting woodland and detecting poaching oifenses had acquainted them with likely
hiding-places and sharpened their ears to unexplained sounds in woods and
copses—qualities that could be of evident service in hunting down deserters,
especially as the young men were known to seek shelter in communal woods
and forests. One commune in the Nord, Steenvoorde, specifically asked that the
brief of the gardes be widened so that they could operate beyond the communal
boundaries and become, in effect, rural gendarmes with powers of surveillance
and arrest (115). There were numerous instances where prefects ordered the
gardes to join with the gendarmerie in hunting down such deserters as surfaced
on the territory of their municipalities, a provision made possible by an Imperial
decree of 1806(116).
The gardes, in short, found their powers extended and their concerns widened from braconnage to insoumission. It was not an enviable position, especially because many of those they encountered were young men from their own
and surrounding villages. More serious still was the fact that the gardes seldom
enjoyed much respect or status in the communities they served, since they were
poorly paid and badly educated, the objects of pity rather than regard, and since
the laws on poaching were only intermittently obeyed. In the Haute-Garonne
the prefect noted that even their arrests were often ignored, since "la plupart des
juges de paix ne tenaient aucun compte des proces-verbaux qui leur etaient
remis" (117). Moreover, the process of making an arrest had become so cumbersome that gardes were reluctant to take any action against wrongdoers. Their
inability to read and write meant that they had to make their report to a greffier
so that the proces-verbal could be drawn up, which in turn involved the garde
in a long journey and often the cost of the greffe. Was it any wonder, asked the
canton of Remiremont in Year IV, "que les gardes-forestiers, la plus grande partie peres de famille et sans fortune, ne recevant plus depuis longtemps aucun
salaire, se bornent a faire quelques rapports centre des citoyens peu aises, tandis
qu'ils favorisent les citoyens riches a commettre des delits pour en retirer du
grain ou autres subsistances" (118). Given their low status and the lack of support from the rest of the community, it was impossible to replace them or to find
better qualified candidates. In the former royal forests of the Paris Basin, around
Versailles and Marly, Meudon and Saint-Cloud, they were better respected than
most. Here they received under the Empire salaries of 500 francs per year
(though there were some gardes in these areas who survived on much less), in
208 / Conscripts and Deserters
contrast to many village gardes in the South who were dependent on the local
peasantry for any remuneration and were often reduced to near starvation. They
came from poor families, either from families of gardes, from military families,
or, in some cases, from careers as woodworkers, gardeners, or unskilled laborers
(119). Often they were sick or suffering from wounds received in the army. The
majority of the gardes at Rambouillet, for example, seem to have been either
suffering from rheumatic attacks or pulmonary complaints or bearing the
wounds of their military past (120). Nor could their poverty necessarily be
equated with honesty. Reports on the quality and morality of gardes in the
Drome during the Empire demonstrated the range of misdemeanors to which
they turned to supplement their meager pay. Several retained "un gout prononce
pour la chasse" or were "braconniers par gout et par speculation," even though
this conflicted with their central purpose as gardes. Maillet, at Allan, was known
to be "le protecteur des braconniers qu'il rassemblait au nombre de six et de
huit et avec lesquels il chassait en tout temps et en tout lieu." Charriere, at SaintLaurent, went even further, making private deals with wood merchants so that
wood cut in the communal forest passed freely by the cartload on its way to the
riverside. The garde at La Roche-sur-le-Buis, Jussian, devoted himself to keeping his cabaret well-stocked and to maintaining his popularity with the locals,
with the result that "il avait sciemment laisse voler la majeure partie des bois
de la foret de reserve." His colleague in the Imperial forest at Mantaille was
