of personal betrayal. The "honnetete" of the village, in the sense defined by Yves
Castan, was impugned by the demands made by the state (77). Even when the
fugitive was sought for serious criminal offenses elsewhere—as in the case of one
deserter near Mirecourt who was suspected of murder—any attempt by the gendarmerieto remove him from the custody of the villagers was violently resisted
(78). In cases like this the police might feel perplexed as well as aggrieved; however, it was the deserter who was closer to the pulse of the local community, who
understood the villagers' sense of what was right and wrong. Faced with the gendarmerie, men on the run from authority knew very well that they could with
some assurance throw themselves on the mercy of their fellows and take a gamble that village opinion would not allow them to be sacrificed.
Rioting was an extreme response, a rejection by the local community of the
state and the law that it was trying to impose. But in much of rural France, and
occasionally in larger towns and cities (79), the issue of recruitment ensured that
hostility to this conception of law remained deeply embedded in the popular
236 / Conscripts and Deserters
consciousness. The sight of gendarmes and other state officials systematically
persecuting the young for a cause that enjoyed little popular support merely
served to spread disaffection (80). There was little sympathy for the police in
their task, and, in a society that accepted a high level of everyday violence, few
qualms about causing them wounds or injuries. Gendarmes entering villages on
unpopular missions were habitually jeered and humiliated by local people, or
greeted with the roars of derision that accompanied the traditional village charivari from time immemorial. At Lucenay in the Rhone, for example, two gendarmes arrived to arrest a deserter whom they knew to be at work threshing corn
with other lads from the village community. They went up to groups of harvesters and exchanged pleasantries with them, only to be greeted with sullen
hostility. For "les batteurs ne reconnaissant point, ou feignant de ne point reconnaitre les gendarmes, s'emparent d'un de ces derniers, lui demandent le pourboire qu'on exige aux etrangers qui entrent dans 1'aire sans permission, et, sur
son refus de donner ce pourboire, font subir a ce gendarme une punition corporelle tres humiliante" (81). The message was clear. Not only were they unwelcome in the community, but on that territory it was local custom that should
prevail. In other villages the welcome reserved for the agents of the law could
be even more unpleasant, involving physical injury or even death. The thirtyfour members of the colonne mobile from nearby Preches who arrived in the
village of Felleries (Nord) in Year VII to hunt for deserters at first faced little
more than abuse from the local population. But as the night wore on and everyone became the worse for drink, so tempers rose and general brawling took over.
Members of the force were attacked, local people were heard to urge that they
be put to death, punches were exchanged, and one of the gendarmes was
knocked out with a pelle a feu (82). The hatred and lack of respect for the troops
and the job they were sent to perform were clear to everyone. But the violence
in Felleries was as Boulevard comedy compared to what occurred in other parts
of France. When a gendarme was murdered in the village of Saignes (Cantal) in
1808, only the rural bourgeoisie offered the authorities any assistance. The rest
of the community, particularly bouviers and those living in the outlying hamlets,
actively protected the men who had committed the outrage, and the majority of
local people showed neither sympathy for the victim nor any desire to see the
killers brought to justice (83). Similarly in the Pyrenean village of Riverenert
where a gendarme was killed in the course of a riot over the arrest of deserters,
his death caused little sorrow or compunction among the villagers (84). At times,
indeed, there was something wholly gratuitous, even joyous, about the violence
used against those seeking to enforce unpopular laws. At Clazay (Deux-Sevres)
in 1806 three gendarmes who were leading captured deserters back to their base
were attacked with carefree brutality. Two of them were killed by gunshots—
"ils essuyerent une decharge de quarante a cinquante coups de fusils"—while
the third, lying seriously wounded, was callously finished off by one of the rioters
who smashed his riflebutt across the officer's head (85).
Attacks on state officials occurred more frequently over conscription than
over any other single question. Neither taxation nor food supply was the occasion for such sustained rejection of the pretensions of central government or
such persistent attacks on the agents and symbols of the stale. At Hazebrouck
Desertion, the State, and the People / 237
in 1813—a riot that was savagely repressed with the imposition of four death
sentences—conscription provided the backcloth for a mass insurrection involving some 1,200 to 1,500 people, in which the sous-prefet, the government's representative, was "outrage, maltraite et frappe" and forced to flee for his life (86).
The choice of target was no accident. To local people the sous-prefet symbolized
the very essence of state power and personified Napoleonic centralism. In its
pursuit of deserters the government had intruded as never before into people's
everyday lives, with troops and gendarmes dismantling hayricks and bursting
into bedrooms. Louis Bergeron has remarked that "the consular and imperial
power was a power that defended itself by attacking," a judgment fully sustained
by a study of recruitment policy. He adds that it was established so rapidly
because its active opponents were minorities who could be easily isolated and
who failed to mobilize popular support (87). In large tracts of France those who
were opposed to one significant aspect of government policy, that of recruitment
for the armies, were far more numerous, and the intrusion of national politics
into village affairs risked turning their resentment into a vocal and violent opposition to the government itself. Much of village France clung to its customs and
traditions and remained stubbornly archaic in its structure for decades after the
Emperor's abdication. It was not fertile ground for Napoleon's wholesale administrative and judicial reforms or for a committed role in the creation of a modern
nation-state. In the long term annual conscription was to play an important part
in modernizing the French countryside, in making peasants into Frenchmen.
But in the short term the enervating recruitment policy pursued in the revolutionary and Napoleonic years did little to persuade the inhabitants of the
Gausses or of the Auvergne that the brave new world had much to offer them.
It served rather to revive their village archaisms and to jeopardize the new civic
order that was Napoleon's greatest and most enduring achievement.
This page intentionally left blank