

The gun now at Dymchurch is a genuine 24-pounder, cast sometime between 1792 and 1815, but it is not the actual gun mounted here during the Napoleonic War, which was withdrawn in 1817. The wooden slide carriage and traversing platform are replicas of an 1860s design: the original carriage was not a slide but a garrison type, with four small truck wheels.

Men of the Coast Blockade (right, in blue) in a fight against smugglers in the 1820s

© Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy Stock Photo

## The Coast Blockade and Coastguard

An invasion did not come, and the towers never saw any fighting. At the end of the Napoleonic War in 1815, the garrisons were disbanded, and the towers were disused, with only a caretaker to look after them. Towers 1 to 27 had all been disarmed by 1817, with the guns, carriages and platforms removed to storage. However, a new use was quickly found for some of the towers, including tower 24.

In 1816 a new naval force was created to combat smuggling, which was commonplace along the coast of Kent and Sussex. Known as the Coast Blockade, it conducted patrols in small ships and boats at sea and foot patrols on shore. Small detachments occupied coastal buildings and several Martello towers were made available to them.

Martello tower 24 was a Coast Blockade station from 1819, possibly earlier, and continued as such until 1832. It was a small naval barracks, usually for one officer (occasionally two) and between eight and thirteen ratings. In some stations, the ratings (non-officers) could have women living with them.

Patrol work and intercepting smuggling gangs were dangerous. The gangs were large, well-armed and ruthless and often enjoyed support from local people who benefited from their activities. One infamous band, the Aldington Gang, operated from the area of Romney Marsh until its members were finally brought to justice in 1826. In April 1830, Lieutenant Gustavus Baker from Martello tower 23 and Sentinel Martin Donovan of tower 24 were severely wounded in the head and legs in a fight at Dymchurch Wall.

Dymchurch Coastguard station in 1919, flying signal flags to celebrate the end of the First World War. By this time, a stair had replaced the original retractable ladder at the entrance

© Friends of Martello24

In 1832 the Coastguard took over the activities of the Coast Blockade and tower 24 became a Coastguard station. By 1856, smuggling had been brought under control, and the Coastguard became a naval reserve force, still watchful of smuggling, but also involved in lifesaving at sea. Until the late 1880s, the station had up to four Coastguard families in residence, after which they lived in new cottages, while the tower remained as an active station until the mid 20th century.

During the Second World War, the tower had brief periods of use by army units preparing, like their predecessors 140 years earlier, to defend against an invasion. On 13 June 1944, observers at the Royal Observer Corps Post located on top of the tower reported the first V1 flying bomb to enter the UK.