


LATERAL  TEMPLES.  U 

These  latter  are  of  sandstone — the  others  of 
granite. 

The  distance  of  the  most  advanced  propy- 
lon,  from  the  south  wall  of  the  temple  (in 
which  there  is  a  gate  of  communication),  is 
about  eleven  hundred  feet.  An  avenue  of 
sphinxes  extends  nine  hundred  feet  further, 
terminating  at  a  detached  gateway,  similar 
to  those  before  mentioned.  This  communi- 
cates with  yet  another  group  of  temples,  the 
principal  of  which  seems  to  have  been  dedi- 
cated to  Jupiter  Ammon.  It  is  defended  on 
three  sides  by  a  wide  tank,  or  pond,  but  ap- 
pears to  have  been  entirely  surrounded  by 
an  inner  fosse  or  dry  ditch,  which  is  lined 
throughout  with  sphinxes  of  dark  coloured 
granite  and  basalt. 

The  north  front  of  this  temple  is  orna- 
mented with  a  double  row  of  columns,  behind 
which — on  either  side  the  entrance — an  ad- 
mirable grotesque  figure  of  the  abominable 
Typhon  decorates  the  wall.  The  budding 
lotus  and  sacred  eagle  are  on  his  left ;  and, 
at  his  right  hand,  is  a  serpent  climbing  up 


12  AVENUE  OF  SPHINXES. 

the  stem  of  a  lotus.  But  little  can  be  made 
out  of  the  other  figures  carved  upon  the  walls, 
which  have  been  much  mutilated. 

The  roof  of  the  principal  apartment  of  the 
temple  was  supported  by  finely  reeded  columns, 
of  which  two  fragments  only  are  now  stand- 
ing. The  Pronaos  appears  to  have  contained 
twelve  columns  of  the  same  kind,  but  larger. 

The  foundation  walls  of  various  buildings 
maybe  traced  in  all  directions  round  the  tank 
that  encloses  this  temple,  and  about  midway 
between  it  and  the  modern  road  to  Luxor, 
(distant  about  two  hundred  yards  to  the  west), 
is  the  avenue  of  sphinxes,  that  in  former  ages 
is  said  to  have  reached  the  whole  way  be- 
tween that  place  and  Karnac. 

At  this  spot,  however,  all  traces  of  it  are 
lost  under  a  high  embankment,  that  has  been 
thrown  up  round  the  tank  to  retain  the  water 
of  the  inundation  :  but,  when  arrived  at  the 
distance  of  three  hundred  yards  from  a  gate- 
way, through  which  another  temple  is  ap- 
proached, two  rows  of  tigers'-heads  begin  to 
protrude   above  the  soil,  and   soon  after  the 


VAST  TEMPLE.  -13 

whole  of  the  animals'  figures  are  displayed, 
arrang-ed  in  compact  order. 

The  length  of  this  temple  is  four  hundred 
feet,  and  it  is  distant  about  five  hundred  from 
the  main  temple,  with  which  it  does  not  stand 
quite  at  right  angles.  The  intervening  space 
is  covered  with  mounds  of  sand  and  ruins  ; 
and,  from  a  spot  about  midway  between  the 
two  buildings,  but  rather  to  the  eastward, 
— that  is,  towards  the  great  lateral  propylae — 
was  taken  the  admiral  panoramic  view  of  the 
temples  lately  exhibited  in  London. 