


16  VAST  TEMPLE. 

are  considered  to  be  more  ancient  than  any  of 
the  other  ruins  now  to  be  met  with  in  Egypt. 

Some  of  the  sculpture  on  the  walls  is  in 
the  very  best  style  of  the  Egyptian  art ;  but 
to  whose  valorous  deeds  it  refers  is  yet  a 
matter  of  uncertainty,  since  we  are  by  no 
means  sure  of  the  order  of  succession  of  the 
sovereigns  of  Egypt. 

It  is  evident  that  some  one  of  the  heroes 
whose  exploits  are  here  engraven  was  a  con- 
queror of  the  Jews,  since  long  files  of  suppli- 
cants, whose  peculiar  features  sufficiently 
mark  them  as  belonging  to  that  people,  are 
following  his  triumphal  car. 

These  matters  I  shall,  however,  leave  for 
the  decision  of  the  learned  in  the  zoolotrous 
language,  and  merely  add  that  the  ruins  of 
this  splendid  edifice — in  whatever  age  it  may 
have  been  erected  —  proclaim  it  the  most 
wonderful  work  that  has  been  executed  by 
the  hand  of  man,  even  in  this  land  of  wonders. 

We  repeated  our  visits  daily  for  an  entire 
week;  !ind  always  found  fresh  cause  for  admi- 
ration and  astonishment  in  the  venerable  pile 


THE  MEMNONIUM.  17 

—  the  ruin  of  nearly  four  and  twenty  cen- 
turies ! 

With  regret  we  at  length  turned  our  backs 
upon  it,  and  crossed  over  to  the  opposite  bank 
of  the  river,  to  visit  the  western  half  of  the 
ruins  of  immortal  (if  any  city  is  to  be  so) 
Thebes. 

The  remains  of  temples,  tombs,  statues,  &c., 
are  here  scattered  over  nearly  the  whole  space 
between  the  Nile  and  the  Lybian  chain,  but 
they  have  been  so  fully  described,  that  I  shall 
readily  be  excused  from  undertaking  the  task. 

Numerous  trifling  errors  have  been  made 
by  my  precursors,  but  it  would  be  useless  to 
correct  them,  excepting  for  the  gratification 
of  the  hieroglyphico-maniac.  To  the  general 
reader  it  can  signify  but  little  whether  the 
hero  of  the  Memnonium  is  receiving  offerings 
in  the  pronaos,  or  in  the  cella. 

This  temple,  by  the  bye,  is  now  called  the 
Rhamsseion,  and  both  it  and  that  of  Medinet 
Abou  face  the  east.  On  the  outer  wall  of  the 
latter  is  a  battle  scene,  that  has  been  most 
poetically  described  by  Dr.  Richardson.      ft 

VOL.  ir.  c 


18  THE  HIEROGLYPHIC  LANGUAGE. 

is  in  every  respect  worthy  of  his  three  grand- 
iloquent pages  on  the  horrors  of  war. 

Monsieur  Champollion,  determined  not  to 
be  outdone,  describes  it  in  equally  glowing 
colours.  The  four  sons  of  the  heroic  Rhamses 
Meiamoun,  who,  he  says,  are  making  a  "  hor- 
rihle  carnage,''  are  standing  together,  bending 
their  bows  with  outstretched  arms,  very  much 
in  the  attitude  of  the  Horatii  in  David's  cele- 
brated picture — which,  perhaps,  excited  this 
excessive  admiration  for  the  Egyptian  sculp- 
ture on  the  part  of  his  '*  compatriote." 