

CHAPTER  X. 

Journey  Continued  —  Convent  of  Asomatos — Mountain  Pass  — 
Beautiful  Scenery — Execrable  Road — Villages  of  Keriana,  Adil, 
and  Maroulas — Arrival  at  Retimo — Description  of  that  Town — 
Citadel — Population — Trade — Provincial  Council — Departure  for 
Canea — Dangerous  Road — Armyro — Mineral  Waters — Splendid 
Scenery— Neo  Horio— The  Capo's  House — The  Ridiculous  and 
the  Sublime  —  Day  of  Waterloo  —  Bay  of  Suda  —  Arrival  at 
Canea — Description  of  the  Town — Great  Increase  of  its  Popula- 
tion    :  .  .  •  .  ,  .  .281 

CHAPTER  XI. 
Trade  of  Candia —  Productions  —  Exports  and  Imports  —  Injurious 
Consequences  of  the  total  want  of  Inland  Communication  —  Re- 


CONTENTS.  Vll 

venue — Taxes  —  Greek  Church  Establishment — Price  of  Labour 
and  Provisions — Character  of  the  Inhabitants — Wretched  Condi- 
tion of  the  Island — Summary  Account  of  the  State  of  Candia  dur- 
ing the  War  in  Greece — Effects  of  the  Battle  of  Navarin — Can- 
dia given  up  to  Mohammed  Ali  —  Insurrectionary  Movement  — 
Desertion  of  Osman  Pasha — Form  of  Government — The  acquisi- 
tion of  the  Island  not  beneficial  to  Egypt  —  Advantages  its  Pos- 
session holds  out  to  Great  Britain — Conclusion         .  .  313 


RAMBLES 


EGYPT  AND  CANDIA. 


CHAPTER  I. 


Temple  of  Luxor  —  System  of  Plunder — Solitary  Obelisk — Grand 
Avenue  of  Sphinxes — Temple  of  Karnac — Its  vast  extent — Ruined 
Propylse  —  Lateral  Temples  —  Cross  to  the  Western  side  of  the 
Nile —  The  Memnoniura  —  Specimen  of  the  Wonderful  Capacity 
of  the  Hieroglyphical  Language — Palace  of  Sesostris — Sculpture 
of  the  Egyptians — Remarks  on  ChampoUion's  Hieroglyphical  Dis- 
coveries— Dammy  and  Shammy— Temple  of  Dair— Tombs  of  th« 
Kings — Belzoni's  Tomb — Village  of  Gournou — Traffic  in  Mum- 
mies— Anecdote  of  a  post  mortem  Ambitious  English  Traveller — 
Remains  at  Denderah — Dinner  at  Sheik  Hassan's. 

Without  pretending  to  any  such  exqui- 
sitely fine  antiquarian  feeling  as  Count  Forbin, 
who  was  driven  from  this  very  spot,  if  I  re- 
collect right,  by  seeing  an  English  lady,  with 
a  bright  silk  spencer,  clambering   amongst 

VOL.  II.  B 


2  TEMPLE  OF  LUXOR. 

the  ruins  of  the  ancient  Diospolis  ;  yet  we 
were  sufficiently  alive  to  the  "  gout  detestable'' 
displayed  in  the  white-washed  villa  of  his 
countrymen,  to  be  induced  to  change  our  pre- 
viously-arranged plan  for  staying  some  days 
at  Luxor.  Ordering  the  Reis,  therefore,  to 
drop  down  the  river  with  the  cange  to  the 
landing-place  abreast  of  Karnac,  we  pro- 
ceeded to  explore  the  splendid  ruin  before  us. 

The  effect  of  the  interior  of  the  temple  is  as 
much  spoilt  by  its  containing  an  Arab  village, 
as  is  the  exterior,  by  the  French  **  Rus  in  urhe.'' 
The  quantity  of  sand  that  has  drifted  in  also 
tends  greatly  to  rob  it  of  its  fair  proportions. 