

Another  immense  apartment,  larger  even 
than  any  of  the  preceding  divisions  of  the 
temple,  and  containing  one  hundred  and  sixty- 
eight  columns,  has  to  be  traversed  ere  reach- 


O  GROUP  OF  FIGURES. 

ing  the  posticum.  In  a  niche,  on  the  northern 
side  wall  of  this  chamber,  is  a  handsome  sar- 
cophagus of  white  marble,  and  nearly  under 
it  a  gateway. 

In  a  small  recess  over  the  posticum  is  a 
group,  carved  in  one  block  of  crystallized  lime- 
stone, consisting  of  two  figures,  very  similar 
to  those  on  the  obelisks  in  front  of  the  sanc- 
tuary ;  and  in  advance  of  the  gateway  are  four 
statues,  which,  from  their  posture  and  folded 
arms,  seem, like  those  before  mentioned,  to  have 
been  caryatic  figures  :  and — facing  outwards 
— to  have  stood  in  a  kind  of  opisthodomus. 

In  front  of  them  (or,  to  speak  correctly, 
of  their  pedestals,  for  only  one  of  the  statues 
was  standing)  is  another  open  court,  or  dro> 
mos,  which  appears  to  have  carried  the  great 
temple  yet  further  to  the  east,  or  rather  to 
have  connected  it  with  a  temple  dedicated  to 
some  inferior  deity,  which  is  built  on  the 
same  alignement. 

In  front  of  the  western  entrance  to  this  edi- 
fice (that  is,  facing  the  posticum  of  the  great 
temple)  are  two  mutilated  granite  colossi. 
The   dimensions   of   the   building   itself  are 


HANDSOME  PYLON. 


small,  but  immediately  beyond  it  is  a  spacious 
(though  much  ruined)  peristyle  court,  at  the 
eastern  extremity  of  which,  standing  apart 
from  any  other  building,  is  a  small  but  hand- 
some pylon,  having  a  gateway  in  its  centre, 
corresponding  with  the  grand  avenue  that 
passes  through  the  great  temple,  and  making 
its  entire  length,  from  west  to  east,  sixteen 
huiidred  feet. 


Beyond  the  north  wall  of  the  mother  temple 


10  RUINED  PROPYL.E. 

are  the  ruins  of  several  others.  The  largest 
of  these  communicated  with  it  by  the  lateral 
gateway,  already  noticed  ;  the  avenue  passing 
through  its  various  courts  and  apartments 
being  directed  upon  it.  A  double  row  of 
sphinxes  prolongs  this  avenue  to  a  gateway 
similar  in  all  respects  to  that  on  the  eastern 
side  of  the  great  temple. 

On  the  south  side  of  the  great  temple,  and 
distant  from  it  about  two  hundred  feet,  is  a 
large  walled  tank,  beyond  which  are  the  ruins 
of  other  buildings,  but  so  embedded  in  sand 
as  to  be  traced  with  difficulty. 

To  the  westward  of  the  tank  are  four  huge 
ruined  propylae,  standing  parallel  to  each 
other,  and  to  the  south  wall  of  the  great 
temple,  but  disposed  slightly  "  en  echellon," 
so  that  their  gateways  are  not  aligned.  They 
are  of  unequal  dimensions,  but  all  built  of 
immense  blocks  of  sandstone ;  the  first  and 
last,  only,  have  their  gateways  lined  with  gra- 
nite. Two  colossal  statues  formerly  adorned 
the  front  of  each  propylon,  and  the  most  dis- 
tant of  the  four  has  also  two  facing  the  rear. 