

From  no  one  point,  however,  can  an  ade- 
quate idea  be  conveyed  of  the  vast  extent  and 
grandeur  of  the  principal  temple.  To  form 
a  just  conception  of  the  size  and  proportions 
of  its  interior  courts,  its  long  lines  of  columns, 
their  varied  forms  and  ornaments,  &c.,  the 
spectator  must  be  within  the  wall  of  the  tem- 
ple ;  but  then  the  vast  extent  of  the  building 
in  all  its  parts,  its  huge  propylae,  gateways, 
&c.,  are  lost  sight  of — to  say  nothing  of  the 
distant  mountains  and  other  requisites  for 
making  a  picture. 


14  VAST  TEMPLE. 

From  the  posticum  of  this  lateral  temple 
the  grand  approach  from  Luxor  was  doubtless 
continued  by  an  avenue  of  sphinxes,  to  a 
gateway  in  the  side  wall  of  the  first  court  of 
the  great  temple  of  Karnac ;  but  this,  from  the 
accumulation  of  sand,  is  no  longer  visible. 

The  grand  propylon  faces  the  Nile,  and  is 
the  largest  edifice  of  the  kind  in  Egypt,  being- 
three  hundred  and  sixty-six  feet  in  length. 
It  is  also  approached  by  an  avenue  of  sphinxes, 
which,  in  all  probability,  commenced  at  the 
river,  distant  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile. 

From  the  uniformity  of  plan  in  all  the 
Egyptian  temples,  (which  is  to  diminish  gra- 
dually in  width  from  the  front  propylon)  it 
may  be  adduced  that  this  was  the  largest  of 
all  those  of  which  any  traces  now  remain.  It 
appears  to  have  stood  in  the  centre  of  a 
group  of  temples,  dedicated  to  the  worship 
of  various  deities,  with  each  of  which  there 
appears  to  have  been  a  communication, 
though  some  of  the  gateways  are  now  choked 
up  with  sand  and  rubbish.  Those  which  are 
still  open,  (besides  the  grand  entrance  and 


VAST  TEMPLE.  15 

posticum)  are  a  doorway  in  the  south  wall  of 
the  third  court  (in  the  centre  of  which  is  the 
sanctuary)  facing  the  four  propylae  leading* 
to  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Ammon,  and  another, 
(before  noticed)  in  the  north  wall  of  the  fourth 
court,  corresponding  with  the  temple  and 
avenue  of  sphinxes  on  that  side. 

Although  but  four  avenues  of  sphinxes  have 
as  yet  been  discovered,  it  can  scarcely  be 
supposed  that  the  eastern  approach  to  the 
temple  was  not  equally  ornamented.  The 
dimensions  of  the  great  temple  within  the 
walls  may  be  said  to  be  one  thousand  six  hun- 
dred feet  in  length,  i.  e.  from  east  to  west,  and 
three  hundred  and  sixty  in  breadth ;  but  the 
circuit  of  the  space  occupied  by  the  various 
temples  and  buildings  connected  with  it  (ex- 
clusive of  the  northern  and  western  avenues 
of  sphinxes)  is  two  miles. 

The  date  of  the  foundation  of  this  temple, 
or  city  of  temples,  is  beyond  the  utmost  reach 
of  the  knowledge  of  man  to  establish.  It  is 
evidently  the  work  of  various  ages,  and  some 
parts  of  it,  according  to  the  best  authorities, 