


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  V. 


Character  of  Ibrahim  Pasha — His  Conduct  in  Syria — In  the  Morea 
— Popularity  of  Mohammed  Ali  —  Grievances  of  his  Subjects  — 
Difficulties  he  has  to  contend  against  —  Wasteful  Expenditure  of 
Money  on  the  Wild  Schemes  of  Foreign  Adventurers  —  Project 
to  throw  a  Dam  across  the  Nile — Railroads — Concluding  Remarks 
upon  the  system  of  Government       .  .  .  .140 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Revenues  of  Egypt — Taxes — Expenditure — Government  Monopo- 
lies— Necessity  of  retaining  many  of  them,  in  the  present  state  of 
the  Country — Agricultural  System — Extent  of  Land  susceptible 
of  Cultivation — Productions  of  Egypt — State  of  her  Commercial 
Relations  with  other  Countries — Imports  and  Exports — Amount 
of  Population  —  Different  nations  composing  it  —  State  of  the 
Fellahs  as  compared  with  the  Peasantry  of  other  Countries — 
Paupers — Good  effects  resulting  from  the  Establishment  of  Manu- 
factories—Manners and  Customs  of  the  Inhabitants — Education 
of  the  Lower  Orders — Arts  and  Sciences — Music — Gradual  Im- 
provement in  the  Condition  of  the  Inhabitants— Anecdote  of  the 
March  of  Mind,  and  of  the  drag  upon  it — Smoking  .  .156 

CHAPTER  VII. 

First  Attempt  of  Mohammed  Ali  to  Organize  the  Army  of  Egypt  on 
the  European  Model  —  Revolt  of  the  Troops — War  with  the  Wa- 
habees  —  Expedition  to  Senaar  —  Formation  of  the  Nizam,  and 
Dispersion  of  the  Janizaries  and  Albanians — Renewal  of  Hostili- 
ties with  the  Wahabees — Excellent  Conduct  of  the  new  Levies — 
War  in  the  Morea  —  Uninterrupted  Success  of  the  Arab  Army — 
Affair  of  Mylos  —  Siege  of  Missolonghi — War  in  Syria — Strength 
and  Composition  of  the  Present  Egyptian  Army — Pay  —  Rations 
— Conscription  —  Good  Qualities  of  the  Fellah  —  Dress  of  the 
Troops  —  Remarks  on  theEffieiency  of  the  Army,  &c. — Sulieman 
Pasha 195 


VI  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Public  Schools — Encouragement  given  by  Mohammed  Ali  to  the 
Education  of  the  Lower  Orders — Artillery  and  Naval  College  at 
Tourah — Cavalry  School  at  Ghizeh — Medical  and  Veterinary 
College  at  Abouzabel — Disadvantage  under  which  it  labours 
from  the  want  of  a  common  Language  between  the  Professors 
and  Students — Instance  of  a  Dragoman's _/re<?  Translation — Con- 
cluding Remarks  on  the  College — Clot  Bey  .  .  .  230 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Voyage  to  Candia  —  A  Health  Establishment  ill-adapted  to  the 
Establishment  of  Health  —  Fine  View  from  the  Lazaretto  Mole — 
A  Sicilian  Guardiano  —  Description  of  the  Island  of  Crete  —  Its 
Population  —  City  of  Candia  —  Mustapha  Pasha  —  Difficulty  in 
procuring  Horses — Departure  for  Canea  —  Villages  of  Defnes, 
Evegenichi,  and  St.  Tomas  —  View  from  the  Summit  of  the  Pass 
on  the  Eastern  side  of  Mount  Ida —  Change  in  the  appearance  of 
the  Country  —  Agius  Decca  —  Ruins  of  Gortyna  —  Road  to  the 
Celebrated  Cretan  Labyrinth  —  Description  of  that  "  Wonder  of 
the  World  " — Arrival  at  Apodoulo    ....  248 