

The  sculpture  on  the  exterior  walls  ap- 
peared to  me  to  be  coarser,  and  of  worse  ex- 
ecution, than  usual,  although  stated  by  Cham- 
pollion  to  be  extremely  fine.  The  chariot  of 
the  hero  of  the  sculptured  tale  looks  as  like  a 
wheelbarrow,  drawn  by  a  Giraffe,  as  a  car 
by  a  pair  of  horses. 

Two  splendid  obelisks  of  red  granite  for- 
merly stood  in  front  of  the  principal  entrance 
of  this  temple  ;  but  one  of  them  was  carried 


SYSTEM  OF  PLUNDER.  O 

off,  a  few  years  since,  to  embellish  the  French 
capital. 

It  is  difficult  to  understand  the  feeling  that 
leads  to  such  a  sj'^stem  of  plunder.  The  ab- 
straction of  this  characteristic  ornament  is 
much  felt  here,  where  it  was  in  keeping  with 
the  rest  of  the  building — whereas  it  is  divested 
of  all  interest  amongst  the  gravel  walks  of 
(that  constant  arena  of  strife)  the  Place  de  la 
Concorde,  where  it  has  recently  been  erected. 

No  people  have  exclaimed  so  vehemently  as 
the  French  at  Lord  Elgin's  carrying  off  the 
bassi  relievi  on  the  freize  of  the  Parthenon, 
where,  had  they  been  suffered  to  remain  but  a 
few  years  longer,  they  would  have  been  com- 
pletely destroyed,  and  yet  the  arrival  of  the  in- 
destructible Egyptian  obelisk,  at  Paris,  was 
hailed  with  as  much  classic  enthusiasm,  as  if 
the  great  Ammon  Ra  himself  had  started  into 
life,  and  come  to  the  French  capital  to  pre- 
side over  "  La  societe  pour  la  propagation  des 
connoissances  scientiJiquesJ" 

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  British  Govern- 
ment will  not  be  induced  to  follow  so  bad  an 

B  2 


4  AVENUE  OF  SPHINXES. 

example,  by  removing  the  great  obelisk  yet 
standing  at  Karnac,  which,  report  says,  has 
been  presented  by  Mohammed  Ali  to  the  Eng- 
lish nation. 

The  grand  entrance  to  the  temple  of  Luxor 
faces  the  north,  and  is  still  adorned  by  the 
remaining  granite  obelisk  and  four  colossal 
statues.  From  thence,  the  whole  way  to  the 
southern  propylon  of  the  Temple  of  Karnac 
— a  distance  of  about  a  mile  and  a  half — an 
avenue  of  Sphinxes  is  supposed  to  have  ex- 
tended. It  is  even  now  visible  for  several 
hundred  yards,  on  approaching  the  outer 
gateway  of  the  latter  temple ;  but  the  tra- 
veller, on  his  first  visit  to  this  magnificent 
pile,  should  enter  it  by  the  gateway  in  the 
western,  or  principal,  propylon. 

What  a  sight  then  bursts  upon  him ! 
Whilst  he  stands  in  a  splendid  court — which 
itself  equals  in  grandeur  anything  of  the  kind 
ever  executed  by  the  hand  of  man — his  eye  is 
directed  by  an  avenue  of  enormous  pillars 
that  passes  entirely  through  the  centre  of  the 
building,  to  an  endless  perspective  of  gate- 


TEMPLE  OF  KARNAC.  5 

ways,  columns,  and  obelisks — an  extent  of 
one  thousand  six  hundred  feet ! 