

The  edifice  now  presented  to  his  view  not 
only  surpasses  in  splendour  and  magnitude 
all  the  other  temples  of  Egypt,  but  makes  the 
works  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  sink  into 
insignificance,  for  the  celebrated  Temple  of 
Minerva  at  Athens  might  stand  within  the 
Dromos,  whilst  the  court,  enclosing  the  sanc- 
tuary, could  contain  the  Roman  Colosseum ! 

Passing  through  the  second  propylon,  the 
astonished  spectator  enters  an  immense  apart- 
ment, the  roof  of  which — composed  of  enormous 
flat  slabs — is  supported  by  one  hundred  and 
thirty-six  pillars,  of  infinite  variety  of  shape 
and  ornament,  disposed  in  sixteen  rows. 

From  thence,  a  passage  through  a  third 
propylon  leads  him  into  the  principal  court 
of  the  temple,  nearly  in  the  centre  of  which 
stands  the  sanctuary,  built  entirely  of  polished 
granite. 

Ere  admittance  could  be  gained  to  the  Holy 
place,  there  was  yet  another  small  pylon  to  be 
passed,  at  the  angles  of  which  formerly  stood 


b  THE  SANCTUARY. 

four  granite  obelisks.  Of  these  two  only  are 
now  erect :  a  third  lies  broken  on  the  ground, 
and  the  other  has  either  been  carried  away, 
or  is  buried  under  the  surrounding  ruins. 

These  obelisks  must  have  stood  within  an 
hypoethral  naos,  or  open  cella,  which  appears 
to  have  been  surrounded  by  a  colonnade  of 
Caryatic  figures  (if  the  anachronism  may  be 
permitted)  each,  with  arms  folded  across  the 
breast,  holding  the  Sacred  Tau,  or  Key  of  the 
Nile. 

On  either  side  the  entrance  to  the  sanctuary 
is  a  beautiful  little  Obelisk  of  rose-coloured 
granite,  having  their  north  and  south  faces 
carved  (in  relievo),  with  a  lotus  flower  shoot- 
ing from  a  long  stem,  and  their  other  sides, 
with  two  figures  bound  together,  in  amity. 
One  of  these,  painted  white,  is  somewhat 
larger  than  the  other,  which  is  a  reddish 
brown  divinity,  and  holds  the  sacred  tau. 
The  bird  of  the  mighty  Jove  hovers  over 
their  heads,  and,  though  the  hieroglyphics 
appear  to  refer  to  the  lesser  figure,  the  other 
is  evidently  the  more  powerful,  and  superior 


THE  SANCTUARY.  7 

in  rank.  They,  probably,  are  emblematic  of 
Alexander  the  Great  and  Egypt,  or  may  be 
yet  more  modern,  and  refer  to  Julius  Caesar 
and  Cleopatra. 

These  obelisks  are  clearly  the  work  of  a 
much  later  date  than  any  portion  of  the  tem- 
ple, rendering  it  probable  that  the  sanctuary 
was  restored  by  the  politic  Greeks,  after  the 
destruction  of  the  building  itself  by  Cambyses. 

The  central  passage  that  leads  through  the 
sanctuary  is  sixty  feet  long.  A  narrow  ave- 
nue branches  off'  from  it  to  the  North,  which 
is  lined  with  grey  granite ;  and,  though  ob- 
structed by  the  ruins  of  the  fallen  roof,  may 
be  traced  to  lead  to  a  small  chamber  occupied 
by  an  enormous  block  of  calcareous  spar,  the 
mummy  of  a  colossal  statue,  but  of  which  not 
a  feature  can  now  be  distinguished.  It  pro- 
bably was  the  principal  deity  of  the  temple 
(Osiris,  or  Jove),  and,  therefore,  the  first  ob- 
ject to  fall  under  the  holy  rage  of  the  Persians. 