


30  SHEIK  HASSAN. 

Taking  a  reluctant  leave  of  the  ruined  city 
of  the  Hundred  Gates,  we  once  more  got  un- 
der weigh ;  and,  favoured  by  a  light  breeze, 
dropped  down  in  the  course  of  a  night  to  the 
landing-place  of  Kheneh. 

We  proceeded  at  once  to  the  house  of  our 
old  acquaintance.  Sheik  Hassan,  to  request 
his  aid  to  procure  us  camels  and  guides  to 
take  us  to  Kosseir.  He  undertook  to  have 
every  thing  requisite  ready  for  us  on  the  day 
appointed,  and  letters  prepared  for  his  son, 
who  filled  the  office  of  British  consular  agent 
at  that  port. 

Our  curiosity  in  matters  of  Arab  domestic 
economy  induced  us  to  accept  his  invitation 
to  dinner  for  the  morrow  :  and  these  matters 
being  arranged,  we  crossed  over  to  the  left 
bank  of  the  river,  and  passed  the  rest  of  the 
day  in  exploring  the  extensive  ruins  of  Den- 
derah. 

The  temples  at  Denderah,  being  the  first, 

removed — the  papyrus  was  discovered,  vi'hich,  in  plain  English,  de- 
clared the  great  defunct  to  have  been  a  Mr.  Peter  Simpkins  of  Fen- 
church  Street  and  Camberwell  Grove,  soapboiler  and  salt-refiner  to 
the  Royal  Family,  and  many  years  an  inmate  of  St.  Luke's. 


TEMPLES  AT  DENDERAH.  81 

on  a  large  scale,  that  are  met  with  in  ascend- 
ing the  Nile,  make  an  impression  upon  the 
traveller  that  has  given  them  an  undeserved 
celebrity  as  compared  with  those  that  he 
afterwards  meets  with. 

There  are  the  remains  of  two  temples  yet 
visible,  both,  I  am  inclined  to  say,  of  a  mo- 
dern date.  One  is  but  small,  faces  the  south, 
and  must  have  opened  into  one  of  the  outer 
courts  of  the  Great  Temple,  which  stands  at 
right  angles  to  it,  facing  the  east.  It  appears 
to  have  been  dedicated  to  the  evil  spirit,  Ty- 
phon,  whose  hideous  form  is  carved  above  the 
capitals  of  the  columns  in  the  portico.  On 
the  interior  walls,  Isis  is  represented  suckling 
Horus,  and  attended  by  Typhon  and  his  cara 
sposa.     The  figures  are  all  in  relief. 

The  propyla  of  the  Great  Temple  are  nearly 
destroyed,  but  its  magnificent  pronaos  of 
twenty-four  Isis-headed  columns  is  in  excel- 
lent preservation.  The  columns  are  nearly 
seven  feet  in  diameter,  and  their  distance  from 
centre  to  centre  is  twenty-four  feet ;  so  that 
the  intercolumniations  are  about  equal  to  two 


32  DINNER  AT  SHEIK  HASSAN  S. 

diameters  and  a  half  of  the  pillars — a  nearer 
approach  than  any  other  I  met  with  in  Egypt 
to  the  due  proportions  prescribed  by  Grecian 
taste. 

On  the  ceiling  of  the  pronaos,  the  signs  of 
the  zodiac  are  painted.  The  Temple  contains 
three  large  apartments  en  suite,  from  which 
passages  and  staircases  lead  to  an  upper 
range  of  small  chambers,  curiously  sculptured 
and  painted. 