


EL  HAMAMAT.  41 

of  some  recently  deceased  animal,  heedless  of 
the  approach  of  man  —  unscared  even  by  the 
whizzing  of  his  bullet.  They  afforded  us  ex- 
cellent pistol  practice. 

In  four  hours  and  three  quarters,  we  arrived 
at  some  ruined  wells,  and  crossed  the  head  of 
a  wide  valley,  opening  to  the  north.  Beyond 
it  a  lofty  granite  range  of  mountains  stretches 
away  to  the  east.  Continuing  our  journey,  in 
seven  hours  and  a  half  from  the  time  of  our 
setting  out,  we  reached  the  well  of  El  Hama- 
mat  (baths),  the  descent  to  which  is  by  a  cir- 
cular stone  staircase.  The  well  is  sixty  feet 
deep,  but  we  found  no  water  in  it.  Several 
sarcophagi  were  lying  about,  that  had  served 
as  troughs  for  watering  cattle.  Some  of  them 
were  made  of  a  very  hard  and  beautiful  brec- 
cia verde,  numerous  blocks  of  which  were  ly- 
ing scattered  about. 

A  little  beyond  the  well,  an  old  tower  frowns 
upon  the  narrow  ravine  from  a  steep  hill  on 
the  left;  and,  some  distance  further  on,  we 
reached  the  foot  of  a  lofty  peak,  that  had 
served  us  all  day  as  a  kind  of  directing  mark. 


42  EL  MEGRIB. 

We  reached  the  well  of  Issud  after  ten 
hours  and  a  half's  riding,  and  pitched  our 
tent  at  the  mouth  of  a  cavern  that  had  served 
as  a  burying'-place  in  former  ages,  and  was 
swarming  with  bats.  The  water  of  the  well 
is  strongly  impregnated  with  salt  and  sulphur, 
which  obliged  us  to  have  recourse  to  our  buf- 
falo-skins of  Nile  water. 

The  pass  of  Issud  is  about  half  a  mile  long, 
very  narrow,  and  rough ;  and  may  be  con- 
sidered as  the  connecting  link  of  the  great 
mountain-chain  that  divides  the  Nile  from 
the  Red  Sea — for  the  ascent  and  descent  in 
the  road  are  both  very  perceptible. 

We  reached  El  Megrib  in  an  hour  and 
three  quarters  :  it  consists  only  of  some  ruined 
buildings.  From  thence,  during  the  follow- 
ing eight  hours,  our  way  was  bounded  on  the 
left  by  a  range  of  lofty  mountains,  and  to- 
wards sunset  we  arrived  at  some  wells  si- 
tuated in  a  small  plain,  under  the  peaked 
Gibel  Abumelad,  where  we  encamped  for  the 
night. 

W^e  reached  the  Bir  Inglese  (Well  of  the 


KOSSEIR.  43 

English)  in  three  hours  and  a  half  from  our 
resting-place.  The  valley  there  becomes  more 
open,  and  the  hills  gradually  lower.  A  lime- 
stone stratum  again  overlays  the  granite  and 
sand-stone,  and  the  blue  surface  of  the  Red 
Sea  may  be  seen  in  the  distance.  In  three 
hours  more  we  reached  Kosseir,  which  is 
screened  from  view  until  arrived  close  under 
its  walls,  by  a  point  of  land  that  projects  into 
the  sea,  sheltering  it  to  the  south-west. 

To  persons  arriving  from  the  banks  of  the 
Hoogley,  I  can  conceive  Kosseir  must  appear 
a  miserable  place  enough ;  to  one,  however, 
who  has  recently  left  the  mud-built  towns  on 
the  banks  of  the  Nile,  it  wears  an  aspect  of 
comfort  and  cleanliness,  quite  refreshing  to 
the  senses.  It  is  far  cleaner,  and  infinitely 
better  built,  than  any  Egyptian  town  south 
of  Cairo. 