

In  four  hours  we  reached  the  village  of 

Beerahambah,  beyond  which  all  cultivation 

ceases.     It  is  a  wretched  place,  containing 

about  one  hundred   inhabitants.      After   an 

hour's  rest,  which  we  stood  in  some  need  of, 

we  resumed  onr  exalted  seats,  but  it  took  us 

d2 


36  PACE  OF  THE  DROMEDARY. 

six  hours  to  reach  the  wells  of  El  Gaytah, 
where  we  arrived  dreadfully  fatigued  froLi 
our  inexperience  in  this  new  mode  of  travel- 
ling— for  the  motion  of  the  dromedary  is,  to  a 
novice,  peculiarly  wearying.  The  animal's 
long  step  throws  the  body  forward,  and  pro- 
duces a  constant  action  of  the  back,  which  is 
painfully  increased  if  the  saddle  be  not  placed 
quite  even  on  the  animal's  broad  shoulder. 

At  his  usual  pace,  the  dromedary  gets  over 
the  ground  at  the  rate  of  about  two  miles 
and  a  half  an  hour,  but  when  made  to  step 
out,  he  will  travel  three  and  a  half.  His 
pleasantest  pace  is  a  sort  of  amble,  or  what 
the  Spaniards  call  paso,  at  which  he  goes  at 
from  five  to  six  miles  an  hour.  His  trot  is  to  be 
recommended  only  to  rheumatic  subjects,  and 
is  utter  destruction  to  all  friable  articles.  His 
stumble — at  whatever  pace  he  may  be  pro- 
ceeding— is  awful ! 

A  dromedary  is  merely  a  finer  race  of  camel, 
whose  paces  are  rather  quicker,  and  motion 
more  springy,  and  therefore  less  disagreeable. 
These   animals   undergo   hunger  and   thirst 


WELLS  AT  EL  GAYTAH.  37 

with  great  patience ;  but  they  by  no  means 
carry  a  burthen  in  proportion  to  their  size.  I 
have  seen  a  little  donkey  with  half  a  camel 
load  upon  his  back  outwalk  them  with  ease. 

In  crossing  the  desert,  however,  travellers 
will  find  it  to  their  advantage  to  use  the 
larger  animal ;  the  rider  being  removed  to  so 
much  greater  a  distance  from  the  heated 
sand,  and  put  in  the  way  of  getting  any  little 
air  there  may  be  stirring.  We  found  a  won- 
derful difference  in  the  heat  whenever  we  dis- 
mounted. That  operation,  by  the  way,  is  by 
no  means  an  agreeable  one,  particularly  to 
the  tyro  in  camelestrianism,  who,  from  the 
suddenness  with  which  the  animal  drops  on 
his  knees,  risks  having  his  nose  brought  in 
collision  with  the  camel's  poll. 

El  Gaytah,  where  we  arrived  very  late, 
consists  of  three  wells  of  bad  water,  and  two 
wretched  hovels  for  the  accommodation  of 
travellers,  but  has  no  permanent  inhabitants. 
We  found  a  large  caravan  encamped  round 
the  wells,  but  the  buildings  unoccupied ;  so, 
giving  up  the  larger  of  the  two  to  our  ser- 


38  MOUNTAIN  RANGE. 

vants  and  camel-drivers,  we  spread  our  mat- 
tresses and  carpets  upon  the  floor  of  the 
other,  (a  small  mosque  or  the  tomb  of  some 
saint)  glad  to  have  four  walls  to  shelter  us 
from  the  cold  night-blast  of  the  desert. 