

The  tombs  of  the  kings  (Biban  el  Malook) 
are  in  a  rocky  ravine,  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Lybian  chain,  nearly  behind  the  Mem- 
nonium.  The  mountains  are  of  a  fine  white 
lime-stone,'having  numerous  flints  and  agates 
embedded  in  it,  and  rest  upon  a  schistose 
foundation.  Some  of  the  rents  in  the  rock 
are  filled  with  beautiful  crystallizations, 
and  there  are  numerous  petrifactions,  zoo- 
phites,  shells,  &:c. 

The  tomb  discovered  by  Belzoni  is  by  far 


26  BELZONI'S  TOMB. 

the  most  interesting',  from  the  freshness  of 
the  colouring  and  comparatively  perfect  state 
of  its  walls,  but  the  admission  of  air  and 
Monsieur  Champollion  have  tended  much  to 
destroy  its  beauty.  It  has  been  cruelly  mu- 
tilatecl  by  every  traveller  since  the  scientific 
Frenchman  set  the  example. 

The  supposition  that  the  passage  discovered 
by  Belzoni  under  the  sarcophagus  (and  in 
which  he  penetrated  to  the  distance  of  three 
hundred  feet)  leads  to  the  eastern  side  of  the 
mountains  is  rather  fanciful,  since  its  direction 
is  about  s.s.w.  It  probably  communicates 
with  some  other  entrance  to  the  tomb  from 
another  ravine. 

There  are  otlier  tombs  niore  extensive  than 
Belzoni's,  (as  it  is  usually  called)  but  I  think 
none  in  which  the  figures  are  so  well  executed,' 
which,  in  it,  by  the  way,  are  almost  all  in  re- 
lief ;  whereas  the  others  are  mostly  intaglio. 
There  is  a  great  similarity  in  the  plan  of  all. 
A  small  square  vestibule,  from  whence  a  lon^^ 
passage  inclining  gradually  downwards,  and 
communicating  with  various  small  apartments, 


INTERIOR  OF  THE  TOMBS.  27 

or  cells,  right  and  left — reaches  a  rectangular 
transverse  chamber,  the  roof  of  which,  in  most 
instances,  is  carved  in  the  form  of  an  arch, 
out  of  the  solid  rock.  Thence,  continuing-  its 
downv^^ard  course,  the  passage  finally  arrives 
at  the  sepulchre  of  the  great  personage,  w^hose 
bones  the  mania  for  the  "  diffusion  of  useful 
knowledge  "  will  no  longer  allow  to  remain 
quietly  in  the  red  granite  sarcophagus,  pre- 
pared with  so  much  labour  and  expense  for 
their  reception. 

The  figures  with  which  the  walls  are  co- 
vered throughout  are  of  the  same  deformed 
brute-headed  divinities  that  decorate  the  tem- 
ples. They  are  carved  without  the  least 
regard  to  perspective,  or  proportions,  and 
daubed  all  over  with  the  most  gaudy  colours 
that,  in  early  ages,  the  vegetable  and  mineral 
worlds  were  known  to  produce. 

The  village  of  Gournou  is  situated  on  the 
acclivity  of  the  mountain,  about  one  hundred 
and  fifty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  valley  of 
the  Nile.  Its  inhabitants  dwell  mostly  in 
caverns  and  tombs  practised  in  the  face  of 