

The  speech  of  the  victorious  hero  to  his  as- 
sembled chiefs — as  translated  by  the  learned 
Frenchman — shows  the  wonderful  variety  of 
terms  and  energy  of  expression  that  the 
hieroglyphical  language  admitted  of.  It 
approaches  nearer  to  the  "  sublime  and  beau- 
tiful "  of  one  of  Napoleon's  bulletins  than  any 
thing  I  have  ever  read  — par  exemple :  "  Les 
etrangers  sontrenverses  par  ma  force  ;  la  terreur 
de  mon  nom  est  venue  — leurs  cceurs  en  ont  ete 
remplis^e  me  suis  presente  devant  eux  comme 
un  lion — -je  les  ai  poursuivis  semhlable  a  un 


PALACE  OF  SESOSTRIS.  19 

^pervier,"  &c. ! !  One  could  hardly  have  sup- 
posed that  any  combination  of  beetles,  geese, 
and  ibises,  could  have  produced  such  an  over- 
flow of  eloquence. 

The  Rhamsseion,  Monsieur  Champollion 
assures  the  world,  was  the  palace  of  the  great 
Sesostris;  but  where  the  mighty  monarch  could 
possibly  find  accommodation  in  it  for  himself, 
family,  and  suite,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  conceive. 
The  whole  palace,  including  the  outer  courts 
and  the  propylse,  is  but  five  hundred  feet 
long  and  about  two  hundred  wide,  and  could 
have  contained  but  two  apartments,  besides 
the  great  salle  hypostyle.  This  he  states  to 
have  been  a  grande  salle  d'Assemblee,  and 
maintains  that  even  one  of  the  two  smaller 
apartments  was  a  library. 

If  there  were  other  chambers,  as  Monsieur 
Champollion  supposed,  (of  which  there  is  not 
the  least  appearance)  then  his  laborious  at- 
tempt to  prove  that  this  edifice  is  the  one 
described  by  Diodorus  Siculus  as  the  monu- 
ment of  Osymandyas  falls  altogether  to  the 
ground.   But  the  truth  is,  the  building  resem- 

c  2 


20  ART  OF  PERSPECTIVE. 

bles  in  its  general  plan  all  the  other  ancient 
Egyptian  temples ;  the  grande  salle  d'assemblee 
of  which  was  most  probably  the  place  of  worship 
of  the  multitude — for  I  question  much  whether 
politics  were  ever  discussed  in  a  general  as- 
sembly of  the  people  in  the  days  of  Sesostris. 
This  is  quite  a  French  idea  of  the  nineteenth 
century. 

Carried  away  by  his  enthusiastic  admira- 
tion for  the  works  of  the  ancient  Egyptians, 
Monsieur  Champollion  has  even  gone  so  far 
as  to  express  a  doubt  of  the  value  of  the  art 
of  perspective.  **  Chaque  groupe  consider e 
apart,"  says  he  on  this  subject,  *'  sera  trouve 
certainement  defectueux  dans  quelques  points 
relatif  a  la  perspective,  oil  aux  proportions 
comparativement  aux  parties  voisines,"  and 
then  adds,  that  "  les  plus  beaux  vases  grecs, 
representant  des  combats,  pechent  precisement, 
(si  pecJie  il  y  a),  sous  les  memes  rapports  que 
ces  bas  reliefs  Egyptiens." 

Now,  let  the  demerits  of  the  Grecian  vases 
be  what  they  may,  I  do  not  see  how  the 
value  of   the  Egyptian  work  can   be  at  all 