

On  our  arrival  at  Sheik  Hassan's,  at  the 
appointed  dinner-hour,  he  informed  us  that 
six  camels  had  been  engaged  for  the  morrow 
to  carry  us  to  Kosseir,  for  which  and  the  re- 
turn (staying  there  two  entire  days)  we  were 
to  pay  the  moderate  sum  of  forty-five  piastres 
each — about  twelve  shillings  and  sixpence  in 
English  money. 

After  enumerating  the  various  precautions 
we  must  take,  over  a  preparatory  pipe,  dinner 
was  brought  in,  and  we  sat  down  to  table,  a 
partie  quarree,  in  most  Christian  fashion,  each 
person,  besides  a  chair,  being  provided  with 
a  knife,  fork,  and  spoon. 


SUBSTANTIAL  HEPAST.  33 

Our  fare  consisted  of  a  lamb  roasted  whole, 
and  stuffed  with  a  farci  of  rice,  raisins,  and 
pistachio  nuts.  This  was  followed  by  a 
turkey,  dressed  in  the  same  manner,  and  va- 
rious stews  of  meat  and  vegetables.  These 
were  in  turn  succeeded  by  two  immense  dishes 
of  a  kind  of  paste,  of  the  consistence  of  ra- 
violi, one  flavoured  with  cheese,  the  other 
with  honey. 

A  huge  bowl  of  rice  and  cream  closed  the 
substantial  repast,  which  was  washed  down 
with  some  tolerable  wine,  and  a  bottle  of 
*'  Hodgson's  pale  ale,''  that  had  been  pre- 
sented to  our  host  by  an  English  gentleman, 
who  passed  through  Kheneh  on  his  way  home 
from  India,  and  which  the  worthy  old  Sheik — 
telling  us  it  was  Bengal  wine — thought  must 
needs  be  a  great  treat. 

We  were  waited  upon  at  dinner  by  the 
Sheik's  two  sons  and  grandson,  who  changed 
our  plates  as  required,  and  handed  the  dishes 
off  to  the  domestics,  ranged  in  second  line, 
near  the  door  communicating  with  the  base 
of  operations. 

VOL.  II.  D 


34  MERRIMENT. 

They  were  quite  lost  in  astonishment  at 
our  strangely  circuitous  mode  of  conveying 
the  food  to  our  mouths  ;  and,  judging  by  a 
suppressed  female  giggling  we  occasionally 
heard,  they  were  not  the  only  persons  that 
derived  amusement  from  the  curious  ma- 
noeuvres of  our  knives  and  forks.  The  usual 
ablution  over,  we  resumed  our  seats  on  the 
divan,  and  replenished  pipes. 


DEPARTURE  FOR  KOSSEIR.  35 


CHAPTER  II. 

Departure  for  Kosseir — Pace  of  the  Dromedary — Welis  at  El  Gay- 
tah — Observations  on  the  Desert — Pass  of  Issud — El  Megrib — 
The  Consular  Agent  at  Kosseir — American  Trickery — The  Ci- 
tadel— Hospitality  of  Said  Mohammed — An  Arab  Dinner — New 
Route— Mountain  Pass — Wad-el- Ash — Hints  to  the  Traveller — 
Nomadic  Arab  Tribes — Partridges  and  Grouse — Return  to  Khe- 
neh — Seizure  of  our  Boatmen  for  the  Nizam — Visit  to  Girgeh — 
Apprehension  of  the  Delinquents  —  The  Bastinado  —  Town  of 
Akhmin — Minieh — Return  to  Cairo. 

At  an  early  hour  the  following  morning  v/e 
mounted  our  camels  on  the  beach,  and  started 
for  Kosseir.  The  road,  after  leaving  Kheneh, 
takes  a  south-easterly  direction,  skirting  the 
cultivated  land  that  hereabouts  extends  some 
distance  from  the  bank  of  the  river. 