

Resuming  our  march  at  daybreak,  much 
refreshed  by  our  night's  rest,  we  pushed  our 
camels  on  at  a  brisk  pace  ;  and,  in  about  an 
hour  and  a  half,  reached  the  foot  of  the  intri- 
cate belt  of  mountains  that  extends  between 
the  Nile  and  the  Red  Sea,  spreading  its  la- 
byrinth of  ramiflcations  in  all  directions. 

Since  leaving  the  village  of  Beerahambah, 
our  road  (a  hard  sandy  track,  covered  with 
large  coarse  pebbles)  had  been  perfectly  level ; 
the  country  on  all  sides  a  dreary  expanse  of 
desert,  the  horizon  broken  only  by  occasional 
ranges  of  shifting  sand-hills.  Not  a  house, 
nor  a  tree,  was  to  be  seen  any  where ;  and 
there  was  nothing  but  the  extraordinary  ef- 
fects of  the  mirage,  and  an  occasional  drove 
of  camels,  bearing  supplies  to  the  Egyptian 
army  employed  in  Arabia,  to  break  the  wea- 
risome sameness  of  the  journey. 


MOUNTAIN  RANGE.  39 

The  change  to  a  narrow  valley,  bounded  by 
hills,  which  gradually  increased  in  height  as 
we  proceeded  onwards,  was,  at  first,  pleasing 
enough ;  but  the  reflected  heat  from  the  white 
cliffs,  and  want  of  air,  soon  made  us  regret  the 
open  desert. 

The  numberless  windings  of  the  valley  al- 
ways gave  us  something  to  look  forward  to, 
however ;  and,  as  we  got  further  into  the 
heart  of  the  mountains,  we  did  occasionally 
see  an  old  tower  perched  upon  the  summit  of 
some  crag  that,  in  former  days,  interdicted 
the  advance  of  an  enemy  by  the  narrow  pass. 

The  formation  of  this  mountain  range  is 
very  peculiar  ;  stretching  from  the  confines  of 
Nubia,  as  far  north  as  the  latitude  of  Cairo 
— where  it  terminates  abruptly  in  the  steep 
cliffs  of  the  Mokattan  and  Ettagah  ranges — 
the  chain,  though  broken  constantly  by  iso- 
lated peaks,  no  where  presents  a  continuous 
ridge,  running  north  and  south.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  furrowed  laterally  by  innumerable 
valleys,  whose  rugged,  bounding  ledges  com- 
pletely intersect  it  from  east  to  west. 


40  IxNTRICATE  COUNTRY. 

The  beds  of  these  valleys  are  very  narrow, 
and  so  flat,  that  in  proceeding  along  them, 
the  rise  and  fall  of  the  ground  is  barely  per- 
ceptible. The  mountains  sometimes  rise 
perpendicularly  along  them  for  several  miles, 
broken  only  by  the  gorges  of  other  ravines. 

The  road,  by  constant  traffic,  has  become 
well  defined ;  otherwise,  without  a  guide,  it 
would  be  next  to  impossible  to  make  one's 
way  across  this  intricate  country,  the  ravines 
being  all  so  much  alike,  and  that  by  which 
the  road  proceeds  often  winding  in  the  very 
direction  you  think  you  ought  not  to  take. 

Besides  the  tramp  of  feet,  the  way  has  now 
become  well  marked  by  the  bleached  bones  of 
the  numerous  animals  that  have  fallen  under 
the  joint  weight  of  years  and  an  oppressive 
burden.  Sometimes  a  flight  of  hungry  vultures 
swoops  round  the  startled  traveller,  fixing 
their  keen  eyes  upon  the  emaciated  brute  he 
rides,  as  he  moves  slowly  and  mournfully 
along,  as  if  to  judge  what  length  of  time  he 
will  yet  have  to  wait  for  his  repast.  At  others, 
they  may  be  seen  disputing  over  the  carcase 