

The  two  celebrated  colossal  statues  of 
Memnon,  commonly  known  as  *'  Shammy  and 
Dammy,"  are  chiselled  from  blocks  of  highly 
crystallized  grit-stone,  with  numerous  agates 
embedded,  and  of  a  similar  nature  to  some 
rocks  I  saw  in  the  bed  of  the  Nile,  at  Hagar 
Silsilis,  from  whence,  in  all  probability,  these 
colossi  were  brought.  They  face  the  east, 
(nearly  opposite  the  temple  of  Luxor),  and, 

but  his  pretending  to  a  perfect  knowledge  of  it  was  going  rather  too 
far. 

Is  it  not  probable^  that  the  arts  having  revived  in  Egypt  when 
under  the  dominion  of  the  Greeks,  whilst  the  meaning  of  the  hiero- 
glyphical  characters  had  been  lost  daring  the  two  eventful  centuries 
that  elapsed  between  the  conquests  of  Cambyses  and  that  of 
Alexander,  they ,  were  thenceforth  copied  without  change,  either  in 
form  or  arrangement  ?  It  is  easy  to  conceive  that  such  might  again 
be  the  case  if  Egypt  were  left  to  itself  for  even  half  a  century,  and 
during  that  period  its  inhabitants  should  acquire  a  taste  for  sculpture 
and  painting,  without  having  better  models  before, their  eyes  than 
those  remaining  on  the  walls  of  their  ruined  temples. 


24  TEMPLE  OF  DAIR. 

from  being  situated  in  a  vast  plain,  apart 
from  any  other  objects,  can  be  seen  at  a  great 
distance  ;  and  look  very  like  two  gouty  old 
gentlemen,  with  their  legs  wrapped  up  in 
flannel.  The  most  northerly  of  the  two  has 
been  broken  and  put  together  again ;  this 
was  the  celebrated  vocalist  described  by 
ancient  writers  ;  and  some  modern  travellers, 
doubtful  of  the  loss  of  his  musical  talent — have 
been  persuaded  to  sit  by  his  side  all  night  in 
the  hope  of  hearing  his  morning  song. 

A  short  distance  behind  the  two  colossi  are 
the  ruins  of  another  temple,  but  they  now 
scarcely  protrude  themselves  above  the  level 
of  the  sand  that  has  drifted  round  them. 
Some  of  the  remaining  stones  are  of  the  same 
nature  as  that  of  the  two  statues. 

The  Temple  of  Dair  is  cut  in  great  part  in 
the  perpendicular  face  of  the  mountain  that 
rises  behind  it,  and  nearly  fronting  the  grand 
propylon  of  the  Temple  of  Karnac.  The 
figures  of  animals  carved  on  the  walls  of  this 
building  are  particularly  good.  It  has  evi- 
dently  been   used   as   a   place   of  Christian 


TOMBS  OF  THE  KINGS.  25 

worship,  and  the  plaster  with  which  the 
heathen  figures  were  covered  has  kept  them 
in  excellent  preservation. 

The  Temple  of  Dair  Medinet  Abou  is 
situated  considerably  to  the  south  of  Dair, 
and  stands  some  distance  from  the  foot  of  the 
mountains.  The  only  thing  for  which  it  is 
remarkable  is  the  sculpture  on  its  walls.  In 
one  place,  the  great  Osiris  is  receiving  offer- 
ings from  an  inferior  deity  —  amongst  which 
a  female,  in  a  state  of  nudity,  is  presented 
for  his  acceptance.  Another  deity  of  the  fair 
sex  turns  her  back  upon  the  scene. 