


EGYPTIAN  SCULPTURE.  21 

raised  by  the  comparison  ;  since  he  might  as 
well  have  said  that  the  rules  of  perspective 
are  violated  on  the  pictorial  soup  tureens  of 
our  modern  crockery-ware. 

The  sculpture  of  the  Egyptians,  to  which 
Champollion  alluded,  was  not  carved  on  com- 
mon vases,  but  on  the  tombs  of  their  kings, 
or  on  the  walls  of  their  temples  ;  and  it  may 
fairly  be  looked  upon,  therefore,  as  the  work 
of  the  best  artists  the  country  could  produce 
at  the  time  of  its  execution. 

No  one,  however,  ever  yet  saw  an  Egyptian 
figure  represented  in  any  posture  in  which  the 
human  form  as  now  constructed  could  possi- 
bly stand.*  The  hands  also  are  nearly  always 
either  both  right  or  both  left,  and  the  eye  is 
invariably  full,  though  the  face  is  always 
in  profile.  It  must,  therefore,  I  think  be 
admitted,  in  spite  of  Monsieur  Champollion's 
doubt  on  the  subject,  that  "  peche  il  y  a.'' 

Whatever  merit  has  hitherto  been  allowed 
to  the  Egyptians  for  their  knowledge  in  the 

•  Some  author  (I  think  Winkelman)  has  said  the  Egyptians 
sacrificed  to  every  divinity  but  the  Graces. 


22  EGYPTIAN  SCULPTURE. 

arts  of  painting  and  sculpture,  Monsieur  Cham^ 
pollion's  arguments  goto  deprive  them  of,  since 
he  says  that  the  inscriptions  on  the  walls  of  the 
numerous  temples  erected  to  commemorate  the 
conquests  of  Sesostris  were  executed  '*  c?e  su 
vivant."  Now,  Diodorus  Siculus  asserts  that 
this  same  great  sovereign  made  it  his  boast 
that  none  of  his  subjects  were  employed  on 
ciny  of  the  w^orks  executed  during  his  reign — 
amongst  which  he  enumerates  a  temple  in 
every  city  throughout  Egypt.  It  consequently 
follows  that  the  specimens  of  sculpture  which 
Monsieur  Champollion  admired  so  much  were 
the  works  of  foreigners. 

The  Rhamsseion,  or  Memnonium,  whether 
a  temple  or  a  palace,*  is,  next  to  the  Temple 

*  I  have  already,  in  a  preceding  note^  pointed  out  an  apparent 
inconsistency  on  the  part  of  Mons.  ChampoUion,  in  ascribing  the 
hieroglyphical  deeds  sculptured  on  the  walls  to  persons  who  evi- 
dently did  not  understand  the  language  in  which  such  flattery  was 
offered  to  them.  I  do  not,  however,  mean  to  maintain  that  the 
hieroglyphics  were  used  merely  as  ornaments,  for  I  think  they 
were  originally  conventional  signs,  adopted  by  the  priesthood,  under- 
stood only  by  them,  and  lost  on  their  "  occupation  ceasing,"  when 
their  temples  were  thrown  down  by  the  Persians.  Mons.  Cham- 
pollion may  have  discovered  the  clue  to  this  conventional  language. 


SHAMMY  AND  DAMMY.  ,23 

of  Karnac,  the  finest  specimen  that  remains 
of  Egyptian  architecture.  It  is  not  quite  so 
large  as  the  Temple  of  Edfou,  nor  by  any 
means  so  perfect,  but  it  presents  a  great 
variety  of  ornaments  and  a  higher  degree  of 
finish. 