


28  TRAFFIC  IN  MUMMIES. 

the  hills,  and  are  notorious  for  carrying  on  a 
considerable  trade  in  mummies  and  other  ar- 
ticles of  virtu.  Of  late  years,  however,  their 
traffic  has  been  attended  with  some  risk, 
Mohammed  Ali  having  prohibited  the  digging 
for,  and  carrying  away,  antiquities,  through- 
out his  dominions.  He  has,  in  consequence, 
been  accused  of  having  monopolized  this 
branch  of  commerce ;  but  this  statement  is  by 
no  means  borne  out  by  facts,  as  he  himself 
takes  no  part  in  and  derives  no  part  from  the 
disgusting  trade  in  old  bones  and  dried  flesh. 

The  Viceroy's  reasons  for  putting  a  stop  to 
the  unprofitable  and  sacrilegious  violation  of 
the  tombs  of  the  ancients  is,  that  it  took  a 
number  of  hands  from  the  much  more  bene- 
ficial occupation  of  husbandry ;  for  the  fields 
were  neglected,  whilst  the  tombs  were  dug  up 
and  rifled.  He  is  always  ready,  however,  to 
grant  permission  to  explore  to  such  persons 
as  are  actuated  solely  by  scientific  motives. 

Ibrahim  Pasha  employs  a  number  of  per- 
sons constantly  in  excavating  amongst  the 
various  ruins :  and  most  of  the  foreign  Consuls, 


AMBITIOUS  TRAVELLER.  29 

also,  avail  themselves  of  the  Viceroy's  libe- 
rality in  bestowing  resurrection ising  diplo- 
mas. His  indulgence  to  foreigners  on  this 
score  (as  indeed  on  most  others)  is,  of  course, 
much  abused ;  for  the  eagerness  with  which 
every  sort  of  trash  is  purchased  by  travellers 
makes  the  trade  a  very  profitable  concern, 
and  opens  a  wide  door  for  fraud,  by  the  en- 
couragement it  gives  to  the  manufacture  of 
mummies.* 


•  The  following  story  was  in  circulation  whilst  I  was  in  Egypt, 
which,  though  I  will  not  vouch  for  its  "  whole"  truth,  is  not  suffi- 
ciently improbable  (considering  the  eccentric  habits  of  my  country- 
men) to  be  altogether  regarded  as  fiction. 

An  English  traveller  had  a  great  desire  to  be  mummified  after  the 
manner  of  the  ancient  Egyptians ;  and,  having  paid  in  advance  to  the 
operators,  bound  them  by  a  solemn  oath  to  do  his  bidding,  prepared 
his  sarcophagus,  and  written  a  long  notice  of  his  life  and  opinions, 
swallowed  a  dose  of  arsenic.  He  was,  of  course,  "  gathered  to  his 
fathers;" —  his  body  underwent  the  embalming  process,  and — the 
papyrus  having  been  placed  on  his  ambitious  breast — was  enclosed 
in  the  red  granite  case,  and  deposited  in  a  tomb  that  had  been  pre- 
pared for  its  reception. 

Not  many  years  afterwards,  some  roguish  Arabs  sold  the  precious 
relic  to  a  learned  Frenchman,  who  carried  it  to  Paris  —  vain  beyond 
belief  of  having  acquired  such  a  treasure,  which—judging  from  the 
splendour  of  the  case — he  thought  must  be  a  Pharaoh  at  least.  A 
party  of  brother  savans  were  invited  to  assist  at  the  ceremony  of 
unrollment,  when— after  some  hundred  yards  of  fine  linen  had  been 