

The  Arabs  like  to  hear  Mohammed  Ali 
called  their  Soldan.  A  murmur  of  approba- 
tion ran  through  the  crowd  of  satellites  that 
encircled  the  Viceroy's  lieutenant  (himself  an 
Arab) — our  flourish,  in  fact,  had  produced  the 
desired  effect.  The  witnesses  were  at  hand  : 
their  evidence  clear — the  delinquents  stood 
before  him.  So,  after  sundry  Mashallahs ! 
and  numerous  protestations  of  his  respect  for 
Mohammed  Ali,  and  regard  for  all  Franks — 
Englishmen  in  particular  —  his    Excellency 


60  THE  BASTINADO. 

most  composedly  asked,  if  we  should  like  to 
have  one  of  the  culprits  hanged  ! 

This  obliging  offer,  which,  no  doubt,  was 
dictated  by  the  most  refined  politeness  (for 
the  power  of  inflicting  death  being  no  longer 
in  his  hands,  we  were  aware  that  his  proposed 
sacrifice  could  be  intended  only  as  a  compli- 
ment), we  begged  leave  to  decline,  adding 
(moved  a  little  thereto,  I  must  confess,  by 
curiosity),  that  a  slight  bastinadoing,  admi- 
nistered on  the  spot,  would  quite  satisfy  us, 
though  the  crime  perhaps  called  for  a  much 
more  severe  punishment. 

A  ring  was  instantly  formed.  The  feet  of 
one  of  the  delinquents  were  fastened  by  iron 
clamps  to  a  stake,  and,  after  being  hand- 
bound,  he  was  thrown  flat  upon  his  belly  ; 
the  soles  of  his  feet  were  then  turned  up  by 
means  of  the  stake,  and  two  Kawasses  pro- 
ceeded to  belabour  them  most  unmercifully 
with  strong  thongs  of  hippopotamus  hide, 
and  he  to  bellow  Am  an  !  aman  !  (mercy  ! 
mercy  !) 

Unconscious  of  the  etiquette  observed  on 


THE  BASTINADO.  61 

these  occasions,  I  was  beginning  to  get  very 
much  disgusted  with  this  mode  of  punish- 
ment, which  had  already  proceeded  to  a  great 
length,  when  I  perceived,  by  certain  anxious 
glances  cast  by  the  spectators,  first  on  us, 
and  then  on  the  governor,  that  we  were  *'  out 
of  order,"  somehow  or  other.  Calling  upon 
Dick  to  explain,  I  learnt,  to  my  consterna- 
tion, that  I  was  expected  to  signify  when  I 
wished  the  punishment  to  cease.  This  I  im- 
mediately did,  amidst  the  approving  exclama- 
tion of  Taibe !  taibe  !  (good)  from  all  the  old 
magnates  assembled. 

I  was  sorry  that  such  a  mistake  had  oc- 
curred, as  the  principal  offender  was  still  to 
be  punished,  to  whom  I  felt  but  little  inclined 
to  be  merciful.  The  Kawasses,  however,  for 
what  reason  I  know  not,  unless  that  they  ex- 
pected a  backschis  from  us  proportioned  to 
their  exertions,  resumed  their  work  with  in- 
creased vigour  when  the  feet  of  the  adjunct 
of  the  Sheik  el  Belled  of  Lembieh  were  placed 
before  them. 

Not  content  with  crimping  his  soles,  they 


b2  THE  GOVERNOR  S  CIVILITY. 

inflicted  a  portion  of  their  blows  upon  a  part 
of  his  body,  that  must  have  effectually  pre- 
vented his  sitting  a  la  turque,  with  any  degree 
of  comfort,  for  a  fortnight. 