

f2 


68  THE  RAS  EL  WADI. 

I  started  on  this  excursion,  contrary  to  the 
advice  of  all  the  old  Egyptians,  just  as  a  dread- 
ed Khampseen  wind  had  set'  in  ;  and  accom- 
panied only  by  my  relative  C ,  our  ser- 
vants, and  two  guides,  all  mounted  on  drome- 
daries. 

We  agreed,  after  visiting  the  Ras  el  Wadi, 
to  proceed  to  the  site  of  the  ancient  canal  of 
the  Ptolemies,  thence  to  Suez,  and  return  to 
Cairo  by  the  route  across  the  desert,  which 
the  Viceroy  has  selected  for  laying  down  a 
rail-road. 

Taking,  therefore,  the  great  Syrian  road, 
we  passed  through  El  Hankah ;  and,  diverg- 
ing slightly  to  the  left,  to  visit  the  College  of 
Abouzabel,  (of  which  an  account  will  be  found 
hereafter),  regained  that  road  a  few  miles  be- 
fore it  reaches  Zoameh.  The  day  was  so  far 
spent,  however,  ere  we  left  the  interesting  es- 
tablishment at  Abouzabel,  that  night  overtook 
us  before  we  reached  that  village. 

Having  a  lively  recollection  of  all  the  desa- 
gremens  experienced  at  the  Capo's  house  on 
my  way  to  Cairo  from  Damietta,  we  deter- 


THE  RAS  EL  WADI.  69 

mined  to  encamp  for  the  night  in  a  grove  of 
date-trees,  at  the  outskirts  of  Zoameh ;  de- 
clining a  guard  of  honour,  which  the  Sheik 
volunteered  to  send  to  watch  over  our  slum- 
bers. 

We  struck  our  tent  at  daybreak,  and  rode 
to  Belbeis  to  breakfast,  where  we  were  obliged 
to  procure  another  guide,  as  we  found  that 
neither  of  the  camel  drivers  that  accompanied 
us  was  acquainted  with  the  part  of  the  desert 
we  purposed  traversing. 

Remounting  our  dromedaries,  and  keeping 
a  little  to  the  right  of  the  Syrian  road  on 
leaving  Belbeis,  we  arrived,  in  about  two 
hours  and  a  half,  at  the  commencement  of  the 
Ras  el  Wadi,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  the 
Wadi  Toumlet.  It  is  a  narrow  valley,  that 
stretches  about  eighteen  miles  east  by  north 
into  the  heart  of  the  Great  Desert,  and  must 
be  that  along  which  the  Canal  of  the  Ptole- 
mies was  carried  to  connect  the  Red  Sea  with 
the  Nile.  The  bed  of  the  valley  is  perfectly 
flat,  and,  perhaps,  twenty  feet  below  the  level 
of  tbe  sandy  desert  that  presses  upon  it  on 


70  THE  RAS  EL  WADI. 

both  sides,  contracting  it  to  a  width  of  about 
a  mile. 

It  receives  the  annual  fertilizing  deposit 
brought  down  by  the  inundation  of  the  Nile ; 
and,  what  with  embankments,  reservoirs,  and 
two  small  canals,  that  extend  nearly  its  whole 
length,  a  sufficient  quantity  of  water  is  re- 
tained to  irrigate  it  throughout  the  year. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  one  of  the  few  spots  in 
Egypt  where  a  want  of  agricultural  labourers 
is  clearly  perceptible ;  for,  with  all  this  com- 
mand of  water,  we  found  a  great  portion  of 
the  valley  lying  waste. 