

The  Reis  and  boat's  crew  entered  warmly 
into  our  well-concerted  plan,  but  the  first  act 
of  our  melo-drama  failed,  from  unavoidable 
circumstances.    Remaining  a  day  at  Kheneh, 


VISIT  TO  GIRGEH.  tj 

to  replenish  our  stock  of  provisions  and  throw 
our  friends  at  Lembieh  the  more  off  their 
guard,  we  timed  our  departure  from  thence 
so  as  to  reach  the  village  by  dawn  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning. 

We  immediately  landed  a  strong  and  well- 
armed  party,  and,  guided  by  the  Reis,  pro- 
ceeded straight  to  the  Sheik's  abode. 

The  village  dignitary  was  taken  completely 
by  surprise,  and  was  dreadfully  alarmed  at 
our  hostile  attitude  ;  but,  on  learning  our 
purpose,  declared,  by  all  that  was  holy  in 
Cairo,  Mekka,  and  Medina,  that  the  offenders 
had  been  sent  to  Girgeh  some  days  previously, 
and  were  consequently  then  in  the  governor's 
hands,  and  doubtless  undergoing  punishment 
in  prison. 

Having  satisfied  ourselves  that,  at  all  events, 
the  first  part  of  this  story  was  correct  (which 
proved  the  Governor  of  Girgeh's  duplicity), 
and  compelled  the  Sheik  to  refund  the  mo- 
ney of  which  the  boatmen  had  been  robbed, 
we  re-embarked,  and  proceeded  on  our  voyage 
to  Girgeh,  where  we  arrived  in  the  afternoon. 


58  ARREST  OF  THE  DELINQUENTS. 

We  landed  forthwith,  and  were  on  our  way 
to  the  governor's  house,  when  our  Reis  espied 
his  two  quondam  acquaintances  comfortably 
seated  at  a  coffee-shop,  smoking  their  chi- 
bouques. They  had  the  impudence,  in  the  first 
moment  of  recognition,  to  greet  their  victims 
with  a  most  friendly  salaam.  Their  second 
impulse — at  the  sight  of  **  Dick's"  wrathful 
countenance — was,  however,  to  run  away ;  but 
his  strip  of  hippopotamus  hide  overtook  them 
in  a  trice,  and,  whilst  his  powerful  arms  pini- 
oned the  principal  delinquent,  the  other  was 
secured  by  our  Maltese  servant  and  the  Reis, 
and  both  were  marched  prisoners  through  the 
town,  to  their  unspeakable  horror  and  the 
great  astonishment  of  the  inhabitants. 

We  proceeded,  of  course,  to  the  governor's 
house,  and,  being  informed  that  he  was  holding 
a  grand  levee,  presented  ourselves  to  his  Ex- 
cellency without  any  announcement.  He  was 
not  a  little  surprised  at  the  cortege  that  fol- 
lowed us,  and  looked  extremely  sheepish.  It 
was  clear  that  he  had  not  intended  to  punish 
the  offenders, unless  some  further  notice  should 


DEMANDED  PUNISHMENT.  59 

be  taken  of  the  affair  by  us  ;  and,  even  now — 
after  he  had  had  time  to  regain  his  self-pos- 
session— seemed  disposed  to  shuffle  off  doing 
what  we  required. 

Producing  the  Viceroy's  firman,  we  de- 
manded respectfully,  but  firmly,  that,  in  vir- 
tue of  the  injunctions  therein  contained,  to 
**  render  us  aid  and  assistance,"  &c.,  he  would 
instantly  punish  the  perpetrators  of  an  offence 
so  heinous  against  the  laws  of  their  own  coun- 
try, and  so  insulting  to  us,  foreigners,  travel- 
ling under  the  protection  of  its  sovereign, 
Mohammed  Ali. 