

The  anchorage  of  Kosseir  is  bad,  being 
completely  open  from  seaward,  and  only 
partially  sheltered  from  the  northerly  winds 
by  a  sandy  point,  which  juts  some  distance 
into  the  sea,  terminating  in  a  coral  reef. 

The  Red  Sea  abounds  in  shell-fish  of  infi- 
nite variety,  offering  a  great  treat  to  the  con- 
chologist,  but  valued  only  by  the  inhabitants 
of  Kosseir  according  to  their  possessing  nu- 
tritious qualities,  or  otherwise  ;  for  they  have 
no  notion  of  the  superiority  in  rank  claimed 
by  a  thorny  woodcock  over  a  yellow  admiral. 


THE  CITADEL.  47 

One  small  garden  on  the  sea-shore  is  the 
only  speck  of  vegetation  within  sight  of  the 
town  ;  but  the  distant  mountain  scenery  to 
the  south  is  strikingly  fine. 

The  governor  very  politely  sent  his  stud, 
consisting  of  a  restive  mule  and  a  donkey, 
to  take  us  to  old  Kosseir — a  distance  of  five 
miles  from  the  modern  town — ^but  there  is 
little  to  excite  interest,  the  foundations  of  the 
fort  alone  remaining  to  mark  its  site. 

I  could  not  obtain  admission  to  the  citadel 
— as  it  is  ostentatiously  called — the  governor 
assigning  as  an  excuse  for  his  refusal  of  my 
request,  that  some  part  of  his  female  esta- 
blishment was  living  in  it.  It:  is,  however,  but 
little  worthy  of  notice — a  mere  square  fort  of 
rough  masonry,  unprotected  by  a  ditch  and 
flanked  only  by  circular  bastions,  and  strength- 
ened by  a  kind  of  couvre-porte  on  the  side  to- 
wards the  town. 

Several  old  pieces  of  artillery  are  mounted 
on  the  walls,  which,  if  brought  into  play, 
would  do  more  mischief  to  the  firers  than  the 
fired  at.  I  perfectly  satisfied  my  curiosity  from 


48  ARAB  CUISINE. 

the  exterior,  committing  my  notes  to  paper 
free  from  the  obtrusive  gaze  of  sentinels. 

During  our  stay  at  Kosseir,  we  were  most 
hospitably  entertained  by  Said  Mohammed, 
son  of  our  good  friend  Sheik  Hassan,  the  con- 
sul at  Kheneh,  and  himself  his  Britannic 
Majesty's  agent  at  Kosseir.  He  kindly  pro- 
vided us  with  all  things  needful,  and  always 
favoured  us  with  his  company  at  our  seven 
o'clock  dinner. 

The  Arab  cuisine  produces  many  dishes 
that  are  far  from  being  unpalatable ;  but  the 
Arabs  are  by  no  means  pleasant  dinner  com- 
panions. Their  custom  of  hurrying  over  the 
affair  as  if  it  were  a  punishment,  and,  more- 
over, their  habit  of  dipping  hands  into  the 
various  dishes  on  table — wandering  from  one 
to  another  as  fancy  or  appetite  prompts — are 
particularly  disagreeable. 

The  worst  of  all  their  practices,  however, 
is,  when  wishing  to  be  particularly  marked 
in  their  attention,  they  tear  a  tit-bit  off  the 
joint  before  them,  and  throv/  it  across  the 
table  into  your  plate,  or,  perchance — if  your 