


TOWN  OF  MINIEH.  65 

sculpture  on  the  walls.  It  is  probable  that, 
originally  excavated  for  abodes  for  the  dead, 
they  were  converted  into  habitations  for  the 
living,  at  the  time  of  the  introduction  of 
Christianity  and  the  ascetic  life  into  Egypt, 
and,  perhaps,  served,  at  a  yet  more  recent 
date,  as  places  of  refuge  for  the  inhabitants 
of  the  flat  country,  when  it  has  been  flooded 
by  any  unusual  rise  of  the  river. 

Minieh  was  the  next  town  that  induced  us 
to  bring  to,  for  the  desire  for  a  stroll  through 
the  refreshing  groves  by  which  it  is  sheltered 
was  irresistible.  It  contains  some  fine  build- 
ings of  recent  construction,  amongst  others, 
a  palace  for  the  governor,  barracks,  cotton 
factories,  &c. 

The  streets,  though  narrow,  are  clean,  and 
the  houses,  excepting  those  on  the  outskirts 
of  the  town,  are  mostly  built  either  of  stone 
or  baked  bricks.  The  bazaars  are  inferior 
to  those  of  Siout,  but  Minieh  is  decidedly  the 
best  looking  town  of  Upper  Egypt.  It  con- 
tains about  ten  thousand  souls,  exclusively  of 
a  pretty  strong  garrison.     There,  as  at  most 

VOL.   II.  F 


G6  RETURN  TO  CAIRO. 

of  the  principal  ports  on  the  Nile,  a  show  is 
made  of  a  naval  force — a  kind  of  gun-boat 
being  fixed  immoveably  in  the  mud  abreast  of 
the  town. 

On  leaving  Minieh,  a  northerly  gale  delayed 
us  for  several  days  ;  for,  with  all  our  exertions 
and  the  stream  in  our  favour,  we  could  make 
no  way  against  it. 

We  reached  Boulak  on  the  last  day  of  the 
ninth  week  from  the  time  of  our  leaving  Old 
Cairo. 


DEPARTURE  FOR  SUEZ.  CIJ 


CHAPTER  III. 

Departure  for  Suez— The  Ras  el  Wadi,  or  Wadi  Toumlet— Traces 
of  the  Canal  of  the  Ptolemies— Salt  Lake  —  Disagreeable  Pickle 
—  Wells  of  Adjeroud — Suez  —  Fortifications  —  Population,  &c. 
— Canal  connecting  the  Red  Sea  with  the  Nile — Market  of  Suez 
— Climate — Anchorage — Trade — Difficult  Navigation  of  the  Gulf 
of  Suez  —  Steam  communication  with  India  —  Difficulty  of  Main- 
taining it  at  all  Seasons  —  Advantages  of  the  Line  by  the  Red 
Sea  over  that  by  the  Euphrates  —  Proposed  Lhie  by  Kosseir  — 
Passage  of  the  Red  Sea  by  the  Israelites  —  Failure  of  all  At- 
tempts to  disprove  the  Miracle — Land  of  Goshen — March  of  the 
Jews  —  Return  to  Cairo  —  Observations  on  the  Line  of  the  pro- 
jected Rail- road. 

Being  desirous  of  visiting  the  Ras  el  Wadi, 
a  belt  of  land  which  has  recently  been  brought 
into  cultivation,  that  stretches  some  distance 
into  the  great  desert  of  Suez  (to  which  allu- 
sion has  already  been  made),  we  lost  no  time, 
on  our  return  to  Cairo,  in  making  the  neces- 
sary arrangements  for  our  journey,  the  sea- 
son being  already  far  advanced  for  travelling 
over  burning  sands. 