

The  culprits  were  then  conducted  to  jail, 
and  limped  off  in  a  most  pitiable  plight,  to 
the  no  small  amusement  of  the  crowd  of 
spectators.  The  office  of  executioner  ap- 
peared to  be  much  sought  after — Kawasses, 
slaves,  eunuchs — all  seemed  to  be  equally 
amateurs  of  the  art. 

The  business  over,  pipes  and  coffee  were 
brought  in,  and  the  governor  was  remarkably 
civil,  offering  us  the  use  of  his  horses,  grey- 
hounds, &c.  We  had  to  give  a  handsome 
present  to  his  suite,  as  well  for  the  active 
service  they  had  been  doing  us,  as  for  a 
peace-offering  of  lambs,  fowls,  and  eggs,  that 
were  sent  down  to  our  boat  as  we  were  get- 
ting under  weigh. 

The  next  place  that  attracted  our  attention 
on  our  return  to  Cairo,  was  Akhmin,  a  large 
town  standing  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from 
the  eastern  bank  of  the  Nile,  on  the  site  of 


TOWN  OF  AKHMIN.  63 

the  ancient  Chemnis.  It  was  formerly  noted 
for  the  number  of  its  Coptic  inhabitants,  and, 
indeed,  to  this  day,  contains  a  large  propor- 
tion, but  it  has  fallen  much  from  its  high 
estate,  the  total  population  not  exceeding 
six  thousand  souls. 

This  town  is  of  a  rectangular  shape,  en- 
closed by  a  wall  of  sun-burnt  bricks.  The 
streets  are  wide  and  regular,  but  the  houses 
are  poor  and  in  a  ruinous  condition.  The 
convents,  for  which  it  was  celebrated,  are 
in  as  dilapidated  a  state  as  the  houses,  and 
the  mosques  in  nearly  the  same  condition. 
In  fact,  the  only  tenantable  edifices  are  the 
pigeon-houses. 

The  place  is  strewed  with  fragments  of 
marble  and  granite  columns,  and  contains 
the  ruins  of  an  ancient  temple,  on  the  founda- 
tion walls  of  which  a  party  of  workmen 
were  busily  engaged,  clearing  out  the  stones 
for  exportation ;  so  that,  by  this  time,  the 
lime-stone  Isises  and  other  divinities  are, 
probably,  hiding  their  heads  within  the  walls 
of  some  cotton  factory. 


64  CULTIVATED  COUNTRY. 

From  the  number  of  Copts  at  Akhmin,  I 
expected  to  find  some  commerce  going  on,  as 
these  people  seldom  congregate  in  places 
where  money  or  litigation  is  not  rife:  but, 
excepting  a  little  flax-spinning  and  indigo- 
dyeing,  I  saw  nothing  going  on  within  the 
walls,  almost  all  the  inhabitants  being  era- 
ployed  in  agriculture. 

The  adjacent  country  is  remarkably  well  ir- 
rigated, and  produces  abundant  crops  of  corn. 
There  are  also  some  thriving  groves  of  lemon, 
pomegranate,  and  other  fruit-trees  near  the 
town,  but  it  is  a  bad  place  for  obtaining 
general  supplies.  On  the  bank  of  the  river, 
several  diahbiehs  and  other  boats  were  build- 
ing and  repairing. 

Proceeding  on  our  voyage,  we  ran  quickly 
down  to  Manfalout,  a  short  description  of 
which  place  has  already  been  given.  Between 
it  and  Melawi,  but  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
river,  a  high  precipitous  cliff  overhangs  the 
stream  for  several  miles.  The  entire  range 
is  pierced  with  excavations,  most  of  which  I 
visited,    but    found    neither    paintings    nor 