


RETURN  TO  KHENEH.  49 

mouth  should  unhappily  be  within  their  reach 
— insist  on  cramming  it  therein.  I  shuddered 
whenever  T  saw  dear,  old  Said  Mohammed's 
fat  hand  plunge  into  the  very  innermost  re- 
cesses of  a  turkey's  craw,  dreading  lest  I  was  to 
be  selected  as  the  victim  of  his  kind  attention. 

Water  was  our  only  beverage  during  the 
repast — and,  the  operation  of  washing  hands 
over,  (in  which,  by  the  bye,  they  improve  upon 
our  custom,  by  using  hot  water)  we  resumed 
our  pipes  —  which  had  only  quitted  our 
mouths  on  dinner  being  placed  on  the  table — 
and  we  were  served  with  coffee. 

On  the  third  day  after  that  on  which  we 
had  arrived  at  Kosseir,  we  bade  ^dieu  to 
our  worthy  host,  who  was  very  unwilling  to 
allow  even  his  servants  to  receive  a  present 
from  us  ;  and,  loaded  with  good  things  for 
the  journey,  started  on  our  return  to  Kheneh. 

By  way  of  varying,  in  some  measure,  the 
scenery,  we  determined  to  take  a  different 
road  back  from  that  by  which  we  had  come  : 
and,  though  we  lengthened  the  distance  by  the 
change,  (increasing  it  from  ninety-six  to  one 

VOL.  II.  E 


50  NOVEL  ROUTE. 

hundred  and  two  miles),  to  attempt  effecting 
the  journey  in  three  days. 

The  route  we  now  selected,  besides  the 
advantage  of  novelty,  possessed  that  of 
having  some  wells  of  drinkable  water  upon 
it.  In  other  respects,  it  was  equally  uninte- 
resting, yet  more  lonely,  and  the  country 
quite  as  arid. 

It  strikes  off  from  the  former  road  at  the 
Bir  Inglese,  (three  hours  from  Kosseir)  enter- 
ing a  valley  that  debouches  on  the  little  plain, 
in  the  centre  of  which  the  wells  have  been 
sunk.  After  travelling  eight  hours  from  thence, 
under  an  unseasonably  hot  sun,  and,  conse- 
quently, over  an  abominably  hot  sandy  road, 
I  got  so  bad  a  headache  that  I  was  obliged 
to  beg  a  halt ;  and  we  pitched  our  tent  for  the 
night  by  the  road  side,  having  rendered  our- 
selves independent  of  the  wells  by  a  provision 
of  two  skins  of  Kosseir  water. 

We  resumed  our  journey  before  daybreak, 
and,  in  an  hour,  reached  some  wells,  situated 
in  the  mouth  of  a  very  narrow  valley — I  may 
say  chasm — for  it  is  contracted  by  high  per- 


WAD-EL- ASH.  51 

pendicular  cliffs,  to  a  width  that  barely  ex- 
ceeds that  of  the  road.  Half  an  hour's  riding 
brought  us  to  two  more  wells,  (Bir  Moilah) 
and  yet  a  little  further  on  are  some  others, 
but  the  water  of  all  is  equally  bad.  Soon  after 
passing  the  last  wells  the  valley  again  widens. 

The  whole  length  of  this  extraordinary 
mountain  gorge  is  about  two  miles  and  a 
half,  and  such  is  its  nature  that  fifty  deter- 
mined men  would  prevent  the  advance  of  a 
whole  army. 