

We  found  the  consular  agent  (who  some- 
how or  other  had  been  apprized  of  our  ap- 
proach) a  most  obliging  person.  He  had  pre- 
pared a  house  for  our  accommodation  ;  and  a 
clean  room,  carpeted  and  divaned,  some  excel- 


44  CONSULAR  AGENT. 

lent  coffee,  and  a  plentiful  supply  of  fresh 
water,  were  "  impayable''  luxuries  after  the 
discomforts  of  the  wilderness.  Having  "  made 
ourselves  decent,"  we  accompanied  the  Consul 
to  visit  the  Governor.  A  band  of  music  was 
stationed  at  his  door,  consisting  of  four  ket- 
tle-drums of  various  sizes,  upon  which  the 
performers  played  with  all  their  might,  on 
our  approach.  We  found  his  excellency  had 
made  an  extraordinary  advance  in  Frank  in- 
novation and  activity,  being  seated  on  a  chair 
— the  pipe,  however,  was  at  his  mouth. 

He  was  a  pleasant,  and,  for  a  Turk,  well- 
informed  man,  talked  politics  freely,  and  said 
that,  but  for  the  English,  French,  and  Rus- 
sians, (he  would  not  give  the  credit  to  any 
one)  Mohammed  Ali  would  now  have  been 
master  of  Constantinople.  After  the  usual 
coffee  and  pipes,  we  took  our  leave,  urgently 
pressed  by  the  governor  to  repeat  our  visit 
ere  we  took  our  departure  from  his  government. 

The  population  of  Kosseir  is  probably  about 
three  thousand  souls.  I  could  obtain  no  very 
precise  ansicer  to  my  inquiries  on  the  subject 


AMERICAN  TRICKERY.  45 

— the  reply  being  always  truly  Turco- Arabic. 
"  Caffier  !  mini  araf?  "  (Many  !  who  knows  ?) 

The  town  has  increased  considerably  of 
late  years,  and  its  trade  is  evidently  thriving-. 
The  marl^et  is  dear — many  of  the  necessaries 
of  life  are  particularly  so — yet  I  saw  far  less 
misery  in  the  place  than  in  most  Arab  towns. 
Wood,  for  instance,  is  brought  from  a  dis- 
tance of  thirty  miles,  and  water — fit  to  drink 
— is  not  to  be  had  nearer  than  fourteen. 

The  only  things  to  be  procured  at  a  rea- 
sonable price  are  fish  and  Mocha  coffee,  or 
rather  what  is  sold  as  such,  for  the  Americans 
have  of  late  years  played  us  Europeans  a 
trick,  by  taking  their  own  produce  to  Mocha 
and  bartering  it  for  that  of  Arabia. 

This  patriotic  conduct  on  the  part  of  cousin 
Jonathan  was  found,  in  the  outset,  to  be  so 
beneficial  to  Mohammed  Ali's  coffers,  that 
every  encouragement  was  given  to  the  traffic, 
but  the  fraud,  having  been  detected,  will  pro- 
bably have  the  effect  of  driving  all  coffee  that 
passes  through  Egypt  out  of  the  European 
markets. 


46  SHELL  FISH. 

The  principal  trade  of  Kosseir  is  with 
Jedda  and  the  other  ports  on  the  eastern  coast 
of  the  Red  Sea.  It  is  likely  to  increase  con- 
siderably, when  a  communication  with  India 
by  steam  comes  to  be  permanently  established, 
as  goods  can  be  much  more  conveniently 
landed  here  than  at  Suez,  and  there  is  nothing 
whatever  to  prevent  a  railroad  being  laid 
down  to  Kheneh.  In  fact,  by  merely  levelling 
the  road  through  the  pass  of  Issud,  a  steam- 
carriage  might  almost  travel  now  without 
the  necessity  for  a  railway. 