

A  much  more  open  country  than  any  we 
had  hitherto  traversed  extended  for  about 
five  miles,  from  the  pass  to  the  wells  of  Wad- 
el-Ask.  The  water  of  these,  though  having  a 
soft  vegetable  taste,  that  is  not  pleasant,  is, 
nevertheless,  wholesome — and  indeed  may  be 
considered  the  only  water  drinkable  by  man 
in  this  part  of  the  great  desert.  The  position 
of  the  wells  is,  therefore,  important.  They 
are  calculated  as  being  distant  ten  Arab 
miles*  from  Kosseir,  twelve  from  Kheneh, 
and  twenty-four  from  Edfou. 

*  The  Arab  mile  is  about  five  English. 

e2 


52  HINTS  TO  THE  TRAVELLER. 

In  travelling  from  Kheneh  to  Kosseir,  when 
expedition  is  the  object,  this,  though  rather 
the  longer  of  the  two  roads,  is  decidedly  to 
be  preferred,  on  account  of  the  advantage 
offered  by  these  wells;  for,  by  employing 
dromedaries,  the  distance  may  be  easily  ac- 
complished in  two  days,  but,  if  water  has  to 
be  carried,  two  and  a  half  are  required.  By 
making  Wad-el-Ash,  therefore,  the  halting- 
place  for  the  night,  the  necessity  for  carry- 
ing water  is  avoided.  Besides  this,  an 
animal  cannot  travel  fast  when  laden  with 
two  skins  of  water.  The  element,  too,  does 
not  improve  by  being  jolted  a  whole  day  on 
the  back  of  a  camel  and  exposed  to  a  hot 
sun. 

The  traveller  should  carry  a  tent  with  him, 
as  there  is  no  shelter  on  this  road  between 
Beerhambah  and  Kosseir,  and  exposure  to  the 
night  air  is  very  dangerous  in  this  climate. 
We  experienced,  indeed,  some  smart  showers 
of  rain  during  the  last  night  of  our  journey: 
and,  on  that  of  our  return  to  our  boat,  at 
Kheneh,  we  were  completely  drenched  by  a 


ARAB  TRIBES.  53 

tremendous  storm  ;  —  so  much  for  Upper 
Egypt's  being  exempt  from  rain  ! 

We  pushed  on  from  Wad-el-Ash  after  get- 
ting- some  breakfast,  and  ten  hours  more  hard 
riding  (thirteen  and  three  quarters  from  our 
previous  night's  bivouac)  brought  us  to  our 
old  quarters  in  the  mosque  at  Beerhambah, 
at  which  the  two  roads  from  Kosseir  re- 
unite. 

I  cannot  say  that  the  southern  road  pos- 
sesses any  greater  interest  than  the  other. 
It  traverses  a  more  open  and  somewhat 
higher  level  of  country,  but  the  slopes  are 
equally  gradual.  There  is  not  a  tree,  and 
scarcely  a  bush,  to  break  the  wearying  same- 
ness of  the  barren  mountain  scenery — not\a 
house  nor  even  ruin  to  indicate  that  the 
country  ever  has  been  inhabited. 

Round  the  different  wells  on  both  roads, 
we  found  nomadic  tribes  of  the  Ababde  Arabs 
encamped,  whose  shaggy  dress,  wild  looks, 
and  thick,  bushy,  uncombed  hair  were  in  strict 
keeping  with  the  savage  scenery  around. 

On  approaching  the  wells,  we  met  with  a 