


54  PARTRIDGES  AND  GROUSE. 

few  coveys  of  sand  partridges  and  flocks  of 
pigeons  that  gave  us  some  amusement,  but 
scarcely  a  meal,  for  they  were  extremely  shy 
and  wary.  The  former  have,  perhaps,  more 
of  the  character  of  the  grouse,  both  in  their 
plumage  (inasmuch  as  that  they  are  fea- 
thered down  to  the  feet)  and  call.  The  colour 
of  the  feathers  of  their  backs  and  wings  so 
nearly  resembles  that  of  the  sand,  that  it  is 
with  difficulty  they  can  be  distinguished,  ex- 
cepting when  in  motion  ;  but  under  the  wings 
their  feathers  are  very  dark. 

There  is  another  kind  of  grouse  met  with 
on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  whose  plumage  is 
mottled  ;  of  this  the  flesh  is  excellent,  which 
cannot  be  said  of  that  of  the  sand  partridge 
of  the  desert. 

To  the  geologist,  the  journey  across  the 
desert  is  highly  interesting,  by  whatever 
route  he  travels.  The  surface  of  the  earth, 
unveiled  by  a  particle  of  vegetation,  is  fully 
exposed  to  his  observation,  and  the  changes 
from  the  lime-stone  to  the  sand-stone  forma- 
tion, and  afterwards  successively  to  the  argil- 


ARRIVAL  AT  KHENEII.  55 

laceous,  schistose,  basaltic,  and  granitic,  are 
very  marked  and  curious.  In  some  places, 
we  passed  high  cliffs,  composed  entirely  of 
serpentine — in  others,  huge  mountains  of 
breccia  verde. 

We  reached  Kheneh  in  nine  hours  from 
Beerahambah,  having  taken  nearly  thirty- 
four  hours  (exclusively  of  stoppages)  to  per- 
form the  journey.  We  found  that  our  boat 
had  only  that  morning  returned  from  Girgeh 

with  our  friend  D ,  who,   from  previous 

indisposition,  had  not  felt  quite  equal  to  the 
journey  to  Kosseir,  and  had  been  amusing 
himself  during  our  absence  in  visiting  the 
towns  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Kheneh. 

His  return  had  been  retarded,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  seizure  of  the  Reis  and  one  of 
the  crew  of  our  boat  (at  the  village  of  Lem- 
bieh,  where  they  had  been  sent  on  shore  to 
purchase  provisions),  to  serve  in  the  Nizam ; 
and  a  personal  application  to  the  governor 
of  the  district,  whose  head-quarters  were  at 
Girgeh,  had  been  necessary  to  obtain  their 
release. 


56  SEIZURE  OF  BOATMEN. 

The  Detenus  were  given  up,  on  an  order  to 
that  effect  having  been  sent  off  to  the  village 

— my  friend  D wisely  remaining  at  Girgeh 

until  they  were  delivered  up  to  him ;  but  the 
poor  fellows  had  been  robbed,  beaten,  pini- 
oned, and  confined  for  two  days  in  a  well. 
The  Governor  screened  the  perpetrators  of 
this  barbarity  from  punishment,  by  declaring 
that  the  kawasses  he  had  sent  to  Lembieh 
had  not  been  able  to  secure  them,  as  they  had 
fled  into  the  desert. 

Having  ascertained  that  the  Sheik  ei  Belled's 
deputy  was  the  chief  offender,  and  that  it  was 
to  save  two  of  his  dependents  from  the  con- 
scription that  our  boatmen  had  been  seized, 
we  determined  that  he  should  not  escape  the 
punishment  he  so  richly  deserved,  and  accord- 
ingly we  laid  a  plan  to  kidnap  and  take  him 
to^Girgeh  ourselves,  and  compel  the  Governor 
to  do  justice  between  the  parties. 