

Again,  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  Pharaoh 
allotted  to  the  Israelites  the  land  that  was 
best  calculated  for  their  following  the  occu- 
pation to  which  they  were  at  that  time  de- 
voted— namely,  the  tending  and  breeding  of 
cattle — and  which  was  not  of  any  great  value 
to  the  natives,  who  were  all  agriculturists. 
Now,  the  tract  of  land  along  the  right  bank 


BY  THE  ISRAELITES.  89 

of  the  pelusic  branch  of  the  Nile  exactly  an- 
swered these  purposes  ;  the  uncertainty  of  the 
inundation  of  the  river  rendered  the  cultiva- 
tion of  this  part  of  the  Delta  very  precarious  ; 
whereas,  the  flocks  and  herds  could  be  driven 
from  one  part  to  another,  according  as  pas- 
turage was  to  be  found,  having  the  desert  to 
retire  to  whenever  the  flood  was  general. 

Again,  the  locality  of  Goshen  is  established 
by  another  passage  of  Scripture ;  for,  when 
the  time  was  come  for  the  people  of  Israel  to 
leave  Egypt,  "  God  led  them  not  through  the 
way  of  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  although 
that  was  near — lest,  peradventure,  the  people 
repent  when  they  see  war  and  they  return  to 
Egypt ;  but  God  led  the  people  about  through 
the  way  of  the  Red  Sea."  This  can  apply 
only  to  the  most  eastern  pare  of  Egypt,  be- 
cause, from  any  part  of  the  valley  of  the  Nile, 
the  wilderness  of  the  Red  Sea  would  be  on 
the  direct  line  to  go  either  to  Canaan,  or 
Mount  Sinai. 

The  whole  march  of  the  Israelites  is  evi- 
dently marked  by  the  Divine  hand,  to  impress 


90  PASSAGE  OF  THE  RED  SEA 

upon  their  stubborn  hearts  the  conviction  of 
His  omnipotence.  They  might  easily  have 
been  made  victorious  over  the  Philistines  and 
over  the  Egyptians  ;  but  they  would  have  at- 
tributed their  success  rather  to  their  superior 
prowess  than  to  Divine  interference  in  their 
favour.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  by  a 
series  of  indisputable  miracles,  to  convince 
them  of  their  dependence  upon  a  Divine  ruler ; 
and  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea  was  one 
chosen  for  that  purpose. 

When  permission  for  the  Israelites  *'  to  de- 
part" was  at  length  wrung  from  Pharaoh,  it 
was  not,  however,  to  leave  Egypt,  but  merely 
to  go  three  days'  journey  into  the  wilderness 
to  offer  sacrifices.  Pharaoh,  it  is  true,  ex- 
pressed himself  in  these  words,  '*  Get  ye  forth 
from  amongst  my  people,  and  go  serve  the 
Lord,  as  ye  have  said."  Had  they  understood 
this  to  imply  a  permission  to  leave  Egypt,  (a 
favour  that  it  does  not  appear  Moses  and 
Aaron  ever  asked,)  their  march  would  at  once 
have  been  directed  to  the  eastward.  Such 
was  not  the  case,  as  will  be  shown  hereafter. 


BY  THE  ISRAELITES.  91 

"  They  journeyed  from  Rameses  to  Succoth," 
and  "  they  took  their  journey  from  Succoth 
and  encamped  at  Etham,  in  the  edge  of  the 
wilderness — and  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses, 
saying,  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel  that 
they  turn  and  encamp  before  Pi-hahiroth,  be- 
tween Migdol  and  the  sea,  over  against  Baal- 
Zephon,  before  it  shall  ye  encamp  by  the 
sea." 