


78  TEMPERATE  CLIMATE. 

tance,  have  very  much  the  appearance  of  pier 
heads.  It  must  have  been  carried  through 
the  low  part  of  the  desert — now  a  salt  bog — 
and  thence  by  the  Ras  el  Wadi  to  Belbeis. 

The  present  state  of  this  desert  tract  would 
completely  prevent  such  a  communication 
between  the  two  seas  from  being  re-opencd. 
The  level  of  the  Red  Sea  is  thirty  feet  higher 
than  that  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  about 
eighteen  lower  than  that  of  the  Nile  at  Cairo. 

The  market  at  Suez  is  ill-supplied  with  pro- 
visions, fish  being  the  only  consumable  article 
that  is  abundant.  The  water  is  so  bad,  that, 
for  culinary  purposes,  the  place  is  supplied 
from  the  fountains  of  Moses,  situated  on  the 
opposite  shore  of  the  Red  Sea. 

The  climate  is  said  to  be  very  temperate. 
Rain  is  nevertheless  as  infrequent  here  as  in 
the  rest  of  Egypt.  In  the  months  of  January 
and  February  a  few  showers  refresh  the  parch- 
ing sands,  but  rarely  at  any  other  period  of 
the  year. 

The  place  has  been  constantly  visited  by 
plague  ;   and  the  cholera,  in  its  devastating 


TRADE  OF  SUEZ.  J9 

tour,  made  a  long  sojourn  at  Suez,  carrying 
off  nearly  half  its  inhabitants. 

The  anchorage  is  between  two  and  three 
miles  from  the  town,  and,  though  good — as  far 
as  affording  firm  holding  ground — is  exposed 
to  every  wind  that  blows.  Fortunately,  the 
northerly  gales,  which  are  the  most  prevalent, 
are  the  least  dangerous,  being  off  shore. 
Several  sandy  reefs  must  be  crossed  to  gain 
the  anchorage,  rendering  the  landing  and 
shipment  of  goods  both  hazardous  and  tedi- 
ous. The  present  trade  of  Suez  is  principally 
with  Tor,  Jedda,  and  the  other  ports  of  the 
Red  Sea,  and  carried  on  in  small  bottoms 
that  can  get  up  to  the  town  at  high-water. 
The  mariners  are  by  no  means  bold,  never 
going  to  sea  when  it  blows  hard,  and  seldom 
venturing  far  from  the  coast  under  any  cir- 
cumstances. 

It  is  expected  (though  I  much  doubt  it) 
that  the  contemplated  rail-road  to  Cairo  will 
draw  to  Suez  a  great  part  of  the  English 
trade  with  China  and  India.  The  establish- 
ment of  a  steam  communication  with  Bombay 


80  OBSTACLES  TO  COMMERCE. 

will  certainly  give  an  impetus  to  the  com- 
merce of  the  place ;  but  there  are  too  many 
difficulties  in  the  way  ever  to  permit  of  its 
carrying  on  a  flourishing  trade  by  means  of 
sailing 'vessels,  for,  besides  the  insecurity  of 
the  anchorage  and  the  risk  in  landing  goods, 
a  northerly  wind  blows  from  Suez  to  Jedda, 
almost  uninterruptedly  from  March  to  Sep- 
tember, against  which  but  few  merchant  ves- 
sels could  make  head,  even  with  plenty  of  sea- 
room  ;  whereas,  here  they  would  be  confined 
to  a  very  narrow  space,  surrounded  on  all 
sides  with  dangerous  coral  reefs,  and  without 
a  port  on  either  coast  to  seek  shelter  in.  At 
the  straits  of  Jubal,  indeed,  the  entrance  to 
the  Gulf  of  Suez  is  contracted  by  these  reefs 
to  the  width  of  only  a  few  miles. 