

Now,  Rameses  was  evidently  another  name 
given  in  those  days  to  the  land  of  Goshen,  * 
and  not  to  any  particular  city.  Succoth  (which 
we  may  suppose  to  be  Salahieh)  was  the  place 
appointed  for  the  assemblage  of  the  different 
tribes  of  Israelites — who  could  not  possibly, 
previously  to  the  permission  for  them  to  de- 
part was  granted,  have  been  kept  collected 
together  on  any  one  point — and  there,  ere 
Pharaoh's  suspicions  of  their  ulterior  designs 
could  be  verified,  they  stopped  to  bake  their 
bread. 

Resuming  their  march  towards  the  wilder- 
ness, they  reached  Etham  (El  Khereen)  situated 

*  See  Genesis,  chap.  47,  v.  6  and  11. 


92  PASSAGE  OF  THE  RED  SEA 

on  its  edge.  Thus  far  their  route  had  been 
directed  towards  the  nearest  range  of  moun- 
tains, on  the  summit  of  which  they  had, 
doubtless,  expressed  a  wish  to  offer  up  their 
sacrifices,  *  but  now  they  received  directions 
to  turn  towards  the  Red  Sea,  and  henceforth 
they  marched  day  and  night  to  gain  its 
northern  extremity,  ere  Pharaoh  could  cut 
them  off. 

In  this  endeavour,  it  was  intended  they 
should  be  frustrated  ;  for  Pharaoh — who,  it  is 
evident,  had  all  along  suspected  their  intention 
was  to  fly  from  Egypt,  and  had  kept  his  forces 
collected  ready  to  pursue  them — no  sooner 
learnt  *'  that  the  people^et?,"  than  he  marched 
towards  the  head  of  the  Red  Sea,  calculating 
on  coming  up  with  the  fugitives  "  entangled 
in  the  land,  and  shut  in  by  the  wilderness." 

Had  not  Pharaoh  been  deceived  by  the  pre- 
vious southerly  direction  of  the  march  of  the 

*  It  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  Jews  wished  to  offer  their 
sacrifices  on  high  ground — otherwise,  much  less  than  a  three  days' 
journey  (which  they  constantly  requested  permission  to  make) 
would  have  carried  ihem,  from  avy  part  of  Egypt,  to  a  sufficiently 
secluded  spot  for  their  purpose. 


BY  THE  ISRAELITES.  93 

Israelites,  they  would  not  have  gained  a 
day's  march  upon  him ;  and  he  would  natu- 
rally, on  hearing  of  their  flight,  have  pursued 
immediately  and  overtaken  them  in  the  de- 
sert, where  no  miracle  so  convincing  as  that 
which  was  contemplated  could  have  been 
wrought,  to  render  God's  power  evident  to 
such  a  stubborn  race  as  the  Jews. 

It  was  necessary,  therefore,  that  Pharaoh's 
suspicions  should  be  confirmed  in  time  only 
to  allow  of  his  reaching  the  Red  Sea  before 
them.  We  may  suppose  he  came  up  with 
them  encamped  about  the  wells  of  Adjeroud, 
having  the  Red  Sea  before  them,  and  the 
rocky  cliffs  of  Pi-hahiroth  (Gibel  Ettagah) 
hemming  them  in  to  the  south.  The  Egyp- 
tian army,  therefore,  taking  post  for  the  night 
on  the  left  flank  of  the  Jewish  encampment — 
between  it  and  the  head  of  the  Gulf  of  Suez 
— seemed  to  cut  them  off"  from  all  chance  of 
escape. 