

It  is  by  many  persons  supposed  that  Old 
Cairo  stands  on  or  near  the  site  of  the  city  of 
Rameses,  (from  which  two  millions  of  souls 


94  MARCH  OF  THE  ISRAELITES. 

departed ! !)  and  that  Belbeis  is  the  Succoth 
of  Scripture.  In  that  case,  where  is  Etliam 
("on  the  edge  of  the  wilderness")  to  be 
placed  ?  Why  should  not  the  Israelites  have 
turned  at  once  from  Succoth  (or  even  before) 
towards  the  Red  Sea  ?  for,  if  they  were  de- 
parting out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  with  full 
permission,  then  all  deceit  on  their  parts  was 
unnecessary  ;  and,  by  proceeding  to  Etham, 
they  were  going  a  day's  journey  out  of  their 
direct  way,  without  any  object  in  view. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  considered  that 
they  had  merely  Pharaoh's  permission  to  go 
and  sacrifice  as  they  had  often  requested,  and 
it  therefore  became  an  object  with  them  to 
deceive  him  as  to  their  ulterior  intentions, 
still,  they  gained  nothing  by  continuing  their 
march  a  second  day  towards  Pelusium,  ere 
they  turned  towards  the  Red  Sea — since  Ra- 
meses  (if  Old  Cairo)  was  as  near  Pihahiroth  as 
Etham  was,  (supposing  it  to  be  on  the  edge 
of  any  part  of  the  desert),  and  the  road  much 
better. 

If  the  Israelites  pretended   to   be    merely 


LAND  OF  GOSHEN.  96 

going*  to  a  sandy  desert  to  offer  up  their  sa- 
crifices, their  not  striking  at  once  off  the  direct 
road  to  Palestine  would  naturally  have  con- 
firmed the  suspicions  of  Pharaoh,  instead  of 
allaying  them,  as  they  could  have  no  possible 
excuse  for  continuing  their  march  for  two 
entire  days  along  the  edge  of  a  desert  that 
was  in  every  way  suited  to  their  purpose. 

I  think,  therefore,  it  is  evident  that  the  land 
of  Goshen  was  the  north-eastern  part  of  the 
Delta ;  and  that  all  the  attempts  which  have 
been  made  to  account  for  the  deliverance  of 
the  Jews  from  bondage,  and  the  destruction 
of  Pharoah's  host  otherwise  than  by  the  means 
recorded  in  the  Scriptures,  are  founded  on  the 
supposed  occurrence  of  natural  phenomenay 
equally  as  dependent  as  the  miracle  itself,  on 
the  will  of  an  Almighty  power  ;  without,  in 
the  result,  being  attended  with  the  same 
convincing  proof  of  the  Divine  interference. 

During  our  stay  at  Suez,  we  were  most 
hospitably  entertained  by  Kodsi  Manoulli, 
his  majesty's  consular  agent,  whose  judgment 
in  old  East  India  Madeira  compensated  for 


96  ROUTE  FROM  SUEZ  TO  CAIRO. 

his  want  of  musical  taste  —  a  defect  that  has 
been  before  recorded  of  him.  Some  Mount 
Sinai  wine,  to  which  he  treated  us,  we  should 
have  considered  excellent  under  other  circum- 
stances ;  the  admirers  of  the  **  fine,  rough- 
flavoured"  port,  might  even  have  preferred  it 
to  his  old  Cercial. 