


86  PASSAGE  OF  THE  RED  SEA 

is  a  mere  roadstead.  The  channels  through 
the  shoals  that  lie  between  the  anchorage  and 
the  town,  even  at  high  tide,  are  very  shallow  ; 
whilst,  at  low  water,  they  are  practicable 
only  for  small  boats  ;  and,  with  the  least  wind, 
such  a  surf  is  raised  as  to  cut  off  all  com- 
munication between  the  town  and  shipping. 

It  is  the  received  opinion  that  the  pas- 
sage of  the  Red  Sea  by  the  Israelites  was 
effected  at  Suez  ;  and  it  has  been  maintained, 
that,  without  any  miraculous  interposition, 
such  a  host  as  Moses  and  Aaron  led  might 
have  passed  between  the  ebbing  and  flowing 
of  the  tide. 

The  objections  to  this  hypothesis  are  nume- 
rous. In  the  first  place,  the  breadth  of  the 
Red  Sea  at  Suez  is  about  three  miles  ;  which 
space,  at  high  water,  is  completely  covered  to 
the  depth  of  upwards  of  six  feet  in  the  most 
shallow  parts.  At  low  tide,  the  greater  part 
of  this  distance  is  laid  dry ;  but  it  is  inter- 
sected by  various  channels,  which  are  even 
then  from  four  to  five  feet  deep.  Now,  since 
"  The  children  of  Israel  went  into  the  midst 


BY  TPIE  ISRAELITES.  87 

of  the  sea  upon  the  dry  ground^"  it  follows 
that,  without  a  miracle,  they  could  not  have 
done  so  here. 

We  will  suppose,  however,  that  the  Jewish 
leaders  were  learned  enough  to  calculate  their 
movements  so  as  to  take  advantage  of  the 
period  when  the  tides  were  at  the  flood  (which 
is  granting  a  great  deal,  since  their  departure 
depended  on  Pharaoh's  permission  being  ob- 
tained)— and,  further,  that  by  "  dry  ground" 
is  simply  meant  that  the  Israelites  had  not  to 
swim  for  it ;  and  that  "  the  waters  being  as  a 
wall  to  them  on  their  right  hand,  and  on  their 
left,''  should  be  considered  only  as  the  cus- 
tomary hyperbole  of  Eastern  language.  Still, 
could  a  multitude  of  two  millions  of  souls,  en- 
cumbered with  some  thousands  of  camel  loads 
of  baggage,  and  numerous  flocks  and  herds, 
pass  along  a  defile  *  of  the  kind  {up  to  their 
waists  in  water),  in  the  short  space  of  time 
allowed  between  the  ebbing  and  flowing  of 

•  A  defile  it  must  in  any  case  have  been,  for  the  IsraeUtes  were 
confined  by  deep  water  on  the  one  side,  and  the  host  of  the  Egyp- 
tians on  th^  other.  Their /ro»t  must  necessarily,  therefore,  have  been 
but  small. 


88  PASSAC4E  OF  THE  REI>  SEA 

the  tide  ?  Any  one,  who  has  an  idea  of  the 
time  a  disciplined  army  of  one-tenth  that 
amount  would  occupy  in  effecting  such  a  pas- 
sage, must  say  it  would  have  been  perfectly 
impossible. 

That  the  passage  was  effected  near  Suez 
will,  from  the  nature  of  the  country,  hardly 
admit  of  a  doubt,  whatever  difference  of  opi- 
nion may  exist  as  to  the  situation  of  the  land 
of  Goshen.  On  this  latter  point,  it  appears 
to  me  that  no  discrepancy  should  exist,  as 
the  tract  of  country  about  Salehieh  and  San 
is  clearly  pointed  out  in  the  Scriptures  as  the 
land  given  to  the  Israelites  ; — "  Marvellous 
things  did  he  in  the  sight  of  their  fathers,  in 
the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  field  of  Zoan." 