

The  same  obstacles,  though  presenting 
great  difficulties,  are  not  so  insurmountable 
for  steam  navigation ;  but,  though  the  English 
government  may  find  it  worth  while  to  incur 
the  expense  of  keeping  up  such  a  mode  of 
communication  with  our  Eastern  possessions, 
yet,  as  a  commercial  speculation,  there  is  not, 


SOUTH-WEST  MONSOON.  81 

at  this  moment,  the  slightest  chance  of  its 
answering. 

There  is,  however,  a  terrible  obstacle  in  the 
way  of  keeping  up  a  constant  communication 
even  by  steam  between  Bombay  and  Suez ; 
an  obstacle  which,  if  not  altogether  insur- 
mountable during  several  months  of  the  year, 
will  be  found  so  hard  to  overcome  as  to  ren- 
der the  intercourse,  during  that  period,  at  all 
events,  very  uncertain.  I  allude  to  the  south- 
west monsoon,  which  blows,  from  the  month  of 
May  until  the  autumnal  equinox,  between  the 
coast  of  Adel  and  that  of  India.  Difficult  as 
this  obstinate  wind  would,  under  any  circum- 
stances, be  to  contend  against,  even  with 
steam  power,  yet  perseverance  would  even- 
tually prevail,  could  fresh  supplies  of  fuel  be 
furnished  to  make  good  the  consumption 
occasioned  by  such  a  contest.  But  that,  in 
the  present  case,  is  out  of  the  question. 

From  Bombay  to  Mucala  (the  nearest  port 
where  a  supply  of  fuel  could  be  deposited)  is 
a  distance  of  one  thousand  four  hundred  miles, 
and  no    steamer  could    possibly  contrive  to 

VOL.    11.  G 


82  COMMUNICATION  WITH  INDIA. 

carry  a  sufficient  quantity  of  coals  to  make 
such  a  distance  against  a  constant  strong 
adverse  wind.  The  remainder  of  the  voyage 
could  be  accomplished  without  much  diffi- 
culty, as  between  Mucala  and  Suez  (a  distance 
of  one  thousand  six  hundred  miles)  the  ports 
of  Mocha,  Jedda,  and  Kosseir,  successively 
present  themselves,  at  any  of  which  fuel  could 
be  procured,  as  occasion  might  require. 

In  one  respect,  and  in  one  only,  the  pro- 
jected communication  with  India  by  the  Eu- 
phrates holds  out  an  advantage  over  that  by 
the  Red  Sea,  namely,  that  steamers  proceed- 
ing to  the  Persian  Gulf,  during  the  prevalence 
of  the  south-west  monsoon,  would  neither  have 
to  contend  against  that  wind  for  such  a  dis- 
tance, nor  have  it  so  directly  opposed  to  them, 
the  entrance  of  the  Persian  Gulf  being  only 
nine  hundred  miles  from  Bombay,  and  its 
bearing  about  e.  n.  e. 

On  entering  the  Euphrates,  however,  the 
difficulties  of  this  line  commence;  and  they 
are  such  as  will  have  to  be  encountered  at  all 
seasons,  and  at  every  step,  consisting  of  rocks, 
shallows,  rapids,  (rendering  steaming  by  night 


NAVIGATION  OF  THE  EUPHRATES.  83 

out  of  the  question),  scarcity  of  fuel,  insecu- 
rity of  the  depots  from  the  hostility  of  the 
natives  and  wandering  tribes,  intolerable  heat, 
insalubrity  of  climate,  and,  finally,  a  long  land 
journey  across  a  mountainous  country  from 
Bir  to  Scandaroon.  This  journey  may,  at  the 
present  moment,  (thanks  to  Mohammed  Ali) 
be  undertaken  with  confidence,  but,  if  any 
change  should  take  place  in  the  government 
of  Syria,  might  next  year  expose  travellers 
to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  "  poor,  oppressed" 
inhabitants. 