

We  resumed  our  journey  at  sunrise,  and, 
ascending-  the  hills,  after  a  four  hours'  scram- 
ble across  them,  reached  the  wells  of  Adje- 
roud,  the  precipitous  cliff  in  which  the  lofty 
Gibel  Ettagah  terminates  at  the  east,  having 
served  as  a  directing  point,  until  we  got  sight 
of  the  wells.  These  being  situated  on  a  gen- 
tle rise,  are  seen  several  miles  off.  The  fort 
of  Adjeroud  is  left  about  two  miles  off  on  the 
right. 

The  water  of  the  wells  is  quite  undrink- 
able,  excepting  for  camels.  A  gradual  slope, 
of  about  two  miles  and  a  half  in  length, 
brought  us  to  Suez. 

Suez  stands  at  the  extremity  of  a  low  sandy 


76  TOWN  OF  SUEZ. 

cape,  that,  jutting-  into  the  Red  Sea,  forms  a 
kind  of  estuary  of  that  part  of  it  which  is 
situated  to  the  north  of  the  town.  On  the 
land-side,  it  is  enclosed  by  an  old  and  badly 
flanked  stone  wall,  in  which  there  is  but  one 
gate  to  enter  by. 

With  the  exception  of  a  rusty  old  iron  gun, 
that,  protruding  its  muzzle  from  a  decomposed 
embrasure  made  to  flank  the  gate,  threatens 
destruction  to  all  who  might  be  bold  enough 
to  fire  it,  the  pomp  and  circumstance  of  a 
fortified  town  are  no  where  perceptible. 

A  lazy  authority  (whether  civil  or  military 
puzzled  us  to  divine)  laid  down  his  pipe  to 
have  an  uninterrupted  stare  at  us.  His  curi- 
osity being  satisfied,  he  threw  himself  back 
on  his  divan,  without  troubling  himself  or  us 
with  either  question  or  salutation. 

The  town  does  not  occupy  one  half  the 
space  enclosed  by  the  walls,  and,  though 
apparently  in  a  ruinous  condition,  is  said  to 
contain  from  twelve  to  sixteen  thousand  in- 
habitants —  principally  boatmen  and  fisher- 
men. It  is,  perhaps,  from  their  occupations 
calling  them  frequently  from  home,  and  the 


SITE  OF  ARSINOE.  Tl 

great  influx  of  Hadji  bound  to  the  Holy  City, 
and  other  less  devout  travellers,  that  the  fair 
skins  and  light  hair  of  most  of  the  rising  ge- 
neration are  to  be  attributed. 

The  site  of  an  old  city  (Arsinoe)  is  indicated 
by  a  heap  of  rubbish  and  broken  pottery,  a 
little  distance  to  the  north-east  of  Modern 
Suez  ;  and  the  remains  of  a  line  of  entrench- 
ments, thrown  up  by  the  French  during  their 
occupation  of  Egypt,  and  somewhat  more 
scientifically  arranged  than  the  works  of  the 
town,  may  yet  be  traced  in  advance  of  the 
walls. 

The  estuary  stretches  inland  about  two 
miles  and  a  half  from  Suez,  and,  at  its  head, 
passes  the  road  from  Cairo  to  Tor  and  Mount 
Sinai,  which  strikes  off  from  the  Suez  road 
before  reaching  the  wells  of  Adjeroud. 

The  course  of  the  canal  that  formerly  con- 
nected the  Red  Sea  with  the  Nile  can  be  but 
imperfectly  traced.  It  seems  to  have  com- 
menced at  a  point  where  the  coast  bends  to 
the  eastward,  and  where  two  brick  ruins, 
running  in  a  northerly  direction  for  some  dis- 