


SALT  LAKE.  73 

Turning-  now  more  to  the  south,  we  arrived 
in  about  an  hour  and  a  half  at  a  low,  flat 
expanse  of  sand,  strewed  with  blocks  and 
intersected  with  natural  walls  of  crystallized 
salt,  and  having  at  a  little  distance  all  the 
appearance  of  the  ruins  of  a  large  Arab 
town.  After  proceeding  along  it  for  some 
time,  our  attention  was  attracted  by  a  shin- 
ing, narrow  line  that  intersected  our  path, 
resembling  a  bright  scaly  serpent  winding 
through  the  sandy  desert.  We  soon  ascer- 
tained that  it  was  water.  Our  guide  seemed 
puzzled ;  and,  as  a  high  bank  of  crystallized 
salt  edged  the  little  stream  on  the  opposite 
side,  I  went  forward  with  "  Arab  Dick  "  to 
look  out  for  a  fordable  place. 

We  had  not  advanced  far  on  our  reconnois- 
sance,  when  our  camels  sank  suddenly  up  to 
their  girths,  and  we  had  to  jump  off  their 
backs  in  great  haste,  to  save  ourselves  from 
being  pickled  along  with  them  in  this  salt  bog 
— for  such  it  proved  to  be — on  the  hard  trea- 
cherous surface  of  which  we  had  been  travel- 
ing for  some  distance.     It  covers  an  area  of 


74  SALT  LAKE. 

several  hundreds  of  square  miles,  in  the  very 
heart  of  the  desert. 

Fortunately,  we  had  left  our  baggage 
camels  on  a  sound  footing,  for  it  required  the 
exertions  of  the  whole  party  to  deliver  the 
two  struggling  animals  from  their  unpleasant 
situation.  The  great  difficulty  was  to  turn 
their  heads  round,  as  every  plunge  forward 
planted  the  huge,  awkward  beasts  deeper 
and  faster  in  the  brine.  They  were  much 
terrified,  and  trembled  during  the  rest  of  the 
journey  whenever  they  put  their  feet  upon  a 
treacherous  piece  of  sand. 

After  heavy  rains,  large  lakes  are  formed 
here  by  the  torrents  poured  down  from  the 
ravines  in  the  side  of  the  mountain  range 
that  bounds  the  plain  some  miles  to  the  south, 
but  a  stratum  of  salt  must  underlay  the 
greater  part  of  the  desert  of  Suez,  for,  dig 
where  you  will,  and  to  whatever  depth,  the 
I  water  is  always  strongly  impregnated  with  it. 
We  passed  near  and  tasted  the  water  of  one 
large  pond,  which  was  quite  as  salt  as  that 
of  the  Red  Sea,  and  clear  as  crystal.      It  is 


WELLS  OF  AD.IEROUD.  7^ 

evident,  also,  that,  at  some  distant  period, 
the  sea  has  swept  over  this  vast  plain,  as  beds 
of  marine  shells,  bleached  by  the  sun  of  cen- 
turies, are  scattered  about  on  all  sides. 

About  two  hours  after  our  corning,  (to  avoid 
a  repetition  of  which,  we  took  a  yet  more 
southerly  direction),  we  reached  the  foot  of 
the  hills,  and  pitched  our  tent  for  the  night 
in  a  ravine,  sheltered  from  the  Khampseen 
wind,  which  blew  strong  and  cold. 