

A  vast  quantity  of  rnulb^ ;  y-trees  were 
planted  here,  some  years  sincft  tly  Mohammed 
Ali ;  and  several  colonies  oP^Bedouins  and 
Nubians  were  settled,  and  houses  built,  for 
propagating  the  silkworm ;  but  the  specula- 
tion failed  —  principally  from  the  insalubrity 
of  the  place,  caused  by  the  constant  exposure 
of  the  inhabitants  to  the  exhalations  from  the 
pools  of  stagnant  water  and  decayed  vegeta- 
ble matter.  The  villages  are,  for  the  most 
part,  deserted,  and  the  mulberry-trees  have  a 


EL  MASHAMET.  71 

very  unhealthy  appearance.  The  chief  pro- 
duce of  the  valley  is  now  corn,  and  the  mud- 
hut  villages  of  its  cultivators  are  scattered 
thickly  over  it ;  but  they  are  extremely  wretch- 
ed, and  scarcely  contain  more  than  twenty  or 
thirty  families  each. 

The  principal  village  of  the  district  is  Tal 
el  Kebeer,  situated  near  the  mouth  of  the  val- 
ley, and  indicated  by  a  large  white-washed 
edifice,  that  assumes  a  viceregal  pre-emi- 
nence over  a  dense  mass  of  mud  cottages  that 
are  huddled  together  round  about  it.  This 
house  was  the  residence  of  Mohammed  Ali, 
during  his  sojourn  in  the  valley  to  superin- 
tend the  laying  out  his  mulberry  plantations, 
and  is  now  used  as  a  silk  depot. 

The  road  keeps  on  the  south  side  of  the 
valley  ;  and,  on  arriving  opposite  the  last  vil- 
lage, (El  Mashamet),  which  is  about  thirteen 
miles  from  the  entrance,  we  pitched  our  tent 
for  the  night,  near  a  well  of  very  good  water. 

All  cultivation  ends  here,  though  the  val- 
ley continues  as  marked  a  feature  as  ever 
for  five  miles  further,  the  whole  of  which  dis- 


r^  ARTIFICIAL  EMBANKMENT. 

tance  it  is  thickly  covered  with  dwarf  cypress, 
and  other  shrubs.  A  belt  of  the  same  kind  of 
jungle  continues  to  stretch  in  the  direction  of 
the  Ras  el  Wadi,  yet  many  miles  into  the 
sandy  desert ;  but  the  valley  may  be  said  to 
terminate  in  a  wide  far-spreading  hollow, 
some  f^w  feet  below  the  level  of  the  surround- 
ing sand-hills. 

Here  all  semblance  of  a  road,  or  even  beaten 
track,  is  lost ;  and  our  march  became  hence- 
forth really  "journeying  across  a  desert,"  un- 
marked by  a  single  bush  or  mound,  that  could 
serve  to  direct  the  course  of  any  but  the  prac- 
tised eye  of  a  Bedouin. 

At  the  expiration  of  five  hours,  we  arrived 
at  an  artificial  embankment,  running  for  about 
a  mile  in  a  north-west  direction.  Along  it 
we  observed  many  fragments  of  pottery,  and 
pieces  of  decomposed  limestone  and  scoriae. 
The  ground  falls  slightly  to  the  east,  and  bears 
evident  traces  of  being  occasionally  covered 
with  water,  which  can  only  be  from  rain :  its 
surface  presented,  for  some  distance,  quite  a 
forest  of  dwarf  cypress. 