

A  great  disadvantage  that  the  Viceroy  of 
Egypt  labours  under  in  this  respect  is  his 
being  placed  in  personal  contact  with  the 
Ministers  accredited  to  him  by  the  European 
Powers.  In  conversation,  promises  are  ex- 
acted on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  which  a 
moment's  reflection  shows  the  impolicy  of  his 
having  made.  Mohammed  Ali  is  in  this  way 
constantly  engaged  in  a  struggle  between  the 
sacredness  of  his  word,  and  the  expediency  of 
keeping  it. 

From  this  embarrassing  position,  nothing 
but  the  appointment  of  an  Effendi  for  Foreign 
Affairs  can  possibly  relieve  him.  This  useful 
medium  would,  in  the  first  place,  afford  him 
the  means  of  returning  an  evasive  answer  to 
any  unconscionable  demand,  (which  as   an 


120  THE  sultan's  foreign  policy. 

absolute  sovereign  he  cannot  give  ;)  and,  in 
the  next,  would  allow  time  for  the  matter  to 
be  viewed  in  all  its  bearings,  and  for  feeling 
the  pulses  of  any  other  European  Powers  that 
might  be  affected  by  the  measure.  Finally, 
it  would  furnish  him  with  a  scape-goat  on 
which  to  throw  the  blame,  when  driven  to  the 
last  extremity.  A  Potentate,  who  admits  a 
Foreign  Minister  to  the  conviviality  of  a 
Chibook,  does  not  stand  the  same  chance  in 
diplomacy,  as  the  Sovereign  who  is  hedged 
round  by  chamberlains,  lords  in  waiting, 
gentlemen  ushers,  and  aides-de-camp. 

In  his  foreign  policy,  as  in  many  acts  of 
his  home  administration,  Mohammed  Ali  has 
been  led  astray  from  his  true  interest  by  the 
needy  sycophants  about  him.  Persuaded  that 
the  wealth  and  greatness  of  England  are  de- 
rived from  her  numerous  manufactories  and 
powerful  navy — the  political  consequence  and 
strength  of  France  and  Russia,  from  the  size 
and  discipline  of  their  armies — he  has  been 
induced  to  establish  factories  and  arsenals, 
build  a  large  fleet,   and  raise   an  immense 


THE  EGYPTIAN  NAVY.  121 

body  of  troops,  with  the  idea  of  exciting  the 
respect  of  those  powers.  Though  these  esta- 
blishments were  certainly  called  for,  and  have 
been  eminently  useful  in  promoting  the  poli- 
tical regeneration  of  Egypt,  and  insuring  its 
internal  tranquillity,  yet  they  have  totally 
failed  in  effecting  the  purpose  for  which  they 
were  set  on  foot,  whilst  the  scale  on  which 
they  have  been  instituted  was  far  too  great 
for  the  necessities,  and  the  expense  of  main- 
taining them  is  totally  disproportioned  to  the 
resources,  of  the  country. 

The  navy  of  Egypt  is,  for  the  purposes  of 
either  defence  or  aggression,  perfectly  use- 
less. To  nations  which,  like  England  and 
France,  carry  on  an  extensive  trade  to  all 
parts  of  the  world  under  their  own  flags,  a 
state  navy  is  essentially  necessary;  but  Egypt 
has  no  merchant  vessels  of  her  own  to  protect, 
nor  will  she  possess  any,  whilst  the  present 
monopolizing  system  is  continued.  When 
she  has  capitalists  and  merchants  of  her 
own,  then,  and  not  before,  will  she  possess  a 
mercantile  navy ;  and  then  it  will  be  time  for 