

Mohammed  Ali  has  victories  also  to  boast 

VOL.  II.         •  I 


114  PARTING  WORDS  TO  IBRAHIM. 

of,  though  not  of  the  same  stupendous  kind  as 
those  of  the  French  conqueror.  The  massacre 
of  the  Mamelukes  may  be  considered  Ids  Jaffa, 
but  the  cold-blooded  murder  of  the  innocent 
Due  d'Enghien  remains  without  a  parallel. 
Mohammed  Ali  is  not  cruel  without  necessity : 
his  parting  words  to  Ibrahim,  on  his  proceed- 
ing to  the  Morea,  do  him  infinite  honour :  — 
*'  May  God  give  3^ou  the  victory,  my  son ; 
and,  if  He  give  it  to  you,  may  He  grant  you 
the  virtue  of  clemency!  Be  an  enemy  with 
your  enemies,  but  with  the  weak  be  mer- 
ciful!" 

Conscious  of  the  precariousness  of  his  posi- 
tion, the  government  of  Mohammed  Ali  has, 
from  the  very  commencement  of  his  career, 
been  founded  on  a  system  of  balance.  Thus, 
to  shelter  himself  from  the  anger  of  the  Porte, 
his  first  care  was  to  gain  over  the  Turkish 
officers,  his  immediate  subordinates :  his  next, 
to  compromise  them  with  the  Sultan ;  and,  by 
giving  them  a  share  of  his  hatred,  to  bind 
them  to  his  own  interest. 

To  establish  himself  yet  more  firmly  in  his 


DEATH  BY  IMPALING.  115 

rule,  and  to  enable  him  to  dispense  with  the 
support  of  his  Osmanlee  adherents,  his  next 
step  was  to  gain  the  affections  of  the  native 
inhabitants  of  the  country ;  and  in  this  he  has 
succeeded,  by  introducing  milder  laws,  dis- 
tributing justice  with  an  impartial  hand,  re- 
lieving them  of  the  numerous  petty  exactions 
of  his  subordinates  in  authority,  and  promot- 
ing them  to  situations  of  trust  and  emolu- 
ment. 

Amongst  the  many  benefits  for  which  the 
natives  are  indebted  to  Mohammed  Ali,  by 
these  changes  in  the  institutions  of  the 
country,  that  of  the  abolition  of  the  punish- 
ment of  death  by  impaling,  *  or  by  any  other 
barbarous  means,  deserves  particular  notice  : 
as,  also,  the  stop  that  has  been  put  to  the 
wholesale  butcheries  that  were  formerly  arbi- 
trarily committed  by  the  Governors-  of  Pro- 
vinces, and  other  petty  authorities :  the  Vice- 
roy having  reserved  to  himself  alone  the 
power  of  disposing  of  his  subjects'  lives,  f   Of 

•  Excepting  in  extreme  cases. 

f  The  power  of  inflicting  death,  without  a  reference  to  the  Vice- 

i2 


116  COUNCIL  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL 

this  privilege,  however,  he  avails  himself  but 
seldom — so  unwilling,  indeed,  is  he  to  be  the 
judge,  even  in  trifling  matters,  where  he  is  a 
party  concerned,  that  for  offences,  however 
slight,  committed  in  his  own  household,  the 
culprits  are  handed  over  for  trial  to  the  usual 
authorities.  A  remarkable  instance  of  this 
occurred  during  my  stay  at  Cairo. 

To  shelter  himself  from  the  odium  that 
some  of  his  measures  might  excite  amongst 
the  people,  as  well  as  to  keep  open  the  breach 
that  has  been  effected  between  the  Sultan  and 
his  Turkish  adherents,  Mohammed  Ali  has 
called  to  his  assistance  a  council,  consisting 
of  some  thirty  or  forty  of  the  principal  officers 
of  State  and  Ministers,  to  whose  considera- 
tion all  the  acts  of  his  Government  are  sub- 
mitted, ere  they  are  promulgated.  The  sit- 
tings of  this  Council  are  constant ;  but  its 
functions  are  deliberative  only:  for  no  act 
originates  with  it — nor  is  it  permitted  to  dis- 