

This  detestable  race  having — after  a  period 
of  the  utmost  misery  to  the  country — been  at 
length  got  rid  of,  by  an  act  as  unjustifiable  in 
principle  as  it  was  beneficial  in  consequences, 
the  undivided  power  passed  once  more  into 
the  hands  of  the  Sultan's  lieutenant.  But 
Mohammed  Ali  had  not  imbrued  his  hands  in 
the  blood  of  the  Mamelukes,  to  deliver  over 
the  power  of  which  he  dispossessed  them  to 
the  wily  Sultan.  He  knew  full  well  how  un- 
willingly he  was  continued  in  the  Pashalic  of 
Egypt,  and  was  quite  aware  of  the  snare  that 
had  been  laid    to    deprive  him  of  it.*     He 

•  The  Sultan  (Mahmoud  II.)  was_  most  desirous  to  remove  Mo- 
hammed Ali  from  the  Pashalic  of  Egypt ;  but,  all  his  firmans  having 
failed  to  produce  his  head,  he  thought,  by  ordering  him  to  undertake 
the  war  against  the  Wahabees,  his  purpose  might  be  effected.  This, 
as  a  war  of  religion,  he  knew  his  faithful  lieutenant  could  not  refuse 


102  CHARACTER  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL 

most  wisely  resolved,  therefore,  to  reap  him- 
self the  benefit  of  his  crime,  by  assuming,  in 
all  things  but  the  name,  the  sovereign  svs^ay  of 
the  former  rulers  of  Egypt. 

In  the  commencement  of  his  ambitious 
career,  it  can  hardly  be  supposed  that  Mo- 
hammed Ali  had  any  other  views  than  those  of 
his  own  personal  aggrandizement  in  liberating 
Egypt  from  the  yoke  of  the  Porte  ;  but,  con- 
scious that,  in  relieving  the  country  from  the 
oligarchical  tyranny  of  the  Mameluke  Beys, 
he  exposed  himself  to  a  danger  yet  more 
urgent  than  the  hatred  of  the  Sultan,  namely, 
the  envy  of  his  Turkish  subordinates ;  he 
saw  the  policy  of  calling  forth  the  energies 
of  the  natives  to  shield  him  from  the  impend- 
ing storm.  Whilst,  in  effecting  this,  much 
good  has  been  done  to  the  country,  so  com- 
pletely  have  its   interests  become  identified 

to  engage  in,  and  lie  trusted  in  his  absence  to  stir  up  the  Mamelukes 
— who  were  even  more  inimical  to  Mohammed  Ali  than  to  himself — 
to  prevent  his  return,  and  receive  a  more  compliant  Pasha  from  his 
hands.  Mohammed  Ali  had  no  excuse  to  plead  for  not  marching 
against  the  Wahabees,  but  he  rendered  the  Sultan's  plan  abortive, 
by  murdering  all  the  Mamelukes  ere  he  set  out  on  his  expedition. 


CHARACTER  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL  103 

with  those  of  its  ruler,  that  to  speak  of  the 
government,  commerce,  policy,  &c.,  of  Egypt, 
is  to  speak  of  the  character  of  Mohammed 
Ali,  who  may  most  justly  apply  to  himself 
the  noted  words  of  an  equally  despotic  poten- 
tate— VEgypte  "  c'est  moi.'' 

It  may  be  as  well,  therefore,  before  pro- 
ceeding further,  to  sketch  an  outline  of  the 
character  of  this  extraordinary  man.  His 
early  history  and  rapid  advancement  from  a 
simple  tax-gatherer  to  the  three-tailed  dignity 
of  a  pasha  are  too  well  known  to  require 
dilating  upon ;  and,  indeed,  are  events  of 
such  common  occurrence  in  Turkish  history, 
as  to  excite  no  surprise ;  but,  that  a  Moham- 
medan should  shake  off  his  early  prejudices, 
and  take  a  lead  in  the  march  of  innovation,  is 
a  phenomenon  that  calls  forth  general  asto- 
nishment. 