

There  are  several  roads  from  Suez  to  Cairo. 
That  which  is  most  usually  taken  passes 
by  the  Birket  el  Hadjee,  as  it  offers  the  ac- 
commodation of  two  trees,  upon  which  pilgrims 
on  their  route  to  the  Holy  City  can  hang  their 
old  garments  ;  whereas,  on  none  of  the  other 
roads  is  there  more  than  one  of  these  conve- 
nient old  clothes'-pegs.  I  believe,  also,  that 
the  two  tree  road  affords  more  pasturage  for 
their  camels,  if  the  long  rank  grass  that  grows 
scantily  here  and  there  can  be  so  called.  One 
road  turns  the  Gibel  Ettagah  to  the  south, 
reaching  the  Nile  at  Old  Cairo,  and  to  this  has 
most  preposterously  been  given  the  name  of 
"  The  Wandering  of  the  Israelites." 

We  returned  to  Cairo  by  the  middle  road, 
which  is  the  best  and  shortest,  and  that  by 


PROJECTED  RAIL-ROADS.  9/ 

which  it  is  proposed  to  carry  the  rail-road. 
The  ascent  to  the  wells  of  Adjeroud  is  very 
gradual.  From  thence,  the  road  keeps  along 
the  perpendicular  face  of  the  Gibel  Ettagah, 
(distant  about  three  miles),  leaving  the  fort 
of  Adjeroud  (five  miles  from  the  wells)  about 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  off  on  the  right.  It 
encloses  only  a  well,  mosque,  and  a  large 
storehouse  belonging  to  the  Viceroy,  and  occa- 
sionally— when  the  town  of  Suez  is  full — serves 
to  lodge  Hadjee  bound  to  Mekka.  In  the  year 
1833-4,  no  less  than  ten  thousand  of  these 
devout  pilgrims  bent  their  steps  by  this  one 
route  to  the  shrine  of  the  prophet. 

After  passing  Adjeroud,  the  road  traverses 
a  nearly  flat  and  perfectly  uninteresting  coun- 
try, presenting  at  times  a  surface  of  hard 
sand  and  pebbles,  but  generally  exposing  to 
view  the  bare  lime  and  sandstone  rocks.  At 
the  distance  of  sixteen  miles  from  Suez,  the 
road  by  the  Birket  el  Hadjee  turns  off  to  the 
right — keeping  on  the  northern  side  of  the 
Gibel  Aoutah — a  rocky  range  that  stretches 
northward  some  little  distance  into  the  desert. 

VOL.  n.  H 


yo  REMARKABLE  TREE. 

The  direct  road  passes  between  this  chain 
and  the  western  roots  of  the  Gibel  Ettagah ; 
and,  at  thirty-seven  miles  from  Suez,  arrives 
at  the  tomb  of  some  Mohammedan  Santon, 
which  is  considered  just  half  way  between 
Suez  and  Cairo.  Near  it  is  a  well  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty  feet  deep,  but  no  water.  About 
three  miles  beyond  the  wall  is  the  tree. 

It  is  hung  all  over  with  the  tattered  gar- 
ments of  the  Hadjee,  which,  in  default  of 
foliage,  afford  a  shade  for  the  weary  traveller 
to  repose  under.  The  many-coloured  canopy 
was  not  sufficiently  attractive  to  induce  us  to 
accept  its  shelter  —  on  the  contrary,  it  had  a 
plaguey  look  that  made  us  give  it  a  wide 
berth ;  so,  jogging  on  yet  some  miles  further, 
we  reached  a  low  hill  on  the  right  of  the  road, 
under  which  we  pitched  our  tent  for  the  night. 