

roy,  still  remains  in  the  hands  of  the  Governors  of  Provinces,  in  cer- 
tain cases,  where  immediate  punishment  is  considered  necessary — 
such,  for  instance,  as  open  resistance  to  the  laws,  &c. 


THE  LATE  WAR  WITH  TURKEY.  117 

CUSS  the  merits  of  any  other  matters,  than 
those  submitted  for  its  opinion  and  advice. 

Each  member  gives  his  opinion  separately 
and  in  writing — but  the  Council,  being  com- 
posed entirely  of  the  dependents  of  the  Vice- 
roy, who  are  nominated  by  him,  and  remove- 
able  at  his  pleasure,  it  cannot  be  supposed  that 
it  is  in  the  habit  of  thwarting  his  views.  In- 
deed, the  French  Chambers,  under  Napoleon 
in  prosperity,  were  hardly  more  compliant. 

The  Council  of  Mohammed  Ali  possesses, 
however,  this  advantage  over  those  of  his 
great  prototype;  namely,  that  whilst  it  screens 
him  from  unpopularity  at  home,  it  involves 
many  in  the  responsibility  of  his  foreign  po- 
licy— which,  where  it  militates  against  the 
interest  of  the  Porte,  is  very  important. 
Thus,  the  late  war  with  Turkey  was  not  un- 
dertaken (although  there  can  be  no  doubt  it 
was  fully  determined  on,)  until  the  policy  of 
the  measure  had  been  submitted  to,  and  ap- 
proved of  by  this  complaisant  assembly  of 
grandees — and  it  consequently  became  very 
popular. 


118  INTERFERENCE  OF  THE  PORTE. 

For  the  better  administration  of  justice,  and 
to  facilitate  the  collection  of  the  revenues  and 
imposts,  the  country  has  been  divided  into 
provinces,  and  these,  again,  into  departments ; 
and  proper  officers  have  been  appointed  to 
perform  these  several  duties,  by  which  means 
the  Fellahs  are  in  a  great  degree  relieved  from 
the  petty  exactions  to  which  they  were  for- 
merly subject. 

The  governors  of  provinces  are  nearly  all 
Turks ;  but  amongst  the  Mamours  (or  chiefs 
of  districts)  are  now  to  be  found  many  Arabs, 
and  the  Sheiks  or  heads  of  villages  are  inva- 
riably chosen  from  amongst  the  natives.  All 
these  appointments,  as  well  as  those  of  Ca- 
dees,  Nazirs,  &c.,  are  made  by  the  Viceroy ; 
but,  strange  to  say,  a  Cadeeliskier,  or  Chief 
Judge,  is  still  sent  periodically — as  heretofore 
—from  Constantinople ;  although  in  the  more 
important  concerns  of  the  country — its  com- 
merce, foreign  relations,  &c — the  interference 
of  the  Porte  is  totally  disregarded,  excepting 
where  policy  obliges  Mohammed  AH  to  shelter 
himself  from  responsibility.    This  he  is  some- 


APPOINTMENT  OF  AN  EFFENDI.  119 

times  driven  to  do,  from  the  embarrassing 
demands  of  the  European  Powers ;  for,  though 
the  Council  of  State  is  an  admirable  shield 
against  the  Firmans  of  the  impotent  Sultan, 
yet  it  affords  no  protection  against  the  pro- 
tocols directed  against  his  commercial  system, 
from  all  parts  of  Europe. 