

The  remainder  of  the  road  is  perfectly  un- 
interesting :  it  crosses  several  slight  undula- 
lations,  but  none  of  sufficient  importance  to 
cause  a  rail-road  to  diverge  from  its  direct 
course,  for  they  may  be  cut  down  with  the 
greatest  ease.      The  rock  is  always  close  to 


RETURN  TO  CAIRO.  99 

the  surface,  and  in  no  part  of  the  road  is  there 
any  deep  sand  to  contend  against. 

When  arrived  within  five  or  six  miles  of 
Cairo,  a  dead  level  extends  all  the  way  to 
Boulak,  upon  which  place  a  branch  rail  will 
doubtless  be  directed,  as,  for  all  useful  pur- 
poses, the  bank  of  the  Nile  is  the  point  to  be 
gained  rather  than  Cairo. 

The  whole  distance  from  Suez  to  Cairo  is 
reckoned  eighty  one  miles,  (which  is  certainly 
the  maximum),  and  took  us  eighteen  hours  and 
a  half,  dromedary  riding,  to  accomplish.  The 
only  drawback  to  this  line  for  a  rail-road  is  the 
want  of  water,  for,  although  there  are  several 
wells,  yet  not  a  drop  of  water  is  to  be  had 
between  Cairo  and  Adjeroud. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  give  my  readers 
more  '*  pencillings  by  the  way  :"  suffice  it  to 
say,  that  when  I  next  get  under  weigh,  it  will 
be  by  the  vessel  that  conveyed  me  from  Alex- 
andria to  Candia.  In  the  meanwhile,  I  shall 
introduce  a  few  chapters  on  the  present  state 
of  affairs  in  Egypt. 


H  2 


lOO  FORM  OF  GOVERNMENT. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Form  of  Government — Character  of  Mohammed  All — Former  State 
of  the  Country — Difficulties  to  Overcome  in  Effecting  Improve- 
ments— Unw^arrantable  Abuse  of  Foreigners — Parallel  of  Mo- 
hammed Ali  and  Napoleon — System  of  Administration — Ameliora- 
tions Effected — Council  of  State — Faulty  Position  of  the  Viceroy 
of  Egypt  in  his  Intercourse  vi^ith  the  Diplomatic  Agents  of  the 
European  Powers  —Errors  in  his  Foreign  Policy — The  Advantage 
of  his  Ceding  Canada  to  Great  Britain— Policy  of  England  tow^ards 
Mohammed  AU — Views  of  Russia — Necessity  of  Increasing  the 
Power  of  Egypt  to  counteract  them — Feebleness  of  Persia — 
Policy  of  Recognising  the  Independence  of  Egypt,  and  of  Guar- 
ranteeing  the  Succession  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  to  the  Throne. 

Egypt,  "  terre  classique  de  VEsclavage,' 
continues  to  be  governed  with  the  same  de- 
spotic sway,  as  when  under  the  dominion  of 
the  Pharaohs,  Ptolemies,  and  Caesars — the 
Khaiifs,  Mameluke  Sultans,  and  Turkish 
Pashas.  As  the  power  of  the  last  of  this  long 
list  of  tyrants  diminished,  on  the  decadence 
of  the  Turkish  empire,  the    wretched  inhe- 


THE  MAMELUKE  BEYS.  lOI 

ritors  of  this  hereditary  oppression  became 
subjected  to  a  yet  more  intolerable  yoke,  and 
plunged  yet  deeper  in  the  abyss  of  misery  by 
exchanging  the  single  despot  for  a  multitude 
of  tyrants — the  power  of  the  satrap  appointed 
by  the  Sultan  having  been  usurped  by  the 
lawless,  self-elected  Mameluke  Beys. 