

If,  in  the  prosecution  of  his  ambitious  pro- 
jects, Mohammed  Ali  had  plunged  Egypt  in 
greater  misery  than  she  formerly  suffered, 
then,  indeed,  with  justice,  might  be  applied 
the  opprobrious  epithets  that  have  so  pro- 
fusely been  lavished  upon  him ;  but  what,  let 
me  ask  his  detractors,  could  possibly  be 
worse  than  the  condition  of  the  native  Egyp- 
tian, under  the  satraps  of  the  Sultan,  or  the 
Mameluke  Beys  ? — each  bent  on  extracting 
the  utmost  amount  of  treasure  from  the  land, 
in  the  least  possible  time. 


EGYPTIAN  PEASANTRY.  lOJ 

In  the  more  remote  ages,  the  state  of  the 
Egyptian  peasant  was  probably  somewhat 
better:  for  then,  though  the  agriculturist 
was,  perhaps,  as  much  the  property  of  the 
upper  classes  (the  priesthood  and  military) 
as  the  ground  he  was  employed  to  till,  yet, 
estates  being  hereditary  in  the  different 
classes,  the  proprietors  of  the  land  were  in- 
terested in  the  well-being  of  their  dependents. 

But,  from  the  period  of  the  Persian  con- 
quest, the  natives  of  Egypt  have  toiled  only 
for  the  benefit  of  strangers,  who  had  but  a 
passing  interest  in  the  country.  Their  em- 
bracing the  religions  of  their  various  con- 
querors served  them  nought ;  they  remained 
mere  slaves,  whose  bonds  every  succeeding 
set  of  masters  tightened :  and  when,  at  last, 
Egypt  fell  a  prey  to  the  Turks,  under  the  fe- 
rocious Selim,  those  masters  being  themselves 
barbarians,  the  degradation  of  its  inhabitants 
could  go  no  further.  From  that  period  they 
have  been  worse  treated,  and  considered  of 
less  value  than  the  ox  or  buffalo  they  were 
condemned  to  goad. 


108  RELIGIOUS  PREJUDICES. 

Mohammed  Ali  found,  therefore,  the  native 
Egyptians  sunk  in  the  lowest  depth  of  misery 
and  degradation — a  race  of  beings  human 
only  in  form  and  the  faculty  of  speech. 
Hence,  to  judge  of  the  correctness  of  the 
abuse  that  has  been  heaped  upon  him,  we 
must  compare  their  present  state  with  their 
condition  at  that  period,  when  an  obvious 
improvement  is  apparent — bearing  in  mind, 
at  the  same  time,  that,  even  amongst  civilized 
nations,  there  is  no  short  cut,  no  royal  road, 
to  secure  their  well-being.  Whilst  the  path  of 
the  Egyptian  Viceroy  appeared  to  be  strewed 
with  almost  insuperable  difficulties,  the  pro- 
gress that  has  been  made  towards  this  de- 
sirable end  has  been  wonderfully  great,  for  not 
only  had  Mohammed  Ali  to  remove  the  over- 
whelming mass  of  religious  prejudices  that 
weighed  down  the  Egyptian  nation,  and  to 
break  through  the  barrier  of  ignorance  that 
blinded  it  to  its  state  of  degradation,  but  he 
had  to  overcome  the  opposition  of  all  those 
powerful  chieftains,  whose  interest  it  was  to 
keep  their  vassal  Fellahs  in  this  debased  and 