

One  complains  of  his  not  cultivating  more 
land.  He  orders  a  canal  to  be  excavated,  and 
another  instantly  raises  an  outcry  at  his  com- 
pelling the  ''  starving  Fellah"  to  work  at  it : 
quite  forgetting  —  or  not  being  aware  —  that 
they  are  not  to  be  hired,  like  the  starving  pea- 
santry of  some  other  countries.  Another  finds 
fault  with  him  for  his  monopoly  of  corn,  with- 
out remembering  that  famine  has  constantly 
resulted  from  a  free  trade  in  Egypt. 

Others,  again  — w^ho  incline  to  the  fabulous, 
—  lend  their  willing  ears  to  all  the  stories  of 


112  COMPLAINTS  AGAINST  THE  VICEROY. 

the  banishment  of  foreign  merchants,  drown- 
ing of  prime  ministers,  &c.  &c.  tales,  which — 
though  they  serve  very  well  to  fill  up  a  dull 
letter  —  are,  perhaps,  yet  more  destitute  of 
foundation  than  the  "  Arabian  Nights'  Enter- 
tainments ;  but  are  abundantly  fabricated  by 
the  tribes  of  Greeks,  Levantines,  and  Arme- 
nians, who — perceiving  that  their  hitherto  in- 
dispensable intervention  in  all  affairs  is  no 
longer  needed :  that  the  peculations  and  im- 
positions by  which  they  lived  can  no  longer 
be  practised  with  impunity  —  endeavour,  in 
every  possible  way,  to  cry  down  the  system 
of  Mohammed  Ali. 

The  Franks  who  have  been  discharged 
from  the  Viceroy's  service,  either  from  their 
exorbitant  demands,  or  their  proved  incapa- 
city, join  in  the  clamour.  ,  Those  who,  over- 
rating their  abilities  or  services,  consider 
themselves  ill  rewarded  or  neglected,  pro- 
nounce Mohammed  Ali  to  be  "  an  ungrateful 
old  monster ;"  whilst  by  others,  whose  swind- 
ling schemes  he  has  seen  through,  he  is  called 
"  a  cunning  old  fox." 


CHARACTER  OF  MOHAMMED  ALT.  113 

His  parasites,  on  the  other  hand,  would  fain 
persuade  him  that  he  is  a  second  Napoleon ; 
and,  in  some  respects  indeed,  he  may,  without 
flattery,  be  compared  to  that  wonderful  man. 
Like  him,  he  has  had  the  courage  to  grasp  a 
sceptre,  that  threatened  to  wither  the  hand 
that  touched  it  —  like  him,  he  has  had  the 
talent  to  unite,  under  his  despotic  sway,  men 
whose  opinions  and  characters  were  as  oppo- 
site as  day  and  night  —  like  the  French  Em- 
peror, he  has  improved  his  dominions  by  nu- 
merous useful  institutions  and  public  works — 
has  rewarded  munificently  those  who  served 
him  faithfully.  He  drains  the  resources  of  his 
conquered  provinces,  to  pay  the  immense 
standing  army  that  is  necessary  to  hold  his 
empire  together  —  he  oppresses  his  subjects 
with  a  heavy  conscription,  to  fill  the  ranks  of 
that  army :  and  here  the  Egyptian  despot 
loses  much  in  the  comparison  in  the  opinion 
of  his  subjects,  who  consider  the  word  "  glory" 
a  poor  backschis,  for  the  sacrifices  they  are 
obliged  to  submit  to,  to  obtain  it. 