

All  this  has  been  effected  in  so  subtile  a 
manner,  with  so  many  declarations  of  good 
faith  and  such  professions  of  moderation,  as 
to  allay  the  fears  of  the  other  European 
powers ;  which,  however  sensible  of  the  ad- 
vantages obtained  by  Russia  to  their  eventual 
prejudice,  still  scarcely  thought  each  fresh 
aggression  of  sufficient  consequence  in  itself, 
to  dispute  at  the  cost  of  a  general  war. 
Thus,  without  being  absolutely  duped  by  the 
protestations  of  Russia,  the  southern  powers 
of  Europe  have  quietly  shut  their  eyes  to  her 
ulterior  designs. 

In  the  mean  time,  that  power  has  neglected 
no  opportunity  of  improving  and  augmenting 
her  navy,  which  now  rides  in  undisputed  pos- 
session of  the  Black  Sea,  ready  to  favour  her 
operations  against  Egypt,  Persia,  or,  per- 
chance, India  ;  and  what  power  will  be  able 


POLICY  OF  AUSTRIA.  131 

to  prevent  her  armies  penetrating  to  the 
south,  when  the  time  for  carrying  her  am- 
bitious projects  into  execution  arrives  ? 

We  shall  turn  our  eyes,  perhaps,  to  Austria 
in  this  emergency  ;  but  what  interest  has  that 
power  in  preserving  India  to  England  ?  or  in 
checking  the  growth  of  Russia,  provided  she, 
herself,  gains  strength  in  a  like  ratio  ?  Does 
not  one  glance  at  the  map  of  modern  Europe 
show  what  the  interest  of  Austria  will  he,  if 
not  what  her  intentions  now  are  ?  Her  terri- 
tories, stretching  along  the  eastern  shore  of 
the  Adriatic,  whilst  they  shelter  the  attack  of 
the  Russians  on  Constantinople,  place  her  in 
a  position  to  seize  on  her  portion  of  the  spoil, 
whenever — throwing  off  the  mask — these  two 
ambitious  powers  determine  on  dividing  the 
Ottoman  dominions  between  them.  The  im- 
potent kingdom  of  Greece  will  offer  no  resist- 
ance. Great  Britain,  from  her  outports — 
Corfu  and  Zante — will  have  the  satisfaction  of 
witnessing  a  catastrophe,  which  her  distance 
deprives  her  of  the  possibility  of  averting  : 
and  France  will,  in  all  probability,  be  other- 

K  2 


132  VIEWS  OF  FRANCE. 

wise  occupied.  Indeed,  no  very  urgent  rea- 
son can  be  advanced,  why  France  may  not 
be  tempted  to  join  in  the  crusade — "  L'Expe- 
dition  de  I'Egypte  n'y  est  pas  oubliee"  has 
been  stated  by  a  recent  writer  ;  and  may  she 
not  be  actuated  by  a  "  morbid  desire"  of  ag- 
grandizement, as  well  as  Russia?  Has  her 
conduct,  of  late  years,  been  such  as  to  war- 
rant our  coming  to  a  different  conclusion? 

It  behoves  Great  Britain,  therefore,  to  leave 
no  means  untried  of  averting  the  impending 
danger  ;  and,  though  the  subjugation  of  Tur- 
key in  Europe  appears  inevitable,  to  endea- 
vour to  render  that  calamity  as  little  disas- 
trous as  possible,  by  taking  up  a  position  her- 
self, and  forming  fresh  combinations  amongst 
the  Asiatic  nations,  for  driving  back  the 
Kalmucs  to  their  native  steppes,  should  they 
attempt  to  penetrate  yet  further  to  the  south. 