


122  THE  EGYPTIAN  NAVY. 

the  country  to  have  vessels  of  war  for  its 
protection. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Navy  of  Egypt  is 
not  powerful  enough  to  cope  with  the  fleets 
of  the  great  European  powers,  and  is  not  re- 
quired to  defend  her  shores  from  the  attacks 
of  any  others.  It  is  true,  without  it,  the  Sul- 
tan— should  he  feel  inclined  to  try  the  hazards 
of  another  war,  to  regain  his  lost  Asiatic 
provinces — and  should  the  European  powers 
permit  him — might  declare  the  blockade  of 
the  Egyptian  ports.  But,  it  would  be  merely 
a  declaration  —  for  the  nature  of  the  coast, 
from  Alexandria  to  Scandaroon,  is  such  as 
to  prevent  a  Turkish  fleet  from  carrying 
a  blockade  into  effect;  whilst  an  attack  on 
his  Syrian  frontier  would  quickly  bring  the 
Sultan  to  terms,  or  occasion  the  recall  of  the 
Turkish  fleet  to  the  sea  of  Marmora,  for  the 
defence  of  Constantinople. 

Candia  is  the  only  part  of  Mohammed  Ali's 
dominions,  for  the  protection  of  which  a  fleet 
could  be  required ;  and  its  possession  is  not 
worth  retaining,  at  the  cost  of  his  present 


POSSESSION  OF  CANDIA.  123 

navy,  much  less  at  that  of  a  war  with  any 
European  power.  A  few  frigates  would  de- 
fend it  from  the  Greeks,  as  well  as — perhaps 
better  than  —  a  fleet  of  line-of-battle  ships. 
From  the  Turks,  an  attack  on  their  own  do- 
minions would,  as  before  stated,  at  all  times 
relieve  it ;  whilst  the  jealousy  of  Great  Bri- 
tain may  quiet  his  apprehensions  of  having 
it  to  protect  from  any  other  European  power. 

Mohammed  Ali  would,  indeed,  act  wisely 
in  giving  up  this,  to  him,  unprofitable  posses- 
sion ;  by  which,  not  only  would  he  save  the 
great  expense  attendant  on  its  maintenance, 
but  remove  all  cause  for  collision  with  the 
Greeks,  with  whom  it  is  so  clearly  his  inte- 
rest to  be  on  good  terms,  not  only  from  their 
being  the  great  consumers  of  the  produce  of 
Egypt — and  its  principal  carriers — but  from 
their  friendship  being  of  the  utmost  conse- 
quence to  him,  in  the  event  of  a  rupture  with 
the  Porte. 

The  Sultan  would,  I  have  no  doubt,  most 
willingly  make  over  Candia  to  the  Greeks, 
but,  as  such  a  transfer  would  not  be  permit- 


124  ALLIANCE  WITH  ENGLAND. 

led,  he  ought  to  make  the  best  bargain  he 
can  for  it  with  Great  Britain* — the  power,  of 
all  others,  whose  friendship  it  is  of  the  great- 
est importance  to  him  to  cultivate,  since  her 
enmity  could  at  any  time  effect  his  ruin ;  for, 
it  is  a  truth  that  cannot  be  too  strongly  im- 
pressed upon  his  mind,  that,  whilst  it  would 
be  extremely  difficult  for  any  power  what- 
ever to  attack  Egypt,  without  the  consent  of 
England — so  long  as  she  maintains  her  mari- 
time superiority — so,  on  the  other  hand,  she 
can,  at  any  time,  and  in  spite  of  the  whole  of 
Europe,  effect  his  downfall.  A  simple  block- 
ade of  the  Egyptian  ports  would  do  this, 
without  firing  a  shot  or  landing  a  soldier — 
whilst  an  army  of  thirty  thousand  men  would 
effect  the  conquest  of  the  country. 