

It  is,  therefore,  only  by  threatening  the 
last  named  place  that  such  a  plan  could  be 
thwarted ;  and,  from  the  Egyptian  territories 
(if  advanced  to  the  shores  of  the  Bosphorus 
and  Euphrates)  this  might  be  done  :  whereas, 
if  they  continue,  as  at  present,  to  be  confined 
to  the  narrow  strip  of  coast  at  the  eastern 
extremity  of  the  Mediterranean,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  undertake  an  operation  of  the 
kind,  leaving  Persia  on  the  right  flank. 


136  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  EGYPT. 

The  course  of  the  Tigris,  or  Euphrates, 
(even  should  Persia,  by  conquest  or  alliance, 
become  a  party  in  the  war  on  the  side  of 
Russia)  can  never  be  taken  as  a  line  of  ope- 
rations for  attacking  India ;  for,  besides  the 
natural  difficulties  that  present  themselves  by 
that  route,  and  its  being  a  diverging  line,  it 
is  one  which,  by  leading  towards  the  shores 
of  the  Persian  gulf,  would  be  liable  to  be 
cut  off,  by  a  force  despatched  from  England. 
It  would  be  still  further  objectionable,  from  its 
being  exposed  to  attack  from  Egypt :  and 
this  again  shows  the  advantage  it  would  be 
to  Great  Britain,  to  strengthen  that  power, 
and  attach  her  to  our  interest ;  as,  by  her 
means,  we  should  at  all  times  have  it  in  our 
power  to  attack  Persia,  and  so  bind  the  Shah 
to  us  by  fear,  when  other  means  fail ;  and 
the  Egyptian  army  is  even  now  more  than 
a  match  for  the  disunited  and  undisciplined 
Persians.* 


*  The  total  population  of  Persia  is  eight  millions  of  souls,  two 
millions  of  which,  perhaps,  are  Nomads.  Indeed,  the  entire  popula- 
tion is  divided  into  independent  tribes,  having  different  habits  and 


COMMERCE  WITH  EGYPT.  137 

Turning  now  to  other  considerations,  that 
urge  Great  Britain  to  adopt  a  friendly  line  of 
policy  towards  Egypt,  besides  the  preserva- 
tion of  her  eastern  empire,  it  must  be  evident 
to  every  one,  that  the  great  change  which 
has  been  wrought  in  the  state  of  Egypt  must 
produce  a  corresponding  one  in  her  com- 
mercial relations  with  other  countries.  The 
greater  the  advance  of  Egypt  towards  civili- 
zation, the  greater  will  be  the  amount  of  her 
produce — the  more  numerous  her  wants  :  and 
here  again  it  becomes  the  policy  of  Great 
Britain  to  be  early  in  the  field  to  counteract 
the  intrigues  of  other  powers,  particularly  of 
France,  our  principal  competitor  for  commer- 
cial advantages. 

The  advocates  of  the  system  of  free  trade 
will  say — only  let  the  ports  of  Egypt  be  thrown 

interests,  and  presenting  but  slight  means  of  resistance  to  an  in- 
vader. The  regular  army  amounts  only  to  about  twenty  thousand 
men — cavalry,  infantry,  and  artillery ;  but  the  troops  that  might  be 
brought  into  the  field,  in  any  popular  war,  would  amount  probably 
to  three  hundred  thousand,  two-thirds  of  which  would  be  cavalry. 
But  such  an  army  is  little  to  be  depended  upon — the  annual  reve- 
nue which  reaches  the  Shah's  treasury  being  under  two  millions 
sterling — far  too  small  a  sum  to  pay  so  large  an  army. 