


138  SUPPLY  OF  EGYPT. 

open  to  all  nations  alike,  and  England  will  be 
sure  to  have  the  advantage  ;  doggedly  main- 
taining that  in  no  case  can  we  stand  in  need 
of  commercial  favour. 

When,  however,  we  see  the  artful  manner 
in  which  France  is  using  every  means  to  mo- 
nopolize the  supply  of  Egypt — when  we  con- 
sider the  advantages  she  derives  from  situa- 
tion—  and  the  preference  she  claims  as  the 
principal  consumer  of  Egyptian  produce,  we 
must  indeed  be  wedded  to  a  theory,  to  which 
practice  is  so  diametrically  opposed.  It  be- 
hoves Great  Britain,  therefore,  on  this  score 
also  to  unite  herself  firmly  with  Egypt  by 
the  tie  of  recipi^ocal  inteixst ;  and  the  ad- 
vantages we  have  to  offer,  are  —  security 
to  her  commerce — and  release  from  foreign 
control. 

Any  attempt  to  attain  our  end  by  bullying 
Mohammed  Ali  would  be  the  acme  of  impo- 
licy. If  he  ceded  to  our  demands  through 
necessity,  he  would  be  our  pretended  friend 
and  concealed  enemy.  If  he  resisted  them, 
though  he  would  inevitably  succumb,  Russia 


GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  EGYPT.  139 

would  be  the  only  party  benefited  by  his 
fall.  Let  Great  Britain,  therefore,  throw  off 
the  mantle  of  hypocrisy,  and  bind  Egypt  to 
her  by  gratitude  as  well  as  mutual  advan- 
tage. That  the  tie  may  be  lasting,  and  the 
benefits  conferred  on  the  country  greater  than 
those  which  would  be  produced  by  a  mere  ac- 
knowledgment of  her  integrity,  let  a  spur  be 
given  to  her  industry  by  insuring  her  against 
falling  into  the  hands  of  a  Turkish  oligarchy, 
equally  as  baneful  to  the  prosperity  of  the 
nation  as  the  tyranny  of  the  Mameluke  Beys  ; 
and  this  can  only  be  effected  by  guaranteeing 
the  succession  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  to  the  throne 
of  his  father. 


140  IBRAHIM  PASHA. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Character  of  Ibrahim  Pasha — His  Conduct  in  Syria — In  the  Morea 
— Popularity  of  Mohammed  Ali  —  Grievances  of  his  Subjects  — 
Difficulties  he  has  to  contend  against  —  Wasteful  Expenditure  of 
Money  on  the  Wild  Schemes  of  Foreign  Adventurers  —  Project 
to  throw  a  Dam  across  the  Nile — Railroads — Concluding  Remarks 
upon  the  system  of  Government. 

Travellers  do  not  differ  more  in  their 
measurements  of  the  base  of  the  Great  Pyra- 
mid of  Ghizeh  than  in  that  of  the  intellect  of 
Mohammed  Ali's  son.  Indeed,  whether  Ibra- 
him be  really  his  son,  or  merely  the'  child  of 
his  adoption,  is  even  matter  of  dispute.  I 
incline  to  the  former  opinion ;  but  it  signifies 
very  little  whether  such  be  the  case  or  not, 
provided  he  is  acknowledged  to  be  so  by 
Mohammed  Ali,  and  has  sufficient  talent  to 
follow    in    his   soi-disant   father's    footsteps. 


IBRAHIM  PASHA.  141 