

This  last  point,  as  before  observed,  is  that 
whereon  accounts  most  differ. 

Judging  from  Ibrahim  Pasha's  actions,  he 
cannot  be  denied  the  possession  of  the  quali- 
ties of  courage  in  the  field  and  tact  in  the 
cabinet;  whilst,  by  the  encouragement  he 
gives  to  agriculture,  the  protection  he  affords 
to  foreigners,  and  the  establishment  of  nume- 
rous schools  and  colonies  at  his  own  expense, 
it  may  be  presumed  he  is  desirous  of  promot- 
ing the  welfare  of  the  country  over  which  he 
looks  forward  to  rule. 

In  his  manner,  he  is  lively  and  impetuous, 
but  affable  and  communicative,  with  a  slight 
disposition  to  sarcasm.*  In  person,  he  is 
short  and  thick  set. 

A  great  deal  of  virtuous  indignation  has  of 

*  At  an  inspection  of  the  French  army  sent  to  the  Morea,  in  1827:, 
Ibrahim  Pasha,  pointing  to  some  particularly  ill-conditioned  and 
badly  clothed  regiments,  asked  Marshal  Maison  what  troops  they 
were  :  "  They  are  some  that  have  just  arrived  from  Spain/'  replied 
the  French  Generalissimo,  "  and  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity 
of  receiving  new  appointments."  "What!  "  exclaimed  the  Turk, 
with  well  feigned  astonishment,  "  do  you  employ  the  same  troops 
to  give  liberty  to  the  Greeks  that  have  been  making  slaves  of  the 
Spaniards  ? " 


142  IBRAHIM  PASHA  IN  SYRIA. 

late  been  expressed  at  the  extortions  and 
atrocities  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  in  Syria:  but 
what  do  all  his  acts  of  tyranny  amount  to  ? 
The  levying  taxes  on  a  turbulent  population 
which  had  been  accustomed  from  time  im- 
memorial to  beard  all  authority  with  impu- 
nity—  in  raising'  an  army  by  conscription 
amongst  a  set  of  lawless  bandits  that  had 
lived  by  rapine  and  plunder,  and  relieving  the 
peaceable  portion  of  the  inhabitants  from 
their  exactions  —  in  allowing  the  Franks  to 
remain  undisturbed  with  their  hats  on  their 
heads,  and  their  heads  on  their  shoulders  — 
the  putting  on  the  one  having  but  a  few  years 
since  been  deemed  quite  sufficient  excuse  for 
taking  off  the  other.  In  fact,  if  the  whole 
population  of  Palestine  had  been  cut  off  by 
"  one  fell  swoop  "  of  the  despotic  sword  of  the 
**  ferocious  Ibrahim  " — great  as  would  have 
been  the  loss  of  human  life,  it  would  have 
been  a  gain  to  civilization. 

The  war  in  the  Morea  was  certainly  carried 
on  in  the  most  barbarous  manner,  but  in  this 
species  of  warfare  the  Greeks  have  the  honour 


POPULARITY  OF  MOHAMMED  ALI.  143 

of  the  initiative — and  to  Ibrahim's  credit  be 
it  stated  that,  on  his  troops  carrying  the 
fortress  of  Anatolico  by  assault — when  even 
by  the  European  code  of  martial  law  the 
garrison  might  have  been  put  to  the  sword, 
— he  granted  the  Greeks  their  lives,  merely 
disarming  the  men  and  sending  them  with 
their  wives  and  families  to  Arta.  Ibrahim  is 
beloved  by  his  own  troops  and  feared  by  those 
of  the  enemy — and  if  he  does  occasionally — 
as  report  says — take  something  stronger  than 
sherbat,  Alexander  the  Great  and  other 
heroes  have  done  so  before  him.  He  is  not, 
however,  so  generally  liked  as  his  father. 