

That  Mohammed  Ali  is  popular  in  Egypt 
cannot,  I  should  think,  be  questioned  by  any 
one  who  has  seen  him  ride  almost  unattended 
through  the  streets  of  Cairo,  dense  with  a 
fanatic  population.  To  all  my  inquiries  on 
this  point — and  I  questioned  persons  of  all 
ranks  and  of  every  nation — ^the  answers  were 
invariably  in  his  favour.  Each,  it  is  true,  had 
some  one  grievance  to  complain  of,  that  bore 
particularly   hard    on    himself    individually. 


144  EVILS  IN  THE  GOVERNMENT. 

The  Levantine,  whilst  he  praised  Mohammed 
Ali's  justice  and  liberality  generally,  com- 
plained of  the  laws  affecting  commerce.  The 
Jew,  though  he  admired  the  Viceroy's  tole- 
rance, disliked  his  system  of  monopolies.  The 
Arab  peasant  complained  only  of  the  con- 
scription ;  and  his  sole  regret,  after  becoming 
a  soldier,  is  that  his  new  calling  obliges  him 
to  leave  his  native  land.  The  Turk  alone 
finds  no  one  thing  to  praise,  and  fear  only 
checks  him  from  uttering  his  abuse  of  the 
whole  system  of  Mohammed  Ali's  govern- 
ment. 

That  there  are  faults  in  it  cannot  be  de- 
nied ;  but  the  seeds  of  many  of  the  evils  that 
retard  the  prosperity  of  the  country  —  evils 
that  are  equally  detrimental  to  the  interest 
of  Mohammed  AH  and  of  Egypt  —  are  too 
deeply  sown  to  admit  of  being  removed  but 
by  a  cautious  system  of  weeding  —  avoiding 
the  rooting  them  out  with  a  rash  hand,  lest 
the  good  seed  that  has  already  shot  up  might 
run  the  risk  of  being  also  destroyed. 

The  great  evil  that  weighs  down  the  coun- 


I 


APPROPRIATION  OF  LAND.  145 

try  —  pressing  particularly  on  the  springs  of 
industry  —  is  the  necessity  which  obliges  Mo- 
hammed Ali  to  constitute  himself  the  sole 
proprietor  of  the  soil ;  but  who  else  could,  in 
the  present  condition  of  Egypt,  possess  it  with 
greater  advantage  ?  If  the  country  were  par- 
celled out  in  grants  to  the  different  grandees 
of  his  court,  they,  being  all  Turks,  would 
regain  the  influence  of  which  it  has  (most 
wisely)  been  his  constant  aim  to  deprive 
them.  The  Arab  Sheiks  of  the  old  school 
are  not  sufficiently  enlightened  to  be  trusted, 
whilst  those  natives,  who  have  been  fitted  by 
education  for  such  charges,  are  not  old  enough 
to  have  the  requisite  influence  with  the  peo- 
ple, (whose  hereditary  respect  for  grey  beards 
is  unabated),  and  they  are,  besides,  wanted  for 
other  purposes.  If  the  lands  were  divided 
amongst  the  people  themselves,  each  Fellah 
would  cultivate  merely  the  quantity  of  ground 
sufficient  to  afford  him  subsistence. 

Mohammed  Ali  sees  the  necessity  of  creat- 
ing a  class  of  hereditary  landed  proprietors, 
who  would  have  an  interest — beyond  that  of 