

To  do  this,  a  new  power  must  be  called 
into  existence  in  Asia  Minor,  and  every  sup- 
port given  to  the  tottering  empire  of  the 
Shah.  The  possession  of  the  Island  of  Can- 
dia  becomes  also  imperatively  necessary,  to 


POLICY  OF  ENGLAND.  133 

enable  Great  Britain  to  watch  the  operations 
of  the  enemy,  and  serve  her  as  a  rendezvous 
for  an  army,  which,  thus  centrically  situated, 
could  threaten  so  vast  an  extent  of  coast. 
The  power  that  must  be  called  into  existence 
is  clearly  E^ypt ;  for,  though  that  country 
itself  is  far  distant  from  the  seat  of  war,  yet 
its  frontier  possessions  have  wisely  been  ad- 
vanced to  meet  the  coming  danger  :  so  that, 
whilst  her  armies  will  be  at  hand  to  move 
forward  on  the  first  alarm,  her  inexhaustible 
resources  will  remain  in  perfect  security ; 
and,  under  the  protection  of  an  English  fleet, 
can  be  forwarded  quickly  to  the  scene  of  ope- 
rations. 

But  England  ought  not  to  rest  satisfied 
here.  It  is  her  policy  to  increase  the  power 
of  Egypt  by  every  possible  means,  and  not 
only  to  acknowledge  but  to  guarantee  her  in- 
dependence, and  even  ensure  the  succession 
to  the  throne  to  the  present  dynasty.  Her 
frontiers  should  be  extended  until  they  reach 
the  Tigris  on  the  side  of  Persia,  and  come  in 
contact  with  Russia  to  the  North  :  so  that  any 


134  PRESENT  CONDITION  OF  PERSIA. 

further  encroachments  on  the  part  of  that 
power  would  at  once  occasion  a  rupture.  In 
fact,  to  meet  Russia  with  a  chance  of  suc- 
cess, the  order  for  the  first  cossack  to  cross 
the  Balkan  should  be  the  signal  for  Ibrahim 
to  advance  on  Scutari  and  Trebizonde ;  for 
the  English  fleet  to  take  possession  of  Smyrna 
and  the  castles  on  the  southern  bank  of  the 
Dardanelles;  and  for  the  transfer  of  Candia 
to  the  protection  of  Great  Britain. 

Persia,  far  too  feeble  to  contend  single- 
handed  against  Russia,  and  cut  off  by  her 
position  from  receiving  any  effectual  assist- 
ance from  Great  Britain,  might,  nevertheless, 
by  the  help  of  such  an  ally  as  Egypt  would 
then  become,  be  able  to  resist  any  further  en- 
croachments upon  her  territory. 

The  aggrandizement  of  Russia,  at  the  ex- 
pense of  Persia,  has,  of  late  years,  been  rapid 
indeed ;  but  far  more  detrimental  to  the  inte- 
rests of  England  have  been  the  insidious  in- 
trigues of  that  Northern  Power  at  the  Court  of 
Tehraun,  than  even  the  success  of  her  arms  in 
the  field.     The  influence  of  Russia  is  already 


RUSSIAN  INVASION  OF  INDIA.  135 

nearly  equal  to  that  of  Great  Britain ;  and 
should  a  Prince  ever  be  placed  by  her 
means  upon  the  throne  of  Persia,  our  pre- 
ponderance will  cease  altogether,  and  the  in- 
vasion of  India  need  no  longer  be  regarded 
as  so  Quixotic  an  enterprise  as  it  appears  to 
be  at  the  present  day ;  for  the  base  of  opera- 
tions for  such  an  enterprise  might  then  be 
considered  as  advanced  to  Esterabad  ;  be- 
tween which  place  and  Astrakhan,  the  undis- 
puted possession  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  and  the 
use  of  steamers,  would  render  the  transmis- 
sion of  troops  and  supplies  both  certain  and 
immediate. 