

The  policy  of  Great  Britain  (whatever  may 
be  its  intention)  tends  rather,  I  fear,  to  assist 
Russia  in  her  designs,  and — for  the  sake  of 
retaining  some  paltry  commercial  advantages 
— to  keep  Egypt  in  a  state  of  dependence 
upon  the  Sultan.  The  outcry  that  has  been 
raised  at  the  iniquity  of  assisting  Mohammed 


I 


128  EGYrT  AND  TURKEY. 

AH  against  his  liege  lord  (so  consistent  in  a 
people  that,  in  the  same  breath,  advocates  the 
independence  of  Poland)  is  too  absurd  to  be 
listened  to. 

Has  not  England  been  the  abettor — if  not 
the  prime  mover  —  of  most  of  the  revolts 
and  rebellions  that  have  distracted  both 
hemispheres  during  the  last  quarter  of  a  cen- 
tury, whenever  it  was  her  interest  to  be  so  ? 
Has  she  been  deterred  by  any  such  fine 
chivalric  feeling  as  she  is  called  upon  to 
display  in  the  case  of  Egypt  and  Turkey, 
from  acknowledging  the  independence  of  the 
Brazils,  of  Mexico,  Columbia,  Greece,  Bel- 
gium, &c.  ?  And  is  she  to  be  prevented,  by 
a  senseless  clamour,  from  interfering  in  the 
case  oi  two  perfectly  distinct  people — connected 
by  no  one  bond  of  common  interest  or  affec- 
tion— in  whose  separation  no  ties  of  family 
are  torn  asunder,  no  one  class  of  men  ruined 
to  enrich  another,  no  misery  inflicted  on  the 
liberated  people  beyond  the  onerous  war- 
taxes  necessarily  imposed  upon  it,  to  meet 
the  expenses  of  the  immense  establishments 


DESIGNS  OF  RUSSIA.  129 

kept  up  to  secure  its  independence  ? — evils 
for  which  Egypt  is  indebted  to  the  vacillating 
policy  of  the  great  European  powers,  (but, 
above  all,  that  of  England)  in  not  frankly 
recognising  the  independence  of  Mohammed 
AH. 

Our  delaying  this  act  of  justice  to  the 
Egyptian  people  is  so  completely  playing  the 
game  of  Russia,  that,  in  the  event  of  the  pre- 
sent Viceroy's  death,  and  a  determination  on 
the  part  of  the  Sultan  to  resist  the  succession 
of  his  son  Ibrahim,  it  will  afford  that  power 
an  excellent  pretext  for  interfering  openly  in 
reducing  revolted  Egypt  to  subjection.  May 
not,  indeed,  the  secret  treaty  that  binds 
Turkey  hand  and  foot  to  Russia  contain  some 
provision  of  the  sort  ? 

Russia,  since  the  days  of  Catherine  II.,  has 
been  constantly  persevering  in  an  insidious 
scheme  of  aggrandizement.  At  the  conclusion 
of  each  succeeding  war,  she  has  invariably, 
either  under  the  pretence  of  protection,  or  as 
an  absolute  conquest,  added  some  portion  of 
her  adversary's  territory  to  her  dominions ; 

VOL.  II.  K 


130  DESIGNS  OF  RUSSIA, 

thereby  furnishing  herself,  in  the  former  case, 
with  a  never-faiiing  pretext  for  engaging-  in 
another  war ;  in  the  latter,  with  the  means 
of  re-commencing  hostilities  with  increased 
advantage. 