

At  the  same  time,  however,  that  it  is  the 
obvious  policy  of  Mohammed  Ali  to  court  the 
friendship  and  alliance  of  Great  Britain,  we 
must  not  lose  sight  of  the  advantage  that  it 
also  is  to  England  to  maintain  the  indepen- 

•  Of  the  value  of  this  possession  to  Great  Britain,  I  have  offered 
some  remarks  in  treathig  more  particularly  of  that  island. 


ULTIMATE  VIEWS  OF  RUSSIA.  125 

dence  of  Egypt :  for,  chimerical  as  I  cannot 
but  consider  the  fears  of  a  Russian  invasion 
of  India,  at  the  present  day  —  where,  sup- 
posing all  the  difficulties  to  be  encountered 
on  the  march  to  have  been  overcome,  and  the 
Tartar  hordes  to  have  reached  the  frontiers 
of  Hindostan,  they  will  be  met  by  soldiers 
fully  equal  to  themselves  in  discipline  and 
courage,  and  superior  in  numbers — yet,  there 
is  no  foreseeing  what  changes  the  course  of  a 
few  years  may  bring  about. 

That  the  ultimate  views  of  Russia  are  di- 
rected towards  India,  I  am  not  by  any  means 
inclined  to  dispute ;  and,  as  she  would,  with- 
out doubt,  endeavour  to  possess  herself  of 
Egypt,  before  carrying  her  ultimate  plans 
into  execution  (since  it  would  be  madness  to 
push  an  army  to  the  southward  of  the  Cau- 
casian range,  leaving  Si  powerful  nation,  like 
modern  Egypt,  under  the  control  of  England, 
on  its  flank),  it  becomes  the  policy  of  Great 
Britain  to  prepare  beforehand  to  meet  this 
aggression,  against  the  execution  of  which 
no  insuperable  objections  present  themselves. 


126  LOSS  OF  THE  TURKISH  FLEET. 

Turkey  no  longer  offers  a  barrier  against 
the  designs  of  Russia.  The  loss  of  her  for- 
tresses was  the  unavoidable  consequence  of 
the  destruction  of  her  fleet ;  and  thus,  by 
the  influence  of  one  '*  untoward  event,"  was 
the  Ottoman  empire  laid  crouching  at  the 
feet  of  her  persevering  and  implacable  foe. 
"Not  a  hundred  English  line-of-battle  ships 
on  the  Euxine  would  now  affect  the  march  of 
a  Russian  army  on  Constantinople."*  The 
attempt  of  Turkey  to  resume  her  station 
amongst  the  European  powers,  byre-modelling 
her  army  on  their  plan,  is  but  a  fruitless  waste 
of  money.  She  possesses  not,  within  herself, 
the  materials  required  for  the  accomplishment 
of  such  an  undertaking.  Her  crafty  enemy, 
well  aware  of  this,  encourages  her  in  the 
vain  attempt,  which  helps  to  drain  her  re- 
sources, and  watches  but  the  favourable 
moment  to  effect  the  long-meditated  plan  of 
effacing  Turkey  from  the  map  of  Europe. 

Great  Britain,  having  thus  suffered  the  first 
and  great  outwork  that  secured  her  Indian 

*  Slade's  Turkey. 


POLICY  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN.  12/ 

possessions  to  be  razed  to  the  ground,  must, 
necessarily,  erect  some  other  barrier  for  their 
protection,  and  Egypt  presents  herself  as  that 
best  suited  to  the  purpose.  Whilst,  there- 
fore, it  is  the  policy  of  England  to  strengthen 
the  new  power  that  has  started  into  existence 
in  every  possible  way,  it  is,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  interest  of  Russia  to  keep  Egypt  in  its 
present  half-dependent  state; — not  exactly 
subject  to  the  Porte,  because  Turkey  would 
be  thereby  strengthened — and  Turkey  is  per- 
mitted to  drag  out  its  existence  yet  a  few  years 
longer  —  and  not  altogether  independently 
of  the  Porte,  because  the  power  of  Egypt 
would  be  thereby  doubled,  and,  consequently, 
the  better  prepared  to  resist  the  ulterior  am- 
bitious projects  of  Russia. 