

VOL.  II.  L 


146  CAUSES  OF  MONOPOLY. 

the  moment  —  in  the  improvements  of  the 
country  and  the  condition  of  its  inhabitants 
— a  class  whose  well  being"  would  be  dependent 
upon  that  of  his  government,  and  which  could 
be  relied  upon  to  rally  round  him  in  resisting 
any  attempt  of  the  Turks  to  resume  their 
blighting  supremacy.  But  where  are  the 
materials  for  forming  this  class  to  be  found  ? 
He  has  commenced,  as  an  experiment,  by 
granting  lands  to  several  Europeans  ;  but  the 
Mohammedan  law  obliges  them  to  hold  their 
estates  in  the  names  of  natives  of  the  country, 
which,  in  a  great  degree,  defeats  his  object. 
He  has  also  bestowed  lands  on  some  few  of 
his  Moslim  adherents,  but  they  enjoy  only  a 
life  interest  in  them ;  whereas  it  is  a  body  of 
hereditary  landed  proprietors  that  is  called  for. 
It  is  the  want  of  this  substantial  class  that 
in  like  manner  has  forced  Mohammed  Ali  to 
burthen  himself  with  the  various  monopolies 
for  which  he  is  so  generally  abused,  and  to 
become  the  sole  merchant  of  the  country  ; 
but  where  are  the  capitalists  in  Egypt  that 
could  embark  in  manufacturing  or  mercantile 


EXPERIMENTS  OF  ADVENTURERS.  147 

speculations?  The  natives  and  Turkish  in- 
habitants are  out  of  the  question .  The  Greeks, 
Copts,  and  Egyptian  Jews,  are  too  pettifog- 
ging in  their  dealings  to  engage  in  com- 
mercial transactions  on  a  large  scale,  whilst 
the  Franks  resident  in  the  country  are  not 
wealthy  enough  to  do  so,  even  if  they  were 
sufficiently  trustworthy ;  respectable  Euro 
pean  merchants  would  hardly  be  found  willing 
to  hazard  their  capital  in  the  enterprises  of  a 
government,  which,  whilst  its  independence 
remains  unacknowledged,  can  offer  no  gua- 
rantee for  the  fulfilment  of  its  engagements. 
The  existence  of  Egypt  as  a  nation  depends 
entirely  upon  that  of  its  present  ruler.  His 
death  might  either  plunge  the  country  into 
civil  war,  or  engage  it  in  a  ruinous  contest 
with  Turkey  and  Russia. 

The  greatest  fault  with  which  the  adminis- 
tration of  Mohammed  Ali  can  be  charged  is 
the  outlay  of  large  sums  of  money  (obtained 
by  an  onerous  taxation)  upon  the  wild  experi- 
ments of  the  Viceroy's  Frank  advisers.  These 
needy  adventurers  —  mostly   refugees   from 

l2 


148  WORKS  INJUDICIOUSLY  PERFORMED. 

France,  Spain,  Piedmont,  and  Naples  —  with 
the  word  honour  on  their  lips,  and  a  bit  of 
ribbon  at  their  button-holes,  have  no  other 
object  in  view  than  to  cut  out  work  that  will 
put  them  in  a  way  of  making  fortunes  at  his 
expense,  in  as  short  a  time  as  possible. 

It  is  thus,  that  even  the  useful  public 
works,  the  execution  of  which  has  been  en- 
trusted to  their  direction,  have  all  been 
hurried  on,  for  the  sake  of  being  done  quickly 
rather  than  with  a  view  to  their  being  done 
well.  The  canals,  bridges,  factories,  forts, 
&c.,  all  partake  of  this  radical  defect.  The 
Egyptian  ships  of  war  are  said  to  be  falling 
to  pieces  from  the  same  cause.  Much  as  this 
system  of  roguery  is  to  be  regretted,  the 
wasteful  expenditure  of  money  on  wild  spe- 
culations, that  can  —  in  the  present  state  of 
Egypt — tend  to  no  possible  good,  is  yet  more 
seriously  to  be  deplored.  That  steam-power, 
railroads,  &c.,  are  of  infinite  service  in  a 
country  that  is  already  in  an  advanced  state 
of  civilization,  and  in  which  they  can  be  used 
cheaply,  will  not  admit  of  dispute ;  and  it  is  to 