

•  Under  this  head  must  be  classed  the  sale  of  the  -produce  of  the 
country,  which  almost  all  belongs  to,  and,  until  lately,  was  sold 
exclusively  by  the  Government. 


158  EXPENDITURE. 

army,  one  million  and  a  quarter,  sterling ; 
navy,  five  hundred  thousand  pounds ;  ar- 
senals, manufactories,  and  public  works,  five 
hundred  thousand  pounds ;  civil  administra- 
tion, secret  service,  and  gratuities,  eight 
hundred  thousand  pounds  ;  Envoys,  and  pre- 
sents to  Constantinople,  one  hundred  and  sixty 
thousand  pounds  ;  the  Viceroy's  household, 
seventy-five  thousand  pounds. 

The  revenues  of  Egypt  that  reached  the 
Sultan's  coffers,  under  the  Mameluke  Beys, 
amounted  only  to  two  millions  and  a  half 
sterling,  but  that  sum  was  increased  to  four 
millions,  when  the  country  was  again  brought 
under  the  more  immediate  dominion  of  the 
Porte.  Considering,  therefore,  the  new  sources 
of  revenue  that  have  been  opened  to  Egypt 
under  Mohammed  Ali,  by  the  cultivation  of 
the  cotton  plant,  olive,  and  mulberry  trees, 
&c.,  and  the  increased  facilities  afforded  to 
its  agriculture  by  the  excavation  of  canals, 
and  the  improved  system  of  irrigation,  a 
corresponding  increase  of  revenue  ought  to 
have  followed,  had  the  inhabitants  continued 


THE  VICEROY  FARMER  GENERAL.  159 

subject  to  the  same  rate  of  taxation  as  under 
former  administrations.  It  appears,  however, 
that,  with  all  these  increased  means,  the 
amount  of  revenue  raised  from  the  country 
continues  much  the  same  as  formerly. 

The  revenues  of  Egypt  might  be  very  con- 
siderably augmented  in  various  ways,  but  I 
am  sceptical  as  to  the  expediency  of  abandon- 
ing altogether  the  manufactories,  monopolies, 
&c.,  and  opening  the  trade  ;  for,  as  I  have 
already  attempted  to  show,  the  possession  of 
manufactories  is  called  for  by  the  uncertainty 
of  Mohammed  All's  foreign  relations,  and  the 
government  monopoly  on  the  export  of  corn, 
to  save  the  country  from  famine :  whilst  the 
want  of  landed  proprietors  and  capitalists 
obliges  the  Viceroy  to  constitute  himself 
the  farmer  general  and  sole  merchant  of 
Egypt. 

I  doubt,  therefore,  whether,  under  all  cir- 
cumstances, Mohammed  All's  monopolizing 
system  be  not  the  best  that  could  be  adopted, 
until  knowledge,  and  with  it  confidence,  can 
be  imparted  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  country. 


160  OBSTACLES  TO  AGRICULTURE. 

It  is  security  that,  above  all  things,  is  wanting  ; 
for,  besides  that  agricultural  pursuits  cannot 
be  followed  without  considerable  funds,  (which 
none  of  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt  possess,)  it 
is  security  alone  that  stimulates  industry,  and 
renders  labour  productive  ;  without  it,  though 
the  Arab  Fellah  should  possess  the  treasures 
of  Haroun-el-Raschid,  he  would  not  venture 
to  make  use  of  them  to  improve  his  land. 