


MODE  OF  CULTIVATION.  163 

kind  of  produce,  that  is  prescribed  by  the 
Nazeer,  who  furnishes  the  seed  and  takes  the 
Viceroy's  proportion  of  the  crop.  The  residue 
used  formerly  to  be  taken  also,  and  paid  for 
at  a  price  fixed  by  the  Nazeer ;  but  the  cul- 
tivator is  now  allowed  to  seek  a  market  for 
what  remains  for  himself,  after  the  lion's 
share  has  been  taken — a  change  which  has 
been  of  infinite  benefit  to  the  peasant,  but 
has  occasioned  a  sad  falling  off  in  the  receipts 
of  the  Nazeer,  who  generally — between  his 
absent  employer,  the  Viceroy,  and  the  trem- 
bling peasant — made  a  very  profitable  busi- 
ness.*    Out  of  the  profits  made  on  the  sale  of 

•  It  has  been  so  often  asserted  as  at  length  to  have  become  firmly 
believed  by  most  Europeans,  that,  in  levying  the  taxes,  &c.,  it  is 
part  of  Mohammed  All's  system  to  make  those  vpho  possess  the 
means  pay  the  contributions  of  such  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  same 
district  as  from  idleness  or  misfortune  cannot.  A  proceeding  so 
calculated  to  nip  industry  in  the  very  bud,  and,  at  the  same  time,  so 
extremely  unjust,  struck  me  as  being  most  improbable,  and  induced 
me  to  make  particular  inquiries  on  the  subject.  A  gentleman,  high 
in  the  Viceroy's  confidence,  to  whom  I  applied,  said,  that  he  also 
had  often  heard  the  same  assertion;  that  such  a  circumstance 
might  have  occurred,  but  he  could  say  from  his  own  experience 
(and  he  held  lands  under  the  Viceroy)  that  it  was  not  the  general 
practice.  He  had  an  opportunity  very  shortly  after  our  conversa- 
tion of  putting  the  case  to  Mohammed  Ali  himself,  stating  that  such 

M  2 


164  ANNUAL  RENT   OF  LAND. 

his  share  of  the  crop,  the  peasant  has  to  pay 
the  annual  rent  of  the  ground.  This,  in  the 
lower  part  of  the  Delta,  is  about  thirty 
piastres  per  feydan  ;  near  Cairo,  sixty  ;  and 
in  Upper  Egypt,  about  seventy ;  but  every- 
where subject,  of  course,  to  considerable 
variation,  according  to  the  distance  of  the 
land  from  a  market,  from  the  banks  of  the 
river  or  of  a  navigable  canal,  the  quality  of 
the  soil,  and  the  means  of  irrigation. 

This  last  named  is  the  principal  source  of 
expenditure  to  the  cultivator,  and  that  of  all 
others  w^hich  most  calls  for  improvement. 
The  Persian  wheel  is  still  considered  the  ne 

was  the  general  belief  in  Europe.  The  Viceroy  in  reply  said,  that 
such  malpractices  had  certainly  taken  place  formerly,  and  he 
brought  to  his  interrogator's  recollection  an  instance  where  the 
governor  of  a  district  had  been  displaced  for  such  abuses — adding, 
if,  therefore,  they  are  yet  continued,  it  is  not  only  without  my  know- 
ledge, but  at  the  risk  of  my  most  severe  displeasure.  This  merely 
goes  to  prove,  perhaps,  that,  with  the  best  intentions,  Mohammed 
Ali's  plans  for  the  amelioration  of  the  country  are  defective,  from 
their  depending  too  much  on  himself.  He  cannot  be  every  where ; 
and  where  he  is  not,  he  is  likely  to  be  cheated,  and  his  subjects 
oppressed.  Such  has  been  the  system  for  ages.  It  is  a  kind  of 
prerogative  that  the  govermment  oflBcers  of  Egypt  have  enjoyed, 
and  a  tyranny  that  the  natives  have  been  obliged  to  submit  to,  from 
time  immemorial. 