


PROJECT  TO  DAM  THE  NILE.  149 

be  hoped  that  the  day  is  not  far  distant  when 
Eg-ypt  will  be  in  a  fit  state  to  receive  benefit 
from  their  introduction ;  but  at  present,  the 
cheap  rate  at  which  human  labour  is  obtained 
there  —  the  facility  of  water  carriage  in  that 
level  and  intersected  country  —  the  bulky 
nature  of  the  commodities  it  produces  —  the 
expense  attendant  on  the  purchase  of  foreign 
machinery,  and  on  its  repairs  —  the  want  of 
fuel,  and  want  of  science,  cause  them  to  be 
applied  to  the  purposes  of  commerce  and 
manufactures  at  a  dead  loss. 

All  Mohammed  Ali's  bubbles  sink,  however, 
into  insignificance,  when  compared  to  his 
project  to  dam  the  Nile.  This  notable  enter- 
prise has  been  undertaken  at  the  suggestion 
of  the  sect  of  St.  Simonians  resident  at  Cairo, 
and  the  "  Pere  enfantin  "  has  been  pleased  to 
extend  his  fatherly  care  towards  it,  as  chief  en- 
gineer and  treasurer,  assisted  in  his  labours  by 
a  Monsieur  Lelan — an  eleve  of  the  Polytechnic 
School  at  Paris.  The  spot  selected  for  the 
stupendous  work  is  a  few  miles  below  the 
bifurcation    of    the    Rosetta   and   Damietta 


150       DAM  TO  BE  FORMED  OF  STONES. 

branches  of  the  river,  and  its  object  is  to 
raise  the  water  to  the  height  of  ten  feet  above 
its  usual  level  at  low  Nile,  so  as  to  form  a 
head  of  water,  from  which  every  part  of  the 
Delta  can  be  irrigated  at  all  seasons  of  the 
year. 

The  work,  as  originally  projected,  was 
feasible,  though  sufficiently  daring  to  have 
made  even  a  Brunei  pause  before  undertaking- 
it:  but  the  enormous  expense  that  would 
have  been  occasioned  for  timber  fit  for  piles 
to  make  a  foundation  has  caused  that  part  of 
the  plan  to  be  abandoned,  and  the  dam  is  to  be 
formed  altogether  of  stones,  and  to  rest  on  the 
sandy  substratum  of  the  Delta !  None  of  the 
stones  which  I  saw  collected  for  the  work  ex- 
ceeded four  feet  in  length,  and  the  whole  bu- 
siness looks  so  like  a  job,  as  almost  to  make 
one  doubt  the  sincerity  of  the  cosmopolitan 
father's  profession,  that  he  acts  solely  ''pour 
V amour  de  lafamille  universelle  des  hommes." 

It  is  proposed  to  have  bridges  across  the 
two  branches  of  the  river,  and  an  intermediate 
one  over  the  canal,  which  must  necessarily  be 


DOUBTS  AS  TO  ITS  PRACTICABILITY.  151 

made,  to  convey  the  irrigating  stream  into  ttic 
Delta.  The  two  principal  bridges  will  be 
about  five  miles  apart,  the  whole  of  which 
distance  must  be  banked,  to  resist  the  con- 
stant pressure  of  this  immense  head  of 
water.  Should  this  work  ever  be  brought  to 
a  happy  conclusion — which,  without  profess- 
ing a  knowledge  of  hydromancy,  I  will  ven- 
ture to  predict  it  will  not  —  the  consequences 
inevitably  must  be,  that  the  whole  system  of 
canals,  dykes,  and  sluices  of  the  Delta,  will 
have  to  undergo  an  alteration,  and  its  inha- 
bitants will  be  constantly  exposed  to  the  risk 
of  being  themselves,  and  (what  will  then  be 
of  minor  importance),  having  their  cattle, 
fields,  date  groves,  and  habitations,  swept 
away ;  either  by  the  river's  forcing  the  dam,  or 
by  its  making  itself  another  channel. 