

That  a  despotism  is  the  only  form  of  go- 
vernment suited  to  Egypt  in  its  present  con- 
dition is  very  evident,  and  fortunate  is  the 
country  (since  it  must  have  a  Mohammedan 
ruler)  in  having  such  a  despot  as  Mohammed 
Ali  to  govern  it. 

Of  the  difficulties  he  has  had  to  contend 
against,  few  except  those  who  have  visited 
Egypt  can  form  an  idea ;  but  they  are  in  part 


DESPOTIC  GOVERNMENT.  155 

SO  accurately  described  by  Machiavelli  in  II 
Principe,  that  I  cannot  refrain  from  quoting 
the  passage. 

"  E  debbesi  considerare  come  non  e  cosa  piii  difficile  a  trattare 
ne  piu  dubbia  a  riuscire,  ne  piii  pericolosa  a  maneggiare,  che 
farsi  Capo  ad  introdurre  nuovi  ordini.  Perche  I'introduttore  ha 
per  nemici  tutti  coloro  che  degli  ordini  vecchi  fanno  bene ;  e  tepidi 
defensori  tutti  quelli  che  degli  ordini  nuovi  farebbono  bene :  la 
qual  tepidezza  nasce  parte  per  paura  degli  avversari,  che  hanno  le 
leggi  in  benejicio  loro,  parte  della  incredulita  degli  iiomini,  i  quali 
non  credeno  in  verita  una  cosa  nuova,  sennon  ne  veggono  nata 
esperienza  ferma." 


156  REVENUE  OF  EGYPT. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Revenues  of  Egypt — Taxes— Expenditure — Government  Monopo- 
lies— Necessity  of  retaining  many  of  them,  in  the  present  state  of 
the  Country — Agricultural  System— Extent  of  Land  susceptible 
of  Cultivation— Productions  of  Egypt— State  of  her  Commercial 
Relations  with  other  Countries — Imports  and  Exports — Amount 
of  Population  —  Different  nations  composing  it  —  State  of  the 
Fellahs  as  compared  with  the  Peasantry  of  other  Countries — 
Paupers — Good  effects  resulting  from  the  Establishment  of  Manu- 
factories—Manners and  Customs  of  the  Inhabitants — Education 
of  the  Lower  Orders — Arts  and  Sciences — Music — Gradual  Im- 
provement in  the  Condition  of  the  Inhabitants— Anecdote  of  the 
March  of  Mind,  and  of  the  drag  upon  it — Smoking. 

The  revenue  of  Egypt  is  calculated,  in  the 
years  of  "  a  good  Nile,"  to  amount  to  twenty 
millions  of  dollars  ;  (four  and  a  half  milliions 
sterling,  nearly ;)  but  at  other  times  it  does 
not  exceed  fifteen  millions.  This  is  exclusive 
of  Syria  and  Candia,  both  of  which  are  at 
present  sources  rather  of  expense  than  profit 
to  the  Egyptian  treasury  ;  the  former,  how- 


REVENUE  OF  EGYPT.  157 

ever,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  Mrill  pro- 
bably become  a  source  of  revenue — the  latter 
never. 

The  principal  sources  from  which  the  re- 
venue of  Egypt  is  derived,   are  the  Miri,  or 
land-tax  (more  properly  ground  rent),  which 
amounts  to  about  a  million  and  a  half  ster- 
ling ;  the  Capitation  tax,  calculated  at  half  a 
million,  and  the  customs  and  excise  at  three 
hundred   and  fifty   thousand   pounds.      The 
rest  of  the  gross  amount  is  made  up  by  the 
farming  out  of  fisheries,    monopolies,*   and 
various  minor  taxes  ;  amongst  which,  one  on 
jugglers,    dancing   women,   and   courtesans, 
amounts  annually  to  thirty  thousand  pounds. 
This  statement  is  taken   from  an   official 
return  of  the  state  of  the  revenues  of  Egypt 
in  the  year  1830,  when  they  amounted  only  to 
three  millions,  six  hundred  thousand  pounds. 
Another  official  document  gives  the  principal 
expenses  of  the  government  during  the  same 
year,    in   round    numbers,    as    follows :    the 