


•  In  making  this  calculation,  I  suppose  the  cultivatable  land  of 
the  Delta  to  form  an  isosceles  triangle ;  of  which  the  base  is  one 
hundred  and  twenty  miles  long,  and  perpendicular  height  sixty-five 
miles.  The  valley  of  the  Nile,  from  the  apex  of  the  Delta  to  Assou- 
an, I  consider  a  rectangle,  five  hundred  miles  in  length,  and  five 
in  breadth;  and  that  the  Fayoum  contains  four  hundred  square 
miles— thus,  therefore,  3900  +  2500  +  400  =  6800. 

These  are  geographical  miles  —  and  it  must  be  borne  in  mind, 
that,  although  the  valley  of  the  Nile  considerably  exceeds  five 
miles  in  width,  yet,  that  the  extent  of  cultivation  is  seldom  so  much 


DECREASE  OF  POPULATION.         IJl 

of  seven  millions  would  have  given  upwards 
of  one  thousand  souls  to  every  square  mile — 
an  hypothesis  that  is  quite  unreasonable. 
We  read,  moreover,  in  Scripture,  that  Pha- 
raoh said — "  Behold  the  people  of  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  are  more  and  mightier  than 
we."  Now,  since  the  people  of  Israel,  that 
left  Egypt  with  Moses,  amounted  only — on 
the  most  liberal  calculation  —  to  two  millions 
of  souls  ;  it  would  make  the  entire  population 
of  Egypt,  at  that  time  (including  the  Jews), 
under  four  millions  :  and  it  cannot  be  sup- 
posed that  its  population  was  ever  greater 
than  during  the  sojourn  of  the  Israelites. 

It  is  generally  imagined  that  the  popula- 
tion of  Egypt  has  been  on  the  decrease  for 
the  last  few  years,  although  the  official  re- 
turns give  a  different  result ;  and,  certainly, 
the  large  army  maintained,  and  the  extermi- 
nating wars  the  country  has  been  engaged 
in  —  occasioning  a  constant  drain  upon  its 

— sometimes,  indeed,  it  is  not  half  a  mile  wide.  It  is  also  to  be 
recollected^  that,  although  tlie  Nile  winds  very  much  in  its  course, 
yet  the  valley  does  not. 


172  IMPROVED  HABITS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 

youth — cannot  but  be  against  the  increase  of 
population ;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  various 
causes,  that  periodically  swept  off  the  popu- 
lation by  thousands,  have  been  removed  or 
very  much  diminished  in  their  effects.  Fa- 
mine, for  instance,  has  been  felt  but  once, 
during  a  long  period  (on  which  occasion  Mo- 
hammed Ali  had  thrown  open  the  corn-trade), 
and  the  country  has,  by  the  adoption  of  sana- 
tory precautions,  been  relieved,  to  a  very 
great  degree,  from  the  ravages  of  the  plague. 
The  habits  of  the  people,  also,  are  daily 
improving ;  they  are  becoming  more  cleanly, 
both  in  their  persons  and  food  ;  and  their 
prejudices  are  giving  way  to  the  virtues  of 
medicine  and  wine.  To  their  previous  filth, 
wretched  fare,  and  contempt  for  medicine, 
are  to  be  attributed  the  havoc  caused  by  oph- 
thalmia, small-pox,  typhus  fevers,  and  other 
endemic  disorders,  which  now  do  compara- 
tively but  little  injury. 