

Sickness,  I  should  say,  prevails  to  a  very 
small  extent  amongst  the  adult  portion  of 
the   Arab   population   of  Egypt.      Numbers 


MIXED  POPULATION.  173 

have  hitherto  perished,  at  a  very  early  age, 
from  the  absolute  ignorance  of  the  science  of 
medicine ;  for,  those  of  weak  constitutions 
fell,  without  resistance,  before  the  successive 
diseases  by  which  mankind  is  attacked  in  in- 
fancy ;  and,  consequently,  such  only  as  were 
naturally  robust  reached  maturity,  and  have 
continued  healthy  in  after-life ;  and,  though 
many  of  these  bear  evidence  of  the  ravages 
made  by  ophthalmia,  yet  the  plague  and  old 
age  are  the  only  enemies  they  have  now  to 
encounter. 

The  population  of  Egypt  is  made  up  of  a 
medley  of  almost  all  the  nations  of  the  East. 
The  Arabs  (fellahs  and  Bedouins)  constitute 
about  twelve-thirteenths  of  the  total  amount ; 
that  is,  nearly  three  millions  of  souls.  The 
Copts  are  the  next  most  numerous  body. 
They  are  the  mongrel  descendants  of  the 
various  people  that  in  turn  conquered  Egypt, 
and  with  whose  decadence  they  have  kept 
pace ;  possessing,  at  this  day,  a  rare  mixture 
of  the  rapacity  of  the  Greek,  the  depravity  of 
the  Roman,  and  effeminacy  of  the  Persian. 


174  NATIVE  CHRISTIANS. 

The  Copts,  at  the  period  of  the  Saracenic  in-= 
vasion,  were  the  proprietors  of  the  soil  and 
the  principal  merchants  of  Egypt :  in  the 
dark  ages  that  followed,  though  stripped  of 
their  possessions,  their  smattering  of  learn- 
ing gave  them  considerable  influence  in  the 
administration ;  to  all  the  minor  posts  of  which 
they  were  admitted. 

They  are,  yet,  distinguished  by  the  generic 
term,  *'  writers  ;"  but  their  numbers,  as  well 
as  influence,  is  very  much  reduced ;  for,  at 
the  present  day,  they  cannot  be  estimated  at 
more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
souls.  They  profess  Christianity  ;  but,  as  a 
writer  on  Egypt  has  most  justly  observed — 
"  All  that  bears  the  name  of  Christianity,  in 
Egypt,  is  but  the  sightless  and  hideous  mum- 
my of  a  Christian  church." 

The  Turks,  Albanians,  &,c.  —  the  last  con- 
querors of  Egypt  —  have  in  their  turn  been 
much  reduced  in  number  by  the  events  of  the 
last  few  years.  They  continue,  however,  to 
hold  the  first  rank  in  the  land,  filling  most  of 
the  principal  military  posts,  and  may  still  be 


ETHIOPIANS  AND  LEVANTINES.  1/5 

estimated  at  ten  thousand.  The  Ethiopians, 
on  the  other  hand,  have  increased  consider- 
ably in  numbers,  and  may  be  calculated  at 
fifteen  thousand  souls.  They  are  the  most 
daring  soldiers  of  the  Egyptian  army,  but 
neither  so  tractable  nor  so  enduring  as  the 
native  fellah.  It  appears  contradictory — but 
such  nevertheless  is  asserted  to  be  the  case — 
that,  whilst  Nostalgia  has  nearly  cleared  the 
ranks  of  the  Egyptian  army  of  these  tropical 
people,  they  have  been  found  to  succeed  re- 
markably well  in  colonies. 