

In  the  year  1831,  the  exports  of  Egypt 
amounted  to  £1,650,000;  the  imports,  to 
£1 ,568,000.    Of  this,  raw  cotton  was  exported 


168  IMPORTS  AND  EXPORTS. 

to  the  amount  of  £620,000 ;  and  manufactured 
cotton  imported  to  the  value  of  £325,000. 
But,  since  the  above  period,  an  enormous  in- 
crease has  taken  place  in  the  production  of 
cotton.  In  1835,  (before  the  breaking  out  of 
the  plague)  the  cotton  crop  was  valued  at 
one  and  a  half  million  sterling. 

The  principal  articles  procured  from  Austria 
are  timber,  copper,  iron,  manufactured  cot- 
tons, cloth,  glass,  and  hardwares  ;  from  Tus- 
cany, manufactured  cottons,  silk  and  woollen 
goods,  iron,  and  straw  plait.  England  sup- 
plies iron,  cutlery,  coals,  manufactured  cottons, 
and  warlike  stores  ;  and  France,  cloth,  silk 
goods,  sugar,  lead,  and  wine.  Egypt  supplies 
Turkey  with  every  thing,  but  since  the  cession 
of  the  province  of  Adana,  takes  hardly  a 
single  one  thing  in  exchange.  Her  trade  with 
Greece  is  also  nearly  all  for  money.  Amongst 
the  numerous  articles  furnished  to  these  two 
powers,  the  principal  one  is  rice. 

A  census  of  the  population  of  any  Moham- 
medan country  is,  from  the  sacredness  of  the 
hareems,  very  difficult  to  be  obtained  with  any 


POPULATION  OF  EGYPT.  169 

degree  of  correctness,  even  by  the  govern- 
ment itself,  and  renders  it  the  less  surprising 
that  the  population  of  Egypt  should  have 
been  so  differently  estimated  by  foreigners. 
For  my  own  part,  judging  from  the  quantity 
of  land  under  cultivation,  the  number  of  hands 
that  must  necessarily  be  required  to  till  it, 
the  great  waste  of  human  labour  in  Egypt, 
and  the  thick-set  way  in  which  the  towns  and 
villages  are  strewed  over  its  surface ;  and 
comparing  it,  in  these  respects,  with  other 
countries,  1  do  not  hesitate  to  pronounce  the 
population  to  amount  to  at  least  three  and  a 
quarter  millions  of  souls. 

The  population  of  Egypt,  under  the  first 
Ptolemies,  is  stated  to  have  amounted  to 
three  millions;  and,  considering  the  sangui- 
nary contests  that  had  been  carried  on  be- 
tween the  Egyptians  and  Persians,  during 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  two  centuries  pre- 
ceding the  Macedonian  invasion,  it  is  pro- 
bable that  at  that  period  it  did  not  amount 
to  more.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  not  by  any 
means  likely  that  the  population  ever  much 


170  CULTIVATED  LAND. 

exceeded  the  number  at  which  I  now  estimate 
it,  notwithstanding  that  the  ancient  writers 
affirm  it  amounted  to  seven  millions ;  for  the 
mountains  that  hem  in  the  Nile  are  the  same 
that  always  existed — and,  though  the  sand 
that  has  drifted  from  them  may  have  con- 
tracted the  width  of  the  valley  in  a  slight  de- 
gree, yet  large  tracts  (according  to  the  ac- 
counts of  these  same  writers)  have,  in  the 
interim,  been  gained  from  the  sea,  to  counter- 
balance this  loss  of  cultivated  land,  above  and 
on  the  skirts  of  the  Delta.  Calculating,  there- 
fore, the  superficial  contents  of  Egypt  {i.  e.  of 
the  land  that  is  susceptible  of  cultivation)  to 
have  been  then  as  it  now  is  —  six  thousand 
eight  hundred  square  miles* — a  population 