


WATERING  MACHINES.  165 

plus  ultra  of  watering  machines  by  the  Arabs, 
but  in  Egypt  it  is  of  the  rudest  description. 
The  water  is  brought  up  in  leather  buckets, 
made  fast  to  a  rope,  which  admits  of  being 
lengthened  at  pleasure  so  as  to  reach  the  level 
of  the  Nile  at  all  seasons.  When  the  river 
is  low,  it  hangs  down  far  below  the  wheel, 
describing  an  oval  figure,  the  bottom  part  of 
which — owing  to  its  distance  from  the  wheel 
— is  propelled  with  but  slight  force  into  the 
water,  and  the  buckets  consequently  bring  up 
but  a  scanty  supply.  A  water-wheel,  turned 
by  an  ox,  supplies  as  copious  a  stream  as 
three  couple  of  men  with  baskets,  and  waters 
seven  feydans*  of  ground.  The  average  crop 
of  corn  is  four  ardebs  per  feydan.  The  price 
of  labour  in  Upper  Egypt  is  twenty  paras  a 
day. 

The  quantity  of  land  susceptible  of  cultiva- 
tion in  Egypt  may  be  computed  at  about  four 
million  five  hundred  thousand  feydans,  but 
not  more  than  three-fourths  of  that  quantity 

*  The  feydan  is  a  measure  nearly  equal  to  one  and  a  quarter 
acre  English. 


166  PRODUCTIONS  OF  EGYPT. 

can  be  reached,  so  as  to  be  rendered  pro- 
ductive, by  the  present  means  of  irrigation. 

The  chief  productions  of  Egypt,  of  the 
vegetable  kind,  are  cotton,  hemp,  flax,  indigo, 
sugar,  rice,  corn,  barley,  millet,  peas  and 
beans,  clover,  tobacco,  and  dates.  Vast 
tracts  of  land  have  been  planted,  in  various 
parts  of  the  country,  with  olive  and  mul- 
berry trees.  The  former  thrive  in  an  extra- 
ordinary way,  producing  fruit  in  the  third 
year.  This  valuable  acquisition  has  been 
gained  from  Candia,  (where,  however,  it  takes 
five  years  to  bear  fruit)  and  Egyptian  oil  will, 
ere  long,  enter  the  European  market  with 
great  advantage.  Rose-water  is  produced  in 
the  Fayoum.  The  silk  of  Egypt  is  on  the 
decline :  principally,  I  should  think,  from  the 
ill-chosen  spots  for  the  plantations  of  mulberry 
trees.  The  mineral  productions  of  Egypt  are 
emeralds,  copper,  silver,  and  other  metals 
(the  mines  of  which  do  not  appear  to  have 
been  worked  since  the  days  of  the  Romans)  ; 
salt,  nitre,  soda,  sal-ammoniac,  &c. 

Besides  the  above  articles  of  produce,  which 


CONSUMERS  OF  THE  PRODUCE.  167 

Egypt  exports  to  a  vast  amount,  may  be 
enumerated  buffalo,  ox,  and  goat  skins. 

A  number  of  very  valuable  articles  pass 
through  Egypt,  in  search  of  a  market,  from 
Nubia  and  Arabia,  such  as  gums,  spices, 
drugs,  ivory,  and  coffee. 

The  principal  consumer  of  Egyptian  pro- 
duce (after  Turkey)  has  hitherto  been  Austria, 
which  took,  some  years  since,  nearly  twice  as 
much  as  England  ;  Austria,  in  return,  sent 
more  than  double  the  amount  of  goods  sup- 
plied by  England;  but  the  trade  with  that 
power  is  on  the  decline,  in  consequence  of 
Syria  now  furnishing  Egypt  with  timber, 
which,  formerly,  was  almost  all  procured  from 
Dalmatia.  In  the  rank  of  consumers,  England 
takes  the  next  place,  followed  very  closely 
by  France  and  Tuscany.  In  supply,  this  last 
named  nation  takes  precedence  of  both  France 
and  England,  and  nearly  furnishes  goods  to 
an  equal  amount  with  Austria. 