

It  has  been  observed  by  a  talented  writer 
on  political  economy,  **  that  all  men  are  by 
nature  disposed  to  idleness  ;  [an  axiom  that 
applies  peculiarly  to  the  ignorant  inhabitant 
oi fertile  Egypt]  and  this  disposition  is  a  great 
obstacle  to  the  pursuit  of  agriculture,  which 
requires  a  considerable  degree  of  foresight 
and  knowledge,  and  a  firm  reliance  on  the 
security  of  property  to  labour  at  one  season, 
in  order  to  reap  the  fruits  at  another.  The 
minds  of  men  should  be  freed  from  the  de- 
grading fetters  of  ignorance,  before  they  can 
reap  advantage  from  personal  emancipation. 
In  all  cases,  we  shall  find  that  gradual  and 
progressive  improvement  is  conducive  to  the 


THE  sultan's  monopolies.  161 

happiness  of  mankind,  whilst  sudden  and 
violent  revolutions  are  always  attended  with 
danger." 

Ignorant,  indolent,  and  distrustful,  as  th^e 
inhabitants  of  Egypt  are,  I  doubt,  therefore, 
whether  the  fellah  would  labour  with  more  zeal 
and  activity  if  the  ground  he  tilled  were  his 
own.  At  this  moment,  being  quite  destitute 
of  property  of  any  sort,  he  is  a  mere  *'  me- 
chanical engine,"  working,  it  is  true,  for  his 
own  subsistence,  but  principally  for  the  benefit 
of  those  who  will  follow. 

Mohammed  Ali  is,  nevertheless,  modifying 
his  system,  according  as  he  sees  his  subjects 
acquire  knowledge  and  throw  off  their  pre- 
judices: and  is  gradually  giving  up  his  mono- 
polies, beginning  with  those  which  bear  most 
heavily  on  the  fellah  population.  Amongst 
that  number,  may  be  enumerated  those  on  the 
sale  (not  export)  of  corn  and  barley — of  oil, 
fowls,  eggs,  and  other  articles  of  produce ; 
on  the  spinning  of  flax  and  manufacture  of 
mats ;  and,  doubtless,  he  will  proceed  in 
liberating  the  inhabitants  from  other  vexa- 

VOL.  11.  M 


162  COPTS  AND  NAZEERS. 

tious  restrictions,  when  he  perceives  that  it 
may  be  done  without  detriment  to  the  finances 
of  the  country,  and  without  the  risk  of  eventu- 
ally proving  injurious  to  their  own  interest. 

The  collection  of  the  revenues  is  still,  in  a 
great  degree,  entrusted  to  the  Copts — the  only 
persons  who  are  at  present  sufficiently  learned 
in  financial  matters  to  undertake  so  compli- 
cated an  affair.  The  Nazeers  are  mere  land- 
stewards  of  the  Viceroy,  who  collect  his  rents 
and  see  that  the  lands  are  cultivated  according 
to  his  directions  ;  he  having,  as  before  stated, 
made  himself  the  proprietor  of  almost  the 
whole  of  Egypt,  The  estates  possessed  by 
various  mosques  have,  however,  in  most  cases, 
been  respected,  and  small  patches  of  ground 
round  the  villages  are  appropriated  to  the 
growth  of  vegetables,  &c.,  for  the  inhabitants, 
amongst  whom  the  rest  of  the  land  is  allotted 
for  cultivation,  in  portions  varying  in  extent 
according  to  their  own  desire,  which,  of 
course,  depends  upon  the  strength  of  their 
families  ;  but  they  have  not  the  option  of  re- 
fusing to  cultivate  any,  nor  of  choosing  the 