

In  a  commercial  point  of  view,  this  barrage 
of  the  Nile  is  objectionable,  by  presenting  a 
fresh  impediment  to  the  navigation  of  the 
stream  between  Cairo  and  the  sea-ports  ;  on 
military  grounds,  by  affording;  terrible  fa- 
cilities   to    an   enemy   for    laying. waste    the 


152  SCHEMES  FOR  RAILROADS. 

country.  The  first  of  these  objections  it  is 
proposed  to  remove — as  far  as  the  trade  with 
Alexandria  is  affected  —  by  making  a  canal 
along  the  left  bank  of  the  Rosetta  branch 
of  the  river,  to  communicate  between  the 
reservoir,  and  the  existing  Mahmoudieh 
Canal. 

The  schemes  for  railroads  (for  any  present 
use  they  will  be  of)  are  yet  more  absurd  than 
this  great  experiment  in  hydraulics.  That 
which  is  about  to  be  laid  down  between  Cairo 
and  Suez  may  hereafter  be  a  profitable  con- 
cern, but  at  this  moment  it  occasions  a  use- 
less outlay  of  money,  that  might  be  much 
more  beneficially  employed. 

To  Egypt,  this  rail  communication  offers 
no  advantages  at  all  likely  to  compensate  for 
the  immense  expense  incurred  in  its  construc- 
tion ;  for  the  trade  between  Egypt  and  Arabia 
is  very  trifling,  and,  whilst  the  scheme  of 
steaming  on  the  Euphrates  occupies  the  at- 
tention of  the  British  government,  our  inter- 
course with  India  by  this  much  shorter  route 
is   neglected,   which    may   eventually    cause 


GOVERNMENT  OF  EGYPT.  153 

Mohammed  Ali  to  abandon  his  expensive  en- 
terprise. 

He  has  already  (most  wisely)  given  up  the 
projected  line  of  railroad  from  Cairo  across 
the  desert  to  Alexandria,  and  indeed  the  only 
railway  that  has  yet  been  completed  in  this 
country  is  one  from  the  quarries  of  the  Mo- 
kattan  Hill  to  Boulak,  a  distance  of  but  a  few 
miles.  This  has  been  laid  down  at  the  urgent 
request  of  the  "  Pere  enfantin,''  to  facilitate 
the  transport  of  building  stone  for  the  com- 
pletion of  his  benign  undertaking  of  deluging 
the  Delta. 

In  conclusion,  I  may  say  of  the  government 
of  Egypt,  that  it  is  efficient  without  being 
tyrannical,  which  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the 
small  amount  of  crime.  Murders  and  high- 
way robberies  are  unheard  of,  and  more  thefts 
are  committed  amongst  the  Frank  population 
of  Alexandria,  than  in  the  whole  of  the  rest 
of  the  country. 

The  local  authorities  experience  but  little 
difficulty  in  enforcing  obedience  to  the  laws  ; 
but  when,  as  sometimes  will  happen,  a  contu- 


154  DESPOTIC  GOVERNMENT, 

macious  resistance  to  the  conscription  mani- 
fests itself,  the  troops  are  called  upon  to  aid 
in  bringing  the  refractory  Fellahs  to  order. 
This  is  generally  effected  without  bloodshed, 
and  without  exposing  the  soldiers  to  a  shower 
of  abuse  and  brickbats,  until  some  aged 
Sheik  has  been  found,  who  can  and  will  read 
a  riot  firman.  Neither  is  the  Bim  bashee,  or 
other  officer  in  command,  deterred  from,  or 
delayed  in,  doing  his  duty  when  called  upon, 
by  having  to  consider  how  the  Cadee  General's 
opinion  bears  upon  the  case,  and  whether  he 
may  not  be  bastinadoed  for  doing  what  he  is 
taught  to  consider  the  first  duty  of  a  Mussul- 
man— obeying  his  orders. 