

VOL.   II.  N 


178  HABITS  OF  THE  ARABS. 

vernor  of  a  province  to  the  common  field-la- 
bourer. 

The  food  of  the  fellah  is  coarse,  and  his 
mode  of  eating  as  well  as  cooking  it  is  dis- 
gusting to  persons  of  cleanly  habits,  which 
occasions  his  being  charged  with  the  vice  of 
gluttony ;  but  it  is  the  manner  of  eating 
rather  than  the  quantity  he  eats  that  has 
given  rise  to  this  accusation.  He  has  his 
meals  as  regularly  three  times  a  day  as  any 
field-labourer  in  Christendom,  but  place  the 
Arab's  simple  and  quickly  despatched  meal 
by  the  side  of  an  English  peasant's  solid  fare, 
and  it  sinks  into  insignificance.  All  the  Arab 
race  are  addicted  to  the  use  of  the  pipe,  and 
to  this  pernicious  habit  may  be  traced  the 
origin  of  most  of  their  vices,  and  a  great  por- 
tion of  their  misery. 

The  Fellah's  clothing,  in  the  v/inter  season, 
is  quite  sufficient  for  the  mild  climate  in 
wdiich  he  lives,  whilst,  in  summer,  any  more 
than  what  decency  requires  would  be  irksome 
to  work  under.  His  habitation  is  certainly  as 
good  as  the  cabin  of  the  Irish  peasant — with- 


CHARITABLE  TURKS.  179 

out  taking  the  difference  of  climate  into  the 
comparison  —  of  furnishing  it,  he  has  no  no- 
tion— a  mattress  stuffed  with  cotton  or  wool, 
a  wooden  bowl  to  contain  the  meal  of  the 
family  circle,  and  an  earthen  jug  for  its 
beverage  of  milk  or  Nile  water,  are  all  the 
necessaries  he  possesses  :  a  carpet  and  divan, 
a  low  circular  metal  table,  and  coffee  cups, 
are  luxuries  to  be  met  with  only  in  the  dwel- 
ling of  a  Sheik  el  belled. 

The  lower  orders  of  the  population  of 
Egypt  are  not  encouraged  by  any  faulty  sys- 
tem of  poor  laws,  to  give  way  to  habits  of 
extravagance,  improvidence,  and  profligacy. 
Mendicity  is  permitted,  and  consequently 
seen,  in  all  its  disgusting  nakedness,  uncon- 
cealed by  the  cloaks  of  poor-houses,  peniten- 
tiaries, and  houses  of  correction.  The  Turks, 
as  well  as  the  wealthy  Arabs,  are  extremely 
charitable,  and  the  Mosques  also  relieve  an 
immense  number  of  those  whom  actual  mis- 
fortune has  driven  to  seek  a  subsistence  in 
the  streets.  At  Cairo,  one  Mosque  alone  sup- 
ports eight  thousand  blind. 

N  2 


180  FAILURE  OF  THE  NILE. 

The  establishment  of  factories  in  Egypt,  if 
it  has  done  no  other  good,  has  considerably 
alleviated  the  condition  of  the  lower  orders, 
by  giving  employment  to  many,  (children  as 
well  as  adults)  who  formerly  depended  on  a 
precarious  agriculture  for  their  subsistence ; 
for  it  not  unfrequently  happened,  in  times 
past,  that  the  able-bodied  population  of  a 
whole  district — by  the  failure  of  the  Nile  to 
fertilize  their  grounds — could  not  find  employ- 
ment, and  required  relief  as  much  as  those 
who  were  incapacitated  from  working  by  sick- 
ness, old  age,  or  bodily  infirmities.  To  such, 
relief  could  be  afforded  but  in  two  ways,  either 
gratuitously,  or  in  exchange  for  labour. 