


190  DIFFUSION  OF  KNOWLEDGE. 

up  any  other  equally  absurd  prejudices,  can 
make  him  a  worse  man,  or  is  likely  to  have  a 
deteriorating  effect  upon  the  Egyptians  as  a 
nation.  The  Mohammedan  Protestantism, 
(if  I  may  be  allowed  so  to  call  it)  that  has 
been  introduced,  has,  on  the  contrary,  given 
birth  to  a  social  system,  which  tends  to  bind 
a  people  together  more  firmly  than  mere  ac- 
cordance in  religious  opinions.  The  finer 
feelings  of  human  nature — affection  for  their 
kindred,  friendship,  patriotism,  (which  may 
be  said  to  have  been  hitherto  unheard  of  in 
the  annals  of  Islamism,)  are  beginning  to  find 
a  place  in  the  breasts  of  the  people  of  Egypt 
— 1  myself  have  witnessed  repeated  instances 
of  those  virtues. 

At  the  same  time,  a  wide  and  general 
stream  of  knowledge  is  spreading  over  the 
whole  land,  sapping  to  the  very  foundation 
the  already  crumbling  fabric  of  Mohammed. 
Every  fresh  contact  with  the  more  enlight- 

the  Levantine's  pork^  and  the  complaint  was  dismissed.  The  tri- 
umphant baker  now  professes  to  roast  "  Frank  and  other  meats/'  and 
has  had  a  thriving  bnsiness  ever  since  the  wise  decision  of  the  judnje 
ill  his  favour. 


DIFFUSION  OF  KNOWLEDGE.  191 

ened  European  removes  from  the  mind  of  the 
Egyptian  some  one  of  the  precepts  inculcated 
by  the  Koran.  He  already  admits  the  infi- 
nitely superior  knowledge  of  the  Christian  in 
every  branch  of  science,  and,  such  being  the 
case,  it  cannot  but  be  supposed  that  ulti- 
mately his  eyes  may  be  opened  also  to  the 
truths  of  our  holy  religion. 

I  do  not  for  one  moment  mean  to  assert, 
that  Mohammed  Ali  has  any  such  ulterior 
object  in  view ;  but  I  do  fully  and  faithfully 
give  him  credit  for  wishing  to  raise  the  peo- 
ple of  Egypt  from  the  degraded  rank  they 
have  for  years  held  in  the  scale  of  nations, 
and  cannot  join  in  the  abuse  of  an  "  iron 
despotism,"  which,  whilst  it  promotes  and 
causes  a  diffusion  of  knowledge  that  wars 
against  the  religious  prejudices  of  the  Egyp- 
tians, benefits  the  country  in  various  other 
ways.  To  it,  the  country  is  indebted  for  the 
adoption  of  quarantine  restrictions,  which, 
though  they  have  not  afforded  it  perfect  im- 
munity from  the  plague,  have  certainly  on 
several  occasions  prevented  its  spread,  and  in 


192  PROHIBITION  OF  SMOKING. 

others  mitigated  its  direful  ravages.  It  is  this 
despotism  which,  by  confining  the  youths 
within  the  walls  of  their  colleges,  gives  a 
check  to  the  early  marriages,  that  tend  to 
unfit  them  for  all  active  employments ;  and, 
by  prohibiting  the  use  of  the  pipe  at  these 
public  seminaries,  takes  the  first  step  towards 
eradicating  this  predominant  vice  of  Moham- 
medanism. * 