


INMATES  OF  THE  HAREEMS.  183 

they  are  of  all  education,  they  possibly  may 
not  find  their  confinement  very  irksome.  Their 
acquirements  amount  to  a  knowledge  of  the 
arts  of  embroidery,  confectionary,  and  sham- 
pooing-; to  which  some  few  add  the  accom- 
plishments of  music,  dancing,  and  smoking. 
They  make  themselves  as  captivating  as  pos- 
sible, by  tinging  their  nails  and  fingers  with 
hennah,  and  colouring  the  insides  of  their 
eye-lids  with  a  dark  poivder,  which  they 
doubtless  suppose  makes  their  eyes  sJioot 
stronger.  They  are  extremely  vain  of  show- 
ing their  wardrobes,  and  curious  to  examine 
the  costume  of  the  Frank  ladies,  who  are  oc- 
casionally permitted  to  visit  them.  Of  course, 
the  monotony  of  their  lives  is  broken  by  nu- 
merous little  bickerings  and  jealousies,  and 
not  unfrequently  by  amatory  intrigues.  The 
wives  of  the  fellahs  are  not  subjected  to  the 
restraint  of  the  hareem ;  they  work  in  the 
fields  with  their  lords  and  masters  ;  and,  when 
they  are  near,  hide  their  faces  very  scrupu- 
lously from  Christian  eyes.  As  one  ascends 
the  Nile,  this  mock  modesty  wears  off. 


184         IGNORANCE  OF  THE  ARABS. 

Their  dress  has  already  been  described, 
and  I  need  only  further  remark  of  it,  that,  as 
one  approaches  the  tropic,  it  diminishes  in 
quantity  as  one  would  wish  it  to  increase, 
until  at  length  a  leather  band  round  the  waist 
is  the  only  screen  that  conceals  the  sex  of  the 
wearer,  leaving  all  their  natural  deformities 
exposed  to  view. 

Amongst  such  of  the  Arabs  as  are  in  easy 
circumstances  —  particularly  the  young  men 
—  the  eccentricities  of  dandyism  are  by  no 
means  unknown  or  uncultivated,  and  the 
Nizam  dress  (that  worn  by  the  new  troops)  is 
becoming  very  fashionable,  admitting,  as  it 
does,  of  great  latitude  in  cut,  colour,  and  en- 
richments. 

As  might  be  expected  in  a  country  so  long 
under  the  dominion  of  Turks,  the  Arab  po- 
pulation of  Egypt  was  in  the  most  profound 
ignorance,  until  Mohammed  Ali,  by  establish- 
ing schools  at  Cairo,  Boulak,  and  other  places, 
set  an  example  that  has  been  generally  fol- 
lowed in  all  the  large  towns.  One,  which  I 
visited  at  Kheneh,  was  very  numerously  at- 


EXTENT  OF  EDUCATION.  185 

tended,  and  contained  some  very  promising 
scholars. 

The  education  at  these  schools  extends 
only  to  reading  and  writing  in  Arabic,  and 
arithmetic ;  but  an  almost  insuperable  objec- 
tion to  a  finished  education  in  any  Moham- 
medan State  is  the  early  age  at  which  mar- 
riages are  contracted  : — a  father  provides  a 
wife  for  his  son,  when  he  ought  to  be  still  at 
school;  so  that  the  youths  themselves  have 
the  cares  and  distractions  of  a  family  upon 
them,  ere  they  are  of  an  age  to  be  removed 
from  under  the  rod  of  the  schoolmaster  ; — 
and,  it  may  be  here  observed,  that  precocity 
of  intellect  is  by  no  means  remarkable 
amongst  the  Arabs,  so  that  their  education 
cannot  commence  at  an  earlier  age  than  in 
more  northern  climates. 