

It  has  been  stated  as  an  objection  to  Egypt 
ever  becoming  a  powerful  nation,  that  the 
Mussulman  fanaticism  of  its  inhabitants  has 
passed  away,  and  been  succeeded  by  a  laxity 
of  religious  feeling,  amounting  in  many  cases 
to  absolute  atheism  ;  that  the  only  bond  of 
union  by  which  the  followers  of  Islamism  were 
linked  together,  having  thus  been  burst 
asunder,  without  any  other  system  of  theology 
having  been  substituted  for  it,  Egypt  must 
in  a  short  time  fall  to  pieces. 

It  is  certainly  true,  that  the  Egyptian 
Fellah  is  a  less  rigid  observer  of  all  the  prac- 
tices prescribed  for  the  faithful  followers  of 
Mohammed,  than  either  the  Turk,  Persian, 
or  Moor  of  Western  Africa ;  yet  I  do  not  see 
that,  by  clothing  himself  in  a  different  raiment 
from  that  of  his  father,  allowing  his  wife  or 


MUSSULMAN  BAKER.  189 

daughters  to  go  at  large,   his  eating  food, 
hitherto  considered  unclean*,  or  his  giving 

•  A  ridiculous  instance  of  the  change  effected  in  pubhc  opinion  of 
late  occurred  a  short  time  previously  to  my  arrival  at  the  Egyptian 
capital :  a  Levantine  tradesman  of  Cairo,  wishing,  probably,  to  do 
honour  to  his  patron  St.  Anthony,  and  at  the  same  time  give  his 
friends  a  treat,  took  a  joint  of  pork  to  be  cooked  at  a  Mohammedan 
bakehouse.  The  backsliding  baker  of  the  faithful  made  no  scruple 
in  admitting  the  unclean  flesh  to  cook  in  company  with  orthodox 
meats,  but  one  of  his  customers — a  more  rigid  observer  of  the  Koran 
— on  coming  for  his  bit  of  buffalo,  discovered  it  with  horror,  baking 
alongside  the  smoking  ribs  and  crackling  skin  of  the  abominated 
beast,  and  raised  an  outcry  against  the  offending  baker,  who  was 
instantly  dragged  before  Habib  Effendi  (a  sort  of  sitting  Magistrate 
of  the  Egyptian  metropolis)  and  ordered  to  explain  forthwith  his 
reason  for  daring  thus  to  set  the  mandates  of  the  Prophet  at  de- 
fiance. "  Truly,"  said  the  trembling  culprit,  "  I  have  lately  wit- 
nessed such  changes  in  Egypt,  that  I  thought  I  was  committing  no 
sin.  Do  I  not  daily  see  Moslim  soldiers  equipped  as  Franks  ?  Beys, 
half-dressed  as  Franks  ?  Women  shamelessly  exposing  their  faces 
like  Franks  ?  Frank  dishes  eaten — nay,  even  Frank  wines  drank  ? 
Could  I,  with  such  sights  before  my  eyes,  suppose  there  was  any  sin 
in  allowing  a  piece  of  Frank  pork  to  bake  quietly  by  the  side  of  Mus- 
sulmanish  meats  ?" — adding  that,  in  what  he  had  done,  he  had,  in  fact, 
but  acted  up  to  the  "  spirit  of  the  age."  The  Mohammedan  sage 
was  a  little  staggered ;  he  admitted,  however  true  all  that  had  been 
stated  might  be,  (and  he  regretted  to  say  that  there  was  much  in 
the  example  of  some  who  should  know  better,  to  lead  away  ignorant 
men  like  the  culprit,)  yet  he  was  placed  there  to  see  that  all  the 
faithful  inhabitants  of  Cairo  acted  up  to  the  spirit  of  the  Koran — 
that  pork  was  pork ;  and  the  precepts  of  the  Prophet  must  be  obeyed, 
A  quibbling  Moolah  here  observed  thatyire  was  a  puiifier  of  all  things 
—  upon  which,  after  a  consultation,  it  was  decided  that  no  harm 
could  have  been  done  to  the  other  meats  in  the  oven,  bv  the  steam  of 