


198  TACT  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL 

indignant  soldiers  back  their  pistols  and  pa- 
pouches,  and  allowing'  them  to  domineer,  as 
before,  over  ail  the  other  classes  of  his  unof- 
fending subjects. 

Mohammed  All's  eyes  were  now,  however, 
opened  to  the  error  he  had  committed ;  and, 
with  Machiavellian  tact,  he  adopted  a  plan, 
which,  whilst  it  unobtrusively  accomplished 
his  long  cherished  purpose,  crushed,  at  the 
same  time,  the  very  power  that  had  thus,  at 
the  commencement,  successfully  opposed  it. 
These  same  refractory  Janizaries  were  em- 
ployed to  compel  a  more  pliant  race  to  learn 
the  tactics,  and  submit  to  the  discipline  which 
they  themselves  despised.  Blinded  by  their 
self-sufficiency,  they,  not  till  it  was  too  late, 
discovered  that  they  had  given  away  their 
power  ;  that  the  men  on  whom  they  had  look- 
ed with  contempt  were  become  their  masters  ; 
and  having,  at  the  same  time,  become  sen- 
sible of  the  advantage  they  had  gained  by 
the  change,  v/ere  determined  to  retain  it. 

The  first  step  towards  effecting  this  change 
had  been  the  getting  gradually  rid  of  the  un- 


WAR  WITH  THE  WAIIABEES.  199 

disciplined  hordes,  that  composed  the  existing 
army ;  and  Fortune  favoured  Mohammed  Ali 
with  an  exceiient  opportunity  for  so  doing, 
the  Sultan  having'  saddled  upon  him  the 
charge  of  carrying  on  the  war  against  the 
Wahabees. 

The  wily  Pasha  was  well  aware  that  this 
distinguished  mark  of  favour  was  bestowed 
much  less  with  the  view  of  putting  down  the 
schismatic  Arabs  than  with  that  of  crippling 
his  own  growing  power.  He  had  conse- 
quently, of  late  years,  carried  on  the  war  very 
supinely :  so  much  so,  indeed,  that  the  Waha- 
bees had  at  one  time  even  possessed  them- 
selves of  Jedda,  Mekka,  and  Medina ;  and,  at 
about  the  period  of  the  revolt  of  the  Janiza- 
ries at  Cairo,  had  obtained  some  marked  suc- 
cesses over  the  Pasha's  army  in  the  field: 
which,  the  year  following,  had  also  to  regret 
the  loss  of  its  young  General,  Toussoun 
Pasha,  (Mohammed  Ali's  third  son),  who  fell 
a  victim  to  the  plague. 

Mohammed  Ali,  now,  in  good  earnest,  set 
about  executing  the  pressing  orders  of  the 


200  MEKKA  PLACED  IN  SECURITY. 

Porte.  To  redeem  the  character  of  the  sol- 
diers of  the  true  faith,*  and  preserve  the  holy 
city  from  profanation,  were  strong  incentives 
to  his  fanatic  troops  to  embark  wilhngly  in 
the  enterprize,  and  were  excellent  pretexts 
with  him  for  the  adoption  of  energetic  mea- 
sures ;  but  the  most  potent  of  all  the  reasons 
that  actuated  him  —  though  the  least  appa- 
rent—  was  policy.  Ibrahim  Pasha  was  ac- 
cordingly despatched  to  the  Edjaz,  late  in 
the  year  1816,  with  a  large  force;  in  which, 
as  may  easily  be  imagined,  most  of  the  Ar- 
nauts  were  incorporated,  who  had  rendered 
themselves  conspicuous  by  their  opposition 
to  Mohammed  All's  innovations. 