

The  Levantines — under  which  term  may  be 
classed  Syrians,  Armenians,  and  Greeks  — 
amount  to  about  thirty  thousand :  they  em- 
ploy themselves  principally  in  trade  —  as  in- 
terpreters, &c.  The  Georgians,  Circassians, 
and  other  female  and  neuter  inmates  of  the 
hareems,  may  be  calculated  at  twenty-five 
thousand ;  the  Franks  at  six  thousand,  and 
Jews  at  twenty  thousand. 

The  character  of  the  native  Egyptian,  or 
fellah,  has  already  been  given  in  treating  of 
the  Delta,  where  certainly  the  best  specimen 


176  THE  NATIVE  FELLAHS. 

of  the  genus  is  to  be  met  with.  In  ascending 
the  Nile,  he  descends  in  the  scale  of  humanity 
— gradually  changing  in  colour,  features,  and 
make,  until  at  length  all  trace  of  Arab  blood 
is  lost.  The  change  in  his  moral  qualities 
keeping  pace  with  that  of  his  physical,  the 
condition  of  the  inhabitant  of  the  Saide  is 
naturally  much  worse  than  that  of  the  fellah 
of  the  Delta.  Throughout  Egypt,  the  state 
of  the  lower  orders  is,  according  to  our  notion, 
very  wretched ;  although,  comparing  their 
condition  with  that  of  the  corresponding  class 
in  some  countries  that  can  boast  of  a  much 
greater  degree  of  civilization,  and  a  more 
liberal  form  of  government,  I  do  not  see  that 
the  "  starving  fellah"  of  Egypt  is  more  en- 
titled to  pity  than  the  European  pauper,  who 
begs  his  bread  from  door  to  door ;  nor  that  the 
government  of  Mohammed  Ali  is  deserving  of 
abuse,  whilst  that  of  the  Swiss  Cantons  is 
lauded  to  the  skies.  We  see  daily  the  persons 
of  the  lower  orders  of  many  European  na- 
tions clothed  in  rags,  and  swarming  with  dis- 
gusting vermin  :  a  sight  which,  whilst  it  makes 


CONDITION  OF  THE  LOWER  CLASSES.  177 

a  Frenchman  or  an  Englishman  shudder, 
merely  produces  a  shrug  of  the  shoulders  from 
a  Neapolitan  or  a  Portuguese.  The  Arab 
finds  his  mud  habitation,  his  bare  feet,  coarse 
bread,  and  fried  beans,  neither  disagreeable 
nor  unpalatable ;  and,  rather  than  work  harder 
to  procure  more  comforts,  he  would  be  con- 
tented to  live  on  in  the  same  miserable  way 
to  the  last  day  of  his  existence.  So  likewise 
the  Neapolitan  or  Portuguese  rests  perfectly 
satisfied  with  the  scanty  pittance  that  will 
produce  him  his  daily  allowance  of  maccaroni 
or  baccalao ;  and  submits  to  the  irritating 
poll-tax  levied  on  his  indolence,  rather  than 
work  a  little  harder  to  earn  the  price  of  better 
food  and  a  hair-comb. 

The  Arabs  are  all  beggars,  but  this  arises 
not  from  their  being  all  in  want,  but  from 
their  being  all  covetous,  and  not  deterred  by 
a  feeling  of  shame  from  asking  for  anything 
they  think  you  are  possessed  of — particu- 
larly if,  by  your  looks,  they  imagine  their 
demand  is  likely  to  be  complied  with.  This 
applies  to  the  whole  Arab  race,  from  the  go- 