

VOL.   II.  O 


194  RESULT  OF  CIVILIZATION. 

new  order  of  things  tends  to  civilize  tlie  conn- 
try,  and  civilization  produces  happiness,  then 
has  Mohammed  Ali  been  a  benefactor  to 
Egypt. 


EGYPTIAN  ARMY.  J95 


CHAPTER  VII. 

First  Attempt  of  Mohammed  Ali  to  Organize  the  Array  of  Egypt  on 
the  European  Model  —  Revolt  of  the  Troops — War  with  the  Wa- 
habees  —  Expedition  to  Senaar  —  Formation  of  the  Nizara,  and 
Dispersion  of  the  Janizaries  and  Albanians — Renewal  of  Hostili- 
ties with  the  Wahabees — Excellent  Conduct  of  the  new  Levies — 
War  in  the  Morea  —  Uninterrupted  Success  of  the  Arab  Army — 
Affair  of  Mylos  —  Siege  of  Missolonghi — War  in  Syria — Strength 
and  Composition  of  the  Present  Egyptian  Army — Pay  —  Rations 
— Conscription  —  Good  Qualities  of  the  Fellah  —  Dress  of  the 
Troops  —  Remarks  on  the  Efficiency  of  the  Army,  &c. — Sulieman 
Pasha. 

Mohammed  Ah  judged  correctly  in  suppos- 
ing that  by  compulsion  only  could  a  new 
order  of  things  be  introduced  into  a  country, 
which,  though  degraded  to  the  lowest  depth 
of  misery  and  ignorance,  and  long  accus- 
tomed to  be  governed  with  the  most  despotic 
sway,  was,  nevertheless,  imbued  with  nine 
centuries  of  religious  prejudices,  all  opposed 
to  innovation.    He  erred,  however,  in  the  out- 

o  2 


196  CHARACTER  OF  THE  SOLDIERS. 

set,  by  imagining  that  the  lever,  by  the  help 
of  which  he  trusted  to  overturn  these  ob- 
stacles, could  be  itself  re-modelled.  The  tur- 
bulent Turks  and  Arnauts  composing  the 
army  that  had  raised  him  to  the  Pashalic  of 
Egypt,  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  Sultan, 
were  prepared  to  go  any  lengths  to  maintain 
him  in  his  independence  of  the  Porte;  but 
they  had  been  too  long  accustomed  to  look 
upon  the  natives  of  the  soil  as  their  slaves, 
and  to  regard  the  Pasha  himself,  indeed,  as  a 
mere  instrument  to  work  their  will,  during 
their  pleasure ;  to  brook  being  subjected  to 
any  rules  of  discipline  that  trenched  upon 
their  long  abused  prerogatives. 

Possessed,  moreover,  with  a  Greco-Mussul- 
man idea  of  their  being  quite  able  to  cope 
with  the  best  troops  in  Christendom,  these 
lawless  soldiers  were  naturally  averse  to  sub- 
mit to  the  drudgery  of  a  system,  which — set- 
ting prejudices  aside  —  they  conceived  their 
superior  valour  placed  them  above  the  neces- 
sity of  learning ;  and,  accordingly,  Moham- 
med Ali's  order  for  organizing  his  army  on 


EUROPEAN  SYSTEM.  197 

the  European  model  was  received  with  gene- 
ral and  undisguised  dissatisfaction.  This  oc- 
curred in  1815. 

The  Pasha's  popularity  with  the  troops  — 
founded  on  his  oft  proved  courage  and  libe- 
rality—  induced  them,  however,  to  give  his 
plan  a  trial,  and  the  first  orders  were  sullenly 
obeyed.  Mohammed  Ali,  regardless  of  the 
clouded  brows  of  his  soldiery,  persisted  in 
the  attempt  —  perhaps  he  pushed  on  his  va- 
rious innovations  too  rapidly,  (it  is  his  pre- 
vailing fault),  and  thereby  hurried  on  the 
crisis  ;  but,  under  any  circumstances,  I  doubt 
much,  whether  the  men  with  whom  he  had  to 
deal  could  ever  have  been  rendered  efficient 
for  his  purpose.  —  Men  who  looked  with  con- 
tempt on  a  bayonet  as  compared  with  a  yata- 
gan,  and  who  for  six  hours  a  day  were  re- 
quired to  submit  to  the  privation  of  their 
pipes,  could  be  little  expected  to  find  pleasure 
in  musket  exercise,  and  the  "  goose  step." 
The  result  was,  that  the  Pasha's  obstinacy 
produced  a  revolt,  which  nearly  cost  him  his 
life ;  and  was  appeased  only  by  giving  the 