

In  almost  any  other  country  than  Egypt,  the 
evil  resulting  from  the  uncertainty  in  the  cul- 
tivation of  their  fields  could  not  be  so  much  felt 
by  the  inhabitants  ;  and  if  it  were  experienced, 
they  would  seek,  and  be  sure  to  find,  employ- 
ment elsewhere  ;  so  that  the  price  of  labour 
only  would  be  effected  by  it,  and  that  gejie- 
rally,  and,  therefore,  in  but  a  slight  degree  : 
now,  in  Egypt — besides  that  the  inhabitants 


ESTABLISHMENT  OF  MANUFACTORIES.  181 

are  mere  serfs,  to  whom  the  land  is  portioned 
out  for  cultivation,  and  who  receive  a  tithe 
on  the  produce  in  payment  of  their  work — 
such  a  mode  of  equalizing  and  lowering  the 
price  of  labour  could  not  be  brought  into 
practice,  even  if  it  were  understood  ;  for  the 
ground  would  not  receive  any  after-benefit 
by  the  additional  number  of  cultivators  em- 
ployed upon  it ;  the  crop  produced  would  not 
be  increased  by  their  assistance ;  and,  as  the 
quantity  that  would  feed  ten  labourers  would 
not  satisfy  twelve,  the  loss  would  fall  entirely 
upon  the  landholder.  Therefore,  though  the  es- 
tablishment of  manufactories,  &c.  has  thrown 
large  tracts  of  laud  per maiiently  out  of  cultiva- 
tion, by  giving  employment  to  the  hands  that 
formerly  occasionally  tilled  them,  yet,  until 
machinery  supersedes  human  labour,  no  injury 
will  have  been  thereby  done  to  the  peasant.  On 
the  contrary,  he  has  been  relieved  from  the 
risk  of  starvation,  attendant  on  this  periodical 
dearth  ;  and  spared  the  misery  of  witnessing 
the  sufferings  of  his  family,  struggling  against 
the  various  endemic  diseases  generated  by  it. 


J82  POLYGAMY  PERMITTED. 

By  the  time  machinery  can  be  worked  in 
Egypt,  so  as  to  produce  goods  at  a  cheaper 
rate  than  by  manual  labour,  (which  must  be 
the  case  as  knowledge  spreads,  and  the  price 
of  human  labour  increases),  then  it  may  be 
expected  that  improved  means  of  irrigation 
will  also  have  been  adopted,  to  enable  the 
Fellah  to  return — with  a  certainty  of  gaining 
his  livelihood — to  his  original  and  destined 
occupation. 

The  Arabs,  though  permitted  by  their  re- 
ligion to  have  four  wives,  seldom  possess 
more  than  two,  and,  indeed,  (as  they  must  be 
in  "  comfortable  circumstances  "  to  support 
even  that  number,)  most  of  them  are  obliged 
— like  hapless  Christians — to  be  content  with 
one.  A  very  small  stock  of  worldly  goods 
enables  them,  however,  to  make  a  settlement 
— the  moderate  sum  of  three  hundred  piastres 
being  considered  quite  sufficient  to  set  up  an 
establishment.  Concubines  are  maintained 
only  by  the  rich. 

The  inmates  of  the  hareems  describe  their 
lives  as  being  very  happy,  and,  deprived  as 