

The  arts  and  sciences,  of  which  Egypt 
"claims  the  honour  of  having  been  the  cradle, 
(though  she  certainly  never  brought  any  to 
maturity,)  are  in  the  same  mummy  state  as 
the  bodies  of  the  philosophers  and  savans 
that   formerly  cultivated   them.     All   know- 


186  SONGS  OF  THE  ARABS. 

ledge  of  astronomy,  chemistry,  medicine, 
sculpture,  and  painting,  is  quite  lost.  Arab 
music  is  mere  noise,  without  the  slightest  pre- 
tensions to  harmony  ;  and  obtains  favour  in 
Egyptian  ears  in  proportion  to  the  din  and 
discord  produced.  The  common  instruments 
in  use  amongst  the  Fellahs  are  the  reed  pipe, 
and  a  kind  of  drum,  or  tambourine,  made  of 
an  earthenware  pot,  covered  with  a  sheep- 
skin, on  which  they  thrum  with  their  hands 
most  unmercifully  and  unceasingly.  There 
are,  also,  several  kinds  of  stringed  instru- 
ments, of  the  lyre  and  guitar  kind  ;  but  they 
are  seldom  heard  outside  the  walls  of  the 
hareems. 

The  songs  of  the  Arabs  are  monotonous 
ditties,  set  to  the  simplest  airs.  The  awali 
and  dancing  girls  usually  accompany  their 
voices  by  castanets.  The  boatmen  on  the 
Nile  always  have  recourse  to  singing,  when 
any  extraordinary  exertion  is  required  of 
them  ;  and  the  buffo  of  the  crew  improvises 
on  any  subject  that  suggests  itself,  connected 
with  the  voyage  or  the  passengers,  his  com- 


FUNERAL  CEREMONIES.  18/ 

panions  joining*  in  chorus,  and  generally  ap- 
pearing to  derive  great  amusement  from  the 
wit  of  their  leader — sometimes,  he  encourages 
them  by  a  noise  resembling  the  neighmg  of  a 
horse,  which  I  observed  always  gave  the  boat 
additional  way.  I  cannot  convey  a  better 
idea  of  what  the  Arabs  consider  music,  than 
by  repeating  a  description  with  which  our 
worthy  consular  agent  at  Suez  favoured  me, 
of  the  sufferings  of  his  family,  under  the 
pangs  of  cholera — after  imitating,  in  a  kind 
of  cadenza,  all  the  varieties  of  moans,  groans, 
shrieks,  and  other  disagreeable  sounds,  inci- 
dental to  the  complaint — from  the  sharp  and 
piercing  cry  of  his  young  children,  to  the  low 
grunt  of  his  aged  mother — he  concluded  by 
saying  that,  in  fact,  "  it  was  just  like  music." 
The  ceremony  of  mourning  on  the  death  of 
a  near  relative  continues  to  be  practised  by 
almost  all  the  different  species  of  inhabitants 
of  Egypt,  with  all  the  curious  peculiarities 
described  by  Herodotus.  The  females  of  the 
family  bewail  their  loss  with  loud  cries,  beat- 
ing  their    breasts,    and   throwing   dirt   and 


188  MUSSULMAN  FANATICISM. 

ashes  against  the  walls,  &c. — but,  as  there 
needs  must  be  a  turn  to  this  extravagant 
effort  to  be  mournful,  after  a  certain  lapse  of 
time,  persons  are  hired  to  continue  the  lamen- 
tations, until  the  body  of  the  deceased  is 
committed  to  the  earth. 