

*  Nothing  tends  so  much  as  the  pernicious  and  universal  habit  of 
smoking  to  retard  all  improvement  amongst  the  nations  of  the  East, 
producing  habitual  indolence,  and  occasioning  an  irreparable  loss  of 
time — an  instance  I  witnessed  of  this,  though  trifling  as  to  its  con- 
sequences, is  laughable  enough  to  be  recorded. 

Having  expressed  a  wish  to  be  present  at  the  operation  of  casting 
at  the  great  foundry  of  Boulak,  Mr.  Galloway  obhgingly  sent  one 
morning  to  acquaint  me  that  a  grand  exhibition  was  to  take  place 
there  at  mid-day,  under  the  personal  superintendence  of  Athem 
Bey,  one  of  the  first  oiBcers  of  state.  I  accordingly  proceeded 
at  the  hour  appointed  to  witness  the  operation.  As  might  be  ex- 
pected, the  heat  was  overpowering ;  for,  besides  six  large  smelting 
furnaces,  and  the  fire  and  boilers  of  a  steam-engine,  we  were  in  the 
month  of  May.  Despite,  however,  the  heat,  smoke,  and  coal-dust, 
unconscious  of  the  din  of  voices,  hammers,  and  bellows,  there  lay 
extended  at  full  length  on  a  sofa,  a  fat,  swarthy,  sleeping  lump  of 
human  flesh,  which  I  expected  every  moment  to  see  run  melting 
into  the  channels  laid  down  for  casting  ship's  ballast.  A  host  of 
secretaries,  chiboukdgees,  and  cafedgees,  with  their  respective  im- 
plements of  office,  were  in  attendance,  and  immediately  held  a  con- 
sultation as  to  the  propriety  of  awakening  the  great  man ;  for  this 


THE  ARAB  FELLAHS.  ]<)3 

By  Mohammed  All's  tyranny,  the  Arab  fel- 
lahs— considered  but  a  short  time  since  fit 
only  to  direct  the  ox  that  drew  their  plough, 
or  turned  their  water-wheel — have  been  raised 
to  fill  offices  of  trust  in  every  branch  of  the 
administration  of  their  country.  If  they  are 
now  compelled  to  cultivate  eight  times  the 
quantity  of  land  beyond  what  is  necessary  for 
their  own  subsistence ;  to  excavate  canals, 
construct  roads,  bridges,  and  other  public 
works ;  to  receive  instruction  in  the  arts  and 
sciences  as  taught  in  the  various  arsenals, 
manufactories,  schools,  and  colleges,  that  have 
been  established ;  and,  finally,  to  serve  in  the 
military  service,  by  which  the  whole  system 
is  upheld  ;  it  is  by  a  tyranny  that  must  even- 
tually improve  their  condition,  by  invigorat- 
ing their  minds  as  well  as  bodies :  and,  if  this 


personage  was  no  other  than  Athem  Bey  himself,  a  general  of  artil- 
lery, chief  engineer,  and  superintendent  of  all  the  scientific  establish- 
ments of  Egypt ;  the  greatest  philosopher  and  mathematician  of  the 
universe,  and  looked  upon  as  a  kind  of  Mohammedan  Mecaenas ! 
What  a  picture  for  the  pencil  of  Crnikshank  !  He  had  smoked  him- 
self to  sleep,  and  the  whole  operation  that  he  came  to  inspect  was 
performed  before  his  closed  eyes, 