

number  of  conscripts  required  to  recruit  the 
present  immense  standing*  army,  without 
drawing  upon  the  cultivators  of  the  lands 
that  may  always  be  rendered  productive. 

The  native  of  Egypt  is  in  many  respects 
fitted  to  make  a  good  soldier;  he  is  hardy, 
and  equal  to  great  bodily  fatigue  ;  temperate, 
and  satisfied  with  the  coarsest  food ;  docile, 
and  easily  led,  particularly  by  kindness ;  re- 
spectful to  his  superiors,  and  obedient  to  the 
rules  of  military  discipline ;  but  the  Frank 
instructors  of  the  Egyptian  army  know  not 
themselves  the  true  meaning  of  the  term  dis- 
cipline, nor  are  they  of  that  class  of  men  to 
excite  much  respect,  even  from  ignorant 
Arabs.  For  the  most  part,  outcasts  from  so- 
ciety, and  natives  of  those  countries  of  south- 
ern Europe  that  are  the  least  distinguished 
for  military  conduct,  they  are  by  no  means 
qualified  for  the  task  they  have  undertaken, 
and  are  quite  satisfied  with  the  degree  of  dis- 
cipline they  have  instilled  into  their  disciples, 
which  amounts  to  little  more  than  the  timid 
obedience  of  a  flock  of  sheep  to  the  bark  and 


DRESS  OF  THE  TROOPS.  223 

worry  of  the  shepherd's  dogs.  —  For  the  qua- 
lities of  alertness  on  their  posts,  order  and 
regularity  in  their  quarters,  or  cleanliness 
and  respectability  in  their  appearance,  it 
would  be  in  vain  to  seek  in  the  soldiers  of  the 
present  army  of  Egypt. 

I  know  not,  however,  what  Egyptian  troops 
a  modern  traveller  can  have  seen,  who  asserts 
that  they  are  the  dregs  of  Lower  Egypt,  and 
that  he  hardly  saw  a  soldier  in  the  ranks  who 
had  not  lost  one  eye.  The  defect  of  vision  must 
decidedly  have  been  on  his  side  —  for  such 
a  want  in  a  conscript  Fellah  would  cause 
him  to  be  rejected  from  the  military  service. 

The  dress  of  the  troops  is  certainly  not 
calculated  to  set  them  off  to  advantage  in 
European  eyes,  but  it  is  as  convenient  a  cos- 
tume as  could  have  been  adopted,  considering 
the  prejudices  to  be  encountered  ;  and  its  de- 
scription will  furnish  an  exemplification  of 
the  transition  state  of  every  thing  in  this 
country.  The  nether  garment,  without  hav- 
ing been  actually  fashioned  into  trowsers,  is 
in  a  kind  of  chrysalis  state,  between  the  Turk- 


224  SHOES  AND  HEAD-miESS. 

ish  shaksheer  and  what  used  to  be  called 
**  Cossacks  ;"  the  upper  part  having  the  sem- 
blance of  breeches,  but  being  furnished  with 
'*  continuations  "  fitting  tight  from  the  knee 
down,  in  the  style  of  leggings.  The  jacket 
fits  close  to  the  body,  is  unencumbered  with 
skirts,  and  convenient  enough.  These  gar- 
ments, as  also  a  wide  sash  that  folds  round 
the  waist,  >  are,  for  winter  wear,  made  of  a 
coarse,  red*  woollen  stuff,  but  others  of  white 
cotton  are  substituted  in  summer.  The  feet 
roam  about  in  a  pair  of  large  red  leather 
shoes,  which  —  pointed  and  turned  up  at  the 
toes — are  altogether  against  file  marching. 
The  head  dress  is  the  common  red  cloth  cap, 
or  turbouch  ;  which,  besides  that  it  affords 
no  protection  to  the  eyes  against  sun,  wind, 
and  dust,  (thereby  multiplying  the  causes  of 
ophthalmia),  must  be  very  disadvantageous 
when  the  sun  has  sided  with  the  enemy,  and 
has  to  be  faced  as  well  as  their  fire  :  for  the 
glare  of  the  one  would  effectually  prevent  a 
correct  aim  being  taken  in  returning  the  other. 