

It  is  here  necessary  to  remark,  that  a  con- 
siderable change  had  been  effected  in  the 
Egyptian  army  since  it  first  took  the  field 
against  the  Wahabees,  when  it  was  composed 
principally  of  the  black  slaves  captured  in 
the  wars  of  Senaar  and  Kordofan.  Those 
natives  of  a  tropical  region  had,  in  the  course 
of  a  very  few  years,  been  swept  off  by  diseases 
brought  on  by  change  of  climate,  food,  &c., 
and  Mohammed  Ali  then  determined  on  filling 
up  the  vacancies  in  his  ranks  exclusively 
with  the  native  fellahs.  Of  these,  the  army 
which  conquered  the  Morea  was  principally 
composed,  and  the  regular  army  of  Egypt 
continues,  in  a  great  measure,  to  be  recruited 
to  this  day  from  the  same  class. 

It  would  be  a  matter  of  extreme  difficulty 
for  any  foreigner  to  ascertain  the  exact 
numerical  strength  of  the  Egyptian  army,  as 
well  from    its   being    so   dispersed  over   the 


THE  EGYPTIAN  ARMY.  213 

various  provinces  that  are  now  comprised 
within  the  government  of  Mohammed  Ali,  as 
from  the  want  of  returns  that  can  at  all  be 
depended  upon.  But,  if  all  the  regiments  of 
which  it  is  composed  were  kept  to  their  full 
establishment,  it  would  amount  to  about 
ninety  thousand  men,  organized  as  shown  in 
the  following  table  : — 


200 
480 
1800 
1200 
Total  Artillery  3760 

Sappers,  Miners,  and  Pontoniers       .....        2000 

Cavalry.      .     13  Regiments  of  Chasseurs  and  Lancers      .        6890 

Infantry       .       3  Regiments  of  Guards  (9  Battalions  only)       7200 

do.  22  Regiments  of  the  Line  .         .         .      70400 

do.  3  Companies  of  Veterans  (in  the  Fortresses)         300 

Total  of  Regular  Troops  of  all  Arms  90,550 


The  complement  of  men  to  each  regi- 
ment of  cavalry  is  five  hundred  and  thirty, 
formed  into  six  companies,  or  three  squad- 
rons ;  and  the  strength  of  the  regiments  of 
infantry  is  three  thousand  two  hundred  men, 


Horse  Artillery  of  the  Guard 

.     1  Company 

Foot        do.              do. 

2  Companies 

Horse  Artillery 

6  Companies 

Foot  Artillery 

.     3  Battalions  of  6  Companies 

Field  Train 

214  STAFF  OF  THE  REOIMENTS. 

divided  into  four  battalions  of  eight  companies 
each. 

As  but  few,  if  any,  of  the  regiments  are 
complete,  (indeed,  some  of  them  are  mere 
skeletons)  the  strength  of  the  regular  Egyp- 
tian army,  even  including  the  staff  and 
military  schools,  cannot,  however,  be  cal- 
culated at  more  than  eighty  thousand  men. 
Even  this  number  is  an  enormous  force  to 
raise  out  of  the  population  of  Egypt. 

The  staff  of  each  regiment  consists  of 
a  colonel,  lieutenant-colonel,  four  chefs  de 
bataillon,  four  adjutant-majors,  four  assist- 
ant adjutant-majors,  one  surgeon,  four  assist- 
ants, four  accountants,  and  an  iman  (priest)  ; 
each  company — officered  by  a  captain,  lieu- 
tenant, and  sub-lieutenant — is  composed  of 
a  serjeant-major,  four  Serjeants,  eight  cor- 
porals, two  drummers,  and  eighty  rank  and 
file. 