

Demetrius  Ipsalanti  was  a  brave  man,  and,  what  was  yet  more 
strange,  amongst  modern  Greeks,  an  upright  one.  No  person  was 
better  calculated  than  himself  to  play  the  part  of  Leonidas  ;  but  he 
might  have  looked  in  vain  for  three  hundred  brother  heroes  to  lay 
down  their  lives  to  save  their  country — there  being  a  vast  difference 

VOL.   II.  -  P 


210  SIEGE  OF  MISSOLONGHI. 

The  remainder  of  the  year  1825  was  oc- 
cupied in  reducing  the  Morea  to  submission  ; 
and,  early  in  the  following  spring,  Ibrahim, 
crossing  over  to  Roumelia,  halted  before 
Missolonghi,  which  fell  into  his  hands  after 
a  siege  of  three  months.  This  success  was 
purchased  at  an  enormous  cost  of  human 
life,  but  without  any  loss  of  reputation  to  the 
Arab  troops.  The  difficulties  they  had  to 
contend  against  were  very  great ;  the  season 
selected  for  undertaking  the  siege  the  very 
worst  of  the  whole  year — being  that  at  which 
the  entire  face  of  the  country  round  the 
fortress  becomes  a  perfect  bog,  rendering  an 
attack  by  regular  approaches  almost  im- 
possible— and  the  Greeks,  emboldened,  pro- 
bably, by  the  recent  failures  of  the  Turks 
against  these  same  walls,  defended  themselves 
with  a  degree  of  resolution  and  courage  that 
they  certainly — on  land — in  no  other  instance 
evinced. 

between  the  Spartans  of  old  and  the  Palicari  of  this  age — tliat  is  to 
say,  if  we  credit  all  that  we  read  of  the  former,  and  only  what  we 
see  of  the  latter. 


BATTLE  OF  NAYARINO.  '  2l"l 

The  events  which  followed  need  not  be  dwelt 
upon — the  Morea  again  bent  to  the  Moham- 
medan yoke ;  the  fortresses  of  Nauplia  and 
Napoli  di  Malvasia  alone,  of  all  its  strong- 
holds, remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Greeks 
(and  these,  without  the  co-operation  of  a  fleet, 
may  be  considered  impregnable) ;  the  piratical 
Mainotes  had  been  driven  and  confined  to  the 
fastnesses  of  their  native  peninsula ;  and  the 
more  peaceful  inhabitants  of  the  plains,  re- 
leased from  the  dread  of  the  wandering 
bands  of  "  Palicari,"  once  more  returned  to 
the  cultivation  of  their  vineyards,  or  resumed 
their  long-interrupted  commercial  intercourse 
with  the  Turks. 

The  Egyptian  army,  having  fulfilled  its 
task  in  the  Morea,  was  about  to  be  trans- 
ported to  some  other  part  of  the  theatre  of 
war,  when  the  parties  to  the  triple  alliance 
interfered  to  arrest  it.  The  battle  of  Navarino 
followed,  and,  in  September  1828,  the  victorious 
Ibrahim  was  compelled  to  return  to  Egypt — 
stript  of  all  his  conquests,  but  certainly  not 
of  his  well-earned  laurels. 

p2 


^212  THE  EGYPTIAN  ARMY. 

The  war  in  Syria  broke  out  soon  after  ;  and 
the  siege  of  Akka  and  battle  of  Konieh 
added  to  the  reputation  of  the  Arab  troops 
and  their  commander. 