

When  the  regiments  were  prononnced  to  be 
in  a  fit  state  to  take  the  field,  (1824)  one  pro- 
ceeded, as  before  mentioned,  to  relieve  the 
force  occupying  Senaar  and  Cordofan,  and 
another  was  despatched  to  reinforce  the 
troops  that  had  been  left  for  the  protection 
of  the  Paslialic  of  Mekka :  the  Wahabees 
having  again  taken  the  field,  and  drawn  near 
the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea. 

In  this  quarter,  hostilities  soon  commenced. 
The  Wahabees,  despising  the  new  levees  sent 
against  them — so  differently  equipped  from 
the  splendidly  attired  troops  with  vsrhom  they 


206    CONDUCT  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  TROOPS. 

had  hitherto  been  engaged — quitted  their 
strong  positions,  with  the  intention  of  sur- 
rounding and  cutting  to  pieces  these  pitiful 
adversaries.  They  had  soon  cause,  however, 
to  repent  their  temerity,  and  to  regret  the 
fiery  coursers  and  gaudy  trappings  of  their 
old  opponents.  The  Egyptian  infantry  be- 
haved with  great  steadiness  and  gallantry, 
and  obtained  a  complete  victory.  Such  is 
the  superiority  of  discipline,  however  slight, 
over  mere  brute  courage,  however  great. 

Throughout  the  campaign  that  followed, 
(the  first  in  which  the  new  levees  were  actively 
employed)  the  Egyptian  troops  earned  the 
reputation  of  possessing  the  principal  qualities 
requisite  in  a  soldier — courage,  endurance  of 
privations  and  fatigue,  and  sobriety ;  whilst 
their  Turkish  officers  proved  themselves  to 
be  totally  unworthy  of  commanding  them. 
In  1826,  this  regiment  (the  2nd)  was  relieved, 
and,  on  its  return  to  Egypt,  the  soldiers  re- 
ceived a  decoration  in  testimony  of  their  good 
conduct  and  gallantry. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  enter  into  a  de- 


THE  WAM  IN  THE  MOREA.  207 

tailed  account  of  all  the  campaigns  of  the 
Egyptian  army,  but,  in  justice  to  it,  I  am  bound 
to  say  a  few  words  relative  to  the  war  in  the 
Morea,  where  the  long  despised  fellah  of 
Egypt  first  came  in  contact  with  Europeans, 
— undisciplined  and  intractable  Greeks,  it  is 
true,  but  a  race,  neyertheless,  to  whom  persons 
generally  —  (so  apt  are  we  "  d  prendre  les 
souvenirs  pour  des  esperances")  would  be  in- 
clined to  award  the  palm,  over  their  less  in- 
tellectual opponents. 

Of  the  impolicy  of  Mohammed  Ali  in  enter- 
ing upon  this  contest,  it  is  not  my  intention 
to  offer  any  observations :  suffice  it  to  say, 
that,  pressed  by  the  importunate  supplications 
of  the  Sultan,  and  tempted,  perhaps,  by  the 
promise  of  the  Pashalic  of  the  Morea  for  his 
son  Ibrahim,  he  undertook  to  prop  up  the 
tottering  empire  of  the  Crescent ;  for  which 
purpose  a  force  of  about  seventeen  thousand 
men  was  collected  at  Alexandria,  early  in  the 
year  1824,  and  placed  under  the  command  of 
Ibrahim  Pasha. 