

After  a  series  of  combats,  Ibrahim  finally 
succeeded  in  capturing  the  chief  of  the  Wa- 
habees,  and  placing  the  Pashalic  of  Mekka 
in  security ;  but  his  army  was  reduced  to  a 
mere  handful  of  men,  with  whom,  in  Decem- 
ber, 1819,  he  returned  to  Egypt. 

*  Aboul  Waliiab,  the  founder  of  this  new  sect,  maintained,  how- 
ever, that  his  was  the  true  faith;  and  that  his  object  was  merely  to 
bring  back  Islamism  to  its  original  purity. 


CONQUEST  OF  SENAAR.  201 

The  favourable  time  for  the  execution  of 
Mohammed  All's  long  projected  plan  had 
now  arrived  —  the  ranks  of  his  refractory 
army  had  for  the  present  been  sufficiently 
thinned  to  answer  his  purpose — and,  with 
what  remained  of  his  Albanian  troops,  he 
determined  on  undertaking  the  conquest  of 
Senaar,  calculating  that  whilst,  on  the  one 
hand,  this  war  would  still  further  diminish 
the  number  of  his  intractable  countrymen,  it 
would,  on  the  other,  supply  him  with  cap- 
tives of  a  more  docile  race,  with  whom  he 
purposed  forming  his  new  levees,  or  Nizam. 
Accordingly,  in  June,  1820,  Ishmael  Pasha 
(Mohammed  All's  second  son)  set  off'  for  Se- 
naar, with  an  army  of  three  thousand  men, 
and,  after  some  hard  fighting,  obtained  pos- 
session of  the  capital.  In  the  course  of  the 
following  year,  a  reinforcement  of  an  equal 
number  of  troops  arrived,  under  the  com- 
mand of  the  Defterdar  Bey  (a  son-in-law  of 
Mohammed  Ali),  to  whom  was  entrusted  the 
conquest  of  Cordofan. 

On  the  death  of  Ishmael — who,  falling  into 


202  DEATH  OF  ISHMAEL  PASHA. 

a  snare,  was  burnt  alive* — the  Defterdar  as- 
sumed the  command  of  the  army,  which  con- 
tinued to  occupy  both  Senaar  and  Cordofan 
until  the  latter  end  of  1824,  when  it  was  re- 
lieved by  a  body  of  the  black  slaves  who  had 
been  captured  and  sent  to  Egypt  by  thou- 
sands, on  the  first  arrival  of  the  Defterdar, 
and  who  now  returned,  formed  into  regiments 
and  drilled  in  the  European  manner.  The 
astonishment  of  the  undisciplined  Janiza- 
ries was  unbounded  —  resistance  fruitless — 
so,  sheathing  their  scimitars,  and  exclaiming 
"  Allah  akhah'' — God  is  great — they  took  their 
way  back  to  Egypt,  from  whence  the  greater 
portion  of  them  was  shortly  afterwards  ship- 
ped for  Candia. 

Mohammed  Ali  had  commenced  carrying 


*  Ishmael  Pasha  fell  a  victim  to  the  revenge  of  the  Sheik  of  a 
village,  on  vrhom  he  had  inflicted  a  blow.  The  hut,  in  which  he 
and  his  suite  had  taken  up  their  quarters  for  the  night,  was  sur- 
rounded with  dried  logs  of  wood  and  straw,  whilst  they  were  asle^, 
and  set  on  fire.  They  attempted  to  force  their  way  out,  and  killed 
several  of  their  besiegers,  but  were  eventually  overcome  by  the 
smoke  and  heat,  and  all,  excepting  one  attendant,  thus  miserably 
perished.  The  horrid  Defterdar  Bay  devoted  twenty  thousand 
heads  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  manes  of  Ishmael. 