

Although   the   fleet  conveying  the  first  di- 


208  SIEGE  OF  NAVARIN. 

vision  of  this  army  left  the  shores  of  Egypt  in 
the  month  of  July,  yet,  retarded  by  an  in- 
surrection which  broke  out  in  Candia,  and 
other  causes,  it  only  reached  its  destination 
on  the  26th  of  March  of  the  following  year. 

At  that  period,  the  fortresses  of  Modon, 
Coron,  and  Patrass,  and  the  castle  at  the 
southern  side  of  the  Straits  of  Lepanto,  were 
the  only  points  in  the  Morea  still  in  the  pos- 
session of  the  Turks.  The  garrisons  of  these 
places,  pent  up,  without  the  means  of  com- 
municating with  each  other,  either  by  sea  or 
land,  and  without  a  hope  of  succour,  could 
not  have  held  out  many  days. 

Ibrahim  landed  at  Modon,  and  commenced 
operations  by  laying  siege  to  Navarin  and 
raising  that  of  Coron  ;  and,  before  the  month 
of  July — that  is  to  say,  in  three  months — he 
had  made  himself  master  of  the  fortresses 
of  Old  and  New  Navarin ;  relieved  all  the 
others ;  defeated  the  Greeks  in  three  general 
actions,  besides  numerous  minor  affairs ;  and 
marched  his  victorious  troops  across  the 
Morea  to  the  very  gates  of  Nauplia.     The 


DEMETRIUS  IPSALANTI.  209 

solitary  skirmish  of  Mylos  (claimed  by  the 
Greeks  as  a  signal  victory,  and  regarded  by 
them  as  a  second  Thermopylae*)  being  the 
only  check  that  his  arms  sustained. 


•  Ou  Ibrahim  Pasha's  first  advance  on  Argos,  he  found  Demetrius 
Ipsalauti  occupying,  witli  five  hundred  men,  the  almost  inattackable 
post  of  Mylos.  This  position  extends  about  five  hundred  yards, 
between  a  rocky  precipice,  that  overhangs  the  road  from  Tripolizza 
to  Argos,  and  the  sea.  Its  front  is  covered  so  effectually  by  the 
Lermean  marsh  as  to  leave  merely  the  breadth  of  the  road  itself  to 
advance  by.  Behind  the  marsh  (which  the  inhabitants  to  this  day 
maintain  is  unfathomable)  are  the  scattered  mills  and  houses  of  Mylos, 
surrounded  by  gardens,  walls,  ditches,  &c.  The  right  flank  of  the 
Greeks  was,  of  course,  the  only  assailable  point  of  their  line ;  but  even 
this  was  protected  by  the  fire  of  several  gun^boats,  which,  anchored 
close  to  the  shore,  on  the  left  of  the  position,  these  were  enabled 
to  sweep  the  whole  front  of  the  Hne  with  their  fire.  The  advanced 
guard  of  the  Egyptian  army,  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  ground, 
attacked  the  Greeks  along  their  whole  front ;  but  Ibrahim  Pasha, 
coming  up  and  discovering  how  matters  stood,  withdrew  his  troops, 
turned  the  position,  by  crossing  a  low  mountain  ridge  on  his  left, 
regained  the  road  in  the  rear  of  Mylos,  and,  without  troubling  himself 
about  the  five  hundred  Greeks  behind  him,  continued  his  march  to 
Argos.  The  Greeks  made  no  attempt  to  disturb  him,  but  immedi- 
ately took  to  their  boats  and  hastened  to  Nauplia,  and  so  ended  the 
affair  of  Thermopyke  Mylos. 