

The  Sheiks  are,  consequently,  by  no  means 
scrupulous  of  laying  their  hands  upon  any 
eligible  persons  who  come  within  their  reach, 
in  order  to  save  their  own  relations  or  friends. 
Whole  boats'  crews  have  been  thus  kidnapped 
to  save  the  inhabitants  of  a  village,  whilst, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  inhabitants  of  the 
village  itself  are  selected  completely  at  his 
whim  or  caprice,  without  being  allowed  a 
chance  of  escape,  by  ballot  or  substitute. 
Those  who  mutilate  themselves  (which  num- 
bers formerly  did)  to  avoid  being  taken  for 
the  army  or  navy — if  found  to  have  rendered 
themselves  incapable  of  being  turned  to  ac- 
count in  the  cotton  factories,  &c,, — are  sent 
to  labour  in  chains  at  the  public  works  ;  and 
thus,  in  addition  to  the  pain  and  loss  (some- 
times even  of  a  hand)  which  they  have  in- 


218  THE  EGYPTIAN  FELLAH. 

flicted  on  themselves,  are  subjected  to  a  much 
harder  fate  than  if  they  had  quietly  submitted 
to  become  useful  members  of  society,  though 
in  a  way  that  appears  to  have  but  few  charms 
for  them. 

The  dislike  that  the  fellah  of  Egypt  has  to 
quit  his  native  place  is  unconquerable.  To  us 
Englishmen,  it  appears  almost  incredible  that 
young  men  of  from  eighteen  to  twenty-five 
years  of  age  should  regard  as  a  hardship  the 
being  obliged  to  leave  home  :  it  is  with  them, 
nevertheless,  the  grievance  universally  com- 
plained of,  and  may  be  accounted  for  by  the 
ties  of  early  marriages ;  the  indolence  in  which 
men  grow  up  who  possess  the  means  of  sub- 
sistence at  the  cost  of  but  little  exertion  and 
fatigue  ;  the  total  want  of  mental  cultivation, 
and  consequent  ignorance  of  there  being  any 
other  pleasures  in  this  life,  besides  the  grati- 
fication of  the  passions  in  common  with  the 
brute  creation  :  the  full  enjoyment  of  which  is 
the  reward  held  out  to  the  good  Mussulman, 
in  the  sensual  paradise  of  his  prophet. 

The  Egyptian  fellah  sees  a  companion  — 


CONSCRIPTION  UNAVOIDABLE.  219 

perhaps  a  brother  —  who  wallowed  in  the 
same  filth,  and  was  covered  with  the  same 
disgusting*  vermin  as  himself;  who  fed  on  the 
same  coarse  food,  and  was  clothed  with  simi- 
lar rags  ;  dragged  in  handcuffs  from  his  native 
village  to  be  made  a  soldier  or  sailor.  He 
sees  him  return  in  a  few  years,  metamor- 
phosed into  a  half-civilized  being,  provided 
with  all  the  necessaries  of  life,  smart  in  his 
appearance,  and  liking  his  new  state  of  exist- 
ence ;  but  neither  his  envy  nor  his  ambition  is 
excited.  Of  patriotism  he  has  little  notion, 
except  that  he  would  rather  be  governed  by 
the  Sheik  el  belled,  his  countryman,  than 
spurned  and  bullied  by  his  former  oppressor, 
the  Turk. 