

With  such  men  as  these,  a  conscription  is 
an  unavoidable  evil — for  a  recruiting  party, 
with  all  the  allurements  of  drums,  ribbons, 
and  promises,  might  march  from  Rosetta  to 
Assouan  without  picking  up  a  single  volun- 
teer— and  yet,  the  first  prejudices  overcome, 
the  fellah  takes  a  great  liking  to  the  military 
life  ;  and  his  carriage  and  deportment  clearly 


220  DREAD  OF  THE  MILITARY  SERVICE. 

show  that  he  is  quite  conscious  of  having 
taken  a  higher  grade  in  the  scale  of  society. 

Desertion  is  very  rare,  but  it  is  much  to  be 
regretted  (at  least  by  those  who  wish  to  see 
Egypt  become  civilized)  that  the  constant 
wars  in  which  Mohammed  Ali  has  been  en- 
gaged since  the  establishment  of  the  Nizam 
have  not  allowed  the  soldiers  such  frequent 
opportunities  of  visiting  their  friends  and  na- 
tive places  as  is  desirable.  This,  therefore, 
tends  to  keep  up  the  dread  entertained  for  the 
military  service,  it  being  considered  as  certain 
death  to  enter  it ;  for  writing  being  altogether 
unknown  amongst  the  lower  orders  of  the  Arab 
population  of  Egypt,  and  the  opportunities  of 
conveying  information  by  other  means  ex- 
tremely rare ;  the  relatives  of  a  conscript, 
after  a  lapse  of  some  time  without  hearing  of 
him,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  has  fallen 
a  victim  to  the  sword  or  disease. 

It  is  said  that  the  number  of  men  taken  by 
conscription  in  the  Delta,  which  is  the  most 
productive  part  of  Egypt,  bears  no  propor- 
tion to  that  levied  in  the  other  provinces.     I 


EFFECTS  OF  THE  CONSCRIPTION.  221 

believe  this  to  be  the  case,  for  I  certainly,  as 
I  before  mentioned,  saw  no  want  of  young 
men  there  ;  whereas,  I  observed  that  the  fields 
in  Upper  Egypt  were  frequently  cultivated 
exclusively  by  old  men  or  boys,  and  females. 
I  cannot,  however,  admit  that  mischief  to 
the  extent  generally  represented  has  arisen 
from  the  conscription.  It  is  true  that,  both  in 
the  Delta  and  in  Upper  Egypt,  large  tracts 
of  country  susceptible  of  cultivation  are  lying 
waste ;  but  then  it  frequently  would  happen, 
from  the  Nile  not  rising  to  the  necessary 
height,  that  the  cultivators  of  those  tracts 
would  be  thrown  out  of  employment.  I 
think,  the  sacrifice  of  those  lands  is  fully 
counterbalanced  by  the  degree  of  security 
with  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  more  fa- 
voured parts  of  the  country  now  cultivate 
their  fields ;  freed  by  this  army  of  conscripts 
from  the  marauding  visits  of  the  Bedouins, 
and  the  oppressive  exactions  of  the  Mame- 
lukes and  Janizaries.  The  mischief  to  be 
apprehended  is  that  the  country  will  not  be 
able  to  furnish   for  any  length   of  time  the 


222        INSTRUCTORS  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  ARMY. 