


ARMY  RE-MODELLED.  203 

into  execution  his  plan  of  re-modelling  the 
Egyptian  army,  immediately  after  the  depar- 
ture of  the  Defterdar  Bey  for  Senaar,  with  the 
last  of  the  Janizaries.  For  this  purpose,  he 
ordered  a  camp  to  be  formed  at  Esneh  (after- 
wards moved  to  Assouan),  where  a  kind  of 
military  school  was  established,  to  which  he 
directed  all  his  own  Mameluke  attendants,  as 
well  as  those  of  his  principal  officers,  to  re- 
pair —  appointing  one  of  his  most  devoted 
adherents  its  commandant,  and  giving  him,  as 
an  instructor,  Monsieur  Seves,  formerly  a  co- 
lonel in  the  French  service,  and  aid-de-camp 
to  Marshal  Ney. 

The  persons  here  brought  together  and  in- 
structed, were  to  become  the  officers  of  the 
new  levees.  The  slaves  from  Senaar  and 
Cordofan,  who  were  to  fill  the  ranks,  soon  ar- 
rived in  crowds,  and  were  incorporated  with 
a  certain  proportion  of  native  Egyptians,  ob- 
tained (in  the  first  instance)  by  voluntary 
enlistment.  The  army  was  formed  upon  the 
French  model,  and  divided  into  regiments  of 
five  battalions  of  eight  hundred  men  each. 


204  SIX  REGIMENTS  COMPLETED. 

This  organization  (which  has  since  under- 
gone some  modification)  was  considered  as 
the  best  calculated  for  the  kind  of  warfare  in 
which  the  Egyptian  army  was,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, likely  to  be  engaged ;  each  regiment 
forming,  as  it  were,  a  small  corps  d'arm^e, 
that  could  be  employed  separately,  under  its 
own  colonel.  By  this  plan,  also,  a  saving- 
was  effected  in  the  staff  and  superior  officers, 
who,  in  the  outset,  were  difficult  to  be  met 
with  :  Mohammed  Ali  soon  discovering  that 
the  most  perfect  Chiboukdgee  oftentimes 
made  but  an  indifferent  Chef  de  Bataillon. 

In  the  course  of  three  years,  six  regiments 
were  completed,  making  an  army  of  twenty- 
four  thousand  men.  The  soldiers  (the  drudgery 
of  learning  the  elements  of  their  profession 
over)  soon  took  a  liking  to  their  new  life, 
which  they  found  was  not  one  of  greater 
labour  than  that  to  which  they  had  been 
brought  up  ;  but  the  Turkish  officers  regretted 
much  their  former  otium  cum  dignitate,  and 
adopted  the  new  costume  with  a  very  bad 
grace.     Ibrahim  Pasha  did  all  in  his  power 


MOHAMMEDAN  PREJUDICES.  205 

to  overcome  this  Mohammedan  repugnance 
to  march  forward  in  the  road  of  innovation, 
himself  setting  an  example  of  the  most  perfect 
submission  to  the  directions  of  the  Frank 
instructors,  and  holding  out  rewards  to  those 
who  should  soonest  make  themselves  masters 
of  the  European  tactics.  But  prejudice  has 
too  strong  a  hold  of  the  present  generation  of 
Turks  to  be  easily  shaken,  and  the  instructions 
of  the  officers  did  not  keep  pace  by  any  means 
with  that  of  the  soldiers. 