


250  THE  LAZARETTO. 

There  was  no  help  for  it :  we  must  either 
submit  or  proceed  on  to  Malta,  where  a  worse 
fate  would  have  befallen  us  ;  we  disembarked, 
therefore,  and  were  forthwith  conducted  to 
the  Lazaretto,  in  which  we  were  assured  every 
attention  should  be  paid  to  our  comfort. 
Nothing  could  be  more  libellous  than  that 
term,  as  applied  to  the  accommodation  the 
place  afforded  —  namely,  a  dark  unventilated 
cell,  on  the  bare  walls  of  which  rheumatism, 
catarrh,  pleurisy,  and  consumption  were  writ- 
ten in  ever-trickling  streams  of  water. 

We  had  fortunately  brought  hammocks  and 
a  tent,  which  rendered  us  in  a  great  measure 
independent  of  the  unwholesome  den  allotted 
for  our  use ;  and  brandy  and  tobacco,  which 
enabled  us  to  counteract  the  effects  of  its 
damp  walls  and  the  night  dews.  From  the 
town  we  procured  tables  and  chairs,  as  well  as 
all  things  needful  to  satisfy  our  wants,  and,  on 
the  whole,  I  am  not  sure  but  that  I  should 
prefer  being  again  immured  within  the  old 
Venetian  galley  docks  of  Candia,  to  incar- 
ceration in  any  other  Lazaretto,  of  which,  in 


HARBOUR  OF  CANDIA.  261 

my  peregrinative  life,  it  has  been  my  misfor- 
tune to  be  an  inmate.  There,  at  all  events,  we 
enjoyed  a  splendid  view,  a  bustling  scene, 
and  a  bracing  sea  breeze — our  sanatory  tether 
being,  by  special  favour,  extended  so  as  to 
admit  of  our  walking  on  one  of  the  old  moles 
by  which  the  harbour  of  Candia  is  formed. 

The  view  from  thence  is  singularly  fine. 
Looking  over  the  clear  blue  surface  of  the 
harbour,  which  is  studded  with  an  infinite 
variety  of  vessels  of  the  most  fantastic  rig, 
the  spectator's  eye  dwells  with  interest  on 
the  ruined  vaults  of  an  extensive  range  of 
buildings,  (the  Venetian  docks)  the  bold  arches 
of  which  are  reflected  far  back  on  the  surface 
of  the  liquid  mirror.  Beyond  the  docks,  rise 
the  walls  and  houses  of  the  city,  their  bright, 
but  picturesque  outlines,  standing  finely  out 
from  a  dark  mountain  ridge,  which  runs  east 
and  west  through  the  centre  of  the  island, 
Ida's  snow-capped  peaks  rising  gracefully 
above  all  the  other  points  of  the  chain. 

When  driven  by  the  heat  of  the  mid-day 
sun  from  basking  in  the  enjoyinent  of  this 


252  A  SICILIAN  GUARDIANO. 

lovely  scene,  or  watching  the  constant  bustle 
of  the  port,  we  retired  to  the  shade  of  the 
vault  appropriated  to  our  use :  in  one  corner 
of  which  was  our  cell.  This  also  was  one  of 
a  range  of  Venetian  docks,  but  perfectly  dis- 
tinct from  that  before  noticed.  Here  our 
amusement  was  to  draw  out  the  little  ill-be- 
gotten man,  appointed,  with  the  Italian  title 
of  Guardiano,  to  watch  over  us.  His  tales, 
extremely  amusing  in  themselves,  were  render- 
ed doubly  entertaining  by  the  polyglot  nature 
of  his  vocabulary.  By  birth  a  Sicilian,  he  had, 
during  the  threatened  invasion  of  his  native 
island  by  the  French,  served  on  board  the 
flotilla  of  English  gun-boats,  and,  in  his  inter- 
course with  our  tars  had,  as  may  readily  be 
supposed,  picked  up  many  choice  expressions. 
His  deeds  of  valour  were  dwelt  upon  with 
great  complacency,  but  it  was  quite  evident 
that  grog  had  been  mainly  instrumental  in 
getting  up  his  courage  to  the  sticking  place, 
for  he  candidly  confessed  that  the  whizzing 
of  the  French  shot  and  shells  was  particularly 
disagreeable  until  after  the  second  allowance 