

The  students,  on  first  joining  the  College, 
are  merely  required  to  be  able  to  read  and 
write  Arabic  :  their  course  of  studies  after- 
wards comprises  arithmetic,  geometry,  alge- 
bra, military  and  landscape  drawing,  fortifi- 
cation, and  foreign  languages.     In  the  last- 


COURSE  OF  INSTRUCTION,  233 

named,  they  receive  instruction  according  to 
the  particular  service  for  v^^hich  they  are  des- 
tined ;  those  intended  for  the  navy  being 
taught  English,  those  for  the  army  French, 
and  such  as  have  either  taste  or  capacity  for 
more  tongues,  learn  Italian  also.  The  Turk- 
ish language  forms  a  part  of  the  education  of 
all 

I  remarked  that  the  Arab  youths  acquired 
the  pronunciation  of  French  with  much  greater 
facility  than  that  of  either  English  or  Italian, 
which  was  explained  to  me  as  arising  from  its 
greater  similarity  to  the  Turkish.  They  are 
occupied  ten  hours  a  day  at  their  various 
studies,  and  an  hour  and  a  half  at  out-dcor 
instruction,  in  artillery  practice,  or  small  arm 
and  sword  exercise ;  leaving  them  by  far  too 
small  a  proportion  of  the  day  for  recreation ; 
in  fact,  they  all  looked  mentally  fatigued. 

The  conduct  of  the  lads  appeared  very  cor- 
rect and  orderly,  and  great  attention  is  evi- 
dently paid  to  the  cleanliness  of  their  habits. 
The  principal  v*'ant  of  the  establishment  is 
that  of  properly  qualified  professors,  particu- 


234  HALLS  OF  STUDY. 

larly  of  languages  and  drawing.  English  and 
Italian  were  taught  by  a  young  Spaniard ; 
French  by  a  German,  who,  after  a  vain  at- 
tempt to  persuade  Mohammed  Ali  that  High 
Dutch  was  the  most  useful  of  modern  dialects, 
succeeded  at  length  in  convincing  him  that  a 
wide  Saxon  mouth  gives  a  peculiarly  soft 
turn  to  the  final  ants  and  merits  of  the  French 
language. 

The  halls  of  study  are  small,  but  lofty  and 
airy,  and  occupy  the  whole  of  one  side  of  the 
square.  Another  division  of  the  building  con- 
tains the  dormitories  —  eight  large  apart- 
ments, each  capable  of  accommodating  an 
entire  company  of  students.  They  are  scrupu- 
lously clean,  and  to  each  is  attached  a  wash- 
ing-room. Every  cadet  has  a  separate  bed 
made  up  on  boards  and  iron  trestles,  and  is 
furnished  with  a  garde-robe  for  his  clothes,  &c. 

The  refectory  and  kitchen  occupy  another 
side  of  the  square,  and  do  equal  credit  to  the 
establishment.  The  students  are  formed  in 
messes  of  ten,  and  squat  down  round  circular 
tables,  the  place  of  each  being  marked  by  a 


THE  HOSPITAL.  235 

piece  of  bread  and  wooden  spoon.  They  are 
furnished  with  but  two  meals  a  day — (for  a 
crust  of  bread  issued  at  daybreak,  though  lite- 
rally a  breakfast,  can  hardly  be  called  a  meal) ; 
the  first  at  mid-day,  the  other  at  sunset.  Each 
consists  of  soup,  a  stew  of  meat,  vegetables, 
and  maccaroni.  The  habit  of  eating  out  of 
the  same  dish — helping  themselves  generally 
with  their  fingers — still  obtains  ;  rendering  a 
plentiful  supply  of  copper  kettles  and  hot 
water  necessary,  to  remove  any  obstinately 
adhesive  particles  of  paste  or  grease,  v^^hich 
cannot  be  displaced  from  the  fingers  by  the 
usual  Arab  process. 