

The  hospital  is  on  the  western  side  of  the 
square,  facing  the  Nile.  I  was  surprised  to 
find  that,  out  of  so  many  youths,  seven  or 
eight  was  the  average  number  of  its  inmates  ; 
and  of  these  the  greater  portion  are  victims 
to  a  too  easy  access  to  the  dissipations  of  the 
capital. 

Under  the  hospital  is  the  armoury,  which 
might  be  better  arranged,  and  its  contents  in 
better  order. 


236  DRESS  OF  THE  STUDENTS. 

The  dress  of  the  students  is  a  step  further 
advanced  towards  the  European  costume  than 
even  that  of  the  army.  It  consists  of  a  close- 
fitting,  single-breasted  jacket  of  blue  cloth, 
with  red  "  stand-up"  collar  and  cuffs ;  blue 
cloth  trow^sers ;  a  broad  white  cotton  sash  ; 
red  shoes  ;  and  turbouch.  The  two  last-named 
are  the  only  objectionable  articles  of  their 
attire. 

At  the  period  of  my  visit  to  the  College  of 
Tourah,  it  was  under  the  direction  of  Sequera 
Bey  —  a  Spanish  ofEcer,  to  whose  scientific 
acquirements  and  indefatigable  exertions 
Pvlohammed  Ali  owes  the  foundation  of  most  of 
his  thriving  military  establishments.  But  the 
envy  and  self-sufficiency  of  the  Turkish  au- 
thorities, with  whom  he  was  called  upon  to 
act,  have  since  led  this  gentleman  to  throw 
up  all  his  appointments. 

The  cavalry  school  is  at  the  village  of  Ghi- 
zeh,  nearly  opposite  Old  Cairo  ;  and  stands  on 
the  site  of  the  palace  of  the  celebrated  Mame- 
luke, Mourad  Bey.  This  school  was'  esta- 
blished in  1830,  and  is  Under  the  direction  of 


THE  CAVALRY  SCHOOL.  23/ 

a  French  officer.  It  contains  one  luindred 
and  ninety  cadets,  mostly  Arab  youths  of 
from  thirteen  to  eighteen  years  of  age.  They 
are  formed  into  two  squadrons,  are  tolerably 
good  horsemen,  and  well  instructed  in  the 
sword  and  lance  exercises ;  but,  beyond  these 
accomplishments,  their  education  is  very  su- 
perficial; comprising,  besides  reading  and 
writing  their  own  language,  a  very  slight 
knowledge  of  the  Turkish.  I  was  informed 
that  French  was  about  to  be  added. 

An  apartment  has  been  fitted  up  as  a  kind 
of  theatre,  in  which  the  theory  of  the  profes- 
sion is  taught  by  the  evolutions  of  sundry 
wooden  squadrons  upon  a  table  placed  in  the 
centre  of  the  stage — rather  a  farcical  exhibi- 
tion. 

The  students  are  badly  lodged,  eight  in  a 
small  room,  with  a  vile  smell  of  oiled  arms 
and  appointments  ;  each  cavalry  aspirant  hav- 
ing the  charge  of  his  own  equipment,  saddle 
and  bridle  inclusive.  Except  in  the  single 
article  of  dress,  the  cadets  of  Ghizeh  are  in 
every  respect   far  behind   those  of  Tourah : 


238  SCHOOL  FOR  TRUMPETERS. 

their  costume,  however,  has  been  pushed  one 
degree  further  towards  the  Frank  ;  their  Mo- 
hammedan legs  being  actually  installed  in 
red  Cossack  trowsers,  whilst  their  green  jack- 
ets,with  red  collars,  cuffs,  and  braiding,  "  Wel- 
lington" boots,  and  fixed  spurs,  are  perfectly 
European.  The  only  Arabic  remains  about 
them  are  the  white  cotton  sash  and  abomina-' 
ble  red  skull-cap. 