

The  inconvenience  caused  by  the  want  of  a 
common  language  between  the  instructor  and 
his  pupils  will,  in  some  degree,  be  overcome 
by  the  attention  now  paid  at  Abouzabel  to 
the  study  of  the  French  language,  for  which 
there  are  three  professors. 

The  situation  of  the  college  is,  perhaps,  as 
good  as  any  that  could  have  been  selected  in 
Egypt.  The  students  are  sufficiently  re- 
moved from  the  distractions  of  the  capital 
(distant  about  seventeen  miles)  without  being 
beyond  the  personal  observation  of  the  Vice- 
roy— and  in  no  country  more  than  in  Egypt 
is  shown  the  truth  of  the  Spanish  proverb, 
that  "  el  ojo  del  amo,  engorda  al  cavallo."  * 

•  The  Master's  eye  fattens  the  horse. 


SITUATION  OF  ABOUZABEL.  247 

As  an  hospital,  Abouzabel  possesses  the 
advantages  of  being  on  a  good  carriage-road, 
and  of  enjoying  a  freer  circulation  of  air, 
than  could  be  had  in  any  part  of  the  valley  of 
the  Nile ;  whilst,  at  the  same  time,  it  is 
slightly  removed  from  the  sandy  desert,  and 
elevated  above  the  level  of  the  Delta.  From 
the  baneful  Khampseen  w^ind,  it  would  have 
been  vain  to  seek  for  shelter  any  where  in 
Egypt. 

In  every  respect,  this  establishment  does 
credit  to  Clot  Bey,  its  projector  and  super- 
intendent—  however  much  envious  Franks 
may  sneer  at  his  crimson  trowsers  and  red 
morocco  boots. 


248  DEPARTURE  FOR  CANDTA. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Voyage  to  Candia  —  A  Health  Establishment  ill-adapted  to  the 
Establishment  of  Health  —  Fine  View  from  the  Lazaretto  Mole — 
A  Sicilian  Guardia7io -^  Descr'vption  of  the  Island  of  Crete  —  Its 
Population  —  City  of  Candia  —  Mustapha  Pasha  —  Difficulty  in 
procuring  Horses  —  Departure  for  Canea  —  Villages  of  Defnes, 
Evegenichi,  and  St.  Tomas  —  View  from  the  Summit  of  the  Pass 
on  the  Eastern  side  of  Mount  Ida —  Change  in  the  appearance  of 
the  Country  —  Agius  Decca  —  Ruins  of  Gortyna  —  Road  to  the 
Celebrated  Cretan  Labyrinth  —  Description  of  that  "  Wonder  of 
the  World  " — Arrival  at  Apodoulo. 

On  leaving  Egypt,  it  had  been  the  intention 

of  my  friend  D and  myself  to  proceed  by 

way  of  Smyrna  to  Constantinople  ;  but  the 
appearance  of  the  plague  at  both  those  places 
obliged  us  to  alter  our  course,  and  Candia 
lying  conveniently  on  our  route  to  the  Morea, 
we  thought  a  few  weeks  might  be  agreeably 
passed  in  a  visit  to  that  interesting  island. 
A  homeward-bound  English  merchant  brig 
presented  a  favourable  opportunity  for  carry- 


A  HEALTH  ESTABLISHMENT.  249 

ing  our  wishes  into  effect,  the  skipper  — 
tempted  by  a  liberal  offer — engaging  to  land 
us  at  any  port  in  the  island  that  he  could 
most  readily  make. 

An  obstinate  Etesian  wind  inflicted  on  us  a 
tedious  passage  of  nine  days,  in  the  course 
of  which  our  eyes  were  successively  regaled 
with  distant  views  of  the  fine  bold  coasts  of 
Rhodes  and  Scarpanto,  and  the  magnificent 
mountain  ranges  on  the  terra  firma  beyond. 
We  reached,  at  length,  the  port  of  Candia, 
and,  on  casting  anchor,  learnt,  to  our  dismay, 
that  a  '*  health  establishment "  had  recently 
been  formed  there ;  indeed,  the  display  of 
bright  yellow  flags,  iron  tongs,  palisadoes, 
and  fumes  of  sulphur,  sufficiently  declared 
that  it  was  in  the  full  vigour  of  youth,  and 
consequently  held  out  the  prospect  of  our 
being  subjected  to  an  unusually  strict  anti- 
pestilential  surveillance.  By  way  of  consola- 
tion— or  temptation — we  were  informed,  how- 
ever, that,  if  we  determined  on  landing,  seven 
days  would  be  the  extent  of  our  sanatory 
imprisonment. 