

*  The  guards  are  clothed  in  dark  brown. 


DRESS  OF  THE  OFFICERS.  225 

The  muskets  are  rough,  but  good,  and  are 
invariably  in  excellent  order.  The  accoutre- 
ments are  of  white  leather,  and  inconveniently 
long. 

The  dress  of  the  officers  is  provided,  in  the 
first  instance,  at  the  Viceroy's  expense.  It  is 
covered  with  gold  lace — tasteless  and  tawdry, 
but  is  uniform,  and  bears  some  resemblance 
in  colour  to  that  of  the  soldiers.  From  its 
costliness,  however,  the  officers  are  afterwards 
permitted  to  indulge  their  own  fancies,  and  I 
have  seen  them  on  parade  decked  out  in  all 
sorts  of  colours — blue,  green,  brown,  and  even 
yellow  —  the  red  skull-cap  and  pointed  shoes 
being  the  only  articles  that  are  common  to 
all.  This  sweeping  permission  to  "  depart 
from  the  regulation  "  has  probably  been  given 
to  the  officers,  from  the  greater  difficulty  ex- 
perienced in  overcoming  the  prejudices  of  the 
Turks,  who  still  fill  all  the  upper  ranks  of 
the  Egyptian  army ;  the  Arabs,  except  in 
very  few  instances,  being  confined  to  the 
lower  grades.* 

*  They  seldom  rise  beyond  the  rank  of  Ueutenant. 
VOL.   II.  Q 


226       ARMY  COMMANDED  BY  TURKS. 

In  the  formation  of  the  Egyptian  army, 
Mohammed  Ali's  greatest  difficulty  was  to 
find  a  class  of  men  of  whom  he  could  make 
officers.  The  Arabs — with  all  their  ignorance 
— were  probably  more  fit  for  the  purpose  than 
the  Turks  ;  but  he  was  justly  fearful  that  the 
officers,  if  taken  from  the  same  class  as  the 
soldiers,  would  acquire  an  influence  which 
might  prove  subversive  of  his  plans ;  and 
cause  his  own  destruction,  without  effecting 
any  permanent  good  for  the  country  ;  whereas, 
by  persuading  the  Turks  to  accept  the  supe- 
rior offices,  he  kept  them  in  his  interest,without 
apparently  doing  any  injustice  to  the  con- 
temned native  Fellah. 

Aware,  however,  that  this  state  of  things 
cannot  last ;  whilst  Mohammed  Ali  affects  to 
favour  the  Turks,  and  is  obliged  to  humour 
their  prejudices;  he  is  at  the  same  time  pre- 
paring the  natives  of  the  country  —  who  are 
by  no  means  so  inveterately  opposed  to  Frank 
innovations,  and  do  not  possess  the  overbear- 
ing conceit  and  obstinacy  of  the  Osmanlees — 
to  take  the  stations  to  which  their  superior 


ESTABLISHMENT  OF  SCHOOLS.  227 

acquirements  will  entitle  them.  By  the  en- 
couragement given  to  talent  and  the  establish- 
ment of  schools,  they  are  already  made  aware 
of  the  debt  of  obligation  they  owe  Mohammed 
Ali.  They  are  also  daily  losing  some  portion 
of  the  awe  with  which  they  have  been  ac- 
customed to  regard  their  Turkish  oppressors, 
and  it  is  to  be  hoped  will — when  they  become 
aware  of  their  strength,  which  they  inevitably 
must  do  ere  long — see  the  necessity  of  remain- 
ing united,  and  the  advantage  of  following 
up  a  system  that  has  wrought  so  happy  a 
change  in  their  condition. 