

The  students  receive  a  rate  of  pay,  varying 
according  to  their  respective  classes,  from  ten 
to  fifteen  piastres  a  month. 

Strange  as  it  may  appear,  particularly  to 
the  hussar  and  lancer  officers  of  our  service, 
this  establishment  contains  a  school  for  trum- 
peters ;  who,  except  in  point  of  pay,  are  as 
well  treated  as  the  candidates  for  cornetcies 
in  the  *'  crack"  regiments  of  the  Egyptian 
army ;  and  with  whom  (though  they  eat  and 
sleep  in  different  apartments)  they  associate 
on  the  most  perfect  footing  of  equality. 

This  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the  want 
of  a  gradation  of  ranks  among  the  inhabitants 
of  the  country  ;  an  eviJ,  which,  whilst  it  lasts, 


MILITARY  SCHOOLS.  239 

must  ever  prevent  Egypt  attaining  to  any 
great  degree  of  prosperity,  or  the  troops  ac- 
quiring the  requisite  degree  of  subordination 
that  might  place  them  on  a  footing  with  the 
soldiers  of  the  disciplined  armies  of  Europe. 
Education  will  eventually  produce  this  gra- 
duated scale  of  society,  by  bringing  forth  ta- 
lent, and  occasioning  an  unequal  distribution 
of  wealth  ;  at  present,  its  want  is  felt  in  every 
department  of  the  state. 

The  other  military  schools  of  Egypt  are  at 
Boulak.  and  Damietta.  The  former  has  only 
recently  been  established,  and  is  intended  ex- 
clusively for  the  education  of  cadets  for  the 
engineers  (who  have  hitherto  been  prepared 
at  Tourah) ;  the  other  is  for  officers  of  in- 
fantry, and  contains  near  three  hundred  stu- 
dents. I  shall  readily  be  excused  from  enter- 
ing into  a  detailed  account  of  these,  and  pro- 
ceed to  describe  the  medical  college  of  Abou- 
zabel. 

This  truly  useful  establishment  was  origi- 
nally a  mere  military  hospital,  to  which,  from 
its  healthy  situation,  the  sick  were  sent  from 


240  MONSIEUR  CLOT. 

the  neighbouring  camp  at  Hankah.  It  now 
contains — besides  an  hospital  on  a  magnifi- 
cent scale  —  schools  of  medicine,  anatomy, 
and  chemistry,  and  one  also  of  the  veterinary 
art.  The  whole  are  on  a  scale,  and  in  a  de- 
gree of  order,  that  would  do  credit  to  any 
country. 

The  present  building  was  erected  about  ten 
years  since,  under  the  directions  of  Monsieur 
Clot  (a  Frenchman),  lately  created  a  Bey, 
and,  at  this  moment,  Hakim  Effendi  of  Egypt. 
The  hospital  contains  thirty-two  wards,  each 
capable  of  accommodating  thirty  patients. 
They  are  all  on  the  ground-floor,  lofty  and 
well  ventilated,  but  certainly  too  large. 

The  number  of  sick,  at  the  time  I  visited 
the  hospital,  was  about  two  hundred.  The 
most-  common  diseases  were  fevers,  oph- 
thalmia, &c.  A  separate  ward  is  appropri- 
ated to  the  treatment  of  each  disease,  and 
every  attention  appeared  to  be  paid  to  the 
cleanliness  and  comfort  of  the  patients,  of 
which  they  seemed  to  be  fully  sensible :  in- 
deed, the  change  that  has  taken  place  in  the 