


230  PUBLIC  SCHOOLS. 


CHAPTER  Vlli. 

Public  Schools  —  Encouragement  given  by  Mohammed  Ali  to  the 
Education  of  the  Lower  Orders— Artillery  and  Naval  College  at 
Tourah  —  Cavalry  School  at  Ghizeh — Medical  and  Veterinary 
College  at  Abouzabel  — Disadvantage  under  which  it  labours 
from  the  want  of  a  common  Language  between  the  Professors 
and  Students — Instance  of  a  Dragoman's //-ee  Translation — Con- 
cluding Remarks  on  the  College — Clot  Bey. 

If  to  the  army  Egypt  be  indebted  for  the 
progress  she  has  made  towards  civilization — 
to  the  public  schools  that  have  been  founded 
must  she  henceforth  look  for  completing  her 
regeneration :  and,  although  many  persons 
are  disposed  to  accuse  Mohammed  Ali  of  hav- 
ing solely  had  the  furtherance  of  his  own  am- 
bitious projects  in  view  by  establishing  the 
former,  he  must  certainly,  considering  his 
advanced  age,  be  acquitted  of  the  charge  of 
educating  the  i^ising  generation  for  any  selfish 
purpose. 


COLLEGE  OF  TOUR  All.  231 

The  principal  colleges  that  have  been 
founded  by  the  Viceroy  are,  it  is  true,  devoted 
exclusively  to  the  preparation  of  youths  for 
the  military  services ;  but,  at  the  same  time, 
he  gives  every  encouragement  to  the  esta- 
blishment of  schools  in  all  the  towns  and  vil- 
lages of  Egypt.  He  is  himself  at  the  expense 
of  maintaining  one  near  Cairo,  at  which  two 
thousand  male  children  (chiefly  the  sons  of 
poor  people)  are  not  only  educated,  but  fed, 
clothed,  and  even  paid,  to  induce  the  parents 
to  overcome  their  pertinacious  opposition  to 
the  march  of  intellect. 

The  establishment  that  first  claims  notice 
is  the  College  of  Tourah,  where  the  candi- 
dates for  commissions  in  the  artillery,  engi- 
neers, and  navy,  are  educated. 

The  village  of  Tourah  is  situated  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Nile,  about  eight  miles 
above  Old  Cairo.  The  College  stands  upon  ^ 
the  margin  of  the  river,  and  its  various  build- 
ings are  disposed  so  as  to  enclose  a  large  open 
space,  which  serves  the  double  purpose  of  a 
play-ground  and  place  of  instruction.     A  brig 


232  NUMBER  OF  STUDENTS. 

of  war,  fully  equipped,  is  moored  abreast  of 
the  College,  to  afford  the  students  practical 
means  of  learning  naval  exercises  and  gun- 
nery. 

The  students  are  three  hundred  and  forty 
in  number,  and  are  divided  into  eight  com- 
panies. By  far  the  greater  proportion  are 
Arabs,  the  rest  Turks  and  Candiote  Greeks. 
During  my  visit,  two  of  the  Viceroy's  nephews 
were  receiving  their  education  at  the  College. 
They  were  treated  —  excepting  that  they  got 
a  somewhat  better  dinner  —  in  every  respect 
like  the  other  lads. 

The  age  of  admission  is  from  eleven  to  fif- 
teen, but  Mohammed  Ali  has  broken  through 
the  rule,  in  some  instances,  by  sending  young 
men  of  nineteen  or  twenty.  Several  have  even 
come  to  school  with  an  establishment  of  wives. 