


MEDICAL  KNOWLEDGE.  241 

opinions  of  the  Arab  population  of  Egypt,  as 
to  the  utility  of  medicine  and  surgery,  is  one 
of  the  greatest  victories  that  has  been  gained 
over  their  early  prejudices.  Not  only  are  the 
soldiers  become  fully  aware  of  their  value, 
but  the  women,  who  formerly  repelled  all 
medical  aid  with  the  utmost  contempt,  now 
anxiously  seek  it  both  for  themselves  and 
children ;  and,  awful  as  have  been  the  re- 
sults of  the  late  visitation  of  the  plague,  yet 
this  change  of  feeling  was  most  conspicuously 
seen  during  its  continuance,  and  certainly 
tended  to  diminish  its  fatal  effects. 

The  college  contains  one  hundred  and 
ninety  students — all  Arabs  ;  and  has  already 
supplied  the  military  services  with  many  sur- 
geons, who,  however  slight  their  acquire- 
ments may  be  (and  such  as  left  the  college 
in  the  first  few  years  after  its  establishment 
could  not  be  expected  to  be  very  learned), 
are  certainly  better  than  the  totally  unedu- 
cated quacks,  who,  until  then,  lent  their  as- 
sistance to  thin  the  ranks  of  the  Egyptian 
army. 

VOL.  II.  R 


242  COLLEGE  OF  ABOUZABEL. 

The  pupils  are  now  taken  at  an  earlier  age 
than  they  were  in  the  first  instance,  when  the 
urgent  want  of  medical  men  caused  them  to 
be  admitted  long  after  they  had  passed  the 
period  up  to  which  Arabs  (I  may  say  Mus- 
sulmans) learn  any  thing.  The  complaint, 
therefore,  which  has  very  generally  been 
made,  that  the  surgeons  hitherto  furnished 
by  the  College  of  Abouzabel  have  done  very 
little  credit  to  that  establishment,  will  not,  it 
may  be  hoped,  be  urged — with  justice — here- 
after. 

All  the  appointments  to  the  medical  de- 
partments, both  of  the  navy  and  army,  must 
(excepting  in  the  case  of  Franks)  be  given 
from  Abouzabel.  The  students  are  well 
lodged,  fed,  and  clothed,  and  receive  a  rate 
of  pajr,  varying,  according  to  the  classes  into 
which  they  are  divided,  from  thirty  to  one 
hundred  and  fifty  piastres  a  month. 

No  expense  appears  to  have  been  spared 
in  furnishing  the  schools  with  chemical  ap- 
paratus, anatomical  drawings,  models  in  wax, 
&.C.     The  establishment  is  well  supplied  also 


SURGICAL  INSTRUMENTS.  243 

with  subjects  for  dissection ;  the  moslem  stu- 
dents suffering  themselves  to  be  persuaded 
that  none  but  the  bodies  of  Copts,  Jews,  or 
Franks,  are  submitted  to  their  examination. 
The  surgical  instruments — infinite  in  variety, 
and  models  of  French  ingenuity — struck  me 
as  having  been  supplied  on  the  principle  of 
Peter  Pindar's  razors,  and  to  be  of  very  rude 
workmanship. 

Within  the  court  of  the  hospital  is  a  bota- 
nical garden,  and  adjoining  it  is  the  veteri- 
nary college,  which  promises,  under  the  able 
superintendence  of  Monsieur  Hamond,  to  be 
of  infinite  service.  From  this  school,  each 
cavalry  regiment  of  the  Egyptian  army  has 
already  been  supplied  with  a  veterinary  sur- 
geon. The  number  of  pupils  is  one  hundred 
and  twenty.  They  are  paid  and  treated  the 
same  as  those  of  the  medical  college.  The 
lecture  room  is  fitted  up  as  an  amphitheatre, 
and  is  well  supplied  with  anatomical  subjects, 
models,  and  drawings. 