

The  stable  is  only  capable  of  receiving- 
eighty  horses — but  there  was  not  a  third  of 

r2 


244  ARAB  MODE  OF  SHOEING  HORSES. 

that  number  in  it.  Those  I  saw  had  mostly 
been  sent  from  the  army  in  Syria,  were  all 
entire  horses,  and  many  of  them  under  treat- 
ment for  a  disease,  to  which  I  had  always 
supposed  the  human  race  was  alone  subject. 
Monsieur  Hamond  informed  me  that  to  him, 
also,  it  was  quite  a  new  disease  in  the  horse  ; 
and  one  for  the  contracting  of  which  he 
could  not  possibly  account ;  but  stated  that 
it  assumed  all  the  appearances  of  the  same 
malady  in  the  human  frame,  and  gave  way 
to  the  same  remedies. 

The  Arab  method  of  shoeing  horses  is  ex- 
tremely bad  ;  a  plate  of  iron  covers  the  entire 
foot,  preventing  all  expansion,  and  pressing 
upon  the  frog,  so  as  to  lame  the  poor  animal 
the  moment  he  leaves  his  native  sands  or 
meadows,  to  travel  upon  a  stony  road.  It  is 
a  Turkish  prejudice  that  Monsieur  Hamond 
seemed  to  think  will  be  difficult  to  overcome. 
Far  greater  have,  however,  been  conquered, 
since  the  establishment  of  the  College  of 
Abouzabel — for  what  barriers  of  ignorance 
and  fanaticism   have   not  given  way  to   the 


PLAN  OF  INSTRUCTION.  246 

persevering  industry  of  the  present  ruler  of 
Egypt ! 

A  great  disadvantage  under  which  this 
establishment  at  present  labours  is,  that  the 
professors  are  all  foreigners,  who,  not  under- 
standing Arabic  sufficiently  to  lecture  in  that 
language,  are  under  the  necessity  of  having 
their  instructions  translated.  Now,  besides 
the  inconvenience  that  cannot  but  be  felt  by 
such  a  circuitous  mode  of  communicating 
knowledge,  the  indispensable  Dragoman  must 
himself  be  a  proficient  in  the  languages  of 
both  the  lecturer  and  the  pupil,  and  should, 
moreover,  have  a  very  clear  head — desiderata 
that  are  rarely  to  be  met  with,  even  in  the 
most  accomplished  Dragomans. 

One,  indeed,  (considered,  too,  a  perfect 
master  of  his  business)  whom  I  had  occa- 
sion to  request  to  officiate  as  my  interpreter, 
translated  "  Tell  him  to  go  to  the  devil."  "The 
Effendi  says  he  is  extremely  sorry  for  what 
has  happened."  Though  fully  expecting  my 
brief  and  not  over  civil  request  would  be  in- 
stantly followed  by  the  departure  of  the  com- 


246  THE  FRENCH  LANGUAGE. 

plainant — if  not  for  the  place  of  destination  I 
pointed  out,  at  all  events  from  the  room  in 
which  our  conference  took  place — yet,  I  was 
by  no  means  prepared  to  witness  the  degree 
of  satisfaction  his  countenance  expressed  on 
making  his  salaam  —  my  surprise  ceased 
only  on  learning  afterwards  what  a  turn  had 
been  given  to  my  unpalatable  words,  in  the 
polite  mouth  of  Signor -. 