


266  VILLAGE  OF  DEFNES. 

force  their  young  shoots  through  the  en- 
tanglement of  weeds,  that  overshadows  and 
renders  them  fruitless :  but,  excepting  the 
dwarf  alders  and  ash  growing  on  the  edges 
of  the  rivulets,  and,  as  we  advanced  further 
into  the  interior,  a  few  mulberry  trees,  no 
other  foliage  presented  itself,  for  many  miles, 
from  the  walls  of  Candia. 

In  three  hours  and  a  half,  we  reached  a 
wretched  village,  called  Defnes — situated,  like 
an  eagle's  nest,  on  the  summit  of  a  barren 
rocky  ledge.  It  is  now  an  abandoned  heap 
of  ruins ;  but  was  evidently,  in  former  days, 
a  flourishing  place.  The  walls  of  the  houses, 
solidly  built  of  blocked  stone  ;  the  well-turned 
arches,  over  the  doors  and  windows ;  have  in- 
deed resisted  the  hand  of  the  destroyer — but 
roofless,  comfortless,  blackened  by  the  Mos- 
lem torch — in  revenge  for  the  vineyard  up- 
rooted the  day  before,  by  the  Greek  inmate  of 
this  now  wretched  abode — the  place  offers  a 
most  heart-rending  example  of  the  sad  effects 
of  civil  war  !  and  such  is  the  picture  of  almost 
every  village  of  Candia  ! 


EVEGENICHI  AND  ST.  TOMAS.  2(>7 

On  leaving  Defnes,  the  road  enters  a  more 
fruitful  country,  and,  at  two  miles  and  a  half 
from  that  village,  passes  under  the  equally 
miserable  one  of  Evegenichi.  Its  ruined 
church  and  roofless  houses  are  extremely 
picturesque,  and  contrast  finely  (I  mean  in 
colour)  with  the  darkly  wooded  ravine  on  the 
brink  of  which  they  stand  ;  where,  flourishing 
in  unpruned  luxuriance,  the  fig,  pomegranate, 
almond,  and  other  fruit  trees,  vie  with  the 
stately  oak  and  plane,  that  clothe  the  sides  of 
the  valley. 

Ascending  and  crossing  over  the  summit 
of  the  ridge  on  the  right  side  of  the  ravine, 
we  entered  a  wood  of  well-grown  oaks ;  and, 
thence,  scrambling  up  the  side  of  another 
steep  chain — our  path  overhung  with  ivy- 
covered  rocks,  and  shadowed  by  indigenous 
vines,  clinging  in  graceful  festoons  to  fruit 
trees  of  every  variety — reached  the  village  of 
St.  Tomas. 

The  roofless  and  almost  tenantless  houses 
of  this  once  thriving  village  are  clustered 
round  the  foot  of  a  rocky  knoll,  at  the  sum- 


268  nuiNs  OF  meralibuisi. 

mit  of  the  mountain  ridge  —  its  population 
reduced  from  three  hundred  to  thirty  fami- 
lies !  The  position  of  the  place,  the  pic- 
turesque church,  impending  rocks,  and  lux- 
uriant overshadowing  groves,  make  it  quite 
a  scene  of  romance ;  and,  from  the  top  of  the 
conical  eminence,  rising  in  the  centre  of  the 
ruined  village,  a  superb  panoramic  view  is 
obtained.  It  lies  nearly  due  south  of  the 
town  of  Candia,  and  is  distant  from  it  about 
fourteen  miles. 