


MONSIEUR  CAPORAL.  253 

had  been  issued — neat.  After  that — "G —  d — , 
pull  away  ;  "  "Viva  il  buon  grog- ;  "  "  Huzza 
for  King  George,"  &,c.,  &c.  He  always  spoke 
with  great  affection  of  the  English  nation  ; 
but,  so  identified  was  his  love  of  us  with 
that  of  his  favourite  liquor,  that  he  never 
failed  terminating  his  discourse  with  an 
eulogium  on  the  virtues  of  *'  quel  buon  grog." 
Next  to  his  deeds  of  arms,  our  guardian's 
favourite  theme  was  the  wonderful  talent  and 
extraordinary  influence  of  a  certain  Monsieur 
Caporal.  Of  the  station  and  title  of  this  im- 
portant personage,  we  were  doomed  for  a 
length  of  time  to  remain  in  ignorance,  never 
being  able  to  elicit  more  from  the  little  man, 
than  that  Monsieur  Caporal  was,  at  that 
very  time,  on  a  visit  at  Candia,  and  was 
"  Vistesso  come  il  Pasha."  In  saying  this,  he 
used  to  shove  out  his  little  fin-like  right  arm 
and  make  a  sidelong  motion,  as  if  it  would 
be  no  disgrace  to  either  to  walk  arm  in  arm 
with  the  other — repeating,  always,  "I'istesso 
come  il  Pasha."  Monsieur  Caporal,  we  at 
length  learnt,   was   a  French  gentleman,   at 


254  ISLAND  OF  CRETE. 

the  head  of  the  board  of  health,  and  Monsieur 
Caporal,  having  come  one  afternoon  to  take  a 
look  at  us  through  the  palisades,  was  so  well 
satisfied  with  our  appearance,  that  he  thought 
the  health  of  the  island  would  not  be  en- 
dangered by  our  release  on  the  following 
morning,  thereby  kindly  reducing  our  con- 
finement to  six  days. 

On  once  more  becoming /rce  agents,  we  re- 
paired to  the  dwelling  of  our  worthy  consular 
agent,  whose  attentions  had  been  unremitting 
whilst  we  were  in  the  lazaretto,  and  who  now, 
assuring  us  that  not  a  lodging  could  be 
procured  in  the  city,  on  any  terms,  in- 
sisted on  our  accepting  apartments  at  his 
house. 

The  island  of  Crete,  as  it  is  still  called  by 
the  Greeks,  is  about  one  hundred  and  sixty 
miles  in  length,  and  thirty  in  its  greatest 
breadth.  It  is  divided  into  three  districts, 
which  bear  the  names  of  their  principal 
towns,  viz.  Candia,  Retimo,  and  Canea ;  all  of 
them  sea-ports  on  the  north  side  of  the 
island.     The   first-named   is  the  seat  of  go- 


MOUNT  IDA.  255 

vernment,  but  Canea  is  the  principal  place  of 
commerce. 

A  serrated  range  of  mountains  stretches 
from  east  to  west,  quite  through  the  island, 
but  this  chain  is  not  equally  lofty  and  rugged 
throughout ;  indeed,  in  some  places  it  loses 
altogether  its  asperity,  and  is  cultivated  to 
the  very  summit ;  but  these  mountain-passes 
are  few,  and  the  roads  traversing  them  are, 
for  the  most  part,  cut  off  from  each  other  by 
cragged  impracticable  peaks. 