

VOL.  II.  s 


258  STATE  OF  THE  FORTIFICATIONS. 

cover  the  attackable  points  of  the  principal 
line. 

The  artillery  with  which  the  walls  are 
armed  is  in  a  wretched  condition ;  the  iron 
guns  being  rusted  and  honeycombed — their 
carriages  rotten.  The  brass  pieces  are  in  a 
more  serviceable  state,  and  there  are  four 
guns,  of  immense  length,  on  the  sea  wall, 
which  ships  would  find  very  troublesome 
acquaintances ;  though  the  state  of  their 
carriages  would  not  permit  of  an  interchange 
of  civilities  being  long  maintained  on  their 
parts. 

The  sea  wall  is  not  above  twenty  feet  high, 
very  irregular,  and  but  badly  flanked.  It  is 
protected  in  some  measure  by  the  nature  of 
the  beach,  which  is  broken  by  ledges  of  flat 
rocks  that  stretch  a  considerable  distance 
into  the  sea,  rendering  a  debarkation  ex- 
tremely difficult  if  there  be  the  least  wind ; 
otherwise,  there  are  several  spots  of  sandy 
beach,  on  which  boats  may  be  run  without 
danger.  The  western  mole  of  the  harbour 
would,  if  properly  armed,  present  a  formidable 


DESCRirXION  OF  THE  HARBOUR.  259 

flanking  fire  along  the  greater  part  of  the 
sea  wall ;  but,  besides  that  the  artillery  is 
dismounted,  the  work  itself  is  in  a  very 
crazy  state. 

The  harbour  is  a  mere  basin,  formed  by 
two  moles,  which,  bending  towards  each 
other,  project  about  two  hundred  and  fifty 
yards  into  the  sea,  and  are  defended,  at  their 
extreme  points,  by  forts.  That  at  the  head 
of  the  western  pier  encloses  a  light-house, 
which  is  highly  necessary  to  enable  vessels 
arriving  at  night  to  discover  the  harbour; 
for,  such  is  the  velocity  with  which  an  easterly 
current  sets  along  the  shore,  that,  if  the 
entrance  be  missed  by  ever  so  little,  great 
risk  is  incurred  of  shipwreck  on  the  rocky 
coast  beyond ;  or,  if  that  misfortune  be 
avoided,  a  considerable  delay  must  inevitably 
be  experienced  in  working  a  vessel  up  against 
the  stream. 

The  two  castles  that  defend  the  harbour 
do  not  appear  to  be  in  a  state  to  stand  even 
the  concussion  that  would  be  occasioned  by 
the   fire   of    their  own    guns.     The   channel 

s2 


260  NUMBER  OF  VESSELS  IN  THE  POUT. 

between  them  opens  rather  to  the  eastward, 
and  is  so  very  narrow  as  barely  to  allow  two 
small  vessels  to  pass,  but  the  harbour  is 
thereby  completely  sheltered  against  every 
wind.  It  is,  at  the  present  day,  choked  up 
with  sand  and  the  ruins  of  the  old  Venetian 
docks  and  arsenal,  so  that  it  serves  only  for 
vessels  of  one  hundred  tons  burthen.  Large 
vessels  are  obliged  to  anchor  under  the 
island  of  Standia  ;  abreast  of,  and  about  three 
miles  distant  from  the  harbour,  where  they 
are  sheltered  from  the  north-east  wind, 
which  prevails  on  this  coast  during  the 
greater  part  of  the  year. 