

From  St.Tomas  the  road  gradually  ascends 
amongst  vineyards  and  orchards,  for  some- 
thing more  than  a  mile,  to  the  ruins  of  Mera- 
librisi,  embosomed  in  groves  of  mulberry  and 
apple  trees  ;  from  thence,  continuing  still  to 
ascend  for  another  mile,  it  at  length  reaches 
the  summit  of  the  pass  in  the  great  mountain 
chain  that  runs  through  the  island  from  east 
to  west,  where  a  fine  view  is  obtained  of  the 
southern  side  of  Candia.  The  rich  vale  of 
I\Iassara  extends  far  to  the  west,  directing 
the  eye  to  the  Mediterranean,  from  the  blue 
surface  of  which  rises   the   rocky  island  of 


ASPECT  OF  THE  COUNTRY.  269 

Paximades,  distant  but  a  few  miles  from  the 
shore;  whilst,  far  beyond,  the  bolder  outline  of 
Gozo  di  Candia  breaks  the  line  of  the  horizon. 
The  face  of  the  country  presents  a  very 
different  look  from  that  which  we  had  hither- 
to traversed.  It  is  much  less  wooded.  The 
valleys  are  wider,  less  tortuous,  and  easier  of 
cultivation ;  and  being,  from  their  southern 
aspect,  exposed  to  the  full  influence  of  the 
sun,  their  crops  are  sooner  ripened  than  on 
the  other  side  the  mountains,  so  that  we 
found  nothing-  standing  but  a  few  neglected 
fields  of  corn  and  oats — scarcely,  I  should 
have  conceived,  worth  the  trouble  of  gather- 
ing in.  The  greater  part  of  the  country  had 
not,  however,  been  cultivated  for  many  a  year. 
Villages  are  scattered  throughout  the  plains, 
and  the  olive  groves  that  once  formed  the 
chief  source  of  the  riches  of  the  country  still 
grow  round  them  ;  but  the  hands  that  tilled 
the  fields,  and  pruned  and  rendered  the  trees 
productive,  have  been  swept  off,  and  the  fer- 
tile country  will  soon  assume  the  appearance 
of  a  wilderness. 


270  VILLAGE  OF  AGIUS  DECCA. 

The  road,  now  little  more  than  a  rough 
stony  track,  descends  to  Gurguliete,  seven 
miles  from  St.  Tomas  ;  from  whence,  crossing 
another  steep  ridge,  and  traversing  a  rocky 
defile,  overhung  by  precipitous  cliffs  of  dark 
grey  marble,  it  enters  the  celebrated  valley 
of  Massara — extending,  east  and  west,  nearly 
ten  miles.  Near  the  head  of  the  valley,  and 
distant  about  three  miles  from  the  last  named 
village,  is  that  of  Agius  Decca  —  a  dirty 
place,  containing  some  sixty  or  eighty  ill- 
built  houses,  shaded  by  a  few  fruit  trees.  It 
stands  near  the  site  of  the  ancient  city  of  Go- 
tyna,  which,  judging  from  the  vast  extent  of 
ruins,  must  have  stretched  for  several  miles 
down  the  valley.  We  found  the  walls  of  the 
village  church  yet  standing,  as  also  some 
marble  pillars  that  once  supported  its  roof. 
The  floor  is  paved  with  slabs  of  the  same  and 
breccia  verde,  which,  I  imagine,  must  have 
been  quarried  from  the  neighbouring  moun- 
tains. 