

During  my  stay  at  Candia,  the  number  of 
vessels  in  the  port  averaged  about  twenty. 
They  were  mostly  Greek  misticos,  of  from 
eighty  to  one  hundred  tons  burthen.  The 
basin  is,  however,  capable  of  containing  three 
times  that  number. 

Under  the  Turkish  Government,  the  export 
trade  of  the  island  was  confined  exclusively 
to  the  port  of  Candia ;  but,  since  Mohammed 
Ali   has  assumed  the  sovereignty,  the  place 


ENTRANCE  TO  THE  TOWN.  261 

has  been  deprived  of  this  privilege,  and  has, 
consequently,  succumbed  to  its  rival,  Canea, 
which  stands  in  a  more  productive  country, 
and  possesses  a  better  harbour. 

There  are  now  but  three  gates  to  the  city 
of  Candia,  (exclusive  of  that  communicating 
with  the  harbour.)  That  of  Canea  opens  to 
the  west,  near  the  sea  shore — the  "Porta- 
nuova"  to  the  south,  about  the  middle  of  the 
enceinte — and  the  Lazaretto-gate  towards  the 
east.  Between  this  last  and  the  sea,  the  ram- 
parts are  somewhat  lower  than  elsewhere, 
and  the  multiplied  outworks  that  cover  the 
town  on  that  side  form  so  many  stepping- 
stones  into  it.  The  ground  there  also  favours 
an  attack  in  other  respects.  The  principal 
streets  of  the  city  are  wide,  but  roughly 
paved  ;  they  are  furnished  with  fountains  and 
adorned  with  clumps  of  trees,  which  give 
them  an  agreeable  and  refreshing  look.  The 
houses  are  mostly  low,  seldom  exceeding  one 
story  above  the  ground-floor,  and  are  built 
with  wide  projecting  roofs,  which,  being  sup- 
ported by  wooden  pillars,  form  a  shady  co- 
lonnade the  whole  length  of  the  street. 


262  PUBLIC  BUILDINGS. 

The  bazaars  are  good  ;  and  there  is  an  air 
of  freshness  and  cleanliness  extremely  pleas- 
ing, after  the  narrow  filthy  lanes  of  Alex- 
andria. 

The  city  walls  enclose  a  very  considerable 
space ;  but  the  upper  or  eastern  part  of  the 
town,  having  sustained  much  damage  from  an 
earthquake  a  few  years  since,  is  almost  de- 
serted, and  has  altogether  a  different  cha- 
racter to  that  just  described — the  few  habit- 
able streets  that  remain  being  narrow  and 
unpaved — the  houses  lofty,  more  scattered, 
and  interspersed  with  gardens. 

Amongst  the  public  buildings  of  the  place, 
the  most  conspicuous  are  the  barracks  and 
hospital  for  the  troops,  the  palace  of  the  go- 
vernor, and  the  metropolitan  cathedral  of 
the  Greeks — the  size  of  this  last  gives  but  an 
unfavourable  idea  of  their  devotion ;  and  its 
condition  furnishes  rather  an  argument 
against  the  *'  voluntary  principled  The  city 
contains  another  small  place  of  worship  for 
the  Greeks — numerous  mosques — and  the  re- 
mains of  two  Roman  Catholic  churches.    One 


MUSTAPIIA  PASHA.  263 

of  these  has  been  repaired  and  converted  into 
a  mosque  ;  and  it  was  the  wish  of  Mohammed 
Ali,  that  the  other  should  be  fitted  up  as  a 
public  school,  but  the  inhabitants  of  the  island 
will  not  suffer  their  children  to  be  instructed, 
fearing  that  by  education  they  might  be 
turned  to  some  honest  account,  and  sent  out 
of  the  country. 