

The  city  is  well  supplied  with  water  by 
means  of  two  aqueducts  ;  but  as  these,  in  the 
event  of  a  siege,  are  liable  to  be  cut  off,  every 
house  in  the  place  is  provided  with  a  well ; 
the  water  found  on  the  spot  is  not,  however, 
by  any  means  good.  There  are  some  old 
tanks  belonging  to  the  Government,  but  they 
are  no  longer  serviceable.  The  market  is 
tolerably  well  supplied  with  meat ;  but  poultry, 
fruit,  and  vegetables,  are  scarce,  and  appeared 
to  us,  who  had  just  come  from  Egypt,  particu- 
larly dear. 

The  introduction  to  one  Turkish  authority 
is  so  similar  to  that  of  another,  that  I  will  ab- 
stain from  any  account  of  our  presentation  to 
Mustapha  Pasha  (the  Governor  of  the  island), 


264  DIFFICULTY  IN  PROCURING  HORSES. 

further  than  by  observing,  that  the  pipes 
with  which  he  honoured  us  were  very  hand- 
some—  the  coffee  very  bad  —  that  he  is  a 
young  man  of  about  two  or  three  and  thirty ; 
very  good  looking  ;  possesses,  in  an  eminent 
degree,  the  suaviter  in  modo  of  all  well  bred 
Turks ;  is  said  to  be  very  much  given  to 
break  the  precepts  of  the  Koran,  touching 
abstinence  from  wine;  and  is  distinguished 
for  the  courage  and  moderation  he  evinced 
throughout  the  turbulent  period  of  the  insur- 
rectionary war,  when  he  commanded  the  gar- 
rison of  Canea. 

We  were  detained  several  days  beyond  the 
period  we  had  fixed  for  our  departure  for 
Canea,  by  the  difficulty  experienced  in  pro- 
curing horses  to  convey  ourselves  and  lug- 
gage ;  and  it  was  only  at  last  overcome  by  the 
interference  of  the  Pasha,  who  kindly  took 
upon  himself  to  order  the  horse-owners  to 
furnish  us  ;  answering  for  their  safe  return. 
We  were  obliged,  nevertheless,  to  be  satisfied 
with  three  ;  and  to  send  the  greater  part  of 
our  baggage  by  water. 


DEPARTURE  FOR  CANEA.  265 

The  direct  road  to  Canea  skirts  the  sea- 
coast,  nearly  the  whole  way ;  we  determined 
to  vary  the  scenery,  by  crossing  to  the  south- 
ern side  of  the  island,  visiting,  on  our  route, 
the  ruins  of  Gortyna,  and  the  celebrated  la- 
byrinth. Striking  off,  therefore,  from  the 
Canea  road,  about  a  mile  from  Candia,  we 
commenced  ascending,  by  a  narrow  valley, 
towards  the  mountain-pass,  on  the  eastern 
side  of  Ida.  Our  road  soon  became  a  mere 
mule  track,  though  here  and  there  traces  of 
an  old  Venetian  pav^  gave  evidence  of  its 
having  seen  better  days.  The  country  is 
broken  and  steep  —  the  soil  light  and  thin, 
lying  over  a  stratum  of  calcareous  rock.  The 
sides  of  the  valleys  are  clothed  with  rank 
grass,  which  affords  but  poor  food  to  the 
flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  that  are  doomed  to 
remain  thin  upon  it.  The  crops  of  barley 
and  corn  in  the  bottoms — where  a  deep  rich 
soil  and  flowing  stream  promise  abundance 
— are  scanty  and  neglected.  Groves  of  olive 
trees  are  scattered  sparingly  along  the  way- 
side,   and   occasionally    some    stunted    vines 