

French  lady,  Madame  C ,  whom  her  tender 

husband  described  as  being  '*  enceinte  de  5 
mois." 

The  purpose  for  which  this  labyrinth  was 
formed  is  yet  a  matter  of  conjecture.  There 
is  not  the  slightest  indication  of  its  having 
been  a  place  of  burial,  and  the  narrow  en- 
trance is  very  much  against  the  supposition 
of  its  having  been  a  stone  quarry  —  indeed  it 


CELEBRATED  LABYRINTH.         277 

is  quite  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the 
builders  of  Gotyna  should  have  come  here 
for  stone  when  they  had  plenty  of  the  same 
kind  much  nearer  at  hand. 

It  most  probably  was  a  natural  cavern, 
which  served  in  early  ages  as  a  place  of  refuge 
for  the  inhabitants  of  the  plain  below,  against 
the  marauding  visits  of  their  more  powerful 
neighbours,  and  thus  came  to  be  enlarged 
to  contain  their  stores  of  grain  as  well  as 
their  families,  and,  finally,  to  assume  its  pre- 
sent regular  appearance. 

Some  doubts  have  been  started  as  to  this 
cavern  being  the  famed  labyrinth  from  which 
Theseus  was  delivered  by  the  contrivance  of 
the  love-stricken  Ariadne.  Far  be  it  from 
me  to  throw  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  on  the 
truth  of  a  tale  of  such  true  love,  but  I  needs 
must  confess  that  the  locale  but  ill  agrees 
with  the  account  handed  down  to  us  of  the 
Minotaur's  abode,  for  veracious  Greek  authors 
state  that  it  had  an  opening  on  the  sea 
shore — now  this  certainly  never  possessed 
such  a  back-door,  for  it  is,  at  least,  six  miles 
from  the  coast. 


2^8 


THE  BAY  OF  MKSSARA. 


On  leaving  the  labyrinth,  we  descended  the 
mountain  in  the  best  way  we  could  to  regain 
the  road  in  the  valley,  from  which  we  had  pre- 
viously struck  off,  as  by  it  we  purposed  gaining 
the  pass  on  the  western  side  of  Mount  Ida  and 
proceeding  to  Retimo.  The  road  soon  quits 
the  plain,  inclining  slightly  to  the  right,  and 
traverses  a  broken  country,  of  which  the 
gravelly  surface  is  thickly  clad  with  gorse, 
heather,  and  aromatic  shrubs  of  infinite  variety. 
On  attaining  the  summit  of  a  barren  ridge, 
an  agreeable  view  burst  upon  us.  The  beau- 
tiful village  of  Faneromegnie,  nestled  in  the 
bottom  of  the  ravine,  lies  below,  shadowed  by 
magnificent  carob  trees,  and  encompassed  by 
orchards,  bending  under  the  weight  of  their 
own  riches.  From  thence,  a  level  country 
stretches  all  the  way  to  the  sea,  but  the  road, 
when  arrived  at  within  a  mile  of  the  coast,  in- 
clines again  to  the  right,  keeping  parallel  to 
the  eastern  shore  of  the  Bay  of  Messara,  and 
crosses  the  beds  of  several  mountain  torrents. 
The  soil  of  the  plain  is  red  clay  and  gravel, 
and  it  is  covered  with  aromatic  plants  that 
give  out  a  delightful  fragrance. 