

The  Capo  of  the  village,  a  Greek,  received 
us  into  his  house,  or  rather  into  his  garden, 


THE  GREEK  CAPO.  271 

where  we  pitched  our  tent — and  asked  us, 
mysteriously,  in  the  few  words  of  Italian 
of  which  he  was  master,  whether  we  were 
English  or  French  ;  saying,  on  my  acknow- 
ledging to  belong  to  the  former  locomotive 
nation,  *'Inglez!  buono" — immediately  putting 
my  assertion  to  the  test,  by  asking  for  a  knife 
and  fork  out  of  our  canteen.  He  volunteered 
his  services  as  guide  and  Cicerone  to  the 
labyrinth,  which  we  purposed  visiting  next 
morning,  and,  on  the  plea  of  laying  in  a  pro- 
vision of  twine,  tapers,  he,  extracted  a  sum 
of  money  in  advance,  which  would  have  pur- 
chased all  the  hemp  and  wax  in  the  village. 
His  own  stores,  however,  furnished  the  re- 
quired articles,  which  had  already  been  used 
and  paid  for  a  hundred  times  over  by  former 
travellers. 

We  set  out  at  day-break,  and,  at  about 
half  a  mile  from  the  village,  reached  a  bridge 
thrown  across  a  crystal  stream  that  gushes 
out  of  a  ravine  in  the  wide-spreading  roots  of 
Mount  Ida.  On  the  margin  of  the  torrent 
stands  an  extremely  picturesque  ruin,  over- 


272  RUINS  OF  GOTYNA. 

shadowed  by  a  group  of  wide-spreading  plane 
trees.  A  dilapidated  bridge  affords  a  passage 
across  the  stream,  which,  however,  is  fordable 
at  most  seasons  of  the  year.  The  surface  of 
the  plain,  on  the  left,  is  strewed  as  far  as  the 
eye  can  reach  with  fragments  of  marble  co- 
lumns, building  stones,  and  ruins;  the  remains 
of  Gotyna. 

At  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from  our  sleep- 
ing-place is  the  village  of  Avenuson,  which  is 
a  much  more  inviting  locale  than  Agius  Decca, 
being  embosomed  in  groves  of  fruit  trees,  and 
watered  by  a  limpid  rivulet.  Soon  after  pass- 
ing this  village,  the  pathway  to  the  labyrinth 
strikes  off  to  the  right,  ascending  the  steep 
mountain,  on  the  acclivity  of  which  this  won- 
der of  the  world  is  situated.  It  requires  a 
scramble  of  three  quarters  of  an  hour  to  reach 
it ;  for,  although  but  a  short  distance  from  the 
road,  it  is  elevated  at  least  six  hundred  feet 
above  the  plain,  and  the  pathway  is  obstructed 
by  rocks  and  bushes. 

The  entrance  cannot  be  discerned  until 
within  one  hundred  paces  of  it.     It  faces  the 


NATURAL  CAVERNS.  273 

south,  and  is  evidently  one\>f  the  natural  ca- 
verns so  common  in  the  island,  and  indeed  in 
the  sides  of  all  mountains  of  the  same  geolo- 
gical character. 

From  this  vestibule,  a  passage  of  consider- 
able width,  but  obstructed  by  huge  blocks  of 
rock,  leads  for  some  distance  into  the  heart  of 
the  mountain,  when,  turning  sharply  to  the 
left,  and  diminishing  suddenly  to  a  width  and 
height  of  between  four  and  five  feet,  it  con- 
tinues in  that  direction  for  about  eighty 
paces.  This  inconvenient  hoyau  is  the  only 
passage  in  the  labyrinth  that  obliges  one  to 
bend  the  back.  At  its  termination,  we  arrived 
at  a  kind  of  star  chamber,  (I  mean  a  chamber 
in  the  form  of  a  star),  from  which  passages 
branch  off  in  all  directions,  leading  to  other 
chambers,  where  new  radii  conduct  still  fur- 
ther into  the  interior  of  the  mountain,  form- 
ing, indeed,  a  very  intricate  net-work,  of 
which  some  idea  may  be  formed  by  those  who 
are  acquainted  with  the  purlieus  of  St.  Giles's, 
by  merely  imagining  a  succession  of  subter- 
ranean seven  dials. 