

The  mountains  of  the  eastern  division  of 
the  island  never  attain  any  very  great 
elevation,  but  are  rough  and  barren,  fall 
precipitously  to  the  sea,  and  present  an  unsafe 
and  inhospitable  shore.  On  stretching  to 
the  westward,  the  chain  attains  a  great 
height,  and  we  found  most  of  its  peaks  still 
covered  with  snow  in  the  month  of  June.  It 
falls  suddenly  on  approaching  the  centre  of 
the  island,  leaving  a  wide  gap  between  its 
western  extremity  and  the  rugged  side  of 
Mount  Psitorite  or  Ida.  The  conical  peak 
of  this  magnificent  mountain   towers  above 


256  ABSENCE  OF  RIVERS. 

all  the  other  points  of  the  island,  and  it  may 
be  considered  almost  an  isolated  mount,  for 
another  low  pass,  on  its  western  side,  divides 
it  from  the  mountains  of  Levka,  whilst,  to  the 
north  and  south,  its  wide-spreading  roots 
are  washed  by  the  waves  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean. 

The  mountains  at  the  western  extremity 
of  Candia  are  yet  more  savage  and  impracti- 
cable than  those  already  described,  are  very 
lofty,  assuming  the  most  fantastic  and  pic- 
turesque forms,  and  fall  suddenly  to  the 
sea,  presenting  an  indented  and  inaccessible 
coast. 

The  island  is  watered  by  no  great  rivers, 
but  every  little  ravine  in  the  furrowed  sides 
of  the  different  mountain  ranges  bears  its 
own  tribute  of  melted  snow  to  the  rich 
alluvial  valleys  lying  at  their  feet.  At  the 
present  day,  however,  they  are  mostly  doomed 
to  flow  for  no  more  useful  purpose  than  to 
slake  the  thirst  of  the  wild  boar  and  ibex, 
with  which  the  forests  abound ;  or,  perchance, 
that  of  some  lonely  traveller,  led  by  curiosity 


POPULATION  OF  CANDIA.  257 

to  visit  this  neglected  garden :  for  such  the 
greater  part  of  the  island  is.  On  every  side 
are  to  be  seen  villages  razed  to  the  ground, 
olive  groves  cut  down,  uprooted  vineyards, 
and  un weeded  crops. 

The  population  of  Candia,  from  the  raising 
of  the  standard  of  Greek  independence  to 
the  present  day,  has  been  reduced  from  two 
hundred  and  eighty  to  one  hundred  thousand 
souls  !  Of  this  number,  the  city  of  Candia 
alone  contains  from  twelve  to  fourteen  thou- 
sand. It  stands  near  the  site  of  the  ancient 
Heraclea,  and  is  defended  by  a  formidable 
bastioned  enceinte  of  Venetian  workmanship, 
having  lofty  cavaliers,  deep  retired  flanks, 
and  orillons  a  la  Pagan  ;  but,  excepting  the 
scarp  wall  of  the  body  of  the  place  (a  beautiful 
specimen  of  the  art,  which  still,  in  most  places, 
presents  a  perpendicular  height  of  fifty  feet) 
the  fortifications  are  in  a  very  dilapidated 
state.  The  ditch  is  wide,  partially  choked 
up  with  ruins  and  overgrown  with  bushes, 
and  the  out-works  are  in  a  yet  worse 
plight,    and   have    not    capacity   enough    to 