

VOL.  II.  T 


274  CIIARLATANERIE  OF  THE  GUIDES. 

The  roof  of  all  these  numerous  passages 
and  chambers  is  one  uninterrupted  even  sur- 
face, for  though  they  differ  materially  in 
height,  yet  this  irregularity  is  chiefly  caused 
by  the  greater  or  less  accumulation  of  stones 
and  rubbish  heaped  upon  the  floors,  over 
which  the  adventurer  has  sometimes  to  make 
his  way  at  the  risk  of  his  neck.  Some  of  the 
chambers,  however,  are  entered  by  steps,  the 
floors  bemg  sunk,  but  even  of  these  the  roof 
is  invariably  on  the  same  hanging  level. 

The  passages  are  sufficiently  complex  and 
tortuous  to  puzzle  any  one  who  visits  them 
for  the  first  time,  but  to  persons  accustomed 
to  thread  their  mazes,  like  our  guides,  I  should 
say  the  huge  hanks  of  twine  and  extravagant 
supply  of  torches  and  wax-tapers  were  called 
for  merely  by  the  "  chai^latanerie  "  of  their 
profession  ;  and  I  feel  persuaded  that,  bearing 
in  mind  the  before-noticed  peculiarity  in  the 
formation  of  the  roof  of  this  extraordinary 
place,  any  one  provided  with  plenty  of  wax 
candles,  presence  of  mind,  a  box  of  lucifers, 
and  the  organ  of  locality,  ought  to  find  his 


APPEARANCE  OF  THE  INTERIOR.  275 

way  out  of  it.  The  direction  of  the  chain  of 
hills  is  east  and  west ;  their  composition  a  soft 
limestone,  disposed  in  thin  parallel  strata, 
underlying  slightly  north.  Recollecting, 
therefore,  that  the  roof  is  always  the  under 
part  of  the  same  stratum — it  is  clear  that  all 
the  passages  which  are  on  an  inclined  pliane 
parallel  to  that  of  the  roof  must  run  north 
and  south — whilst  those  which  are  level  must 
be  in  the  direction  of  the  range  of  hills,  and 
cannot,  therefore,  lead  to  the  entrance,  facing 
the  south,  which  must,  consequently,  be  sought 
for,  by  attaining  the  very  highest  level  of  the 
passages  on  an  inclined  plane. 

One  passage  that  we  followed,  with  every 
appearance  of  caution  on  the  part  of  our 
guides,  brought  us,  after  divers  windings,  to 
a  small  chamber,  of  which  the  roof  having 
given  way  to  the  constant  action  of  a  trick- 
ling stream,  and  formed  numerous  stalactites, 
has  assumed  the  appearance  of  the  interior 
of  a  Gothic  spire.  The  water  is  constantly 
dripping,  and  some  charitable  person  has 
furnished  the  chamber  with  an  earthenware 

t2 


276  THE  HALL  OF  SACRIFICE. 

vase  to  collect  the  stream  and  enable  the 
traveller  to  quench  his  thirst.  This  is  the 
only  part  of  the  labyrinth  that  we  found  un- 
comfortably damp,  and  in  no  place  was  the 
air  hot  or  disagreeable. 

Another  passage  conducted  us  to  a  large 
chamber,  which  we  were  informed  was  the  ne 
plus  ultra  in  that  direction — I  think  our  guides 
called  it  the  hall  of  sacrifice.  The  venture- 
some persons  who,  by  the  aid  of  flambeaux 
and  twine,  penetrate  "  thus  far  into  the 
bowels  of  the  earth,"  consider  themselves 
entitled  to  lay  claim  to  immortality  by  in- 
scribing their  names  on  the  wall.  Amongst 
others  were  those  of  Mustapha  Pasha,  and  of  a 