


282  ROUTE  FROM  APODOULO. 

boars  are  very  plentiful  in  that  part  of  the 
island. 

Our  road  conducted  us  across  a  succession 
of  very  rugged  ridges  and  deep  ravines,  that 
furrow  the  side  of  Psilorite.  Near  the  head 
of  one  of  these  dells — yet  screened  from  the 
sun's  rays  by  the  lofty  summit  of  the  moun- 
tain— is  the  large  village  of  Stenefavri,  and, 
a  little  farther  on,  we  passed  that  of  Isigiani, 
situated  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the 
road,  on  the  left. 

After  having  travelled  about  five  miles 
from  Apodoulo — our  sleeping  place — we  de- 
scended to  the  bed  of  the  great  valley  men- 
tioned in  the  preceding  chapter,  the  water  of 
which  flows  to  the  southern  sea  of  Candia, 
and  into  which  the  numerous  minor  ravines 
that  we  had  previously  traversed  finally 
open. 

The  valley  presents  a  wide  pebbly  bed, 
but  is  so  thickly  covered  with  myrtle  and 
oleander,  that  the  windings  of  the  transparent 
stream  which  waters  it  cannot  be  followed, 
even  with  the  eye.     feo  luxuriant,  indeed,  is 


CONVENT  OF  ASOMATOS.  283 

the  growth  of  these  shrubs,  that  their  boughs, 
loaded  with  blossoms,  hung  high  above  our 
horses'  heads,  and  screened  us  from  the 
rapidly  increasing  heat  of  the  sun.  The  side 
of  the  mountain  range  on  our  left  was  clothed 
with  corn,  vines,  and  olives,  and  studded  with 
villages  and  orchards,  rendering  the  ride 
perfectly  beautiful.  In  three  hours  and  a 
half,  we  reached  the  convent  of  Asomatos, 
and — though  yet  early  in  the  day — were  in- 
duced, by  its  lovely  situation,  to  make  a  halt 
of  some  hours. 

The  convent  is  much  fallen  in  estate 
(literally  as  well  as  figuratively)  since  the 
time  when  Candia  was  under  the  Venetian 
rule.  It  consists  now  of  but  a  few  ruined 
out-houses  and  a  small  chapel.  Its  only  in- 
mates are  three  Capuchin  monks,  who  depend 
entirely  on  j:he  cultivation  of  their  garden  for 
subsistence. 

From  the  garden,  a  splendid  view  is  ob- 
tained of  the  mountain  range  to  the  east ;  and 
the  little  white  chapel,  with  its  picturesque 
belfry,  occupying   the  foreground,   is  set  off 


281  DRESS  OF  THE  MONKS. 

to  great  advantage,  by  a  rich  belt  of  foliage 
that  springs  up  behind.  In  the  court-yard, 
in  front  of  the  chapel,  are  some  of  the  finest 
cypresses  I  ever  saw. 

The  monks,  truly  good  souls,  {A<Tcafxxro; — 
incorporeal)  volunteered  to  provide  for  our 
bodily  wants  by  furnishing  breakfast  —  an 
offer  which  our  early  ride  made  us  accept 
without  much  solicitation,  although  our  cold 
pig  (at  which  they  cast  most  longing  glances) 
rendered  us  in  some  measure  independent  of 
their  hospitality.  Coffee,  milk,  bread,  eggs, 
and  fruit,  were  quickly  produced,  as  also 
wine  and  vinegar — all,  they  assured  us,  the 
produce  of  the  convent  lands.  With  respect 
to  the  first  article  on  the  list,  there  was  evi- 
dently some  little  mistake ;  the  two  last,  I 
gave  the  worthy  monks  full  credit  for  having 
manufactured  —  and  they  were  clearly  the 
production  of  the  same  barrel. 