

We  had  not  left  Retimo  ourselves  until  past 
mid-day,  and  had,  consequently,  been  exposed 
to  a  scorching  sun  during  the  whole  after- 
noon. The  slow  pace  at  which  we  had  been 
condemned  to  travel,  from  the  badness  of  the 
road,  had  also  wearied  us  exceedingly  —  al- 
though the  distance  we  had  travelled  hardly 
exceeded  twenty-three  miles  —  so  that,  tired 
and  feverish,  we  were  glad  enough  to  throw 
ourselves  down  on  our  carpets  in  the  Capo's 
house,  and  be  spared  the  trouble  of  pitching 
our  tent. 

The  place  allotted  for  our  dormitory  was 
a  kind  of  loft,  formed  by  some  loose  boards, 


302  THE  VILLAGE  CHIEF'S  DORMITORY. 

spread  across  the  rafters  of  one  corner  of  the 
village  chief's  large  but  only  room,  the  ascent 
being  effected  by  means  of  a  ladder.  To  this 
snug  retreat  our  host,  with  his  prolific  help- 
mate, and  some  half  dozen  of  their  progeny, 
were  in  the  nightly  habit  of  congregating,  and, 
I  dare  say,  of  sleeping  soundly  ;  but  I,  alas  ! 
closed  my  eyes  in  vain  ;  Morpheus  was  blind 
to  my  intreaties,  and  never  did  I  pass  a  more 
miserable  night.  The  heat  of  the  place  was 
excessive,  for,  independently  of  the  foul  and 
heated  atmosphere  occasioned  by  our  exalta- 
tion above  the  family  and  domestic  animals, 
sleeping  on  the  ground-floor  below,  we  dis- 
covered that  directly  beneath  us  was  a  huge 
oven,  wherein  a  week's  consumption  of  bread 
was  baking  for  the  whole  village.  Mean- 
while, myriads  of  insects,  of  divers  kinds, 
ceased  not  for  an  instant  puncturing  my 
unfortunately  tender  skin  —  pleased,  ap- 
parently, like  human  kind,  to  vary  the 
sameness  of  "  toujours  perdrix  "  —  and,  no 
doubt,  relishing  the  '*  grand  mousseux  "  state 
of  my  blood,  after  the  flat,  sluggish  stream 


ANNIVERSARY  OF  WATERLOO.  303 

which  flowed  in  the  veins  of  the  fat  phleg- 
matic Capo. 

It  was  the  night  of  the  J  7th  of  June ; — from 
the  sublime  to  the  ridiculous  ''  il  rCy  aqu'un 
pas ;  at  least,  we  have  the  authority  of  Na- 
poleon for  saying  so;  whilst  lying  in  this 
unenviable  state,  exposed  to  the  reiterated 
attacks  of  these  persevering  enemies,  I  looked 
as  impatiently  for  the  dawn  of  the  anniversary 
of  the  glorious  day,  as  England's  immortal 
captain  is  erroneously  said  to  have  invoked 
its  close,  or  the  arrival  of  the  Prussians. 

I  say  erroneously,  because  I  feel  persuaded 
that,  though  the  unconquered  chief  might 
possibly  at  one  time  have  despaired  of  ob- 
taining the  complete  fruits  of  the  combination 
planned  by  his  master  mind,  yet  that  he 
never  for  an  instant  felt  the  dread  implied  by 
that  oft-quoted  invocation.  If,  from  any 
fault,  not  his,  the  Prussians  had  failed  alto- 
gether in  executing  the  movement  of  con- 
centration prescribed  for  them,  though  the 
victory  would,  probably,  have  thereby  been 
less  brilliant,  yet  the  British  general  knew 