

The  town  covers  a  considerable  space  of 
ground,  and  is  well  built  and  clean.  The 
streets  are  wide,  straight,  well  paved,  and 
abundantly  supplied  with  water.  The  houses, 
except  those  on  the  outskirts,  are  lofty  and 
good ;  the  bazaars  well  furnished,  and  pro- 
visions cheap.  The  place  is  supplied  with 
water  by  means  of  an  aqueduct,  but  that  of 
the  wells  is  excellent. 

The  trade  of  Retimo  has  fallen  off  greatly, 
from  the  neglected  state  of  the  port ;  for  the 
mole  forming  the  harbour  has  nearly  disap- 
peared, and  sand  and  mud  have  accumulated 
to  such  a  degree  within  it,  that  no  vessels  of 
more  than  thirty  tons  burden  can  now  shelter 
there.  Steps,  however,  are  takings  to  deepen 
the  harbour  and  repair  the  mole,  at  the  head 
of  which  a  small  light-house  has  been  erected. 
Large  vessels  can  anchor  off  the  eastern  side 
of  the  town,  sheltered  from  the  north-west 
wind,  which  prevails  on  this  coast  nine  months 


294  COUNCIL  OF  RETIMO. 

in  the  year;  but  a  sudden  change  would 
oblige  them  to  go  to  sea  immediately. 

The  trade  of  the  place  is  principally  with 
the  Morea,  and  the  islands  of  the  Grecian 
Archipelago,  exporting  oil  and  soap,  and 
taking  in  exchange  corn  and  oats. 

The  garrison  consists  of  a  battalion  of  the 
Nizam,  varying  in  strength  from  six  to  eight 
hundred  men.  Its  colonel  is  Governor  of 
the  place  for  the  time  being.  The  province 
is  governed  in  civil  matters,  by  a  Council 
composed  of  a  president  and  twelve  members  ; 
and  holds  its  sittings  at  Retimo.  But  the 
rule  laid  down  for  the  composition  of  these 
assemblies  has  here  been  unavoidably  broken 
through,  from  the  difficulty  of  finding  a  suf- 
ficient number  of  persons  who  could  or  would 
read  and  write,  amongst  the  rural  population 
of  the  different  districts.  The  members  of 
the  Provincial  Council  of  Retimo  are,  conse- 
quently, almost  all  Mohammedans  and  inha- 
bitants of  the  city  itself. 

The  road  to  Canea  skirts  the  sea-beach  for 
the  first  half  hour  after  quitting  Retimo ;  it 


ROAD  TO  CANEA.  295 

then  ascends  the  rocky  cliffs  that  for  the  suc- 
ceeding five  miles  border  the  coast,  along 
which  a  paved  road  has  been  formed,  pre- 
senting an  obstacle  that  one  would  conceive 
had  been  purposely  and  cunningly  devised  to 
impede  the  march  of  an  enemy  upon  the  for- 
tress. It  winds  up  and  down  continually,  at 
times  being  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  steep 
staircase,  at  others  skirting  some  awful  pre- 
cipices, which  threaten  annihilation  in  the 
event  of  a  false  step. 

Our  horses  were  good  and  tolerably  fresh, 
so  that  we  managed  to  scramble  safely  over 
this  work  of  art,  accomplishing  the  task  in 
something  under  two  hours  and  a  half ;  but 
deeply  to  be  commiserated  is  the  luckless 
wight  who  arrives  here  on  a  jaded  hack,  after 
riding  from  Canea !  For  the  benefit  of  future 
travellers,  it  is  earnestly  to  be  hoped  that 
some  Mohammedan  M'Adam  may  arise  to 
amend  the  ways  of  the  island,  and  conduct 
Mohammed  Ali's  Candiote  subjects  by  more 
safe  and  less  tortuous  paths,  from  one  town 
to  another.     On  reaching  the  foot  of  the  hill, 