

The  dress  of  this  religious  order  is  very 
peculiar ;  it  is  altogether  of  black.  The 
jacket  and  shaksheer  are  of  cotton,  made  in 
the  usual  Greek  fashion,   but  bound  round 


PSILORITE  AND  LEVKA.  '  285 

the  waist  by  a  broad  black  leather  belt. 
The  legs  are  encased  in  strong  leather  boots, 
or,  more  properly,  leggings,  sewn  on  to  shoes. 
A  high  stand-up  fur  cap  completes  the  sin- 
gular costume. 

Resuming  our  journey  in  the  afternoon,  an 
ascent  of  a  couple  of  miles  brought  us  at 
length  to  the  head  of  the  valley,  where  a 
rocky  pass  presents  itself  between  the  two 
great  mountain  ridges  of  Psilorite  and  Levka. 
The  view,  looking  back,  is  very  fine,  and  the 
pass  itself  is  wild  and  beautiful,  being  thickly 
clothed  with  dwarf  oak  and  myrtle^  shadowed 
with  carob  and  wild  vines,  and  overhung  by 
precipitous  rocks. 

After  descending  a  little  way  on  the  north 
side  of  the  pass,  the  road  enters  a  wooded 
ravine,  in  which  the  varied  foliage  of  the 
oak,  plane,  olive,  and  arbutus,  spreading 
out  in  unrestrained  luxuriance,  presents  an 
impenetrable  barrier  to  the  sun's  rays — 
whilst,  beneath  their  shade,  the  ground  is  clad 
with  fern,  heather,  and  mastic.  A  spring 
of  icy  cold  water,  that  issues  gurgling  from 


286  VILLAGE  OF  ACADES. 

the  rocks  bordering  the  road,  invites  the 
traveller  to  stay  his  horse,  moisten  his 
parched  lips  at  the  rustic  fount,  and  enjoy 
the  rich  sylvan  beauty  of  the  spot. 

The  scenery  undergoes  a  rapid  change  on 
emerging  from  the  wood,  when  the  northern 
side  of  the  island  again  opens  to  the  view. 

A  fine  valley  lies  at  the  spectator's  feet,  its 
sides  covered  with  the  brilliant  verdure  of 
long-neglected  vineyards,  backed  by  rocky 
cliffs,  its  mouth  apparently  closed  by  the 
lofty  serrated  ridge  of  Levka,  still  capped 
with  its  winter  covering  of  snow.  In  two 
hours,  we  arrived  at  the  summit  of  a  moun- 
tain, much  higher  than  the  pass  we  had  pre- 
viously traversed,  from  whence  the  northern 
sea  of  Candia  first  bursts  upon  the  view. 
The  intervening  country  is  rugged  and  bar- 
ren, and  the  valleys  are  not  so  abundantly 
watered  as  those  on  the  south  side  of  the 
island.  The  village  of  Acades  is  seen  just 
below  the  road,  which  winds  to  the  left, 
keeping  along  the  summit  of  the  ridge, 
and,   in  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  reaches 


WRETCHED  ROAD.  287 

Mesi,  around   which  we   found  a  few  corn- 
fields. 

A  little  farther  on,  but  situated  off  the  road 
— to  the  left — is  the  village  of  Cavous.  A  hor- 
rible road  commences  here,  on  the  side  of  which 
—  the  first  half  mile  having  been  safely  got 
over — a  mosque,  covering  the  tomb  of  some 
Mohammedan  santon,  presents  an  opportunity 
of  offering  up  prayers,  for  a  safe  passage  over 
the  portion  that  yet  remains  to  be  traversed. 
The  way  winds  down  the  side  of  a  rugged 
mountain,  and  is  marked  only  by  the  absence 
of  furze  and  briars,  the  rest  of  the  steep  bank 
being  thickly  covered  with  them.  There  is 
no  attempt  at  road-making  :  a  natural  pave- 
ment, rising  in  sharp  pyramidical  points,  be- 
tween which  our  horses  could  hardly  find  a 
footing,  is  apparently  considered  quite  suffi- 
cient for  every  purpose  that  a  road  is  required 
in  Candia.  I  had  travelled  over  mountain 
roads  in  Greece,  in  Switzerland,  yea,  and  in 
Spain  —  where  a  camino  de  perdices  is  an 
awful  thing — but  never  before  did  I  ever 
meet  with  any  thing  so  bad,  called  a  road,  as 