

The  road  advances  by  the  right  side  of  the 
valley ;  and,  after  making  a  slight  detour,  to 
avoid  the  stream,  by  crossing  the  springs 
near  their  source,  passes  close  under  the  walls 
of  one  of  the  castles,  being  hemmed  in  on  the 
other  side  by  a  steep  hill.  The  Valley  is 
watered  by  another  fine  stream,  which  takes 
its  rise  in  the  mountains  more  to  the  west- 
ward,  and,  after   passing  between   the   two 


VALLEY  OF  ARMYRO.  299 

castles,  receives  the  tribute  furnished  by  the 
salt  springs,  and  discharges  itself  into  the 
bay  of  Armyro.  The  village  of  Agiromoun 
stands  on  the  acclivity  of  the  mountain,  on  the 
left  bank  of  the  stream. 

This  must  have  been  a  very  formidable 
pass  in  the  olden  time,  when  artillery  could 
not  be  moved  about  with  the  ease  it  is  at 
present ;  and  even  now  it  is  a  military  post 
of  some  importance,  from  its  commanding 
the  only  practicable  road  between  the  land- 
ing place  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  and 
Canea. 

The  valley  is  extremely  beautiful.  The 
machiolated  walls  of  the  old  castles,  overhung 
with  ivy,  peer  out  from  amidst  a  grove  of 
wide-spreading  carob  and  walnut  trees ;  the 
foaming  torrent,  dashing  impetuously  over 
its  rugged  bed,  washes  their  feet :  beyond  are 
steep  hills,  covered  to  their  very  summits 
with  vineyards  and  orchards,  and  yet  above 
these  rise  the  snow-clad  peaks  of  the  lofty 
mountains  of  Sphackia. 

About  three  miles  from  Armyro,  we  arrivtd 


300  VIEW  OF  THE  MEDITERRANEAN. 

at  some  water-mills,  where  a  picturesque 
old  bridge  carries  the  road  to  the  left  bank 
of  the  stream.  The  view  looking-  back  is  yet 
more  beautiful  than  that  described.  The 
glassy  Mediterranean  lies  apparently  at  the 
spectator's  feet,  reflecting  the  successive  ranges 
of  grey  mountains  that,  between  Retimo  and 
Candia,  stretch  far  into  its  bosom ;  the  splendid 
peaks  of  Ida  rise  gracefully  above  all  the  in- 
termediate ridges,  casting  their  broad  shadows 
over  the  eastern  part  of  the  island.  The 
richly-wooded  slopes  of.  the  valley,  warmed 
by  the  rays  of  a  setting  sun,  formed  a  natural 
frame  to  this  enchanting  picture ;  equal,  per- 
haps, to  any  thing  in  Europe. 

On  approaching  the  head  of  the  valley,  it 
contracts  once  more,  so  as  to  become  a  mere 
defile  ;  and,  on  gaining  the  summit  of  the 
ridge,  another  magnificent  view  bursts  upon 
the  sight,  looking  over  the  western  portion  of 
the  island.  The  day  was  too  far  gone,  how- 
ever, to  admit  of  our  enjoying  it  in  perfec- 
tion; and,  indeed,  soon  after  crossing  the 
mountain,  night  overtook  us,  our  guide  missed 


NEO  HORIO.  301 

his  way,  and  we  were  doomed  to  wander  in 
the  dark  for  upwards  of  an  hour — scrambling 
over  a  most  execrable  collection  of  blocks  of 
stone,  which  our  conductor  persisted  in  calling- 
a  road.  At  length,  we  got  sight  of  a  lime- 
kiln, and,  making  our  way  to  it,  induced  one 
of  the  workmen  to  guide  us  to  Neo  Horio, 
where  we  were  glad  to  find  our  baggage 
safely  arrived,  having  been  sent  on  from  Re- 
timo  early  in  the  day. 