

There  are  two  gateways  in  the  land  front, 
one  near  the  sea-shore  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  isthmus,  the  other  towards  the  centre  of 
the  line.  The  wall  is  about  twelve  feet  thick, 
loop-holed  for  musquetry,  and  irregularly 
flanked  by  artillery.  From  both  the  extre- 
mities of  the  line,  slightly  built  walls  retire 
along  the  sea-shore,  until  they  meet  the  pre- 


i 


THE  CITADEL.  291 

cipitous  cliffs  of  the  citadel-hill,  and  so  com- 
plete the  enceinte  of  the  place.     The  whole 
town  thus  lies  between  the  land  front  and  the 
citadel,  and,  consequently,  that  work,  though 
on  very  commanding  ground,  is  not  in  a  situa- 
tion to  assist  much  in  the  defence  of  the  forti- 
fications on  the  land  front  of  the  place.     It, 
however,  covers  it  most  effectually  from  an 
attack  on  the  sides  washed  by  the  sea.     It  is 
a  Venetian   work,    presenting    towards  the 
town  three  well  planned,  though  irregularly, 
bastioned  fronts,  whilst  sea-wards  the  walls 
follow  the  sinuosities  of  the  rocks,  which  are 
high,  and  difficult  of  access ;  and  are  yet  fur- 
ther strengthened  by  ledges  of  shelving  rocks, 
which  jut  a  considerable  distance  into  the 
sea.     The  only  advanced  work  of  the  citadel 
is  a  kind  of  demi-lune,  covering  the  curtain 
of  the  eastern-most  front,  in  which  is  the  gate. 
The  walls  are  thirty-five  feet  high,  and  rest 
upon  the  rocky  foundation  afforded  by  the 
hill  itself,  which,  being  elevated  about  fifty 
feet  above  the  town,  most  completely  com- 
mands it. 

u2 


292  POPULATION  OF  THE  TOWN. 

There  was  not  a  single  piece  of  artillery 
mounted  that  would  stand  three  rounds  of 
firing.  The  mortars  could  not  be  fired  at  all. 
The  front  towards  the  town,  indeed,  was 
armed  principally  with  petareros.  The  guns 
are  all  brass,  and  towards  the  sea  there  are 
some  very  long  pieces.  The  tanks  and  ma- 
gazines are  no  longer  serviceable,  and  the 
citadel  altogether  is  in  a  very  unhealthy 
state.  It  is  inhabited  (for  it  contains  nume- 
rous streets  and  mosques)  by  five  hundred 
Turks,  who  carefully  and  prudently  exclude 
all  of  Grecian  blood  from  their  stronghold.  It 
is  garrisoned,  however,  by  a  detachment  of 
Egyptian  troops,  a  battalion  of  whom  is  con- 
stantly quartered  at  Retimo. 

The  population  of  the  town,  including  the 
inhabitants  of  the  citadel,  is  estimated  at 
eight  thousand  souls ;  the  greater  portion  are 
Turks,  who  employ  themselves  principally  in 
agriculture  ;  but  the  place  contains  also  some 
tanneries  and  silk-looms  on  a  small  scale, 
which,  likewise,  are  worked  by  the  hands  of 
the  faithful.    The  Greek  inhabitants,  amount- 


STATE  OF  THE  HARBOUR.  295 

ing',  perhaps,  to  one-third  of  the  whole  popu- 
lation, are  fishermen,  mariners,  and  shop- 
keepers. 