


304  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  VICTORY. 

too  well  the  character  of  his  soldiers,  to  mis- 
trust their  ability  to  hold  the  ground  he  had 
so  judiciously  chosen  for  them. 

The  well-contested  field  has,  however,  been 
described  by  far  abler  pens  than  mine,  and 
has  little  to  do  with  Candia.  I  feel  con- 
fident, nevertheless,  that  this  digression  will 
be  pardoned  on  the  morning  of  tne  **  Day 
of  Waterloo,"  at  least,  by  all  good  and  true 
Britons,  whose  bosoms  still  —  spite  of  the 
lapse  of  years — cannot  but  feel  a  glow  of 
pride  on  the  anniversary  of  a  victory  which, 
from  the  importance  of  its  results  to  the 
human  race,  stands  unequalled  in  the  annals 
of  the  world — a  victory  compared  to  which 
the  glorious  days  of  Cressy,  Agincourt,  and 
Blenheim  sink  into  insignificance,  and  even 
a  shade  is  cast  on  those  of  Marathon  and 
Pharsalia. 

I  return,  unwillingly,  to  the  mosquitoes, 
and  other  un-nameable  phlebotomizing  in- 
sects, that  inhabit  the  sleeping-place  of  the 
chief  magistrate  of  Neo  Horio  ;  from  which, 
seeing   no  hope   of  deliverance,   but   in   the 


BAY  OF  SUDA,  305 

coming  day,  it  may  easily  be  conceived  with 
what  joy  I  greeted  the  crowing  of  a  cock, 
perched  but  a  few  feet  above  my  head,  and 
who,  during  the  night,  had  several  times 
given  me  notice  of  the  vicinity  of  himself  and 
hareem,  by  obliging  me  to  drag  my  carpet 
into  a  corner. 

We  lost  no  time  in  awaking  the  still  snoring 
occupants  of  the  lower  region,  when,  after 
performing  our  ablutions,  and  mounting  our 
steeds,  we  were  glad  enough  to  get  into  a 
purer  atmosphere,  and  to  depart,  even  with- 
out breakfast. 

The  road  descends  into  a  fertile  valley, 
watered  by  a  clear  stream,  and,  after  con- 
tinuing along  it  for  about  a  mile,  ascends  the 
ridge  bounding  it  on  the  western  side,  by 
a  rugged,  stony  track,  leaving  a  small  village 
within  pistol-shot,  on  the  left.  In  an  hour  and 
a  half  (or  a  distance  of  four  miles  and  a  half) 
we  arrived  at  the  brink  of  some  stupendous 
cliffs  that  fall  precipitously  to  the  bay  of  Suda. 
The  road  now  inclines  to  the  left,  skirting 
along   and    looking  down  upon   the   mirror- 

VOL.   II.  X 


306        GRANDEUR  OF  THE  SCENERY. 

like  expanse,  whilst,  at  the  same  time,  it 
is  itself  overhung'  by  a  range  of  lofty  moun- 
tains. 

The  scenery  is  very  grand,  and  the  bay 
as  fine,  perhaps,  as  any  in  the  world,  being 
capacious  enough  to  contain  the  entire  navy 
of  Great  Britain,  and  so  situated  as  to  be 
sheltered  from  every  wind.  It  stretches  in- 
land six  miles,  and  is  about  three  miles  across, 
but,  at  its  mouth,  the  width  is  compressed  to 
little  more  than  a  mile  ;  and,  towards  the 
centre  of  this  narrow  channel — but  rather 
within  the  bay — are  two  low  rocky  islands, 
the  larger  of  which,  occupied  by  the  little 
fortress  of  Suda,  completely  commands  the 
entrance. 