


296  BAY  OF  ARMYRO. 

we  found  an  unfortunate  gentleman  "in  ar- 
ticulo  mortis,"  from  a  fall  he  had  just  had  with 
his  donkey. 

The  hills  are  furrowed  by  numerous  deep 
fissures,  across  which  the  solid  Venetian 
bridges  continue,  fortunately,  to  be  in  toler- 
able repair  ;  but  the  consciousness  of  their 
vicinity,  and  of  the  dilapidated  state  of  their 
parapet  walls,  would  not  add  to  the  pleasu- 
rable sensations  of  the  traveller,  should  he 
chance  to  be  benighted.  On  a  steep  crag,  on 
the  left  of  the  road — about  mid-way — is  perch- 
ed the  almost  inaccessible  village  of  lerame ; 
but  its  flickering  lights  would  but  bewilder 
the  night  wanderer,  for  they  would  not  serve 
to  guide  him  up  the  rugged  mountain  path, 
and  the  village  is  just  sufficiently  distant  to 
be  out  of  reach  of  the  human  voice. 

The  view  before  us  offered  some  compen- 
sation for  what  was  under  our  feet  —  the 
glassy  bay  of  Armyro,  a  richly- wooded  coast 
beyond,  and  splendid  mountains  in  the  dis- 
tance. We  rejoiced  on  again  reaching  the 
sea-beach  ;  and,  pushing  our   horses  into  a 


VILLAGE  OF  EPISCOPI.  297 

canter,  arrived  at  the  end  of  about  two  miles 
(eight  from  Retimo)  at  a  fine  clear  stream  of 
water,  that  issues  from  a  dark  rocky  fissure 
in  the  cliffs,  bounding  the  coast.  On  the  edge 
of  the  chasm  stands  the  village  of  Episcopi ; 
and,  at  its  gorge,  are  the  picturesque  ruins 
of  a  bridge,  which  probably  has  been  de- 
stroyed by  some  unusual  flow  of  the  moun- 
tain torrent. 

From  thence,  a  deep  sandy  beach  extends 
for  about  six  miles ;  whilst  a  plain,  planted 
with  vines  and  corn,  and  studded  with  ham- 
lets and  farm-houses,  stretches  some  distance 
inland.  On  the  coast  stands  a  Casa  forte,  in- 
tended, in  times  past,  as  a  defence  against 
pirates,  but  now  dismantled.  Soon  after 
passing  it,  the  road,  leaving  the  sea-shore, 
inclines  to  the  left,  and  enters  a  narrow  valley, 
opening  to  the  eastward,  when  we  reached  Ar- 
myro,  distant  fifteen  miles  from  Retimo. 

The  place  consists  merely  of  a  few  farm 
houses,  scattered  over  the  sides  of  the  steep 
hills,  bounding  the  valley,  and  two  castellated 
buildings,  which  occupy  the  narrowest  part 


298  MINERAL  WATERS. 

of  the  defile.  It  takes  its  name  from  the  nu- 
merous springs  of  mineral  waters  that  rise  in 
its  vicinity,  and  which,  in  former  days,  were 
held  in  great  repute.  Perhaps,  by  some  va- 
gary of  fashion,  they  may  yet  eclipse  the 
fame  of  Spa,  Selzers,  and  Langen  Schwalbach. 
They  certainly  are  copious  enough  to  cleanse 
the  biliary  ducts  of  all  the  valetudinarians  in 
Christendom.  Collecting  immediately  in  one 
body,  they  form  a  deep  and  rapid  stream, 
which  it  is  physically  impossible  to  pass ; 
whilst  the  noise  they  make  in  gushing  from 
the  side  of  the  mountain  is  heard  at  a  con- 
siderable distance,  resembling  that  of  the  fall 
of  a  cataract. 