


VILLAGES.  279 

On  approaching   Clima,   which   is   about 
twelve  miles  from  Agius  Decca,  the  country 
again  becomes  hilly  and  wooded  with  carob, 
olive,  and  other  trees,  intermixed  with  patches 
of  corn.     The  village  stands  on  the  acclivity 
of  a  mountain,  and  is  miserable  in  the  ex- 
treme.    The  road  zig-zags  up  the  side  of  the 
steep  ridge  beyond  Clima,  and  in  the  valley, 
on  the  reverse  side,  reaches  as  far  as  Santa,  a 
wretched  ruined  hamlet  that  affords  shelter  to 
some  sixty  or  eighty  souls.    Crossing  another 
steep  chain,  and  leaving  on  the  right  the  pic- 
turesque  village  of  Sanota,  which  nestles  in 
the  intervening  valley,  we  passed  a  mass  of 
ruins,  once  known  as  the  village  of  Dafiaco, 
and,  traversing  a  wild  and  partially  wooded 
valley,   arrived    at    Apodoulo,    where   a  few 
decent  houses,  but  more  especially  a  litter  of 
sucking  pigs,  tempted  us  to  stay  for  the  night. 
We  sent  our  Greek  servant  forthwith  in  search 
of  the  owner  of  the  unclean  little  beasts — our 
christian    appetites  craving    strangely  at   a 
sight  with  which  our  eyes  had  not  been  feasted, 
during  the  whole  of  our  residence  in  Egypt. 


280  SITUATION  OF  APODOULO. 

Apodoulo  is  about  twenty  miles  from  Agius 
Decca.  It  is  agreeably  situated  on  a  knoll, 
projecting  from  the  western  side  of  Mount 
Ida,  and  commands  a  fine  view  over  a  wide 
and  deep  lateral  valley,  that  stretches  many 
miles  into  the  interior  of  the  island.  The 
accommodation  it  ojffered  was  poor,  but  our 
tent  rendered  us  independent  of  house-room, 
and  our  squeaker,  placed  on  two  blocks  of 
stone,  was  soon  crackling  over  a  blazing  fire  ; 
bread,  fruit,  and  eggs  we  were  able  to  procure 
in  the  village,  and  wine  we  had  brought  with 
us  from  Candia  —  for,  whilst  there,  we  had 
ascertained,  that  not  a  drop  could  then  be 
obtained  in  the  interior  of  the  island. 


BARREN  COUNTRY.  281 


CHAPTER  X. 

Journey  Continued  —  Convent  of  Asomatos — Mountain  Pass  — 
Beautiful  Scenery — Execrable  Road — Villages  of  Keriana,  Adil, 
and  Maroulas — Arrival  at  Retimo — Description  of  that  Town — 
Citadel — Population — Trade — Provincial  Council — Departure  for 
Canea — Dangerous  Road — Armyro — Mineral  Waters — Splendid 
Scenery— Neo  Horio— The  Capo's  House — The  Ridiculous  and 
the  Sublime — Day  of  Waterloo — Bay  of  Suda — Arrival  at  Canea 
— Description  of  the  Town — Great  Increase  of  its  Population. 

We  resumed  our  journey  on  the  following 
morning  as  the  sun  first  broke  upon  the 
snowy  peaks  of  Ida.  The  early  part  of  our 
ride  was  over  a  rough  and  barren  country, 
the  soil  of  which,  mostly  gravel  and  ferrugi- 
nous clay,  is  friendly  to  the  growth  of  no 
other  forest  trees  than  the  carob  and  wild 
olive.  From  the  underwood,  our  dogs  sprang 
a  great  many  partridges,  of  the  common 
brown  kind,  and  our  guides  told  us  that  wild 