


288  VILLAGE  OF  KERIANA. 

this  :  the  main  communication  between  the 
fields  where  the  riches  of  the  country  grow, 
and  the  harbour  whence  they  are  shipped  for 
exportation.  It  can  be  likened  only  to  the 
inside  of  a  shark's  lower  jaw. 

Making  a  vow  never  again  to  grumble  at  the 
payment  of  tolls  on  an  English  turnpike-road 
— should  I  be  fortunate  enough  to  live  to  see 
one — I  gave  my  horse  his  head,  and  abandoned 
myself  to  reflection.  My  thoughts  naturally 
recurred  to  Egypt,  and  rested  with  gratitude 
on  Mohammed  Ali,  who,  by  the  establishment 
of  the  school  of  surgery,  at  Abouzabel,  had 
qualified — as  I  fondly  hoped — the  assistant 
Galen  of  the  regiment  quartered  at  Retimo, 
to  set  a  broken  limb  in  a  case  of  emergency. 

Fortunately  no  opportunity  of  putting  his 
capability  to  the  proof  occurred,  as,  after 
sundry  stumbles,  we  reached  the  village  of 
Keriana  in  sound  skins.  It  is  situated  nearly 
at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and  is  distant  about  two 
miles  from  the  sea,  the  intervening  country 
being  gently  undulated,  and  covered  with  fine 
crops  of  corn  and  plantations  of  olive-trees. 


VILLAGE  OF  PERIVOGLIA.  289 

After  traversing  Keriana,  the  road  inclines 
slightly  to  the  west,  sloping  down  towards  the 
coast;  and,  in  about  a  mile,  reaches  the  vil- 
lage of  San  Demetrio,  the  church  of  which  is 
an  interesting  ruin.  A  short  distance  farther 
on  is  Adil,  a  place  with  more  claims  to  be 
called  a  town  than  any  we  had  seen  since 
leaving  Candia ;  and,  between  it  and  Marou- 
las,  the  country  is  very  productive  in  corn 
and  oil.  The  latter  village  is  finely  situated 
on  the  left  of  the  road,  some  little  way  up  the 
side  of  the  mountain  ridge  we  had  descended. 
About  half  a  mile  beyond  it,  we  rejoined  the 
direct  road  from  Candia  to  Retimo,  which 
keeps  along  the  coast  on  the  north  side  of 
Mount  Ida. 

After  crossing  a  fine  stream  of  water,  we 
arrived  at  Perivoglia — the  gardens  of  Retimo 
— a  long,  straggling,  ruined  village;  and,  in 
another  half  hour,  were  at  the  gates  of  the 
town.  The  latter  part  of  the  road  (from 
Adil)  is  very  good.  The  total  distance  from 
the  convent  of  Asomatos  is  about  fifteen 
miles,  and  occupied  us  six  hours. 

VOL.  II.  u 


290  SITUATION  OF  RETIMO. 

Retime  stands  on  a  low  cape  that,  jutting 
about  three-fourths  of  a  mile  into  the  sea, 
terminates  in  a  rocky  eminence,  which  is 
crowned  by  the  citadel.  From  the  foot  of  the 
hills  to  the  town  —  a  distance  of  three  hun- 
dred yards — the  isthmus  gradually  diminishes 
in  breadth  from  one  thousand  two  hundred  to 
five  hundred  yards :  and  here  an  old  embat- 
tled wall,  of  Turco-Venetian  construction, 
extends  across  it  diagonally  from  sea  to  sea. 
The  western  part  of  the  line  is  thus,  in  mili- 
tary phrase,  refused,  on  account  of  a  high 
conical  knoll,  that  stands  out  from  the  hills  in 
front  of  the  place,  which  would  favour  an 
attack  on  that  side,  if  the  walls  were  ad- 
vanced nearer  to  it. 