

The  pile  was  thus  all  prepared,  and  waited 
but  the  application  of  the  torch,  to  involve 


328         DESPERATE  CHARACTERS. 

again  this  ill-fated  island  in  one  extermin- 
ating blaze  ;  and  England,  as  if  determined 
to  enact  the  part  of  Herostratus  on  the  occa- 
sion, selected  this  moment  for  letting  loose 
upon  it  the  nest  of  political  firebrands  col- 
lected at  Carabousa, 

This  little  rock,  by  nature  extremely  diffi- 
cult of  access,  and  strengthened  by  art,  so  as 
to  be  rendered  almost  impregnable,  lies  close 
to  the  shore,  at  the  north-eastern  extremity 
of  Candia.  Delivered  by  treachery  into  the 
hands  of  the  insurgent  Greeks,  it  had,  at  the 
pacification  of  the  island,  remained  in  the 
possession  of  a  band  of  miscreants,  composed 
of  the  most  desperate  characters  of  the  whole 
Grecian  Archipelago;  who,  allured  to  Candia 
by  the  prospect  of  plunder,  as  the  vulture  is 
attracted  to  the  battle-field,  had,  since  the 
termination  of  hostilities  there,  perched  them- 
selves on  this  inaccessible  rock,  ready  to 
pounce  again  upon  their  prey. 

Keeping  up  an  active  and  friendly  corre- 
spondence with  the  Philhellenists  of  theMorea 
and  the  intriguing  President  of  Greece,  this 


LOSS  OF  A  BRITISH  FRIGATE.  329 

band  of  miscreants,  under  pretence  of  a  state 
of  war  with  the  Porte,  committed  the  most 
infamous  acts  of  piracy  on  vessels  of  all 
nations ;  but  at  length,  having  drawn  upon 
themselves  the  observation  of  the  allied  fleets, 
a  combined  English  and  French  squadron 
was  sent  under  the  late  gallant  Sir  Thomas 
Staines,  to  dislodge  them  from  their  strong- 
hold. 

This  difficult  enterprise  was  accomplished 
with  the  loss  of  a  British  frigate,  which 
unfortunately  got  upon  a  reef  of  rocks  ;  the 
pirates,  loaded  with  their  booty,  escaped  to 
Candia,  and  took  refuge  with  their  friends 
the  Sphackiotes ;  in  the  impracticable  fast- 
nesses of  whose  mountains  they  were  more 
secure  from  attack,  and  much  more  danger- 
ous to  the  peace  of  Candia,  than  even  at 
Carabousa.  There,  aided  by  the  remittances, 
and  instigated  by  the  promises  of  Capo 
d'Istrias,  they  soon  succeeded  in  re-kindling 
the  war  ;  resorting  to  the  most  violent  mea- 
sures to  co7?ipel  the  peaceably-disposed  part 
of  the  Greek  peasantry  to  join  in  the  insur- 


330  renp:wal  of  civil  war. 

rection  ;  the  houses  of  such  as  refused  to  take 
up  arms  in  the  cause  of  liberty  being  most 
tyrannically  rased  to  the  ground. 

Thus  was  the  island  again  plunged  into  civil 
war ;  and  this  second  struggle  was  yet  more 
destructive  than  the  former.  Nothing  was 
now  spared ;  and,  the  entire  country  having 
been  laid  waste,  by  each  party  destroying  all 
that  belonged  to  the  other,  the  Turks,  as 
before,  retired  to  their  fortresses. 