


ARRIVAL  OF  IBRAHIM  PASHA.        325 

the  Turks,  they  would  themselves  fall  victims 
to  the  barbarians  of  Sphackia. 

The  Turks,  as  usual,  every  way  unpre- 
pared, were  immediately  driven  into  the  for- 
tified towns,  where  they  were  secure  from  the 
attacks  of  their  enemies,  and  from  which  they 
issued,  as  favourable  opportunities  presented 
themselves  for  carrying  off  the  crops  and  cattle 
of  the  Greeks,  and  destroying  their  villages, 
vineyards,  and  olive  grounds. 

This  unnatural  warfare  was  carried  on  for 
nearly  four  years,  during  which  period  the 
greater  part  of  the  island  was  laid  waste ; 
and  was  brought  to  a  close  only  by  the  ar- 
rival of  Ibrahim  Pasha,  on  his  way  to  the 
Morea,  in  November,  1824.  The  Candiotes, 
seeing  that  resistance  to  the  Egyptian  troops 
would  be  unavailing,  tendered  their  submis- 
sion, and,  having  obtained  the  promise  of 
a  general  amnesty,  gladly  returned  to  the 
peaceable  cultivation  of  their  fields.  The 
promises  of  Ibrahim  were  faithfully  kept ; 
and,  wretched  as  was  the  state  to  which  the 
island  had  been  reduced,  yet,  the  eighteen 


326  BATTLE  OF  NAVARIN. 

months  that  followed  the  visit  of  the  Egyptian 
army  was  a  period  of  perfect  happiness  to 
the  Candiotes,  after  the  years  of  bloodshed, 
rapine,  and  dearth,  which  they  had  previously 
endured. 

The  duration  of  this  state  of  tranquillity 
was  doomed  to  be  but  short:  the  battle  of 
Navarin  took  place,  and  extended  its  baneful 
influence  even  to  Candia.  The  Greeks  mis- 
took that  "  untoward"  demonstration,  for  an 
overt  act  of  hostility — or  thought,  at  all  events, 
the  Turks  would  do  so — and  calculated,  con- 
fidently, that  this  hitherto  ill- understood 
mode  of  mediating  would  be  resented  by  an 
indiscriminate  massacre  of  the  Christians 
throughout  the  Ottoman  empire,  and  thus 
render  a  war  inevitable. 

The  subtle  President  of  Greece  immediately 
sent  his  emissaries  to  Candia,  (where  he  al- 
ready maintained  a  number  of  paid  agents,) 
to  point  out  to  its  inhabitants  that  the  favour- 
able moment  had  arrived  for  renewing  the 
war ;  and  the  Candiotes  could  not  but  per- 
ceive that,  whilst  the  destruction  of  the  Turco- 


INTRIGUES  OF  CAPO  D'ISTRIAS.  327 

Egyptian  fleet  had  relieved  them  from  the 
dread  of  another  visit  from  the  Arabs,  it  had 
rendered  their  communication  with  their  own 
friends  in  the  Morea  perfectly  secure. 

Still,  however,  so  large  a  portion  of  the 
population  was  averse  to  plunge  again  into 
the  horrors  of  a  civil  war — attended  with 
certain  loss  to  the  proprietors  of  the  soil, 
which-ever  side  came  off  victorious — so  that, 
for  a  time,  the  intrigues  of  Capo  d'Istrias  were 
fruitless ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  those 
amongst  the  inhabitants  who  had  lost  their 
all  in  the  past  struggle,  or  who,  never  having 
possessed  anything  to  lose,  were  reckless  of 
the  destruction  of  the  property  of  others,  and 
longed  to  take  advantage  of  so  favourable  an 
opportunity  of  possessing  themselves  of  the 
estates  of  their  Turkish  compatriots,  were 
determined  to  drive  matters  to  the  last  extre- 
mity, and  waited  only  for  the  promised  means 
— leaders  and  money — to  re-commence  their 
devastating  warfare. 