

The  streets  are  wide  and  well  paved,  but 
by  no  means  clean,  and  an  oily  Greek  smell 
pervades  the  whole  place.  The  shops  are 
good,  but  offer  no  great  variety  of  merchandize. 
The  houses  are  wretched,  without  a  single 
exception  ;  lofty,  old,  and  ricketty.  The  mos- 
ques and  churches  are  propped  up  on  crutches, 
and  even  the  flag-staffs  of  the  European  Con- 
suls partake  of  the  general  tottering  cha- 
racter of  the  place ;  the  old  foretop-mast, 
from  which  the  union  jack  is  displayed,  seem- 
ed disposed  to  part  company  with  the  roof  of 
Mr.  Capogrotiso's  house,  whilst  the  consular 


312  EARTHQUAKES. 

pole  of  the  King  of  the  French  appeared  to 
be  quite  overweighted  with  the  enormous  out- 
spread charter  of  the  *'  three  glorious  days." 

One  would  suppose  that  a  smart  shock  of 
an  earthquake  would  make  Canea  a  heap  of 
ruins  ;  it  has,  however,  withstood  so  many — 
for  the  island  is  very  subject  to  them — that 
the  inhabitants  appear  to  have  no  fears  of 
such  a  catastrophe. 


TAXATION  IN  CANDIA.  313 


CHAPTER  XL 

Trade  of  Candia  —  Productions  —  Exports  and  Imports  —  Injurious 
Consequences  of  the  total  want  of  Inland  Communication  —  Re- 
venue— Taxes  —  Greek  Church  Establishment — Price  of  Labour 
and  Provisions — Character  of  the  Inhabitants — Wretched  Condi- 
tion of  the  Island — Summary  Account  of  the  State  of  Candia  dur- 
ing the  War  in  Greece — Effects  of  the  Battle  of  Navarin — Can- 
dia given  up  to  Mohammed  Ali  —  Insurrectionary  Movement  — 
Desertion  of  Osman  Pasha — Form  of  Government — The  acquisi- 
tion of  the  Island  not  beneficial  to  Egypt  —  Advantages  its  Pos- 
session[^holds  out  to  Great  Britain — Conclusion. 

The  trade  of  Candia,  though  in  a  more 
thriving  state  than  during  the  latter  years  of 
the  Turkish  domination,  is,  nevertheless,  far 
from  being  in  the  flourishing  condition  that 
the  extreme  productiveness  of  the  island,  and 
its  admirable  commercial  position,  might  na- 
turally lead  one  to  expect.  It  is  taxed,  like 
that  of  Egypt,  with  a  three  per  cent  ad  va- 
lorem duty  on  all  imports ;  and  most  articles 
of  produce  pay  the  same  rate  of  duty  on  ex- 


314  TRADE  THROWN  OPEN. 

l)ortatioii.  Some,  however,  are  charged  much 
liighcr ;  soap,  for  instance,  pays  ten  and  a 
half  per  cent  duty  on  its  value ;  silk,  eight 
per  cent ;  oil,  seven  and  a  half. 

Although  the  productions  of  the  island  are 
thus  taxed  rather  heavier,  perhaps,  than  they 
were  under  the  Turkish  government,  yet  the 
removal  of  several  most  vexatious  restrictions 
offers  more  than  counterbalancing  advantages 
to  the  country  generally ;  for  instance,  many 
of  its  productions  —  amongst  others,  all  the 
oranges  and  lemons!  —  were  obliged  formerly 
to  be  shipped  at  the  port  of  Candia,  and  to  be 
sent  exclusively  to  Constantinople !  so  that 
perishable  articles  had  sometimes  to  undergo 
a  land  journey  of  a  hundred  miles,  ere  they 
reached  their  place  of  embarkation. 