


ENTRANCE  TO  THE  HARBOUR.        309 

it  is  formed  by  a  long  narrow  mole,  built  on 
the  prolongation  of  the  western  face  of  the 
north-east  bastion  of  the  town,  and  parallel 
to  and  extending  nearly  the  whole  length  of 
the  sea-wall.  About  midway  on  it  are  the 
remains  of  an  old  castle,  which  terminates  in 
a  circular  tower,  also  in  ruins ;  indeed  the 
whole  work  is  in  a  wretched  state,  and  is  in- 
debted for  its  'present  existence  to  a  ledge  of 
sunken  rocks,  that  serves  both  for  a  foun- 
dation and  breakwater. 

The  entrance  to  the  harbour  is  between 
the  ruined  tower  and  an  elevated  battery  ;  the 
termination  of  the  western  fortifications  of 
the  town.  The  channel  is  deep  but  narrow, 
and  quite  open  to  the  north ;  the  anchorage  is 
consequently  exposed  to  a  rolling  sea,  when- 
ever the  wind  is  from  that  quarter. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  town,  and  over- 
looking the  harbour,  is  a  kind  of  citadel,  evi- 
dently a  work  of  much  more  remote  date  than 
any  other  portion  of  the  fortifications.  It 
covers  a  considerable  extent  of  ground,  and 
is   slightly   elevated   above   the  rest   of  the 


310  THE  ANCIENT  CITADEL. 

place.  Indeed,  it  may  be  regarded  as  an 
inner  town,  for  it  contains  numerous  and 
thickly  populated  streets ;  and  is  furnished 
with  gates,  to  cut  off  the  communication  at 
pleasure  with  the  rest  of  the  fortress.  It  for- 
merly contained  the  arsenal,  docks,  &c.  The 
old  Venetian  galley-vaults  are  still  in  toler- 
able preservation,  but  the  walls,  battlements, 
&c.  looking  towards  the  harbour,  are  in  a 
very  bad  state. 

The  harbour  is  much  obstructed  by  the 
ruins  of  the  mole  and  docks,  but  a  few  vessels 
of  three  hundred  tons  burden  can  still  lie  in 
its  deepest  part,  which  is,  however,  the  most 
exposed  ;  and  there  is  sufficient  space  behind 
the  mole  to  shelter  two  or  three  hundred 
small  craft.  The  whole  is  about  to  undergo 
repairs  and  improvements. 

The  privileges  enjoyed  by  the  port  of  Can- 
dia  under  the  dominion  of  the  Turks  having 
wisely  been  abolished,  Canea,  which,  besides 
being  the  best  harbour,  is  also  that  which  lies 
nearest  to  the  most  fertile  districts  of  the 
island,   has  naturally  become  its  great  com- 


POPULATION  OF  CANEA.  311 

iiiercial  mart.  The  population  of  the  place 
has  increased  proportion  ably,  for,  although 
not  one-third  the  size  of  the  capital,  Canea 
contains  now  nearly  an  equal  number  of  in- 
habitants. Of  late  years,  the  increase  has 
been  extraordinarily  great;  confidence  in  the 
government  of  Mohammed  Ali  having  induced 
no  less  than  three  thousand  "  mediatised" 
Greek  pirates  to  settle  at  Canea,  since  the 
island  has  been  annexed  to  the  Egyptian  do- 
minions. 