

The  price  of  labour  in  the  rural  districts 
varies  from  three  to  four  piastres  a  day.  In 
the  vicinity  of  the  towns,  it  amounts  to  six, 
and  carpenters,  masons,  and  other  artificers, 
are  paid  as  high  as  eight  or  ten.  Provisions 
of  all  sorts  are  much  dearer  than  in  Egypt; 


320  EXPENSE  OF  TRAVELLING. 

but  the  lower  orders  of  Candiotes  manage, 
nevertheless,  to  feed  better  than  the  corre- 
sponding classes  in  the  sister  kingdom — that 
is  to  say,  according  to  our  English  notions  — 
for  a  Greek's  daily  consumption  of  animal 
food  is  equal  to  that  of  the  entire  population 
of  an  Arab  village. 

The  expense  of  travelling  keeps  pace  with 
the  advance  in  price  of  provisions  and  labour, 
it  being  at  least  four  times  greater  than  in 
Egypt.  The  sum  for  which  a  camel  can  be 
hired  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  will  not  pro- 
cure an  ass  in  Candia,  and  in  all  their  deal- 
ings the  Candiotes  are  equally  as  distrustful 
of  strangers  as  the  Arabs,  less  faithful  to 
their  engagements,  and  more  cunning  and 
extortionate. 

Here,  as  in  every  other  part  of  the  world 
that  has  long  bent  under  the  Mohammedan 
yoke,  smoking  is  a  prevailing  vice.  The 
Greek,  however,  is  not  such  a  perfect  slave  to 
his  pipe  as  either  the  Turk,  Arab,  or  Persian 
— not  that  he  loves  smoking  less,  but  because 
his  pipe  is  shorter.     He  can,  therefore,  move 


DESOLATE  COUNTRY.  321 

about  with  it  in  his  hand,  puffing  as  he  goes  ; 
and  from  morning  to  night  it  is  at  his  mouth, 
excepting  during  the  time  he  feeds  —  a  duty 
he  never  fails  to  perform  at  the  usual  stated 
periods,  for  a  Greek  can  eat  in  spite  of  to- 
bacco-smoke. 

Theije  is  nothing  very  peculiar  in  the  cha- 
racter or  manners  of  the  inhabitants  of  Can- 
dia.  The  Turks  are  Turks  ;  the  Candiotes 
very  Greeks.  The  former  continue  to  dwell 
within  the  walls  of  the  towns,  to  which  they 
were  driven  during  the  late  civil  war ;  the 
latter  are  scattered  thinly  over  the  face  of  this 
beautiful,  productive,  but  devastated  country. 

Great  as  have  been  the  exertions  of  Mo- 
hammed Ali,  to  induce  confidence  and  pro- 
mote the  prosperity  of  the  island,  it  remains 
nearly  in  the  same  desolate  state  in  which  it 
was  left  at  the  termination  of  the  late  long 
and  sanguinary  struggle  between  its  Greek 
and  Mussulman  inhabitants.  Large  villages, 
that,  but  a  few  years  since,  contained  some 
hundreds  of  families,  have  not  now  that 
number  of  souls  sheltered  under  their  crum- 

VOL.   II.  Y 


322  EVILS  OF  CIVIL  WAR. 

bling  walls  Not  a  mosque  is  to  be  seen  out- 
side the  fortified  towns  —  scarcely  a  church 
but  what  is  roofless  and  deserted.  The  wells 
are  choked  up  —  reservoirs  and  irrigating 
channels  ruined  —  roads,  bridges,  and  aque- 
ducts destroyed — vineyards  uprooted — olive 
trees  hewn  dov/n,  or,  from  neglect,  become 
barren  and  profitless.  Nothing,  in  fact,  can 
be  more  perfectly  wretched  than  the  state  of 
Candia  ;  nothing  could  picture  more  forcibly 
the  evils  resulting  from  civil  war. 