

The  trade  has  now  been  thrown  open,  and 
the  duties  have  been  equalised  at  all  the  ports 
of  the  island.  The  same  fixed  rate  of  export 
duty  is  now  also  charged  on  the  various  arti- 
cles of  produce,  to  whatever  foreign  ports 
they  may  be  consigned,  which  was  not  for- 
merly the  case. 


PRODUCTIONS  OF  THE  ISLAND.  315 

The  exports  of  Candia  are,  at  the  present 
day,  but  few,  and  consist  principally  of  con- 
sumable articles  ;  oil,  soap,  honey,  wax,  a  few 
raisins,  oranges,  and  other  fruits,  and  a  small 
quantity  of  raw  silk. 

Of  every  thing-  else,  the  island  may  be  said 
to  be  actually  in  want,  not  even  a  sufficiency 
of  corn  being-  grown  for  the  subsistence  of  its 
scanty  population.  It  possesses,  neverthe- 
less, a  soil,  and  enjoys  a  temperature,  that 
should  render  it  independent  of  any  produc- 
tions but  those  of  a  tropical  climate.  The 
woods  of  oak,  chesnut,  walnut,  and  pine,  with 
which  its  mountains  are  clothed,  ought  even 
to  be  a  valuable  source  of  profit ;  but  there  is 
not  a  practicable  road  to  any  one  port  of  the 
island,  and,  consequently,  timber  is  imported ! 
The  olive-tree  is  better  calculated  than  any 
other  for  making  charcoal,  but  though  the 
whole  island  is  covered  with  old  and  unpro- 
ductive trees  that  can  be  turned  to  no  other 
account,  yet  the  want  of  communications, 
and  the  expense  of  labour,  occasion  fuel 
to  be  procured  cheaper  from  abroad  !     Both 


316  PRODUCTIONS  OF  THE  ISLAND. 

flax  and  cotton  are  successfully  cultivated  on 
the  island,  but  neither  in  a  sufficient  quantity 
to  meet  the  demand  of  its  inhabitants :  what 
they  do  grow  is  manufactured  by  the  pea- 
santry for  their  own  use. 

The  fruits  and  vegetables  of  Candia  are 
particularly  fine,  and  the  list  of  them  includes 
almost  every  variety,  not  omitting  those  mon- 
sters of  the  vegetable  world,  the  aloe  and 
prickly  pear  (jicus  indicus),  neither  of  which, 
however,  is  held  in  such  estimation,  or  turned 
to  such  useful  purposes,  as  in  other  coun- 
tries. 

The  greater  portion  of  the  produce  of  Can- 
dia is  exported  to  Turkey,  but  its  oil  (which, 
indeed,  is  the  principal  source  of  revenue  of 
the  island,  and  considered  particularly  fine), 
finds  a  sure  market  at  the  Austrian  ports  of 
the  Adriatic,  and  even  at  those  of  the  south 
of  France.  The  island  is  badly  stocked  with 
cattle  (goats  only  excepted),  and  the  breeds 
are  extremely  small.  Horses  and  mules  are 
now  imported  in  considerable  numbers.  Rep- 
tiles of  all  sorts  are  scarce,  but  the  forests 


WANT  OF  ROADS.  317 

abound  with  the  ibex,  wild  boar,  and  wolf. 
Game  is  also  plentiful  in  some  parts  of  the 
island,  and  poultry  is  every  where  abundant. 