

The  bay  opens  to  the  east,  but  is  screened, 
in  that  direction,  by  a  high  promontory,  which, 
jutting  some  distance  into  the  northern  sea 
of  Candia,  serves  as  a  breakwater  to  the  har- 
bour. To  the  north  and  south,  the  bay  is 
sheltered  by  ranges  of  mountains,  but  from 
its  western  extremity  a  comparatively  level 
country  stretches  all  the  way  to  Canea. 


.SITUATION  OF  CANEA.  oOJ 

The  road  is  execrable  during  the  first  two 
miles  of  the  descent,  but,  after  passing  a  ruined 
castle,  it  improves ;  and,  in  three  hours'  time 
from  Neo  Horio,  we  reached  the  head  of  the 
Bay  of  Suda  ;  from  thence,  over  the  level  coun- 
try to  Canea,  the  road  is  very  good,  even  ad- 
mitting of  the  passage  of  carriages.  The  soil 
of  the  plain  is  light  and  sandy,  and  is  covered 
with  unpruned  olive  trees  and  scanty  crops 
of  corn.  It  is  abundantly  watered,  but  the 
means  of  irrigation  are  totally  neglected,  so 
that  stagnant  pools  have  been  formed  along 
the  courses  of  the  streams,  round  which  a 
rank  vegetation  has  sprung  up,  rendering  the 
tract  extremely  insalubrious.  Numerous  vil- 
lages are  scattered  along  the  foot  of  the  hills, 
bounding  the  plain  to  the  south,  but  some 
distance  from  the  road. 

We  came  very  suddenly  upon  Canea,  which 
is  sheltered  to  the  east  by  a  low  hill,  and  is 
about  twelve  miles  distant  from  Neo  Horio — 
from  Retimo  thirty-five  miles.  It  stands  on 
the  site  of  the  ancient  Cydonia,  but  covers 
only  a  small  portion  of  the  ground  occupied 

X  2 


308  THE  FORTIFICATIONS. 

by  that  city.     Its   present   walls   were  con- 
structed by  the  Venetians,  but  they  are  far 
inferior  to  those  of  Candia,  both  in  regard  to 
elevation  and  disposition.     The  general  lines 
of  the   fortifications    describe    an    irregular 
quadrilateral  figure,  of  which  the  longest  side 
is  towards  the  sea;  the  three  others  present 
bastioned    fronts,    and    are    furnished   with 
ditches   and   cavaliers ;    but,   excepting    the 
eastern  curtain  of  the  south  front,  are  unpro- 
tected by  any  kind  of  outworks.     There  a 
small  demi-lune  serves  as  a  couvre-porte  to 
the  only  carriage  entrance  to  the  town.     The 
walls  are  tolerably  well  covered,  however,  by 
the  height  of  the  counterscarps  of  the  ditches, 
from   the   crest    of    which   (for   there   is   no 
covered   way)  the  ground  falls   in   a  gentle 
slope  towards  the  country.     The  walls  are  in 
a  tolerable  state  of  repair,  and  vary  in  height 
from  twenty  to  thirty  feet.     The  ditches  have 
been  converted  into  gardens  and  sheep-folds. 
Towards  the  sea,  the  fortifications  have  in 
great  part  been  demolished,  and  replaced  by 
houses.     The  harbour  is  tolerably  spacious  ; 