

Candia  is  indebted  to  Egypt  for  the  corn 
and  flax  she  stands  in  need  of,  as  well  as  for 
rice,  soda,  hides,  and  cured  fish :  most  of  the 
other  articles  for  which  she  has  occasion  are 
procured  from  Austria — timber  and  manufac- 
tured goods  in  particular. 

In  the  interior  of  the  country,  the  articles  of 
home  produce  are  to  be  obtained  at  a  very 
cheap  rate,  for  the  same  reason  that  every 
thing  foreign  is  extravagantly  dear,  viz.  the 
want  of  roads.  This  want  is  particularly  felt 
by  the  inhabitants  of  the  southern  division  of 
the  island ;  for,  all  the  ports  being  on  the 
northern  coast,  the  produce  of  the  fertile  plains 
lying  on  the  sunny  side  of  the  mountains  must 
necessarily  be  sent  on  mules'  backs  over  the 
barely  practicable  tracks  that  I  have  at- 
tempted to  describe  ;  and  this  mode  of  trans- 
port entailing  a  considerable  expense,  occa- 
sions, of  course,  a  corresponding  advance  on 
the  price  of  the  commodities. 


318  SOURCES  OF  REVENUE. 

There  are,  it  is  true,  two  small  ports, 
Sphackia  and  Girapetra,  on  the  south  side  of 
the  island  ;  but,  in  addition  to  being*  difficult 
of  access  by  land,  they  are  very  insecure:  and 
even  were  they  otherwise,  the  export  trade  of 
the  island  being-  directed  to  Europe,  and  not 
to  Africa,  the  ports  on  the  northern  coast 
would  always  be  preferred  to  ship  from. 

The  principal  source  of  revenue  in  Candia 
is  the  miri,  or  land  tax — a  duty  of  seven  and 
a  half  per  cent  on  the  produce  of  all  the  land 
of  the  island  :  besides  this,  vineyards  are  sub- 
ject to  an  additional  impost,  according  to 
measurement :  and  a  tax  is  levied  on  every 
head  of  cattle,  that  on  sheep  being  forty-two 
paras  (about  threepence)  per  annum.  The 
inhabitants  cannot,  however,  be  considered 
highly  taxed,  since  they  are  not  subject  to 
either  a  poll  tax,  or  house  and  window  taxes ; 
nor  have  they  poor's  rates  to  pay  —  nor  a 
church  establishment  to  support;  both  the 
churches  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  mosques  of 
the  Mohammedans,  being  endowed  with  lands 
for  their  maintenance. 


THE  GREEK  CHURCH.  319 

The  Greek  church,  nevertheless,  draws 
heavily,  in  the  way  oi voluntary  contributions 
SiuA  penances,  on  the  purses  of  its  superstitious 
disciples  ;  so  that  in  this  respect  the  Candiote 
Mussulmans  are  exempt  from  a  charge  that 
their  Christian  brethren  have  to  bear,  and  it 
is  the  only  kind  of  tax  they  do  hear  with  any 
degree  of  patience.  Superstition  is,  however, 
stronger  with  them  than  even  the  love  of 
gain ;  and,  working  upon  that,  their  ghostly 
preceptors  induce  them  to  contribute  pretty 
largely  to  the  support  of  the  various  religious 
establishments  —  that  is,  of  the  priesthood  — 
which  is  the  only  department  of  the  Greek 
church  that  appears  to  have  derived  benefit 
from  these  free  gifts.  The  island  is  divided 
into  eleven  bishoprics,  under  the  archiepis- 
copal  see  of  Candia. 