


EXECUTION  OF  THE  DELINQUENTS.  341 

their  command  to  put  it  down,  had  despatch- 
ed the  Egyptian  fleet,  under  Osman  Pasha,  to 
render  assistance ;  and  had  empowered  him  to 
inflict  summary  punishment  on  certain  indi- 
viduals known  to  be  the  promoters  of  the 
revolt. 

These  instructions  the  drunken  admiral 
chose  to  carry  into  effect,  although  he  did  not 
reach  Candia  until  some  time  after  the  insur- 
rection had  been  suppressed  by  Mustapha 
Pasha,  who,  feeling  that  his  honour  was  some- 
what compromised  by  this  departure  from  the 
terms  he  had  granted,  interfered  strongly,  but 
in  vain,  on  behalf  of  the  delinquents.  The 
execution  of  these  miscreants — who,  for  the 
preceding  ten  years,  had  caused  the  island  to 
be  deluged  with  innocent  blood — could  excite 
but  little  commiseration  :  yet,  under  the  pecu- 
liar circumstances  of  the  case,  this  act  of  seve- 
rity was  to  be  regretted,  as  it  was  looked 
upon  as  a  breach  of  faith,  and  tended  to  make 
Mohammed  Ali  very  unpopular. 

It  was  at  first  attributed  to  Osman  Pasha's 
habitual  inebriety  and  consequent  stupidity  ; 


342  CONDUCT  OF  OSMAN  PASHA. 

and  his  subsequent  desertion  from  the  Egyp- 
tian service  was  supposed  to  have  been  from 
the  dread  of  his  master's  displeasure.  But 
the  whole  of  this  man's  conduct  leads  to  the 
belief  that  he  acted  in  the  affair  with  premedi- 
tation ;  for,  in  a  letter  addressed,  shortly  after 
his  desertion,  to  Mr.  Borgos,  (one  of  the  Vice- 
roy's principal  secretaries)  he  stated  that,  on 
quitting  Egypt  for  Candia,  he  had  made  up 
his  mind  to  embrace  the  first  favourable  op- 
portunity of  leaving  Mohammed  Ali's  service  ; 
and,  since  that  opportunity  presented  itself 
the  moment  he  left  the  port  of  Alexandria,  it 
is  pretty  evident  that  he  delayed  carrying  his 
intention  into  efTect,  until  he  could  do  some 
mischief  to  his  employer.  Finding,  therefore, 
on  his  arrival  at  Candia,  that  the  insurrection 
had  been  quelled,  he  adopted  the  only  means 
remaininginhispowerto  injure  Mohammed  Ali 
by  putting  in  force  his  severe  orders,  given  in 
the  antici])ation  of  a  much  more  serious  crisis. 
By  this  act,  he  hoped  to  throw  again  the  brand 
of  discord  between  the  Viceroy  and  his  Can- 
diote  subjects,  and  perform  a  service  which 


ODIUM  CAUSED  TO  MOHAMMED  ALL  343 

he  well  knew  would- find  favour  with  Sultan 
Mahmoud,  whose  protection  he  immediately 
sought  and  obtained. 

In  Candia,  the  whole  odium  of  this  act  of 
treachery  fell,  naturally  enough,  upon  Moham- 
med Ali,  and  was  a  death-blow  to  his  rising 
popularity ;  but  that,  under  any  circumstan- 
ces, his  government  should  be  disliked,  is  by 
no  means  surprising,  considering  the  previous 
lawless  state  of  the  island  and  the  composition 
of  its  inhabitants.  The  Greeks,  (forming  still 
the  bulk  of  the  population),  have  an  innate 
distaste  for  any  government  that  will  punish  an 
infringement  of  its  laws,  and  put  down  rapine 
and  piracy.  The  Turks,  accustomed  to  con- 
sider themselves  the  rulers  of  the  land,  cannot 
brook  being  kept  in  subjection  by  Arabs. 
The  former,  long  unused  to  contribute  towards 
the  expenses  of  a  government,  consider  all 
imposts  as  grievances.  The  latter,  whose 
property  has  been  ruined  by  their  opponents, 
conceive  that  they  are  entitled  to  exemption 
from  taxation,  in  consideration  of  their  losses. 
Mohammed  Ali  finds  it,  therefore,  a  difficult 