

Candia  is  thus  worse  than  useless  to 
Mohammed  Ali.  Its  possession  drains  his 
finances,  gives  jealousy  to  the  Greeks,  and 
weakens  him  in  every  possible  way.  In  the 
event  of  a  war  with  Turkey,  a  large  force 
would  be  required  for  its  defence,  which  might 


ITS  POSSESSION  ADVANTAGEOUS  TO  ENGLAND.   347 

be  much  more  advantageously  employed  else- 
where ;  in  the  case  of  a  rupture  with  Greece, 
it  would  be  subject  to  constant  marauding 
visits,  which  his  cumbersome  line  of  battle 
ships  would  never  be  able  to  prevent ;  and, 
whenever  a  general  war  again  convulses 
Europe,  far  from  being  allowed  to  remain 
quietly  in  his  hands,  it  would  be  9ne  of  the 
points  first  contested  for  by  the  belligerents. 

Mohammed  Ali  is  too  clear-sighted  not  to 
be  aware  of  these  circumstances,  and  to  see 
that  it  is  merely  the  mutual  jealousy  of  the 
European  powers  that  causes  this  valuable 
island  to  be  placed  as  a  kind  of  deposit  in  his 
hands ;  and  there  can  be  but  little  doubt  he 
would  willingly  barter  away  the  honorary 
distinction  of  being  its  governor  for  any  per- 
sonal benefit,  however  slight. 

The  advantages  offered  to  Great  Britain 
by  the  possession  of  Candia  are,  on  the  other 
hand,  incalculable ;  and,  since  the  boundaries 
of  Russia  may  now  be  considered  as  advanced 
to  the  Dardanelles  and  Cape  Matapan,  (for  the 
impotent  kingdom  of  Greece,  if  suffered  to 


348  AMBITIOUS  PROJECTS  OF  RUSSIA. 

exist,  must  always  act  in  obedience  to  the 
Czar's  dictates),  it  behoves  Great  Britain  to 
take  up  a  position,  to  be  at  hand  to  frustrate 
the  further  ambitious  projects  of  that  power. 
Malta  is  no  longer  sufficiently  near  the  Le- 
vant to  protect  our  trade  and  give  timely 
support  to  Greece,  Syria,  and  Egypt,  in  case 
of  need ;  particularly,  keeping  in  view  the 
change  that  will  be  effected  in  naval  warfare 
by  the  application  of  steam.  The  same  may 
be  said  of  all  the  Ionian  Islands,  except  Ce- 
rigo,  which,  however,  does  not  possess  a  port 
that  could  contain  a  collier,  much  less  shelter 
a  fleet. 

Candia,  whilst  it  is  so  situated  as  to  watch 
the  whole  of  the  Levant,  the  entrances  to  the 
Dardanelles  and  Adriatic,  and  the  northern 
coast  of  Africa,  possesses,  in  the  Bay  of  Suda, 
a  harbour  without  its  equal  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean, and  which  might  be  rendered  as 
strong  as  either  Port  Mahon  or  La  Valletta. 
The  island  is  capacious  enough  to  contain  a 
force  of  sufficient  strength  to  he  of  service,  in 
the   event  of  an   armed   intervention   being 


ACQUISITION  OF  CANDIA.  349 

necessary :  and  it  would  not,  like  most  of  the 
present  possessions  of  Great  Britain  in  the 
Mediterranean,  be  dependent  upon  other 
countries  for  its  supplies.  The  expense  at- 
tendant on  its  occupation  would,  doubtless, 
in  the  first  instance,  be  heavy,  considering; 
the  wretched  condition  of  the  fortified  points, 
harbours,  roads,  &c.  &c. ;  but  the  extraordi- 
nary fertility  of  its  soil  would,  under  proper 
management,  soon  enable  it  to  repay  this 
outlay;  and,  in  the  meanwhile,  England  might 
spare  herself  the  expense  of  protecting  five 
of  the  seven  islands  composing  the  absurd 
Ionian  Republic. 