


•  Contrast  this  with  the  account  pubhshed  by  an  English  gentle- 
man— himself  an  eye-witness — of  the  horrible  massacre  perpetrated 
by  the  Greeks  at  Hydra,  but  a  short  time  before ;  a  gentleman 
who  certainly  cannot  be  accused  of  a  leaning  towards  the  Turks, 
On  the  mere  rumour  that  a  Hydriote  vessel  had  been  blown  up  by 
a  "  refractory  Turkish  slave,"  whom  the  captain  had  struck,  (of 
the  truth  of  which  story,  by  the  way,  there  never  could  be  any  con- 
firmation, since  all  on  board  perished, "  refractory  Turk  "  inclusive,) 
the  inhabitants  of  Hydra  assembled  to  put  to  death  every  Turk  in 
the  place.  The  inmates  of  the  prison  were  first  despatched ;  they 
were  driven  forth  and  butchered  07ie  by  one.  Not  satisfied  with 
this  unparalleled  atrocity,  search  was  then  made  for  every  slave,  as 


336  BLOCKADE  OF  THE  ISLAND. 

At  length,  in  January,  1829,  the  English 
blockade  of  the  island  was  raised,  all  attempts 
at  negotiation  having  been  thwarted  by  the 
arrogant  pretensions  of  the  Greeks,  and  the 
two  parties  were  left  to  settle  the  matter  as 
they  could. 

So  prompt  was  Mohammed  Ali  in  taking 
advantage  of  this  return  to  justice  on  the 
part  of  the  interfering  powers,  that  an 
Egyptian  armed  squadron,  despatched  from 
Alexandria,  surprised  and  captured  some 
Greek  vessels  in  the  bay  of  Suda,  when 
some  curious  correspondence  between  Capo 
d'Istrias  and  his  agents  fell  into  the  hands  of 
the  Egyptian  commander.  This  led  to  the 
recall  of  Baron  Renech,  to  whom,  neverthe- 
less, a  successor  was  appointed,  to  take  the 
direction  of  affairs.  His  military  exploits 
were,  however,  still  less  brilliant  than  those 

well  in  the  houses  as  on  board  ship,  and  "  two  hundred  wretches  " 
were  thus  sacrificed  to  the  "fury  of  the  mob."  "During  the  con- 
tinuance of  this  scene,  which  lasted  for  many  hours,  no  attempt  was 
made  by  the  primates  to  check  the  fury  of  the  crowd,"  and  "  the 
noble  Canaris  "  was  "  lying  on  a  bench,  drowned  in  tears  !  "  And 
yet  these  people  call  themselves  christians,  and  consider  themselves 
civilized ! 


IXSURGEXT  CANDIOTES.  337 

of  his  predecessor ;  and,  not  possessing  his 
tact,  the  different  parties  into  which  the 
Greeks  were  divided  soon  became  altogether 
unmanageable.  The  chief  of  each  band, 
thenceforth,  acted  entirely  according  to  his 
own  whim ;  rapine  and  murder  continued, 
as  before,  to  lay  waste  the  country ;  but,  all 
the  Turks  having  long  since  disappeared, 
Greek  now  turned  upon  Greek,  and  their  cup 
of  misery  was  full. 

Had  a  small  reinforcement,  or  even  a  supply 
of  ammunition,  been  despatched  from  Egypt 
at  this  juncture,  the  island  would  have  been 
quickly  reduced  to  subjection  ;  but  Moham- 
med Ali,  justly  mistrusting  the  actions  of  the 
mediating  powers,  was  afraid  to  commit  him- 
self. Matters  were,  therefore,  allowed  to  take 
their  course,  and  the  insurgent  Candiotes, 
finding  that  they  had  destroyed  all  belonging 
to  the  Turks,  and  plundered  all  they  possibly 
could  from  each  other;  that  the}^  could  no 
longer  look  for  aid  from  Greece,  and  had  no 
means  of  disposing  of  the  produce  of  their 
lands ;  gladly  consented  to  receive  a  master 