


THE  INSURGENTS  ORGANIZED.  333 

Greeks  were  masters  of  the  island.  Such, 
however,  was  the  footing  on  which  all  nego- 
tiations for  the  pacification  of  Candia  were 
required  to  be  based. 

In  September,  1828,  Capo  d'Istrias,  finding 
that  matters  did  not  progress  according  to 
his  desires,  sent  a  trusty  agent  to  Candia,  to 
organize  the  insurgents  and  direct  their  move- 
ments ;  but  though  the  "  Condottlere  "  se- 
lected for  this  purpose  was,  by  the  influence 
and  money  of  his  employer,  enabled  to  assume 
the  post  allotted  to  him,  and  thereby  to  give 
a  little  more  unity  of  action  to  the  military 
operations  of  the  insubordinate  Greek  bands, 
and  infuse  some  slight  unanimity  into  the 
councils  of  the  different  chiefs  ;  still  his  mis- 
sion ended  in  complete  disappointment.  The 
Greeks  could  not  even  be  brought  to  face  the 
Turks  when  they  sallied  from  their  fortresses, 
much  less  to  undertake  the  siege  of  any  of 
them. 

The  crops  being  no  longer  on  the  ground 
— the  Turks  now  wisely  determined  to  hus- 
band   their  small  store   of  ammunition   and 


334         RAGE  OF  THE  TURKISH  INHABITANTS. 

provisions,  by  remaining  on  the  defensive  ; 
for,  the  open  country  having  been  thoroughly 
sacked,  it  would  have  been  a  mere  waste  of 
blood,  as  well  as  throwing  aside  a  decided 
advantage,  to  have  taken  the  field  against  an 
enemy  who  could  always  baffle  pursuit,  by 
retiring  to  the  mountains.  Trusting,  there- 
fore, that,  by  the  blessing  of  Allah,  mediation, 
or  a  happy  turn  in  the  tide  of  Mohammedan 
affairs,  would,  sooner  or  later,  release  them 
from  their  unpleasant  situation,  they  quietly 
squatted  to  their  pipes,  on  the  ramparts  of 
Candia,  Retimo,  and  Canea. 

It  required,  however,  all  the  address  and 
influence  of  the  Seraskier  Pasha  of  the  island, 
and  Mustapha,  his  lieutenant,  to  restrain  the 
rage  of  the  Turkish  inhabitants  of  the  country, 
who,  thus  compelled  to  abandon  their  homes, 
and  leave  their  crops  to  be  gathered  by  their 
enemies,  burned  to  take  revenge  on  the  Greek 
inhabitants  of  the  towns.  The  Albanian 
troops,  also,  who  were  upwards  of  a  year  in 
arrears  of  pay,  wished  much  to  help  them- 
selves from  the  tills  of  the  good  citizens. 


MASSACRE  OF  THE  GREEKS.  335 

To  the  credit  of  the  Turkish  authorities  be 
it,  however,  recorded,  but  one  instance  of 
disorder  occurred,  and  that  was  occasioned 
by  the  unprovoked  murder  of  an  old  man — 
one  of  the  principal  Turks  of  Candia — almost 
within  sight  of  the  city,  to  which  he  was 
returning  from  a  visit  to  his  country-house. 

The  public  feeling  was  so  excited  by  this 
cowardly  act,  that  a  tumult  arose,  and  up- 
wards of  a  hundred  Greeks  were  massacred 
in  the  streets  of  Candia.  The  Seraskier 
Pasha  succeeded  only,  with  the  greatest  diffi- 
culty, in  putting  a  stop  to  the  slaughter,  and 
saving  the  rest  of  the  Christian  population* 
of  the  place. 