


344  THE  ISLAND  GOVERNED  BY  A  PASHA. 

task  to  frame  laws  that  will  meet  the  views  of 
his  dissatisfied  Candiote  subjects,  without 
burdening  the  Egyptian  treasury  with  the 
expense  of  enforcing  them  ;  but  his  addresses 
to  the  provincial  councils  of  the  island  are 
certainly  not  traced  by  the  hand  of  a  "  san- 
guinary tyrant,  whose  only  idea  of  govern- 
meiit  is  taxation/'* 

The  island  is  governed  by  a  Pasha,  nomi- 
nated by  the  Viceroy  of  Egypt,  who  is 
assisted  in  his  arduous  duties  by  the  pro- 
vincial councils  of  Candia,  Retimo,  and  Canea. 
These  three  provinces  are  subdivided  into 
districts,  (of  which  the  whole  island  contains 
twenty-four)  each  governed  by  a  Boulak 
Bashee  ;  and  every  village  has  two  chiefs — one 
Greek  and  one  Mohammedan. 

The  provincial  councils  are  composed  of  a 
president  and  two  deputies  (one  Greek  and 
one  Turk)  from  each  of  the  districts  contained 
in  the  province.  Their  duties  are  both  of  a 
legislative  and  judicial  nature  ;  the  laws  being- 
framed  by  them,  and  all  offences  punished  at 

*  See  Addenda,  No.  2. 


NUMBER  OF  TROOPS.  345 

their  award.  Death,  however,  cannot  be  in- 
flicted without  the  approval  of  the  governing 
Pasha.  The  other  duties  of  the  councils  are, 
to  watch  over  the  public  health,  to  regulate 
the  price  of  provisions,  superintend  the  public 
works,  &c.,  in  their  respective  provinces.  The 
deputies  receive  a  trifling  salary,  and,  being 
rather  nominated  by  the  governor  than  elected 
by  the  people,  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  very 
independent.* 

The  number  of  troops  maintained  in  the 
island  is  scarcely  five  thousand.  This  amount  is 
made  up  of  five  weak  battalions  of  the  Nizam 
(about  three  thousand  five  hundred  bayonets) 
and  an  irregular  force  of  Albanians.  The 
guard  of  the  fortresses  is  entrusted  to  the 
Egyptian  troops,  the  Turkish  soldiers  being 
scattered  in  small  parties  throughout  the 
island.  In  addition  to  the  three  cities  on  the 
north  coast  and  the  island  of  Suda,  the  other 
fortified  points  of  Candia  are  Spina  longa, 
Gira  petra,  and  Castel-Franco — all  mere  forts  ; 

•  The  unavoidable  departure  from  the  rule  for  the  composition  of 
tlipse  provincial  councils  has  already  been  noticed  in  the  case  of 
Retimo.     The  other  two  adhere  pretty  rigidly  to  it. 


346  CANDIA  USELESS  TO  MOHAMMED  ALL 

the  former  also  on  the  northern,  the  two 
others  on  the  southern,  shore  of  the  island. 

The  paltry  revenue  raised  in  the  island  is 
barely  sufficient  to  pay  the  current  expenses 
of  the  government,  and  the  cost  of  the  Egyp- 
tian troops  necessary  for  its  protection,  the 
number  of  which  is  certainly  as  small  as  pru- 
dence will  admit ;  and,  at  this  moment, 
Candia,  far  from  being  a  source  of  profit  to 
Mohammed  Ali,  obliges  him  to  expend  on  its 
protection  part  of  the  taxes  levied  on  the 
people  of  Egypt.  The  expense  of  putting 
Candia  mto  thorough  repair  would  occasion 
an  outlay  that  the  treasury  of  the  Viceroy 
could  at  this  moment  ill  afford ;  and,  even  if 
the  island  were  in  ever  so  sound  a  state,  still 
it  would  not  furnish  Egypt  with  a  single 
thing  of  which  she  stands  in  need. 