


338        CANDIA  ANNEXED  TO  EGYPT. 

from  the  hands  of  the  allied  powers.  Thus, 
after  a  period  of  nearly  nine  years,  ended 
the  revolt  of  Candia  —  a  revolt  brought 
about  by  the  intrigues  of  revolutionary  pro- 
pagandists, fomented  by  Capo  d'Istria  to 
further  his  own  ambitious  views,  and  abetted 
by  the  three  great  powers  that  signed  the 
treaty  of  London  "  to  prevent  the  effusion  of 
blood  " — a  revolt  that  caused  the  destruction 
of  more  property  than  fifty  years  of  uninter- 
rupted prosperity  can  repair,  and  that  de- 
luged the  island  with  the  blood  of  two-thirds 
of  its  inhabitants. 

By  the  arrangement  which  was  now  effect- 
ed, Candia  was  annexed  to  the  dominions  of 
the  Viceroy  of  Egypt,  who,  tied  down  to 
govern  it,  without  imposing  fresh  taxes,  was 
expected  (Heaven  knows  why)  to  be  in  the 
possession  of  some  secret  for  conciliating  both 
Turks  and  Greeks.  The  short  period  of  tran- 
quillity that  followed  gave  some  colour  to  the 
belief  of  his  having  discovered  this  panacea ; 
but  the  true  cause  of  it  was  his  order  to  dis- 
arm   the  inhabitants,   and   the  arrival  of  a 


VISIT  OF  MOHAMMED  ALL  S6\) 

body  of  Egyptian  troops  to  overawe  both 
parties. 

In  the  summer  of  1833,  Mohammed  Ali 
visited  his  newly-acquired  possession,  when  he 
directed  several  useful  public  works  to  be  un- 
dertaken; and,  in  his  addresses  to  the  different 
provincial  councils  of  the  island,  he  called 
upon  them  to  second  him  in  affording  protec- 
tion and  encouragement  to  the  cultivators  of 
the  soil,  on  whom  the  prosperity  of  the  country 
so  much  depends.  To  these  appeals  most 
"  loyal  and  dutiful  "  replies  were  returned,  but 
no  steps  have  been  taken  to  carry  out  his  plans ; 
first,  from  the  disbelief  of  all  Greeks  in  the  pos- 
sibility of  anybody's  working  disinterestedly 
for  their  good — secondly,  from  a  latent  hope, 
on  the  part  of  the  leading  men,  of  being  able 
eventually  to  form  a  snug  little  republic  of 
their  own — a  project  which  every  act  that  is 
likely  to  render  Mohammed  Ali  popular  tends 
to  thwart. 

This  feeling  manifested  itself  soon  after  the 
return  of  the  Viceroy  to  Egypt.  The  turbu- 
lent chiefs  of  the  former  insurrection — under 

z2 


340  INSURRECTIONARY  MOVEMENT. 

the  pretence  of  its  being  in  contemplation  to 
levy  new  imposts — succeeded  in  collecting 
several  thousand  inhabitants — Turks  as  well 
as  Greeks  —  who  refused  to  pay  any  taxes 
whatever. 

Mustapha  Pasha  possessed  now,  however, 
the  means  of  putting  a  speedy  stop  to  the 
insurrectionary  movement,  and  did  not  fail  to 
avail  himself  of  it ;  advancing  quickly  with 
the  Egyptian  troops,  he  succeeded  without 
difficulty  in  dispersing  the  mob  and  securing 
several  of  the  ringleaders.  These  were  con- 
ducted to  Candia,  tried  and  condemned  to  ten 
years'  hard  labour,  whilst  their  deluded  fol- 
lowers were  permitted  to  return  to  their 
homes,  thankful  for  not  being  deprived  of 
their  ears  as  well  as  their  guns  and  yatagans. 
The  affair  would  have  terminated  here,  and 
the  lenity  exhibited  might  have  had  a  good 
effect,  but,  unfortunately,  Mohammed  Ali, 
on  receiving  the  first  report  of  the  insurrec- 
tion —  the  extent  of  which  was,  as  usual, 
greatly  exaggerated  —  conceiving  that  the 
local  authorities  had  not  sufficient  means  at 