

"  I  have  fully  penetrated  the  spirit  of  your  instructions, 
and  understood  how  the  Ottoman  empire  is  an  object  of 
your  deep  solicitude  and  interest.  As,  on  my  part,  I  have 
no  other  desire,  and  meditate  nothing  more  than  to  with- 
draw that  empire  from  the  controlling  power  of  the  Rus- 
sians, who  rule  it  in  the  character  of  masters,  and  of 
rescuing  my  unhappy  nation  from  the  disgrace  which 
oppresses  it ;  those  benevolent  intentions  of  the  English 
and  French  governments,  in  accordance  as  they  are  with 
my  own  sentiments,  claim  the  expression  of  my  unre- 
served gratitude.  Nevertheless,  as  we  do  not  all  agree 
in  the  means  of  rendering  that  empire  strong  and 
powerful,  I  must  now  declare,  as  a  zealous  patriot,  my 
inward  convictions  on  this  point,  in  order  that,  if  they 
should  receive  from  both  governments  that  attention  of 
which  their  wonted  justice  and  impartiality  assure  me, 
the  interest  they  possess  towards  my  country  may  produce 
the  happy  results  we  may  expect  from  them. 

"  1st.  His  Excellency  M.  Roussin,  ambassador  from 
France  at  the  Porte,  being  desirous  of  removing  every 
ground  for  the  detention  at  Constantinople  of  the  Rus- 
sian vessels  which  have  arrived  there,  has  written  a 
pressing  letter,  urging  me  to  accelerate  the  conclusion  of 
peace  between    the  Porte   and  Egypt,  and   proposing 


ADDENDA.  353 

that  I  should  be  content  to  accept  of  the  four  districts 
composing  the  government  of  Saida.  By  the  adoption  of 
this  course  he  has,  in  reahty,  departed  from  the  system  of 
benevolent  protection,  adopted  as  the  principal  object  to 
be  attained ;  for  such  a  proposal  too  well  harmonizes  with 
the  views  of  Russia,  who  aims  at  weakening  the  Ottoman 
empire. 

"  2nd.  Russia,  on  account  of  her  proximity  to  Turkey, 
and  her  subsisting  intercourse  with  Constantinople,  is 
fully  sensible  of  the  inertness  of  the  Porte,  and  of  the 
steady  progress  made  by  Egypt,  when  she  pledges  herself 
that  the  mere  province  of  Saida  shall  be  annexed  to 
Egypt,  and  that  the  other  provinces  occupied  by  the 
Egyptian  forces  shall  remain  under  the  power  of  the 
Grand  Signor  in  their  former  state  of  destitution ;  her 
object  is  to  retain  the  superiority  she  has  acquired,  and 
to  destroy  the  Ottoman  empire  at  any  moment  she  may 
think  proper.  This  proposal  being  thus  at  variance  with 
the  policy  of  England  and  France,  it  should  naturally  be 
rejected. 

'*  3rd.  Tlie  provinces  which  Egypt  has  demanded  of 
the  Porte,  through  the  channel  of  Halil  Pacha,  have  been 
so  demanded,  like  the  governments  usually  granted  to 
other  viziers,  under  the  title  of  a  revocable  nomination, 
and  not  in  absolute  property.  Susceptible  as  those  pro- 
vinces are  of  cultivation  and  improvement,  and  of  shortly 
becoming  so — witness  the  rapid  prosperity  of  Egypt — it  is 
evident  that  the  advantages  to  be  derived  from  them 
would  accrue  to  the  Porte,  and  that  England,  France, 
and  the  other  powers  of  Europe  would,  owing  to  the 
VOL.  II.  A  A 