


354  ADDENDA. 

intercourse  which  would  result  from  their  position,  reap 
every  benefit  from  them.  In  the  contrary  case,  of  those 
countries  still  continuing  under  the  authority  of  the 
Porte,  they  would,  owing  to  her  improvidence  and  neg- 
lect, remain  wild,  uncultivated  deserts ;  so  far  from 
affording  the  means  of  strengthening  her  power,  they 
would  be  wholly  unable  to  assist  her.  Let  them  be, 
therefore,  united  to  Egypt,  and  they  will  soon  be  found 
well  cultivated,  teeming  with  population,  and  supplying 
all  the  resources  of  which  they  are  susceptible.  The 
Porte  would  thus  become  strong  and  powerful,  and  be 
naturally  relieved  from  the  oppression  of  Russia.  Should 
the  interest  so  kindly  taken  by  England  and  France  in 
the  welfare  of  Turkey  manifest  itself  by  such  results, 
they  will  assuredly  have  rendered  the  Ottoman  Porte  a 
signal  service,  and  my  own  most  fervent  wishes  will 
have  been  crowned  with  success. 

"  4th.  My  whole  nation,  without  distinction  of  ranks, 
is  fully  sensible  that  such  has  been  my  exclusive  object 
in  devoting  myself,  as  I  have  done,  and  in  exposing  my 
fortune,  my  family,  and  my  worthiest  servants.  Through- 
out Arabia,  in  Anatolia,  on  the  very  shores  of  the  Black 
Sea,  that  is  to  say,  in  Daghestan  and  Lazistan,  in  Bosnia 
and  Roumelia,  at  Constantinople  itself,  the  greater  part 
of  the  ministers,  ulemas,  and  inhabitants,  have  addressed 
themselves  to  me.  They  have  successively  transmitted 
supplications  and  despatches,  both  openly  and  in  private, 
purporting  that  the  whole  Mussulman  nation,  revolted  at 
the  unworthy  conduct  of  Sultan  Mahmoud,  behold  him 
with  repugnance,  and  that,  having  failed  to  obtain  from 


ADDENDA.  365 

him,  by  persuasive  means,  the  organization  of  his  domi- 
nions, they  are  compelled  to  resort  to  the  influence  of  a 
powerful  personage ;  that,  failing  to  discover  any  other 
than  myself  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  they  earnestly  im- 
plore my  aid  and  support. 

"  Let  the  countries  which,  at  the  instigation  of  so  many 
suffrages  and  prayers,  I  have  demanded  of  my  govern- 
ment, be  granted  to  me ;  and  I  trust  that,  thanks  to  the 
good- will  of  England  and  France,  I  shall  soon  succeed  in 
augmenting  my  revenue,  increasing  my  army,  completely 
organizing  every  branch  of  the  service,  and  ever  faithful, 
as  a  vassal,  to  my  government,  be  found  prepared,  at  the 
first  bidding,  to  wage  war  against  the  Russians. 

"  Should  they  attempt  to  manifest  their  perfidious  de- 
signs against  Turkey,  uniting  myself  with  the  whole  of 
Persia  and  of  Lesguistan,  I  should  proceed  to  encounter 
and  inflict  such  severe  losses  upon  them,  that  my  un- 
happy nation  would,  at  last,  be  rescued  from  their  re- 
lentless tyranny.  These  considerations,  so  easy  of  ap- 
prehension, are  still  more  evident  to  Russia,  contiguous 
as  she  is  to  Turkey ;  she,  accordingly,  strains  every  nerve 
to  prevent  my  receiving  the  grant  of  the  desired  terri- 
tory. This  concession  would  militate  too  much  against 
her  policy,  not  to  make  her  endeavour  to  obstruct  it. 
England  and  France,  on  the  other  hand,  will  assuredly 
not  favour  the  wishes  of  Russia  to  the  detriment  of  their 
own  policy,  and  in  opposition  to  the  interest  they  mani- 
fest towards  the  Ottoman  empire.  Now  that  her  projects, 
which  had  hitherto  been  disguised,  have  been  laid  open 
to  view,  it  behoves  the  honour  and  dignity  of  both  go- 