

Whilst  Great  Britain  would  thus  improve 
her  own  position  by  the  acquisition  of  Candia, 
she  would  at  the  same  time  be  strengthening 
Egypt,  (which  it  is  clearly  her  policy  to  do), 
by  ridding  that  power  of  an  incubus,  and 
allowing  it  to  direct  its  undivided  energies 
towards  Syria. 

From  what  I  have  here  stated,  it  may,  I 
think,  be  inferred  that  Mohammed  Ali  would 
gladly  dispose  with  this,  to  him,  worse  than 


350  POLICY  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

useless  possession  to  any  power  that  would 
give  him  any  thing  for  it :  but  if,  contrary  to 
his  own  interest,  he  should  demur,  the  alterna- 
tive is  to  take  it. 

Such  a  step,  on  the  part  of  Great  Britain, 
mig'ht  occasion  a  vast  deal  oi  protocoling,  but 
what  considerations  should  deter  her  from 
taking  it  ?  Could  Russia  remonstrate  — 
having,  without  her  concurrence,  possessed 
herself  successively  of  Poland,  Bessarabia, 
Moldavia,  Wallachia,  and  Georgia  ?  Could 
Austria  or  Prussia — both  daily  interfering  in 
the  affairs  of  the  petty  states  of  Germany 
and  Italy?  Could  France — which  continues 
to  occupy  Ancona,  and,  in  contempt  of  the 
pledged  word  of  her  king,  retains  possession 
of  Algiers  ? 

The  best  answer  to  our  own  objection  is, 
that  the  surest  way  of  avoiding  a  war  is  to 
be  prepared  for  one  ;  and,  if  our  prepon- 
derance in  the  East  be  worth  preserving,  it 
can  now  only  be  upheld  by  occupying  Can- 
dia  and  supporting  Egypt. 


ADDENDA. 


No.  I. 

The  following  note  is  so  perfectly  characteristic  of 
Mohammed  Ali,  and  evinces  such  a  consciousness  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  value  of  his  friendship  to  certain  Euro- 
pean powers,  that  it  will  be  read  with  interest  by  such 
as  have  not  had  an  opportunity  of  judging  of  the  Vice- 
roy of  Egypt's  diplomatic  calibre. 

I  make  no  scruple  in  giving  publicity  to  this  docu- 
ment, which,  though  certainly  not  intended  to  meet  the 
public  eye,  has  been  given  at  length  in  a  recent  French 
work. 

The  harsh  expressions  it  contains,  with  reference  to 
Russia,  have  doubtless  been  long  since  explained  away^ 
leaving  the  two  powers  much  in  the  state  of  a  couple  of 
dogs  with  a  bone  in  expectancy — each  wagging  his  tail 
with  most  amicable  demonstration,  but,  at  the  same,  shift- 
ing his  ground,  so  as  to  secure  the  best  possible  posi- 
tion for  falhng  upon  the  prey  the  moment  it  should  be 
dropped. 


352  ADDENDA. 

This  Mohammedan  protocol  (written  under  the  Vice- 
roy's own  dictation)  was  addressed  to  the  diplomatic 
agents  of  Great  Britain  and  France,  pending  the  media- 
tion to  arrest  the  march  of  Ibrahim  Pasha  on  Constanti- 
nople after  the  victory  of  Konieh,  and  thereby  to  deprive 
Russia  of  all  pretext  for  interference. 