


No.  11. 

Extract  from  a  Firman^  addressed  by  his  Highness  Mo- 
hammed AH,  Viceroy  of  Egypt,  to  the  Members  of  the 
Provincial  Council  of  Canea,  dated  1 6th  August,  1 833 . 

***** 
"  Although  the  island  of  Candia  contains  within  itself 
all  the  seeds  of  prosperity,  and  combines  all  the  conditions 


IX 


Di 


PLAIN   ofthe   RUINS 
of  the  TEMPLES  at  KARNAC 

Reference 

b   ?  Granite  coltanris  carvid'  wi^  J^ums  &c 
c  f'm^ment  of  a  CoUtssal  ■stutue 
d  Seinaop/iaffU.f  of  wfiiic-  niarblf 


h 


t:ii.'^ 


lH/a^e    of  Kanicu 


jiLikiuT^ibliiheaVHeniyColbUinlS.lJifeatltajl'botoug'liS 


MiMd^Zuxor   „_ 


Skcfi/u'd  by 

C  h'oc^ubrt  Scolb . 


ADDENDA.  357 

necessary  for  rendering  it  rich  and  prosperous,  yet  doomed 
for  many  years  past  to  be  distracted  by  internal  broils 
and  dissensions,  a  great  portion  of  its  fertile  soil  has  been 
left  untilled,  and  the  olive-tree,  which  may  be  considered 
its  richest  production,  still  remains  totally  neglected. 

*'The  cause  of  this  is,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  land 
devoted  to  its  cultivation  is  owned  by  individuals  who  do 
not  possess  the  means  indispensably  requisite  for  render- 
ing it  productive. 

*'  Now,  it  is  evident,  that  if  such  a  state  of  things  con- 
tinues much  longer,  the  result  must  be  that  this  valuable 
production  will  become  extinct.  To  check,  therefore,  the 
progress  of  an  evil  that  every  day  grows  more  serious, 
some  means  must  be  devised  for  improving  the  culture 
of  the  olive ;  and,  to  effect  this  desirable  purpose,  the 
inhabitants  have  no  better  method  than  that  above  re- 
commended, which  consists  in  their  mutually  lending 
each  other  aid  and  assistance. 

"  The  government,  on  its  part,  moved  thereto  by  a  sense 
of  justice  and  equity,  will  charge  itself  with  the  manu- 
facture of  all  the  implements,  &c.  necessary  for  the  cul- 
tivation of  the  country,  for  such  of  the  inhabitants  as 
have  not  the  means  of  otherwise  procuring  them. 

"  It  will,  at  the  same  time,  chastise  those  malevolent 
persons,  whose  conduct  may  tend  to  hurt  the  interests  of 
the  country.  It  will  undertake  to  lay  the  foundation  of 
the  mighty  structure  of  civilization,  using  every  possible 
means  of  delivering  the  inhabitants — Mussulmans  as  well 
as  Christians — from  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  by  open- 
ing their  eyes  to  the  beneficent  light  of  science." 


358  ADDENDA. 

The  Firman  then  proceeds  to  give  directions  to  the 
government  of  Canea  to  clean  out  and  improve  the  port 
—  to  estabHsh  two  schools  for  the  education  of  the  chil- 
dren of  the  inhabitants — Mussulmans  and  Christians. 

The  whole  to  be  effected  at  the  cost  of  the  government. 

Another  paragraph  decrees  the  abolition  of  the  tax, 
estabhshed  "from  time  immemorial"  on  cattle. 