68                                                                   The Northern Mariner

 institutional system was based upon a consensus of notables, a majority of whom, at least
 in port cities, were merchants. The regime therefore had to make some concessions and
 permit a limited trade in order to preserve some consensus.
          From the spring of 1808 Napoleon tried to reinvigorate trade in French ports by
 introducing a system of licences. To maintain a commercial war against Britain, shipping
                                  13



was subjected to strict regulation. There was a remarkable disparity in licences between
old and annexed ports. Even though Livorno had been attached to the Empire in 1808,
 it did not receive any licences of the ancien système in 1809-1810. Bordeaux, though, got
more than a third of the total and became the most privileged port in the Empire. The
same was true for the different types of licences for European trade created after 1810.
Bordeaux merchants could buy twice as many as Livorno traders, and four times as many
as those of Hamburg. Trade with the U S , which had been re-established in 1810, was
almost entirely reserved for French ports: Bordeaux received 620 navigation permits,
while Hamburg was granted only five and Livorno just one.       14




          Even if they enjoyed a privileged existence, Bordeaux merchants were not
disposed to submit to strict control or limitations, and therefore often abused the trade
opportunities they obtained. False declarations concerning cargoes seem to have been
quite common. For example, in 1813 the commercial house of Clamageran declared to
customs agents a shipment of wine that was three times the size and seven times the value
of the real cargo. They inflated the declaration because their licence obliged their exports
                    15



to be as valuable as their imports. Apparently Clamageran risked little, as police and
custom controls in Bordeaux were rather weak.
          But licences were costly and bureaucratically demanding. Merchants complained
about the insufficient number, the excessive time between their requests and the actual
granting of the permit, and the inadequacy of the trade permitted compared to real market
conditions. It is not surprising that, wherever possible, traders tried to find other means
               16



to keep trade active. Corruption, smuggling and shifting the flow of merchandise toward
regions where control was less efficient were their most important responses.
          Merchants engaged in massive bribery of customs officers, consuls and any
authorities charged with enforcing prohibitive legislation, especially outside of old France,
where only a handful were delegated to enforce laws against trade. In the first half of
1807, for example, when French troops occupied Hamburg, the city's senate and chamber
of commerce spent about 1.5 million francs to persuade the authorities to ignore trade on
the Elbe. The American consul in Hamburg reported that, according to his French
          17



colleague, means might be found to facilitate the entry of vessels that had stopped in
England: "the secret of this, as of most of their measures [i.e., of French authorities in
Hamburg], is that the austerity of the agents must be softened by pecuniary motives."      18




          Corruption worked well for continental merchants, and during 1807 about 1500
small boats entered Hamburg from Tonning with colonial produce and English
manufactures, both of which were prohibited. Tonning was at the time one of the major
                                                19



neutral staple centres in the north. Between 11 March and 6 June 1807, 281 ships left
London for Tonning: in that year, thirty percent of all British re-exports were directed to
Denmark. Americans also were active in Danish ports. Once the merchandise reached
                                                           20



Denmark, its redistribution was entirely in the hands of Hamburg merchants, who were
extremely successful in reorganising the flows. In 1807, the net profit of Robert Sloman,
