Port Cities in the French Wars                                                          69

 a Hamburg merchant of British origin who had settled in Tonning during the first
 blockade of the Elbe in 1803, amounted to the substantial sum of £45,000.    21




          Smuggling constituted another means of circumventing trade restrictions.
 Smugglers were well organised and generally received widespread protection from the
 local populace. The permeability of the Rhine and the Spanish borders is well known,
                 22



 but there was another form of fraud practised both in Hamburg and Livorno. The walls
 of both towns were customs borders: between 1808 and 1810, Livorno was a sort of free
 port, where goods could be stored free of duty. It was therefore tempting for merchants
 to import merchandise fraudulently into the French Empire without paying the heavy
 duties levied on colonial produce. By the same token, Hamburg was about a fifteen-
 minute walk from Altona, Denmark, which was swollen with colonial goods. In both
 Livorno and Hamburg, thousands of people crossed the customs line daily, transporting
 small amounts of goods. In total, the quantities of contraband were substantial. In August
 1810, customs agents seized 9300 kilograms of colonial goods at the gate between
 Hamburg and Altona. Moreover, this quantity seems to have represented at most five
                           23



 percent of the quantity smuggled. Re-export was not a problem: an inquiry into the
 bribery of Bourienne, the French consul in Hamburg, revealed that from 1807 to 1810 he
 had signed passports granting the free circulation of about 100 million francs worth of
 imports annually. According to the French customs director in Hamburg, in 1810 about
                      24



 one inhabitant in six subsisted on the income from this fraud. At a time when port
                                                                  25



 activity was heavily reduced, deceit permitted much of the population to survive. The
main profits, however, went to the merchants who organised these exchanges.
         In both Livorno and Hamburg this sort of fraud ceased at the end of 1810 — in
the former because of the end of its free port status and in the German port because of
extremely tight enforcement of French legislation. Smuggling was thereafter more
discreet. Merchants let the goods flow into the North Sea or along the Tyrrhenian coast.
But in general it was less risky to introduce them along continental borders. Spain, Naples
and the Baltic states were relatively open, and some Bordeaux, Livorno and Hamburg
merchants were able to carve out places on these diverted trade routes.  26




         To facilitate commerce, merchant houses also exploited international networks to
obtain important information and to organise alternative trade flows. Livorno merchants,
for example, learned about the alteration in the port's duty-free status on 1 October 1810,
only a week after the decision was made in Paris. Since the official proclamation of the
new system did not occur until one month later, merchants had a few weeks to prepare
and were able to forestall the worst consequences. 27




         Quite often, merchants sent one of their associates abroad. Many Hamburgers
could be found in Altona, the Baltic ports or in Gôteborg, another major centre of
smuggling. And it is quite striking that the destinations of passports demanded by
            28



Bordeaux merchants between 1806 and 1813 follow the new trade routes: the Baltic was
particularly frequented in 1809-1810, when the Royal Navy escorted hundreds of
American and British ships through the area. The US was the main destination of
Bordeaux merchants before the Embargo of December 1807, and again from 1810 until
the outbreak of the Anglo-American war in June 1812.    29




         The French government was unable to match the resources and ingenuity of
merchants determined to flout embargoes, and there were too few customs agents to
