66                                                                 The Northern Mariner

         After the defeat of Prussian armies at Jena and Auerstadt, Napoleon announced
a blockade of the British Isles on 21 November 1806. A few days earlier, French troops
had occupied the Hanseatic towns of Hamburg, Bremen and Liibeck. While the blockade
might seem pretentious when his own fleet had almost been destroyed at Trafalgar,
Napoleon was perhaps aiming above all to close the continent to all imports from Britain,
rather than to affect British overseas navigation. Since fifteen years of war had proven the
impossibility of ending the conflict with a final, decisive battle, Napoleon returned to one
of the old projects of the French Convention: a plan to weaken British credit through a
commercial war, which would force the realm to make peace.
         From 1806 until the end of his European hegemony, Napoleon tried to enforce
the Berlin decree throughout the continent. During this time, neutral trade, as it had
previously been practised in Hamburg or Livorno, was no longer tolerated. For a better
understanding of developments, it is necessary to take a step backward and briefly analyse
European trade patterns after the outbreak of war in February 1793, since the situation
merchants in continental ports had to face in 1806 was decisively affected by their
experiences during the previous decade.

Trade Patterns in War

 After the outbreak of the maritime war, the situation varied enormously according to the
 status of the port. As in most eighteenth-century wars, both belligerents forbade direct
trade with the enemy and used privateers to attack the opponent's commerce. Because
 England prohibited neutral vessels from carrying French property, French cargoes had to
appear to belong to neutral merchants. As well, French ships had to sail under neutral
flags. But neutrals played a much more active role than simply legitimising papers and
cargoes: trade with colonies, reserved in peacetime to vessels belonging to the mother
countries, was opened to neutrals to ensure sufficient supplies of vital goods. A l l data
concerning neutral European ports confirm the great expansion of overseas trade.
          In contrast, French ports like Bordeaux had to face the damaging consequences
of maritime war and experienced the problems connected to the loss of St. Domingue
after the slave revolt. Neutral European ports considerably increased their trade during this
period. In the Mediterranean, for example, Tuscany had recovered its neutrality at the
beginning of 1795 and was able to preserve it; as a result, Livorno replaced blockaded
Marseille and Genoa as the region's primary commercial port.
          On the shores of the North Sea, Hamburg became the main continental port after
Amsterdam was occupied by the French in 1795. During the 1790s, the quantity of sugar
and coffee imported into Hamburg more than doubled. Before the French Revolution, half
of Hamburg's imports came from France. Within a few years, this situation had
                                               4



drastically changed: by 1795, Hamburg imported more sugar and coffee from Britain than
it had from France five years earlier. The prosperity of European neutral ports is striking;
                                      5



Hamburg's duties on imports and exports increased three-fold between 1793 and 1799;
within ten years, the number of poor people receiving assistance was reduced by half.      6




         European neutrals were not the only ones to gain enormously from the situation:
the United States also emerged as a maritime power. American foreign commerce grew
from $20 million in 1792 to $94 million in 1801, and US merchants were particularly
