Port Cities in the French Wars                                                                      7!

          Seaport merchants demonstrated a resolute and persistent capacity to adapt during
 the Napoleonic era. After 1815, changes in international trade were again to tax their
 abilities. Efforts to enliven old trade patterns during the Restoration were linked with an
 increasing attention to new commercial areas. With the independence of Haiti, France lost
 its most important colony. Although Bordeaux merchants were no longer conveniently
 placed to direct the flow of colonial goods between the West Indies and Europe, they
 converted successfully to non-colonial goods. In the 1820s, the Bordeaux wine trade was
so profitable that it would have been unwise to substitute other products.           38




          Hamburg merchants, on the other hand, managed to enter the overseas trades. The
independence of South America opened a new commercial area in which German
merchants were particularly active. Hamburg was conscious of the importance of the free
staple trade and refused until 1888 to enter the Zollverein, or German custom union.
          Recent studies have confirmed the vitality of Livorno merchants in the first half
of the nineteenth century. The Tuscan port was still a major staple centre in the
                                  39




Mediterranean, even if it had lost the dominant position it enjoyed in the eighteenth
century. The port was particularly important in the cereal trade.         40




          Based on our observations of the period 1806-1815, we can also advance an
hypothesis concerning the following years. It seems that the transmission of entrepreneur-
ial talent to the new generation was apparently not interrupted during the French Wars.
If so, the argument about merchant decadence and socio-economic decline in the nine-
teenth century, which persists because scholars have shown little interest in testing it,
needs re-examination.        41




                                              NOTES

*    Silvia Marzagalli is Associate Professor of      2. Erik Aerts and François Crouzet (eds.), Econ-
History at the Université de Bordeaux III. Her        omie Effects of the French Revolutionary and
essays on early nineteenth-century Europe have        Napoleonic Wars (Leuven, 1990). See also the
appeared in journals such as Ricerche storiche,       articles in Revue économique, X L , (1989), special
Società e Storia and Bulletin du Centre d'Historié    number entitled "Révolution de 1789. Guerres et
des Espaces Atlantiques.                              croissance économique."

 1. About Bordeaux, François Crouzet, "La ruine       3. For an excellent synthesis, see Stuart Woolf,
du grand commerce," in François-Georges Pariset       Napoleon's Integration of Europe (London, 1991 ).
(éd.), Bordeaux au XVIIIe s/èc/e (Bordeaux, 1968),    For Tuscany, see Ivan Tognarini (éd.), La Toscana
510, remarks that "le XIX siècle ne fut plus l'âge
                         e
                                                      nell'età rivoluzionaria e napoleonica (Naples,
du sucre, du café et du vin, mais celui du charbon,   1985).
du fer et du coton...La Révolution et la guerre
n'ont fait que précipiter et aggraver un déclin       4. Archives Nationales, Paris (AN), F 566-595,
                                                                                            12



inévitable par suite des changements de structure     2nd annexed document to an anonymous Mémoire
de l'économie mondiale." For Livorno, David G.        presented by the three Hanseatic towns, 30 June
Lo Romer, Merchants and Reform in Livorno,            1807. See also Pierre Jeannin, "Die Hansestadte im
1814-1868 (Berkeley, 1987), 19, states that "both     europâischen Handel des 18. Jahrhunderts,"Hansi-
contemporary observers and recent studies agree       sche Geschichtsblatter,hXXX\X (1971), 41-73.
that Livorno's commercial situation changed
radically in the period following the wars of the     5. Ernst Baasch, "Beitràge zur Geschichte der
French Revolution and the restoration of the grand    Handelsbeziehungen zwischen Hamburg und
ducal government in Tuscany."                         Amerika," in Hamburgische Festschrift zur
