Port Cities in the French Wars: The Responses
of Merchants in Bordeaux, Hamburg and Livorno
to Napoleon's Continental Blockade, 1806-1813

Silvia Marzagalli

It is striking that nineteenth-century western European merchants have been studied much
less than those of the ancien régime. Instead, social and economic historians of the period
have devoted their attention to industrialists and bankers. This historiographie lapse makes
it difficult to appreciate if and when merchants began to decline in importance relative
to other groups in port cities. Implicitly, the turning point seems to have come during the
French wars — that is, between 1793 and 1815. Most historians assume that European port
cities and maritime commerce suffered enormously during this era and that structural
changes in regional economies prevented maritime merchants from re-establishing their
previous social and economic hegemony after the Restoration. Recent studies of the
                                                                   1



economic effects of this period have hardly altered this concept of maritime economies.    2



Indeed, their interpretation is even more negative when it is applied to territories annexed
by Napoleon, where scholars concentrate on the French exploitation of local resources,
even if they acknowledge some positive effects upon the future institutional development
of the country. In such negative visions, there is no place for nuances. The ruin of
               3



merchants' fortunes is assumed implicitly, without asking what strategies for commercial
survival may have existed. A more focused analysis of mercantile responses to the
continental blockade suggests, however, that merchants were much more able than other
professionals, such as artisans, shopkeepers, and longshoremen, to surmount difficulties
and prohibitions, not only because of the inefficiency of the French regime but also
because they were used to adapting constantly to market changes and could draw on an
international commercial network.
         Merchants had in fact developed effective ways to continue to trade in previous
wars, and were as eager as ever to respond to the demand of continental customers, even
if the authorities considered their behaviour illegal. This comparative study based upon
three port cities will evaluate the success of the different strategies adopted by
international traders. I will analyse the most important means by which continental
merchants attempted to cope with Napoleon's efforts to enforce his legislation against
British commerce after the Berlin decree. Bordeaux — the major eighteenth-century French
port — will be compared with two other cities which fell to Napoleon — Livorno, in
Tuscany, and Hamburg — major ports in the Mediterranean and northern Europe,
respectively. After the decline of Marseille and Amsterdam they became for some years
the most important ports in their areas. This prosperity lasted until 1806-1807.


The Northern Mariner/Le Marin du nord, VI, No. 4 (October 1996), 65-73.

                                            65
