Port Cities in the French Wars                                                             67

 active in the rich West Indies trade. They re-exported increasing quantities to almost
                                       7



 every part of Europe. For French ports in particular, this neutral shipping was vital to the
maintenance of international trade. But European neutral ports were provisioned by
American ships as well; in 1799, for example, 192 entered the port of Hamburg.         8




         During the 1790s, neutral trade was not particularly hampered by the belligerents.
 While it is true that a quasi-war between France and the US led to the seizure of over 300
American ships, and that Britain hindered neutral navigation whenever its trade laws were
violated, as a whole the decade was a golden age for neutral trade.
         The situation changed rapidly after the 1803 rupture of the Peace of Amiens. On
the one hand, Britain reconsidered the status of the neutrals, who were accused of being
a serious challenge to British colonial interests and supporting enemy trade. The Essex
decision of 1805, in which an American ship was condemned for trading through
Barcelona, Salem and Havana, was the first in a long series of seizures. On the other
                                                                             9



hand, France enacted more severe commercial legislation against Britain. From 1803
French merchants were required to prove the non-British origin of all imports. Meanwhile,
Napoleon attempted to force the rest of Europe to adopt similar measures. Between 1803
and 1805, Napoleon tried to attack British interests by closing the Elbe, Weser and Ems
rivers to British traffic. This proved to be useless, as Hanseatic merchants shifted their
trade to neighbouring neutral ports, such as Tonning, in the case of Hamburg.     10




         Only after the Prussian defeat at Jena in 1806 did an effective closure of the
North Sea and the Baltic seem possible. During 1807, Russia, Prussia and Austria
accepted the Berlin decree. Copenhagen, which was bombarded by the Royal Navy in
September, shifted to Napoleon's side. Portugal, which had been reluctant to accept the
decree, was occupied. Spain was forced to adopt measures against British trade, and all
major Italian ports were either occupied by French troops or controlled by their allies.
Under such favourable circumstances, France adopted new measures. In response to the
British orders-in-council of November 1807, which put the whole continent under
blockade and obliged all ships to stop in England and pay duties, Napoleon declared that
any ship coming from England would be seized.      11




         As there was no room left for neutral trade, President Jefferson imposed an
embargo upon American shipping and closed US ports to European vessels. By 1807,
both Livorno and Hamburg were occupied by French troops and were annexed to the
Napoleonic Empire in 1808 and 1810, respectively. If they did not want to cease their
activities, their merchants had to find new ways of keeping trade alive.

Merchants and Trade in Napoleonic Europe

The cessation of neutral trade by the end of 1807 proved tragic for French ports. Whereas
in 1807 forty-three percent of vessels entering Bordeaux were foreign, the next year only
two percent were non-domestic. By that time, hardly any French ships ventured on to
                                 12



international sea routes. The situation was parlous, as many residents of French ports were
unemployed and signs of misery were increasingly evident. The Napoleonic regime could
not afford to tolerate this situation. Yet there was a fundamental ambiguity in its attitude
toward merchants. On the one hand, Napoleon believed that commercial maritime interests
ought to be sacrificed in economic war against Britain. On the other, France's whole
