70                                                                 The Northern Mariner

enforce the commercial laws; what agents could be found were badly paid and thus
unreliable. In a report to his superior, Livorno's chief of police asked how he could
possibly prevent a customs officer, who at a salary of forty francs a month earned just
enough to survive, from refusing 200 or 300 francs to close his eyes for half an hour
while smugglers transferred their merchandise? The Customs Director estimated that two-
thirds of his men were bribed, adding that their numbers were inadequate anyway. In         30



1811, the Livorno police was reduced to twenty-two men, in order to afford their salary.         31




         Increasingly repressive measures, such as the Fontainebleau decree of October
1810 condemning armed smugglers to death, were hardly able to deter the real organizers
of smuggling. If some smugglers were arrested, the bulk remained at liberty. And the
merchants who stood behind all these activities were almost never arrested.
         There was also reluctance by juries to prosecute the rich and most influential
merchants, who were often their relatives. This was particularly evident in Bordeaux and
Livorno, where the city administration was largely entrusted to Tuscans. In Hamburg, by
contrast, all important places were given to French functionaries, who proceeded
energetically against local interests. But the proximity of the border, the importance of
Hanseatic harbours in northern European commerce, and the extension of merchant
networks permitted trade, even in Hamburg, to continue to flow.

Conclusion

In Bordeaux, Hamburg and Livorno, travellers and contemporary observers unanimously
painted pictures of misery. Many thousands in fact were unemployed because of trade
stagnation, and port populations noticeably decreased. Most historians have taken the view
that port cities suffered greatly because of the continental blockade. That said, there has
been some research in recent decades that has indirectly questioned this conclusion, at
least for merchants. Authors such as François Crouzet and Paul Butel have challenged the
orthodoxy that the entire revolutionary and Napoleonic era was marked by a protracted
crisis, arguing instead that there were distinct phases in Bordeaux's maritime trade. The
                                                                                       32



chronology they constructed, at once more accurate and more nuanced, called implicitly
for a reassessment of the consequences of the blockade upon the mercantile community.
In addition, a few monographs have shown the vitality and relative success of individual
merchants. Yet no major study has analysed the success responses of the merchants in
           33



one or several ports to the blockade. For inland cities, however, the historiography has
begun to shift. For example, Louis Bergeron and Jean-Pierre Hirsch have revealed the
dynamism of bankers, merchants and industrialists in Paris and Lille; according to these
scholars, the Napoleonic era did not represent a break in the development of French
capitalism. Could their conclusions apply equally to seaport merchants?
            34




          By concentrating on the years of the continental blockade it has been possible to
show that seaport merchants developed strategies to keep trade flowing. They possessed
                                                                          35



both the skills and the will to surmount the legal obstacles designed to stifle their trade.
Merchants played a central role in the organisation of the huge smuggling trade of those
years, a function which seems to have been only partially revealed by existing studies.          36



The success of illegal trade was a measure of Napoleon's ability — or inability — to
implement his legislation, a task that was particularly difficult in time of war. 37
