Patricia Herlihy, Odessa (copyright 1986; site labels 1991), third-party OCR from downloads/pages/83d83211926c.md. URL https://ebin.pub/odessa-a-history-1794-1914-0916458431-9780916458430.html

icipation of Greeks in Odessa’s trade precipi­ tously declined. We shall subsequently investigate the reasons.75 The Greeks and most other
foreign merchants were already actively involved in international commerce before settling in Odessa. Jewish merchants, on the other hand,
had a much different origin. Important as middlemen in the hinterland, Jews were slow to penetrate the ranks of the great export merchants.
Jewish commercial houses at Odessa were gaining importance by the decade of the 1830s. Between 1837 and 1844, as Table 4.7 shows, the number
of Jewish commercial houses grew from 160 to 221, while Christian firms diminished in number. Skal’kovskii saw the opening of the Odessa
Bourse in 1837 as a principal reason for this.76 Like St. Petersburg, Trieste, and other great commercial cities, Odessa now had its own
money market. The opportunity to act as brokers attracted Jews. Because their operations ranged from small to middle scale, they clustered
in the second and third guilds. Overwhelmingly, they were Russian subjects. “ And when have the Jews,” asked Skal’kovskii, “ not been
humble, faithful and often useful subjects of the Russian state?” 77 Still, by 1848 Jews do not figure prominently among the largest firms.
An article in the August 1848 issue of the Journal de la Haye listed them last after Greeks, Italians, French, English, and Germans active
in Odessa’s commerce. Not until the 1850s did the favorable political climate attract wealthy Jews from Austria. By the 1850s, Jewish firms,
such as Efrusi and Raffalavich, had more than one million rubles in total trade.78 Unlike the other merchant groups that tended to depart
from Odessa after the initial boom in cereal exports had spent its course, the Jews remained. They were destined to play an ever larger com­
mercial role in the export trade over the second half of the century. To this theme we shall return. CHAPTER FIVE Foreign Trade and Domestic
Industry, 1 8 1 4 -1 8 6 1 . . . the [Napoleonic] war removed thousands of hands from agricul­ ture, and famine years capped the misery of
the land, at one time so rich and so flourishing. With these pressing needs, people thus had recourse to the southern provinces of Russia.
—Thom, Austrian consul at Odessa, 1826 From the late eighteenth century, western Europe faced a grow­ ing scarcity of cereals and was forced
to search for them in widening circles. The vagaries of weather, the altered use of land, the long­ term growth of population, the
mobilization of millions in search of new jobs and new homes—all heightened the demand for cereals in western Europe without stimulating a
proportionate increase in their local production. The western search for cereals was, in fact, creat­ ing an integrated, worldwide market in
grain. In that market, Odessa was foreordained to become a principal participant. The Swell o f Cereal Exports The Euxine steppes were
ideally placed to serve this mounting demand emanating from the West for cereals. They were close to the growing market; indeed, in the
entire world, no other large and new agricultural area, capable of massive wheat production, was so near to western consumers. The steppes
were, moreover, easily reached. Even slow sailing vessels could deliver the wheat with rela­ tive ease and expedition. In fact, the slowness
of sailing ships long shielded the steppes from the competition of equally fertile, but much more distant areas—the United States and
Canada, for exam­ ple, or Argentina. Trade and Industry, 1814-1861 97 With Richelieu’s departure from Odessa in 1814, the business community
understandably feared for the future of its commerce. As it happened, the simultaneous movements of another Frenchman—Napoleon—had a larger
effect upon the city’s economic fortunes. He was forced into exile to Elba in 1814, but slipped away from the tiny kingdom and returned to
Paris, and for one hundred days Europe was in an uproar. The sudden, unexpected remobiliza­ tion of huge armies in the West shot the demand
for Black Sea wheat skyward. Happily too, the political obstacles to the free flow of trade had also diminished; in particular, the Ottomans
who con­ trolled the vital Straits, were becoming more accommodating to the passage of foreign vessels. The last years of the Napoleonic
adven­ ture defined a pattern of commerce that persisted over nearly the entire course of the nineteenth century. To be sure, the course of
international trade does not always run smooth. Napoleon’s violent and dramatic exit from politics was very soon followed by what one
historian calls “ the last great subsistence crisis” of European history.1 Beginning in 1816, torrential rains swamped the grain fields of
western Europe. Protracted belligerence had disrupted European production and had already exhausted local reserves. Europeans hungered.
Speculators in the West hoarded supplies in expectation of still higher prices, and venturesome mer­ chants sought the treasured cereals in
the Euxine regions. In 1817, Odessa shipped nearly one and one-half million chetverts of wheat to the West. In 1815, some 1,500 ships
entered the Black Sea, principally in search of grain; only thirty-nine ships had called at Odessa’s port in 1795, and only 552 in the
previous high year of 1803.2 The Austrian representative at St. Petersburg was amazed at this outpouring of Russian wheat and expressed
alarm at the highly favorable balance of payments it assured the Russian Empire.3 The price of a chetvert of wheat at Odessa soared to
forty-five rubles in 1816 and 1817 and may have briefly reached fifty-two.4 It would not regain this value for decades. The Neapolitan
consul at Odessa, de Ribas, cynically com­ pared the city to a doctor, who prospered when others were ill.5 But Doctor Odessa could not
assure his own good health. Exports slumped badly in 1818 and 1819. The price of a chetvert of wheat at Odessa dwindled to ten rubles and
below.6 Crops in the Ukraine failed in 1820 and 1821; plagues of locusts and outbreaks of smallpox harassed the harvesters and disrupted
harvests throughout the decade. Nature, which had severely taxed western farmers in the previous years, was righting its balances. In the
West, political 98 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 instability in Greece and Italy disturbed the trade routes. Even restored peace in the
West did not help. England, France, and other western powers reerected tariff barriers to protect native farmers against the cheap and
abundant Russian production. In retaliation, in 1821 Russia raised its tariffs on wines, liquors, silks, and cottons—characteristic imports
from the West. The customs officials at the port could show growing revenues. In 1824, customs amounted to 2,980,314 rubles, and in 1825
they rose to 3,220,575 rubles.7 The effect of restrictive policies of protectionism in both West and East squeezed the arteries of
international commerce, how­ ever. In 1826, the august Academy of Sciences offered a prize for the best essay in explanation of the
collapsing prices for Russia's agricul­ tural produce, especially wheat. The winner, A. Fomin, advanced the straightforward thesis that
Russian production was too great, and western demand too little.8 Also in 1826, the Austrian consul in Odessa offered his analysis of grain
trade after the boom year of 1817.9 Too many speculators had entered the business. Their failures discouraged more prudent merchants from
establishing trad­ ing companies. Further, the guild charges were too high, and long­ term credit was too scarce. Wealthy landowners, he
claimed, did not put their capital into commerce; instead, they squandered it in lux­ urious living and frequent trips abroad. No doubt all
of these obser­ vations were accurate, but Fomin’s explanation of diminished demand is the most persuasive. To be sure, there were small
gains. In the euphoria of 1817, the government declared that Odessa would become a free port, and the decision was implemented two years
later, in 1819. The delay was necessary, as the government needed to construct walls and gates around the city, to stop smugglers from
carrying the duty-free goods off into the hinterland. The hope was that Odessa would become the great entrepôt for western goods in the
regions of the Black Sea. The status conveyed advantages, but not the full prosperity that the government expected. Most western merchants
doubted the possi­ bilities of making large and profitable sales at Odessa; ships arrived in ballast. An institutional change of far greater
significance was the opening of the Turkish Straits to merchant ships making peaceful passage. Trade and Industry, ,1814-1861 99 Rights o f
Passage The importance of the Straits for Odessa’s commercial prosperity impressed every merchant and traveler. In 1819, a passing English
preacher commented: “ So long as the Dardanelles and the Bos­ phorus remain in the possession of the Turks, the commerce of Odessa must be
subject to great fluctuations.’’10 Even in times of peace, ships from western nations could not sail through the Straits without express
permission from the Porte. Since 1774, Russian ships could enter the Straits, but they were few in number. And the Ottomans used their
strategic control over this major trade route for political purposes. During the uprising against their rule in the Greek Islands in 1821,
the Ottomans repeatedly challenged even Russian ships. They suspected that the fomenters of the Greek revolution were going and coming under
the protection of the Russian flag.11 They also frequently requisitioned wheat car­ goes, as they could no longer rely on Greek carriers.
Freight rates and insurance rates soared with the risks of search and seizure. If trade was difficult in peace, it was impossible in war.
Hostilities between Russia and the Porte from 1828 to 1829 closed the Straits entirely. Some three hundred Triestine and four hundred
Genoese ships reportedly languished in their home ports, awaiting the return of peace. The war represented the capstone to the trade
depression of the 1820s. Still, the Russian government labored mightily to facilitate passage through the Straits. Until 1824, it readily
conferred the Russian flag on foreign ships so that they could enjoy the special privileges that the Porte was by treaty obligated to confer
on Russian carriers. Even when this dubious practice was discontinued (in 1824), Russia con­ sistently used its good offices with the Porte
to gain concessions for foreign shipping. The Austrian consul at Constantinople observed in 1829: This cabinet [of St. Petersburg] is the
government which has the greatest interest in having the Black Sea open to all flags indiscrim­ inately and in the manner most advantageous
for them. This for the reason that the production of the south of the Empire should find the widest possible outlet, the more so because
Russia does not have a national merchant marine.12 Thus, the Russians aided the Danes, Spaniards, and Neapolitans to gain a treaty with the
Porte.13 The negotiations, by which the Grand Duchy of Tuscany won similar concessions, illuminate these 100 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9
1 4 procedures. The Treaty of Adrianople, concluded between Russia and the Porte in 1829, extended to ships of all nations at peace with the
Porte the right to pass the Straits.14 In practice, the Turks contin­ ued to harass the ships of those states with which they had no formal
treaty. The Tuscan captains sometimes escaped this difficulty by raising the flag of a privileged power, usually the Austrian. Either the
Turks were confused by the similarity of the Tuscan and Aus­ trian flags, or, more likely, they overlooked this irregularity in order to
collect the required fees. Other Tuscan captains managed to navi­ gate the Straits under their own colors.15 But the Grand Duchy still
wanted the security for its ships which only a treaty could provide. In 1823, the Austrian consul at Constantinople gave helpful advice to
the Tuscan government.16 To gain a treaty, it would have to cul­ tivate the chief ministers of the Porte. Cash might be offered to the grand
vizier and other personages in key positions. If cash payments seemed too crass, the officials were known to be partial to gold tobacco
cases set with diamonds. But beyond cultivating the sym­ pathies of these high-placed Ottomans, the Grand Duchy needed to enlist the help of
the Russians: The Court of Russia will willingly take an active part in the negotia­ tions. It must increase the number of ships able to
anchor at its ports in the Black Sea, and especially at its emporium at Odessa, a market with which the port of Livorno is in active
correspondence. And it would be useful to Russia if our [i.e. the Tuscan] flag might be among those admitted to trade in that sea.17 Treaty
or no treaty, ships were required to stop at Constantinople to obtain written permission (a firman) to sail the Straits. In 1830, the
procedure still took several days and cost 108 piasters.18 But the Ottomans were becoming progressively more liberal in granting the permit.
The Tuscan consul at Constantinople reported in 1832: It is true that for two years the Turkish authorities located at the Dar­ danelles
have abandoned their traditional vigor, so that no visits are made upon ship arrivals, no delay or trouble is caused them.19 The consul,
however, laid stress on the uncertainties inherent in the situation and on the critical need that representatives, such as himself, be
employed to protect the interests of the passing mer­ chants. He predicted darkly: Trade and Industry, 1814-1861 101 The old practices could
be renewed, and could cause critical injuries to those navigators who might lack in such a place consular agents ready to give them
efficacious aid.20 For twenty-five years after the Treaty of Adrianople (1829), the Ottomans did not return to the old policies. Seemingly,
the Otto­ mans learned that the expeditious release of ships increased fees and not foes. At least by the 1850s, consuls or representatives
of ship­ ping companies at Constantinople were applying for firmans in advance of ships’ arrivals, thus minimizing delays.21 The ships were
still subject to numerous charges—to maintain lighthouses and horns, for example. And health regulations, punctiliously enforced, cramped
free-moving traffic.22 Still, from the 1830s shipping moved through the Straits with unprecedented facility. Law and Technology Expeditious
passage through the Straits was a necessary but not sufficient condition for the revival of massive cereal exports from the South Ukraine.
Local harvests obviously mattered, and harvests were poor from 1830 to 1834. Indeed, 1834 was long remembered as a “ black year,” when
people hungered and a few speculators grew rich. For example, in testimony given before a committee of the British House of Commons, an
English merchant told how he had purchased wheat at St. Petersburg in August and shipped it to New­ castle.