80                                         Iwona Janicka﻿


concerned).16 Despite the repertoire of treatments, many of the sick were beyond
saving. The Russian Ministry of Home Affairs, having admitted to being helpless
to some extent, had even announced something of a contest for the best treatise
on cholera and the methods for its successful treatment.17 There was, however,
a condition set, which was that the methods for its treatment should take into
consideration the location, i.e., the Russian, not Indian, conditions the disease had
developed in.18 The advertisement was successful, as in a short time innumerable
entries began to flood the Medical Council: treatises, reports and even recipes,
which the Medical Department was supposed to examine and recommend (or re-
ject). Among the numerous cures suggested there were plenty referred to as “mi-
raculous” or “the only effective”, which in reality were merely quack remedies,
not only posing risks to health but also threatening the lives of patients. Such
dangerous forms of treatment based on the “hit and miss” method were practiced
all over Europe. Myron Echenberg notes that Parisian doctors would place hot
iron on the spines or heels of their patients, replace electrolytes with hot or cold
water orally or through the rectum or administer alcohol and morphine. As he
writes, there was a “[m]isunderstanding of cholera’s mode of attack on the human
body,” and applying the wrong therapy often led to the patient’s death rather than
their recovery.19
     The spread and the course of the disease were greatly influenced by the mis-
managed prophylactics. They were nearly identical to that of a plague epidem-
ic (quarantines, sanitary cordons, bans on public gatherings, travel bans). Some
of the measures, quarantine in particular, had been criticized since the first epi-
demic, yet despite this, practically throughout the whole of the 19th century, they
were introduced due to a lack of alternative ideas.20 The living conditions of the
population were also of importance. Hygiene and sanitary conditions in homes in
villages and towns, as well as their surrounding areas, left much to be desired. In-
sufficient access to clean water was a common problem.21 Taking all these factors

      16
         Vilniaus Universiteto biblioteka – Rankraščių Skyrius (hereafter: VUB RS) F24–111: Pie-
traszkiewicz Onufry, Laiškai, 1830, 9; Tygodnik Petersburski 41, part 2 (October 15, 1830), 336;
I.V. Popov’, Ob’ aziatskoj holere i merah’ predohraneniâ ot’ neâ. Dlâ selskih’ žitelej, izd. 2 (Mosk-
va: Tipografiâ D.I. Inozemceva, 1893), 16.
      17
         For the best treatise written in Russian, German, English or Italian the Russian government
offered 25 thousand rubels (approx. 1000 pounds). Kotar, Gessler, Cholera, 36.
      18
         GARF f. 109, op. 170, ed.hr. 226 mf, k. 8–9.
      19
         Echenberg, Africa, 10.
      20
         Arhangel’skij, Holernyâ èpidemii, 107–108; Anne Hardy, “Cholera, Quarantine and the Eng-
lish Preventive System, 1850–1895,” Medical History 37 (1993): 251, accessed on February 11, 2020,
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/medical-history/article/cholera-quarantine-and-the-
english-preventive-system.
      21
         In Vilnius the waterwork network was very poor and those that existed were in dire condi-
tion, especially the wooden ones built at the start of the 16th century. They began to be exchanged
