             The Register of the Dead from Cholera in Vilnius Pohulanka Hospital...                87


in the Roman Catholic cemetery but “at” an area designated as a graveyard. For
43 people, no information on the subject of the sacrament was provided and for
the rest of the dead, “yes” was written, whereas what seems interesting is that the
Catholic sacraments were also accepted by 4 Orthodox patients and 1 Protestant,
even though with the others a “yes” or “not” was written instead of the name
of the denomination.
    The matter of determining denomination during the epidemic for the sake
of a burial place and communion seems to have played a secondary role. The rules
for burying the dead had been laid out in an all-Russian instruction for methods to
secure against cholera issued on September 14, 1830. With the occurrence of the
disease in the southern governorates of the Empire, it was sent to all the affected
areas. Yet, since it was to be announced publicly, in order not to raise unwanted
anxiety, the matter of burials was treated very perfunctorily.32 The extended and
tightened Zasady, których należy przestrzegać przy grzebaniu zmarłych na chol-
erę (Rules to be followed when burying those who have died of cholera) were
compiled by the Medical Council at the Ministry of Home Affairs on October 8,
1830 and sent to governorate authorities with the suggestion that only those offi-
cials (including the police) who were supposed to supervise their implementation
should familiarize themselves with them.33
    The guidelines given here were based on both the current regulations prac-
ticed during various epidemics and the current state of knowledge, particularly on
the experiences of English physicians who struggled with the disease in India.34
The way a body should be treated was their special focus. Washing the corpses
was forbidden. They were to be put into coffins in the underwear they had been


      32
         The issue of burying the dead was discussed in two points: p. 7 spoke of the bodies of the
deceased to be buried in ditches of proper depth and covered with lime, whereas p. 8 forbade gath-
erings of greater numbers of people during funerals, limiting the number of participants allowed
to only those required. LVIA f. 378, apr. b/s 1830, svnt. 463, l. 7.
      33
         LVIA f. 378, apr. b/s 1830, svnt. 463, l. 37–37v.
      34
         Sanitary regulations regarding the burial of the dead during epidemics were enshrined in
the 1832 Medical Act (Ustawa lekarska; Vračebnyj Ustav); thus, after the first epidemic in the area
in question. The Medical Act was drawn up on the basis of an instruction written for medical offic-
es in 1797 by Stepan Semionowič Andreewski. In 1832, it was amended and became the legal basis
for Medical Council operations as well as for the Medical Department in the Ministry of Home
Affairs in the struggle against epidemic diseases. In fact, it was adopted only as late as in 1842 and
first published in 1857 in volume XIII of the Full Collection of Laws of the Russian Empire (Svod
Zakonov Rossijskoj Imperii, v. XIII: Ustavy o narodnom prodovolʹstvi i, obŝestvennom prizrenii,
S. Peterburg 1857). For the second time the “Doctors Bill” including new annexes was passed in
1892, and for the third time in 1905. In its final incarnation, the new legal regulations were codi-
fied, and the legislative material grouping was changed. Despite already being out of date at the
time of its introduction, the law remained in force until World War I. A. Uspenskij, “Vračebnyj
Ustav,” in: Bol’šaâ Medicinskaâ Ènciklopediâ, accessed on February 2, 2020, http://medencped.
ru/vrachebnyj-ustav/
