86                                  Iwona Janicka﻿


Jewish population) and also soldiers. The peasant population in the countryside
fell victim to the disease considerably less often, which was fostered by the con-
ditions prevailing in rural areas, i.e., the greater distance between households, the
use of separate wells, occasions for gatherings being less frequent than in towns,
and a certain self-reliance when it came to the food supply. Unfortunately, the
Register provides data on the social status or occupations of only several dozens
of people. Thus 12 people were described as “noblemen”, 1 as a “citizen”, and 1
as a “townswoman”. As far as occupation is concerned, the following jobs were
mentioned: soldiers (including female soldiers, sentries and guards) were in total
29 people, 3 in hospital service, 3 doctors, 2 members of the fire brigade, 3 cob-
blers, 2 office-based civil servants (a secretary and a court employee), 2 carriage
owners, 1 postal worker, 1 carpenter, 1 tanner, and 1 teacher. For 188 people,
general information on their place of residence was given instead (e.g., a street or
town district) and for 353 there is no information at all.
     It is a similar case with parish affiliation, which was only given in just over
100 cases. So there were 32 from the parish of St. John, 11 from the Łukiska parish
of Dominican priests, 1 from the Łukiska parish of Missionary priests, 10 from
Łukiska parish (church unknown) 11 Bernardine priests, 7 from St. Casimir of the
Missionaries, 6 from St. Raphael, 5 from St. Jacob in Łukiszki, 2 from the Dis-
calced Carmelites, 6 from St. George, 4 from Montis Salvatoris of Missionar-
ies, 5 from the Carmelite priests, 1 from the Carmelite nuns, 2 from St. Peter
(in Antokol), 1 from the Cathedral, and 1 from the White Canonical Friars. With
all the other deceased there is no information on which parish they belonged to.
It may be assumed that the lack of data, like any other data, was caused by the
inability to acquire that information from the patient (e.g., due to their serious
condition) or perhaps some of the sick were not able to provide the answer to the
questions (perhaps they did not want to?) or the answers were provided by the
canon himself. Therefore, it is difficult to state on this basis alone whether all
the deceased were Roman Catholics, for although the hospital was designated for
them, people of various denominations were accepted there. The Book accounts
for 21 people of Orthodox denomination, 5 Protestants, 2 Old Believers and most
probably 1 Jew (since an Orthodox Jewish home was provided as his place of res-
idence). Moreover, in the case of 2 people, even though their exact parish was
determined, the section “given last rites” quotes “not”. It may be assumed that
these patients refused to have last rites since it was noted. The same information
may be found for other 15 people; thus, the total number of patients who refused
the sacramental service was 17. A reason for the refusal was given only in three
instances, with 2 cases noted as sudden death and in one case that, despite 6 hours
of the chaplain’s work, the dying “did not show any sign, any repentance and did
not confess, uttering the most grievous insults [...].” This victim was not buried
