Patricia Herlihy, Odessa (copyright 1986; site labels 1991), third-party OCR from downloads/pages/83d83211926c.md. URL https://ebin.pub/odessa-a-history-1794-1914-0916458431-9780916458430.html

the planting of private gardens, for a dis­ tance of thirty to forty leagues around the city.71 The first public gar­ den was donated to
Odessa by Felix de Ribas, brother of the city’s founder. However, the best-known urban park was the “ Due’s Gar­ den,” where Richelieu
collected samples of various flowers and plants, both native and foreign.72 Even after his own departure from Odessa, he continued to ship
slips of various plants to enhance the garden’s beauty and interest. Visitors to Odessa waxed lyrical about the city’s rapid progress. After
only five years of the due’s rule, reported Mrs. Guthrie, the city was unrecognizable. The air, she claimed—perhaps too sanguinely—was good,
the streets were wide and straight, and lined by two-storied houses built of stone.73 Storage facilities, also built of stone and as elegant
as houses, could hold three thousand chetverts of wheat. The population had grown to between eighteen and twenty thousand. Another visitor
to the city, the Frenchman de Lagarde, praised giant melons, grown in the Crimea, that he had eaten at the due’s table. He too waxed lyrical
over the city’s progress: The Regime o f Richelieu 37 This city is a marvel when one thinks of the rapidity with which it has grown; all the
houses are built in stone, most of them with two stories; the streets are wide and straight.74 Difficulty in obtaining stone, he admitted,
had delayed the paving of the streets, but sidewalks, lined by rows of trees, had been con­ structed. Among the city’s principal edifices
were Russian churches and a Catholic church. (The Orthodox cathedral, designed by Frappoli in the classical style, was completed in 1809.)
There was a gym­ nasium (high school) harboring one hundred boarders, an institute for young ladies, and a hospital. De Lagarde admired the
botanic gardens and the well-equipped port, and described the barracks. He set the population at twenty-five thousand, and, like most other
visi­ tors, wondered at its polyglot character. One routinely encountered on the streets of Odessa, Russians, Ukrainians, Jews, Greeks,
Armenians, Turks, Tatars, Poles, French, Germans, Italians, and Englishmen. Some wore their native costumes, and this added to t|ie color of
the passing parade. Richelieu himself, in his memoirs, drew up a balance of his own achievements.75 When he arrived at Odessa in 1803, the
population numbered between seven thousand and eight thousand (Pingaud, it should be remembered, thought it was more nearly forty-five hun­
dred), settled in some four hundred houses. When he left eleven years later, the city contained thirty-five thousand persons; the number of
houses had grown remarkably, to twenty-six hundred. He further located the basis of this substantial progress: overseas trade, the city’s
chief source of wealth, had continued to grow, and his own government had used its incremented resources wisely and well. Commerce Richelieu
gave much attention to the construction of good port facilities. The imperial government granted a loan of 200,000 rubles for harbor
improvements; a large mole was built extending into the harbor, dividing the port into two parts—one for ships coming down the Dnieper River
and plying the coastal waters; and the other for larger ships coming through the Straits and subject to quarantine. The quarantine
facilities were modelled after those of Marseilles. To ease conditions for foreign sailors and travelers, he converted the old Turkish
fortress into quarantine quarters, where the new arrivals could wait out their period of confinement in reasonable comfort. Storage
facilities were also greatly enlarged. 38 Odessa: A History, 1794 -1 9 1 4 Still in the interest of promoting commerce, Richelieu sought to
establish a supporting infrastructure of credit and insurance institu­ tions. In 1804, a commercial bank with a capital of 750,000 rubles
was founded under his auspices, although financed through private subscription. A merchant could bring to the bank bills of exchange or
promissory notes endorsed by two other merchants. The bank would discount the bills for a term of nine months at a charge of 6 percent per
annum. Merchants could borrow cash against stocks of goods, which had to be sealed in warehouses. The money granted represented no less than
one-third nor more than three-quarters of the fair market value of the merchandise.76 Insurance too was a needed service for a commercial
city, and in 1806, again under Richelieu’s prompting, a joint-stock company called the Imperial Chamber of Insurance was formed. Capital was
sought from private persons—chiefly local landlords. Navigating in unknown waters, the company soon was paying out more in settlements than
it collected in premiums and was forced to close down.77 It retained the distinc­ tion of having been the first maritime insurance company
founded in Russia.78 Of more lasting service was Richelieu’s establishment of a com­ mercial court, which offered quick and reasoned
settlement of com­ mercial disputes. Its first director, Armand Emmanuel Saint-Priest, was the second son of François Saint-Priest, a
prominent statesman of monarchical France. Richelieu actively cultivated the nobles of Poland, and through his persuasion, “ they soon
commenced the erection of a number of houses and granaries. . . .” 79 His name alone attracted merchants from the west, especially from
France. He advertised the advantages of Odessa among poten­ tial men of commerce—both in the Russian Empire and abroad. One of them, Charles
Sicard, wrote that in 1804: . . . I was in Marseilles. They scarcely spoke of Odessa, having no idea of the city nor of the country, and
consequently, knew nothing of its commerce. I saw three or four expeditions directed to Odessa on the basis that the then young duc de
Richelieu was governor there. It was for this same reason that I myself decided to go there for several months, but then I settled there.
That is, in a word, the history of nearly all the foreigners established in Odessa.80 The Napoleonic conquests also helped to direct the
eyes of mer­ chants eastward. The Genoese merchants Gattomo, Andriccia, Franchi, and Bellari relocated their firms in Odessa, allegedly to
escape the French hegemony over their native city. By 1809 there 39 The Regime o f Richelieu were at least ten Italian firms exporting
grain.81 Richelieu knew most of the foreign merchants personally. He visited them, kept abreast of their business, and listened to their
complaints and suggestions. He also encouraged the establishment of permanent foreign consulates in the city. At least seven of them were
founded during his tenure in office, representing, respectively, France, Austria, Spain, Naples, England, the Republic of Ragusa, and the
Seven Ionian Islands. Important too for a growing commerce were favorable tariffs. By an ordinance of March 5, 1808, Odessa’s merchants
obtained the right to store goods in warehouses for up to twelve months without paying duties. Richelieu’s greatest—and parting—gift to the
city was status as a free port. He had always been sympathetic to Adam Smith’s arguments in favor of free trade, and a plague at Odessa in
1812 showed another advantage. As long as duties were high, con­ traband would be substantial. Smuggled goods escaped the quaran­ tine
regulations and rendered the city more vulnerable to contagion. In 1814, the governor petitioned Alexander to make Odessa a free port. In
1817, the tsar granted his request, but by then Richelieu had returned to France.82 Trade through Odessa boomed. In 1803, about 550 ships
came to its port. They carried off some 600,000 chetverts of grain, valued at five silver rubles per chetvertP European capital also drifted
eastward to the Black Sea regions, since war in the West was limiting oppor­ tunities for investment.84 Table 2.1 shows the value of exports
from Odessa over the years 1804 to 1813. Table 2.1 Odessa’s Exports by Sea, 1804-1813 Year Rubles Year Rubles 1804 1805 1806 1807 1808
2,339,509 3,399,291 822,927 336,022 1,975,013 1809 1810 1811 1812 1813 1,776,290 3,146,994 7,747,544 5,855,045 8,861,956 Source: Morton,
1830, p. 257. Morton learned this information from Prince Trubetskoi, th^en Director of Customs at Odessa. 40 Figure 2.1: Odessa’s Exports,
1804-1813 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The Regime o f Richelieu 41 The wide swings in exports evident in Table 2.1 reflect the con­
stant disturbances in international politics. War, to be sure, some­ times stimulated, sometimes repressed, and nearly always redirected
trade. Napoleon’s “ Continental System,” for example, proved an unexpected benefit to Odessa. It severely restricted commerce through the
Mediterranean ports of the French Empire and diverted some of it to overland routes. Odessa was well placed to capture much of this
redirected flow. It was connected by land routes through Brody on the frontier of the Austrian Empire to Austria, Prussia, and France
itself; its port gave maritime contact with Tur­ key, Persia, Egypt, and the Middle East. Cotton fabrics shipped through Odessa alone
reached the value of about 11 million rubles per year.85 The ever-alert Richelieu worked mightily to take advan­ tage of this unexpected
boon. In 1808, he reduced the quarantine period, enlarged the storage facilities, and otherwise promoted Odessa’s role as entrepôt between
East and West. Eventual peace in Europe reduced this transit trade, but compensated for it through reopening Mediterranean ports. On the
other hand, Russia and Turkey were at war between 1806 and 1807, and again between 1809 and 1812. Trade, to be sure, did not altogether
cease, even with the Ottomans. According to Sicard, who writes about the first of these conflicts: . . . while Russian and Turkish soldiers
were battling along the Danube, Russian and Turkish businessmen were peacefully trading in all the ports of the Black Sea.86 But trade
clearly suffered. Only 279 ships arrived at Odessa in 1806, down from 643 in the previous year, and the price of wheat fell to a quarter of
its former level.87 In the subsequent Turkish war, the imperial government ill-advisedly prohibited the export of cereals to and through
Constan­ tinople, in hopes of starving the Turks into submission. But Con­ stantinople found new suppliers in Egypt, Cyprus, Sicily, and
else­ where, and Odessa itself faced depression. Journeying to St. Peters­ burg in 1811, Richelieu pleaded with the tsar to rescind the
prohibi­ tion. He gained what he sought; characteristically, he carried the good news back to Odessa in secret, lest its premature diffusion
create disordered conditions in the city’s commodity markets. In spite of revolutions and wars, Richelieu carefully built up at Odessa the
material and social supports needed for a vigorous com­ merce. In 1804, commerce brought in about 2 1/4 million rubles. When he left in
1814, the total was 25 million.88 Aided by this 42 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 expanding economic base, he was also able to give the
city liberal and enlightened government. Schools and Culture The due also played a significant role in promoting schools and cultural
activities within the new city.89 Before 1804, there were no public schools at Odessa; each national or religious community trained its own
children. Thus, Jewish schools existed virtually from the foundation of the toWtc R ^ heltëlTfiîmself founded "a schooLiff Thus, called the
Institute for Nobles, intended tor tne education of upper-class children, who could afford the high tuition; and then a second school,
called a gymnasium, supported exclusively by private donations and open to everyone. Sons of merchants, soldiers, officials, meshchane, and
