the like were instructed in philosophy, law, commerce, and military science. Alexander was favorably impressed by the training it imparted;
by an ukaz issued in March 1808, he allowed its graduates to enter the Cadet Corps at St. Petersburg. By 1811, in accordance with the due’s
wishes, the gymnasium became a government school. In reforming its curriculum, he enlisted the aid of a French émigré named Jeudy-Dugour,
who had settled in Russia and adopted the name Dugurov. He was also a former professor at Kharkiv University and rector of St. Petersburg
University. In spite of his foreign origins, Dugurov was convinced that Odessa’s children should receive a common education, in which the
Russian language would predominate. Richelieu took a personal interest in the school; he quizzed those students who aspired to a military
career and often conducted exami­ nations himself. The due also drafted notices in French to be sent out to the hinterland of Novorossiia.
The school, these advertise­ ments stated, offered excellent preparations for military or civil ser­ vice, for trade, or for any other
occupation that appealed to the stu­ dent. By 1814, however, instruction was no longer gratuitous; the student was charged 750 rubles per
year for tuition and 200 rubles for books—fairly substantial costs. Although the institute was successful, Richelieu sensed the need for a
school which would directly serve the commercial community of Odessa. Commercial gymnasia of this sort already existed in Taganrog and
Katerynoslav. He chose as head of the gymnasium a French Dominican, Abbé Nicolle. Richelieu prescribed not only the study of the ancient
languages, but of modern Greek and Italian. He deemed the mastery of these languages invaluable in Novorossiia, The Regime o f Richelieu 43
“ where all trade is found in the hands of Italian and Greek mer­ chants having a close connection with the southern cities of Europe.” 90
The new school also offered training in statistics and bookkeeping—valuable mercantile skills. No tuition was charged, and poor as well as
rich students who wished to prepare for a busi­ ness career could apply for admission. For young ladies, the Italian de Pozzis and his
Russian wife directed an institute. The feminine counterpart of the male gym­ nasium, the school was expensive and clearly designed to serve
the upper classes. The girls were instructed in the Ten Commandments, languages, geography, history, art, music, dance, painting, sewing,
and household economy. Later, after the due’s departure, a rich merchant, Iakov Protasov, grew dissatisfied with the education avail­ able
to girls and founded a new school for young ladies. While supervised by the government, the school was largely supported by the substantial
merchants of the city. In June 1816, the future tsar, Nicholas, paid a visit to Odessa and inspected the schools. Students at the gymnasium
addressed him in Russian, French, Latin, and Italian. He was much impressed. In the following year, the gymnasium and the Institute for
Nobles, founded by Richelieu, were superseded by a lycée, to which, appropriately, the name of Richelieu was given. In 1818, the famous poet
K. N. Batiushkov wrote to his friend, A. I. Turgenev, the director of spiri­ tual affairs in the ministry of spiritual affairs and public
education, about the school: I tell you honestly speaking, the lycée is the best ornament of Odessa, just as Odessa is the best city after
the capital.91 Richelieu’s work for education was thus acknowledged. According to a contemporary, Odessa’s schoolchildren loved him as their
patron.92 The Richelieu Lycée attracted children of the aristocracy even from the capitals. Books abounded in early Odessa, perhaps because
the national communities were intent on preserving knowledge of their particular languages and cultures. In 1810, a visitor to Odessa
remarked on the number of Russian and French bookstores and on the volume of Jewish literature, shipped there from Poland.93 Richelieu’s
lycée also contained the first library in Odessa. Richelieu himself, by then in France, donated his personal library as well as thirteen
thousand francs to maintain it.94 The collection eventually formed part of the library of Novorossiia University, which was founded in 1865.
44 Odessa: A History, 1 7 9 4 -1 9 1 4 The first printer’s shop in the city opened in 1814. As a pros­ perous commercial port set on the
borders of Europe, Odessa, in Richelieu’s view, offered great promise as a center of the book trade. Even after his departure, he
recommended to Alexander I in 1818 that he establish a large press in Odessa. This would satisfy not only the local demand for books, but
could sell volumes in Greek and Armenian through the Balkans and Asia Minor. His suggestion seems to have borne no fruit, but he was right
in his assessment that Odessa was well located to serve cultural as well as commercial exchange.95 The common commercial language, and very
nearly the lingua franca of the city, was Italian, as it was in many port cities of the eastern Mediterranean basin. At Odessa, the earliest
street signs— and also those of many shops—were in both Italian and Russian. Notarial documents were redacted in Italian, as were passports,
bills, receipts, commercial correspondence and books, price lists, and even theater notices. The first publication by a local press was a
sonnet in Italian.96 Because nearly everyone attended the Italian opera and because of the many Italians on the docks, even common people
sprinkled their speech with Italian words. Cab drivers offered rides to “ Signori.” Stevedores asked for “ quaranti” kopecks, and clerks in
shops spoke to their customers in Italian.97 Under Richelieu and his successor, Langeron, French understandably grew in importance; the Jews
preferred German; and Greek was second only to Italian as a language of commerce. But in this polyglot community, Italian long retained a
certain preeminence. In 1811, an Italian opera com­ pany, directed by the famous musician Montovani, visited Odessa to play in the new
theater.98 In 1818, the poet K. N. Batiushkov, a guest of Saint-Priest, wrote to his aunt how much he loved the Italian opera, and indeed,
he exclaimed, “ Odessa is a wonderful city, made up of all