

===== [Killala-land] chars 298633-300633 =====
 brig, secured her pilot, and received on board a captain of the Prince of his life. Wales's Fencible Infantry, who had been sent out with despatches, the port surveyor, and two sons of the Bishop of Killala, all of into the trap. whom had rowed out Anchoring to meet him and in Killala Bay, in the fell county of Mayo, the troops were disembarked, and by the following day everything in the way of arms, ammunition, and stores necessary for the desperate campaign was on shore. Three companies of grenadiers under Adjutant-General Sarrazin marched on Killala, where a tiny garrison, variously estimated at from fifty to two hundred fencibles and yeomen, was routed, with a loss to the French of three wounded. Twenty-three prisoners were made, in addition to several prominent clerics, and two killed. Some of the prisoners were let out on parole or kept in the Bishop's house ; others were taken on board the frigates, which shortly afterwards made all sail for France. Dr. Joseph Stock, the Bishop of Killala, has tion of Humbert's men, whom left a descrip- he found very good fellows. He tells us that "intelligence, activity, temperance, patience, to a surprising degree, appeared to be combined in the came over with Humbert, together with exactest obedience to discipline. Yet, if you except soldiery that the the grenadiers, they had nothing to catch the eye. Their stature for the most part was low, their complexions pale and sallow, their clothes much the worse for wear: to a superficial INVASION OF ENGLAND 143 observer they would have appeared incapable of enduring These were the men, however, almost any hardship. of whom it was presently observed, that they could be on bread or potatoes, to drink water, the stones of the street their bed, and to sleep in well content to live to make no covering but the canopy of heaven. the leader of this singular body of men, was Humbert, their clothes, with " . . . himself as extraordinary a personage as any in his army. Of a good height and

===== [Castlebar?] chars 302861-304561 =====
anwhile the response of the Irish in rallying round Humbert was anything but encouraging, although the General was joined by a few hundred sons of the soil, and proceeded to Ballina, eight miles from Killala. There good fortune again attended them some yeomanry were worsted, and the place fell. On the 25th August the ; army marched in the direction of Castlebar, where was met by some seventeen hundred men 2 under little it General Lake, a name calculated to inspire fear by the of his previous measures, and the victor of Hill. His men held the most advantageous Vinegar sternness positions of the town, and it should be remarked in pass- ing that a numerous force had been set in motion 1 by Lord Autobiography of Wolfe Tone, Vol. II, p. 346. History of the British Army, Vol. IV, p. 592, by the Hon. J. W. Fortescue. In his report Humbert stated that 6000 men were opposed to him. 2 INVASION OF ENGLAND 145 1 Cornwallis, Viceroy and Commander-in-Chief in Ireland, and hurriedly marched to every point of importance. Humbert must have realized before a single shot was fired that nothing short of a miracle could wrest victory from the troops drawn up on the heights. It was not a question of fools rushing in where angels feared to tread when the French General gave the order to attack, but the man to inflict some kind of determination of a brave punishment on self. Had he been that it enemy, no matter at what cost to himfailed, the verdict of history would have his was a mad freak miracle happened, and The Irishmen who had show their to attempt an issue Humbert is ; but the deservedly praised. round him certainly did not native valour to advantage, for they beat an rallied ignoble ret