
===== [UnitedIrishmen-1796ctx] chars 61834-64634 =====
tempt to get under weigh was certainly but in such unpropitious weather that one of the made, vessels sank in sight of the shore. deserted. His Hoche preparations having ended so ignominiously, again came forward, and was able to enlist the rival's sympathies of Truguet, the new Minister of Marine. On June 23rd, 1796, the General was informed by the Directory it relied upon him to put the plans previously matured into execution. The despatch of a relief expedition to the Irish patriots was to be the signal for an that armed rising by them, the arrangements being in the hands of the Society of United Irishmen, the leaders of which, having formed themselves into a Junta (Directory), had entered into negotiations for French assistance to enable the thousands of men they represented to cast off the English yoke. 2 The communication averred that the independence of Ireland would cause England to lose her naval supremacy, but 1 it frankly admitted that the French " Rivers are difficult and dangerous for landing, because they can be easily The defended, and the land is less open and gives scope for more batteries. wind which brought a flotilla would also allow the defenders' squadron to sail Dumouriez MS., p. 8. The Society of United Irishmen was formed at Belfast in 1791. Junta consisted of five members, Lord Edward FitzGerald, O'Connor, Emmet, McNeven, and Bond. up." a The NAPOLEON AND THE 8 Marine was still under a cloud, and three small expeditions only could be fitted out. thousand picked men and A flotilla land was to take them on the five coast of Connaught, Galway Bay, and then proceed at once to the East Indies. This force was to sail in six weeks, and ten thousand muskets were to be stowed away if possible in By the 1st September, 1796, a second expedition was to be ready at Brest, with a complement of six thousand independent troops, including some ex-Chouans and a sprinkling of " undesirables " ; for the use of the Irish. while a third expedition from Holland, with a force of five thousand men, chiefly foreign deserters under French was to augment the former. So vague a method of warfare did not appeal to Hoche, who drew up a more business-like scheme after a conference with Wolfe Tone and E. J. Lewens, the accredited agents in Paris of the Irish Junta. Experiencing some officers, discouragement, the General finally went to Brest and found the ships there in a disgraceful condition. Lorient was and Admiral Villaret-Joyeuse, who had been appointed Naval Commander of the fleet, Hoche being in supreme authority, was forced to leave three ships little better, out of five in that port when he wished to take them to Villaret-Joyeuse still looked upon the Irish part of the cruise as a mere episode, and prepared for a voyage to Brest. Hoche most vigorou

===== [Humbert-early] chars 59653-61153 =====
ter followed by an attack on Jersey and Guernsey, and a chouannerie carried on in England. Hoche's attention was again diverted, and it was not until he had earned for " himself the title of " the peacemaker of La Vendee that he was able to give further attention to the matter. By this time General Humbert 2 had taken up the cause of Irish cally. independence, which Hoche supported enthusiastiThey went apace with the preparations. Six small and a similar number of transports were placed at disposal, and arms were provided for several hundred vessels their at Brest. whom they proposed to release An " independent legion " of men was also recruited, but at the last jail birds from the prison fifteen hundred moment the newly elected Directory cancelled everything, and turned a more willing ear to the proposal of Lieutenant Muskeyn, whose experience in the navigation and strategy of small craft such as might be of service in crossing the Channel was considerable. By birth a Fleming, he had seen service as naval lieutenant with the Swedes in their war against the Russians. 3 He repaired to Dunkirk and set about forming a flotilla. 1 2 Yarmouth and Newcastle were to be the objec- Desbriere, I, p. 31. Jean Joseph Amable Humbert He became (b. 1767) was the son of a small farmer. a volunteer at the outbreak of the French Revolution, and eventually secured the command of his regiment. He was appointed General of Brigade in 1794. After considerable experience in La Vendee he became " " s