

===== [IrishLegion] chars 769987-771987 =====
03. Bingham, Vol. p. 25. 2 3 See letter from C. J. Fox, ante> Napotiorfs Correspondence, Vol. p. 43, and footnote XXXII, p. 328. p. 44. II, INVASION OF ENGLAND dence of Ireland be recognized." 1 From its 95 very inception The French squadrons were the expedition was doomed. " too closely watched by the ravening wolves of the sea," to use Bonaparte's own expressive term for British seamen, and the Irish Legion in France, who were to constitute the major part of the army of invasion, consisted of but fortynine officers and thirteen soldiers. On December 2nd, the 1803, sixteen First Consul peremptory orders for and six frigates to be ready at sail-of-the-line issued Toulon by the middle of the following month. Even had it been possible with the scanty means at his disposal to out these vessels, the acknowledged superiority of the blockading squadrons made a serious attempt at invasion, fit if not actually impossible, at least exceedingly hazardous. Bonaparte's navy was as weak as his army was strong it was now his task to bring the former to the same ; standard of excellence as the latter. All the ship- carpenters and boat-builders from the age of fifteen to sixty were requisitioned, and boatswains of the navy were placed over them. The whole country became an arsenal, and on moonlight nights the men continued to hammer and saw while the blast from the foundries threw a lurid light less, about the yards. and The Activity reigned, ceaseless, relent- untiring. campaign on which the First Consul was so soon to enter centres upon the personalities of the admirals who conducted it. Those chief interest of the arduous naval who fought and won for Great Britain are dealt with in a later chapter, but at this stage it is well to deal with French contemporaries, La Touche Treville, Ganteaume, and Villeneuve. La Touche Tre" ville was appointed their 1 1 3th January, 1804. NAPOLEON AND THE 96 Commander-in-Chief of the Toulon fleet on the 3Oth Decem- He was ber, 1803. unquestionabl

===== [LoughSwilly-1804plan] chars 952513-954713 =====
olution. A certain section of her population was France, and with Napoleon felt that an expedition to that country might be attended still with coquetting success. 1 The 18,000 soldiers already stationed Brest were to embark in the twenty vessels of Ganteaume's fleet, under Marshal Augereau. After having at reached Ireland by a circuitous route so as to elude detection, and landed his human freight, two alternatives were left to of the cover the Vice- Admiral. If the wind favoured the crossing from Boulogne, he was to hasten back and passage if not, he was to convoy seven Batavian flotilla its sail-of-the-line, ; then lying in the Texel with an army of 25,000 strong on board, and proceed to Lough Swilly. The capture of Dublin was to be his primary object. 1 See ante, 197 p. 94. NAPOLEON AND THE 198 Should unforeseen circumstances army from setting foot on "One invaded. the Emperor preventing the Scotland was to be arise Irish soil, of these two operations must succeed," told Decres late in September, 1804, "and then, whether I have 30,000 or 40,000 men in Ireland, or whether I am both in England and Ireland, the success of the war But which is with us." l was only part of a vast strategic movement, " " successful would place the crown o' the world this if on Napoleon's head. British fleets The Emperor sought by causing the Toulon to deceive the and Rochefort squadrons to sail in separate divisions for the West Indies, the former under Villeneuve and the latter under Missiessy. 2 The Toulon squadron was which had been lost, to regain the Dutch colonies as well as to take supplies to St. Domingo, a colony in the fortunes of which Napoleon evinced the keenest personal interest. St. Helena (absit omen) was also to be wrested from its possessors, two vessels remaining in the vicinity for a time to play havoc with British commerce. The Rochefort fleet had similar aggres- measures to carry sive were to be included 1 out. St. Lucia and Dominica in its list of captures, while 2Qth September, 1804. Correspondance de NapoUon. Martinique Letter No. 8063, Vol. IX, p. 557. 2 Missiessy belonged to a noble family, of which several scions had served at sea. He first saw action i