

===== [Humbert-1798-A] chars 291515-293815 =====
rd for detail. The artist evidently believed in picturing the worst side of war ; the dead and dying chiefly Frenchmen are much in evidence, and one plate a stately cathedral is in flames. in CHAPTER V THE FRUSTRATED ATTEMPTS ON IRELAND, Great warriors To welcome With all, obey the glad call, brave Humbert who's just come to land pike, scythe, And and hedge-stake, now prove to the world we can yet let make 1798 ; us the field take, a stand. TOPICAL SONG. ON the 23rd May, 1798, four days after Bonaparte sailed for Egypt, the Irish Rebellion broke had out. It was the far-off echo of the first phase The inhabitants of the Emerald Isle now determined to make a supreme effort to shake off the yoke of Saxon supremacy. The of the French Revolution. of revolt had possibly been fostered by the harsh acts of men in authority, who hoped by this means to nip spirit the insurrection in the bud before French help was forthThe momentary success achieved in County coming. Wexford was sufficient excuse for the Irish exiles in France to again approach the Directory with a demand for immediate assistance. 1 As usual, they were met with vague promises, much goodwill and graciousness on the surface, and the inevitable delays. Eventually a start was and the French Government made, expressed its willingness to send over one thousand men and four thousand " Ireland is not difficult to invade, the points of landing being many. But an invader can hardly hold out more than three months, even with the help of the natives." Dumouriez MS., p. 276. 1 138 INVASION OF ENGLAND 139 muskets to augment the resources of the insurgents, offering at the same time five frigates for the purpose of transport. This force, of course, was so hopelessly inadequate as to be of little practical value. But the Directory had been bitten and, with its greatest military commander on the high seas, was shy. Had it been seriously interested in the welfare of Ireland, it would have been quite possible to send over a formidable detach- ment of the Army of England, now doing nothing particular, and this in the Brest squadron, which was in a sufficiently advanced state of readiness to allow of its being Tone begged and prayed with utilized. all native eloquence and aggressiveness for a measure worthy of the Great Nati

===== [Humbert-1798-B] chars 295888-297888 =====
tion was to be the golden key with which they hoped to unlock the gate which kept Ireland from despoilers. There were to be no harsh measures, no pillage, no breach of morals. By preserving own ranks Humbert hoped strict discipline in his to set a good example to the Irish insurrectionists. Special care was to be taken that national customs and religious observances were respected. This expedition, with its noble ideals, was to receive a further check before starting. General Cherin, the nominal Commander-in-Chief, fell ill, and was on bad terms with Scherer, the Minister of War, as Bonaparte had been before him. He complained that the main force was 1 Desbriere, Vol. II, p. 70. INVASION OF ENGLAND not sufficiently armed. entreaties Scherer turned a deaf ear to his and hardened Humbert more than 141 his heart, giving Hardy and proportionate share of the had been voted for the which livres 200,000 (francs) whole force. Cherin retaliated by appointing subordinates their Such petty spite served to and bickerings only pour contempt on the persons most concerned. Scherer held the trump card in his hand, at variance with those of the Minister. and Che>in was ordered to Italy. Humbert, an enterprising individual with a keen eye to the main chance, had been pushing forward his preparations at Rochefort, while his superior officers had been Captain Savary had been put in of the naval part of Humbert's division, and he hoisted his pennant on the Concorde on July I2th, his merely wasting time. command secret instructions being to sail at night in the hope that the British fleet might not observe his movements. was to steer for Achill Head, the Mullet, or He Cape Teelin, whichever circumstances favoured. After landing the troops he was to return to France; but should the 1 enemy make a "successful attack during the landing," he was to reinforce the soldiers by the crews of the frigates, and burn the latter, thereby cutting off all hope of retreat surely a quixotic way of waging