

===== [Ballinamuck?] chars 309871-311971 =====
 the West Indies, he crossed to France On being liberated from prison in 1794, and was arrested as an English spy. INVASION OF ENGLAND acted as his aide-de-camp 149 were court-martialled and was fortunate enough to make good his escape. It was not until the 23rd September that the rebel garrison at Killala, which numbered some 4000 men, was defeated by 1200 fencibles, yeomanry, and executed, while Sullivan militia, 3 under General Trench. with the exception of an officer All the French soldiers, named Charost and two subordinates, had joined their comrades at Castlebar. The defence of Killala was well maintained, but the town was retaken by the loyalists recalcitrants had been killed. after some hundreds of the Had the Directory supported Humbert's attempt by sending over Hardy's division, the rebels might have cooperated in sufficiently large numbers to offer a serious resistance to the Royal troops. Considering that the rebellion was no longer a flame, but smouldering ashes, that the French General's resources were hopelessly in- adequate, and that he did not receive the assistance from the native Irish that he had been led to expect, the result is Well may Lecky ask what would have hapduring the previous year or two 14,000 or 15,000 astonishing. " if pened men had landed of the same stamp as Humbert ? " 4 " It was not merely vainglory," says a more modern authority, in the following year he again went to America, returning to France at the end of 1797, and becoming a captain in the army. He was executed on September 29th, 1798. 2 Bartholomew Teeling was born in 1774. He became a United Irishman and later a captain in the French army under the name of Beron. Humbert wrote personally to Lord Cornwallis, praying for clemency on behalf of his young comrade (see Ireland in '98, p. 398) ; but although the jury commended him to mercy, he was executed. 3 Sullivan was the nephew of Madgett, Secretary at the French Foreign Office. 4 A History of England in the Eighteenth Century, Vol. VIII, by W. E. H. Lecky. p. 212, NAPOLEON AND THE 150 " when he wrote after his landing

===== [IrelandWouldBeFree] chars 311138-313238 =====
. " if pened men had landed of the same stamp as Humbert ? " 4 " It was not merely vainglory," says a more modern authority, in the following year he again went to America, returning to France at the end of 1797, and becoming a captain in the army. He was executed on September 29th, 1798. 2 Bartholomew Teeling was born in 1774. He became a United Irishman and later a captain in the French army under the name of Beron. Humbert wrote personally to Lord Cornwallis, praying for clemency on behalf of his young comrade (see Ireland in '98, p. 398) ; but although the jury commended him to mercy, he was executed. 3 Sullivan was the nephew of Madgett, Secretary at the French Foreign Office. 4 A History of England in the Eighteenth Century, Vol. VIII, by W. E. H. Lecky. p. 212, NAPOLEON AND THE 150 " when he wrote after his landing to the Directory that, if he were reinforced by two thousand men, Ireland would be free." 1 As it was, Napper Tandy's miniature army reached the coast of Donegal after Humbert had sur- Hearing that their comrades had met with the Anacreon was headed for the Shetlands. disaster, rendered. After having made a desperate brig and captured a merchant fight with an English naval ship, the refugees steered for Norway, being closely followed by a British man-of-war. Tandy was arrested at Hamburg, and after having been handed over to the British authorities, was tried and 2 acquitted on a point of law. General (afterwards Sir) John Moore's diary shows that the means placed at his disposal during his term of service (December, 1797-June, 1799) were quite inade"Should an invasion be attempted," he notes on in Ireland quate. the 1 6th April, 1798, "there will be no head to direct, and no previous arrangements made the scene will be dis" 3 The batteries graceful, and I wish to retire from it." ; erected at Bantry since the French were there would throw some impediments in the way of an enemy, but nothing but a considerable corps of troops could possibly prevent The way is too extensive to be defended by his landing. 4 Again, writing after Humbert had landed, 