

===== [Emmet-1803] chars 680864-683164 =====
 was not much alarmed, for I was very much so for her, as her Nerves seem to be but weak. I had no doubt of Lady Lou and Ly Sarah bearing paragraph about the Duke I do not like your hope our cousin has not been getting himself into any scrape. We have just begun our harvest here, as some suppose for Bonaparte, but I am as stout as a Lyon. I st I believe he will not try, next that if he does he will be destroyed or at least driven back it of well, L r . but I 1 The insurrection planned by Robert Emmet (1778-1803), the central On June 23rd, 1803, idea being to seize the Castle and arsenals of Dublin. Emmet, accompanied by some eighty followers, a mere handful of the large number of men he had expected to come to his aid, marched on the capital, and in the melee which ensued Lord Kilwarden, the Chief Justice, his nephew, and Colonel Brown were killed. Russell at Belfast, and Quigley at Kildare, also attempted to stir up strife on the same day, but their efforts were but partial and failed. Emmet escaped to the Wicklow mountains, but he was afterwards captured, tried, and hanged at Newgate, with several His abortive plot has been aptly termed "the Irish of his accomplices. No-rising of 1803." INVASION OF ENGLAND 45 and lastly that even if he does land, he will frighten more than hurt us, though the arming of the People goes on much slower than it should do, and I think they have at Sea, by their alterations. At all events an an enemy's country, without any communication army with their own or any force at Sea, is in my judgment in a very bad situation. I fear the D. of Y. will be very much displeased at my motion for a military council, but I am sure some such thing is necessary. spoiled the plan in "Yours "ST. ANNE'S HILL, Monday {August " I send you back Urquhart's my own I papers. affecy C Fnv Sth, 1803]. letter, know no more of which I found him than you among do. "ADDRESS: RT. HONBLE. GENERAL Fox, "ROYAL HOSPITAL, KILMAINHAM, DUBLIN." not proposed to enter fully into every detail of the various laws passed for the security of the British Isles, It is but to give a general outline of the more important of them. As Major-General Sir J. F. Maurice has so pithily put it " : The scheme of home defence, at the time when war began again, was based on the notion of o

===== [Emmet-later] chars 768535-770535 =====
803, his thoughts were directed towards Ireland, and Decres was told to offer to the agents of the United Irishmen then in Paris 25,000 men and 40,000 muskets, with artillery and ammunition, provided that 20,000 of their countrymen joined the French army on its The landing. First Consul was also willing that peace should only be concluded with England on condition of Irish independence. 1 The expedition was to be a diversion only, and could not be undertaken before the autumn or winter of 1803. Emmet's desperate attempt at revolution thought so 2 was little and Bonaparte continually endeavoured and a ill-timed of the men who failure, him to succour their country that he refused " any of them personally. They were divided in 3 opinion and constantly quarrelled amongst themselves." to persuade to see Twenty vessels were to be got ready at Brest by November 22nd, but by that date only eight sail-of-theline, four frigates, and four corvettes were in the roads, under Admiral Truguet, who had superseded Dordelin. At the end of October the First Consul decided that the Brest and Rochefort squadrons should be united, and everything was to be completed by January 22nd, 1804. Berthier was to make it known to the Irish leaders that "the General command of the expedition will be furnished with sealed orders, by which I shall declare that I shall not make peace with England until the indepen1 To in Rear- Admiral Decres. Sedan, 8th August, 1803. Bingham, Vol. p. 25. 2 3 See letter from C. J. Fox, ante> Napotiorfs Correspondence, Vol. p. 43, and footnote XXXII, p. 328. p. 44. II, INVASION OF ENGLAND dence of Ireland be recognized." 1 From its 95 very inception The French squadrons were the expedition was doomed. " too closely watched by the ravening wolves of the sea," to use Bonaparte's own expressive term for British seamen, and the Irish Legion in France, who were to constitute the major part of the army of invasion, consisted of but fortynine officers and thirteen soldiers. On