m7 P. B. TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

‘COUNTERFACTUAL MORALITY TALES

Mental simulations can compel people to acknowledge embarrassing or even
shameful inconsistencies in theit application of moral rules. The paradig-
matic example is the identity-substitution thought experiment that manipu-
lates either the perpetrator or victim of a deed and asks the audience to
contemplate whether they had the same emotional reaction to what actually
happened as they would have had to various hypothetical events. For in-
stance: “If Bosnians were bottlenosed dolphins [Rwandans white, Chech-
nyans Lithuanians .. . ], we never would have tolerated the slaughter of
innocents so long.” Insofar as the audience detects a discrepancy in their
reactions to the two scenarios, and insofar as the audience firmly believes
that the mentally manipulated cause should be irrelevant, the audience will
deem the discovery of a differential emotional reaction to be a disturbing
fact about themselves. Moreover, the thought experiment is easily translated
into an actual experiment. For example, survey researchers often perform
actual identity-substitution experiments to gauge the influence of “socially
undesirable” causes of policy preferences that, it is assumed, people would
not be willing to acknowledge if they were asked directly (Sniderman,
Brody, and Tetlock 1991),

COUNTERFACTUAL CONSISTENCY PROBES

Here the mental simulation reveals contradictions between causal beliefs that
may have previously coexisted peacefully within a belief system. The para-
ddigmatic example is the syllogism that traces through the logical implica-
tions of one set of beliefs to the point where the contradiction becomes
undeniable. For example:

If you really believe that there is so much indeterminacy at the micro level (bat-
tles, firms, bureaucratic subunits of government), you cannot plausibly argue for
so strongly deterministic a position at the aggregate or macro level (wars, econ-
‘omies, government decision:

If you commit yourself to an extreme structural-realist position that denies any
significant causal role to domestic politics in shaping properties of the international
system, then you would have to believe that even if the Soviet Union had been a
democracy in 1945, the Cold War would still have occurred.

‘The thinker then has the dissonance-reduction options of changing one or
both sets of beliefs, introducing new cognitions that neutralize the contradic~
tion, or disengaging from the simulation exercise by simply ignoring the
contradiction (cf. Abelson 1959; Festinger 1957).

It is important to be explicit about the likely long-term impact of repeated
counterfactual-consistency probing of expert belief systems. Certain belief

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS 15

systems are much more vulnerable to this type of conceptual challenge: spe-
cifically, belief systems organized around strongly deterministic claims (if x,
then y must occur) and strongly exclusionary claims (x and only x influences
y). The greater vulnerability can be traced to the greater ease of generating
and justifying “could” versus “would” counterfactuals. A “could” counter
factual merely requires showing that there is at least one plausible story
about a possible world in which x did not automatically lead to y or in which
some other cause, 2, also influenced y. By contrast, an unqualified “would”
counterfactual requires showing that an outcome would have occurred in all
possible worlds that pass some threshold of plausibility. ‘The burden of proof
is obviously much higher in the latter case.