

COUNTERFACTUAL EXERCISES AS DEBIASING TOOLS AND MEANS OF
STIMULATING THE IMAGINATION

Retrospective scenario generation is mental simulation in which the goal is,
to prevent premature cognitive closure induced by certainty of hindsight
Some scholars (e.g., Weber 1949) have long suspected, and cognitive psy-
chologists have recently demonstrated (e.g., Fischhoff 1975; Hawkins and
Hastie 1990), that “outcome knowledge” contaminates our understanding of
the past. Once people learn the outcome of an event, they not only perceive
that outcome as more likely ex post than they did ex ante (which might be
defended as a rational Bayesian updating of subjective probabilities), they
often fail to remember their ex ante assessment of what was and was not
likely to happen. Backward and forward reasoning in time are, in this cogni-
tive sense, deeply asymmetrical

Counterfactual thought exercises can check the “creeping determinism” of
certainty of hindsight. Asking people to think of how things could have
worked out differently becomes a means of preventing the world that did
‘occur from blocking our views of the worlds that might well have occurred
if some antecedent condition had taken on a different value. Indeed, there is
1a small “debiasing” literature in experimental psychology that assesses the
usefulness of encouraging people to imagine that the opposite outcome oc-
curred (Fiske and Taylor 1991). There is also a small literature in literary
studies on the concepts of sideshadowing, foreshadowing, and backshadow-
ing in narratives that makes a strikingly similar normative point (M. A.
Bernstein 1994; Morson 1994). Sideshadowing calls attention to what could
have happened, thereby locating what did happen in the context of a range
of possibilities that might, with equal or even greater likelihood, have taken
place instead. Sideshadowing serves as a valuable check on foreshadowing
(the tendency, in extreme form, to reduce all past events to harbingers of the
future) and backshadowing (the even more insidious tendency to judge hi
torical actors as though they too should have known what was to come).

