

As Easthope argued, this was not the behavior one would want from a bank devoted to public service, although it was understandable behavior for a bank more concerned about the dividends it could pay to its stockholders than the general state of the monetary regime. On this point, the Bank' s defense was that the exchanges had turned against Britain in 1825, so it was necessary then to contract its note issue and restore its gold reserves. Yet the evidence produced by the Bank itself for the committee indicates that the exchange rate was never seriously threatened (see Figure 5 ), at least no more than in earlier and later fluctuations that were not accompanied by financial panics. Indeed, such fluctuations as occurred may have created profit opportunities for the House of Rothschild, which the Bank was only too happy to share in part without taking the risks incurred by Rothschild.

The dysfunction of the financial system created at the top by the separation of operations and objectives between the Bank and the Treasury spread even further, affecting the country banks. Confronted by the dis-M AY / J U N E 1 9 9 8 Gayer, Rostow, Schwartz (1975), vol. I, p. 185. Gayer, Rostow, Schwartz (1975), vol. I, p. 185. Pressnell (1956), p. 480. Great Britain (1968) M AY / J U N E 1 9 9 8 tress caused by severe and unanticipated deflation in 1819-21, the Treasury did not wish to renew its reliance upon the Bank for buying Exchequer bills, as it had done in 1817 in order to finance public works projects in the manufacturing districts and Ireland. 19 Instead, it allowed the country banks to continue to issue notes of small denominations, deferring their elimination from circulation for 10 years. Instead of disappearing from the money supply in 1823, as previously provided in legislation of 1816 (which mandated their termination within two years after the Bank resumed cash payments), such notes were allowed to continue circulating until 1833.

The country banks, already providing necessary finance to manufacturing districts throughout England by the second half of the eighteenth century, found their business prospects greatly enhanced during the Napoleonic Wars. 20 Part of the reason was the expansion of heavy manufacturing in the Midlands and South Wales, part was the growth of foreign trade from outports other than London, and much was due to the role of country banks in remitting to London the government' s revenues from the land tax, the stamp tax, and the income tax while it was in effect. The end of the war reduced the basis for all these activities and eliminated the income tax. Moreover, the continuing threat of cash resumption by the Bank of England meant that the profitable note-issue business would have to be wound up and replaced by some other form of revenue.

Into the breach stepped the stockjobbers and brokers operating in the London stock exchange. Their business, too, was greatly enhanced by the incredible increase in government debt issued during the wars of 1793-1815. It was interrupted briefly by the crisis of 1810, which foretold the difficulties the stock exchange traders would face when the war ended. In 1811, the response of stock traders was to enlarge greatly the list of securities available for investors in the London stock exchange. Canal stocks were especially favored, although a few other joint-stock companies were listed-iron-tracked railways, docks, waterworks, and a few gasworks. Trading in most of these public-utility stocks was quite limited, however, as most shareholders preferred to hold them for their value as long-term assets and for their voting power. The various forms of government debt remained the most lucrative source of commission and speculative income for traders.