

In the early period from 1811 until 1819, by contrast, the London stock market had established a stable price relationship among the three securities. The market yield on East India Company stock was always the highest of the three. Presumably, this situation reflected the higher risk associated with the stock. The directors succeeded in keeping the dividend rate high at a steady 10 percent per annum throughout this period, but there was always a high risk that the government would either increase its charges on the company or reduce its source of profits, say by returning Ceylon and Indonesia to the Dutch. The much lower market yield on Bank stock reflected the perception that the Bank' s business with the government was assured and even less risky than the government' s financial affairs. The Bank stock' s market yields were always lower than those available from the 3 percent consols, at least until 1819. This is not as counterintuitive as it may first appear, because the amount of Bank stock was fixed by terms of its most recent charter, while the supply of "Three Per Cents" kept changing unpredictably with the shocks to the government' s finances.

All this changed, however, with the Resumption Act of 1819. The Bank' s stock was assessed by the market to be then as risky as that of the East India Company. The success of actual resumption in full in 1821 appears to have reassured the market that it was less risky than the stock of the East India Company, whose fate was still a matter of intense discussion and dispute.

At times, Bank stock even appeared less risky than consols. The crisis of 1825 disrupted further the price and yield patterns. Thereafter, consols were clearly judged the safest security, East India Company stock became priced with a higher risk premium yet, and Bank stock was priced with a risk premium that seems to have risen steadily toward the fateful year of 1833, when its charter was up for renewal.

It may be helpful to put this argument, derived from visual inspection of the price and yield charts, in terms more familiar to modern financial analysts. The visual evidence is that the three major components of "the funds" were co-integrated in the period up to 1819 and presumably for a number of years before 1811. At some point in the period of conflict between the Bank and the government over the timing and terms of resumption of cash payments, from 1819 to 1821, the co-integrating relationship was broken. Table 1 presents the results of some formal testing of the statistical hypotheses implied by this argument. 12 he top panel demonstrates that the prices of all three securities probably followed random walks, both during the period 1811-20 and the period 1821-30. This is reassuring evidence that the market was at least weakly efficient in pricing each security. That is, there was no obvious trading rule that investors could use to make consistent profits by knowing when prices would rise or fall.

The second panel shows the results of Dickey-Fuller tests to see if there existed cointegrating relationships between each pair of securities in each subperiod. These indicate that co-integration did exist between 3 percent consols and both Bank of England stock and East India Company (EIC) stock in the first subperiod, 1811-20. This is sensible, as the dividends for both the Bank and the EIC rested in large part on passing through the interest payments each company received from the government. However, no co-integration existed between Bank of England and East India Company stock. This is also reasonable, because each company' s additional earnings above the interest payments received from the government were determined independently of each other. But even the co-integration of each company' s stock with consols disappeared in the second subperiod, 1821-30.