

9 Mitchell (1988), p. 581.

M AY / J U N E 1 9 9 8

The elimination of the income tax in 1816 brought an end to the mutually agreeable arrangements between the Treasury and the Bank that had existed during the war. The fall in tax revenues meant a sharp rise in the ratio of tax revenues that the government had to devote to servicing the huge debt accumulated during the war. Figures 1 and 2 show clearly the rise in government debt during the war, the ease with which the mounting debt was serviced while the income tax existed, and then the constraint upon the government' s peacetime budget created by the continuing debt service. In the absence of an emerging revenue source, it was a serious shock to the Treasury to lose an income stream that had amounted to nearly 20 percent of its total gross income in 1816 (£14.6 million) and had virtually vanished by 1818. 9 This was the shock that forced readjustment throughout the entire British financial system, from the Treasury right down to the country banks.

The Treasury confronted this situation with a variety of ploys. One was to raise the price of its long-term bonds in the London Stock Exchange so that new debt at lower interest rates could be issued in order to reduce its expenditures on debt service. It preferred to reduce this form of expenditure rather than cut back on traditional sinecures of the royal family and the landed aristocracy or reduce further the army and navy. Expenditures had to be cut not only because the repeal of the income tax had reduced revenue, but also because of the fear of further losses of revenue that might follow from reductions in various customs duties and excises. Counterarguments that both foreign trade and domestic commerce would increase in response to lower tax rates enough to generate the same revenues as before failed to persuade a timorous government. A few experiments were tried, some of which proved successful, but in the prevailing disturbed monetary conditions, any reductions in protection levels were vehemently opposed by manufacturing interests. The government was forced to find its budget balance in reduced debt service. By 1821, it became increasingly possible to do this.

Figure 3 shows the course of prices for the major government "stocks," namely the price of 3 percent consols, Bank of England stock, and East India Company stock, over the period 1811-31. The price of consols, with their constant £3 interest payment each year, reflects inversely the default risk-free yield on long-term debt. Its pattern shows clearly the increasing pressures of war finance during the Napoleonic Wars and the rocky road traversed by the British debt overhang in the decadeand-a-half following Waterloo. In the period encompassing the resumption of specie payments, from late summer 1820 Percent to late 1822, the price of all three securities rose. With their dividend rates maintained at wartime levels, this meant the market yields on each fell for first-time investors.

