

M AY / J U N E 1 9 9 8 withstand its impact? More important, why did the British government' s relatively modest reforms prove to be so effective in the long run? Perhaps we can glean more useful lessons for today' s policymakers than previous historians have been able to provide.

The argument developed in this paper is that the common element in all the problems of Britain' s first return to gold arose from the pressures of coping with vastly increased informational uncertainties within the existing structure of English institutions. 1 These problems started with the Treasury itself, confronted by the difficulties of servicing the huge government debt accumulated during the Napoleonic Wars and deprived of its primary source of revenue, the income tax. They continued within the Bank of England, forced now to take on new responsibilities while searching for new sources of revenue to replace its wartime profits. They were compounded by the response of the London capital market, which produced a bewildering array of new financial assets to its customers to replace the high-yielding government debt now being retired. All this left the London private banks and their corresponding country banks-as well as their customers in agriculture, trade, and manufacturing-floundering in the resulting confusion. The government' s piecemeal reforms, introduced during the crisis of 1825 and its immediate aftermath, provided smoother patterns of tax collections and interest disbursements, established Bank of England branches throughout England, stimulated country bank competition with joint-stock companies outside of London, and eliminated the Bubble Act of 1720. Even the bankruptcy laws began to be rewritten in 1831. 2 These disparate reforms made marginal improvements in the efficiency of information gathering and processing by the government, the central bank, the banking system, and the stock market while preserving the separation of functions among them. Maintaining these "firewalls" among the types of institutions making up the financial sector of the British economy diminished the immediate impact of the reforms, but it enabled them to become increasingly effective over time. True, crises continued to arise throughout the rest of the century as the British economy was subjected to repeated shocks of wars, famines, frauds, and foreign defaults. But the evolving financial sector of the British economy surmounted each crisis with increasing confidence, and all the while these firewalls were preserved. The firewalls meant that relationships among financial intermediaries and financial markets had to be maintained by short-term contracts in a competitive market environment rather than by regulations imposed by centralized authority with long-term rigidity.

The focal point for these new market relationships was the market for discounted commercial bills that arose rapidly in importance after the crisis of 1825. 3 Once again, as in earlier crises and in those that were to follow until World War I, the British financial sector was able to find a market solution to the problems created by its relatively inefficient and disparate financial institutions. In the longer run, the flexibility of response provided by the combination of markets and financial intermediaries coexisting in the British financial system enabled it to withstand exogenous shocks and to finance expansion of the real economy. To elucidate and elaborate this argument, I analyze, in turn, the shock to the financial system of shifting from wartime to peacetime finance in 1821, the financial crisis that occurred at the end of 1825, the Bank of England' s efforts to pick up the pieces, and, finally, the rise of a market in discounted commercial bills that put things right again-for awhile. The lessons of each episode highlight the importance of appraising the financial system as a whole, rather than focusing on what appears to be its weakest link. In retrospect, it seems critical to allow information to flow freely among the various parts of the system in order that markets may form to price and intermediate risk. At the time, the Bank of England refused to divulge important information and remained aloof from market activity until it was forced to act, usually too late. Only gradually were Clapham (1945), vol. 2, ch. 1. Chapman (1984), p. 4. Pressnell (1956), pp. 142-44. Letter to Malthus of July 19, 1821, in Works, IX, p. 15 as cited in Fetter (1965), p. 98, n. 11. Hilton (1977), p. 54.