The actual market yields available to investors in "the funds," as they were known at the time, are shown in Figure 4 . There was clearly a period of marked recovery from the trade crisis of 1819, when it was finally determined that Bank of England notes would again be convertible into gold at the pre-suspension mint par. A check occurred, however, at the end of 1822 that lasted until the spring of 1823. Then the upward course in price (and fall in yields) resumed for a year, leveling off from March to September 1824. The government' s success in managing its debt service problem after resumption led to unusually low interest rates, especially in 1824, the year preceding the boom and bust of 1825.

The charts of prices and yields for "the funds" illustrate nicely the problems created by the transition from wartime to peacetime finance. The price patterns of the three major securities available to risk-averse British investors changed their relationship from moving in synchrony to diverging unpredictably. The capital stock of both the East India Company and the Bank of England was invested in permanent government debt, on which the government paid regular interest. Typically, the two chartered monopolies passed this interest payment through to their shareholders along with some part of the profits obtained from their business activities. The dividends declared by the two had increased over the eighteenth century but rose to all-time highs during the Napoleonic Wars. The Bank' s business as the remitting agent for the government' s war finance has already been mentioned. The East India Company gained from absorbing all the Asian trade previously serviced by the French and Dutch East India companies while the hostilities lasted. However, it was assessed a huge annual sum by the government, purportedly as compensation for the naval and military services the government provided for the protection of the East India Company' s trade.

A crossover in the prices of Bank of England and East India Company stock emerged clearly at the beginning of 1823 and widened through 1824. Part of the decline in the Bank' s stock was certainly due to its decision in 1823 to drop its semiannual dividend from £5 per £100, which had remained constant from 1807 through 1822, to £4 per £100. It remained there through 1838 before dropping again. 10 The Bank was steadily withdrawing from its discount business, husbanding reserves, and fending off Parliamentary pressures to resume convertibility. The East India Company, meanwhile, was in its final phases as a trading company in the period 1813-33 10 Clapham (1945), v. II, p. 428 . Price Levels of "The Funds" SOURCE: Neal (1990), data appendix. 12 I am grateful to Marc Weidenmier for his expertise in carrying out this analysis for me.

and faced with a mounting problem of encroachment by noncompany English traders in the exports of Indian goods to Britain. To counter this, the company was allowed to maintain its monopoly on all British trade with China. It was in the 1820s that the company' s import of trade goods from India began to feel the pressure of competition-in 1826-27, they imported no goods whatsoever from India. 11 So it was the prospects of the continued China monopoly, and the earnings on monopoly pricing of tea for British consumers, that raised its market value in the early 1820s and the decline in Indian trade that lowered it in the mid-1820s.