

M AY / J U N E 1 9 9 8 these lessons learned; now is not the time to forget them.

## THE SHOCK: FROM WARTIME TO PEACETIME FINANCE IN 1821

In the expansion of war finance that the Napoleonic Wars induced in Britain, all parts of the British financial system prospered. At the top, the Treasury benefited from increased taxes, especially the income tax, as well as the expanded market for its debt, both long-term, funded debt and short-term, unfunded debt. The Bank of England profited throughout the Napoleonic Wars as the government' s agent for fiscal transfers both at home and abroad throughout the most expensive war fought in history to that time. It increased its annual dividend to 12 percent from 7 percent in 1805 (reduced back to 10 percent in 1807), greatly enlarged its staff, built new facilities at its location on Threadneedle Street, and expanded its note issue as well as its advances to merchants and manufacturers in London. 4 The business of the London private banks expanded at the same time that foreign merchants fleeing the extortions of Napoleon' s troops brought their affairs to London. 5 Country banks multiplied in great number and profited by issuing small-denomination banknotes to replace metal coinage in the domestic circulation after the Bank of England suspended convertibility in February 1797, and the restrictions against issuing small-denomination notes were suspended in March 1797. 6 In short, the entire British financial sector enjoyed prosperity on the basis of war finance.

True, the commercial crisis of 1810 brought the Bank of England' s prosperityand arrogance-under close scrutiny by its enemies and led to the Bullion Report of 1810. By undermining the intellectual authority of the Bank' s directors, the Bullion Report provided the courage needed for subsequent governments to constrain the Bank' s power and to overrule its recommendations on monetary matters if that became politically popular. The Bank' s practical autonomy, however, remained intact as the government still relied on it for managing its remittances and, especially, its recurrent issues of debt-both long-term, funded debt (perpetual annuities comprised mainly of 3 percent consols) and short-term, unfunded debt (one-year Exchequer bills bearing daily interest). The Treasury at this point was the Bank' s strongest defender against the criticisms of the Bullionists, arguing that the needs of war finance justified the fall in the exchange rate of the paper pound.

As a result, for three years after the signing of the peace treaty in Paris in 1815, the government acquiesced to the Bank' s various arguments that resumption of cash payments should be delayedwhether until the exchanges had stabilized, or the bond market had strengthened, or foreign trade had picked up, or its gold reserves were increased. Finally, in 1819, the government initiated a bill to force the Bank to resume convertibility, after initial experiments in 1817 at limited convertibility of Bank notes had succeeded without any harmful consequences. Even so, the Bank managed to make the transition as difficult as possible, first by amassing a large stock of gold, which helped keep up the price of gold in the markets, and then by withdrawing the notes from circulation that the government used to repay £10,000,000 of Exchequer bills that had been held by the Bank. Further, it refused to lower its rate of discount on bills and notes even as its loan business to the private sector declined. The resulting price deflation intensified both agricultural and manufacturing distress but enabled the Bank to resume full convertibility of notes into coin in May 1821 and to skip almost entirely the intermediate step of limiting convertibility to ingots of 60 ounces, as proposed by Ricardo. While, at the time, Ricardo criticized the Bank' s directors as "indeed a very ignorant set," 7 it appears to later historians that the Bank was responding angrily to the government' s efforts to use the Bank to support its short-term debt financing while taking away the Bank' s power to control the level of its own liabilities. 8