

Parliament collected evidence in the years afterward to determine the pattern of bankruptcies. Table 2 distinguishes town and country bankruptcies opened within the total of commissions sealed from 1822 through 1833. Again, 1826 shows up as the crisis year, but what is striking here is the much more dramatic jump in the country bankruptcies, a situation that continued afterwards with a consistently higher number of bankruptcies for country banks. Moreover, bankruptcies of banks located within 65 miles of London totaled only 38 from February 7, 1824, to March 22, 1832, compared to a total of 116 for banks located outside the 65-mile radius from London. Only 12 of the London banks failed in the crisis period from December 13, 1825, to March 11, 1826, while 52 of the country banks failed from December 12, 1825, to 43 Doubleday rants about the widespread distress created from passage of Peel's Act in 1819 until its final full effect in May 1823, "but, in fact, his prime example of distress . . . calculated to tear in pieces, almost, the heart of every just and sensible man that reads it," deals with the loss of a country estate purchased with wartime profits by the son of a trader who went bankrupt in 1822. Clearly, this was not a general condition.

M AY / J U N E 1 9 9 8 M AY / J U N E 1 9 9 8

F E D E R A L R E S E R V E B A N K O F S

F E D E R A L R E S E R V E B A N K O F S T. L O U I S

March 11, 1826. These bankruptcy records indicate further that the financial panic was transmitted through the credit channels of Great Britain, radiating out from the London capital market, and had its final impact in the trade and industry of the countryside through the liquidity crunch exerted upon the country banks.

## Picking up the Pieces

The question naturally arises: Could the Bank of England have prevented this financial disaster, say, by acting earlier and as a monopoly bank bearing more responsibility to the public than to its stockholders? It must bear part of the blame for the expansion of the money supply that apparently arose in 1823-24 and especially for failing to offset the monetary expansion occurring elsewhere. But if, as Duffy suggests, it was the Bank' s drawing account activity rather than its note issue that played the strongest role in easing or constraining the credit conditions in the London money market, then the Bank of England can be no more culpable than the country banks. The sums advanced from the Drawing Office plummeted after resumption of cash payments in 1821, and the Bank of England restricted drawings through most of 1825, never rising to the pre-resumption level until the first quarter of 1826. But this analysis simply casts the Bank of England in the role of just another bank, albeit much larger and more influential. If it was supposed, through its ability, to combine up-to-date, authoritative information from the worlds of finance, commerce, and government policy, it might be expected to have played an earlier, more constructive role. In fact, the evidence from the minutes of the Court of Directors of the Bank indicate that the Bank was taken by surprise and responded with much too little, much too late.