

The third change noted by King was the withdrawal of London private banks from re-discounting after the 1825 crisis. The run upon the Bank of England-as well as its obvious reluctance to hold too much reserves in gold, which was not earning income for its stockholders-convinced the London banks they should not rely on the Bank of England exclusively for cash in times of pressure. Instead, they turned to providing call loans to bill brokers, who could, in turn, increasingly become bill dealers. Instead of delaying discounting of bills in London until a matching buyer had been found for the bills offered for sale, larger firms could now purchase the bills immediately, using funds on deposit with them by the London private banks. 57 Only a few firms were as yet large enough to be able to risk this next step, moving from brokering to dealing in bills. Even those like Gurney' s probably would not have done it then had not the market rate of discount fallen below the usury limit of 5 percent. Had it been at or above the usury limit, there would have been no possibility of making a profit from strict dealing.

The final step in completing the new structure did not occur until 1830, when the Bank of England opened its re-discount facilities to the bill brokers. Even this was not sufficient to overcome the informational asymmetries that could still arise in the market and that lay at the heart of later crises when the emerging bill market was abused opportunistically. The remaining problem was the Bank' s continued refusal to discount at market rates, meaning that it King (1936), p. 38. Testimony by Henry Burgess, the Secretary of the Association of Country Banks to the Committee on Bank of England Charter, 5324-26, in Great Britain (1968), pp. 427-28. Pressnell (1956) later confirmed this tendency, even for country banks, pp. 415-34. King (1936), p. 41.

Testimony of William Beckett to the Committee on Charter of Bank of England, 1436-38, in Great Britain (1968), p. 101. King (1936), p. 64. was unaware of emerging imbalances in the demand and supply of bills of exchange until a large excess demand for cash showed up at the Drawing Office, as in December 1825. Only when the practice of maintaining fixed discount rates at the Bank was foresaken in the crisis of 1847 did the role of the "Bank Rate" come to play its key regulating role in the British financial system. But the information flows that had arisen through the medium of the bill market enabled the London banks to keep closer tabs on the conditions of the country banks, whether they were in agricultural or industrial districts, essentially through the intermediation of the London discount houses. Further improvements in the management of information flows within the entire financial structure were elicited in response to later financial crises, caused by new, unanticipated shocks encountered as the global economy of the nineteenth century was created.

## POLICY LESSONS?

The evidence of the bankruptcies certainly suggest that problems of adverse selection in the London credit markets arose in intensified form during the 1824-25 bubble on the London stock market. Combined with the evidence on changing yield spreads for East India Company stock compared with Bank of England stock, and especially with the evidence of the initial bundling and then wide dispersion of yields on the various Latin American government bonds, it lends support to the hypothesis that the problem of information aysmmetry, always present in financial markets, became especially severe in the London markets in the years leading to the crash of 1825.