

While the focus for foreign loans was mostly on Spain and Spanish America, Greece received a loan and much-needed publicity for its then-premature efforts to break away from Turkish rule. More than 50 years later, when the Greek government was attempting to assure the international community it would go on a gold standard, part of its commitment was to resume payment on these initial bonds!

### Yields of Latin Bonds

Percent M AY / J U N E 1 9 9 8 Dawson (1990) provides a readable account of this episode, but Marichal (1989) while, the net proceeds they had received after the bonds were sold at discount-and after they had paid large commissions up front-to the London investment houses were dissipated rapidly in military conflicts with neighboring states. 24 rom 1822, when both Chile and Colombia floated bond issues with London agents, an increasing number of Latin American governments tried to find the means for financing their transition to independence from the flush pockets of British investors. The bonds they issued, in terms of the amounts actually paid up, as distinguished from the amounts actually received by the governments, were the largest single category of new investment in the London capital market in this period. 25 It is true, even so, that the amount was small relative to the remaining sum of the British government' s funded debt-£43 million compared with £820 million. 26 igure 6 compares the prices of several bond issues of the emerging South American states, as given in James Wetenhall' s semiweekly Course of the Exchange. 27 At the peak of the stock market boom, there was surprising convergence in the prices of all the Latin American bonds. It was only in the ensuing two years that information on the fiscal capacity of the individual governments and their respective economic bases enabled the London market to distinguish among them. Mexico and the Andean countries were clearly marked to be disaster cases by the end of 1828, while already Argentina and Brazil were demonstrating their attractiveness to British investors, an allure that would increase until the Baring crisis of 1890.

The pricing pattern of foreign government bonds displayed in Figure 6 is a classic illustration of the so-called "lemons" problem that can occur in emerging financial markets. In this case, it appears that investors in the London market priced the Latin American bonds at a substantial discount so that the typical 5 percent or 6 percent yield on par value could provide a substantial risk premium compared with both the British funds and the nowseasoned and solid French government debt. Until further information came in from newspapers or merchants' letters from the respective countries concerning their fiscal situation and credit arrangements, however, they all looked much alike, and all were priced at punitively low levels. This discouraged higher-quality governments, perhaps Brazil, from issuing debt until the House of Rothschild had assured itself that adequate provision was forthcoming for servicing it. But it also encouraged lower-quality governments, perhaps Peru, to issue debt early on. Indeed, at one point in October 1822, it induced the Scottish adventurer, Gregor McGregor, to issue bonds from an imaginary government of Poyais, presumably located around Honduras. On October 29, 1822, the official Course of the Exchange quoted Poyais scrip for 6 percent bonds at 81 1 /2 percent of par, compared with Peru' s 6 percent bonds at 86 3 /4, Chile' s at 84, and Colombia' s at 86! Only as more information came in or as investors began to pull out of higherrisk investments and seek safer, betterquality assets did price differences begin to show up. This change began to occur in the fall of 1825 for the new government issues from Latin America; it did not affect the now-seasoned and secure French rentes at all. While the history of the various bond issues is extremely colorful, it appears that Leland Jenks' assessment of many years ago is still fundamentally correct-their main effect was to enrich some issuing agents and impoverish or imperil others, including the redoutable Barings. Jenks notes that the typical arrangement mimicked that devised by the Goldschmidts for the Colombian loan of 1824, whereby "[t]hey received a commission for raising the money, a commission for spending it, and a commission for paying it back." 28 On the other hand, the most recent historian of Barings argues that they lost money on the Argentina loan by buying back large amounts of it in a futile effort to maintain the market price of the bonds and lost even more on the ill-advised investments in Mexico of Francis Baring, the second son of Alexander Baring. 29 In the case of both the Rothschilds and the Barings, however, it appears that the sums risked were relatively small and the risks generally appreciated even by an inexperienced British public. We have to look elsewhere for an explanation of the 1825 speculative bubble and collapse, perhaps in the new domestic companies that were formed.