

In this report, the Bank of England was clearly responding belatedly to the government' s decision to force it to open branches and to promote large, joint-stock banks. The week after the report was laid before the court, the governor presented to the directors the letter he had received from Lord Liverpool, First Lord of the Treasury, and Mr. Frederick Robinson, Chancellor of the Exchequer. The arguments laid out in the letter show that the government, in this instance, was determined to work around the Bank rather than through it. The Liverpool-Robinson letter began with the assertion, "there can be no doubt that the Principal Source of it [the recent distress] is to be found in the rash spirit of Speculation which has pervaded the Country for some time, supported, fostered, and encouraged by the Country Banks." 47 So, the letter continued, it seemed advisable to repeal the authority of the country banks to issue small notes and return to a gold circulation. This action would spread pressure on the exchanges over a wider surface and make it felt earlier-a clear reference to the Bank' s negligence in 1825. But this alone would not suffice; after all, a similar Forster (1956) M AY / J U N E 1 9 9 8

F E D E R A L R E S E R V E B A N K O F S T. L O U I S

convulsion had occurred in 1793 when there were no small notes and Scotland had "escaped all the convulsions which have occurred in the Money Market of England for the last thirty-five years, though Scotland during the whole of that time has had a circulation of One-Pound Notes." In the past, the Bank of England "may have been in Itself and by Itself fully equal to all the important Duties & Operations confided to it," but "the rise of country banks alone shows it is no longer up to the tasks required from the increased wealth and new wants of the Country." 48 e government proposed two remedies: The Bank should establish branches of its own, and it should give up its exclusive privilege to issue notes within a certain distance from the Metropolis. The first suggestion was impracticable, in the government' s view, and it was obvious that Parliament would never agree to an extension of the Bank' s privileges in London. All in all, the government' s proposed legislation would remove pressure from the Bank, and it would still have the government' s business and be the only establishment at which the dividends on the national debt would be paid. With this condescending argument, the letter concluded, "so we hope the Bank will make no difficulty in giving up their privileges, in respect of the number of Partners in Banking as to any District [left blank] Miles from the Metropolis." 49 Clearly, the Bank had failed to meet the recent challenges adequately, and the government was determined to create competitive banks that might better serve the public and, presumably, the government. The Bank' s response was understandably churlish, which Liverpool informed them on January 25 he regretted, but he was determined to move ahead, merely asking if the government had any amendments to propose to the bill pending in Parliament to permit joint-stock banking. He did then accede to encouraging them to set up their own branches as well. Thus, the Bank went ahead with establishing branches, gradually dispersing seven of them into the industrial cities of Manchester, Gloucester, Swansea, Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, and Leeds, starting in 1828, and adding Exeter, Newcastle, Hull, and Norwich in 1829, when small note issues by the remaining country banks ceased. By the time of the Bank Char-ter Committee in 1832, the branches at Manchester and Birmingham were clearly the most dominant in terms of note issues and bills discounted. 50 48 Bank of England, TVC3/11 G4/48, fo. 204.