

The results of the financial crisis of 1825 were beneficial for the British government. The funded debt continued to decline, after a small rise in 1827, throughout the remainder of the century. The government' s gross income remained high and comfortably above gross expenditures, save for the years 1827 and 1828, when it dropped slightly below. 60 The comfortable financial situation gave Britain the lowest interest rates on its debt of any European government throughout the nineteenth century-a great advantage whenever it became necessary to mobilize resources for armed conflict anywhere in the world. 61 It also laid the basis for continuing political reform, culminating in 1834, and economic reform, culminating with the repeal of the Corn Laws and the Navigation Acts in the 1840s, and the promotion of limited liability joint-stock corporations in the 1850s and 1860s. 62 beyond a 65-mile radius of London with out limitation on the number of partners (the previous limit had been six). Both actions were counterproductive, if we take as given the traditional story that the entire episode was yet another example of irra tional speculative bubbles derived from crowd behavior in which investors acted first too optimistically and then too pessi mistically in response to fragments of information. On the basis of the informa tion-processing story told above, however, we can conclude that both actions were constructive. Repeal of the Bubble Act sped up the Parliamentary process of granting corporate charters, limiting the speculative period during which uncer tainty over the prospects of passage of the proposed charter dominated price move ments in the initial share offerings. More over, repeal did not mean that shareholders were granted limited liability in the new joint-stock enterprises; unlimited liability remained in principle. Supplementary leg islation in 1826 specified, moreover, that Parliament could determine for each charter the extent of liability of the shareholders. With these changes, Parliament both encouraged the continuation of the cor porate charter business, which must have been profitable to large number of the members of Parliament, and discouraged overpricing of the subscription shares while the incorporation bill was in progress. The collapse of country banks was one of the last examples of a banking panic in the British banking system. As Mishkin (1991) argues for U.S. banking panics, bank failures removed from the capital markets the principal monitors who could effec tively distinguish borrowers by their quality without resorting to credit rationing or arbi trarily high prices for credit. Bank failures worsened the informational problems in the British capital markets. Creating joint stock banks within which the country banks would become branches instead of correspondents helped restore this critical monitoring function to the British system. In the peculiarities of the 1826 Act, this was done by linking the various country banks within the structure of a joint-stock bank headquartered in London. But the London headquarters performed no banking function. Its role was to process and dif fuse information to the various branch offices located beyond the 65-mile radius from London. The results of the financial crisis of 1825 were beneficial for the British govern ment. The funded debt continued to decline, after a small rise in 1827, throughout the remainder of the century. The government’s gross income remained high and comforta bly above gross expenditures, save for the years 1827 and 1828, when it dropped slightly below. 60 The comfortable financial situation gave Britain the lowest interest rates on its debt of any European government throughout the nineteenth century—a great advantage whenever it became necessary to mobilize resources for armed conflict any where in the world. 61 It also laid the basis for continuing political reform, culminat ing in 1834, and economic reform, culminat ing with the repeal of the Corn Laws and the Navigation Acts in the 1840s, and the promotion of limited liability joint-stock corporations in the 1850s and 1860s. 62