

Asymmetric information is the term applied to the usual situation in which borrowers know more about the actual investment projects they are carrying out than do the lenders. Lenders, knowing this, charge a premium proportional to the uncertainty they feel about the borrowers in question. This situation, in turn, creates an adverse selection problem, in which higher-quality borrowers are reluctant to pay the high interest rates imposed by the market, while lower-quality borrowers are willing to accept the rates and to default if their ventures fail. In an expanding market, which the London stock exchange certainly was in the boom years of 1806 to 1807 and again in the early 1820s, the availability of loanable funds at premium rates will attract lemons to the market (say, Mexican mines) and discourage borrowing by sound enterprises (say, Brazilian diamonds). Borrowers turn back to internal sources of funds or to a compressed circle of lenders who know their superior quality and are willing to extend credit at lower rates.

In the case of British firms in the 1820s, the compressed circle of knowledgeable, low-interest lenders was the web of country banks that had arisen in the past three decades. The continued credit access of high-quality firms, however, depends in each case upon the continued liquidity of the small, local financial intermediaries. Their willingness to continue lending at preferential rates is limited increasingly by the risk of withdrawals by depositors who wish to participate in the high-interest, highrisk investments available in the national financial market. A financial boom of the kind normally experienced before financial crises can discourage real investment, therefore, and intensify the lemons problem as high-quality borrowers withdraw from the loanable funds market. 58 It can also place increasing pressure on local financial intermediaries that specialize in monitoring credit to local enterprises. It cannot be mere coincidence that the collapse of the bubble of 1825, according to one account, was set off by the refusal of a country bank in Bristol to honor the request of a Mr. Jones to redeem in gold its notes that he presented. 59 The coup de grâce occurs when higher-risk borrowers are asked to provide collateral for additional loans, and the financial collapse decreases the value of their collateral. The outcome is a general wave of bankruptcies.

Under public pressure, the Bubble Act was repealed in June 1825. In July 1826, joint-stock banks were allowed to establish 58 Mishkin (1991) beyond a 65-mile radius of London without limitation on the number of partners (the previous limit had been six). Both actions were counterproductive, if we take as given the traditional story that the entire episode was yet another example of irrational speculative bubbles derived from crowd behavior in which investors acted first too optimistically and then too pessimistically in response to fragments of information. On the basis of the information-processing story told above, however, we can conclude that both actions were constructive. Repeal of the Bubble Act sped up the Parliamentary process of granting corporate charters, limiting the speculative period during which uncertainty over the prospects of passage of the proposed charter dominated price movements in the initial share offerings. Moreover, repeal did not mean that shareholders were granted limited liability in the new joint-stock enterprises; unlimited liability remained in principle. Supplementary legislation in 1826 specified, moreover, that Parliament could determine for each charter the extent of liability of the shareholders. With these changes, Parliament both encouraged the continuation of the corporate charter business, which must have been profitable to large number of the members of Parliament, and discouraged overpricing of the subscription shares while the incorporation bill was in progress. The collapse of country banks was one of the last examples of a banking panic in the British banking system. As Mishkin (1991) argues for U.S. banking panics, bank failures removed from the capital markets the principal monitors who could effectively distinguish borrowers by their quality without resorting to credit rationing or arbitrarily high prices for credit. Bank failures worsened the informational problems in the British capital markets. Creating jointstock banks within which the country banks would become branches instead of correspondents helped restore this critical monitoring function to the British system. In the peculiarities of the 1826 Act, this was done by linking the various country banks within the structure of a joint-stock bank headquartered in London. But the London headquarters performed no banking function. Its role was to process and diffuse information to the various branch offices located beyond the 65-mile radius from London.