

Column 100

Column 100

can either prevent or delay the opening of a congress. He derives his persuasion in this respect, from that which his Britannic Majesty has himself confided to the two Emperors, that he is bound by no positive engagement with those who have taken up arms in Spain.—After fifteen years of war, Europe has a right to demand peace. The interest of all the powers, including that of England, is to render it general: humanity commands it; and such a desire, surely, cannot be foreign to the feelings of his Britannic Majesty. How can it be, that he alone can withdraw himself from such an object, and refuse to terminate the miseries of suffering humanity?—The undersigned consequently re news, in the name of the Emperor his august master, the Proposal already made, to send plenipotentiaries to any city on the continent, which his Britannic Majesty may please to point out; to admit to the congress the plenipotentiaries of the sovereigns in alliance with Great Britain; to treat upon the basis of the Uti Poffidetis,and upon that of the respective power of the belligerent parties: In fine, to accept any basis which may have for its object the conclusion of a Peace, in which all parties shall find honour, justice, and equality.—The undersigned has the ho nour, &c.(Signed)

COUNT NICOLAS DE ROMANZOFF.

No. XIV.—LETTER from M. de Champagny to Mr. Secretary Canning, dated Paris, 28th Nov.1808.— Received Dec.6.

SIR; I have the honour to transmit to your Excellency the Answer which I have been commanded to make to the Note which accompanied your Letter of the 28th Oct. last.—I have the honour to be, &c.

(Signed) CHAMPAGNY.

No. XV.—NOTE.

THE undersigned has laid before the Emperor his master, the Note of his excellency Mr. Canning.—If it were true that the evils of war were felt only on the continent, certainly there would be little hope of attaining peace.—The two emperors had flattered themselves that the object of their measure would not have been misinterpreted in London. Could the English ministry have ascribed, it to weakness or to necessity, when every impartial statesman must recognize in the spirit of peace and moderation by which it is dictated, the characteristics of power and true greatness? France and Russia can carry on the war so long as the court of London shall not recur to just and

Column 101

Column 101

equitable dispositions; and they are resolved to do so.—How is it possible for the French government to entertain the Proposal which has been made, to it, of admitting to the negotiation the Spanish Insurgents? What would the English government have said had it been proposed to them to admit the Catholic Insurgents of Ireland? Prance, without having any Treaties with them, has been in communication with them, has made them promises, and has frequently sent them succours. Could such a proposal have found place in a Note, the object of which ought to have been not to irritate, but to endeavour to effect a mutual conciliation and good understanding?—England will find herself under a strange mistake, if, contrary to the experience of the past, she still entertains the idea of contending successfully upon the continent, against the armies of France. What hope can she now have, especially as Prance is irrevocably united with Russia?—The undersigned is commanded to repeat the Proposal, to admit to the negociation all the allies of the king of England; whether it be the king who reigns in the Brazils; whether it be the king who reigns in Sweden; or whether it be the king who reigns in Sicily: and to take for the basis of the negociation the Uti Possidetis.He is commanded to express the hope that, not losing sight of the inevitable results of the force of states, it will be remembered, that between great powers there is no solid peace but that which is at the same time equal and honourable for all parties.—The undersigned requests, &c. (Signed) CHAMPAGNY.