

GEORGE CANNING.

No. X.—LETTER from Count Nicolas de Romanzoff, to Mr. Secretary Canning, dated Paris,31 Oct.1808.— Received Nov. 4.

SIR; The immediate departure of the English courier who, conveyed to me your excellency's Letter of the 28th of this month, obliges me to confine myself for the present to the acknowledgement of its receipt I rejoice that my arrival at Paris enabled me to receive that Letter myself, which was addressed to the Russian ambassador; and, M. de Tolstoi who held that post having been recalled by the emperor my master, in order to his being succeeded by the prince de Kourakin, I am happy to find myself in a situation to correspond directly with your excellency, I have the honour to be, &c. (Signed)

LE COMTE NICOLAS DE ROMANZOFF.

No. XI—LETTER from. M. de Champagny to Mr. Serctary Canmng, dated Paris,31 Oct.1808— Receined Nov.4.

Column 99

Sir; His Majesty, the emperor my master, having left Paris, I am not willing to wait his orders to acknowledge the receipt of the Letter which your excellency did me the honour to write to me on the 28th of this month, and which I received this morning, as also of the official Note which was annexed to it. I shall lose no time in forwarding these Papers to his Imperial Majesty; and, as soon as his intentions shall be made known to me, I shall hasten to send another Courier to your Excellency. I am with the highest consideration, &c.

(Signed) CHAMPAGNY.

No. XII.—LETTER from Count Nicolas de Romanzoff to Mr. Secretary Canning, dated Paris, l6–28th Nov.1808.— Received Dec.6.

SIR; I transmit to your excellency my Answer to the Note of the 28th Oct. which you were pleased to address to count de Tolstoi; and I hasten to seize this fresh opportunity of renewing to your excellency the assurances of the high consideration with which I have the honour to be, &c.

(Signed)

LE COMTE NICOLAS DE ROMANZOFF.

No. XIII.—NOTE.

THE undersigned, minister for foreign affairs of his majesty the emperor of all the Russias, has the honour to replv to the Note of the 28th Oct. signed by Mr. Canning, secretary of state for foreign affairs to his majesty the king of Great Britain, and addressed by his Excellency to the Russian ambassador at Paris:—That the admission of the sovereigns in alliance with England, to a congress, cannot be a point of any difficulty, and that Russia and trance consent to it.—But this principle by no means extends to the necessity of admitting the plenipotentiaries of the Spanish Insurgents: the emperor of Russia cannot admit them. His empire, in similar circumstances,—and England can recollect one particular instance,—has always been true to the same principle. Moreover, he has already acknowledged the king Joseph Napoleon. He has announced to his Britannic Majesty, that he was unite; with the emperor of the French for peace as well as for war; and his Imperial Majesty here repeats that declaration. He is resolved not to separate his interests from those of that monarch; but they are both ready to conclude a peace, provided that it be just, honourable, and equal for all parties.—The undersigned sees with pleasure, that, in this difference of opinion respecting the Spaniards, nothing presents itself which