

## Count Nicolas De Romanzoff

No. II.—LETTER from his majesty the emperor of all the Russias, and Buonaparte, to his Majesty, dated Erfurth,12 Oct.1808. —Received Oct.21.

Sire; The present circumstances of Europe have brought us together at Erfurth. Our first thought is to yield to the wish and the wants of every people, and to seek, in a speedy pacification with your Majesty, the most efficacious remedy for the miseries which oppress all nations. We Column 94

Column 94

make known to your Majesty our sincere desire in this respect by the present letter.—The long and bloody war which has torn the continent is at an end, without the possibility of being renewed. Many changes have taken place in Europe; many states have been overthrown. The cause is to be found in the state of agitation and misery in which the stagnation of Maritime Commerce has placed the greatest nations. Still greater changes may yet take place, and all of them contrary to the policy of the English nation. Peace, then, is at once the interest of the people of the continent, as it is the interest of the people of Great Britain.—We unite in entreating your Majesty to listen to the voice of humanity, silencing that of the passions; to seek, with the intention of arriving at that object, to conciliate all interests, and by that means to preserve all the powers which exist, and to insure the happiness of Europe and of the generation, at the head of which Providence has placed us.

(Signed)

ALEXANDER.—NAPOLEON.

NO. III.—LETTER from M. de Champagny, to Mr. Secretary Canning, dated Erfurth,12 Oct.1808.— Received Oct.21.

Sir; I have the honour to transmit to your Excellency a Letter which the emperor of the French and the emperor of all the Russias write to his Britannic majeesty, The grandeur and the sincerity of tins step will, without doubt, be felt. That cannot be attributed to weakness which is the result of the intimate connection between the two greatest sovereigns of the continent, united for peace as well as for war.—His majesty the Emperor has commanded me to make known to your Excellency, that he has nominated plenipotentiaries, who will repair to that city on the continent to which his majesty the king of Great Britain and his allies shall send their plenipotentiaries. With respect to the bases of the Negotiation, their majesties are disposed to adopt those formerly proposed by England herself; namely, the Uti Possidetis,and any other basis founded upon justice, and the reciprocity and equality which ought to prevail between all great nations. I have the honour to be, &c.

(Signed) CHAMPAGNY.

No. IV.—LETTER from Buonaparté and his majesty the emperor of all the Russias, to his Majesty, dated Erfurth, Oct.12, 1808.— Received Oct.21.

Sire; The present circumstances of Eu- Column 95

Column 95

rope have brought us together at Erfurth. Our first thought is to yield to the wish and the wants of every people, and to seek, in a speedy pacification with your Majesty, the most efficacious remedy for the miseries which oppress all nations. We make known to your Majesty our sincere desire in this respect by the present letter.—The long and bloody war which has torn the continent is at an end, without the possibility of being renewed. Many changes have taken place in Europe; many states have been overthrown. The cause is to be found in the state of agitation and misery in which the stagnation of Maritime Commerce has placed the greatest nations. Still greater changes may yet take place, and all of them contrary to the policy of the English nation. Peace, then, is at once the interest of the people of the continent, as it is the interest of the people of Great Britain.—We unite in entreating your Majesty to listen to the voice of humanity, silencing that of the passions; to seek, with the intention of arriving at that object, to conciliate all interests, and by that means to preserve all the powers which exist, and to ensure the happiness of Europe and of this generation, at the head of which Providence has placed us.