

(Signed)

NAPOLEON.—ALEXANDER.

No. V.—LETTER from Mr. Secretary Canning to the Russian Ambassador, at Paris, dated Foreign Office, Oct.22, 1808.

Sir; At the desire of count Nicolas de Romanzoff, I have the honour to acknowledge to your Excellency the receipt of the Letter which count Romanzoff has been pleased to write to me from Erfurth, dated the 30 Sep. 12 Oct. as well as of the Letter annexed to it addressed to the king my master. I shall lose no time in laving these two Letters before his Majesty, and in transmitting the Answers to your Excellency by an English courier. I have, & c. (Signed) GEORGE CANNING.

No. VI.—LETTER from Mr. Secretary Canning to M. de Champagny, dated Foreign Office,22 Oct.1808.

Sir; I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Excellency's letter of the 12th instant from Erfurth, inclosing a Letter addressed to the king my master. I shall lose no time in laying these Letters before his Majesty, and in transmitting the Answers to them by an English messenger to Paris. I have, &c.

(Signed) GEORGE CANNING.

No. VII.—LETTER from Mr. Secretary Can-Column 96

Column 96

ning to the Russian Ambassador, at Paris, dated Foreign Office,28 Oct.1808.

Sir; Having laid before the king my master the two Letters which his Excellency the count Nicolas de Romanzoff has transmitted to me from Erfurth, I have received his Majesty's commands to reply to that which is addressed to him, by the official Note which I have the honour to enclose to your Excellency.—However desirous his Majesty might be to reply directly to his majesty the emperor of Russia, you cannot but feel, Sir, that from the unusual manner in which the Letters signed by his Imperial Majesty, were drawn up, and which has entirely deprived them of the character of a private and personal communication, his Majesty has found it impossible to adopt that mark of respect towards the emperor of Russia, without at the same time acknowledging Titles which his Majesty never has acknowledged.—I am commanded to add to the contents of the official Note, that his Majesty will hasten to communicate to his Majesty the king of Sweden, and to the existing government of Spain, the Proposals which have been made to him.—Your Excellency will perceive that it is absolutely necessary that his Majesty should receive an immediate assurance, that France acknowledges the government of Spain as party to any negociation.—That such is the intention of the emperor of Russia his Majesty cannot doubt.—His Majesty recollects with satisfaction the lively interest which his Imperial Majesty has always manifested for the welfare and dignity of the Spanish monarchy, and he wants no other assurance that his Imperial Majesty cannot have been induced to sanction by his concurrence or by his approbation, usurpation, the principle of which is not less unjust than their example is dangerous to all legitimate sovereigns— As soon as the Answers on this point shall have been received, and as soon as his Majesty shall have learnt the sentiments of the king of Sweden, and those of the government of Spain, I shall not fail to receive the commands of his Majesty for such communications as it may be necessary to make upon the ulterior objects of the Letter of count Romanzoff. I have, &c. (Signed) GEORGE CANNING.