

No. XVI.—LETTER from Mr. Secretary Canning to Count Nicolas de Romanzoff dated Foreign Office, 7th Dec.1808.

SIR; I shall lose no time in transmitting to your Excellency, by an English courier, the Answer which the King my master shall command me to return to the official Note, annexed to the letter of your excellency, dated the 16–28th of last month, of which I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt.—I seize with avidity this opportunity of renewing to your Excellency the assurances, &c.—(Signed)

GEORGE CANNING.

No. XVII.—OFFICIAL NOTE, dated Foreign Office,9 Dec.1808.

THE undersigned, his Majesty's principal secretary of state for foreign affairs, has laid before the King his master the Note transmitted to him by his excellency the count Nicolas de Romanzoff, minister Column 102

Column 102

for foreign affairs of his Majesty the emperor of ail the Russias, dated on the 16–28th of Nov,—The King learns with astonishment and regret the expectation which appears to have been entertained that his Majesty should consent to commence a Negotiation for general peace by the previous abandonment of the cause of the Spanish Nation, and of the legitimate monarchy of Spain, in deference to an usurpation which has no parallel in the history of the world.—His Majesty had hoped that the participation of the emperor of Russia in the Overtures made to his Majesty would have afforded a security to his Majesty against the proposal of a condition, so unjust in its effect, and so fatal in its example.—Nor can his Majesty conceive by what obligation of duty or of interest, or by what principle of Russian policy, his Imperial Majesty can have found himself compelled to acknowledge the right assumed by Prance, to depose and imprison friendly sovereigns, and forcibly to transfer to herself the allegiance of loyal and in dependant nations.—If these be indeed the principles to which the emperor of Russia has inviolably attached himself; to which his Imperial Majesty has pledged the character and resources of his empire; which he has united himself with prance to establish by war, and to maintain in peace, deeply does his Majesty lament a determination by which the sufferings of Europe must be aggravated and prolonged: But not to his Majesty is to be attributed the continuance of the calamities of war, by the disappointment of ail hope of such a peace as would be compatible with jus tice and with honour The undersigned, &c. (Signed) GEORGE CANNING.

No. XVIII.—LETTER from Mr. Secretary Canning to M. de Champagny, dated Foreign Office7 Dec.1808.

SIR; I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Excellency's Letter of the 28th of last month, and of the official Note therein inclosed.—As soon as I shall have received the King's commands upon the subject of that Note, I shall not fail to transmit to your Excellency, by an English messenger, the Answer which his Majesty may command me to return to

it I have the honour to be, &c. (Signed)

GEORGE CANNING.

NO. XIX.—OFFICIAL NOTE, dated Foreign Office, 9th Dec.1808.