

THE undersigned, his Majesty's principal secretary of state for foreign affairs, has laid before the King his master the Column 103

Column 103

Note transmitted to him by his Excellency M. de Champagny, dated the 28th Nov.— He is especially commanded by his Majesty to abstain from noticing any of those topics and expressions insulting to his Majesty, to his allies, and to the Spanish Nation, with which the Official Note transmitted by M. de Champagny abounds.—His Majesty was desirous to have treated for a peace which might have arranged the respective interests of all the powers engaged in the war on principles of equal justice: and his Majesty sincerely regrets that this desire of his Majesty is disappointed.—But his Majesty is determined not to abandon the cause of the Spanish Nation, and of the legitimate monarchy of Spain: and the pretension of France to exclude from the negotiation the Central and Supreme Government, acting in the name of his Catholic Majesty Ferdinand VII. is one, which his Majesty could not admit, without acquiescing in an usurpation which has no parallel in the history of the world.—The undersigned, &c.—(Signed)

GEORGE CANNING.

No. XX.—LETTER from Count Nicolas de Romanzoff to Mr. Secretary Canning, dated Paris,1–13th of Dec. 1808.— Received Dec. 17.

SIR; The messenger whom I had dispatched to your Excellency is returned to this place, and has brought me the Letter, which you did me the honour to write to me on the 7th of Dec. Some hours afterwards, the messenger whom your Excellency has sent to Paris, delivered to me from your Excellency, a Letter without date, which was accompanied by a Note, dated the 9th Dec. I shall transmit the whole for the information of the Emperor my master.—I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to, &c.—(Signed)

COUNT NICHOLAS DE ROMANZOFF.

No. XXI.—LETTER from M. de Champagny to Mr. Secretary Canning, dated Paris,13th Dec.1808. Received Dec.17 th.

SIR; I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Excellency's Letter of the 9th instant, together with the Official Note which accompanied it. I shall lose no time in laying this Note before the Emperor my master.—I avail myself, &c.

(Signed) CHAMPAGNY.

## Declaration Of The King Of Great Britain Relative To The Overtures Made By Russia And France—Dated Westminster, Dec 15Th 1808

THE Overtures made to his Majesty by

Column 104

Column 104

the governments of Russia and of France have not led to Negotiation: and the intercourse to which those Overtures gave se being terminated, his Majesty thinks right thus promptly and publicly to lake known it's termination.—The continued appearance of a Negotiation, when peace has been found to be utterly unattainble, could be advantageous only to the enemy.—It might enable France to sow distrust and jealousy in the councils of lose, who are combined to resist her oppressions: And if, among the nations which groan under the tyranny of French alliance, or among those which maintain against France a doubtful and precarious independence, there should be any which even now are balancing between the certain ruin of a prolonged inactivity, and he contingent dangers of an effort to save themselves from that ruin; to nations so situated the delusive prospect of a peace between Great Britain and France could not fail to be peculiarly injurious. Their preparations might be relaxed by the vain hope of returning tranquillity; or their purpose shaken by the apprehension of being left to contend alone.—That such vas, in fact, the main object of France in he proposals transmitted to his Majesty from Erfurth, his Majesty entertained a strong persuasion.—But at a moment when results so awful from their importance and so tremendous from their uncertainty, might be depending upon the decision of peace or war, the King felt it due to himself to ascertain, beyond the possibility of doubt, the views and intentions of his enemies.—It was difficult for his Majesty to believe, that the emperor of Russia had devoted himself so blindly and fatally to the violence and ambition if the power with which his Imperial Majesty had unfortunately become allied, as to be prepared openly to abet the usurpation of the Spanish Monarchy; and to acknowledge and maintain the right, assumed by France, to depose and imprison friendly sovereigns, and forcibly to transfer to self the allegiance of independent nations.—When, therefore, it was proposed to his Majesty to enter into negotiation for a general peace, in concert with his Majesty's allies, and to treat either on the basis of the Uti possidetis, (heretofore the subject of so much controversy) or on any other basis, consistent with justice, honour, and equality, his Majesty determined to meet this seeming fairness and moderation, with fairness and moderation,