

No. VIII.—LETTER from Mr. Secretary Canning to M. de Champagny, dated Foreign Office,28 Oct.1808.

Sir; Having laid before the king my master the two Letters which your Excel- Column 97

Column 97

lency transmitted to me from Erfurth, one of which was addressed to his Majesty, I have received his Majesty's commands to return, in answer to that Letter, the Official Note which I have the honour herewith to enclose.—I am commanded to add, that his Majesty will lose no time in communicating to the king of Sweden and to the government of Spain the proposals which have been made to his Majesty.—Your Excellency will see the necessity of an assurance; being immediately afforded to his Majesty, that the admission of the government of Spain as a party to the negotiation is understood and agreed to by France.—After the Answer of your Excellency upon this point shall have been received, and so soon as his Majesty shall be in possession of the sentiments of the king of Sweden and of the government of Spain, I shall receive his Majesty's commands to communicate with your Excellency on the remaining points of your letter.—I have, & c. (Signed)

GEORGE CANNING.

No. IX.—OFFICIAL NOTE.

THE King has uniformly declared his readiness and desire to enter into Negotiations for a general peace on terms consistent with the honour of his Majesty's crown, with fidelity to his engagements, and with the permanent repose and security of Europe. His Majesty repeats that Declaration.—If the condition of the continent be one of agitation and of wretchedness; if many states have been overthrown, and mote are still menaced with subversion, it is a consolation to the King to reflect, that no part of the convulsions which have already been experienced, or of those which are threatened for the future, can be in any degree imputable to his Majesty. The King is most willing to acknowledge that all such dreadful changes are indeed contrary to the policy of Great Britain.—If the cause of so much misery is to be found in the stagnation of Commercial Intercourse,—although his Majesty cannot be expected to hear, with unqualified regret, that the system devised for the destruction of the commerce of his subjects has recoiled upon its authors, or its instruments,—yet is it neither in the disposition of his Majesty, nor in the character of the people over whom he reigns, to rejoice in the privations awl unhappiness even of the nations which are combined against him. His Majesty-anxiously desires the termination of the sufferings of the continent.—Tire war in which his Majesty is engaged, Column 98

Column 98

was entered into by his Majesty for the immediate object of national safety. It has been prolonged only because no secure and honourable means of terminating it have hitherto been afforded by his enemies.—But in the progress of a war, begun for self-defence, new obligations have been imposed upon his Majesty, in behalf of powers whom the aggressions of a common enemy have compelled to make common cause with his Majesty; or who have solicited his Majesty's assistance and support in the vindication of their national independence. The interests of the crown of Portugal and of his Sicilian majesty are confided to his Majesty's friendship and protection.—With the king of Sweden his Majesty is connected by ties of the closest alliance, and by stipulations which unite their counsels for peace as well as for war.—To Spain his Majesty is not yet bound by any formal Instrument; but his Majesty has, in the face of the world, contracted with that nation engagements not less sacred and not less binding upon his Majesty's mind, than the most solemn Treaties—His Majesty, therefore, assumes that, in an Overture made to his Majesty for entering into negotiations for a general peace, the relations subsisting between his Majesty and the Spanish Monarchy have beer, distinctly taken into consideration; and that the government acting in the name of his catholic majesty Ferdinand VII. is understood to boa party to any negotiation in which his Majesty is invited to engage. (Signed)