

Let, then, the true question for consideration be constantly kept in sight It is not whether the Catholics are loyal; the great body of them are loyally attached to the constitution and to the empire, and would be more universally so, were they not led astray by wicked and designing persons, who, to answer purposes of their own, endeavour to excite the Catholics to turbulence. It is not, whether they shall have full toleration; they have it already. It is not whether they shall be protected in their persons and in their property; they are under the protection of the same laws as the rest of the king's subjects:—but whether they shall unconditionally share in every part of political power.

That some qualifications may be required for admission into the exercise of particular parts of political power will hardly be denied, since it is a principle that runs through almost every branch of our constitutional law. That religious opinion may be a proper qualification, should not be brought into discussion; otherwise it may be necessary to defend the propriety of requiring the sovereign himself to be Protestant;—but the true point to be discussed (from which ground the advocates of the Catholics should not be suffered to shift the question), is this, the necessity and safety of making the change, and which can only be established by some great change of circumstances.

What, then, is this great change?—Has the Roman Catholic religion changed its tendency and its great leading characters?—Invidious imputations against that religion, (which can only produce irritation, where mutual kindness is so desirable,) should be carefully avoided. Whether the principles of a dispensing and a deposing power, and of keeping faith with heretics, now or ever did exist, need not be discussed. How far the abuse of such a pretension might take place to mislead the low and ignorant, may be one question 506 but against the enlightened Catholic, against the higher orders of that persuasion, the imputation of such principles must be unfounded.

Particular tenets of the religion, such as transubstantiation, the worship of the. Virgin, and the like, are still less material in considering this question, which is to be, examined in a political, and not in a religious point of view.

But the political tendency of the religion to arbitrary power and intolerance, and its leading characters, namely, the dominion of the priesthood over the flock, and the authority of the pope over the priesthood; are these qualities changed?—and while they exist, can these claims be safely admitted?

What is this power of the pope? an authority of the most extensive kind, vested in a foreigner, not under the controul of the state; and that foreigner (whatever be the character of the individual who, at present, fills the station) must be, as long as Europe remains in its present condition, a mere instrument in the hands of France.

The influence of the priesthood over the flock, is also nearly without limit; it is not confined to religious instruction, but extends itself into all their civil, their social, and their domestic concerns. The tendency of such an influence, under such an authority, has shewn itself in all past times.