

Perhaps the very term, concessions will be objected to. The Catholics, it will be said, do not come to ask concessions, but to demand their rights, their birthrights, their natural rights. In this country it is rather too late to enter into a discussion of the 'natural rights of man.' In constituted societies natural rights must necessarily be abridged for the promotion and security of social order. The constitution of this country has already defined what portion of those rights must be taken away; we must presume that as large a portion of our natural rights has been left to us, as is consistent with the order and happiness of civil society; if there has not, let it be fairly and openly avowed, that it is the constitution itself you propose to alter.

Instead of thus avowing the real proposition, other terms are resorted to it is their 'constitutional privileges, their share in the constitution' that the Catholics claim. The fallacy of this pretension exposes itself. Where are these privileges to be found but in the laws of the constitution? If the laws give these prileges, it is unnecessary to apply to parliament; they already have them. If the laws exclude them from these privileges; then, again, it is the constitution you propose to alter.

Terms, however, still less defined, are then resorted to. The 'principle and spirit' of the constitution, 'these would extend religious liberty as widely as possible.' Thank God! they would carry the blessings of toleration as far as can possibly be done with safety to the constitution itself. But it is still to be presumed, that the laws which have, at various times, been made for the improvement of the constitution, have been framed in its true 'spirit and principle' and with a due regard to 'religious liberty;' and yet, hitherto, it has not been thought safe by those law to concede to the Catholics what they now demand. What is the very leading principle and essential character of our constitutional laws, so far as they regard this subject? the security of the Protestant establishment. It was for the sake of securing the Protestant Church, 503 that the revolution, so fondly termed the 'glorious' revolution, was principally effected. It is for the security of that Church, that the sovereign must be a Protestant; that the royal consort must be a Protestant; that the ministers of the sovereign must be Protestant; that the parliament must be Protestant. It is for the security of that Church that the house of Brunswick sits upon the British throne; why, then, the constitutional principle of extending religious liberty has its boundary; it is limited by whatever is necessary to the security of the Protestant established Church.

Let it, at the same time, be recollected, that this constitutional anxiety for the safety of the Protestant church, is not founded in a bigotted hostility to popery, merely as a different mode of worship, and a different construction of divine revelation,—not founded merely in religious preference, and in a difference of tenets; but it is founded also in an anxiety for the very safety of civil and religious liberty—an anxiety growing out of experience.—Experience had proved that the Roman Catholic church had a strong tendency to arbitrary power and to intolerance;—experience had taught our ancestors at the revolution, (and its impressions should not be effaced from our recollection, nor from that of our latest posterity,) that popery, on the one hand, and puritanism, on the other, were not very congenial with civil and religious liberty. The church of England, standing between the two extremes, had been found favourable to both; and its altar was considered as the soundest basis on which to set up the palladium of our national freedom.