

The hardship upon the higher classes is certainly considerable, but stands justified, by the grounds of expediency upon which the constitution has founded the exclusion. In point of principle, however, the hardship is diminished by the Union: since the Catholics, who, while Ireland was a separate kingdom, formed four-fifths of the population of that country, and were yet excluded from its government, may now, with more appearance of justice, be excluded from sharing in the government of the united empire, of whose entire population they form only one-fifth part.

The next advantage held out, is "conciliation and satisfaction." That concession will conciliate and satisfy the Catholics is at least contrary to past experience; the fact being, that while restriction was most severe, the Catholics were most, quiet; and, ever since concessions have begun, they have been most dissatisfied; and their demands have progressively increased. The fact only is stated. That some inconvenience may have attended the taking off restrictions, furnishes no sufficient reason against the propriety of that measure—far otherwise—stil less, would it justify the reenacting of those restrictions. But when conciliation and satisfaction are held out as advantages which would follow from concession, past experience renders it probable that the expectation of those consequences may be disappointed.

Suppose that all the demands now made were conceded; would the measure stop here? would the Catholics be satisfied?—That is hardly possible; for other measures, some of smaller, some of greater importance, must follow; because they would stand upon the same principle—such as the repeal of all restrictions upon the English Catholics—the repeal of the corporation and test acts—the non-payment of tithes by the Irish Catholics to the Protestant establishment—a Catholic establishment in Ireland. After these, would the Protestant Church of Ireland be quite secure?—would the estates held by Protestants remain unassailed?—and are we quite sure that an attempt at Catholic ascendency would not be made even in this country?—Great privileges have been already granted to the Catholics; 511 not only the free and secure exercise of their religion, and equal protection to their persons and property; but a considerable share of political power has been conceded to them by the elective franchise. The elective franchise has given them an extensive influence over the Protestants themselves;—it has made the voice of the Catholics to be heard pretty distinctly in the legislature. There is no danger of their interests being overlooked and neglected.

But it is said that, "the concession must be made; it is demanded by four millions of subjects. In this demand they are determined to persevere year after year, till they obtain it from parliament;" nay, even menaces are insinuated—"insurrection and rebellion—the dissolution of the Union—and a total separation between tile two countries."

The firmness of the legislature in the discharge of its duty to the nation is not to be alarmed by such considerations. Menaces injure rather than assist the cause they are meant to promote. They will not extort concessions. Extorted concessions never yet produced conciliation; they only serve to degrade those from whom they are extorted. The very attitude of intimidation assumed by the Catholics in Ireland seems of itself a strong objection to the making of any concession at this time.