

But the proof lies upon the Catholics; and that proof must be clear. The nation will not be satisfied that their constitutional liberties should be risked upon speculative opinions, and abstract refinements. The stake is too important to be ventured on a mere calculation of chances. Let the concessions proposed be stated with precision—the barriers and arrangements, which are to accompany them, be accurately set forth, and carefully examined, so as to assure us of perfect security. If that course is not pursued, where are we to stop? where can we make our stand with safety, but at the point at which we are already arrived?—Without a change in the condition of the Catholics, and without ample securities, should the Protestant circle round the throne be drawn still closer, we may, as that circle is diminishing, be carried on, even with accelerated velocity, towards a vortex, which would engulph in its abyss, the Protestant throne, the religious establishments, and the civil liberties of the nation.

rose and said:

I have the misfortune, Sir, to be one of that description of persons which my noble friend (lord Morpeth), who opened the debate, has marked out for the peculiar disapprobation of the House, and of the country; one who, without being unfriendly to the claims of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, am yet not prepared fox immediate and unlimited concession to them; and who think the present not a favourable moment for entertaining the proposal of any concession at all.—I am, at the same time, decidedly hostile to the 515 principle, not obscurely intimated by my right hon. and learned friend who spoke last, of now shutting the door against further concession for ever;—a principle, which must in its necessary consequences lead to the re-enactment; at no distant day, of those penal statutes against the Catholics, which once disgraced our legislation.

Being thus, Sir, one of those unfortunate persons, who stand between the extremes of two opposite opinions, and who therefore cannot hope to satisfy the professors of either, I feel myself obliged to trespass for some short time on the attention of the House, while I declare my sentiments, fairly and explicitly, upon this most important subject, which the motion of my noble friend brings under our consideration.

I regret that such a motion has been brought forward. I regret it from an apprehension, which was excited in my mind by the notice given on the first day of the session, and which the speech of my right honourable and learned friend has certainly not been calculated to diminish,—that the discussion is not at this moment likely to be attended with any chance of practical benefit.

The question of the Roman Catholic claims, which alone gives importance to this night's debate, is so mixed up with other matter in the motion now proposed to us, that it is presented in the most unfavourable point of view. A question of transcendent and permanent national interest, is blended with a dispute about the construction of an act of parliament, and about the dispersion of an assembly of doubtful legality: and it is so contrived, by this mode of proceeding, that no man, however inclined, could give his vote in favour of entertaining the Catholic claims to-night, without at the same time passing a censure upon the conduct of the Irish government.