

It has been said that there are cases in which a government might act upon the bare letter of a law, yet with a purpose of vexation and oppression. Undoubtedly written law must, in the nature of things, be often lamentably deficient as a rule of moral or political conduct. But surely we are not to go into a committee to examine and scrutinize into the motives of government, so long as in their acts there is nothing legally blamble. The legality of their acts must be taken primâ facie as a presumption of the purity of their motives—at least until, by some facts or arguments such as I have not yet heard, a strong presumption has been raised the contrary way:—and the opinions of those legal authorities which the Irish government were bound to respect,—and in defiance of which they could not have acted without incurring a most severe responsibility,—must be taken as presumption of the legality of their conduct until those authorities are over-ruled by some higher decision.

Neither would the investigation of the motives of the government be the only business of such a Committee. There is another party, beside the government, namely, the Catholics themselves, whose conduct must necessarily be subjected to the same scrutiny. If the legal application of the Convention act would not be sufficient to acquit the government of tyrannical disposition, neither, by parity of reasoning, would the legality of the Convention itself (supposing even that established) be sufficient to acquit the Catholics of an imputed disposition to turbulence and mischief. If the government might be rightly advised in respect to the jaw and yet might act maliciously, in dispersing or preventing the Convention; the Catholics might, on the other hand, intend to turn even a lawful assembly to Improper purposes.

518 I impute not such motives to either party. I do not believe them of either. I believe that the Catholics thought themselves warranted in the mode of their meeting, and proposed to meet for purposes perfectly legitimate. I believe the government to have sincerely apprehended danger from such meetings; and, it is perfectly natural that, being advised that they had the power to prevent them, they should not only have felt themselves justified in using that power, but should have thought it unjustifiable not to use it. If this be the true state of the case, there is nothing for a Committee to inquire into. If otherwise, I know not by what means a Committee would be enabled to probe the hearts of men, and search out the motives of their conduct. The transactions of the last summer therefore appear to me, not only to afford no ground for my noble friend's motion; but, on the contrary, to make such a Committee as he has proposed unadvisable, even though it had been in other respects fit to go into a Committee on the other and larger ground on which my noble friend's motion is founded.

In approaching the discussion of this larger question, I am aware that I labour under great disadvantage. The feelings and passions of men are so warmly interested on the one side or the other, that to engage in the discussion without adopting in some measure the views and language of a partizan, is, I am perfectly sensible, to incur the risk of disappointing both parties and pleasing neither. But this disadvantage I am not afraid to encounter. If I know my own heart, I come to the present question uninfluenced by any selfish motives, by any objects either of power or popularity. I wish merely to do my duty. I seek not the triumph of either party, but I look to the tranquillity, the security, and the happiness of the whole.