

The Catholic body, it is true, are numerous, brave, high-spirited, firm, and attached to their religion; but their Protestant fellow subjects, also, are not deficient in these qualities, and in numbers are four to one. The legislature will not be readily prevailed upon to give up the Protestant ascendency. The kindness of the Protestants to their Catholic fellow subjects has no other boundary than what is necessary to the security of their own constitutional establishments in church and state; but they must have security. The very numbers of the Catholics increase the danger of admitting them to a full share of power. If they were few; the boon might be granted with greater safety. But their numbers, though in some respects strengthening their claims, yet also fortifies the ground of refusal, and that on the main point,—namely, security.

What then, is the security? Of special arrangements for domestic tranquillity, and barriers against foreign influence, we hear nothing—the only security is one which 512 the constitution already provides, namely a Protestant sovereign.

In the first place, the constitution has hitherto not thought that alone a sufficient security; but it has encircled the throne with Protestant ministers, and with a Protestant parliament. Stepping down however from that ground, yet looking prospectively to a future period, (for, in a matter of such extreme importance, we must not confine our view to the present moment) let us suppose a monarch secretly inclined to the Catholic religion, or one wholly indifferent to all religion, attached to Catholic favourites and Catholic ministers—that, in the House of Commons there-were a hundred Catholic members, besides the usual influence of the crown—that there were Catholics mixed in all parts of the state, in all the powers of the government, and in high military command—backed by four millions of population, under the influence of a Catholic priesthood; that priesthood under the authority of a foreign power,—and that power, in effect, France;—would there be no danger to your ecclesiastical establishments, or your civil liberties, or rather to both?—for they will stand or fall together! Even all the arrangements and barriers that could be formed might be swept away, and the nation be involved in the horrors of a civil and religious war. It might have no resource but in resistance and revolution: If such calamities are even possible, the risk should not be run; even the risk, even the possibility, even the apprehension, would be a calamity. The nation would not passively deliver up their Protestant Church to a Catholic court, nor their civil liberties to an arbitrary government.—Let us not mistake the silence of the nation at this present moment for insensibility to this subject; still less for acquiescence in these claims. If the table of the House is not covered with petitions, it is only because the people at large think, at present, that there is no chance of the claims being conceded; but if they saw any appearance of it, the voice of the nation would probably be heard in pretty loud accents. Though the mild and benign spirit of toleration, which has long characterized our constitution, and actuated our church, has most happily extinguished religious antipathies, yet it is erroneous to suppose that the nation is become indifferent to its Protestant altars. It is anxious for their perfect security, not only from religious preference, but because they are 513 satisfied that with the Protestant ascendancy are intimately interwoven the civil liberties of the people.