

Much has been said, in the various debates that have taken place on this subject, of promises made, or understandings entered into, at the time of the union. Promises, I know of none; nor do I believe, that any were made. An understanding there certainly was, not expressed by any act of the legislature, but fairly to be collected from the language of almost every man who spoke in favour of the Union in either House of Parliament;—that, whereas the separate resident legislature of Ireland, surrounded and agitated 519 by local passions and prejudices, was incompetent to discuss, impartially and dispassionately, the subject of the Catholic claims,—the imperial parliament, after the accomplishment of the Union, being removed from the influence of those local feelings, and from the sphere of those prejudices which obstructed a temperate discussion in Ireland, might safely and conveniently entertain the question, and might come to a rational and enlightened decision upon it.

That time arrived. The Union being accomplished, the question was open to discussion in the united parliament: when an obstacle arose, to the nature of which it would not be fitting to do more than allude; but of which I believe it may be said without hazard of contradiction, that, however it might impede for a time the consummation of their wishes, there is no virtuous and loyal Catholic who does not deeply deplore its removal.

Is it at this moment, when the expectations, well or ill founded, under which the Union was brought about, might be realized,—when the claims of the Catholics might at length, without impediment; be submitted to parliamentary consideration—is it at this moment that my right hon. and learned friend would break the word of promise to the hopes of the Catholics, and shut the door against their expectations for ever? I do not say that the claims of the Catholics can this day be granted. I do not say with my noble friend that this is the moment for taking them into consideration. I agree indeed with my noble friend as to the great and urgent importance of the subject; but I rather think my noble friend does not agree with me as to the magnitude of the difficulties that encompass it. But whatever doubt I may entertain as to the view which my noble friend has taken of the subject, however much I may be disposed to question whether he has considered it in all its details, and in all its bearings; I must own, that my right hon. and learned friend has done so much to simplify the question,—that if, of the two, I must agree with the one or the other, I could not refuse my noble friend the preference. If the only option were, whether we should go on at once to the extremest limit of concession, or should presently retrace our steps, retract former relaxations, and re-enact former disabilities; I could have no hesitation as to the alternative for which I should give my vote.

520 But in the view which I take of this great question, it is not quite so simple in its nature. It cannot, I think, be considered without reference to times and circumstances. It is not to be decided on abstract principles alone. Those principles must be modified in their application by a view of the actual state of Ireland;—of the relation in which Ireland now stands to the whole of the British empire;—and of the situation of that empire, as affected by the present circumstances of the world.