

But, it may be asked, is the exclusion then necessarily to be perpetual? certainly not—a change of circumstances may render an extension of privileges secure. The most important change is from ignorance to knowledge, from turbulence to civil and social order. The danger, in a considerable degree, arises from the great mass: of the Catholics,—those in whom the physical force of the body resides,—being, through their ignorance, under the entire dominion of their priesthood. This physical force, under that influence, connected with foreign authority, and guided by the higher classes fully sharing in political power, might be applied to the most dangerous purposes; and, unless human nature itself is changed, the attempt of so applying it is probable. A participation of power between parties who materially differ upon some great principle, has never yet existed without each attempting to gain the ascendancy. This is no reflection on the Catholics. The love of power is universal. The Protestants equally possess it. They have the ascendency—they have it justly; not only by the laws of the constitution, but as being four-fifths of the population of the empire.—They use it mildly and moderately; they maintain full toleration; under their ascendancy, the greatest blessings have been enjoyed by the nation; it is their right, nay, it is their duty, not to risk the loss of that ascendancy.

But ameliorate the condition of the lower orders of the Catholics as much as possible—educate them—enlighten them—enable them to read, to examine, and to decide for themselves upon the great principles and precepts of religion;—teach them to estimate the true value of toleration, and the blessings of the British Constitution;—let them shew their change and their improvement by living in due submission and orderly obedience to the laws; then, and not till then, can further concessions be safely granted to them.

This appears to be the view, which parliament should take of the subject. It is highly desirable to come to a frank and open decision upon it; that being the most likely mode (produce quiet. Suspense only fosters discontent. The Catholics cannot but be assured that the legislature has felt the strongest disposition to give the most full and deliberate consideration 514 to their claims; they have been repeatedly entertained and discussed; every argument which ability and zeal could suggest, have been offered in support of them.

Perseverance, however, is threatened.—Can the Catholics suppose that, upon a subject so vitally important to the best interests of the nation, the legislature will be teazed into acquiescence by importunity? still less, that it will be overawed by menace? certainly not. It is only by a reference to the reason and conviction of parliament, that they have any prospect of success to their application. Satisfy parliament that the boon can be granted with perfect safety to the constitution, in church and state, and it will be granted nearly with unanimity, almost by acclamation.