

It may be objected that however this might have been the case with states of such trifling magnitude as the Swiss Cantons, there would be a difficulty in making the application of the same principle to greater states. But what if the same might be shown of another and a larger country? What if it had existed in France itself? Let not my right hon. and learned friend suppose that I am speaking of revolutionary France; or that I, at least, am one of those whom he has described as borrowing their opinions upon this subject from the new philosophy which gave birth to that tremendous and desolating revolution.—I flatter myself that I am known too well to my right hon. and learned friend, as I would fain presume I may be to this House, to be under the necessity of defending myself against such an imputation. I speak of France in her ancient, in her most glorious times; not only when she was a monarchy, but when reigned over by the monarch whose name is the most splendid in her history, and the most cherished in the affections of mankind. I speak of the edict of Nantes, issued by Henry 4. After sixty years of almost uninterrupted struggle between the two conflicting religions: a struggle of open and avowed war, stained with transactions the most disgraceful to human nature: transactions the memory of which was calculated to keep alive in the breasts of the Protestants a jealous suspicion of treachery, and an ardent desire of revenge; and in those of the Catholics an apprehension of merited and merciless retaliation: in this state of mens minds in France, differing happily from any thing that exists in Ireland, did Henry 4 think that he could not better provide, for the general tranquillity and safety of the state, than by extending equal political privileges to all religious descriptions of his subjects. Our squabble and difficulty here, is about the admission to a few political offices. Hear, Sir, what was the enactment of Henry 4, of France, upon that subject.

§"The better to unite the affections of all our subjects, as it is our intent to do, and to prevent all complaints in time to come:

§"We declare all those who profess or may here after the pretended re-fromed religion, capable of holding and 526 exercising all situations, dignities, offices, and public trusts whatsoever, royal and seignorial, or belonging to the cities or towns of our said kingdom, or to the countries, lands, and lordships in allegiance to us; notwithstanding any oaths to the contrary; and to be indifferently admitted and received into such places: And our courts of parliament and other judges shall content themselves with enquiring into the lives, morals, religion" and honest conversation of those who are or may be invested with offices, as well of one religion as another; without exacting any other oath, from them than that in the exercise of their charge, they will well and faithfully serve the king, and keep the ordinances such as they have been observed heretofore. And as to such of the said situations, trusts, and offices, as are in, our own gift, any vacancy arising therein shall be filled up, indifferently and without distinction, by any person capable of executing the same; as being a thing which tends to the uniting of all our subjects. It is our intention likewise, that those of the reformed religion may be admitted into all councils, deliberations, meetings, and functions, which belong to the situations above mentioned, without the possibility of their being, on account of their said religion, rejected or prevented from enjoying the same.*"