

§ Look next to the situation of the Irish bar. In proportion as other walks of liberal profession are shut to the Catholics, must the numbers of them be greater who will naturally flock into the profession of the law. Comparing the amount of the Catholic with that of the Protestant population in Ireland, at no distant time a great proportion of the bar must be of the Catholic persuasion. There is no reason on which to presume, that the talents of the Catholic barristers will not be equal to those of their Protestant competitors; and it is in the very nature of things, that so long as the Catholic population are depressed below the level of their Protestant fellow-subjects, they should feel towards each other with the spirit of a sect, and preferably throw their business into the hands of those of their own persuasion.—I have the highest opinion of the profession of the law; a profession which has produced so many eminent men, ornaments and supports of the state; and which is generally characterized as much by liberality as by talents. But it is no disparagement of that honourable and able profession to say, that great talents are won to the support of the state by honourable expectations, and by the prospects of just reward. And if the bar of Ireland are to be illiberalized (if I may use that word to express my meaning,) and their views to be contracted and debased, by being, confined merely to the acquisition of money, to the exclusion of any object of honourable distinction—would not the character of the bar be materially altered? And ought we not seriously to consider what might be the danger to the state from a body of such ability and influence, if an impassable limit and barrier were to be put to the hopes and exertions of a generous ambition?

§ They who refer to the French revolution, and justly refer to it, as a lesson of dreadful warning, would do well to consider some 533 of the leading principles, and predisposing causes, I will not say from which it arose, but by which the mass of the French people were prepared for it. None of these causes was more prominent, or more universally acknowledged by all thinking men, than the existence of those fanciful and artificial barriers, by which an insuperable line of separation was drawn between the higher ranks of the community, and those whose wealth, or talents and services, might raise them to acquired eminence. This line was drawn with precision, and observed with rigour; but it was drawn only in the manners and prejudices of society. Here you have established it by statute; and established it against a profession, whose daily studies are conversant with the constitution of states, and with the general principles of human society,—whose daily practice is of a nature to kindle and keep alive the spirit of aspiring ambition,—whose habits and qualities fit them to be leaders of the people.

§ Look forward a few years to the period when the mass of the bar being Catholic; and the mass of the business in their hands, a briefless Protestant must nevertheless be selected to fill any vacancy on the bench. Every one knows what is the reciprocal influence of an enlightened bench, and an enlightened bar; the mutual check and controul of authority on the one side, and of opinion on the other. Conceive a state of things in which that check should cease to operate on one side, by the loss of that eminence which is the soul of all authority on the bench, conceive a Catholic bar pleading to Catholic juries, before judges who have been placed upon the bench, not for their wisdom bat for their faith, and imagine what consequences must follow!