

§ differemment et sans distinction de personne capable: comme chose qui regarde l'union de nos subjects. Entendons aussi que ceux de ladite religion pretendue reformée puissent estre admis et receus en tout conseil, deliberation, assemblées et fonctions, qui dependent des choses dessus dictes, sans que pour raison de ladite religion ils ne puissent estre rejectez ou empechez d'en jouïr."

§ the history of other countries to show the unsoundness of the proposition, that difference of religious opinions is incompatible with political equality. Our own history will show, that, so far from a contrary system being absolutely natural and necessary to this country, so far from its either being indigenous to the soil; or growing out of the freedom of our constitution; our restrictions upon the Roman Catholic religion have generally originated in causes external to this country. I infer that in proportion as those causes cease to operate, the necessity of those restrictions, and consequently their justification, has become less strong.

§ From the period of the reformation, during the remainder of the 16th, and part of the following century, a considerable portion of the continent was agitated by wars and quarrels of religion. From the time when this country finally adopted the reformed religion, the British government lost no opportunity of expressing its sympathy with those professing the same creed in foreign states sometimes interfering in their favour by negociations, and sometimes assisting them by arms; and it was in its turn exposed to the machinations of foreign powers of the Catholic persuasion, and to the vengeance and intrigues of the Catholic church. In this state of things the government naturally entertained a strong and just jealousy of its own Catholic subjects; and accordingly we find every attack upon the crown of England, whether by the arms of a foreign Catholic power, or by the spiritual head of the Catholic church, followed by new and more rigorous restrictions upon the Catholics of these kingdoms. In Ireland especially, where the reformation did not make its way, where it must be confessed that little pains were taken to propagate it, in Ireland, which both from the predominance of the Catholic religion, and from its being the most vulnerable point of the British empire, was chiefly the scene of foreign intrigue, and the point of foreign attack, these restrictions were multiplied and enforced with peculiar severity.

§ From the reign of Elizabeth downwards even to the present reign, the statute-book exhibits a series of penal provisions, rendered necessary, or assumed to be so, for the purpose of keeping down Catholic disaffection; a disaffection of which the dread appears uniformly to have increased in proportion to external danger. The 529 war of Philip against Elizabeth, and that which followed the revolution in 1688, were alike the æra and the occasion of new penal restrictions upon Ireland. But is it not equally true, that the abatement of external danger has allowed a proportionate relaxation in the system of internal jealousy and restraint? Was it not reasonable that it should do so? And has not the fact been conformable to the reason of the thing.