

§"Afin de reunir d'autant mieux les volontez de nos subjects, comme est notre intention, et oter toutes plaintes a l'avenir:

§"Declarons tous ceux qui font ou feront profession de ladite religion pretendue reformée, capables de tenir et exercer tous estats, dignités, offices et charges publiques quelconques, royales, seigneuriales, ou des villes de notre dict Royaume, pays, terres et seigneuries de notre obeyssance; nonobstant tous sermens a ce contraires et d'estre indifferemment admis et receus en iceux; et se contenteront nos Cours de Parlemens, et autres juges d'informer et enquerir sur la vie, moeurs, religion, et honneste conversation de ceux qui sont ou seront pourveus d'offices, tant d'une religion que d' autre, sans prendre d'eux autre serment que de bien en fidelement servir le Roy en l'exercise de leurs charges, et garder les ordonnances comme il a esté observe de tout temps.—Avenant aussi, vacation des dicts estats, charges, et offices pour le regard de ceux qui seront en notre disposition, il y sera par nous pourveu in- 527 Such, then, was the opinion of one of the greatest monarchs that ever reigned over that or any other nation, in times when he had not barely to calculate upon possible disturbance and discontent, but to encounter open opposition. His opinion is thus practically shewn to have been, that even in such circumstances, the best course of proceeding was by conciliation. This was his notion of tranquillizing a country. Such an authority is surely not to be despised. And, however difficult it may have been found, in times of so much turbulence, to act fully up to the spirit of this benevolent edict, and to hold the balance of impartial toleration with a steady hand; yet no man who compares the period during which the edict of Nantes was in force, with that which succeeded its revocation by Louis 14, will venture to state that the system of toleration tended to cramp the energies, and blight the prosperity of that kingdom. If the reign of Louis 14 is always cited as the epoch during which the glory of the French monarchy was matured, if his court was at once the model and the terror of Europe,—it is from that period of his reign, when, under the influence of a mistress and a confessor, he repealed the edict of Nantes, and became the persecutor of his subjects, that we are to date the decline of that glory.

§ It is a singular fact, however, that, independently of the edict of Nantes, and even after its revocation, France was allowed to benefit by services, such as we consider as incompatible with the safety of the dominant religion. Sully was placed at the head of her councils; Turenne, Schomberg, and Saxe, were entrusted with the command of her armies.

§ What is it—is there any thing, which makes intolerance more natural, or more necessary to this country? Is it that a free state must necessarily be more rigorous in withholding political privileges on account of religious opinions, than a government purely monarchical? I have referred to