

In tracing the history of the penal laws, and of the long sufferings of Ireland, some gentlemen are fond of going back to remote and almost forgotten periods; to periods when Ireland was treated as a conquered country; and groaned under all those injuries and oppressions which grew not out of religious schism, but out of political and military subjugation. I do not think it necessary to go so far back either to recount the wrongs of Ireland, or to suggest the remedy for them. As reasonable would it be to refer to the Norman conquest for grievances applicable to this country, and to complain at this time of the tyranny of the curfew. But part of the way I must go back, to find the origin and object of the restrictions now under consideration:—I must go back as far as the Reformation.

Blessed as that great event was in its general consequences to mankind, and eminently so to this country, by purifying religion of the gross corruptions and abuses which had been engrafted upon it, and introducing among us that enlightened and rational system of religious worship which we now happily enjoy: yet, like all great and violent changes in the state of human affairs, it was not productive of unmixed good, but brought with it a portion of inevitable evil. It strengthened the religious principle; but it weakened throughout Europe for a time the principle of patriotism; in some cases superseding it, in others coming in conflict with it. The sects into which the nations of Europe were divided by this event, were influenced by the zeal of religious controversy, more than by the love of country. The attachment of Catholics and Protestants to their respective persuasions, was often too strong for those ties of duty and affection which bind men to their native clime. In Germany the reformed religion had to 524 struggle against Catholic supremacy. In this country, where the doctrines of the reformation early prevailed, the Catholics continued to feel a community of interest with the Catholics of other nations, outweighing that which connected them with their Protestant fellow-subjects, the children of the same soil. Under these circumstances, it might perhaps be necessary for the safety of the state, that the dominant sect should place the others under restrictions and disqualifications, which should exclude them from all share in the government, and from all influence, as well as power. But it would surely be idle to contend that a transitory dissension required, or could justify, a permanent and irremovable system of coercion. And it would be false in point of history, as well as in reasoning, to affirm that the religious struggles, which naturally grew out of such an event as the Reformation, must be considered as common to all times, and as arising out of causes inseparable from our nature.

It is true that in this country, and still more in Ireland, from circumstances peculiar to these kingdoms, religious dissensions raged unabated for a longer period than in many other parts of the world. But are there no instances in which difference of faith has been found compatible with strict political union? Within a few years, I believe within thirty years, after the first dawn of the Reformation, and while the rest of Europe was yet convulsed with the divisions arising out of it, the Cantons of Switzerland took the sage and generous resolution to bury all religious animosities, and to live together as Christians, without regard to difference of sect. In four of these Cantons, the reformed religion was adopted; in six, the Roman Catholic continued to prevail; in the remainder Protestants and Catholics were mixed in equal proportions: and in the Diets, in which the general affairs of the union were discussed, the two religions amicably concurred in the settlement of their common political interests. From about the middle of the 16th to the beginning of the 18th century, when there was a slight interruption to their harmony, (which interruption lasted, however, only for a period of six months), and from thence to the time when their independence was swallowed up in the all-devouring gulf of the French Revolution, did the Cantons of Switzerland continue to maintain, with this perfect religious independence, 525 a perfect and cordial political connection.