

§ In 1685, the period of the revocation of the edict of Nantes, the shores of this country were covered, with a multitude of fugitives from France, imploring asylum and protection: Fugitives of what description? Protestant clergy. Flying from what? A Popish persecution. When the spirit of Popish persecution was thus active abroad, we naturally increased our guards and securities against a similar spirit at home. In 1793 again our shores are covered with a banished clergy. Of what persuasion? Roman Catholic. Flying from what? An Atheistical persecution.—Were these events calculated to produce similar impressions? Or did they call for similar precautions? Undoubtedly they did not. And blind indeed must those persons be to the signs of the times, who would apply to cases so different the same reasoning; or act upon them by an undistinguishing and inflexible rule of conduct.

§ But, Sir, we did not so reason or so act. The year 1793; the period to which I have last referred, when the dissension of Catholic and Protestant appeared to be swallowed up in the wider difference between Christian and Anti-Christian:—that was the period chosen, and wisely chosen by the crown, for recommending to the legislature of Ireland, the relaxation of the penal laws against the Irish Catholics. The lesser danger disappeared before the greater: and the restraints which were no longer necessary, were properly considered as no longer just.

§ As much was done for the Irish Catholics at this period as perhaps could be done, while England and Ireland continued separate kingdoms. The question of admission into political office was wisely, if not of necessity, deferred till after the Union. The Union happily did away that argument from numbers, which (in my judgment) has been always as unwisely urged on one side of this question, as unfairly answered on the other. Most unwisely is it urged by the friends of the Catholics: for the boast of numbers sounds 530 too like an attempt at intimidation: but most unfairly is it held out on the other side, to intimidate us the other way; and to induce us to withhold even what it might be right to grant, because the claimants form a large proportion of our population.

§ The Union, however, puts an end to the danger of this argument, without destroying whatever be its legitimate force. The numbers of the Irish Catholics, merged in the whole population of the United Kingdom, have ceased to be formidable from their relative, without ceasing to be respectable from their positive amount.

§ Such being the advantage derived to this question from the Union, I confess I am astonished to find, that some among the Catholics call for a repeal of the Union; and that an hon. gentleman, a strenuous advocate of the Catholic cause, has given notice of a motion to that effect.—Repeal the Union! Restore the Heptarchy as soon!—The measure itself is simply impossible. But with such a question depending in the House, I doubt how far it is possible to entertain the consideration of the present subject to any useful purpose. For, suppose the hon. gentleman to succeed in procuring the repeal of the Union; not only might it become unsafe to concede the Catholic claims at all; but in this House we could not even discuss them with propriety. This House could not presume to determine on a subject which would then belong to separate Ireland alone.