

§ But am I therefore prepared to concede every thing that is required, to concede it without delay, to concede it without condition or limitation? No such thing. The time when the brand of disqualification shall be removed; the period or the generation in which the stain of incapacity shall be considered as worn out or washed away, I am not now pretending to define. I do not say that this is the moment: but I do say that it is utterly inconceivable to me, that any man should talk of the present as a state of things which can endure for ever; that any man should think that we are now arrived at the point at which legislative wisdom can stop, and expect contented acquiescence; that any man should recommend a vote, which is to confirm this state of things, and to extinguish the hope of any future change, as the best mode of tranquillizing Ireland.

§ But then the dangers of any fresh concession! the dangers of a Catholic chancellor, or a Catholic general, influenced by the Pope, and the Pope in the power of Buonaparté! What could we look for in such a case, but the subversion of the constitution, and the conquest of the kingdom?

§ I confess I think that those who are 536 appalled by these terrors, do give a rein to their imagination, rather than consult their sober judgment. I think too, that under the influence of an imaginary fear, they overlook nearer and more substantial dangers.

§ There have been times, no doubt, when (as I have already had occasion to state) the tie of community of religion Was stronger than that of a common country; when the geographer might have distinguished the divisions of the map of Europe by two colours, one denoting the Catholic, and the other the reformed religion; and when the same distinction that described differences of faith would have implied, at the same time, the respective policy, connections, and alliances of the several states of Europe. But, thanks to Buonaparte for this incidental good arising from his various acts of usurpation and atrocity; he has exalted and called into action the feelings of patriotism, and taught them to supersede that fellowship which grew heretofore out of similarity of religious profession. The different nations of the civilized world may now, as heretofore, be characterized by only two descriptions—but these descriptions are no longer Catholic or Protestant, but French or not French.

§ If leagues have been formed in other times of Catholic powers, against the advancement of the Protestant cause and interests, while states which had embraced the tenets of the reformed religion, have combined on the other hand to reduce the pretensions of the ancient and corrupted ecclesiastical establishment; let us see how far the distinctions, founded upon religious differences, would apply to the existing state of the world. What is in this respect the conduct of Buonaparte, the sovereign of France, the successor of Charlemagne, the eldest son of the church? Is his a Catholic league? Is it only with Catholic sovereigns and Catholic states that he forms his connections, or to them alone that he extends the benefit of what he calls his protection? Look, I say, at the map of Europe: see Lutheran Saxony, knit to him in alliance: see Germany, whether reformed or Catholic, portioned out at his will: see Protestant Denmark waiting on his nod, and Protestant Sweden shrinking at his frown; see Calvinistic Holland swallowed up into his empire; Calvinistic Prussia trembling at his footstool; and 537 Uncatholic Russia struggling in his toils! Yet there are those who seem to think, that the power of the Pope is, after all, the formidable part of the great confederacy which Buonaparte has thus arrayed against us;—who, amidst a combination thus extensive, thus violent, and held together by principles with which religion (it might be thought) has very little to do, can see no real dangers, against which we have to guard, but in the debates respecting the concordat and the liberties of the Gallican Church;—there are those who apprehend that, weary of ordinary warfare, Buonaparte is about to substitute the thunders of the Vatican, for those of the mere mortal artillery, by which he has shaken and subjugated Europe;—that after exhausting all terrestrial means of attack, he, waits only for our consent to the Catholic petition, to resort to a spiritual assault; to call in the aid of bulls and indulgences, and the other machinery of ecclesiastical hostilities;—