

§ Quicquid babent telorum armamentaria cœli!

§ There is, however, one remarkable circumstance in the present state of Europe, which might suggest to the most timid and awe-stricken observer of superstitious indications, a doubt at least, whether the principle of religious antipathy be indeed so busy in the world at this moment as he imagines: whether this league of almost all the Protestant states of Europe with France, be indeed directed to the express object of subverting the Protestant religion in this country, and imposing upon us a Catholic hierarchy, and a Catholic sovereign. In one corner of Europe, and in one alone, there exists' a spirit of resistance to France; and this—singularly enough, and as if for the express purpose of banishing all notion of religious difference from the quarrel—exists among nations the most bigoted to the Roman Catholic faith of all the nations of Europe, namely, among the inhabitants of the peninsula. They are precisely the people who most steadily, sincerely, and bravely have opposed themselves to Buonaparte's schemes of conquest and dominion; an opposition quite unintelligible, if this be really a religious war. What? shall it be in the kingdoms the most abjectly submitted to the Papal authority,—in the strong holds of the inquisition itself shall it be, that the standard of rebellion to the Pope, acting (as we are taught to apprehend) 538 through the instrumentality of Buonaparte, shall be raised, and raised with impunity?—And yet shall we be gravely told, that, in the name and authority of the Pope, Buonaparte will wrest Ireland from Great Britain?—If the Pope can conquer for Buonaparte, why does he not conquer the Peninsula for him? Why is Spain yet upheld by Protestant alliarce, and Portugal yet sheltered by heretical arms? A breath of the church, a [...]od of the tiara, should surely dissipate his unnatural, this anti-catholic combination.

§ Fortunately, Sir, in this instance we act more wisely than we reason. We do not distrust the disposition of the naions of the Peninsula to oppose a stout esistance to the French power, because that power is predominant over the Pope who is in his turn undeniably predominant over the spiritual concerns of those nations. Not but we know very well that the times have been, when that circumstance would have been of great importance and effect in the success of the war: but we know, that those tines are past—past for every country upon earth, it seems, except Ireland:—and, in the name of common sense, why not for Ireland too?

§ Well and wisely have we one, in uniting ourselves to the cause of those gallant and oppressed nations: wisely for our own interest as well as for our glory. The page which records our efforts in the peninsular war will be among the brightest in our history. Bit strange indeed, and perplexing will be the duty of the historian, who shall have to blend with those annals of courage and renown, a faithful relation of the fears which prevent us from entertaining the petitions of the Irish Catholics; who shall contrast the jealousy and suspicion with which we regard the populaton of Catholic Ireland, with the fearlessness with which we pour forth that population in the just cause of Catholic Slain.