

§ Scarcely less unfair than the use of the argument derived from numbers, is that which is often made of the concessions heretofore granted to the Catholics by the legislature. It is affirmed, that those concessions have been extorted in times of trouble and danger: that advantage has been taken of the distresses of the crown, to bring forward claims at the moment when it had no means of resisting them. Nothing can be more untrue than this statement: which proceeds entirely on a confusion between the claims of Ireland, as against England, and those of the Catholics of Ireland; which are totally different things. I will not now enter into any inquiry, whether the concessions made to Ireland in 1782, were or were not wrung from the British government by the necessities and difficulties of the times. It is sufficient to remark, that those concessions were not concessions to the Catholics, but to the Protestant parliament 531 of Ireland; that in the boasted adjustment (as it was called) of 1782, not one Word was contained which ameliorated the situation of the Catholics, or in any degree affected their interests. So far is it from being true, that what has been granted to them has been granted to menace; that it has not, in point of fact, been granted even to supplication. Their petitions had been rejected by the Irish parliament; and the crown afterwards voluntarily came forward, and suggested to that parliament a spontaneous compliance with the prayers which it had previously refused. And to this is to be added, that in almost every statute which has passed to improve the situation of the Catholics, their uniformly peaceable and loyal conduct has been recited in the preamble, as occasioning and justifying the concession.

§ In looking at the nature and extent of the concessions which have thus been made to the Catholics, and at the state in which they were left at the Union, will any man contend, that the point at which those concessions have stopped can have been selected as that at which it was seriously intended they should remain? Is it not obvious upon the slightest consideration, that to have opened the elective franchise to the Catholics, and to preclude the exercise of it in favour of candidates of their own persuasion; that to have admitted them to the bar, and to exclude them from the bench, would, if considered as a permanent arrangement, he one of a most perverse and dangerous nature? But it would be perfectly intelligible that such concessions should be made by degrees; and that the consummation of them, and especially that the admission to seats in the House of Commons, should have been purposely postponed till after the Union of the two parliaments.

§ I protest, if I were to look upon the arrangement as permanent, I should doubt whether the seat in the House of Commons might not have been granted with less danger, than the right of voting for members, disjoined from the eligibility to serve. In the former case the conduct of the Catholic member would have been influenced and controuled by his Protestant constituents: but the irresponsible exercise of the elective franchise admits of no controul; and, powerful as the Catholics are, and growing daily more and more powerful by the growing extent of their property, how is it to be supposed that the Catholic constituents should not influence and controul 532 the conduct of their Protestant representative? It was natural to postpone the admission into parliament till the Union, lest there should be in time a preponderance, of Catholic members in the local parliament of Ireland: but as applied to the United parliament, I profess, I see no danger from the admission of Catholic members from Ireland, which does not arise in an equal, or in a more eminent degree from the power of returning members being vested in the Catholic population.