

§ That this opportunity may be afforded to the executive government, I would say to the Catholics, "do not press your claims at the present moment;" and with the same view, I should have most earnestly wished that my noble friend's motion had not been this night brought forward. I know how little I am courting popularity by these declarations. I make no professions of exclusive partiality. I wish well to the Catholics, as a part of the population of the empire. I wish the question at rest, not in the way of victory, but of conciliation; not by a forcible constraint upon the honest prejudices of Protestants, but by the removal of them: and to that removal I confidently look, if the subject be brought fairly before the country, and if the conduct of the Catholics themselves be temperate, prudent, and conciliatory.

§ I not only do not concur in, but I really do not understand the doctrine which my right hon. and learned friend laid down at the conclusion of his speech, that the admission of the Catholics into the offices and situations from which they are now excluded, is absolutely forbidden by the constitution. How is this more true now, than it was true in the year 1793, that the constitution then forbade their admission into the privileges that were then conceded to them?

§ The constitution of this country is not, so far as I have been taught to understand it, a code written out fairly in one book, 546 and struck out at one heat like the revolutionary constitutions of modern France. The constitution, as established at our revolution, is what the constitution was, in principle, before that revolution, with such additional safeguards, and securities for the laws and liberties of the country, as the attacks which made that revolution necessary, and the dangers which followed it, suggested and prescribed. Our revolution was not the erection of a new frame and theory of government, but the vindication and renovation of ancient laws; the assertion of ancient franchises; the confirmation of ancient and undoubted privileges and liberties; established long ago, and established, many of them (be it remembered,) by the wisdom and patriotism of our Catholic ancestors.

§ Nor is it at all more true, that many of the most disgraceful exclusions, and most goading and penal provisions against the Catholics, were in fact the work of the revolution, or even contemporary with it. Reign after reign, from the revolution to the accession of his present Majesty, teemed with more and more severe enactments for keeping down the Catholics in Ireland. Of these enactments, many have been in the course, of his Majesty's beneficent reign repealed. How is it then, that what remains of them is fundamental to the constitution? Is it on account of the date of their enactment? Show that they are all of the date of the revolution. Or it is on account of the date at which their repeal is proposed?

§ This then is an objection which applies universally to the whole Catholic code, as it stood before the relaxation began, if it applies at all. And who is the man bold enough to say, that the Catholic code, as it stood fifty years ago, was an essential and fundamental part of the British constitution?