

§ I cannot think, Sir, that the British constitution is of this close, narrow, and exclusive character. Much rather would I describe it as of a capacity to admit and embrace all those who, born in the British islands, prove themselves sensible and worthy of its blessings; as inviting all the sons of the soil, whether of Great Britain or Ireland, into the shelter of its protecting arms: Pandentemque sinus, et tota veste vocantem Cæruleum in gremium.

§ This is the result to which I fondly look. Were the present motion calculated to hasten that result, it should have my hearty 547 concurrence. But thinking it, for the reasons which I have stated, much rather calculated to defer any such result, by mixing the great question to which it in part refers, with circumstances of temporary and I hope transient irritation, I must give my vote against it.

, in explanation, disavowed any wish to re-enact the restrictions from which the Catholics had already been relieved. So far was he from entertaining any disposition of that nature, that, were such a proposition made, it would meet with his decided opposition. Nor had he, as represented by the right hon. gentleman, intimated any conviction that the exclusion of the Catholics should be perpetual; and he really thought that, in his original speech, he had sufficiently guarded himself from such a misconception.

, in explanation, admitted that the right hon. and learned gentleman had, with respect to the first subject, sufficiently guarded himself in words from the imputation of being favourable to the re-enactment of the restrictions on the Catholics; but his argument certainly tended the other way. He was happy, however, that the right hon. and learned gentleman had an opportunity afforded him of distinctly disclaiming any such disposition. With respect to the other point, he had certainly misconceived the right hon. and learned gentleman through the whole of his speech; for he had decidedly understood him to say, that in his opinion the time would never arrive for granting to the Catholics a participation in the rights of their fellow subjects.

said, he considered it necessary to offer an apology to the House for presuming to address them, after the brilliant and eloquent speech of the right hon. gentlemen who had just sat down. Indeed, he should not have ventured to address them that evening, if he had not been particularly called upon to do so, from the pointed manner in which that right hon. gentleman had thought proper to allude to him. And he thought on that account he was not altogether making an unreasonable request to the House, when he solicited a few moments attention from them. He was neither surprized at the speech of the right hon. gentleman, nor at his conclusion. It was not the first time he had heard that right hon. gentleman make a most brilliant display of talents, and conclude that display with a declaration of his intention of giving such a 548 miserably bad vote. He declared he knew no man more distinguished in that way than that right hon. gentleman; and in following him through his long speech, he really did not know whether he ought most to admire the brilliancy of his talents, or to lament the prostitution of them; for he could not but call the employment of great talents in a bad cause, prostitution,—the employment of those talents to produce bad and wicked impressions, (cries of Order). He confessed that one doctrine introduced by that right hon. gentleman was entirely new to him, and that was, that if any member chose to give notice of a motion on a question of great public importance, that that motion was not to be argued, but was at once to be pronounced upon. On that question, however, he was not afraid of meeting him, when it should come to be discussed. But with what propriety did the right hon. gentleman take upon him to be his lecturer upon this occasion? Was he, who composed a part of that administration who violated their promises to the people of Ireland, to stand up and abuse any gentleman who might presume to urge the violation of that solemn compact? Certainly it suited him, of all men, the least, to come forward and arraign any member for his presuming to state to the House that the solemn compact of the union bad been violated. So far from courting the approbation of the right hon. gentleman, in any measure he might think proper to bring before the House, he should really think he had not discharged his duty, if in any case it had met with his decided approbation. The right hon. gentleman seemed to have seen the claims of the Catholics in a new light that evening; for in all the debates on the Catholic question before, he had thought proper to preserve an inviolable silence. But so inconsistent was he, that while he made a most brilliant exertion, his vote went to negative his argument. The right hon. gentleman had thought proper to say, that he would give his negative to the present motion, because it went to condemn the Irish government. Admitting that that government had had law on their side, he would say, that they had taken the most effectual means of inflaming and disaffecting the Irish people. But he had heard from the first law authorities in this country, that the government had really acted quite contrary to the law. The system of sending delegates was the natural consequence 549 of what had been so often stated in parliament, namely, that those friends to the Catholics who brought forward their petition, did not speak the sense of the Catholic body. But from the late powerful and strong expressions of the sentiments of the Catholics, it would be found that they bad been speaking not the sentiments of a faction, but of the Irish people in general—the expression of united Catholic feeling. It appeared, however, that the government of Ireland were determined to stifle that expression of feeling. The right hon. gentleman had thought proper to allude to him, as representing in a peculiar manner the Catholics. He wished to inform him that he had never arrogated to himself any such distinction, and that he was the representative of as respectable a Protestant constituency as any in Ireland; but he wished him not to think that when he said this he was ashamed of representing the Catholics. He would tell him that it was his pride and his boast that he had the confidence of the Catholics. He would not at present enter into the particulars of the Catholic claims, however impressed he was with the justice of those claims, and that there could be no safety to the state till the Catholics received unqualified admission into the constitution. He differed from the right hon. gentleman with regard to his character of the Irish peasantry; for he contended that a more learned, enlightened, and liberal peasantry did not exist than those of that country, and this assertion of his with respect to them, proved only, that he, who claimed a connection with that country, was, like many others of his countrymen, but very ill-informed with the state of it. He would conclude by saying, that the ministry, by their infernal machinations, had been the means of causing the Prince on the throne to be generally reprobated, and of lowering him in the love of his subjects, and in so far might be said to have been guilty of the most diabolical machinations. He advised them to beware of continuing such measures as might inflame men to seek in desperation for a reparation of their injuries in revolution; for in the hour of revolution, every wise, honest, and conscientious man would tremble, and every wicked man rejoice. God forbid, however, that they should ever live to see such times!