

thought there was little of conciliation either in the motion of the noble lord, or the speech of the hon. gentleman 550 who had just sat down. The motion embraced two objects; namely, to canvass the conduct of the Irish government, and the claims of the Catholics. The first of these he was of opinion could not be entertained without its being shewn that, some offence had been committed; and with regard to the second he agreed with the right hon. gentleman (Mr. Canning) that the preferable and most expedient mode of procedure would be, that which the Catholics had chalked out for themselves, a Petition to the crown. With regard to the vote this night, it was impossible to come to it without having reference to what had passed among the Catholics during the last six months. Before the House consented to grant their claims, they ought to see in what manner they were likely to exercise their power when acquired. Then what necessity could be shewn for a meeting to such an extent as the Catholics had projected? Was their Petition so new a subject as to require such numbers? Were their grievances so hidden in the earth, or the redress they sought so complicated, as to need such an assemblage of peers and peers' sons to make them out? But, said the hon. gentleman, they did this to shew that they spoke the general sense of the Catholic body. Did parliament ever doubt this? Certainly not. They doubted, to a certain degree, that the number of Catholic soldiers or sailors would be enhanced by the door being opened to a few peers; but they never could doubt that every Catholic would be ready to sign a Petition claiming political power to that body. Were the House, then, prepared to say, that the Irish government was wrong in resisting this act, and that the Catholics were right in resorting to these illegal means of enforcing their claims? And this must be the consequence of agreeing to the proposed motion. In his opinion, the greatest friends of the Catholics, even those who thought them entitled to unqualified emancipation, as well as those who thought conditional security necessary, roust vote against the motion. Indeed it was strange that the noble lord should have risked the support of so many of their friends.—The hon. gentleman went on to argue, from lord Grenville's Letter, that that noble lord and his friends must give it their negative: for that noble lord had insisted on the necessity of maintaining the church inviolable, and had even opposed the presentation of a petition, praying for, the appointment 551 of a Committee, as now proposed, on the ground of the indisposition of government, and of the difficulties arising out of the Veto. Although he would not accuse that noble lord of a pertinacious adherence to his opinions for years, yet he could not believe that twenty months could create such an alteration as to induce him now to vote for such a Committee. What was the real state of the question? The law laid down certain securities for the Protestant interests, with which the Catholics were dissatisfied, and called for a concession of the whole, accusing the Protestants of throwing trifling obstacles in their way; while, on their own part, they would not concede even the very little they had in their power. They, on his side, were accused of intolerance; and when they referred, to shew the contrary, to the concessions made in 1778, 1782, and 1793, the Catholic advocates turned upon them, and said, "For these very reasons you are bound to grant us more." But would they tell them where they were to stop, and not ask to be admitted to power without those oaths which were deemed necessary to bind every other description of the subject? It was said, you have given them the reality of power in the elective franchise, &c and why do you refuse them the semblance? To this he would reply, that it never was foreseen by those who framed these measures, that such an argument could have been raised upon them; and that instead of being satisfied with the boons for their own value, they should only be considered as the grounds for further claims and more extended pretensions. He would mention one point more relative to religious prejudices. It had been charged to gentlemen on his side of the House, that they had raised the cry of No Popery; and a most serious charge it was, although altogether unsupported. But he would ask, on the other hand, whether or no pains had not been taken to inflame the passions of Catholics? And whether Liberty of Conscience had not been made the watch-word of a party? In giving his vote, however, on the present occasion, he would by means pledge himself with regard to the. Catholic question, but merely give his negative to a motion which, in the present instance, was at least unnecessary.