

said that in giving his most hearty consent to every principle so eloquently illustrated, and to every argument so ably enforced, in the speech of 552 the noble mover, he could not but express his sincere joy at the circumstances under which the question itself was brought forward. He rejoiced at seeing a proposition laid before that House, which would again bring under its contemplation, and that of the country, a subject, which he was sure the of tener it was discussed would be the nearer its attainment. I am convinced, said the noble lord, that, by the inter course being uninterruptedly maintained between the Irish Catholics and this House, it will establish a mutual confidence between them, it will give additional weight to their claims, and will give the surest earnest to the country of their intention, to pursue, firmly, moderately and legitimately, the great object they have in view. And this effect seems already in part to be produced. A right hon. and learned gentleman (Sir John Nicholl) who spoke early in the debate, seemed to take for granted a conviction on the part of the people of the impossibility of the Catholic claims ever being granted, and referred as a proof of his assertion to the absence of all Anti-catholic Addresses from your table. I will inform that right hon. and learned gentleman, that he will not have the nakedness of that table long to complain of. It is at this moment, I believe, matter of notoriety that petitions in favour of the admission of the Catholics to a participation of rights with themselves, is even now, every hour, and every where in Ireland, receiving the signatures of incalculable numbers of the Protestant population of that country, clergy, as well as gentry and freeholders, (Hear! hear!)

I rejoice at this period being fixed for the discussion of such a question. First, because the Irish Catholic will see that, from the new shape the question has assumed, the united parliament is disposed to watch with tenderness and anxiety over his interests, without being as it were forced to the discussion of them by a petition being brought up to your table; and, secondly, because that circumstances of time, circumstances of event but above all, because the conduct of the Irish government itself have now rendered the interference of parliament imperatively necessary. And what has the conduct the Irish government been? It saw a spirit, and I should be tempted to say a most noble and praiseworthy spirit, spreading itself throughout Catholic Ireland; a spirit, however, which they conceived, or 553 affected to conceive, dangerous to our establishment in that country, both of church and constitution. And how did they attempt to subdue or to destroy that spirit? I will not now enter into any discussion upon what I should be tempted to designate as at least, that very questionable instrument in the hands or government, the Convention Act. I will not ask, whether at its enactment it were capable of those objects for which it was enacted, nor still more, whether it were now capable of those objects for which it has been revived, and to which it has been applied. But certain I am, that for enforcing its power, and bringing it into action, the Irish government has placed its enforcement in the hands of the one person who, officially, was, of all men in Ireland, the most improper for it. I mean the lord chief justice of that country. I will not ask, whether in point of fact the placing the lord chief justice of Ireland in the situation, and into the functions of a police magistrate, were or were not a degradation and a misapplying of the high office he holds in that country; but I will say, that the putting him forward at such a moment, as a police magistrate, was a most absurd and wicked measure; aware as the Irish government must have been, that the Catholic, resolved as he was to persevere in the object of assembling to prepare a petition to parliament, would have rested the legality or illegality of such meetings upon the decision of a jury, it was thought fit to place the lord chief justice in the public predicament of being brought forward, as a delinquent, into his own court, at which he ought to preside, but upon whose bench, under such circumstances, he, of course, could not even have attended.