

§"We will and command, that all who 542 profess the pretended reformed religion, and ethers who have adhered to their party; of what estate, quality, or condition so ever, be held and constrained by all due and reasonable means, and under the penalties contained in the edicts already in force on this subject, to pay and discharge the usual tythes to the curates and other ecclesiastics, and to all such to whom they may properly belong, according to the usages and customs of the different provinces."*

§ I think the Catholics will have no reason to complain if the edict of Nantes be taken as the measure and mode of Protestant concession to them: and my right hon. and learned friend sees that, after that model, he has nothing to fear for the tythes of the Established Church.

§ Another point upon which my right hon. and learned friend has much insisted is, the want of the security to the crown, arising from the refusal by the Catholics of the proposed veto on the nomination of their bishops. Certainly, it may be matter of consideration, whether this would not be a reasonable and proper security; and if so, whether it might not yet be obtained. In Russia, much more than a negative on the nomination of the Catholic Bishops, by agreement (as I believe) with the Court of Rome, is exercised by the emperor, the nomination is actually made by him. The emperor appoints the bishop, and recommends him to the Pope for consecration and ecclesiastical institution, which are never refused. I know not what could be the pretext for withholding the same thing, if thought necessary and desirable here.

§ But I own it seems to me a great error to look at this question as if it were to be settled by a tedious and intricate negotiation between parliament and the Catholics, as between two hostile powers. That is, in my view, not the just notion of what ought to be an act of legislature. The

§* "DIXMES ART XXV

§"Voulons et ordonnons que tous ceux de ladite religion pretendue reformée et autres qui ont suivi leur parti, quelque estat, qualité ou condition qu'ils soient, soient tenus et contraints par toutes voyes deues et raisonnables et sous les peines contenues aux edicts sur ce faits, de payer et acquitter les dixmes aux curez et autres ecclesiastiques et à tous autres à qui elles appartiennent selon l'usage et coustume des lieux."

§ executive government must necessarily arrange the details of the measure before it is recommended to the deliberation of parliament. It is, therefore, that I do not think it necessary or useful to enter here into any discussion, as to what might or might not be the proper securities under which any farther concession might be made. Such discussion could only tend to embarrass and render more difficult the task of the executive government, just as the previous suggestion and examination of the terms of a treaty of peace in this House, would embarrass the subsequent arrangement of the articles of that treaty out of doors.

§ I hardly know whether it be necessary to say a word upon the claim of right, as set up, or supposed to be set up, by some vehement and wrongheaded friends of the Catholics, a claim utterly untenable, and one which, like the question of the repeal of the Union, hardly admits of being made matter of argument. It is not at this time of day to be made matter of dispute whether there exists a paramount right and duty in the supreme power of a state to provide for its own conservation. The question is not whether it be competent to parliament to defend the constitution by excluding from political office any class or description of persons who could not be admitted without danger; the point in doubt is not whether parliament has the right to continue the disabilities, but whether or no, the causes in which they originated having ceased to operate, it might not be expedient to strengthen the constitution, by admitting four millions of men to a participation of its benefits, and to an interest in its security, rather than to continue an unnecessary guard against the shadows of past dangers. As to the mode and conditions of their admission, parliament is to judge. Let those conditions, be as carefully contrived as the wisdom of man, as the jealousy of establishment can desire. Whatever they shall be, let parliament annex them to the boon, and then let those to whom the boon is offered, be left to accept or reject it, accompanied by these conditions.