

§ I confess, Sir, that though I despise not any fears which good men and wise men, like my right hon. and learned friend, profess to feel, I cannot contemplate the Church of England with all her piety and learning, with all her just influence, her honours and endowments, and yet apprehend that she wants strength to defend herself! This is not the time nor the place to inquire what are the real dangers to which the Church of England is exposed; but I think, that whatever they may be, they exist in very different causes, and in very different quarters from those against which we are now so loudly called upon to guard. Not but if any danger be apprehended to the Church of England, from whatever quarter, I for one, 541—and this House—and this country,—will be ready to come forward "with the most strenuous exertions in her support; a support due to her from the love and veneration of all to whom she administers consolation and hope—due even from sectaries themselves, to a church which, nursed in persecution, herself learned mercy; a church which, purified and consecrated by the blood of martyrs, has learned to extend toleration to ail conscientious dissent; a church riveted in the affections of so large a portion of the community, and inseparably allied with the state, which she sanctifies and guarantees! Such a church may surely bid defiance to any dangers with which the change of the civil state of the Roman Catholics,—from what they now are to What they aim at being,—can possibly be supposed to threaten her.

§ But I repeat, the onus probandi lies on those who affirm the church to be in danger.—One point, and (so far as I recollect,) one only, has been distinctly specified by my right hon. and learned friend. The Catholics would seek to avoid the payment of tythes to the Established Church, or even to obtain them for themselves. Now I venture to flatter myself, that I can set my right hon. and learned friend's mind somewhat more at case upon this point. Presuming his alarm to be—not that the Catholics will try to get tythes or any other species of property by force; (in that case, as I have said, force must be met by force; and that case might arise just as well tomorrow as after the repeal of all the remaining disabilities)—presuming my right hon. and learned friend's alarm to be, that after admitting them into civil office, after taking off the bar and brand of religious incapacity, it will be difficult in point of argument, to insist upon their continuing to pay tythes to the Protestant Clergy—if this be (as I imagine) the nature of my right hon. and learned friend's difficulty, I really flatter myself that I can in a great measure relieve him from it. I turn once more to that splendid instrument of Catholic toleration to which I have before referred, the edict of Nantes; and close to the article which I before read, (admitting those of the reformed religion to all offices civil and political,) I find the following enactment with respect to the payment of tythes.