

And what has, on the other hand, been the demeanour of the Irish Catholics? And I will say that, looking at the conduct of the Irish Catholic from the first period of the annunciation of the intended enforcement of the Convention act, which I date from the period of the Irish Secretary's letter, down to this moment, I cannot but contemplate it as having been such as would have ennobled the brightest page of the political history of our country. We have seen him standing forward, strong in the conviction of his power, and, I should say, strong too, in the justice of his cause, against the petulance of a government, whose violence seems to have kept pace with its 554 impotency. We have seen him, with the law in his right hand, the firm assertor of a religion, which he believes to be the right one, which he knows to be the oppressed one, resting his cause upon what he conceived its own intrinsic claims to respect, and entrusting his own fate to justice and to his country. "Methinks," says Milton in an address to parliament on the subject of unlicenced printing, some time ago quoted upon a different subject by a noble lord now in the other House, "Methinks I see a great and puissant nation rousing herself like a strong man from her sleep, and shaking her invincible locks. Methinks I see her purging and unsealing her long abused sight at the fountain itself of heavenly radiance. Whilst the whole noise of timorous and flocking birds, and of those, too, who love the twilight, flutter about, amazed at what she means, and, in their envious gabble, would prognosticate a year of sects and schisms." (Hear! hear!)

Such, Sir, and in such power, do we now see the whole Irish nation arising from slumber. We now, indeed, see the Irish Protestant clearing from his long abused sight the films of prejudice which long overhung it, and standing forward, at once the champion and the advocate of his Catholic fellow-subjects. Why, Sir, to the Irish Roman Catholic, in such a cause, success would indeed be joy, while failure cannot be disgrace. Failure cannot be disgrace, because he will have looked round him, and will have seen much of the talent, much of the integrity, and much of the real political influence of his Protestant brethren at once the patrons of his hopes, the champions of his cause, and the partners of his defeat. And is this the bond which the Irish government has ever believed that it can either disunite or destroy? And how? By the revival of a long dormant and originally questionable act, and by the publishing a circular letter from Mr. Pole to the chief magistrates of the country! Why, it is indeed a giant whose arms you have bound with this thread—a thread, which may indeed gall and irritate him, but which cannot coerce his strength for one moment, after he himself shall have chosen to exert it.—The Irish government is now contending, not with the Irish Catholics, but with the Irish people; she is no longer raising her standard against a sect, but against a nation!