

§ But I do not think that it is in a Committee of this House, such as is proposed to-night, that such a measure can most beneficially originate. The Catholics themselves do not appear to be of that opinion, for they have announced their intention of waiting till the expiration of the restrictions upon the Regent, and of then framing 544 and carrying up a petition to the throne. In this they appear to me to act judiciously. It is by a recommendation from the throne that they have received nearly all the benefits that have been conferred on them during the course of his Majesty's reign. In the delicate and complicated circumstances of a case involving so many interests and so many prejudices, and so much detail of consideration and arrangement, the executive government is alone adequate to prepare and introduce a measure calculated to answer the great object in view. A measure so prepared would be brought in the most convenient and expedient manner before this House; where it is obvious that questions requiring so much delicacy of management cannot be advantageousy discussed in all their detail. The retractation of the offered Veto is a sufficient proof of this proposition. The intention is avowed of petitioning the throne: how that petition may be received, no man is authorized to conjecture: yet there are not wanting grounds of hope to the Catholics, that it may be received favourably: in such circum stances the warmest friend of the measure might have allowed time for making the experiment, and have refrained from bringing the matter before parliament, either to intercept the coming grace of The throne, or to anticipate a disappointment, which I know not what right we have to presume.

§ No man can be ignorant of the prejudices existing in many classes of the community in this country against the concession of the Catholic claims. I can entertain no doubt that these prejudices will be gradually overcome by reflection and reasoning: because I have the strongest conviction that reason is on the side of the concession; and with time in this country reason always makes its way.

§ But nothing could tend more effectually to soften these prejudices than to see the question in the hands of the executive government, and as it is one which, in the present state of the world, cannot be put altogether aside, I do most earnestly hope that those to whom the conduct of the executive government may be committed, be their individual bias what it may, will feel it a duty to look at this question in all its detail and in all its bearings, but to look at it in all its magnitude also, and forthwith to set about the digesting such a plan as may bring it into a practical shape for equitable and final consideration.

§ The obstacle which existed to such a consideration on the part of the government, and which I am not ashamed to say I respected, and would have continued to respect, so long as it existed in full force, and which I think the Catholics themselves ought to have respected, in gratitude for former benefits, in consideration of the age, the sufferings, and the virtues of the venerable and illustrious personage to whom I allude, and in deference to those conscientious scruples, which the Catholics, claiming for themselves full liberty of conscience, are the more eminently bound to respect in others,—that obstacle, I say, being now unhappily no longer in the way, the government (in whatever hands it may be settled) has, in my opinion, no longer any ground or any excuse for leaving this great question loose, to be agitated at the suggestion of whoever may think fit to make a motion upon it. They ought to take it into their own hands. It is, if ever there was one, a question of vital interest to the safety of the empire.