

555 It is a principle on which I believe I shall scarcely be contradicted, that, before we can make it up to our own minds to oppress, or even to suspect, any man, or body of men whatever, we ought at least to ask ourselves whether we do it under any apprehension of immediate and great evil, or whether we have any hope of good resulting from such a system. And let me ask the right hon. gentlemen opposite, his Majesty's ministers, under the influence of what possible apprehension, or with the hope of what possible advantage do they still pertinaciously adhere to a system which has long been the characteristic disgrace of what has been called their government?

The right hon. and learned gentleman (Sir John Nicholl) in his speech seemed to apprehend much danger from what he termed the introduction of Catholic ambition into this House. Why, Sir, is that right hon. and learned gentleman not aware that there exist other dissentients from the established church besides Roman Catholics?—Nay, is he not aware that he is, at this moment, surrounded by dissentient members in every part of the House?—And does he really go so far as to say, that he has detected his dissenting friends in the habit of making, as he terms it, religion a stepping stone to power, of substituting polemical controversy, for parliamentary discussion? The right hon. and learned gentleman seemed again to rest much of his apprehension upon this question; "Is the Catholic religion changed since the period when the penal statutes against it were enacted?" As a political profession, Sir, Popery is most materially changed. We have heard much of the canon of the Council of Lateran, which gives the Papist a power of departing from his oath when pledged to a heretic. Does the right hon. and learned gentleman then in the teeth of the written and specific disavowal of six Roman Catholic Universities, still believe that the Roman Catholic adheres to a profligate canon, which every Catholic from one end of Europe to the other has repeatedly, through every organ of his faith, denied, and which he revolts from, and laughs to scorn, as much as the right hon. and learned gentleman himself can. If he really and sincerely believes in this cause of apprehension, the right hon. gentleman may take up every oath from your table, and bum them one after the other, for they are no longer any safeguard against the 556 encroachments of Popery. If such a position be true, the Roman Catholic may at any moment walk into this House, swear to every one of them, take his seat, and vote in the united parliament; if false, on what rests our alarm? The right hon. and learned gentleman again testifies much apprehension at what he terms the physical force of four millions of Irish papists: why, Sir, if you are afraid of them, you have either done too much, or too little. You have given them arms—nay you have forced them to take arms—if you found the Irish Roman Catholic peasant poaching on your manor, you sent him to man your fleets,—if you found the Irish peasant at his plough, you ballotted him into the militia: you have, then, given him arms;—you have forced him to take arms. And I will say, you have seen him use those arms, and bravely too, in your defence. You saw him, in the 88th regiment, entirely composed of Irish Catholics, driving the French at the bayonet's point from the heights of Busaco. You saw him again, in the 87th regiment, equally composed of Irish Catholics, tearing the French eagle from its staff on the plains of Barrosa, and it is but the other day, that you saw the same 87th defending against a superior French force the hitherto considered untenable town of Tariffa, and prepared to defend the breach with a "living wall of men." You have, then, given him arms; you have taught him to use them; you have seen him use them; but you have not given him the first incentive to a soldier's ambition, the hope of promotion for brave and honourable exertion in the duties of his profession.