

§ It would really seem as if the mighty perils with which we are surrounded, had confused our sense of the real nature of our danger. Our danger is from a mighty deluge which threatens to over whelm us:—but we are crying "fre!" as two centuries ago. The convulsions of the earth have diverted into a new channel that stream which formed the line of demarkation between the different denominations of mankind:—but we stand 539 hesitating on the brink of the ancient channel, which is left dry; and fancy it still impassable.

§ But any farther concessions to the Catholics of Ireland, it is contended, will lead to the overthrow of the established church, and therewith to that of the civil constitution. In this part of the argument it must at least be admitted that the onus probandi lies with those who mate the assertion. By what means, through what process, is this extensive mischief to be effected?—Surely those who have so clear an apprehension of the danger, can in some degree define the mode in which it is to be brought upon us.

§ The bulk of the Catholics are ignorant and unenlightened, says my right hon. and earned friend, and are under the influence of a priesthood, who are subservientto the Pope—Well: but the power of an unenlightened and ignorant multitude consists in physical force. How will that he increased by the admission of some of those who would naturally be looked up to by the multitude as their leaders into the advantages of the civil constitution, into the offices of the state, into magistracies of the law, into seats in parliament, into commands in the army?—But the danger is said to be in these very admissions. Well: then, it must be a danger if a different sort—a danger not of force, but of reason—a danger that the Catholic minister will win over his colleagues, that the Catholic colonel will seduce his regiment, that the Catholic member will persuade this House to countenance and bring about this fundamental change if the constitution. Is it in this way that he mischief is to be effected?

§ My right hon. and learned Mend professes not a enter into the particular doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church, nor even to impute in these days, to persons of that persuasion, the wicked and pestilent tenes which our oath of abjuration disclaims. On what principle then are the fears of my right hon. and learned friend founded? for surely it was in reference to those tenets that the precautions against the admission of Catholics into the state were frimed.

§ It is most true that the Catholic Religion, where predominant, is itself of an intolerant character: but although that be so, it does not follow in theory, nor is it true in fact, that in states not Catholic, that under Protestant establishment—the Catholics 540 have been found intractable and turbulent subjects. But if such attempts should be made as my right hon. and learned friend apprehends, how are they to be met? By reason: and if that should prove insufficient, by force. It would be presumptuous in me to recall the attention of my right hon. and learned friend (skilled as he necessarily is in that branch of history far beyond any knowledge of it that it can have fallen to my lot to acquire) to the history of the primitive Christian Church, before it became civilly and politically established, before it attracted the protection, and mounted the throne of the Cæsars. Yet in looking at this question as a question of reason, it is not immaterial to observe, that the pretension to exercise, or to share the sovereign authority, is not one which the history of the Roman Catholic Church would authorize it to put forward as essential to its existence.—Reason, to be sure, avails little against force; but here force and reason would be on the same side. And, should the Catholics be wicked enough as well as mad enough to attempt the establishment of their religion as the religion of the state, the attempt must be met and defeated by the same means which would be used to suppress any other mode of rebellion. Let it not be forgotten, however, all this time, that the question is not whether we shall now begin to give to the Catholics any rights, influence, and power; we have given them the means of acquiring a great moral force in society; and the question now is, whether we can annihilate the force that we have bestowed? and if not, whether we should not do wisely to reconcile them to the legitimate use of that force by assimilating it to the civil constitution?