

The Catholics were represented, on the same authority, as forming five-sixths of the population of Ireland. The number of persons of that religion, qualified to sit in parliament, from learning, talents, and property, were estimated at thirty thousand; and their clergy, who, it was stated, ought to be provided for by the state, without any condition or limitation, amounted to two thousand. This population, so described, were, it was said, not only qualified to hold all public offices, (even including that of lord lieutenant), but had an actual right to hold five-sixths of them. I ask the House, in what state would the government of Ireland be, if a committee, professing to be the full and complete representation of five-sixths of the whole population of that country, a population possessing such physical and local advantages, avowing such pretensions, and demanding such concessions, was established 576 in the metropolis—what, I ask, would be the security for the tranquillity of the country, if such a committee were allowed to sit, deliberate, and act, in Dublin?

What would you say, Mr. Speaker, if, in one of the theatres in the Hay-market, there was a convention representing four millions of the people of this country, assuming all the forms of parliament? I am convinced, if such a thing were to occur, gentlemen would rise from every corner of the House, and say it ought to be put down. If no law existed to enable government to disperse such a meeting, you would instantly pass an act to suppress it. If such would be the conduct of gentlemen, and I am confident it would, (if the case were applicable to England), surely, they ought to feel the necessity of giving the same, or even greater support to the government of Ireland: a government that does not possess the advantage and support of a resident legislature, and which has nothing to look to but its own vigilance and its own energy.

I will now state the proceedings that took place, in consequence of the conduct of the Catholic Committee which I have just described. The lord lieutenant, having taken every part of the subject into his most serious consideration, sent, on the 20th of July last, a dispatch upon it to his Majesty's ministers. In this dispatch, his grace expressed his opinion, that the government of Ireland ought to proceed against those who had manifested so unequivocal a determination to violate the law. He also observed, that be had laid the whole of the proceedings of the Catholics before the crown lawyers, who were clearly of opinion, that they were direct violations of the Convention act. Such was the substance of the dispatch seat off on the 20th of July, to ministers. It has been often said, and indeed I heard it remarked in another place, that the government of Ireland were very remiss is not communicating with the Catholics, when they found they were going too far, and warning them of the penalties which they were incurring. It had also been stated last year, that it would have been more fair, more liberal, 'and more parental' towards the Catholics, to have proceeded by way of proclamation, instead of issuing tile Circular * Words used by Mr. Ponsonby. See Vol. 19, p. 272, 577 Letter. It was said, that a proclamation would have shewn that there did not exist any intention of taking the people by surprise; that it must have had great weight with the people, and great authority from the sanction of the great law-officers of the crown. Feeling all this, and giving it all the weight it deserved, the lord lieutenant, before he received an answer to his dispatch, considered that it would be highly desirable, notwithstanding the conduct of the Catholics, to proceed with mildness; and, thinking that it was impossible that lord Fingall and the other respectable persons at the head of the Roman Catholic body, could willingly fly in the face of the law, of the known determination of government, and of the avowed opinion of parliament, his grace ordered me, on the 22nd instant, to see his lordship. On the 25th, it not being convenient to him to come sootier, lord Fingall called upon me.