

We have heard much, both in this House and out of it, of a fear that the number of conversions to our faith would be much diminished, if the Catholic religion were admitted to the same civil rights with it. To answer this argument, we need, I think, only refer it to our own feelings, and I confess that, referring it to my feelings, I should be tempted to say that, were I the representative of an old Roman Catholic family, disgusted, perhaps, with many of the ceremonial follies of my own faith, and unattached to any one of its polemical doctrines, no inducement under heaven should operate with me to make me desert the religion of my forefathers, so long as it laboured under civil incapacities, no inducement should make me place myself before the gaze of my countrymen 557 as an object for the finger of scorn and malice to point at, for the whisper of suspicion to say to, "You are the man who, it is possible, may have abandoned your religion for your interest, who may have deserted your God for political influence." Good God, Sir, it is making our Protestant religion a stigma of disgrace to its proselytes; it is rendering those proselytes themselves objects of suspicion both to the Catholics whose faith they have abandoned, and to the Protestants, whose faith they have embraced.

Then to what is it that we are to still refer the principle of exclusion which we; see acted upon by the right hon. gentlemen opposite? Do they believe the Irish Catholic to be disaffected to our constitution? No. Do they believe him to be disaffected to our government? Yes. And I do not conceive myself at all bound to apologise to the Irish Papist for so designating him. I do believe him to be very much disaffected to the English government: and that, on the best and purest principle of human nature; the principle, namely, that renders him disgusted at suspicion and indignant at restraint.

I feel, perhaps, that I ought to apologise to the House for having consumed any part of its time in endeavouring to illustrate points and to enforce arguments, which, I do believe, have long ago been strongly seen and felt by almost every gentleman that now hears me. But, before I sit down, let me implore the right hon. gentlemen opposite to me, as they value their own characters, or their country's safety, to consider well and deeply the crisis which is now fast approaching upon them. A crisis which it will be neither in their power to avert nor to delay. A crisis at which perhaps, (what may God forbid!) those claims which have hitherto come before you as petitions may assume the shape of demands, and of formidable ones. At which the Irish Catholic may no longer approach you in the tone of humble and chastened remonstrance, but in the tone and attitude of menace and defiance.

And let me implore those right hon. gentlemen to consider well and deeply, at such a crisis, the advice which it will then be their duty to give to the Prince Regent. An advice, on which will, I am convinced, depend this alternative. Whether by the adoption of at once a magnanimous, an enlightened, and an honest policy, they will enable him to conciliate 558 to himself for ever the affections of a brave, a naturally loyal and affectionate people, or whether, by still counselling him to an adherence to that system which they long recommended to his royal father, they will place him in the predicament I am sure he will then be placed in, that of himself lighting the torch of civil discord between these countries, the plunging them both in a state of horrid and hopeless civil war, that of being obliged to hoist his standard at the head of eleven millions of his subjects, and lead them forth to political, if not to actual contest, against the remaining five. (Hear! hear!)