

I will not enter into a detailed account of the proceedings or of the debates of the assembly calling itself the Catholic Committee.—I did so, in some degree, last year. It will be sufficient to say, that the Catholic Committee debated every topic that could irritate, inflame, or mislead the public mind; that the columns of the newspapers were filled with their factious harangues and proceedings; that they aped all the forms of Parliament; that they had their committees and their subcommittees; their committee of grievances; in a word, that they affected to be, and assumed the tone of, a Convention representing the whole Catholic population of Ireland. They had even carried their proceedings to such an extent, that they themselves were sensible of the dangerous lengths to which they were going. I will mention an anecdote, to shew the sense they themselves entertained of their own proceedings. During one of the violent debates which took place in the Committee, after some language of a peculiarly inflammatory and seditious nature had been used, one of the members called out to a person who was taking notes, and said, "We are going too far, you bad better not take that down." The note-taker replied, "I thought so myself, and had already shut my book." Such was the character of the proceedings of this Committee before government interfered. When I state this, need it be asked what it was that caused the Circular Letter?—If the 572 question is asked, I answer, it was because, not satisfied with debating and keeping the whole country in a ferment, they issued a circular letter in the name of their secretary, Mr. Hay, the object of which was to augment their numbers by ten representatives from each county. It was then that the government of Ireland felt that it could not consistently, with its duty to the public, adhere any longer to its system of forbearance, and that they were bound, if they meant to preserve the tranquillity of the country, to interfere.

It has been said, I understand, in another place, that the Irish Government, last year, interfered just at the moment that the Committee was about to augment its numbers, by the accession of ten respectable persons from each county, who would have repressed the violence of the others. Was that the fact? Lord Ffrench had, in consequence of the violence of their proceedings, seceded from them;—and had used the emphatic expression, "Ireland is sick of this business; do you mean to erect yourselves into a perpetual parliament?" Lord Fingall had also seceded from them, and it was the remnant, whose violence had disgusted these noble lords and the moderate part of the Catholic body, that issued this circular letter. This was the plain and simple state of the case; and I cannot avoid saying, that it is a pity, when gentlemen take so much pains to vilify government, they do not take equal pains to ascertain the facts upon which they found their slanders.

I will not dwell farther upon the proceedings of last year—I will only state, that we had hoped, that the lenity with which we acted, would have been met by a corresponding conduct on the part of the Catholic Committee. I must observe, however, that the fate of the duke of Richmond, and of those who had the honour of advising him, is rather hard. They endeavoured to prevent the mischief which they saw was likely to ensue; they determined not to allow the Committee to assemble; they intended to stop the elections, and they did stop them; the ten persons which were ordered to be returned from each county last year, in point of fact, never did assemble; and yet, because the Irish Government thought it proper to permit small bodies of the Committee to meet without molestation, it was immediately said, that they had abandoned the measures which they had rashly undertaken, and that the Catholic 573 Committee had triumphed over them. Because, however, the government have now thought proper to interfere with meetings that were likely to become dangerous to the tranquillity of the country, the epithets of madness, folly, intemperance, and intolerance, were immediately applied to them. With what justice those epithets had been so applied, I will leave to the candour of the House to determine.—When we saw danger, we acted; when we saw the public tranquillity menaced, we interfered to preserve it;—when we thought there was no danger, we suffered the Committee to proceed, in the hope that they would find out their error, and that they would not persist in a system pregnant with such general mischief.