

In the next place, what were the provisions of this act? Why its object was to prevent the election of persons to unlawful assemblies, 'under the pretence of preparing petitions, &c.' Now the obvious meaning of 'pretence' was, that something was meant to be concealed by these delegates; that they met together under false allegations; not for the purpose of preparing petitions, but for a very different object. But was there any proof that the Catholics had not met precisely for the purpose of petitioning? and if so, how, by any fairness of reasoning, could the statute in question be presumed to apply to them? The act then went on to prohibit the assembling of any persons pretending to represent any county, city, or borough, other than the Commons in parliament assembled; and this obviously applied to the self-called Convention of Dungannon. The parliament of Ireland did not mean to trench on the right of petitioning; but they knew, that under the pretence of petitioning, other illegal measures might be cloaked and covered, which it was expedient to prevent. Whenever the bona fide purpose of any set of individuals was to present a petition for the redress of grievances, to them the act would not apply; and therefore the framers of the act introduced a proviso to satisfy the most fastidious, that it should operate as an eternal prohibition of any attempt to obstruct or impede the exercise of the right of petitioning. Was any privy council, then, or any court of Justice, entitled so to construe the act as to restrict or impede this right Certainly not. The, Catholic Committee had been sitting from time, to time, from 1793 to 1810, for the purpose of preparing and presenting petitions, and it never occurred to any but the present ingenious government and to interrupt them. But then it was said, the act did not disqualify individual Catholics from petitioning; but only committee men from counties. How inconsistent was this! It was quite natural for 563 the Catholics to wish their petition to be drawn up by a numerous committee, in order that numbers of people might afterwards sign it, and it might come with all the weight which numbers could give it. Some men were better at stating a grievance than others, different grievances would of course occur to different individuals, and hence arose the necessity of appointing committee-men or agents, to draw up their petition in such a form as was likely to meet with general concurrence. Let the House consider in support of his argument the last clause of the statute of 1796, to prevent seditious assemblies (which he quoted) with the view of impressing on themselves the inestimable value of that right of petitioning, which ministers wished to abridge if not to destroy. Adverting to the proclamation issued by the Irish government in July last, authorising any magistrates to center the Catholic meetings therein mentioned, and disperse them, be would assert, that the magistrates had not a right to interfere but in cases of treason, felony, or breach of the peace. The offence for which the Catholic Committee were arraigned, was in the act itself a misdemeanour; and that could only be proceeded against by ex officio information, or by presentment of the grand jury, to be tried in a court of over and terminer. He therefore doubted extremely, the legality of the authority which the proclamation gave the magistrates to commit the persons who assembled in Liffey-street chapel. He doubted much, either the authority of government to issue, or that of the magistrates to obey such an order; and, indeed, he did not believe that one magistrate had acted upon it. It was just cause also for complaint, that the informations against the members of the Catholic Committee had been laid before the lord chief justice, that he was the person who had been applied to, when there were 800 other magistrates in Ireland who could have served the purpose as well. He thought this, to say the least of it, indecorous; and one reason for his thinking so was, in the language held by the right hon. gentleman opposite (Mr. Pole) last year, "because if any of these persons were brought to trial, he, the chief justice, must have presided on the occasion, and every stain on the administration of justice ought to be avoided." No person was less disposed than he to throw out reflections on the administration of justice: but really he thought, that the chief justice of Ireland 564 ought not to have been employed to issue a warrant against these persons. It was essential to the purity of justice, that no communication should take place between him and the crown on the subject of judicial matters; and it would at least have been decent, that one of the many police magistrates whom government had at their disposal in Dublin, should have been employed in his stead. Had a similar application been made under similar circumstances, to the lord chief justice of the court of King's-bench, in England, he (sir. A. P.) was persuaded that that noble and learned lord would have refused to grant his warrant. In saying this, he by no means intended to throw any imputation on the individual, the accuracy of whose conduct he had been questioning. For all those who were appointed to administer justice, he had a sincere respect, but he had a most important duty to discharge, that of a member of the English and Irish parliament, which called upon him to protest against any irregular proceeding on the part of the judicature, if it might not indeed be stigmatized with a more unwelcome term. All these circumstances furnished reasons for going into an enquiry into the causes which had disturbed the tranquillity of Ireland, and that at a time when his Majesty's indisposition had placed the Prince Regent in power, from whose gracious and benignant disposition the Catholics of Ireland had just reason to expect so much. Was it no impediment to the sacred right of petitioning, to say, that all the Irish Catholics, however scattered, must meet together in aggregate bodies, and not appoint committees out of the most intelligent of their number? And was it by rendering necessary the assemblage of such large bodies of men, that government thought they would best prevent the occurrence of riots, tumults, and disorders in Ireland? Was it the design of ministers to implicate the Prince Regent in their proceedings against Ireland? If so, he trusted they would be effectually disappointed. He should certainly give his most hearty assent to the motion of his noble friend.