

Before I proceed to the consideration of that part of the conduct of the Irish government which more immediately claims the attention of the House, I must beg leave to allude very shortly to what passed last session. The House cannot have forgotten the Circular Letter* which was issued, about which so much had been said, and which had given rise to so much wit. That letter was certainly issued in my name, but it was framed and drawn up, as I stated at the time, by the law officers of the crown. I am far from *See Vol. 19, p. 1. 567 wishing to disclaim any responsibility which belongs to me, for any part that I took in that transaction; but I cannot help lamenting, that when a solemn instrument had been issued by the government, it should, for bad purposes, have been turned into ridicule, and represented as the hasty composition of an arrogant man. That letter, when it was discussed in this House last session, underwent a solemn investigation. I remember the motion of the right hon. and learned gentleman opposite to me, (Mr. Ponsonby)* on the subject, and I feel, that I ought to call the attention of the House particularly to it, because I mean to build an argument upon it, which will be of material consequence in the consideration of the present question.

The right hon. and learned gent., upon that occasion, objected to the proceedings of the Irish government on three grounds:

First, That it was impolitic to have recourse to the Convention act at the time and under the circumstances the Irish government attempted to enforce it.

Secondly, That if the Irish government felt it absolutely necessary to act upon fire law, they ought to have proceeded by way of proclamation, instead of issuing a circular letter.

Thirdly, That the Convention act only attached upon those who had attended the meetings described, voted, and acted, but that, in the Circular Letter, the magistrates were called upon to arrest, and hold to bail those who attended, or voted, or acted. These were the objections taken by the right hon. and learned gentleman, but it never was asserted by that the Construction, Which the Irish government had put upon the act of parliament, was hot the true and legal construction, and that the law was inapplicable to meetings of the description "in question. Here Mr. Ponsonby manifested some dissent from Mr. Pole's statement.] I am convinced that I am correct in my assertion, and have no doubt, that I shall be able to Convince the House, and even the right hon. and learned gentleman, that my recollection upon the subject is accurate. The right hon. and learned gentleman had; as I have before stated, contended that the Circular Letter was wrong in asserting, that any person who attended or Voted, or acted at any of the meetings alluded to, were guilty of a misdemeanor, *See Vol. 19, p. 269. 568 because he said, in that case any person who attended innocently, without taking any part in the business, or who even attended for the purpose of dispersing the meeting, might be arrested and held to bail. If I am wrong in my recollection upon this subject, if the fight hon. and learned gentleman really did doubt the legality of the proceedings of the Irish government, I should be glad to know how it happened, that he merely contented himself with moving for papers, and that he never brought forward any specific motion against the Irish government for acting illegally? Was it not most strange and unaccountable, if the right hon. and learned gentleman and his friends on the other side thought that the Irish government had acted illegally upon that occasion, that not one of them had felt it necessary to bring the matter before the House, although it sat for months after the discussion I allude to?—Sir, I must also observe, that in the long discussions which afterwards took place on the Catholic Petition, throughout the whole of that debate, not a syllable was uttered against the conduct of the Irish government. If the gentlemen opposite thought that the government had acted illegally, surely upon that occasion they would have mentioned it. I attended the House during that debate for the purpose of defending the Irish government, if any attack had been made upon it; but not one word respecting the illegality of the proceeding was mentioned by any gentleman on the other side of the House. But, Sir, I must mention one more Circumstance, which will put the matter out of all doubt: an hon. gentleman on the other side of the House (Mr. Hutchinson) gave notice, last session, of a motion to repeal the Convention act: that hon. gentleman, however, did not bring it forward; and in stating his reason for not doing so, he praised the Irish government for the lemency of their conduct, and said he was glad to find that they did not mean to enforce that law I felt it my duty to undeceive him I got up and desired that he would not forego his motion on that ground, I told him that the opinion of the Irish government remained unaltered; and that if the lord lieutenant saw the same reason for putting the few in force that his grate had before seen, he would undoubtedly do so.* Not- *See Vol. 20, p. 575. 569 withstanding this declaration on my part, the hon. member did not press his motion. Thus the matter stood at the end of last session. When, therefore, I returned to Ireland, I contend that the Irish government had a right to feel with perfect confidence that their conduct was approved of by this House, not only that they enjoyed such approbation, but that there was no idea entertained by any man in it, that their construction of the law was not a just and correct one. Every man in Ireland was acquainted with what had passed in this House in the last session; every man knew that the conduct of the Irish government had met with the approbation of parliament, and knew also that the legality of that conduct had not been questioned by a single individual. Under these circumstances, could I possibly have imagined, not only that the legality of that conduct would now have been questioned, but that the government should be accused with having taken the people of Ireland by surprise? Surprise! after every part of the conduct of the Irish government had been fully discussed; after every man in Ireland had been made acquainted with the detail, and with the result of these discussions, and after the public declarations which I had made in this House, that it was the firm determination of the government to enforce the Convention act, if the Committee again had recourse to their former measures.