

, of Kerry, agreed in every thing which had fallen from the right hon. gentleman on the floor (Mr. Canning), and felt as enthusiastic as himself in the cause of the Roman Catholics. He could not pretend to add any thing to the speech of the right hon. gentleman, and merely meant to state, that the right of petitioning had not been infringed, and that the Irish government had done every thing in their power to avoid coming to extremities with the Irish Catholics. For this reason he wished the House to go into the Committee.

wished to know when it was supposed the time would arrive that might be proper for granting the claims of the Catholics? His right hon. and learned friend (Sir. J. Nicholl) had said that when the Irish people were educated, when they were conducted from ignorance to knowledge, and from turbulence to order, that would be the period for taking the subject into consideration. For his part, as he did not pretend to dive into futurity, he could not be supposed to know exactly when that time might come; but really he had no very great hope that he should ever live to see the period when, according to the ideas of his right hon. and learned friend, it might be advisable to take the claims of the Catholics of Ireland into consideration. The right hon. gentleman who followed his right hon. and learned friend in the debate, and whose brilliant and animated speech no one could admire more than himself, had urged the Catholic claims with giant strength, but after putting to flight all the arguments of the opponents of those claims, and dispersing them like chaff before the wind, the right hon. gentleman did at last conclude—"Oh, conclusion most lame and impotent!"—that because his hon. friend (Mr. Hutchinson) had 559 given notice of a motion on the subject of the Union in March next, he could not enter into the consideration of the state of Ireland at present!—The right hon. gentleman had also stated that when the motion before the House was disposed of—and there could be little doubt of the way in which it would be disposed of—that then the subject would be fit for the consideration of the executive government; and that afterwards, when all pre judices were subdued and when all irritation had subsided, he should think it the time to come forward and give the proposition his concurrence. Thus he (sir A. P.) was left in altogether as hopeless a situation by the right hon. gentleman as by his right hon. and learned friend; for he could not, nor could any man foresee the period of that golden age when prejudices should totally disappear from the earth.—In a question so important to the vital interests of the country he should have concluded that no time ought to be lost, and that no compliance with the wishes of any court—no supposed consideration of what might be agreeable to this or to that quarter—would be allowed to have weight with parliament. He thought it was their duty fully to enquire into the present alarming state of Ireland, and into the nature and consequences of the measures of his Majesty's government there, which in his opinion required much explanation and justification. It was with great satisfaction that he saw the right hon. gentleman who was minister for Ireland, and must therefore be supposed to have originated and conducted those measures, in his place; for it was that right hon. gentleman's duty to explain the way in which Ireland had been driven from the quiet situation in which it was before the enterprises of the Irish government, into its present state of dangerous agitation.—If his Majesty's ministers would condescend to name any time at which they would be disposed to enter into the question—if they would say in fifteen days for instance—he would not object to the delay (although he should certainly think that even that was too great a postponement of such an important consideration) but they would say no such thing; and he was persuaded that at the expiration of any given period his Majesty's ministers would be as little disposed to consent to the discussion of the question as at the present moment. It was therefore cruelly trifling with the feelings of the Catholics 560 to play off this political pantomime upon them; to say to them "your claims are fit to be received, but they are not fit to be now received;" and to point out to them no precise period at which their case might be taken into consideration. But as his Majesty's ministers did not think proper to point out any time at which the Catholic claims might be taken into consideration; it was for the House to consider the subject themselves—to consider if it was fit to be entertained at any time; and if fit to be entertained at all, why it was not fit to be entertained now. What was the situation of the empire? Was it safe that things should remain in their present state? The Union had been the occasion of feeding the Catholics—he could not say with promises, but certainly with expectations of success. Notwithstanding all that had been said of what had been done by the legislature for the Catholics, the fact was that excepting some little regulations of trade, nothing had been done for them since the year 1793; the act of which year contained a long list of offices from which Catholics were to be excluded. In 1801, at the period of the Union, it was held out to the Catholics that all local prejudices against them would be removed by transferring the question to a united parliament, from whose impartial justice they would obtain that relief for their grievances for which they had hitherto sought in vain. But from 1801 to 1812—during that long period of 11 years—in what situation were the Catholics of Ireland? They were like subjects out of the pale of the constitution; their case could not be taken into consideration for a reason so well known to every person in the House that it was superfluous to allude more forcibly to it. During that period they had been more like outcasts than subjects. Subject no doubt they were to the legislature; they were subject to the payment of taxes, but all consideration of their complaints was waved. The only consolation which any good subject could feel amidst his distress for the unhappy state of his Majesty, was that the consideration of the grievances of Ireland was thereby opened to parliament, and that the functions of the legislature, which had so long been suspended, need no longer be so; for it was quite impossible, and indeed would be as absurd as false, to suppose, that the august person who now administered the government of the realms did not feel himself free to listen to the 561 advice of parliament on that, as well as on any other question of national importance. There had formerly been some obstacles about a coronation oath, or some nonsense of that sort; as if an oath imposed by the legislature on the executive magistrate was for ever to prevent the legislature itself from making such provisions as the good of the nation appeared to them to require! According to this absurd doctrine, the supreme will of the legislature, consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, was to be fettered and entirely suspended in consequence of an oath which the same legislature had formerly prescribed! He repeated that it was one of the consolations which they had in the present afflicted state of the sovereign, that they were now at liberty to enter fully into the discussion of this great and important subject. As to presenting Petitions by delegation, he most state, that ever since the year 1757, before the Catholics of Ireland had the miserable privilege of reclaiming a little bog, or possessing an acre of arable-land, (unless at a certain distance from a town), they had been accustomed to present their petitions by committee-men of their own choice. These committee-men had at all times negotiated with government on the subject of their petitions, and had frequently been introduced to his Majesty by his secretary of state. In the very year 1793, when this Convention Act was passed, an act of Parliament was also passed, granting farther privileges to the Catholics, and stating in the very preamble of it their peaceable and royal demeanour? It therefore certainly could not have been against them that this act was intended, and yet, from the duke of Bedford's government of Ireland, in 1757, down to that time, they had always been in the habit of acting by delegation through representatives and Committee men. An not of parliament was always best explained by he history of the circumstances which gave rise to it; and it was very well known what gave occasion to the statute in question. In the year 1793 there was a convention of delegates for the province of Ulster that met at Dungannon and assumed all the authority of another parliament. No one subject connected with politics escaped them; peace and war, grievances and reform, were the subjects of their deliberation, and they at last came to resolutions, which went to change the whole constitution of the country. After sitting for some time, 562 they invited a more general convention to meet at Athlone, delegated from all parts of the country, and for similar purpose". It was under these circumstances that the Convention Act was passed; but so far from that statute having any Committee of Catholics for its object, there was actually such a committee sitting in Dublin at the time when it was framed, and in full and frequent communication with government.