

I told his lordship that the lord lieutenant had desired me to acquaint him, that the very high respect he entertained for him, and the thorough good opinion he had of his loyalty and public spirit, had induced him to direct me to express to his lordship, that, from the Resolutions which had appeared in the newspapers, with his name affixed to them, and also from some accounts which had been published of some returns of representatives from parishes in Dublin, for the purpose of forming a meeting of delegates, of the nature stated in those Resolutions, and which it was the opinion of his Majesty's law servants would be illegal; his grace was apprehensive that the Catholics were about to proceed in a manner which would make it necessary for his Majesty's government to take their conduct into serious consideration, with a view to those measures to which it might be his duty to resort; that I was therefore to communicate with his lordship upon the subject: in order that he might be apprised of the lord lieutenant's feelings upon it. I pointed out to his lordship the danger that was likely to result from the meeting of a committee so constituted, and I entered into a comparison between the Resolutions of the committee passed in May, 1809, (readopted in 1810,) and those passed on the 9th of July last. I observed, that in the former all representation was denied, but that in the latter, no such reserve was made. I did not attempt to compare either of the committees with those of 578 former days, as has been done by the learned gentleman. Lord Fingall would have laughed at me if I had done so, for he really knows something of Ireland.—Lord Fingall said, that he was of opinion, that the addition of the peers and the prelates to the committee would give such a preponderance to the loyal and temperate, that no mischief need be apprehended. I beg the House will mark the absurdity of this. We were to trust to the high rank, authority, and loyalty of the peers and prelates, to guard us against the mischief we apprehended, when it was well known that in the preceding year, when the committee was not near so numerous, neither lord Fingall nor his friends could check the violence and intemperance of the factious part of it.

I reminded his lordship of what passed last year in the committee, when he, lord Ffrench, and others, were so disgusted that they were under the necessity of seceding. I told him that the introduction of ten persons from each county would, in all probability, add to the preponderance of the democratic part of the committee over the peers and prelates; and that therefore I was convinced he would not be able to wield this great machine, having already failed in giving a proper direction to a lesser one. I concluded with informing him, that, under all the circumstances of the case, the government felt itself bound to take some serious steps to avert the, threatened danger; that these-steps would not be taken without due deliberation; and that whatever the measures of government might be, his lordship should be apprised of them. The interview then terminated.