

I now come to that part where it is necessary that I should enter into a detail of the measures of the Irish government, which have called forth the animadversions of the hon. and learned gentleman. When I returned to my duty in Ireland, it was impossible for me not to consider, that parliament had sanctioned the conduct of the Irish government, and that the lord lieutenant would be fully warranted in proceeding as he had formerly done, if the necessity of the case, in his judgment, required it.

I shall now proceed, with the leave of the House, to state the circumstances that led to the proclamation as shortly as I can; and detail, with the most unreserved candour, all the subsequent proceedings of the Irish government. On the 9th of July last, an aggregate meeting of the Catholics was held in Dublin; at this meeting certain Resolutions were entered into. With the permission of the House, I will state what was the nature of those Resolutions, and in what they differed from those passed in the preceding January. By the Resolutions of the 24th of May, 1809, readopted in 1810, it was resolved, "that the noblemen and gentlemen are not representatives of the Catholic body, or any portion thereof, or shall they assume or pretend to be representatives of the Catholic body, or any portion thereof."

When I was arguing this question last year, I stated, that there was enough in this Resolution to afford a ground for belief that the Catholics had the Convention act in their mind, and that they would not violate it. But, on the 9th of July last, the meeting, aware of the construction of the Convention act, aware of all the agitation that had been excited in Ireland, 574 aware of the opinion expressed by parliament upon the subject, and aware of the declared determination of the Irish government not to suffer the continuance of such practices; the meeting, aware of all these things, resolved, (leaving out the Resolution which I have just read, disclaiming all representation, that the Committee should be re-appointed, and that the said Committee should consist of the Catholic peers of Ireland, of their eldest sons, of the Catholic baronets of Ireland, of the prelates of the Irish Roman Catholic Church," (appointed then for the first time,) "of ten persons from each county in Ireland, and of five persons from each parish in Dublin, and the survivors of the delegates of 1793."This was the mode in which the aggregate meeting of the Catholic body, with lord Fingall at their head, thought proper to proceed—the very persons against whom it was said, that the Irish government had acted with intemperance and intolerance; and, as if they were determined to remove every doubt that might by possibility exist of their real intentions, they determined that, until the new Committee should be assembled, "the management of the Catholic affairs should be confided to the Catholic peers, baronets, and survivors of the delegates of 1793." This was the first time, as I have already stated, that the Roman Catholic prelates of Ireland had ever been appointed to constitute a part of such a Committee. The meeting thus constituted would have amounted to about 473 persons. This convention of the three estates of the Roman Catholic body, (for a more complete convention of these estates it was impossible to conceive,) was appointed to meet in Dublin. I will fairly own, that when the lord lieutenant, and those who had the honour of advising him, saw those Resolutions, they were struck with the danger that might result from them. They felt that it was a melancholy thing, that a man of lord Fingall's rank and character, should lend himself to such proceedings, particularly after what he had witnessed the year before, when he found that all his attempts were vain to repress the violence and factious language manifested in the debates, and when he found that their proceedings were of so dangerous a nature, as to render it necessary for him to secede. The government felt also, that in consequence of the Resolutions to which I have adverted, all those persons who had distinguished themselves 575 in the Old Committee for their violence and turbulence; who had exerted themselves with the greatest assiduity and zeal to promote general irritation and discontent, would be members of the New Committee; and in fact, there was not a man, no, not a single man, who had ever made a factious speech in the Old Committee, who was not chosen to form a part of the new. This Committee, then, with the advantage, if I may use the expression, of all the experienced advocates of faction of the Old Committee, and all the strength which would be derived from the members that were to be returned from the counties, if allowed to sit in defiance of the law, and to act, as they most undoubtedly would have acted, must have virtually annulled the government. If such a Convention, (for I cannot with propriety give it any other name,) even if assembled for any purpose however legal, had been allowed to sit in the city of Dublin, it would have been impossible to have been responsible for the peace of that city for one moment. What were these people who were thus constituting themselves into so formidable a body? I will tell the House in their own language. They state themselves to be the representatives of four millions of Roman Catholics, who "occupy the most valuable positions, whether for commercial, or for military purposes. The boldest coasts, most navigable rivers, and most tenable passes, the most fertile districts, the richest supplies of forage, the readiest means of attack or defence."