

§ The discussion, however, being now forced upon me, I have do hesitation in declaring, that I am not one of those who think, that at no period further privileges may not be granted to the Catholics; but, at the same time, I am bound to declare, that I never have seen any plan proposed which afforded even a plausible hope that the claims of the Catholics could be granted, with a due regard to the safety of the establishments in church and state. It appears to me to be impossible to put the 593 Roman Catholics upon the same footing with the Protestants, without endangering those establishments. But I am open to conviction, and I might appeal to my conduct in Ireland, during the period of my residence there, a great part of which has been passed in troublesome times, whether I have ever given any reason to suppose, that I was inclined to go one inch further against the Catholics than was actually necessary to protect the constitution.

§ Sir, in my opinion, the Catholics have now assumed a tone, and adopted a line of conduct, which render it impossible for parliament to alter their condition, as long as they persist in the same course, and maintain the same menacing attitude. I do not mean to accuse the Catholic body itself; my observations apply to the committee; but the committee being declared to be the organ of the whole Catholic body, they are, of course, implicated in every act of that committee. The House will recollect, that, in the Catholic proceedings of last year, one of their members stated the progress made by the sub-committee of grievances in their report on the penal laws. At a subsequent meeting, it was determined, that 500 copies of that report should be printed. The first part of this work has been published by Mr. Fitzpatrick, and in such a manner as makes it evident, that it has the sanction of the committee.—I think it impossible, if this book has the authority which I have stated it to have, for any one to say, it does not come forward as the deliberate work of the Catholic committee, speaking the language of the Catholic body;—and, if so, I am sure no man can say it would be safe or proper to giant what is therein demanded.

§ I will just state what it professes to be. Its title is, "A Statement of the Penal Laws which aggrieve the Catholics of Ireland."—Has any gentleman a doubt of its being the production of the Catholic Committee? ["Yes, I, have," exclaimed Mr. Parnell.] The hon. gentleman doubts it, does he? I think I can easily satisfy him on that point. The report the committee is published by Fitzpatrick, in Capel Street; now I beg to read a short extract from a book published by the same person, some days after, and compiled by a Mr. Hamilton. It contains a great deal of matter which is very amusing; it contains all the libels that were written against me in the newspapers, in the course of the year. It is entitled, "A Statement of the 594 Catholic Cause, from the issuing of Mr. Pole's Circular Letter to the present day." The passage which I wish to read is as follows: "It was thought, and justly too, that the people of England were, and indeed still are, ignorant of the nature and extent of the restrictions which oppress, the Catholics of Ireland, and that even the sufferers themselves were not aware of all the privations and grievances to which they were and are liable. The report of the sub-committee is, we understand, fall and luminous, consisting of 124 sheets, evincing much labour and research, and interspersed with a highly-talented commentary." To this passage is annexed the following note: