

§ There was another curious meeting of the same kind at Waterford: a right hon. baronet (Sir. J. Newport) attended it, and made a good common-place speech about Catholic emancipation; but did he, like a good privy counsellor, advise those whom he was addressing, to consider how far they might be guilty of violating the law? However, not seeing the right hon. baronet in his place, I shall not animadvert any more upon what passed at that meeting.

§ I come now to that part of the subject on which I shall have occasion to say a word or two on the issuing of the Lord Chief Justice's warrant. Sir, it would be presumptuous in me to enter into any discussion upon the legal part of the question; shall leave that to be argued by my learned friends near me. I shall only observe, that it was impossible for the lord lieutenant to receive the construction of the law from any body but the law-officers of the crown, and it affords me 584 great satisfaction to find their opinion confirmed by the unanimous decision of the court of King's bench. I think it necessary, however, to vindicate the character of the lord lieutenant, and those who had the honour to advise him, from one of the foulest, and basest, and falsest aspersions that ever was thrown out against any public men; I allude to what has been said respecting the signature of the warrant by the lord chief justice. It has been said, I understand, that the lord chief justice was a man of the highest integrity and talents, and not likely to have taken such a step, but that it was by the 'contrivance' of the Irish government that he was induced to sign the warrant. What is meant by the word 'contrivance?' It must mean something improper;—it means that the lord chief justice had been induced by management or by trick to do something that he would not otherwise have done. Now, what was the plain fact? When it was determined to proceed against persons supposed to have transgressed the law, all informations of course were, brought to me in my official capacity, and I immediately sent them to the crown solicitor, in order that they might be and before the law-officers. The crown lawyers recommended that the persons who had violated the law should be proceeded against, and they at the same time recommended that the warrant which was to be issued against them should be signed by the lord chief justice, stating it to be the common practice in matters of great moment, especially in a case where the law had been so openly violated, that a chief justice's warrant should be issued, and being of opinion, that the solemnity of this proceeding, might have the beneficial effect of detering others from following a similar course. This, Sir, is the true state of the case, and this was the 'contrivance' used by the Irish government to induce the chief justice to affix his signature to the warrant! I never saw the chief justice's warrant except in print; and whether he was right or wrong, is not for me to say; it is sufficient for me to have stated the facts.