

§ The hon. and learned gentleman has alluded to what fell from me, last year, when I said that I had not recommended the taking the benefit of the chief justice's opinion at a council, or giving his authority to a proclamation; because, if any person were to be tried for offending against the law, he would probably be 585 their judge; and I did not wish to throw a stain on the purity of a court of justice; and the learned gentleman asked, why we had not now proceeded upon the same principle? It is very true, that I did use the words the learned gentleman has read, and from the appearance of the paper from which he read them, I suspect it is the same that was used, for a similar purpose, in another place. But the learned gentleman has forgot to state to the House, as the other person did, who bad quoted my speech, that the observation was made in reply to a remark of the right hon. and learned gentleman (Mr. Ponsonby) opposite to me; that if we had proceeded by proclamation, we might have had the benefit of the chief justice's opinion, and all the weight of his authority. Sir, there is, in fact, a most material difference between the two cases; in the former, the chief justice would have actually been called upon to give ah opinion upon the legal guilt or innocence of the parties, before the period of trial, whereas the issuing of the warrant involved no opinion whatever; but was merely an act performed, in the regular and ordinary discharge of his official duty, as a magistrate. Another material difference between the two cases is, that before the issuing the proclamation, and the lord chief justice's warrant, the Irish government had had the sanction of parliament for the whole of their proceedings, as well as for their construction of the Convention Act.

§ An attempt has been made to raise a clamour against the Irish government, for proceeding against lord Fingall; and it has been represented in the newspapers, here to-night, and in another place, as an intentional insult to the whole Catholic body. This is an objection that I did not expect to hear, from those who profess to be advocates for the equal and impartial administration of justice. Upon what principle of justice, I beg to ask, could the Irish government, in a case where persons of high, and persons of low rank, had equally violated the law, pass by the former, and prosecute the latter? It appears to me, that if any difference was to be made, the person of rank and fortune ought rather to be the person prosecuted, because he has the means of knowing better, and his example is more likely to be productive of mischief. But the lord lieutenant admitted of no such distinctions. He knows only those who obey, and those who violate the law. He makes no difference 586 between peer and peasant, between Catholic and Protestant.

§ Sir, there is one point of view in which this subject has struck me, that I beg leave to state to the House. We are accused of madness, felly, and intemperance, because, under the authority of the advice of the law-officers of the crown, in both countries, we endeavoured to put down a complete convention, representing the three estates of the Roman Catholics of Ireland; a convention, in which there were persons who have shewn that they would not stop at any thing short of a separation of the two countries. [Here some gentlemen on the other side expressed their dissent.] If gentlemen will take the trouble of reading the debates of the Committee, they will find that separation was distinctly and openly recommended, and that every argument, every topic of declamation, that ingenuity could suggest, was made use of to throw the two countries into confusion, and to set the people of Ireland against those of England. I put it to the House, whether, if the Irish government believed that to be the case, and that they had the opinion of the law officers of the crown justifying that presumption, they would not have been justly censured, had they allowed the convention to sit in the city of Dublin? Could the convention have been suffered to sit from day to day, with any degree of propriety, or without manifest danger to the public tranquillity? Suppose the Irish government had vainly believed, that it could have sat without danger, that, contrary to the opinion of the law-officers of the crown, they had allowed it to meet; and suppose, that by the intemperance of any one individual, blood had been shed, or any mischief had ensued; what then would have been said of that government? I ask, whether the gentlemen opposite to me, would not have been the first to accuse us, and justly too, for having grossly neglected our duty, and endangered the safety of the state? Will any man tell me, that an assembly, constituted like the one which I have described, without a crown to dissolve, without a speaker to restrain it, could sit in the city of Dublin, without endangering the public tranquillity? What justification could the Irish government have offered, if they had allowed this convention to sit, and any mischief had ensued? Would not the gentlemen opposite to me have said, you knew that this was an illegal meeting; the law officers of the crown told 587 you it was an illegal meeting; they advised you to proceed, and they pointed out the means with which the constitution had invested you to put down such meetings. You have neglected your duty by not taking this advice, and you are responsible for the mischiefs that have occurred. What answer could the Irish government have made to such a charge? I have not put an extreme case, and unless party spirit and political hostility have destroyed all candour, the gentlemen, on the other side of the House, must admit, that we could not have adopted a different course consistently with our duty.