

§ The House, Sir, is now in possession of the facts; and I have no doubt that, under all the circumstances of the case, it will be of opinion, that, if the lord lieutenant tad not enforced the law, he would have been guilty of a gross dereliction of his duty.

§ After the issuing of the proclamation, a great ferment was excited in Ireland; the government was assailed from all quarters, and particularly by the factious prints, with the grossest abuse; and the most violent of the agitators proceeded to have meetings held in the different counties of Ireland, for the purpose of making the people believe that the elections were going, on, according to the resolutions of the Catholics: in fact, however, they were held in such a way as not to come 582 within the provisions of the Convention act. The intention evidently was, to proceed in such manner as to have it supposed that these four millions of Catholics had peaceably, and without opposition, elected representatives to manage their affairs in this new Committee. These meetings were held for the most part during the assizes, but they were conducted in such a manner that it was almost impossible to find out what passed at them. Even in the county which I have the honour of representing, where it may naturally be supposed I have some interest, and could obtain the earliest information, two days elapsed before I could get a copy of their resolutions. Attempts were daily made to make the people believe that the elections were going on publicly, and in open defiance of the government and of the law. The fact, however, was, that they did not venture to act in open opposition to the law in any one county, after the issuing of the proclamation, except in the county of Meath, where lord Fingall presided, in consequence of which, proceedings were ordered against his lordship, and some of the other leading persons who were present. It had been insinuated that the magistrates were afraid to act, though the Catholics openly violated the law; but this was not the fact. The meetings were held in such a manner as to keep within the letter of the law.

§ Sir, I can mention a curious instance to prove this assertion:—There was a gentleman (whose name, I have no doubt, will be received by the gentlemen on the other side with a cheer) I mean major Bryan, who was sent over here last year with an address to the. Prince Regent, signed, as it had been stated, by 29,000 persons, for the removal of the duke of Richmond, and of his chief secretary. From the language and conduct of this gentleman, it might naturally have been supposed that here was a stout champion, who would have boldly expounded the law in a way different from that adopted by government: but what was the fact? When the proclamation of the Irish government was stuck up at Kilkenny, I was informed that major Bryan bad posted up one of his manifestoes along side of it; and we were told by the newspapers that the proclamation, from that moment, was no better than waste paper.—I certainly then thought that this great champion, by this proceeding, was determined on grappling with the government, and disputing the 583 validity of its proclamation. I naturally concluded that the gallant officer's Notice would have run thus:—"Whereas a meeting of the Catholics of Ireland was held on the 9th July last, at which it was resolved, that ten representatives should be elected in each county in Ireland; and whereas a proclamation has been issued by government, stating, that such elections are indirect violation of the Convention act; now we, being of opinion that such proclamation is not in itself justified by law, are determined to meet, for the purpose of electing the said representatives. We therefore call on the inhabitants of the county and city of Kilkenny to assemble on the 6th August, in order to proceed to the said election."—But what, Sir, was my surprise when I inquired into the nature of the gallant major's notice, and found, that, instead of its being an open avowal of his carrying the resolutions of the Catholics into effect, it was only an innocent paper, requiring a general meeting of the Catholics of the county and city of Kilkenny, on the 6th of August, "to take into consideration the propriety of concurring with the general petition of the Catholics of Ireland, and adopting those measures necessarily connected with petitioning."—The Resolution of the Catholics was to elect ten representatives; instead of which the meeting at Kilkenny, contented itself with passing nine resolutions, which were quite as innocent as the gallant major's notice.