

§"Resolved, That in the measures pursued by the administration of Ireland for some years, we have observed, with regret and indignation, a spirit of progressive intemperance, and exasperating intolerance, arising from the impolicy of those rulers, as well as from their ignorance of the country they have undertaken to govern."

§ Sir, these Resolutions are signed by lord Fingall. I really feel quite ashamed to trouble the House so much at length, but the character of the Irish government is implicated, and I hope I shall be excused. It is remarkable, that fourteen months before lord Fingall signed the resolutions which I have just read, that noble lord, at a meeting of freeholders of the county of Meath, moved a vote of thanks to lord Wellington. Now, if during the time lord Wellington had the honour of being one of the duke of Richmond's advisers, that noble duke had manifested a spirit of" progressive intemperance and exasperating intolerance." against the Roman Catholics, lord Fingall, most undoubtedly, would not have proposed such a vote of thanks to lord Wellington. It follows then, of course, that all that intemperance and intolerance must have been manifested during the time I have bad the honour of being one of his grace's confidential advisers. Now I will challenge any man, whatever, to bring forward a single instance of intolerance on my part towards the Roman Catholics—nothing will give me more satisfaction than to have every measure, which I have recommended, examined with the utmost rigour. Is the repeal of the Insurrection Act a proof of intolerance? Is the modification of the Arms Act, by which very considerable powers were taken from the magistrates, a proof of such a disposition? By the latter act, as it at first stood, magistrates were authorised to enter any house to search for arms, of their own authority, and without any information on oath.—By the amended act, that power is taken away from them, and the whole responsibility thrown upon the government. Is the Gaol Act, the benefit of which has been universally felt and acknowledged, a proof of any intolerant feeling?—I have carefully looked over all the prominent measures of the duke of Richmond's administration, and I cannot trace any one act which deserved those epithets; and I am sure that I can 591 assert with safety, that his grace never Sir having concluded all assert with safety, that his grace never meant to act towards that part of his Majesty's subjects, whose case is under consideration, bat with the utmost mildness and conciliation. If any gentleman is disposed to controvert my assertion, let him state the case in which the duke of Richmond's administration has manifested any symptom of intolerance, and I will answer him, and shew by the most decisive documents that the charge is unfounded.

§ In order that the House may see the spirit with which these things are conducted, I will read two Resolutions which were passed in September 1810, at an aggregate meeting of the freeholders and citizens of Dublin, held for the purpose of petitioning for the repeal of the Union. A great number of Catholic gentlemen were present; among others, Mr. O'Connel, who took an active part upon that occasion, as well as at the meeting in December last, when the violent Resolutions against the duke of Richmond were passed.—The Resolutions I am now about to read were carried with acclamation, and will shew the opinion then entertained by those gentlemen, of the duke of Richmond and his government.—I will not give any epithet to their conduct, but leave it to the public to decide upon its consistency.