

§ At the meeting of the 23d December, there were about 300 delegates present, according to the best information that could be collected. After they had been dispersed, in the manner which I have stated, they immediately repaired to an-other place, where they assembled in smaller, but still in considerable numbers. The magistrate followed them thither, and' asked them if they were an adjourned meeting of the Catholic Committee? They replied, they were not; that they were merely met as individuals; and upon that assurance he left them unmolested. From this it was obvious, that if they had wished to call an aggregate meeting to consider their petition, they would not have been impeded. In fact, they did determine to call an aggregate meeting, and it assembled on the 26th of December, at ten o'clock in the morning. Those delegates 589 who had come to town to attend the Committee, having remained in Dublin, were all present at this meeting. Now, Sir, if, as it has been contended, it was necessary, for the more effectually preparing the petition, to have the assistance of persons from all parts of Ireland, here an opportunity had offered of the most favourable nature. Here were the ten representatives from each county, and the five persons from the parishes, &c. assembled as individuals, and assisted by the collective wisdom of a very large and respectable body of Catholics. Here was no fear of molestation from the government. Here lord Fingall was in the very same chair; Mr. Hay sat as secretary, with the very same petition in his pocket, which he was about to read to the Committee on the 23d, when it was dispersed; but did it ever occur to the persons present to avail themselves of a combination so fortunate, if the object really was to ascertain the opinions from all quarters of Ireland on the terms of the petition? no such thing! not one word was mentioned about the petition; their time was occupied in discussing and passing a set of violent Resolutions against the Irish Government, and in establishing a board, composed of all the members of the general Committee, (which has never yet met, as far as I can learn,) to prepare an Address to the Prince Regent. They then adjourned till the 28th February. The Resolutions in question contained some violent censures against the duke of Richmond and his administration, accusing him of a systematic course of oppression against the Catholics.—[Mr. Pole then read the following Resolutions:]

§"At a very numerous Meeting of the Catholics of Ireland, held in Dublin, at the Private Theatre in Fishamble-street, on Thursday, the 26th of December 1811,

§"The Earl of Fingall in the chair,

§"Resolved, That it appears to us, that the general Committee of the Catholics of Ireland, appointed and assembled for the sole and constitutional purpose of preparing petitions to the legislature, on behalf of the Catholic people, and possessing the confidence, esteem, and reverence of Irishmen, of all persuasions, have been forcibly and illegally obstructed and outraged by the orders of his grace Charles duke of Richmond, the present chief governor of 590 Ireland, in conjunction with other persons exercising the civil government therein, and their prominent legal advisers.