

§ [Mr. Pole then read the Resolutions:]

§"REPEAL OF THE UNION.

§"At an Aggregate Meeting of the freemen and freeholders of the city of Dublin, convened pursuant to requisition, held at the Royal Exchange, on Tuesday the 18th of September, 1810.

§"Resolved unanimously, That our excellent and amiable viceroy, his grace the duke of Richmond, has, by the uniform conciliation and wisdom of his conduct, merited the gratitude and thanks of the Irish nation. As a patron of public institutions, as a friend to Irish manufactures, as an upright chief governor, combining at once suavity of demeanor with constitutional moderation; his grace's ministry will be long remembered with affection and esteem by every loyal Irishman.

§"Resolved unanimously, That we, the citizens of Dublin, in Aggregate Meeting legally assembled, fully impressed with a sense of his grace's many virtues, seize with pleasure this public opportunity of returning our grateful acknowledgments to his grace, and of thus recording our unqualified approbation of his lieutenancy in this kingdom."

§ Sir, having concluded all the observations which I have to make, respecting the conduct of the Irish government, I shall now say a few words respecting the other part of the question, namely, the Catholic claims. I wish to premise, that it has never fallen to my lot to take any part in the debates which have occurred from time to time, upon the petitions preferred by the Roman Catholics. I should have been very glad, if a motion had been made, to bring forward the question of the conduct of the Irish government without coupling it with the Catholic question. I should have been glad, for a reason which I shall presently state, to have been able to abstain, while I am in my present situation, from taking any part in the discussion of that question; but the subjects are this night so blended, that it is impossible for me to avoid noticing it. Though I have never taken any part in the debates upon the Catholic claims, I have always voted against the prayer of their petition. When I undertook my present office, I felt that it was most desirable, that any person holding it, should not take any part in the debates relating to the Catholics, unless he was prepared to recommend an alteration of the law in their favour.

§ Sir, it is the duty of the lord lieutenant to see that equal justice is distributed, but it is not his province to alter the constitution.—Feeling that it was not his province to alter the constitution, and feeling that it was not the proper time for granting any further privileges, to the Roman Catholics, I thought it sufficient to express my opinion, as a member of parliament, by my vote; and I thought that I best performed my duty by attending to the business of my office, and not giving a ground for saying that I had done any thing that was likely to throw a prejudice on the Catholic question. Had I been of opinion that the prayer of the Catholic petition ought to be granted, I should have quitted my office, and so declared myself.