

Sir, at this meeting lord Fingall desired that I would write him a letter, expressive of the determination of government, that he might lay it before the Catholic committee; and I wrote him one accordingly, which has been published in all the newspapers. This letter has been represented as an insult to lord Fingall, and it has also been asserted that his lordship and the Catholic body had been taken by surprize, and that they had no intimation of the intentions of government to interfere. I really wish that when persons are so anxious to bring forward charges, they would condescend previously to ascertain facts. I wish that they would recollect that those who compose the government of Ireland are men of honour; that they have characters to maintain; characters, I will add, that stand as high as any of those by whom they are accused: and that those characters ought not to be assailed by assertions which had not the slightest foundation in truth.

Sir, notwithstanding all that had passed, lord Fingall, the very next day, sat in the chair at a meeting of the committee, at which the following Resolutions, among others, were agreed to:—

1. "Resolved, That the Catholic committee, having adjourned on the 25th July to the 19th October 1811, have, notwithstanding, deemed it expedient to hold an extraordinary meeting on this 31st day of July, in consequence of a communication from government to the earl of Fingall, dated the 30th inst. to the following effect:—"That a privy council was to be assembled to take into consideration the "expediency of issuing a proclamation, 581"declaratory of the law, &c. &c.; and likewise of the course to be pursued to ensure its observance."

§"Resolved, That this committee, relying on the constitutional right of the subject to petition the legislature, in the way and manner specified in a resolution to that effect, passed at the last aggregate meeting of their body, do now determine to continue and persevere in the constitutional course they have maturely adopted, for the sole, express, and specific purpose of preparing a petition or petitions to parliament for their full participation of the rights of the constitution, and that, in so doing, they not only, in their opinion, do not violate, but act in strict conformity with its soundest principle." And they resolved also" That the Resolutions of the aggregate meeting of the Catholics, held on the 9th of July, should be republished." [Here some gentlemen on the opposite side of the House cried hear, hear!] I am glad to find that gentlemen are so well disposed to hear; if they mean by that cheer to set up the opinion of this meeting against that of the Irish government, of the law-officers of the crown, and of the court of King's bench, they are at liberty to do so. But I hope and believe the country will pause before it draws similar conclusions.

§ Thus, then, the House will perceive after the proclamation had been issued, and every effort bad been made to apprize lord Fingall of the illegality of the proceedings, the Catholics entered into new, and re-published their former Resolutions, in defiance of the law, and in total disregard of all the high authorities I have stated.