

§ Sir, I had before heard of the opinion given this night by the learned gentleman on the Convention act, and indeed, I have seen it; but I never, till to-night, knew on what grounds, and by what arguments, he intended to defend that opinion. I now perceive that he has read, with some care, the speech of Mr. Burrowes, on Dr. Sheridan's trial, as reported by Mr. Ridgeway. I wish he had read a little farther. I wish he had perused the eloquent and convincing answer of the Solicitor-General; he would have found a complete refutation of the opinion he has now expressed, and the true spirit and meaning of the Convention act accurately pointed out.

§ I will now advert to the proceedings of the Committee, from which it will be manifest, that they were conscious they were acting illegally. Lord Fingall knew that if the Committee attempted to meet, it was the determination of government to disperse it. On the 19th of October the Committee was to meet: it did meet, and there was a kind of race between them and the magistrates. Lord Fingall was not, according to the depositions made on oath by the two peace officers who attended, above ten or fifteen minutes in the chair, when the meeting broke up. On the 23d of December, the Committee was to assemble again. It met accordingly, but government was then more on the alert, and dispersed the meeting. The magistrate who was employed on this occasion, had, it was admitted on all hands, conducted himself in the mildest and most conciliating manner. This gentleman, when he entered the meeting, asked lord Fingall, who was in the chair, if that was the Catholic Committee? If they thought they were acting legally, the answer would have been directly in the affirmative; but what was the answer? Lord 588 Fingall said, "we are met here for lawful purposes." The magistrate was obliged to cross-examine his lordship, and Mr. O'Connell, the barrister, was at his elbow, cautioning him against committing himself by his answers. Surely, this was not the conduct of men conscious of their innocence, and convinced that they were acting in conformity with the laws of the land. I see my hon. friend (Mr. Whitbread) opposite, taking notes—I am sure he would not have acted in such a manner—be would, if conscious that he was acting constitutionally and legally, have avowed in a manly way, the object of the meeting, and he would have defied any one to interrupt them.—Sir, the government of Ireland would have proved itself most inefficient indeed, if it had been satisfied with mere formal declarations, without endeavouring to ascertain what was the real object and intention of the people whose conduct they were watching.

§ I should observe, that a few days before the Committee was dispersed, a dinner was given, as it was described, to the Friends of Religious Liberty. At this dinner a number of very respectable Protestant gentlemen attended, and great pains were taken, and a great deal of art used, to make it appear, that they had given their countenance to the illegal meeting which was about to be held. I am far from believing, that any of the Protestant gentlemen who attended had any intention of giving their sanction to a violation of the law; but such was the construction which was artfully put upon, their attendance, upon that occasion.