

§"As this Report of the sub-committee of grievances is now published by Fitzpatrick, Capel Street, it is unnecessary to enlarge upon the subject."

§ After this statement, I think no doubt can be entertained as to the authenticity of this publication, which contains a most exaggerated account of the grievances under which the Roman Catholics are supposed to labour, and treats with contempt all that has been done for that body.—Mr. Pole then read the following extracts from the work:—"The Irish Legislature has carefully established a new ecclesiastical board, whose province it is to detect Catholic charities, and to appropriate their funds, when detected and seized, to the better maintenance of Protestant institutions. To facilitate this object, a special corporation has been embodied, under the plausible title of Commissioners of Charitable Bequests. This corporation deserves notice, by reason of its alertness in hunting down Catholic charities."—"Thus has the Irish parliament, in the last year of its existence, solemnly, organized a powerful inquisition, vigilant and eager in the pursuit of its prey, and armed with every necessary authority for discovering and seizing the funds destined by dying Catholics for the maintenance of the pious, and the poor of their own communion."—"Suffice it to say, respecting the general conduct of this board, that their zeal and activity in the discharge of their inquisitorial functions have completely succeeded in frustrating every attempt of the Irish Catholics to, provide any permanent maintenance for the ministers of their worship, their places of education, or other pious or charitable foundations."

§ I beg leave to state to the House, that 595 the commissioners of Charitable Donations thus spoken of, consist of the archbishops and bishops, the lord chancellor, and the twelve judges, some high dignitaries of the church, and the several incumbents of the parishes within the city and liberties of Dublin. The commissioners have now existed twelve years; during that period, the number of prosecutions which they have instituted, amount only to fifteen, all under the opinion of the Attorney General for the time being; and of these, only two have been brought against persons of the Catholic religion. The House will, I hope, forgive me if I state shortly the nature of the two cases in which these commissioners felt themselves bound to interfere:—

§ The commissioners, upon a complaint made to them, that a bequest left by a Roman Catholic to endow an hospital for Catholics, had not been carried into effect, commenced a suit, and in consequence of their interference, the hospital has been established, and is now a most well regulated and useful charity, in a country town, in which such an institution was much wanted. The case I allude to, is Houghton's hospital at New Ross. Here then it appears that the commissioners carried into execution the charitable intentions of this Catholic!

§ The other case, where a prosecution was recommended by Mr. Plunket, then Attorney General, was that of a Mrs. Mary Power, of Waterford, who had left a large sum for certain charitable uses; but, this money being left to two Catholic bishops and their successors for ever, it became a question whether they could be legally considered as a corporation; and in order to decide this point, as well as the legality of some of the bequests, Mr. Plunket recommended an application to the court of Chancery. However, before the matter was decided, the heir at law, a Catholic, arrived in Ireland, and commenced a prosecution to recover the property, on the ground that the will had been made under undue influence.—The matter I understand remains still undecided.