

Sir, as long as the Roman Catholics adopt the language of this book, and adhere to the positions laid down in it, I cannot give my assent to a compliance with their demands. If, at any time, I should see a proper temper and disposition actuating the body of the Catholics, and this spirit of exaggeration and disaffection towards the government subside, I should be the last man in this House to oppose their pretensions. But until such a disposition is manifested by the Catholics, I feel it my duty to state distinctly, that I do not think it practicable, or possible, with security to the establishments, to put the Catholics upon an equal footing with the Protestans.

said, the right hon. gentleman had repeatedly appealed to him, although he had not uttered one word during the course of the debate. But as 601 he had so appealed to him, he must beg leave to say a word or two on the manner and matter of the speech of the right hon. gentleman, whom he should be proud to call his friend. He really had a high opinion of the mind and comprehension of the right hon. gentleman; but he had made no display on the present occasion of those talents for which he was willing to give him credit. On the contrary, he had taken a narrow and pitiful view of so great and important a question, and had stuffed his speech with endless extracts of the most miserable minutiæ, the most paltry and contemptible trash, and that in the discussion of a question the most momentous that could come under the consideration of the House; for the question of that night was, whether Ireland should be preserved in her allegiance to the British crown by conciliation and justice, or driven into the arms of the enemy, by injustice, tyranny, and oppression? This was the real question before the House, and not merely the claims of the Catholics, which formed only a part of the mass of grievances of which Ireland had to complain, and on which he would trouble the House of Commons more at length at a more favourable moment. Indeed, he had no intention of saying a word that night, and the few words he had uttered were extorted from him by the tone and the tenets which characterised the speech of the right hon. Secretary. For who could hear, without feelings of indignation, that justice and right was to be refused to a people merely because some of their advocates might have used indecorous and intemperate language in the assertion of their claims? The right hon. Secretary had called on the Irish Catholics to come forward in an attitude of submission and humility; with a tone and language that bespoke meekness, moderation, and forbearance. But while he was thus demanding from the Catholics every demonstration of mildness, submission and docility, he was himself making use of language, and insisting on topics, which no men, conscious of their rectitude and of the justice of their claims, could have temper to listen to, or patience to endure. As many honourable members had not yet spoken, and many valuable speeches might be expected from them, he begged leave to suggest the propriety of an adjournment.