

§ The remaining prosecutions were all against either Protestants or Protestant Dissenters, to compel them to carry into execution certain charitable bequests entrusted to them.

§ The commissioners, so far from considering themselves as composing the "inquisition" described in the book, and so far from acting in the spirit of inquisitors, 596 conceived their duty to be merely to enforce all charitable bequests, be they Protestant or Catholic. By the law, executors are bound to publish in the gazette statements of all charitable donations entrusted to them; but in many instances this provision had been neglected. I have at the same time to remark, that the commissioners are themselves in possession of regular returns of all donations left by will, which are furnished to them from the different registry offices, which returns are printed every second year and distributed. I have examined these returns, which contain donations for every species of Catholic charitable purposes that can be imagined, not one of which has been interfered with in the slightest degree.

then read to the House the following instances from these returns:

"1800.—According to the printed returns of this year, William Sawey of Downpatrick, bequeathed the sum of 1,000l to the Roman Catholic College of Maynooth."

"In the returns of the same year, Patrick Power, of New Ross, left the profit-rent of a house for the use of two chapels near Ross."

"1801.—The Rev. Matt. Lennon, titular bishop of Dromore, bequeathed 500l. to purchase six government debentures, for the purpose of establishing a daily mass in the chapel of Newry, in perpetuance; and he left a further sum of 500l for the erection of a school contiguous to the chapel, for the education of children of poor Catholics only."

"1802.—William Doran, of Wexford, gentleman, left unto the Rev. James Currin a Roman Catholic parish priest, 400l. for building and supporting a charity-school, to be erected at the rear of the chapel of Wexford, in the church yard, and also an annuity of 35l. yearly, for the uses and purposes which he had directed in, and by a letter or memorandum given by him to Mr. Currin."

"1803.—Mrs. Trench left, a sum of money to say masses for her soul, and the souls of her two husbands, besides bequests to seven Roman Catholic charity schools in the city of Dublin."

"1804.—Mrs. Mathews, of Usher's-quay, left 250l. to Maynooth College, and 100l. to the Roman Catholic school of St. Andrew's parish;—and Mr. Bonfield, of Limerick left 500l. for the use only of the Roman Catholic schools in Limerick."

"1805.—Edmund Connellan, of Cork, 597 after leaving a trifling sum to each of the chapels in the city of Cork, adds, 'I leave my executors at liberty to give whatever they please to father Dennis Sullivan, to say masses for mine and my wife's soul."

"John Reilly, of Prospect, in the county and town of Drogheda, left to Dr. Richard Reilly (the titular primate) 1500l. in trust, to be applied to such charitable uses as he should think fit."