

"As for the county gaols of Ireland, a certain limited compensation, under special restrictions, has been recently (by a statute enacted in 1810) provided for such Catholic clergymen as the respective grand juries may be pleased to nominate for the purpose of officiating as chaplains. But here too, from the ignorance of the framers, their neglecting or disdaining to consult the Catholic clergy, and the supercilious management of the entire transaction, this statute has fallen far short of its professed object. In some instances, it has proved even pernicious, by exciting discord between the grand jury and the Catholic bishop of the district. These mischiefs might have been avoided, by timely caution and ordinary prudence in preparing this law."

Now, Sir, this act was framed partly upon the report of the commissioners appointed to enquire into the state of the gaols in Ireland, and partly upon the best information that could be procured. It was submitted to the chief justice and judges of the King's-bench, under whose auspices and inspection it was drawn. It was then brought into parliament, printed, circulated throughout Ireland, and remained four months on the table of this House before it was passed. Every suggestion that was given from any quarter was attended to; and I appeal to the recollection of the House when I state, 599 that the Bill ultimately passed with the unanimous approbation of the House, and the satisfaction of every Irish member.

Catholic chaplains were appointed to the institutions under government in Dublin, at the recommendation of Dr. Troy, the titular archbishop of Dublin, and up to the Moment I am speaking, I am not aware that a single objection to the act, or a single suggestion for any alteration in it, has been made to the government by any Catholic whatever.—It is notorious, and I will appeal for the truth of my assertion to the Irish gentlemen in the House, that this act has been considered by all the lower orders of the Catholics as most beneficial in its effects.

Sir, whether the Roman Catholics derive any benefit from this act will be best shewn by a letter, which I received in the course of the autumn after the act passed, from the Roman Catholic bishop of Kildare and Leighlin; the grand jury of the Queen's county, of which I happened to be foreman, offered the Catholic chaplaincy of the gaol of Maryborough to the priest of the parish, who refused it on the ground that the salary, 30l. a year, was inadequate to the labour. I then wrote to the bishop, requesting him to recommend a proper person, and I received the following answer: "Tullow, 31 st August, 1810. Right hon. Sir; I had the honour this day or your very gracious communication respecting the offer made to Mr. O'Neil, of the chaplainship to the gaol of Maryborough, and his having declined to accept the appointment on the score alleged by him of the reputed smallness of the salary; I should expect that a conscientious clergyman would be chiefly swayed in matters appertaining to the pastoral charge, as in the present instance, by motives of a superior nature to those of pecuniary considerations, and even in the latter point of view, do, for my part, esteem 30l. a year a handsome provision, in addition to his other official emoluments, for a priest, resident on the spot, if otherwise at liberty to discharge the office. How grateful should we feel for this rare concession? What a striking contrast, I cannot help begging leave to observe, between the liberal and beneficial conduct of our legislature at the present day, in this particular, and the penal restrictions, may I presume to say, of former periods? When a Catholic priest, far from dreaming of such a thing as Stipendiary retribution 600 for his service would have considered himself as signally happy to be able to gain, even by stealth, at the most arduous risk, private admission into a gaol, for the purpose of exercising, without any hope, assuredly, or earthly fee or reward, in the most secret-wise, the functions of his sacred ministry, in behalf of its forlorn inmates of his profession; and now; to be not only thus openly and legally sanctioned in the public discharge of this important duty, but even stimulated to its execution, by an ample, permanent remuneration from the state.—What an incitement to the most strenuous co-operation on our side, in carrying into effect such excellent and charitable views! I speak here, permit me to aver, right hon. Sir, only what I intimately feel on the occasion. Under this impression, it must necessarily afford roe unspeakable regret, hot to be able to submit to your consideration a fit person for the office in question, from the extreme want of priests that actually prevails at this juncture, throughout the district with which I am charged; a circumstance that leaves (I humbly beg pardon for this detail,) not a few parochial chapels, to which are nevertheless attached, a numerous and wide-extended population, absolutely without divine service, even on Sundays.—I have the honour to be, &c. (Signed.) D. DELANY. Such, is the opinion, and such the language of a Roman Catholic bishop, respecting the advantages derived by Roman Catholics from this act, of which this work so strongly complains.