

Fortunately for all students of the Napoleonic era, this massive gap in the historiography has now been filled by a massive book. Crafted by Dominic Lieven, perhaps one of the most distinguished specialists in nineteenth-century Russia of his generation, Russia Against Napoleon truly reaches the parts that other works do not. Beginning with the failed alliance of Tilsit between Russia and France, which Lieven presents as an arrangement that was based on a cool and realistic appreciation of Russian interests, the author charts Alexander I's steadily deteriorating relationship with Napoleon and explains how by 1810 the tsar had been forced into a position of open enmity with the French empire, in part because of the latter's relentless aggression, but also because of growing internal pressure (throughout the book, indeed, great stress is placed on the importance of domestic Russian politics). Hostility to France, however, did not necessarily mean war and, as Lieven shows, in 1811 Alexander eschewed the idea of attacking Napoleon: rather, he would wait to be attacked and, initially at least, adopt a purely defensive strategy. When war came in 1812 it was therefore very much the responsibility of the French ruler, and in arguing thus Lieven places himself in the camp of those who argue that the struggles of 1803-15 were in the most literal sense Napoleonic wars.

From this point in Lieven's narrative, the story is naturally dominated by military affairs. Needless to say, the cataclysm of 1812 is covered in immense detail, but almost equal weight is placed on the campaigns of 1813-14, an episode which the author is eager to portray as a distinctly undervalued chapter in the history of Russian military glory. As he argues, just to have got a Russian army of up to 500,000 men from the frontiers of Poland all the way to Paris would have been an extraordinary achievement even had it not been achieved in the face of desperate French resistance and the horrors of 1812. But the matter does not end there: the army concerned was not just a horde of armed peasants that could do no more than rely on brute force, but a highly sophisticated military machine that had come on enormously since the disasters of Austerlitz and Friedland, and was characterised by both highly efficient staffwork and an ability to make use of the most sophisticated tactical combinations.

Particularly in 1813-14, 'war, war' was at all times accompanied by 'jaw, jaw', as the growing number of members of the Allied coalition jostled for position with one another and gradually elaborated a common position in respect of Napoleon (a process that, in testimony to the immense differences that bedevilled the anti-Napoleonic camp, was not completed until March 1814). In this respect, Lieven places great weight on the efforts of Alexander himself. Having already been the heart and soul of Russian resistance in 1812 and, according to the author at least, a leading influence in the great victory of Leipzig, the tsar struggled to ensure that the Allies aimed at nothing less than the overthrow of Napoleon. In this, of course, he was not alone (Britain's Lord Castlereagh was a strong exponent of the same policy), but, as Lieven points out, it is almost certainly the case that, without the Tsar's commitment to war to the death, Napoleon could well have been left on the throne of France in 1814, thereby rendering null and void all the slaughter and suffering of the previous two years.