

Thus far, thus good, but if this was the limit of Lieven's work one would have to ask whether all that Russia Against Napoleon consists of is a reworking of a well-known story from a Russian point of view. Fortunately, however, the reader gets much more than this for his money. Where Lieven is at his most useful is in imparting detailed information on the Russian home front. The informed reader might wish that he had gone much further here, but there is nonetheless sufficient coverage to ensure that the jarring note struck by the incident referred to at the beginning of this review receives at least a measure of contextualisation: in Russia, as everywhere else, the populace often resented the demands of the state and frequently did what they could to resist it.

This brings us to another major feature of Lieven's work, in that we learn a great deal about the reasons why the Russian army was always such a steadfast foe on the battlefields of the Napoleonic era. Given what has just been said, patriotic enthusiasm can seemingly be left out, but what about the much touted idea that Russian soldiers were simply too stupid to run away? As might be expected, Lieven does not dignify such claims with a direct response, but instead we hear a great deal about the internal organisation of the Russian regiment. Utterly isolated from civilian society, Russian soldiers evolved in a very close-knit world of their own, and this imbued them with immense loyalty to one another; it was this loyalty that sustained them in such dramatic fashion on the battlefields of Borodino and Leipzig.

This leads to the central message of Lieven's work. For him, the Russian army of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries was clearly a force of great strength and versatility that was more than capable of meeting the challenges posed by the French Revolution and Napoleon without having to engage in fundamental change. And, as with the Russian army, so with the whole of the Russian state. Far from being some ramshackle eastern despotism, this was in many ways a vibrant and forward-looking organism that possessed extraordinary resources and even offered a number of the advantages that are normally associated only with the French Revolution: a regime that could place such a figure as Mikhail Speransky at the head of its affairs was hardly one in which careers could not be said to be open to talent. In writing about the Russia of Alexander I, Dominic Lieven has also made a major contribution to wider debates on the Napoleonic epoch, and for this, as for so much else, he is to be congratulated.

Charles Esdaile is Professor in History at the University of Liverpool and the author of numerous books on Napoleon's wars.
