NUNC COCNOSCO EX PARTE




TRENT UNIVERSITY
     LIBRARY
          Digitized by the Internet Archive
             in 2019 with funding from
             Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/invasionofnepaljOOOOpemb
THE INVASION OF NEPAL
Sir David Ochterlony
        THE
INVASION
   NEPAL
John Company at War

           BY


      JOHN PEMBLE




CLARENDON PRESS • OXFORD
     DS*S5                       ■ N1P37
     Oxford University Press, Ely House, London W. 1
        GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON
CAPE TOWN SALISBURY IBADAN NAIROBI   DAR ES SALAAM LUSAKA ADDIS ABABA
          BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHI LAHORE DACCA
             KUALA LUMPUR SINGAPORE HONG KONG TOKYO




                © OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 1971




                  PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
           W. & J. MACKAY & CO LTD CHATHAM, KENT
To those whom I knew as
  colleagues and pupils
           at
       Sandhurst




                          163428
v « >*
              ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


N      O historian can hope to progress without the co-operation of
          archivists and librarians, and without their permission to
          quote from the materials in their charge. I am very thankful
for these privileges to the Librarian, Dr. R. Bingle, Mr. A.
Farrington and the staff of the India Office, London; to Peter
Hayes, Boris Mollo and the staff of the National Army Museum,
Camberley; to the Hon. David Erskine and the Librarian of the
Royal United Services Institution, London; to Colonel R. Attoe,
Lieutenant-Colonel E. N. Thursby and the Trustees of the Regi¬
mental Museum of the King’s Shropshire Light Infantry, Shrews¬
bury; to the Librarian of the Royal Army Medical College,
London; to Major R. St. G. G. Bartelot of the Royal Artillery
Institution, Woolwich; to the Librarian of the University Library,
Cambridge; to Commander Godfrey of the Public Records Office,
London; and to Dr. S. V. Desika Char and the Director of
Archives, National Archives of India, New Delhi.
    It is a pleasure to record my gratitude to the following, who must
share the credit for any merit the work may have, but who are in no
way responsible for its weaknesses or for the views it expresses:
Dr. R. J. Moore, whose guidance and encouragement sustained me
during the long period of research and writing; William Mcllwee,
whose trenchant and unstinted comments made me aware of the
considerable blemishes in the first draft; Professor Michael Howard,
 Dr. C. C. Davis and Professor K. Ballhatchet for their valuable
suggestions; Delegates and staff of the Press in the University of
 Oxford for the sympathetic interest they have taken in the work,
and for the confidence they have expressed in it by undertaking to
 publish; Mrs. Jean Lane, my patient typist; and my friends Akbar
 Khan and Mahendra Singh Chaudhuri of Delhi, interpreter and
 driver, in whose cheerful company I passed sultry April days
trekking in the hills of Himachal Pradesh, looking for feringi graves
and Gurkha forts.

London, October, ig6g.
■
                        CONTENTS

LIST OF PLATES                                    X

LIST OF MAPS                                      XI

ABBREVIATIONS                                    xii


                               PART I
   I.   The Gurkhas                                i

  ii.   The Quarrel with the British              30

 hi.    The Matter of Himalayan Trade             54

 iv.    The Bengal Army                          90

  v.    Preparing for War                        125

                               PART II
  vi.   Fiasco in Garhwal                        134

 vii.   Stagnation in Sirmur                     167

viii.   The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives   210

  ix.   The Triumph of Ochterlony                248

  x.    The Conquest of Kumaun                   290

 xi.    Interlude                                308

xii.    The Final Campaign                       324


                             PART III
EPILOGUE                                         342

APPENDICES                                       359

BIBLIOGRAPHY                                     369

INDEX                                            379
                     LIST OF PLATES

         Sir David Ochterlony. Indian Army Museum,
           R.M.A. Sandhurst                              Frontispiece


  l(«)   Tomb of William Wilson, Thomas Thackeray,
           Lt. Munt and Ensign Stalkert, Nahan

   (*)   Tomb of Sir R. R. Gillespie, Meerut

 11(a)   Sir Jasper Nicolls. National Army Museum

   0)    Sir Robert Rollo Gillespie

   w The Marquis of Hastings
   (d)   William Fraser                                       between
                                                             > PP- W6-7
111(a)   Bengal Sepoy, about 1815

   0)    A Nepalese khukuri

         Kalanga Hill, from the south-east

         Jaithak pinnacle, from just below Nahan

         Jaithak pinnacle, with the ruins of the fort,
           from the west
                       LIST OF MAPS

1. North India in 1814                                       2-3

2.   Illustrating the operations in Garhwal and Sirmur in
        1814-15                                             136-7

3. (WEST). Illustrating the campaigns in the Eastern
     Theatre in 1814-16                                      212

     (EAST). Illustrating the campaigns in the Eastern
       Theatre in 1814-16                                     213

4.   Illustrating Ochterlony’s operations in 1814-15          250

5.   Illustrating the operations in Kumaun in 1815            292
                      ABBREVIATIONS

         Mins, of Ev.      Minutes of Evidence
         e.i.u.s.j.         East India United Services Journal
         P.R.N.W.           Papers Respecting the Nepaul War
         Sec. Cons.         Bengal Secret Consultations
         Pol. Cons.         Bengal Political Consultations
         Mil. Cons.        Bengal Military Consultations

   Detailed descriptions of these and all other sources are in Appendix 3
and in the Bibliography at the end of the volume.
   Statistics, and quotations from printed works, have been referred to
their sources, and the politically important manuscript sources have been
specified. Specialists wishing to trace the manuscript sources of a less
general, military and biographical interest on which the text is based are
invited to consult the typescript version deposited in the Senate House
Library, University of London.
                           PART I



                                 I

                     THE GURKHAS

T     he highest mountain range in the world separates India from
        Tibet. In Sanskrit it is called Himalaya, meaning ‘region of
        snow’. Before man existed, it rose from the sea, lifting with
itself rivers which originate in Tibet. These rivers still reach down
to the sea; but their journey is much longer now, the ancient ocean
having receded and exposed the alluvial plain of north India, or
Hindustan. Earthquakes and landslides testify that the causes
which raised the Himalayas continue in operation, moulding them
into some cosmographic design whose completion man will never
witness, and which will come about as though he had never been.
But if the mountains prefigure a future of which man will not form
a part, the foothills in their shadow have long formed a part of his
past. Settlements have existed for uncounted generations in the
valleys and on the slopes of the temperate zone below the un¬
melting snows. This is country where spruce and deodar forests
grow two hundred feet tall, where natural colours have a prismatic
purity, and where white peaks dominate the distance, filling half
the horizon with preternatural silence, and the mind with un¬
answerable questions.
    One of the largest and most densely populated of these valleys is
that of Nepal. Its early history is obscured by an apocrypha of fable
and romance. Buddhist legend avers—and this much geological
evidence confirms—that the Valley was once a lake. The saint
Manjusri, coming down from China, drained it dry by opening the
southern rocks with a blow from his sword, and allowing the water
to flow down to India as the Baghmati river. The earliest inhabi¬
tants were probably members of the Kirata tribe—a short, flat¬
faced people of Indo-Mongolian stock and Tibeto-Burman tongue,
I   I East India Company protectorates

?        5,°      1?°         ™   Miles            /
0   50     100    150   200   250 KiIometres       ^

    78 80 A                         °          °

---1-1--ta
                 Map i. North India in 1814
                                AFGHANISTAN'



                                          PUNJAB




                                   RAJPUTANA       ^
                                   SIND     GWALIOR

                                             INDORE
                                                               Calcutta,
                                                       BERAR

                                 Bombay



                                                          Madras



tianasarovar                                                CEYLON
                                                            (Crown
                                                                Colony)




                                               Shigatse (Tashllu npo)




   ;• Butwal
                    Kathmandu
               Makwanpur

                                 Vijaypur
4                                 The Gurkhas

who came from Assam and north-east India. Several centuries be¬
fore the Christian era, they were joined by the people who still
inhabit the Valley in considerable numbers, the Newars. The
language of the Newars, which is similar to that of the Kiratas, and
their features, which often even now betray Mongolian ancestry,
indicate that they were either a second north Indian group or a
tribe from Tibet. The Newars were a literate race, with an advanced
culture. Their industry and artistry have given the Valley its distinc¬
tive architecture and sculpture, and their language has preserved
its folklore and early history. In the earliest stages, Buddhism was
probably the main religion of Nepal; but when a system of monarchy
replaced the old tribal republican form of government, the kings
were invariably Hindu, and modelled themselves on the monarchs
of the plains. Another north Indian people, the Licchavis, founded
the first recorded Hindu dynasty in Nepal; and Indo-European1 or
not (they could have been Mongolian), they adopted titles used by
the Rajputs,2 introduced the classical Hindu institution of varna
(the division of society into four immutable categories), and even
persecuted the Buddhists. The Kiratas, apparently displaced by
the Licchavis, moved into the hills east of the Valley, where their
descendants are still to be found. The Newars, however, submitted
passively to the rule of Hindu monarchs, and often became con¬
verted themselves. They are still divided into worshippers of the
Hindu deity Shiva (Shivamargis) and worshippers of the Buddha
(Buddhamargis). The Licchavis, who were in Nepal from the first
until the eighth century, built a powerful empire and extended their
dominion even beyond the Himalayas. Soon Nepal became the

    1 The word ‘Aryan’ was formerly used to designate the Sanskrit-speaking
tribe or tribes who, originating probably in eastern Europe, invaded India at the
dawn of its recorded history. It was devised by the distinguished orientalist Max
Muller, from the Sanskrit word arya, meaning ‘noble’, which the authors of the
early Sanskrit epics used to distinguish their own people from the darker in¬
digenous inhabitants of north India. The term never was universally accepted
as an ethnological label, and since the Nazis propagated the notion that the
‘Aryans’ were a fair-haired, blue-eyed ‘master race’ (it is more likely that they
were, in fact, Mediterranean or ‘Brown’ people) it has been generally dropped.
It is retained only to describe the group of languages (Iranian, Sanskrit, and the
descendants of Sanskrit, all forming a branch of the larger Indo-European
family) associated with the people in question.
    2 Rajputs (literally, royal progeny) are a Hindu caste of the ksatriya or military
category—the second in the four varna of the brahminical system. The modern
Rajputs appear to be descended from the white Huns and Gujars who came to
India from central Asia in the sixth century.
                           The Gurkhas                            5
client of a kingdom whose real centre was Tibet, but she exercised
a strong cultural influence, passing on her own artistic idioms to
Tibet and mediating the transfer thither of Buddhism from north
India. In 704, Nepal broke away from Tibet, and a few decades
later the Nepalese Licchavi dynasty came to an end, with the
accession of a king called Amsu Varman, who, according to one
chronicle at least, was not of royal blood but a noble (thakur) who
had married into the royal family.
   Almost nothing is known about the history of the first two and a
half centuries of the Thakuri dynasty. We know only (from Petech’s
researches) that it had three lines, and that during some two hun¬
dred years the Valley was divided into two kingdoms, in one of
which there was a relapse to the Mongolian institution of joint rule
by a pair of monarchs. Unity was ephemerally regained at the end
of the eleventh century under King Sankara Deva, who ruled from
Patan; but the Valley reverted to anarchy when he died. In an inter¬
lude of darkness and confusion, for which native chronicles, con¬
cerned to purify the genealogies of later monarchs, are no source of
enlightenment, the Thakuri dynasty faded into oblivion and the
last of the ‘Newar’ dynasties, the Malla, took its place. The period
was an unhappy one, with raids from north India, especially from
the kingdom of Tirhut. Nanya Deva of that country made a preda¬
tory ascent into the Valley about 1100, and further excursions
followed; but in 1324 it was as a refugee that Hari Sinha of Tirhut
made his way there, fleeing the army of the Muslim Sultan of
Delhi, who had invaded Bengal. Hari Sinha was a patron of
 Sanskrit letters and exercised a strong influence on the develop¬
ment of Hinduism in the Valley, but there is no record that he ever
became its king. This was a tragic time in the history of Nepal.
Hordes of Muslims shattered its solitude on two occasions at least
in the middle years of the fourteenth century, and probably it is
these iconoclastic visitations which account for the disappearance
of all temples of older date than the fifteenth century.
    From a background obscured by this chaos, a strong man, Jaya
 Sthithi Malla, emerged—deliverer and unifier of the Nepal Valley
and one of the most notable rulers in its history. He sought to give
legitimacy to his succession by marrying the daughter of Hari Sinha
and then having the chroniclers record his father-in-law as a king,
but was not content to justify his claim to power with spurious
 pedigrees alone. Nepalese society long bore the imprint of his
6                               The Gurkhas

sagacious administration. His system of weights and measures re¬
mained in use until recent times, and his legal codes are theoretically
still valid. He made his kingdom a sanctuary for the laws and tradi¬
tions of Hinduism. They were recorded and codified by pundits
from India, and the valley of Nepal became the repository for a
way of life menaced with extinction by the Muslims on the plains.
Even the Buddhist society of Nepal, while tolerated, was carefully
graded as a hierarchy of castes. The early Malla kings combined
zealous Hinduism with an interest in local culture. Jaya Yaksha
Malla, grandson of Jaya Sthithi, patronized native letters and
raised Newari to the status of an official language. Unhappily, these
halcyon days were the prelude to another long period of strife. The
kingdom’s precarious cohesion was lost when Jaya Yaksha, on his
deathbed, divided his realm between his three sons, who soon fell
to quarrelling and fighting among themselves. The Valley remained
divided into the warring principalities of Bhatgaon, Patan, and
 Kathmandu until an adventurer from the west, Prithvi Narayan
 Shah of the little hill state of Gurkha, took advantage of the
jealousies separating each from the others to establish his own
authority over all and found the dynasty which still endures.
    The Gurkhas are not a tribe or a caste, but a miniature nation of
several tribes and castes. The only features which they all share are
descent from the original subjects of Gurkha state and a dialect
called Gurkhali or, nowadays, Nepali. The martial energy which
enabled the Gurkhas to conquer the Nepal Valley and then forge a
huge empire in the hills was the attribute of one group in their
community—the Chetris. The word chetri is a vernacular distor¬
tion of the Sanskrit ksatriya, meaning warrior and designating the
second of the four divisions of Hindu society; but in the Himalayan
hills it has lost its generic quality and acquired special significance.
The Chetris have the basic characteristic of a caste,3 which is the
smallest endogamous unit in Hindu society.
   3 Caste is a Portuguese word, denoting the jat of Hindu society—a group
which is endogamous and commensal. The system of caste organization probably
had economic origins, and it grew up independently of the classical brahministic
division of society into varna (literally, colour), though an attempt was made to
harmonize the two systems by classifying the castes as brahmana (priestly),
ksatriya (warrior), vaisaya (peasant) and sudra (serf). The Chetris are an endo¬
gamous group. The only subdivisions are thar (clans), which are generally
exogamous, and gotra (comprising descendants of one remote ancestor), which
are strictly so. Gotra are subdivisions of thar, of which there are about three
dozen, scattered widely through the Nepalese hills to Kashmir. Most traces of
                               The Gurkhas                                7
    Ethnologically, the Chetris are related to the Khas, or Khasias,
of north-west India. The Khas migrated up into the Punjab hills
and the central Himalayas early in their history. They appear to
have been among the original Indo-European settlers in north-west
India, and tradition links them with the five sons of Pandu (the
Pandavas) who are featured in the Sanskrit epic Mahabharata
(1000-500 B.c.) Some hill dynasties still claim descent from the
Pandavas. There is undoubtedly a basis of truth to such asser¬
tions. One of the social institutions of the modern Khas is polyan¬
dry, which they almost certainly contracted as a result of early
contacts with the aboriginal populations of north India, and a society
with such an alien custom was clearly known to the authors of the
poem, since all the sons of Pandu were married to the same wife. It
is also a fact that by the time the Law Book of Manu was drawn up
(200 b.c.-a.d. 200) the Khas had lost all high status. They were
therein listed among the vrishalas, or outcastes, as a race of ksatriyas
who had fallen by the wayside from seeing no brahmins. It is prob¬
able that they were ostracized because of their polyandry and other
habits derived from aboriginal societies, which the brahmins now
despised as perverse. A modern view is that the great war in the
Mahabharata symbolizes the conflict between early Indo-European
settlers of debased blood and unorthodox customs and later, purer-
bred arrivals. It may well be that the Khas’ movement northwards
into the western and central Himalayas was part of a retreat of older
settlers before the new waves of immigration, represented in the
Mahabharata by the ultimate withdrawal of the Pandavas into the
mountains. The certainty is that by the dawn of the Christian era
the Khas had been banished to both the social and geographic
periphery of the Hindu cosmos, and had dispersed throughout the
Himalayan hills from Kashmir to Nepal. They adhered to the
simpler, or Vedic, forms of religious code and ritual which were
becoming obscured on the plains by alterations and refinements
introduced by the brahmins.
    At some time around the eleventh century, two groups of Khas
migrated into western Tibet and established themselves as ruling
cadres in Purang and Guge. Later, these dominions were united
under a single family which adopted the popular title Malla
(literally, wrestler). Their predatory raids proved very troublesome
the endogamous tribal castes which originally made up the Chetri group seem
to have disappeared.
8                          The Gurkhas

to the rulers of the Nepal Valley. This family’s power reached its
zenith in the middle of the fourteenth century under King Prithvi
Malla, who ruled over an extensive empire. It included Guge,
Purang, and territories in the hills as far as the west of modern
Nepal. This dominion seems to have disintegrated after Prithvi
Malla, for no record of his successors has been found and raids
into the Nepal Valley ceased; but it is possible that the Mallas who
came into prominence in the Valley at this time were scions of the
western dynasty. The suggestion receives a measure of support
from the fact that it was in the time of the early Malla kings in the
Valley that a Khas dialect was introduced there. One was in official
use at the durbar of Kathmandu before the end of the seventeenth
century. The reasons for the demise of the empire in the west are
not ascertained; but newly discovered records and lapidary in¬
scriptions mention both the advent of a new aristocracy from the
plains and the Rajput city of Chitor, which, after the heroic resis¬
tance much sung in Rajput minstrelsy, fell to the Muslims in 1303.
This leads to the supposition that the collapse of the Mallas was
caused by the advent of Rajput exiles from India, who carved
principalities for themselves out of the family’s dominions. Many
subsequent hill rajas claimed descent from the Chitor Rajputs.
    These fugitives found in the hills extensively dispersed settle¬
ments of Khas, ranging in size from minor principality to sub¬
 stantial empire and using variants of what had once been a distinct
 Khas language. The Chetri caste was the result of miscege¬
nation between the immigrants and the resident hill societies. Its
 members were born of Khas mothers and spoke a Khas dialect, but
 were recognized as ksatriyas and allowed to wear the sacred thread,
 the emblem of the two highest varna, in deference to their Rajput
 or brahmin paternity. Many Khas conceded the right of spiritual
jurisdiction to the brahmins who came with the Rajputs from the
 plains, and in return were admitted to the Chetri caste and allowed
 to wear the thread. In the area of Gurkha, to the north-west of the
 Nepal Valley, there lived the Magars, a Mongolian people. They
 reacted to the influx of Rajputs and brahmins in much the same
 way as the Khas. Many were converted to Hinduism, and many of
 their women gave birth to the children of the immigrants. Both
 converts and illegitimate progeny were accepted into the new
 caste; and so in this area it came to include Magar names (such as
 Burathoki, Gharti, Thapa) as well as Khas, Rajput and brahmin
                                  The Gurkhas                                     9
ones. At first the authentic Rajputs from the plains probably held
aloof from this new hybrid caste; but given the situation where
their own clans were often exogamous, where their choice of
marriage partners was very circumscribed, and where common
ksatriya status made intermarriage less reprehensible, we can
readily accept that the Rajputs were soon assimilated by the Chetris.
In this way the new caste became a crucible for all the ethnic ele¬
ments of the hills—Magar, Khas, brahmin and Rajput. Chetris
still vary considerably in appearance. Most have a pronounced
Indo-European bias and tend to be small and slight. Others retain
unmistakably Mongolian features, and are more robust and muscu¬
lar. Linguistically, they are more akin to the speakers of the Khas
dialects of the hills than the Hindi speakers of north India.4

    4 Older theories concerning the origin of the Chetris were based on the
assumption that the term had no significance except as a vernacular distortion of
ksatriya. Levi thought that the Mongolian Magar tribesmen were the earliest
inhabitants of the western hills, and that they were the first to come into contact
with the exiles from Rajputana. Basing his conclusions on the pioneer investiga¬
tions of Hodgson, he took the present Khas to be the product of miscegenation
between the Rajput and brahmin exiles and native Magar women. The illegiti¬
mate progeny of these unions, while keeping the names of their fathers, formed a
new caste called Khas. Since its inclusion in the Laws of Manu, the designation
Khas had lost any identification with a specific tribal society, and was used as a
general pejorative for the barbarous hill peoples of the north. The brahmins now
revived the old name as a label for the new caste, which was allowed ksatriya
status. Membership of the new group was increased by the admission of Magar
proselytes, and so became a hybrid caste including brahmin, Rajput and Magar
clan names. Ultimately, the authentic Rajputs merged with the new ksatriyas
or Chetris, and all became members of a single tribal caste called Khas. This
theory, which recognizes no distinction between Khas and Chetri and sees the
Khas as a new creation, was founded on the erroneous assumption that Nepali,
the language of the Khas and Chetris of the Nepal Valley, was in itself a recent
language—a mere patois or dialect of Hindi. Levi considered its existence to be
an important indication of the recent infiltration of Hindi speakers into the hills.
It was Professor R. L. Turner who first contended that Nepali had its closest
affinity with the much earlier Indo-Aryan dialects of the north-west Punjab—
especially Kumauni—with which it has experienced important sound changes
not shared by dialects of the plains. He reckoned that, at the most, southern
languages such as Hindi lent words to Nepali, thus giving it a superficial simi¬
larity to themselves. When Turner published these views, in the preface to his
Dictionary, he had no knowledge of any written Nepali more than a century old,
and his conclusions were based entirely on his examination of sound changes.
Recently, Tucci’s Report on his scientific expeditions to west Nepal revealed the
existence of a royal donation dated 1376 and written partly in a dialect which
sufficiently resembles the modern language of Nepal to be called ‘old Nepali’.
This confirms Turner’s theory that Nepali is related to dialects which were in
use in the western hills long before the first major incursion of Hindi speakers; in
fact it confirms that it was closely related to the language of the group of Khas
10                                The Gurkhas

   At the beginning of the eighteenth century, the country be¬
tween the valley of Nepal and Kumaun was fragmented into
forty-six lordships, grouped into two loose confederations. In the
basin of the Karnali5 river system were the Baisi, or Twenty-Two
Rajas; and further east, in the Narayani6 basin, which comprises
the seven branches of the Gandak, were the Chaubisi, or Twenty-
Four. All paid theoretical allegiance to the Mogul Emperor in
Delhi; but the arm of Imperial authority, never having proved long
enough to control the hill states effectively, was becoming even
more enfeebled as the life blood of the Mogul body politic drained
away, and the intractable hill lords were left to themselves. The
resulting turbulence favoured the ambitions of the Shah family of
Gurkha, a little state among the Twenty-Four. This family, like
most nobility in the hills, claimed descent from the Rajputs of
Chitor. They called themselves Thakur—a Rajput title—and con¬
sidered themselves to be a cut above the Khas, whom they affected
to scorn. In fact, they were almost certainly Chetris—ethnic mon¬
grels of the type we have been describing. These proud people
gradually enlarged and marshalled their resources; and in the
middle of the eighteenth century, under the leadership of Raja
Prithvi Narayan Shah, they set about conquering the Nepal
Valley, an ambition which it took nearly twenty-five years to
accomplish. Kathmandu fell to Prithvi Narayan in 1768, and Patan
and Bhatgaon the following year. These conquests marked the birth
of the Nepalese state as it is known today. It was a state conceived
and nurtured by a minor martial aristocracy of Chetris, who made
their particular caste the sole repository of political power. The
intriguing thing about the Chetri caste is that while it was in itself
a product of the brahmins’ accommodating adjustment to the
pressures of local necessity, it soon ceased to practise the hospi¬
tality by the grace of which it had itself been born. Quite when is
not sure; but at some time it ceased receiving converts from the hill

whose corporate and cultural existence it was the main achievement of Tucci’s
expeditions to reveal.
     Nepali is but one dialect among a number of related tongues known generic-
ally as Khas kura (Khas speech) or Parbatiya (relating to the hills). Modern
Nepali is often referred to by either of these names, but this in effect involves
using generic terms for an individual dialect. A much more satisfying label for
the language is Gurkhali, because this refers the dialect to the Khas of a specific
area.

     5 Called the Gogra when it reaches India.    6 Called the Gandak in India.
                                 The Gurkhas                                    11

tribes into its fold, and Magars who had become Chetris began to
distinguish themselves from those left outside the caste by the
designation ‘Chetri’ after their name (e.g. Thapa-Chetri). The
Gurungs, another Mongolian tribe domiciled north of Gurkha,
who with the Magars formed the bulk of the Gurkha army, were
excluded altogether from the new caste and denied the privilege
of calling themselves ksatriyas even when professed Hindus. Khas
who found themselves outside the caste when it became closed had
to be content with an inferior status. Such were, apparently, the
Khatris of Gurkha. The Newars were excluded without exception.
Such exclusion was inconsistent with the usual pragmatism of the
brahmins, whose practice in effect, if not in theory, was to draw up
a hierarchy of castes designed to embrace all the Hindus of a com¬
munity and then arrange such a distribution of those castes be¬
tween the four varna as would describe its social and political
organization. In Nepal, the brahminical system was not and is not
a reflection of the Hindu community. Religiously orthodox groups
of Gurungs, Magars, Newars and Khas, having been excluded from
the Chetri caste despite the sanction which precedent would appear
to give for their inclusion, have found no allowance made for their
political or military qualifications in the national order of prece¬
dence. Their status was defined only in negative terms. They could
not claim parity with the Chetris, and had no acknowledged right
to wear the sacred thread. When we remember that this state of
petrification favoured the hegemony of the Chetris, by making it
impossible for these groups to acquire the social status which might
justify their pretensions to power and influence, we have perhaps a
clue at hand to help explain the characteristic anomaly of Nepalese
society. It may well be that the development of the caste system
was prevented from working itself out with its accustomed logic as
a result of a determination on the part of the Chetris of Gurkha to
maintain political control. It is at any rate indisputable that the
legal system which they introduced rigorously perpetuated the
existing hierarchy of castes and made further development im¬
possible;7 and it is equally certain that they made political power the
perquisite of a narrow oligarchy of Chetri families.
   7 Hodgson, in ‘On the Law and Legal Practice of Nepal’, remarks on this,
but ascribes it to a conscious desire, on the part of refugees from Muslim bigotry,
to preserve the traditions of Hinduism undefiled. This would appear to be far too
sophisticated an attitude to attribute to the unidealistic and untutored Gurkhas,
who were quite ready to waive the prescriptions of ritual when policy demanded.
12                               The Gurkhas

    The Gurkhas were an uncouth people with few pretensions to
 culture or the arts of peace. As Hindus, they generally respected
 the shrines and temples of the Newars; but they evinced little
 inclination to imitate their industry or their sophisticated urban
 style of life. As the new capital the Gurkhas chose the relatively
 drab town of Kathmandu, in preference to the more opulent centres
 of Patan and Bhatgaon, and they showed reluctance to abandon
 their smallholdings and mud huts. Their interests were almost
exclusively martial, and they idealized conquest and valour in
battle. Prithvi Narayan paused only briefly to consolidate his posi¬
tion in the Valley before resuming his career of acquisition. He
made a feint at the Twenty-Four Rajas, but his main interest at
this stage was directed to the country of the Kiratas, in the basin of
the Kosi river. The objective was Vijaypur, a town in the foothills
across the Kosi in that portion of the lowland called the Morang.
It was the eastern capital of a Rajput family whose three branches
controlled a far-flung empire extending from the Kosi basin to
Makwanpur, the territory just to the south of the Nepal Valley.
Makwanpur was already in the Gurkha Raja’s grasp, and his
generals now attacked Vijaypur. The Morang had for some years
been fermenting with civil war, its Raja having been murdered and
the throne become the object of rival claims from his uncle and the
 Dewan, so it fell an easy prey. The Morang was overrun, the
regicide Dewan ferreted out and killed, and the remains of the royal
family expelled into India. The Gurkha Raja’s next concern was
the state of Sikkim, whose boundaries in those days stretched in
the south-west to Baikantpur on the plains, and in the north-west
to the Arun river in the hills. Sikkim was a colony of the Lepcha
tribe, a Himalayan people who were unique in that they had
acquired for rulers not Hindus from the plains but Buddhist princes
from Tibet. The Sikkim Rajas also exercised a tenuous authority
over the Limbu tribe on the eastern bank of the Arun river. In the
middle 1770s the Gurkhas made preparations for an invasion of

Kirkpatrick recounts that the Nepalese army was authorized to consume chauri
bullocks during its expedition into Tibet (1788-92) on the ground that these
animals were not distinguished by the long dewlaps which were the generic
mark of the sacred bull (p. 120). Furthermore, the Hinduism practised by
Prithvi Narayan Shah and the Gurkhas seems to have been far from undefiled.
It was a primitive, sacrificial religion, characterized by worship of the most
baneful forms of the female aspect of the deity Shiva, and betraying the persist¬
ing influence of pagan fertility rites and Tantrism.
                                 The Gurkhas                                13

Sikkimese territory. A warning from Tibet, which considered
Sikkim a protege, and the death of Prithvi Narayan Shah (1775)
temporarily upset the plan; but skirmishing along the Arun
frontier continued until the Tibetan government ransomed peace
by consenting to move the frontier further east, making the Kankai
river the boundary in the lowlands but leaving Sikkim with Ilam
and Taplejung in the hills. The Gurkhas had no intention of
honouring the treaty, and barely waited for it to be signed before
launching a two-pronged attack, driving into Sikkim by the two
passes of Taplejung and Ilam. But the Lepchas were a virile race,
of the same mountain stock as the soldiers in the Gurkhas’ own
army. They held up the Gurkhas for nine years. Only in 1788 were
the Gurkhas able to renew their onslaught, defeating the prince in
an obstinate battle fought near his capital8 and compelling him to
flee to Tibet, where he was provided with men to continue the
struggle. With additional reinforcements from the Raja of Bhutan,
 he returned to retrieve his capital. He drove the Gurkhas out, but
 then his Bhutanese troops became mutinous from want of pay, and
 the Gurkhas were able to take refuge in the fort of Nagri, to the
 south, where they awaited reinforcements. Soon they were strong
 enough to reconquer all Sikkim west of the Tista and compel the
 Raja, his infant son and his loyal Lepcha general to withdraw into
 the hilly fastnesses east of that river. This defiant band ensconced
 themselves in the town and fort of Gangtok, whence they were still
 harassing the Gurkhas when the British went to war against Nepal
 in 1814. By then the old Raja had died, and his nineteen-year-old
 son, Chogyal Namgyal, was governing the truncated patrimony in
 close association with troops and advisers from Tibet. West of the
 Tista, the Lepchas continued refractory, and the Gurkhas found it
 wise to humour their pretensions by allowing one of their own
 leaders to continue as civil governor and collector at Nagri. This
 was Yuk Namchu, a nephew of the loyal Lepcha general. His other
 nephew, brother to Yuk Namchu, remained at Gangtok as chagzod,
 (chief minister) to the Raja. A large civil and military station was
 constructed at Dhankuta, north of the old provincial capital of
 Vijaypur, and became the administrative centre of all Gurkha con¬
 quests in this part of the hills. The new masters wisely conciliated

   8 Popular Lepcha legend represents this as having been ‘near Pemionchi’
see Geoffrey Gorer, Himalayan village, A Study of the Lepchas of Sikkim, second
edition: London, 1967, p. 237.
H                               The Gurkhas

their fierce and recalcitrant Kirata and Limbu subjects by being
satisfied with token submission. The revenues were lightly assessed,
and allowed to be collected by the tribal societies’ own representa¬
tives.9 The Gurkhas took pains to appease the brahmins hitherto
attached to the Vijaypur royal family by confirming and even in¬
creasing their free grants of land.
    But it was to the west of the Nepal Valley that the main thrust
of Gurkha expansion was directed. At first it was a career of con¬
quest not by the sword alone, but by an opportunist mixture of
attack, alliance, strategem and marriage diplomacy. Force was used
with discretion, care being taken to avoid precipitating antagonistic
coalitions before the Gurkha hegemony was consolidated. It was
essential not to provoke the Raja of Palpa, who enjoyed pre¬
eminence among the hill chiefs and was a favourite tenant of the
Nawab of Oudh. A marriage match was arranged between the
Palpa Raja’s daughter and the regent of Nepal during the minority
of Prithvi Narayan’s grandson, and it was the subsequent con¬
nivance of the Palpa family which enabled the Gurkhas to impose
their authority over all the Twenty-Two and Twenty-Four Rajas.
By 1790, all the mountain rulers as far west as the Kali river were
either enfeoffed by the Gurkhas or replaced by their agents. Palpa
alone remained unannexed, but henceforth its independence was
more apparent than real. The Raja, Prithvi Pala, was twice in¬
veigled into coming to Kathmandu, and twice incarcerated; but
for the moment his connection with the Nawab of Oudh preserved
him from death.
   Beyond the Kali river lay Kumaun. Once the prosperous king¬
dom of the Hindu Chand dynasty, it had been suffering from
malignant anarchy since the rule of a feckless raja in the early
eighteenth century. Nominating and controlling kings had become
the privileges of the highest bidder, and two factions of zemindars
(barons) had been bidding for years without either offering a price
in blood and ruthlessness which the other was not prepared to
match. As the contention dragged on, rich provinces in the low¬
lands had been lost to Oudh; a rash of castles and fortresses had
spread across the surface of the land; trade and agriculture had
languished; and the last legitimate Chands, helpless pawns, had been
exterminated. The most prominent member of the Mara faction
was Harak Deva Joshi, a restless, scheming supporter of the
        9 Rais in the case of the Kiratas; subas in that of the Limbus.
                            The Gurkhas                           i5
Chands who had turned kingmaker and sponsored two pretenders
since the extinction of the royal family. In 1790 he was in exile on
the plains. The Phartiyal faction, his mortal enemies, had seized
power by playing his own trick and invoking the support of
neighbouring Garhwal. Harak Deva Joshi now riposted by en¬
couraging the Gurkhas to invade Kumaun. Dividing their force
into two columns, they crossed the Kali and defeated Raja Mahen-
dra Singh in Gangoli province in the north, and his uncle Lai Singh
in Kali Kumaun province in the south. Both fled to the plains, and
the victors occupied Almora, the capital, with no resistance from a
populace weary after generations of anarchy. The Gurkhas hesitated
to trust the wily Harak Deva Joshi too far, and planned to send him
to Kathmandu, where he could do no mischief; but he fled west to
Garhwal, his old refuge. Here he plotted as actively as ever and
attempted to build an anti-Gurkha coalition. He hawked his cause
around the courts of north India, with many crocodile tears and
fluent stories of Gurkha atrocities, but found little active support
until the British were preparing to invade the hills in 1814.
    Once they had advanced beyond the Kali, the Gurkhas began to
be perplexed by the problem of how to combine military occupa¬
tion with an equitable colonial administration. In conformity to
their usual practice, the land was divided and assigned in separate
 parcels to the officers and troops of the army; but the necessity of
maintaining a large military establishment meant that the income
from each portion was over-assessed, and the troops, who had no
 permanent interest in the welfare of the peasants and landholders,
used brutal treatment and confiscated private property in order to
 realize the revenues. Even the wives and children of cultivators
were seized and sold as slaves. The subsequent depopulation, with
large numbers of farmers emigrating to India, alarmed the durbar
 at Kathmandu, which made eflforts to improve the local administra¬
tion and revise the land settlement. Brahma Shah, the member of
the royal family who succeeded to the governorship of Almora in
 1806, was congenial and just. Under his rule Kumaun became the
 object of special solicitude and favour. Orders were issued for the
 protection of private property, the enslavement of subjects was
 prohibited, rent-free grants of land were confirmed and a special
influence was conceded to the brahmins and zemindars of the
 Phartiyal faction who had been in power when the Gurkhas
arrived.
i6                          The Gurkhas

    To promulgate injunctions was one thing; to have them obeyed,
especially in areas outside the capital, another. The welfare of the
peasantry would only be assured when troops and officers in the
outlying districts were made fully accountable for their misconduct
towards the civilian population. But instead of pausing now to
attend to this and other pressing problems concerning internal
government, the Gurkhas drove on still farther west, accumulating
territories in a fever of aggrandizement. They were partly impelled
by the sheer momentum of their own military advance; partly
drawn by the political vacuum in the hills ahead; and partly stimu¬
lated by a revolution in Kathmandu which brought to power the
imperialist Thapa party.
    For twenty years, from the death of Prithvi Narayan Shah until
the coming of age of his grandson in 1795, a Chetri family of noble
extraction, called Panre, replaced the monarchy as the true source
of authority within the state. It was Damodar Panre, Prime
Minister during the regency, who carried the work of Prithvi
Narayan to its logical conclusion, consolidating and extending the
Gurkha empire without relinquishing due diplomatic discretion
and political moderation. Rana Bahadur Shah came of age in 1795,
but resigned the throne to his infant son four years later in deference
to the wishes of his morganatic favourite queen. Soon after, this
queen died, and Rana Bahadur was distracted to the point of
insanity by grief. He began to perpetrate the most atrocious cruel¬
ties and profanities, and Damodar Panre, with the support of the
brahmins, most of the durbar and all the vassals of the western
hills, compelled him to withdraw to the holy city of Benares, on the
plains of India, in the guise of a pilgrim. His youngest queen was
left as regent. For the next few years, Damodar continued as Prime
Minister, secure from the intrigues of the regent while he had the
support of Brahma Shah, Rana Bahadur’s illegitimate brother. This
member of the royal family enjoyed the prestige and influence of
an elder statesman. In a durbar whose members so often feature in
the pages of history as monstrous allegories of perfidy, cruelty and
greed, he was remarkable for his diffidence, sobriety and decorum.
 But a situation now evolved in which even all his goodwill was in¬
 sufficient to save the Panres. Their inveterate rivals, the Thapas,
 were working for the return of Rana Bahadur. The doyen of the
 clan, Amar Thapa, had been imprisoned by Damodar Panre; but
 at Benares his young son, Bhim Sen Thapa, was pouring schemes
                                The Gurkhas                                  J7
into the unbalanced Rana Bahadur and ingratiating himself with
the frustrated and jealous senior queen; while in the west his
brother, Amar Singh Thapa,10 was rapidly becoming prominent for
his generalship. In 1803, the senior queen staged a coup de theatre.
She suddenly left her profligate husband and travelled up to
Kathmandu alone, nonplussing the Prime Minister, but impressing
the general populace by her courage and determination. She made
herself regent, released Amar Thapa, and admitted him to the
council of state. The following year Rana Bahadur followed her to
Nepal. Prompted, no doubt, by Bhim Sen Thapa, who was at his
elbow, he challenged the troops sent to oppose him as their true
liege lord; and they, perhaps spontaneously, probably not, went
over to him with enthusiastic protestations of loyalty. Damodar
Panre was arrested and beheaded and Bhim Sen Thapa made
Prime Minister. The melodramatic denouement of this operatic
 episode in Nepalese palace politics came when Rana Bahadur was
 assassinated in the open durbar by one of his uncles. Bhim Sen
 Thapa retaliated to what he claimed was a Panre conspiracy by
 energetically purging the administration of the Panres and their
 coadjutors. Some fifty heads are said to have rolled in the Prime
 Minister’s orgy of blood.
    The main beneficiaries and probably the chief protagonists of
 this lurid interlude were the Thapas, a Chetri clan who had never
 quite lost the stigma of their mongrel origin. Chetris who prided
 themselves on their own purer Rajput extraction spurned the
 Thapas, and even treated them as a separate and inferior caste by
 refusing to eat with them. The Thapas had become embittered, and
 nursed secret pretensions. Their jealousy was directed in particular
 against the Panre family, whose control of all political appointments
 since the death of Prithvi Narayan had thwarted their ambitions.
 When their opportunity for self-assertion came, they exploited it
 with all the customary truculence of the newly emancipated. Bhim
 Sen Thapa, to be master of Nepal for the next thirty-five years,
   10 Both were called Amar Singh Thapa. The middle cognomen is omitted in
the case of the one in Kathmandu in order to make distinction easier. Hyder
Hearsey informed the government (P.R.N.W., p. 47) that Amar Singh Thapa in
the west was ‘nephew’ to Bhim Sen Thapa. This should probably read vice versa.
In one letter in the English records (Sec. Cons., 27 Sept. 1815, no 43) Amar
Singh Thapa in the west refers to Bhim Sen Thapa as his ‘son’; but this is
probably a translator’s error, arising from the fact that in Nepali, as in other
north Indian vernaculars, distinction is not always made between ‘son’ and
‘brother’s son’.
i8                          The Gurkhas

was only twenty-five when he became Prime Minister in 1804. He
was tall and sinewy, with fine Rajput features whose constant
animation betrayed great energy and a certain nervousness. His
manner was in strange contrast to the vacant stare and mute
incomprehension of the young roi faineant, whose intellectual and
physical development he purposely retarded by constant confine¬
ment and defective education. For the next 150 years, the Gurkha
monarchy was to be no more than vestigial. While in Benares, Bhim
Sen had carefully observed European manners and customs,
especially those relating to military organization, and he subse¬
quently attempted to introduce some of them into his own country;
but he had acquired neither fondness for the English nor respect
for their mode of political conduct. After his accession, Gurkha
policy became suddenly more intransigent and rash. One of his
first acts was to execute Prithvi Pala, the vain and selfish Raja of
Palpa. Then his father, Amar Thapa, raised to the English rank of
general, was sent with a large force to occupy all the Palpa estates.
These were measures in marked contrast to the circumspection
shown by the Panres in their dealings with this family. General
Amar Thapa fixed his headquarters at Tansing and assumed the
functions of governor of Palpa, which he discharged very pugnaci¬
ously. Most free grants of land were resumed and their brahmin
possessors insulted. Brahma Shah, despite his sympathy for the
Panres, did not perish in the purge of 1804. He was saved by his
popularity and venerability; but soon after the palace revolution
he was banished, on administrative business, to distant Kumaun.
He went tormented by sorrow and worry. The Thapas he detested
as low-born upstarts and their acquisition of power he lamented;
but he knew that if his behaviour gave cause for the slightest
suspicion, his family, kept in Kathmandu as hostages, would
answer for it.
    In Garhwal, and beyond to the Sutlaj river, the softly contoured
hills of Kumaun give place to a more wild and angular topography,
in which there are many precipices and chasms. There is no scat¬
tered distribution of small fertile valleys, as in Kumaun. The pro¬
vince’s whole measure of open space is concentrated into one or two
extensive tracts. In comparison with the barrenness of the rest of
the country, the valley (dun) of Dehra seems extravagantly favoured.
Varying from eight to ten miles in breadth, and nearly forty miles
long, it is stretched between the Ganges and the Jumna in the first
                            The Gurkhas                           l9
tier of hills and well watered by a filigree of rills and streams. In
those days it was generously wooded with sal, sissu, pine, and all
the familiar European trees. But tragedy was ever wont to attach
to beautiful things, and for three generations this idyllic grove had
been a source more of chagrin than of joy to the Rajas of Garhwal.
The valley’s riches, and its proximity to the plains, had combined
to make it a favourite plundering ground for Sikh brigands from
the Panjab and Rajput, Gujar and Afghan rulers from Rohilkhand.
The Raja had been compelled to cede villages and whole sections
of the territory as blackmail to various external princes and chief¬
tains. In 1786 the Dun was actually annexed to the Rohilla kingdom
of Saharanpur, and the Raja only regained it by a judicious
marriage contract in 1800. The Gurkhas made preparations to
march into this distracted kingdom as soon as they had subdued
 Kumaun; but their plans were interrupted by the outbreak of a
war with Tibet and China on their northern frontier, and all
available troops had to be withdrawn eastwards to deal with this
 danger. Meanwhile the Raja of Garhwal, in vain hope of reprieve,
 agreed to pay a tribute and keep a vakil at Kathmandu. He demon¬
strated his sincerity by refusing to compound Harak Deva Joshi’s
 scheme for a coalition against the Gurkhas, but even with all his
inoffensiveness could not deter misfortune. In 1801, the Dun was
 ravaged by Marathas from Saharanpur; in 1803, an earthquake
 devastated his capital, Srinagar; and later the same year the
 Gurkha army returned in increased numbers and crossed the
 Ganges into his territory. The Raja retreated to Dehra town, but
 the Gurkhas followed and defeated him. This slight and nervous
 young man showed courage in his hour of trial. He collected a
 mercenary force on the plains and returned to challenge the in¬
 vaders in January 1804. It was a brave but futile gesture, and it
 cost him his life. His sons fled back to India and sought asylum in
 the territories of the East India Company.
    The Gurkhas regarded the devastated condition of Garhwal
 and the barbarity of much of the population more as justifications
 for plunder than as incentives to constructive administration. The
 land revenues were grossly over-assessed, and the occupation
 troops left to squeeze from their assigned estates rents which bore
 no relation to their yield. Arrears increased, and there was armed
 resistance followed by brutal retaliation, depopulation and an in¬
 crease in the trafficking of human slaves, used as a supplementary
20                          The Gurkhas

currency. But the difficulties of colonial government, no matter
how urgent, were now insufficient to deter the Gurkhas from devis¬
ing even more ambitious schemes of conquest. About this time,
Amar Singh Thapa, uncle to Bhim Sen, was raised to the rank of
 Kaji, the highest for which those of non-royal birth were eligible.
 It was this man’s strong will which thenceforth dominated the
fortunes of his country in the west. Amar Singh Thapa, now nearly
sixty, had spent his life soldiering, but like most of his clan had
hitherto been allowed few hopes of high rank and influence. He
came suddenly into prominence after the Thapas’ coup d'etat in
 1803, and immediately sought to add lustre to his reputation and
exalt his prince by pushing back the frontiers of the Gurkha empire
still farther, perhaps even to Kashmir. Had his judgement been
commensurate with his ambitions, he might well have gone far
towards accomplishing his aim. But his self-confidence overmatched
even his aspirations, and was ever leading him onwards when he
should have stayed to question and deliberate. Perhaps there was
some anxiety to make up for lost time in all this—the urgency of an
old man in a hurry; but there was also a strong trait of superstition
in his character, which caused him to place trust in religious por¬
tents and prophecies but to be otherwise unamenable to counsel.
He was accompanied in these years by Shiva Dat Rai, the son of a
Bhotiya, or Tibetan, of oracular pretensions, whose predictions of
success and recounting of legends foretelling the victorious advent
of the Gurkhas seem to have determined the Kathmandu durbar to
carry the western campaign to the Sutlaj and beyond. The con¬
fidence which he derived from such sources enhanced Amar
Singh’s courage as a soldier, but it made him more dreaded than
popular as a commander and blighted his judgement as a tactician
and a diplomat.
    The country between the Jumna and the Sutlaj is not a par¬
ticularly extensive area, when measured by the scale of distances
which characterizes the Indian sub-continent. It comprises some
five and a half thousand square miles, of which perhaps three
thousand are inhabitable. Yet at the beginning of the nineteenth
century this tract was divided into thirty states and principalities.
The inaccessibility of the territory, and the reluctance of the
Moguls to undertake the subjugation of the hills, had always com¬
bined to preserve it as a sanctuary for political refugees and ascetic
fakirs. Many Rajput princes had founded kingdoms here after the
                                 The Gurkhas                                   21

great exodus from north India in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, and had remained undisturbed in their tumultuous
feudal way of life ever since. Centuries of untended fever had
caused a fortress to erupt on almost every rise in the country’s
broken surface. The original amorphous multiplicity had, by 1803,
begun to crystallize into a recognizable political pattern. Four
states had achieved power and growth at the expense of all the rest.
They were Sirmur, adjoining Garhwal on the west; Hindur, partly
on the plains and partly in the hills where the Sutlaj curves north
to enter the mountains; Bilaspur above it, lying across the Sutlaj
on its loop; and Basahar, straddling the river further up and
separated from Bilaspur by the twelve tiny states which formed the
group known as the Twelve Lordships (Bara Thakuri).n The
remaining fourteen principalities were scattered in the basins of
the Tons, Pabar and Giri rivers.12 All these states had in theory
owed tribute (nazarana) to the Emperor of Delhi, but the liability
had never been much more than a licence for the strongest states to
levy exactions on their weaker neighbours. Collected ostensibly on
behalf of the Emperor, the tribute had seldom found its way into his
treasury. The practice of accepting military service in lieu of
pecuniary contribution was widespread, so the armies of these little
states were often disproportionately large. But they were bedraggled
and protean bodies. G. Forster, who passed through Bilaspur in
 1783, described its army as ‘about three hundred horse and eight
thousand footmen, armed with matchlocks, swords, spears and
clubs, huddled together on two sides of a hill in a state of deep
confusion and filth’.
   11 Hindur was also known as Nalagarh; Bilaspur as Kahalur; Basahar as
Kunawar. The capital of Sirmur was Nahan; of Hindur, Palasi; of Bilaspur, the
town of the same name; and of Basahar, Rampur,
   12 An important source for the history of Gurkha westward expansion is the
‘Memoir on the Hill States between the Tonse and the Sutleje’ by Lt. R. Ross
(Secret Consultations, 27 Sept. 1815, no. 41). The names of the Bara Thakuri as
given by Ross and adopted in Walter Hamilton’s Gazetteer, vol. ii, p. 612, are:
Kionthal, Baghat, Baghal, Kothar, Kumaharasin, Bhajji, Mailog, Dhami, Kiari,
Kunhiar, Mangal, Koti.
  The other fourteen Ross lists as: Jubal, Kotgarh, Balsan, Kanatu, Karanku-
lu, Detailu, Thioka, Pandur, Kiund, Utraj, Sarani, Sangri, Barauli, Darkoti.
   Both J. B. Fraser (p. 52) and Hutchison and Vogel (vol. ii, p. 497) give dif¬
ferent lists. Fraser lists eighteen instead of fourteen additional states, and his
names have in many cases been distorted beyond recognition by the misreadings
of his printer.
   Hutchison and Vogel list the Twelve as: Ivionthal, Baghat, Baghal, Kothar,
Beja, Bajji, Mailog, Dhami, Jubal, Kunhiar, Mangal, Balsan.
22                         The Gurkhas

    The dynasties of Hindur and Bilaspur were cognate, and had for
some centuries lived amicably side by side. Lately, however,
Hindur had been ruled by a particularly energetic and ambitious
raja, called Ram Saran Sen, who had been able to exploit the state
of perpetual jealousy among the various royal houses to extend his
own power at the expense of that of his cousin of Bilaspur, without
precipitating a coalition against himself which was permanent
enough to be dangerous. By usurping Bilaspur’s suzerainty over
the Twelve Lordships and annexing large areas of her cis-Sutlaj
possessions, he had gone a long way towards mastering the whole
tract of territory between the Jumna and the Sutlaj. Now he was
meddling in the domestic politics of Sirmur, abetting a group of
rebellious barons who destested their own Raja, Karman Prakash,
as a bully, and despised him as an imbecile. Karman Prakash
despaired of being able to retain his throne without outside help
and implored Amar Singh Thapa to intervene on his behalf. Amar
Singh sent a detachment of 700 men to quell the rebels, but it was
encircled by a Hindur force at Jampta and forced to capitulate and
withdraw. This was in May 1804. Meanwhile, in his picturesque
little palace of frescoed stucco, slothful Maha Chand of Bilaspur
was stirring indignantly. The combined encroachments of his
kinsman, Ram Saran, and of Ram Saran’s ally, the Raja of Kotoch
across the river, had of late deprived him of the richest portions of
his kingdom. Now, Amar Singh Thapa’s talisman and religious
mentor, Shiva Dat Rai, was a native of Bilaspur; and it seems that
he used his powerful influence to arouse the Gurkha Kaji’s interest
in the plight of Maha Chand. Feeble and recreant though he was,
it was this raja whom Amar Singh Thapa selected to be his special
protege. The Gurkha crossed the Jumna in person in October
 1804, and entered the territory which a decade later was to be the
stage of his crucial struggle against the British. He gave battle,
defeated the Hindur troops at Ajmaigarh, and invested the forts of
Ramgarh and Nalagarh. The garrisons were bribed to surrender,
and Ram Saran Sen fled south to the fort of Palasi. Karman
Prakash was restored to the throne of Sirmur as a Gurkha vassal,
and Maha Chand was given nominal trust of all the territories he
had recently lost to Hindur, including the Twelve Lordships. But
it was Shiva Dat Rai who was made the real agent of Amar Singh
in the new puppet state of Bilaspur. He now urged the Kaji to
advance still farther and attack the Raja of Kotoch, who had
                            The Gurkhas                            23
robbed Bilaspur of her possessions on the west bank of the Sutlaj.
Kotoch included the most renowned stronghold in the Himalayas
—Kangra. Long after their authority had disappeared on the plains,
the Moguls had preserved a garrison in Kangra. Its strength had
become proverbial. The fort had been re-annexed to the patrimony
of Kotoch in 1786, by vigorous young Sansar Chand, who aspired
to the leadership of a revived confederation of hill states and who
was even strong enough to cause perturbation among the Sikhs,
now rising to pre-eminence on the Punjab plain. His durbar was
brilliant, the resort of bards, adventurers and artists from all over
Hindustan. Flushed by the prospect of the prestige which its con¬
quest would confer, encouraged by his first easy victories, flattered
by fresh prognostications of success and seduced by promises of
alliance from the various trans-Sutlaj monarchs, Amar Singh
Thapa had little heed for the weakness of his present position. He
gave no thought to that perfidy of the hill rajas which alone had
enabled him to march so easily across the Jumna; was barely con¬
cerned even by the Hindur troops who still occupied Chamba,
Taragarh, Malaun and Surjagarh—strong forts within the territory
 freshly acquired by his army. Arrogant and self-assured, the Kaji
overreached himself. In April 1806, he committed what he later
admitted was a capital error, and crossed the Sutlaj with his main
army, en route for Kangra. He carried Maha Chand with him, but
had barely restored him to his old estates, when he learned that a
thousand troops from Kangra had crossed the river in the opposite
direction farther south, had joined Ram Saran Sen, and were
attacking the Gurkha garrisons in Nalagarh and Ramgarh. The
 Kaji was forced to pause and send back a strong detachment to
 expel the intruders, but, impenitent, still disdained to ponder the
wisdom of his ambition. The march against Kangra was resumed,
and after a preliminary victory over Sansar Chand’s troops at
 Barahati, the fort was reached in July. Attempts to take the place by
storm miscarried, and Amar Singh was compelled to besiege.
    For three long years the futile enterprise endured. Meanwhile
the irrepressible Ram Saran Sen conspired and schemed and, with
shrewder understanding and longer experience than his adversary
of the chameleon hill rajas, was soon able to stir up an anti-Gurkha
movement. It involved not only the Twelve Lordships, who began
to withhold supplies from the Gurkha army before Kangra, but
 Ram Saran’s own quondam victim, Karman Prakash of Sirmur, as
24                           The Gurkhas

  well. Distracted by this treachery and dismayed at the sight of his
  army wasting away, Amar Singh was at length forced to consider
 the bitter expedient of a compromise. He sent a messenger to
  Sansar Chand; but the tall proud Rajput curled his lip and refused
 to treat with the agent of a Thapa. He demanded to treat with
  Rudra Vir Shah, brother of Brahma, whom alone he considered his
 equal in rank. Stung by this insult, Amar Singh dashed off a letter
 to Kathmandu, urging that Rudra Vir’s treaty (which recognized
 Sansar Chand’s right to Kangra in return for the payment of
 tribute) be not ratified. He insisted that the fort was on the point of
 surrender. Amar Singh never forgave the Shah brothers for this
 humiliation. He used his influence to have Hasti Dal Shah removed
 from the governorship of Garhwal, and to have Rudra Vir relieved
 of his command with the field army—though Brahma Shah re¬
 mained beyond the reach of his vengeance in Kumaun. Amar
 Singh’s petulance ruined his chances of withdrawing from Kangra
 with some semblance of dignity. Sansar Chand, who had already
 rejected one offer of aid from the leader of the Sikhs, Ranjit Singh,
 out of preference for the treaty of Rudra Vir Shah, now called on
 the Sikh again. He escaped from Kangra and made a treaty with
 Ranjit Singh—signed, it is said, in blood. He continued to humour
the Gurkhas, hoping to embroil them with Ranjit Singh and keep
the fort himself; and Amar Singh Thapa, unable to acknowledge,
because of his pride, that he was being double-crossed, dallied with
 Sansar in the vague hope that he could either win over Ranjit
 Singh or take the fort in alliance against him. Ranjit Singh pre¬
varicated until his time was ripe and then, in July 1809, put an end
to all this clumsy intriguing by thrashing the Gurkha army, occupy¬
ing Kangra, and making it perfectly clear that he intended to share
it with no one. Grumbling and affecting to claim that he had been
duped by the Sikh, Amar Singh Thapa led the remains of his army,
decimated by famine and disease, in ungainly retreat across the
Sutlaj, having undertaken never to pass that river again.
    He vented his vexation by chastising the contumacious prince¬
lings who had plotted in his absence. The ungrateful Karman
Prakash of Sirmur was peremptorily ejected, and several of the
Twelve Lords were constrained to flee for their lives. Only now
that he came to subdue it, perhaps, did Amar Singh realize how
tenuous had been his hold over this wild and inaccessible region.
His troops had to tackle the frustrating and arduous task of reduc-
                               The Gurkhas                           25
ing numerous hill castles in remote principalities, of whose existence
they had hitherto hardly been aware. The Thakur of Balsan proved
especially refractory, and the Gurkhas suffered three repulses
when trying to reduce his fort, Nagana. He joined with several of
his neighbours and called on the Raja of Basahar for assistance.
This raja obliged with 10,000 men. Amar Singh dealt with this new
threat from the north in person. In May 1811 he marched from
Subathu with a large force, finally took Nagana, and pushed on to
the more hospitable and smiling landscape of the valley of the
middle Sutlaj, where stood the Basahar capital, Rampur. The Kaji
had chosen his time well. The durbar, confused after the recent
death of the Raja and the accession of an infant to the throne,
fled across the river on hearing of the Gurkhas’ approach. After
lengthy negotiation an agreement was concluded whereby the Raja
was left in unmolested possession of his trans-Sutlaj territories in
return for a tribute. The Basahar minister henceforth formed part
of Amar Singh’s growing and impressive retinue of retainers and
clients. In cis-Sutlaj Basahar, the Gurkha administration again
partook of the character of the country on which it was engrafted.
While in Garhwal, whose population was untamed and defiant,
the Gurkha rule was cruel and unmerciful, in Basahar, which lay
astride the broad trading highway of the Sutlaj and whose denizens
had derived culture and probity from a long tradition of commerce,
it was considerably milder.
    On the eve of the war with the British, the Gurkha empire was
at its zenith. It stretched from the Tista river in the east to the
Sutlaj in the west, a distance equivalent to that between the
southern coast of England and the northern tip of Scotland; and
its average breadth was not much less than that of Great Britain.
In the space of half a century, the Gurkhas had unified, for the
first time in history, a belt of territory which was the most beautiful,
the most inaccessible and traditionally the most politically frag¬
mented in Asia. There seems no reason to suppose that, had the
war with the British not intervened, this empire would not have
proved viable. Its great strength was the army by which it had been
won and by which it was held, for no rival among the Himalayan
states had a force more efficient and more loyal. Among the native
princes of north India, only Ranjit Singh had a comparable army,
but his energies and interests were centred more on Kashmir than
on the Nepalese territories.
26                               The Gurkhas

   The regular army of Nepal was officered by Gurkha Chetris, but
composed in the main of Mongolian hillmen—Magars and, to a
lesser extent, Gurungs. These hill people, diminutive, thick¬
muscled and with oriental features and complexion, first showed
their worth as fighting men in the army raised by the Gurkhas, and
for this reason were thought by the British to be Gurkhas them¬
selves.13 They were ideal soldiers: immensely strong, loyal and
tractable, and with a perfunctory religion which left them free of
the restrictions which ritual normally imposed on Hindu soldiers.
While orthodox Hindus always stripped and washed the whole
body before eating, these hillmen made do with removing their
headgear and washing faces and hands. They were cheerful, agreed
to carry their own provisions, and were not fastidious about food.
The peace establishment of the army was between six and eight and
a half thousand, but by a system of rotation the full potential
strength was about double this. It was exclusively an infantry
force, and its organization had been copied from that of the East
India Company’s Bengal army. Initially, it was organized in com¬
panies; but when Bhim Sen Thapa returned from Benares he re¬
grouped some troops into battalions, using the English title of
captain for their commanding officers. This gave the Nepalese
army much the same sort of organization which the Bengal army
had had in the days of Clive. The involutions of British drill were
mimicked from the beginning, and in Kathmandu the troops were
paraded daily to English words of command, achieving such an
efficiency in their exercises as would not have shamed the East
India Company’s own battalions. These routines were learned from
British deserters who took service with the Gurkha Raja. In 1814
there were still two of these individuals in Nepal, called Byrnes and
Bell. Byrnes was made a schoolmaster and taught the officers
English, while Bell, a gunner, was made a colonel of artillery. They
even seem to have given some musical instruction, for in 1816, at
Makwanpur, Nepalese fifers entertained the astonished British
troops with their own versions of The Lass of Richmond Hill, The
Soldier's Wife, and half a dozen other English marching tunes.
After the middle 1790s the dress of the regular soldiers was in

     13 The misconception still persists. The so-called Gurkha regiments in the
British and Indian armies are composed not of Gurkhas but of the various tribes
of the Nepalese hills whom it was the special policy of the Gurkhas to keep dis¬
tinct from themselves.
                                The Gurkhas                                   27

quaint imitation of the Company’s uniforms. There were red
jackets with facings and white cross belts for the men, and fantastic
outfits for the officers, concocted with little heed for the exact
symbolism of British army dress. The rank of general was held by
the Commander-in-Chief alone in the Nepalese army; yet the suba
 (provincial governor) killed by John Shipp in 1816 was dressed in
the old-fashioned full uniform of an English general, frog lace and
all. Prithvi Narayan Shah had himself distrusted Europeans and
 had been reluctant to employ them; but even he had been obliged
 to have recourse to Frenchmen to teach his artisans how to smelt
 ores and cast and bore cannon. Three Frenchmen were in charge of
 the Nepalese artillery until the middle 1790s, and kept very busy
 supervising the casting of guns, howitzers and mortars, and the
 manufacture of gunpowder. Byrnes and Bell also cast cannon in
 Kathmandu, and by the outbreak of the war with the British there
 must have been four or five hundred guns of all descriptions in
 Nepal. Even quite sophisticated artillery devices were adopted. The
 British discovered shrapnel shells and howitzers with tangent
 scales at Makwanpur in 1816. The Gurkhas did not only copy the
 Europeans. When the Chinese invaded Nepal in 1792, their army
 was provided with very light leather guns, which fired five or six
 rounds before bursting. Their antagonists promptly adopted the
 idea, and after the British had occupied Garhwal they found guns
 ‘made of leather pretty thick, lined throughout with clay and an
 iron hoop rudely twisted round’.14 They were so light that one man
 could easily carry two, used shot of about one pound, and could be
 fired three or four times before bursting. European muskets were
 imported from Calcutta by Prithvi Narayan Shah; but subsequently
 the Gurkhas set up their own manufactories, with the help of
 English deserters, and produced relatively efficient weapons. They
 were spoiled only by inaccurate balance and defective locks. The
 severest disadvantage suffered by Gurkha musketeers was the poor
 quality of their flints. These frequently snapped or missed fire, so
 it was essential to import flints from India to make the firearms work
 properly. With this, and the single other exception of saltpetre,
 the Nepalese territories provided all the raw materials essen¬
 tial to satisfy the Gurkha passion for military appurtenants: good-
 quality iron for muskets, swords and khukuris (short curved knives
   14 ‘Extract of a Letter dated Srinagar’, Calcutta Monthly Journal, vol. xxvii:
October 1815, p. 366.
28                               The Gurkhas

famous as the characteristic weapon of the hill tribes); copper and
zinc for brass guns; lead for shot; and sulphur for gunpowder.
    Having said so much, it must be emphasized that, for all its
apparent sophistication, when actually in the field the Gurkha army
neither acted like a European force nor owed its victories to Euro¬
pean science. Of the regular army, perhaps half was organized in
battalions, and these were kept in Palpa and in the Nepal Valley to
provide for defence and furnish ceremonial corps d’ elite. The re¬
mainder, still divided into independent companies, was dispersed
throughout the wide length of the empire. It was very thinly spread,
and recourse had to be made to irregular troops to thicken its
texture. The greater part of the Gurkha field army consisted of
local troops. In the west large numbers of the inhabitants of
Kumaun and Garhwal were embodied as militia, officered by
Gurkhas and supplied with muskets by the government, but with
no uniform and with regular pay only when on foreign service.
Otherwise they were paid a retaining fee in land. Of a force of be¬
tween six and seven thousand men west of the Kali, between a half
and two-thirds were locals.15 In the eastern provinces, Kiratas and
Limbus were enlisted. They received no pay, but were allowed to
keep all they might obtain, specie excepted, by plunder. These
tatterdemalion bands were very different from the trim English-
style soldiers who manoeuvred with clockwork precision on the
Tundikhel, the vast parade ground laid out in Kathmandu by Bhim
Sen Thapa. Furthermore, the Gurkha officers, although they knew
    15 The most important sources of information about the Nepalese army are:
B. H. Hodgson’s ‘Memorandum Relating to the Gurkha Army’: Sec. Cons., 4
March 1825, no 16; Information submitted to the government by H. Hearsey
and T. Rutherfurd (P.R.N.W., pp. 27, 49, 55); Information from Capt. Richards
(Pol. Cons., 20 Aug. 1813, no 34); Memoir by Capt. Raper: P.R.N.W., pp.
 145—6; Report on Hill Districts by Ochterlony: Ludhiana Records, pp. 399-400,
407; Information supplied by Capt. Hearsey to Capt. Richards: Pol. Cons., 23
July 1813, no. 34; Moorcroft, Asiatic Researches, xii, p. 513. Both Moorcroft
and Hearsey were in agreement in estimating the proportion as one-third regu¬
lars, two-thirds locals. Ochterlony reversed the proportion. Hearsey estimated
the whole army beyond the Kali at 6,000; Ochterlony estimated that beyond the
Jumna alone at 7,000. Subsequent experience showed that Ochterlony’s was an
over-estimation—see below Ch. IX. A rough collation of available sources
indicates that the strength and distribution of the regular army on the eve of the
conflict was as follows:
       War Strength of army—about 14,000.
       Distributed between Kathmandu and Palpa (7,000), provinces east of the
   Kali (3,500), and provinces west of the Kali (3,500). Irregulars of equal
   strength west of the Kali would bring the total of troops there to 7,000.
                             The Gurkhas                            29

English words of command, gasconaded in English uniforms and
taught the rudiments of English discipline, had very little grasp of
the fundamental principles of which all these were but the super¬
ficial expression. The daily parades in Kathmandu were little more
than a decorative choreography, inspired by a love of ostentation
and designed to give an air of martial circumstance to the capital.
In the field, the strength of the army resided less in its collective
discipline and in the training of its officers than in the powers of
endurance and courage of its individual members, who were all
natural guerrilla fighters. Tactics were elementary, and seldom in¬
volved more than the Gurkhas’ favourite expedient of attacking
simultaneously from two or three directions. Usually a volley of
musket fire was sufficient to terrify the enemy into surrender or
flight; but in cases of resistance they would surround their antag¬
onist and starve him into submission. The Gurkhas were past
masters in the art of stockade warfare. Within a few hours a force
could be almost ineradicably ensconced behind a high abatis made
of two parallel screens of wickered branches and filled between
with stones, mud, sticks and any available rubbish. From these
safe retreats they would harass the enemy with daring assaults,
usually nocturnal. The scientific refinements, like the drill and the
polish, were reserved for Kathmandu. Guns were so difficult to
transport that their use was very limited. Apart from the light
leather ordnance, the Gurkhas had only about three dozen small
brass cannon in the west, and these had to be carried on slings or
dragged along the gound. They roared impressively with their
rough hand-beaten shot, but did little damage, because there was
no means of aiming them. Carriages were very few, and often the
guns were merely laid on the ground and fired by a trail. Far more
important to the army than these cumbersome engines was its
agility. There were no pack animals. All stores and supplies were
carried by non-combatant camp servants. There were large numbers
of these, for every soldier had his woman slave and his ‘boy’ (keti).
Baggage was reduced to an absolute minimum. The troops had no
tents, but slept under lowmakeshift shelters of blankets and sticks. An
officer’s camp equipage could be carried by one man, and the whole
tentage of the commander required only six bearers. Supplies suffi¬
cient for three days only were normally carried. The army expected
to provide itself from the country, and agents were stationed in all
the principal towns and villages to buy and forward grain.
                                  II

    THE QUARREL WITH THE BRITISH

   m s the Gurkhas advanced westward, they were paced on their
  /\ southern flank by the British, who were simultaneously
x       pushing back the frontiers of their north-Indian empire. The
eighteenth century was the age of the decline and fall of the Indian
empire of the Mogul1 Emperors of Delhi. Internal decadence
enabled the Emperor’s powerful provincial governors—such as the
Nawabs of Bengal and Oudh in the north and the Nizam of the
Deccan in the south—to assert their independence; while succes¬
sive whirlwind raids by the monarchs of Persia and Afghanistan
hastened the demise of Imperial authority without providing an
alternative Muslim hegemony. The chief contenders for the Mogul
legacy were the Hindus and the Europeans. The Hindu revival
was probably inevitable. Hindu culture is essentially martial in
spirit (Gandhi’s interpretation of the ethic of non-violence to mean
the prohibition of war being a modern departure), and the Mogul
rulers, alien by virtue of their origin and their religion, had never
been completely accepted by the subject races. The resurgent
Hindus were the Sikhs, the Gurkhas and the Marathas. Their
European rivals were the French and the British.
   The Sikhs were a Jat sect—reformed Hindus, impatient at once
of idolatry, caste and asceticism. After many vicissitudes, they
wrested the Punjab and Sirhind from the Afghans, and dominated
a turbulent medley of Turks, Pathans, Rajputs and Jats as a martial
aristocracy. The Gurkhas seized the hills, with little opposition
from anyone. The Marathas remained heirs to the rest, despite a
resounding defeat at the hands of the Afghans at Panipat in 1761,
but were cheated by the British of their inheritance. They were a
wiry tribe of western India, which in the first decade of the eigh¬
teenth century became the agent of Imperial authority in the Deccan
and south-west India. From Poona, the Peshwas (hereditary
ministers)—the Maratha monarchy was otiose from an early stage
   1 Mogul = mongol; but the dynasty was in fact of central Asian Turkish
origin, descended from Tamberlain the Great.
                    The Quarrel with the British                    31

—directed imperialist expeditions which, by 1771, had made them
masters of all central India, Rajputana, Malwa and Berar, and
custodians of the Emperor himself. But the polity split into five
independent portions. The states of Gwalior, Indore, Berar (or
Nagpur), and Gujarat continued to acknowledge the titular
suzerainty of the Peshwas of Poona, but the so-called ‘Maratha
confederacy’ invariably disintegrated in times of crisis, and therein
lay its rivals’ greatest advantage.
    The territorial power of the East India Company, a consortium
of merchants trading under charter from the British Crown, germi¬
nated, like that of the Marathas, in southern India. Its first factories
were at Surat and Bombay on the west, and at Madras on the east,
or Coromandel, coast. But the Company’s wars in the south, during
the second half of the eighteenth century, were less against the
Marathas than against the French, for even after Clive had captured
the last French colonies (1761), a powerful Gallic influence per¬
 sisted at Poona and at the independent Muslim court of Mysore.
 The wars fought by the English with Poona and Mysore between
 1779 and 1799 were basically projections into Indian politics of the
 Anglo-French rivalry. The Company’s real struggle against the
 Marathas took place in northern and central India.
    It was self-defence and skilful opportunism, rather than pre¬
 meditated ambition, that turned this group of British merchants
 into the rulers of an empire. The Company had trading posts in the
 area of Calcutta from the end of the seventeenth century, but with
 no territory and no army at first. Harassment from the Marathas in
 Berar and from capricious Nawabs of Bengal, plus greed for the
 reputedly immense treasure of the Nawabs, led Clive to form an
 army and claim a share of influence in the internal politics of
 Bengal. The share soon grew into a monopoly, and the Company
 began to control the Nawabs. It acquired tenant rights to certain
 territories, and in 1765 became a landed potentate in its own right
 when the Emperor made it Dewan (fiscal administrator in theory,
 farmer of revenues in fact) of the three provinces of Bengal, Bihar
 and Orissa. With these new responsibilities, the Company began
 to develop an administrative identity. The main emphasis during
 the next thirty years was on curbing the Company’s own servants,
 whose orgy of extortion following the devolution of power in Bengal
 had brought the Company near to bankruptcy; but consolidation
 involved a certain extension of territorial power as well. In 1772,
32                  The Quarrel with the British
 the fertile province of Kuch Bihar, wedged between the northern
 frontier of Bengal and Bhutan, was reincorporated into the territory
 of Bengal after a long independence. Its Raja appealed to the
 Company for help against the invading mountaineers of Bhutan,
 and Warren Hastings, Governor of Bengal at the time, was glad of
 this opportunity to annex the territory—though he firmly dis¬
 claimed ‘remote projects of conquest’, and stressed that his only
 aim was to complete the outline of the Company’s dominions. A
 policy of self-defence, mixed with need for money, led Hastings to
 turn his attentions to the Muslim principality of Oudh, long
 effectively independent of Delhi, but now effete. To protect Bengal
 against the Afghans in Rohilkhand and the Marathas in Delhi,
 Oudh was made a buffer state and provided with a protective force,
 for which it was compelled to pay a subsidy.
    The Marathas and the English remained in uneasy truce until
 the arrival of Lord Wellesley as Governor-General in 1798.
 Wellesley, brother of the Duke of Wellington, was a little man with
 an Olympian manner and panoramic vision. He viewed Indian
 politics in relation to those of Europe, and conceived an elaborate
scheme of alliances with the native states designed to preclude the
subversion of the Company’s position in India by the French. The
 Nawab of Oudh was constrained to disband his own army, accept
an increased subsidiary force, cede Rohilkhand and all territory
between the Ganges and the Jumna in lieu of payment, employ no
Europeans and leave the Company in control of his foreign policy.
The weakest of the independent rulers, the Nizam of the Deccan,
meekly submitted to similar terms; but Mysore, whose ruler Tipu
Sultan flaunted his sympathy for the French in an attempt to pre¬
serve his independence, had to be coerced. It was Wellesley’s
attempt to bring the Marathas into this grand system of British
hegemony which finally precipitated the long-pending clash be¬
tween them and the Company. Poona and Gujarat agreed to accept
troops, pay subsidies and forgo the employment of Europeans; but
the other three states vigorously demurred at this betrayal of
Maratha independence. Gwalior and Berar were at war with the
Company from 1802 to 1804, but were then compelled to submit.
Only Berar accepted a subsidiary force, but each received a British
Resident and agreed not to employ Europeans. The blind Emperor,
Shah Alam, was rescued from the clutches of Sindhia of Gwalior
and set up as the mediatized King of Delhi, under the protection of
                    The Quarrel with the British                   33

a British Resident. All Maratha territory between the Jumna and
the Ganges was annexed by the Company. It was combined with
the estates in the same area ceded by Oudh in 1801, and made part
of the Bengal Presidency under the designation ‘Ceded and Con¬
quered Provinces’.2 Holkar of Indore then took up arms, and pro¬
longed the contest until 1805, causing unexpected discomfort to
the English commanders, Lake and Monson. Learning of this, the
home authorities made known their displeasure in such a way that
Wellesley was forced to resign. They had been uneasy about him
for some time. He lorded it over his council, openly despised his
employers, humiliated native princes and seemed to be loading the
Company with debts and barren conquests. Thus, with his plans
only half realized in the crucial area of central India, Wellesley was
obliged to return home, and his successor, Lord Minto, was in¬
structed to pursue a policy of retrenchment and neutrality. British
protection was withdrawn from the states of Rajputana, and Indore
and Gwalior, dangerous as wounded wasps, were left to conspire
uncurbed. The territories of the Company and its clients had by
this time assumed roughly the configuration of a huge question
mark, following the northern and western outline of the subcon¬
tinent. The Ceded and Conquered Provinces, Oudh, and Bihar and
Bengal formed the hook; Madras, the Carnatic, the Deccan and
Mysore the thickened tail; and Ceylon (administered by the Crown)
the stop. In the open-ended space of central India were the Marathas
and the Rajputs.
   In the years between Wellesley’s resignation and the arrival of
 Lord Hastings as Governor-General in 1813, there were serious
 confrontations with the two remaining members of the trio of
 Hindu communities claiming the reversion of Mogul authority in
northern India—the Sikhs and the Gurkhas. It seemed possible
that the Company would find itself in conflict with one or both of
these powers while Gwalior and Indore still remained sufficiently
strong to seek revenge. This was the nightmare of a Hindu con¬
federacy which alarmed Lord Hastings. The Sikh communities
straddled the Sutlaj river, divided between the Punjab and the old
Mogul province of Sirhind. Raja Ranjit Singh of Lahore had be¬
come the most powerful Sikh monarch, and he sought to extend his
control to the Sikhs on the other side of the river. To prevent this,
Minto was compelled to act against the letter of his instructions and
                 2 Later called the North-West Provinces.
34                  The Quarrel with the British

grant British protection to the Sirhind Sikhs, thus pushing further
west, to the left bank of the Sutlaj, the starting place of the hook in
the question mark of British territory. The Gurkha empire was
contiguous throughout its whole length to territories either
administered or protected by the Company. Before long, both the
Company and its hill neighbour found that with their new domin¬
ions they had inherited local disputes about borders.
    There exists no greater contrast than that between the country
occupied by the Gurkhas, where the earth appears to have been
petrified in the full violence of some primeval fermentation, and
that in northern India then under the English Company’s sway,
which is an immense plain, level as a lake and reminiscent of the
 calm, luminous landscapes of Claude le Lorrain, with their groves
and deliquescent distances. From the Ganges eastwards these pro¬
vinces were separated from the Himalayan foothills by a swampy
forest of sal, elephant grass and bamboo, where the air was dank,
close, and ceaselessly vibrating with the noises of mosquitoes,
cicadas and frogs. This fringe, called Tarai along most of the
Nepalese border, Morang in extreme south-east Nepal, and divided
into sections called duars on the frontier of Bhutan, is still the big
game hunter’s paradise. At the time of which we are speaking, it
was intensely malarial throughout the summer and monsoon
months, from April to October—a place of dread, to be avoided at
all cost, save by the Tharus and other indigenous tribes, which
were immune to the infection. The mosquito’s responsibility being
then unknown, the awl (malarial fever) was attributed to some
noxious miasma. According to the natives this emanated from the
mouths of large serpents who inhabited the northern mountains.
The European view was that it derived from putrefying vegetation
or stagnant water. Its effects were swift and horrifying: fever and
vomiting, followed in a few hours by raving madness and death.
The Company’s northern territories, which stretched into this
inhospitable region, were bisected by the province of Oudh. West
of Oudh there were the Ceded and Conquered Provinces, of which
Rohilkhand and Saharanpur were the most northern; and east of
Oudh there were the districts of Gorakhpur, Saran, Tirhut,
Purnea and, in the extreme north-east of Bengal across the Tista
river, the district of Rangpur. These were the mojfussil-—the ‘in¬
terior’ or ‘up country’ areas, as opposed to the Presidency capital,
Calcutta, which might be up to three months’ journey away.
                      The Quarrel with the British                  35

Europeans were few and far between. Besides the handful of
magistrates, revenue collectors and military men, there were only
those few who had managed to secure settlers’ licences—essential
for anyone who wished to live more than ten miles from Calcutta.
They were mostly indigo planters, brutish and boisterous in¬
dividuals, whose handsome villas with spacious verandas were
becoming numerous in Gorakhpur, Tirhut and Purnea. European
life centred around the civil stations. Each composed of district
Judge,3 Collector, Registrar, Surgeon and Postmaster, with a few
army officers attached to guards and escorts, these were remote
pockets of British society in country where the British had barely
been heard of and where white faces still provoked consternation and
amazement. There were no all-weather roads, so the military depots—
 Dinapur, Ghazipur, Chunar, Cawnpore, Meerut—were built
 close to the river Ganges, which remained the principal highway.
 From these centres troops were distributed among the numerous
outposts and frontier pickets.
    The districts of Saran, Tirhut, Purnea and Rangpur formed part
 of the territories of which the fiscal administration was granted by
 the Emperor to the Company in 1765.4 They were divided into the
 territorial assignments of various zemindars, who were, strictly
 speaking, hereditary rent collectors, but who by the terms of Lord
 Cornwallis’s land settlement were recognized as proprietors. The
 rents for which they were liable to the Company were fixed in
 perpetuity. When the land settlement was made, the Company’s
 officials were reluctant to concern themselves with defining the
 boundaries of the estate for which each zemindar contracted to pay
 the revenues. Interference in matters of this nature was held to be
 an infringement of the sacrosanct principle of privacy. This was not
 the province of revenue administrators, but of the civil courts,
 should zemindars feel disposed to make use of their services in
 cases of uncertainty. The result was, in the words of Sir George
 Campbell, that ‘even the very first step towards the roughest
 settlement of modern days, the definition of boundaries, was not
 taken . . . There was a mere register of rent-paying estates, with
 the names of the proprietors, but no means of identifying the lands.’
  Quarrels concerning boundaries therefore inevitably arose. When
 two disputing zemindars were tenants of the same government, no
   3 Who also exercised the functions of magistrate at this time.
   4 Gorakhpur was ceded by the Nawab of Oudh in 1801.
36                  The Quarrel with the British

 grave issue was involved; but when one was a client of the Company
 and the other a tenant or agent of a neighbouring sovereign power,
 then a small domestic problem was transformed into an inter¬
 national border dispute. In the days of feckless Mogul rule, the
 zemindars in these districts had continuously disputed with the
 hill rajas about possession of the rich lowland border areas; and
 after the Company made them its clients and revenue contractors,
 its officers were soon faced with an avalanche of claims and com¬
 plaints. Villages and tracts were reported to have been seized
 either by the Bhutanese or by the people of the Raja of Nepal. It
 was often impossible to make a satisfactory settlement. A collector
 or magistrate might be expected to form a judgement on the basis
 of quite preposterous evidence. The altercation between the Raja
of Bhutan and the Company’s zemindar of Baikantpur, whose
 mutual border meandered back and forth across the shifting Tista,
was typical. When the Magistrate of Rangpur went to inspect the
 boundary of an estate belonging to Bhutan on the west bank of the
river, he found that its distinguishing features were occasional
streams, rivulets and ridges of earth. Elsewhere his only direction
was the memory of his guide, who professed to recognize the
frontier by the different colourings of the grass ‘and other marks of
the like nature which seemed to exist nowhere but in the fertility of
the imagination’. The Raja of Kuch Bihar was in incessant dispute
with the Bhutanese authorities concerning the villages in the area
of their common frontier. In 1809, the Company set up a com¬
mission to examine the claims and counter-claims in question and
even sent military assistance to its vassal when the inquiry indicated
his complaints against Bhutan to be justified. Sometimes, encroach¬
ments were flagrant. The Bhutanese, for example, seized the estate
of Bidyagong, in the extreme north-east of Rangpur, and asserted
their right to nominate a successor when the adjacent zemindari of
Bijni became vacant. But such remote and complex contests were
more tiresome than important to the British officials. The Magis¬
trate of Rangpur reported the Bidyagong affair, but the govern¬
ment decided than an annual rent of forty elephants was a loss too
trivial to warrant giving offence to Bhutan. Bijni, way over on the
Manas river, was the remotest ramification of the province of
Bengal, and virtually nothing was known about the country and the
nature of its connection with the Mogul empire. When the Bhu¬
tanese appointed their own candidate as zemindar in 1791, the
                       The Quarrel with the British                            37
British authorities held a desultory inquiry, but forbore to press
their own right, established by the investigation, to nominate a
successor.
   Company zemindars in areas farther west accused the Gurkhas
of usurpation. Their complaints were numerous, elaborate, insis¬
tent, and often totally without foundation. They were bothersome
to the collectors, busy with the administration of districts of vast
extent; harassing to the magistrates, who had enormous backlogs of
cases; and embarrassing to the government, which wished to avoid
offending Nepal, and which, because its revenues had been settled
on a permanent basis, was not the loser in cases of encroachment.
At first there was no international problem. The Gurkhas showed
themselves anxious to have these disputes settled peaceably, and
the Company seemed prepared to make concessions at the expense
of its own clamouring zemindars. In 1795 Cornwallis assured the
Raja of Nepal that he was willing to define the long-uncertain
border between the Morang and the district of Purnea in exact
conformity with his representations; and writs and petitions from
cheated zemindars of Tirhut were left to gather dust in the
Collector’s files. In the zone to the east of Oudh, the boundary
between the Ceded and Conquered Provinces and the Gurkha
colonies of Kumaun and Garhwal had been made so uncertain by
the collusion and inefficiency of the Oudh officers who had pre¬
ceded the British, and accurate records and surveys were so want¬
ing, that the Company’s servants were perplexed as to how to react
when they saw the Gurkhas move into a fresh frontier area. Often,
indeed, these incursions remained long unnoticed, for in the early
years of British administration of these territories the Company’s
revenue assessments were necessarily tentative,5 and its authority
very tenuous. Rohilkhand had declined into a state of anarchy under
the combined effects of Maratha invasions and maladministration
by Oudh. Cultivators and farmers had relapsed into a state of in¬
stinctive resistance to all revenue collectors. Organized brigandage
was rife, exacerbated by the continued existence of the small
independent states of Rampur and Sirdhana, which were sanc¬
tuaries for fugitives from British justice. One of the first Company
    6 Wellesley proposed applying a permanent settlement on the Bengal pattern
after a ten-year interval of shorter experimental assessments, but in the event it
was a thirty-year settlement that was made. There were no zemindars of the
Bengal type in these provinces, and the revenue contracts were made with the
chiefs among proprietors of groups of villages.
38                  The Quarrel with the British

collectors in Moradabad felt so insecure that he threw elegance to
the winds and made an incongruous moat and mud rampart
around his handsome cutchery. To the west, across the Ganges in
the district of Saharanpur, almost every village was surrounded by
a wall or ditch—testimonies to a long torment inflicted by Sikh
raiders from across the Jumna. The large new military station of
Meerut, outside the old town, had to be built on land reclaimed
from the jungle; and crime was so rampant in the area that it was
not unusual to stumble across the corpse of a murder victim even
on the plain between the city and the cantonments. With so much
else to distract them, it is scarcely surprising that the tiny number
of British officials gave only perfunctory attention to the settlement
of the northern regions, and only scant notice to the subsequent
Nepalese incursions. Indeed, the marauding Mewati and Amir
tribes had made alarums and excursions along the northern
frontier so unexceptional, that such intrusions were often lost in
the general confusion. Then again, British officers were scared by
the climate of the Tarai and tended to avoid it, save for a few weeks
in the healthy season, when they might hunt big game. It was quite
by accident that the Magistrate of Bareilly noticed, in 1811, that
the Gurkhas had built a fort in Kheri. This was a remote appendix
of territory east of the Kali, wedged between Oudh and the hills. It
had been assessed as part of the Ceded and Conquered Provinces,
but its revenue had never actually been realized by the Company.
The Magistrate was sure that the Gurkhas had not been in occupa¬
tion of the tract two years previously, but, as he pointed out, no
one could be sure that they were not entitled to it. ‘Such is the
undefined boundary between the two governments’, he wrote, ‘and
our want of local information of the extent of our territories in the
unexplored tract of country along the foot of the hills, that doubts
may be entertained whether even the acquisitions of the Nepalese
which are stated to appertain to the pergana of Kherigarh can be
pronounced encroachment on our territories.’
   Obviously, such a state of affairs could not be permitted to con¬
tinue. The Directors of the Company wrote from London to
censure the ‘want of vigilance’ or the ‘defect in the system of
management’ which allowed boundaries to elude definition and
anarchy to persist. ‘It is unnecessary for us to insist upon the im¬
portance of having the limits of our dominions accurately defined’,
they pronounced, in February 1814. But the boundary question had
                    The Quarrel with the British                  39

already boiled to a crisis before the ship carrying this dispatch
reached Calcutta. Long even before it was written, both the British
and the Gurkha governments had changed their attitude towards
the frontier problem. When the Thapas acceded to power, the
Gurkha durbar became pugnacious and uncompromising. At the
same time, the Company’s government decided that its own laxity
and complaisance in these matters had gone on long enough. The
border must be clearly defined, once and for all, even at the risk of
displeasing Kathmandu.
    In one area, at least, defining the border was as simple as draw¬
ing a line on a map and then warning the Gurkhas that they would
cross it at their peril. This could be done in the frontier regions
adjacent to the recent Gurkha conquests in the western hills. Here
the Gurkhas had had no time to establish themselves in the low¬
lands. As they held Kumaun and the territory beyond only by
right of conquest, they had no a priori right to parts of these pro¬
vinces which they did not actually occupy. Seizure of the hilly part
of a raja’s kingdom gave them no claim to the lowland portion if the
 raja had not formally resigned it and was able to defend it. Now
the rajas expelled from the western hills were able to defend their
lowland possessions, because the Company decided that it would
support them in their determination to do so. It was made plain to
 the Gurkhas that they would invade these tracts below the hills only
 on pain of war with the British. Because the Gurkhas were not yet
 established below the hills, and because they had no treaty rights,
 it proved a simple and effective way of fixing boundaries. The
 Calcutta government, however, did not dispute the Gurkhas’ claim
 to the mountain territories, and resisted considerable pressure to
 reinstate the rajas in the hills. Early in 1810, Amar Singh Thapa
 announced his intention of occupying certain villages on the plains
 of Sirhind on the justification that they belonged to Sirmur and
 Hindur, all of whose territories were now his by right of conquest.
 Colonel David Ochterlony, at Ludhiana, was Agent for the affairs
 of the Sirhind Sikhs brought under the protection of the Company
 by Minto in 1809. He had already been given clear instructions for
 such a contingency. He was to inform the Gurkha commander that
 all territories below the line of the foothills, whether previously
 attached to hill states or not, were now under the protection of the
 Company; but at the same time he was to make it clear that the
 Company had no interest whatever in the fate of territories within
40                  The Quarrel with the British

 the mountains. But Ochterlony was spoiling for a fight. He urged
 that the Gurkhas be requested not only to give up their new
 possessions in the plains, but also to restore the Dehra and Kayarda
 Duns, in the first range of foothills, to the Garhwal and Sirmur
 royal families respectively. This, he claimed, would create a useful
 buffer region between the Gurkha and the British spheres of in¬
terest, besides enhancing the Company’s prestige in the view of all
the native states of Hindustan. He anticipated little resistance from
the Gurkhas, whom he disdained as ‘a body of ill-armed and un¬
 disciplined barbarians, who affect a wretched imitation of the dress,
accoutrements, and constitution of a British native battalion and
who might have been successfully resisted in such a country by less
than a third of their numbers’.6 Government patiently pointed out
that it would be futile and discreditable to make such a demand, for
it was unlikely that the Gurkhas would comply, and the expediency
of compulsion was ‘more than questionable’. In the event, Amar
Singh did not act on his claim to the lowland villages, and the use of
force even in the plains was unnecessary.
    In the middle of 1813 there was a second frontier crisis. Amar
Singh Thapa’s men seized six villages which two of Ochterlony’s
Sikh proteges, Patiala and Hindur, affirmed belonged to their low¬
land possessions. Amar Singh claimed that they belonged to Sirmur
and Kionthal, states in the hills which he had conquered and to all
of whose estates he had right; and he asked for time to make
reference to Kathmandu before relinquishing them. Ochterlony
agreed to the delay—but only because the season was not yet fit for
military operations. He was convinced, or affected to be convinced,
that Amar Singh had no intention of abandoning the villages.
Briskly, and with obvious enthusiasm, he set about making prepara¬
tions for a punitive expedition, whose object was to be the expul¬
sion of the Gurkhas from all the hill areas west of the Ganges. This
brought him into contact with Captain Hyder Hearsey, a half-
caste who had made his fortune by fighting as a mercenary with
various native princes in the turbulent years before 1804 and by
marrying a Muslim princess of Cambay. Hearsey had in his pocket
his own plan for an invasion of the western hills. It had been con¬
cocted in consultation with Harak Deva Joshi, the quondam king¬
maker of Kumaun, and Hearsey had a special interest in its imple¬
mentation, because in his other pocket he had a deed of right to
                     6 Ludhiana Records, pp. 219-20.
                    The Quarrel with the British                   41

Dehra Dun. He had bought this for a few thousand rupees in
1811, from the impoverished and exiled heir to the kingdom of
Garhwal. Ochterlony proceeded on the assumption that the
Governor-General, Lord Minto, would be of the opinion ‘that the
best way of enforcing the restitution of the disputed villages . . .
would be to show our ability to do much more’; and his own ‘firm
persuasion’ was ‘that Amar Singh Thapa will compel us to dislodge
his troops from below the hills’. But his assumption and his per¬
suasion were wrong, and both his ambitions and Hearsey’s hopes
were for the moment to remain unsatisfied. ‘It is . . . far from
being the wish or intention of the Governor-General in Council to
engage in any extended scheme of operations such as that contem¬
plated [by you]. His Lordship ... is, on the contrary, desirous of
maintaining the existing relation of friendship with the Nepalese
Government, and of effecting an adjustment of all disputed points
by amicable negotiation, if practicable’, wrote the Political Secre¬
tary. At the very most, and then only as a last resort, force might be
used to eject them from the lowlands.7 Meanwhile Amar Singh
Thapa, confuting Ochterlony’s confident assertion that he had
been bluffing, did make reference to Kathmandu. The durbar made
it plain that as far as it was concerned the issue was not to be
settled according to whether the villages were or were not below the
hills, but according to whether the Company or the Gurkhas had
been in possession of them first. His government, in fact, was far
more intransigent than the Kaji himself, who was embarrassed by
these injunctions. He appealed to Ochterlony to spare his dignity.
He had occupied the villages in the sincere belief that they be¬
longed to the Gurkhas by right, and he could not now withdraw
without losing face. Could not the Gurkhas and the Company
share the contested territory? But Ochterlony was obdurate, and
issued an ultimatum. Though peevish and insistent as to his right,
the Kaji had no intention of risking a conflict with the Company,
and he directed his officers to withdraw. Only when he actually
inspected the disputed areas, several weeks later, did Ochterlony
discover that two of the villages were decidedly in the hills.
   Amar Singh Thapa had made a genuine concession because he
was eager to try again to capture Kangra. He was convinced that the
British were preparing to cross the Sutlaj and conquer the Punjab,
and his idea was to use the occasion, with British acquiescence,
                     7 Ludhiana Records, pp. 339-44.
42                  The Quarrel with the British

to march once more against the fortress and avenge his previous
humiliation. Ochterlony peremptorily disavowed such intentions;
but once this Gurkha had formed his own interpretation of a
situation, he was loath to change it. He continued to press for
an alliance, persuaded of the self-evident correctness of his own
assessment of British ambitions. Ochterlony, exasperated by this
obstinacy, complained of Amar Singh’s obtuseness and duplicity.
But however offensive the idea might have seemed to the British,
the Gurkha can hardly be blamed for assuming that they coveted
the Punjab. Sansar Chand of Kangra drew the same conclusion.
Indians who had been dazzled by the Company’s meteoric rise
could hardly be expected to associate it with reluctance for empire.
Ochterlony’s refusal to respond to Amar Singh’s overtures made
the Kaji feel humiliated, and his aversion to the British deepened;
but he knew better than to goad them beyond a certain point.
Almost in spite of himself, he sensed the profound unwisdom of a
war with the East India Company, and the expression of his
hostility was ever tempered by an instinctive respect for its power.
Others of his race were not so circumspect, and in negotiations over
disputed borders further east words and actions of uncontrolled
impetuosity led to the collapse of negotiations and the declaration
of war.
   In the frontier areas in the zone east of Oudh it was much more
difficult to define a boundary. It was too late now for the Company
to draw an imaginary line along the base of the foothills and forbid
the Gurkhas to cross it. With the consent of earlier governments
and, in the case of Gorakhpur, with the connivance of the Nawab
of Oudh’s officers, they had become firmly established in the Tarai
and Morang, effective inheritors of all lowland territories formerly
ruled by the hill rajas they had displaced. These hill rajas, unlike
those in the west, had not been able to protect their estates in the
plains, because the Company had not felt disposed to assist them.
The Gurkhas could therefore legitimately claim the estates as the
fruits of conquest. Now if the British and Gurkha governments
were to honour the limits of their respective dominions, it was
essential to know exactly what lands and villages those lowland
estates had comprised. Such knowledge was not easy to obtain,
because in many cases the hill rajas were not the proprietors of their
lowland tracts, but merely tenants in them of the Nawabs of
Bengal and Oudh. In this area, then, resolving the problem was a
                    The Quarrel with the British                   43

great deal more difficult than drawing a line on a map. Here, the
frontier had to be not created, but discovered: and this involved
unpicking a complicated knot of precedents and rights.
   Such a task demanded patience, good faith, and a compromising
attitude of both sides. Until the fall of the Panres, the durbar of
Kathmandu had reciprocated the Company’s spirit of concession.
The political trio pre-eminent in Nepal in the last decade of the
eighteenth century had been anxious to remain on good terms with
Calcutta. This group had consisted of Damodar Panre, the Prime
Minister; Brahma Shah, who was a chautarya (royal hereditary
counsellor); and Gajraj Misr, the guru (spiritual mentor) of the
royal family. All three had fallen from power after 1803. Damodar
Panre had been executed; Brahma Shah removed to Kumaun; and
Gajraj Misr obliged to make a prolonged ‘pilgrimage’ to India. The
new royal favourites, Prime Minister Bhim Sen Thapa, his father
General Amar Thapa and the new guru, Raganath Pandit, con¬
sidered themselves more as rivals than as vassals of the East India
Company. Contacts were made with the various native states,
Nepal’s relationship with China was turned to special advantage
and in exchanges with the British the old tone of cautious mistrust
gave place to one of cavalier independence. When, in 1804,
General Amar Thapa was sent to annex the territories of the Raja
of Palpa, he did not stop at the hills. He sent officers down into the
department in Gorakhpur called Butwal to collect the revenues,
ignoring the fact that the Raja of Palpa had held this district as a
tenant of the Nawab of Oudh, to whose rights in Gorakhpur the
Company had now succeeded. The Gurkhas could argue from
precedent, because they had been in possession of Siuraj, an
adjacent department whose situation was similar, for sixteen years
when the Nawab of Oudh ceded Gorakhpur to the Company. But,
having discovered that Butwal was very fertile, the Governor-
General was reluctant to lose the department, and he requested the
Gurkhas to evacuate it immediately. He even offered to waive
British rights to Siuraj as a compromise. But the Gurkhas were
equally loath to abandon such a rich acquisition, and would go no
further than offering to pay the Company a rent for it. This offer
was refused; but the Company refrained from pressing its claim,
and as year succeeded year Amar Thapa’s men occupied more and
more of the Butwal villages with impunity, taking British quiescence
as tacit recognition of their right.
44                   The Quarrel with the British

     In 1811, one of the Company’s permanently settled zemindars,
 the Raja of Betiya, in Saran district, took the law into his own hands
 and sent a body of armed men to seize some villages occupied by
 the Gurkhas. The Gurkhas claimed them as part of the inheritance
 of the conquered hill state of Makwanpur, but the Raja insisted
 that they were part of the estates for which he had contracted to pay
 rent to the Company. There was an affray, and a Nepalese suba,
 or civil governor, was killed. The Gurkha Raja, outraged, appealed
 to the Senior Judge at Patna, requesting him to punish the culprits.
 The Judge promised that impartial justice would be done. He
 passed the matter on to his subordinate, the Judge at Saran, who
 came to the conclusion that the suba had been as much to blame as
the Betiya Raja. Accepting this verdict, the authorities in Calcutta
 decided not to chastise their zemindar; but in view of the fact that
the Butwal issue was still unresolved, they proposed an Anglo-
Nepalese commission to investigate the whole border question. The
 Gurkhas chafed at what they considered to be the Company’s
prevarication in favour of its own zemindars, but agreed to depute
agents. For good measure they meanwhile seized more villages in
 Saran, making twenty-two in all.
    The Company’s chief commissioner was Major Paris Bradshaw,
Head Assistant at the Lucknow Residency. He began by investi¬
gating and presenting the Company’s claim to the Butwal and
Siuraj tracts, while Mr. Young, the Saran Magistrate’s Assistant,
conducted preliminary inquiries in Saran. Paris Bradshaw was
Irish, middle-aged, short, slight, dour and archaic. He still wore
the old-fashioned hair powder and pigtail. His young brother-in-
law, John Hearsey,8 found him very much ‘a gentleman of the old
school . . . exceedingly prosaic’. His dispatches, with their enor¬
mous pleonastic sentences and stilted bureaucratic expressions,
betray a rigid punctiliousness. Having no flair for persuasion, and
an ill-disguised distaste for the wiles of oriental diplomacy, he was
disliked by the Nepalese, who made several attempts to circumvent
him. But it would have been impossible for anyone, even without
Bradshaw’s defects, to carry out Calcutta’s instructions without
incurring unpopularity. Bradshaw was instructed not only to
demand the surrender of Butwal, but in addition to revive the
lapsed British claim to Siuraj. He produced sanads and rent rolls to
show that both belonged to the Company, but the Gurkhas were
  8 Later Major-General John Hearsey. He was Hyder Hearsey’s half-brother.
                        The Quarrel with the British                           45
unmoved. The Tarai territories were of vital importance in the
economy of Nepal. Their revenues formed the only income from
land which the Kathmandu exchequer received, because all other
territory was allotted to the army in lieu of payment. Vainly,
Krishna Pandit, a Gurkha commissioner who was well-disposed
towards the British after residing in Calcutta as Nepalese vakil,
suggested a compromise. If the Raja admitted British sovereignty
in the lowlands, would the Company grant him on lease a tract
along the foot of the hills? Calcutta took this as an implicit admis¬
sion of British claims, and the Raja was sent an ultimatum by Minto.
Either he gave up the lands, or they would be taken by force. Here
the matter rested for a few months; the hot season of 1813 was at
hand, and any military movements would have to be postponed
until the autumn. Krishna Pandit fell from favour for his well-
intentioned but apparently unwarranted initiative, and was re¬
called.
    Bradshaw now proceeded to Saran, where Mr. Young had begun
an inquiry concerning the twenty-two villages. His first act was to
renew an initial condition laid down by the Calcutta government—
namely, that these villages be surrendered to the Company pend¬
ing any investigation concerning the question of right. The Gurkhas
demurred, and were suspicious; but finally they consented, and the
 Company’s officers occupied the hamlets and their fields. Major
 Bradshaw then announced that there would be no inquiry. Mr.
Young’s evidence was conclusive enough, and had already estab¬
lished the right of the Company to the lands.9 There was no point
in conducting another laborious investigation, because the Gurkhas,
judging by their intransigence in Butwal, were bound to reject its
 findings in any case. Now this was a blunder. Bradshaw had given
the Gurkha commissioners every assurance that a full investigation

   9 The Gurkhas claimed that the twenty-two villages were included in the
tappa or sub-department of Rautahat, part of the Makwanpur estates which had
been restored to the Nepalese in 1783 by Warren Hastings, after having been
occupied by Captain Kinloch (see below, Ch. III). Bir Krishna Singh, Raja of
Betiya, insisted that the villages were in fact in the tappa of Nanur, which had
continued to form part of his own territories after the adjustments of 1783.
Summing up the findings of Mr. Young’s inquiry, the Magistrate of Saran later
wrote: ‘The whole of the evidence taken on both sides seems evidently to con¬
clude in favour of [the Raja of Betiya] as some of the witnesses on the side of the
Nepalese allow that he had had possession since [1765], whilst his own witnesses
unanimously give evidence to his uninterrupted possession of upwards of forty
years.’ (Sec. Cons., 3 Feb. 1816, no. 21).
46                 The Quarrel with the British

would be opened once they had surrendered the villages; and the
Calcutta government, although it claimed that he had never been
authorized to give such an impression, should have accepted the
consequences of his mistake and allowed the inquiry to proceed.
Furthermore, in asserting that the Gurkhas had rejected the find¬
ings of the Butwal investigation, the government was anticipating
Kathmandu’s reaction to that inquiry. The Gurkha commissioners
had rejected nothing, but had merely asked for time to refer to the
durbar, and the Raja’s refusal to evacuate the contested territory
was not in fact known at Calcutta until the end of 1813. The British
were also inconsistent in their treatment of precedents. While
willing to regard their own long-effective occupation of the twenty-
two villages as ‘sufficient ground, if there had been no other, for
immediately resuming them’, they refused to admit similar argu¬
ments in favour of the Gurkhas, who pleaded twenty-five years’
possession of Siuraj. But then Gurkha tactics were equally dubious.
The commissioners made a great show of indignation, and claimed
that Bradshaw had deceived them, but at the same time betrayed
their own insincerity by claiming that Young’s inquiry had estab¬
lished their right to the villages; and when Bradshaw produced
additional documents to reinforce the Company’s claim, they re¬
fused to accept them on the ground that they had not been pro¬
duced at Young’s inquiry, whose findings they regarded as final.
    Relations between Bradshaw and the Gurkha commissioners
deteriorated to petty bickering. At the beginning of April 1814, the
latter suddenly broke off negotiations and returned to Nepal.
Bradshaw, in a plaintive tone of self-justification, expressed his
cenviction that all their previous rudeness and intransigence had
been designed to provoke him into some indiscretion which would
make him appear responsible for what was in fact a predetermined
cessation. It appears that the commissioners were summoned to
Kathmandu to give their opinions in a debate which the Raja was
holding to determine whether the Gurkhas should make a stand
against the British. After the Raja’s refusal to evacuate Butwal and
Siuraj had been received in Calcutta in December 1813, a fresh
demand, in the form of an ultimatum, had been sent. General Amar
Thapa had no intention of yielding to such imperious representa¬
tions. To humiliate the haughty British, by turning against them
the model soldiers he had drilled and rehearsed with solicitude and
pride, was the paramount ambition of this ailing but ferocious old
                       The Quarrel with the British                          47
war lord. At the end of March he summoned his energies for the
journey to Kathmandu, and there used all his eloquence to urge
resistance and disparage supine concession. Opinion was divided
in the state. Bhim Sen Thapa was in favour of defiance; but
Brahma Shah, his brother Hasti Dal and Amar Singh Thapa had,
from the west, unanimously counselled restraint and concession.
They feared that armed resistance to the British would engender
full-scale war, and they knew the Gurkha state to be too weak to
 embark on military enterprises of that magnitude without risking
 annihilation. Urgently, they stressed the difference between the
 hill rajas and the East India Company: fighting the one was like
 hunting deer, but engaging in battle with the other would be like
 fighting tigers. The party of resistance, however, carried their
 case; and General Amar Thapa, now back in Palpa, was instructed
 to prepare the military defence of the territories under his com¬
 mand.10 In reply to the Governor-General’s protestation at the
 unceremonious interruption of negotiations with Bradshaw, the
 Raja retorted that Bradshaw had been rude and offensive, and that
 the Gurkhas had no intention of restituting lands to which Mr.
 Young’s inquiry had established their incontrovertible right.
     On 22 April 1814, the ultimatum for the formal surrender of
 Butwal and Siuraj having expired, the Magistrate of Gorakhpur
 ordered seventeen companies of native infantry to take possession.
 They met with no resistance, Amar Thapa’s men retreating as
 they advanced. But the regular soldiers had to be withdrawn almost
 as soon as they had arrived, because of the malaria, and defence
 was entrusted to the personnel of a few thanas (police posts). On
 29 May the Gurkha troops moved back into the now virtually un¬
 protected territory, and attacked a thana in Butwal. Eighteen of the
 Company’s policemen were killed and six wounded. The daroga
 (chief officer) was wounded, and surrendered. The Gurkha com¬
 manding officer ordered him to be tied to a tree, and he was then
 shot dead with arrows. Two other police posts were attacked at the
 same time, and their occupants put to flight.
     When the news of this atrocity reached Calcutta, early in June,
 the Governor-General and Council were in conclave on normal
 business. The council chamber in Fort William was not a place of

   10 The original account of this council of war is in Sec. Cons., 20 Oct. 1815,
no. 54. It has been printed in several places, including Prinsep’s Political and
Military Transactions, vol. i, pp. 458-60.
48                        The Quarrel with the British

harmony and relaxed co-operation. Suppressed animosity intensi¬
fied the natural discomforts of the humid Bengal summer. The
 Governor-General, the Marquis of Hastings,11 was not popular
with his colleagues. The mode of his appointment and the nature
of his policies were both causes of resentment. Hastings, now in his
sixtieth year, was a soldier by education and experience. As Lord
Rawdon he had fought with distinction in the American War of
Independence and then in the Revolutionary Wars in the Low
Countries, where Wellington served under him. He was a typical
 soldier—bluff and unsubtle, and never at his ease in Parliament. A
disciple neither of Fox nor of Pitt, he had lacked the personality
and the political skill necessary for forming a party independent of
both. It was his consistent loyalty to the Prince Regent that had
earned him the combined offices of Governor-General and Com-
mander-in-Chief in India in 1812. The object of the dual appoint¬
ment was to give Hastings a chance to recruit his personal finances,
crippled by extravagance and ostentatious largesse; but, however
financially remunerative, it cost him much in terms of popularity.
The friends of Sir George Nugent, the Commander-in-Chief, indig¬
nantly deprecated an untimely supersession whose only justifica¬
tion was the penury of the new Governor-General, and they had
used their influence to have a special post created for Nugent—that
of Commander of the Forces in Bengal.
   Nugent, however, had sulked, and made up his mind to resign—
much to the annoyance of Hastings, who always fancied he could
soothe ruffled feelings. Nugent delayed his departure until Decem¬
ber the following year, and meantime continued as Senior Member
of the Council. This meant that Hastings was now at odds with the
majority of his Council, which consisted of two other members
besides Nugent. Archibald Seton was a background figure, occa¬
sionally asserting himself in an attempt to preserve harmony but
more often overshadowed by Neil Benjamin Edmonstone, who was
openly sympathetic towards the erstwhile Commander-in-Chief.
But there were more fundamental points of difference between
Hastings and the self-assured Edmonstone than Nugent’s super-
session. Edmonstone was rigidly opposed to the style of policy
pursued by Wellesley, while Hastings was resolved to carry his
work to completion. The physical contrast between Wellesley and
     11 At this stage he was in fact still the Earl of Moira; but as he is better known
by his later title, it is probably in the interests of clarity to use it throughout.
                    The Quarrel with the British                    49

Hastings was extreme: the one small but naturally imposing—
animated, lean, and patrician-featured; the other large, comber-
some, and heavy-jowled—an avuncular figure who was too naive
not to seem pompous when he tried to be dignified. But they both
had the same proconsular manner, love of display and super¬
human energy and sense of dedication. Despite his early criticism
of Wellesley, Hastings had lately found himself increasingly in
sympathy with him, especially on the sensitive issue of Catholic
emancipation, of which they were both in favour. It was Wellesley’s
grand scheme of Indian alliances, designed to obviate French
subversion but left unfinished, which Hastings resolved not only to
complete but to re-work into the instrument of British para-
mountcy in India. While Wellesley had striven to turn the native
states into allies, Hastings was avowedly determined to turn them
into vassals. In short, his policy was unashamedly imperialistic—
a term often applied to Wellesley but perhaps better reserved for
his successor. The East India Company was finally to claim the
Mogul inheritance, by dropping the fiction of allegiance to the
puppet Emperor in Delhi and assuming the tone and trappings of
royalty itself.
   It would be wrong, probably, to discount entirely love of im¬
perialism for its own sake; but it does seem that Hastings’s policy
was motivated principally by a sincere fear that unless the British
acted first, the native states would combine and drive the Company
from India. Only paramountcy could pre-empt destruction. This
way of thinking made it impossible for Hastings to treat the
Nepalese encroachments as mere isolated border incidents. He in¬
terpreted them as the symptoms of a profounder and more insidious
disturbance: the first stirrings of a concerted crusade among the
Hindu states, whose apotheosis would be the expulsion of all
Europeans from India. It was with a mixture of irritation and relief
that he heard the Political Secretary read out the dispatch from
Butwal, recounting the murder of the Company’s police officer—
irritation because he had never anticipated that his efforts to resolve
the Nepalese problem by diplomacy could fail; relief, because he
was beginning to suspect an alliance between the Gurkhas and the
Marathas, and considered it wiser that the Gurkhas, obviously the
better prepared, be defeated first, in isolation. But whatever
Hastings’s ulterior motives may have been, his colleagues and em¬
ployers knew nothing of them, and would certainly never have
50                  The Quarrel with the British

 condoned them if they had. In their view, the war was designed to
 end the anarchy attendant on the collapse of Mogul authority,
 which the Gurkhas were intent on exploiting to the detriment of the
 Company’s revenues and of the security of its subjects and officers.
 It was, in other words, designed to turn the Company’s de jure
 rights into a de facto authority. No one disputed the necessity of
war, least of all Nugent, who assented almost mechanically to what
 he probably assumed would be one of what he had described as
 ‘petty warfares on the frontiers of the British territories which
 rarely last more than one campaign, and which always end success¬
fully’. The Court of Directors was fully reconciled to the use of
force and as early as February 1814 sent a dispatch sanctioning ‘a
recourse to arms for the recovery and protection of the rights of the
 British Government’.
    Military operations could not begin until the hot and rainy
seasons had passed. The Governor-General took advantage of the
 interval not only to obtain information and make plans for the
 invasion, but also to require the Raja to disavow responsibility for
the murder of the daroga and punish the culprits. He made it plain
that if such atonement was not forthcoming, the two countries
would be in a state of war. This was Hastings’s last measure in the
 Nepalese crisis before his departure from Fort William on his tour
of the upper provinces. He received the Raja’s reply on 12 August,
while at Patna. It evaded all mention of the fracas in Butwal, but
made obscure references to the assassination of Nepalese police
officers and accused Bradshaw of trespassing and violence. Its tone
the Governor-General found ‘evasive and even implying menace’.
    It is difficult to estimate how far Hastings’s suspicions of collu¬
sion between the durbar at Kathmandu and the Marathas was
justified. There is no doubt that there were diplomatic exchanges;
the Thapas had a relish for ambassadors and the appurtenances of
empire, and stationed agents at many native courts. It was further¬
more later revealed that the Peshwa of Poona had given secret
encouragement to the Gurkhas with a vague and opportunist view
to exploiting, somehow, any consequent diversion of British
energies in the hills. But the existence of mature conspiracy is
unlikely. No reference to aid expected from outside was made in
the replies submitted by the state counsellors in the war debate in
Kathmandu; and Amar Singh Thapa was so far from being con¬
fident of such support that he was aghast at the prospect of war.
                     The Quarrel with the British                       51


Later, when the temerity of the durbar had brought him face to
face with final defeat and ruin, he bitterly castigated the Raja for
his folly at this juncture.
    His main hopes of support were directed to the Sikhs and to
China, though as the war went on he also wrote for assistance to
Gwalior. His urgent concern, as soon as the affray in Butwal be¬
came known to him, was to avert, if possible, British military re¬
taliation by opening a fresh correspondence with Ochterlony and,
through him, with the Governor-General. He reiterated the Gurkha
claim to the disputed lands, made excuses for the expulsion of the
Company’s thanas and repeated the offer to pay a rent for Butwal.
The ambivalent tenor of his letters betokened a struggle between
appeasement and defiance going on within him: the one prompted
by his exasperation at the durbar’s foolhardiness; the other by his
pride and his obstinate loyalty to his prince, right or wrong.
Unbending as far towards actual supplication as his independent
spirit would allow, he invoked the precedent of sixty years’ friend¬
ship between the two governments, and recalled his own concession
in the case of the Sirhind lowlands in a plea for agreement. But,
his fierce pride rejecting peace at the price of humiliation, he could
not resist a note of challenge. Pointedly, he insinuated mention of
 Nepal’s firm friendship with China, and warned all potential
aggressors of the military might and iron resolve of his nation:

If . . . prompt injunctions are issued to the officers of the British
Government who are stationed on the opposite frontier of the Palpa
territory to desist from further sedition and contention, it will be proper
and just, in as much as mutual litigations will cease. Otherwise, by the
favour of God, the troops of the Gurkhas, resembling the waves of the
ocean, whose chief employments are war and hostility, will make the
necessary preparations to prevent the usurpation of any one place which
has been in their possession for years past, and the flame of sedition will
daily increase.12

   To this communication the Governor-General did not see fit to
reply, and Amar Singh’s subsequent attempts to negotiate through
Ochterlony were discouraged. He was asked to address himself to
the Resident at Delhi; but the long-mooted deputation of an agent
there never in fact came about. Once war had begun, the Kaji’s
tenders of negotiation became no more than subterfuge, designed

                             12 P.R.N.W., p. 70.
52                   The Quarrel with the British

 to distract the British and secure delays which he might turn to
 military advantage.
    Nepal’s main diplomatic expedient was to exploit her connec¬
 tions with China. As Chinese vassals, the Gurkhas were obliged to
 send a quinquennial embassy to Peking, and that sent in 1813 was
 much publicized. The Gurkha ambassador asked the Imperial
 authorities for military aid against the Sikkimese, who, he claimed,
 were proving contumacious, and this was apparently promised. It
 appears that about the same time the Chinese officials in Lhasa
 sent money, with a large escort, for the repair of a Buddhist temple
 in Kathmandu. The Gurkha government then propagated the idea
 that both the promise of military aid and the remittance of funds
 were gestures of support against the British. Bazaar gossip in
 Lhasa gave further currency to such notions, and it was in this
 distorted form that the intelligence reached the Company’s officers
 in India. More likely to yield positive results in the way of military
 co-operation were the negotiations opened with Bhutan in Septem¬
 ber, 1814. The position of the Raja of Bhutan vis-a-vis the Com¬
 pany was similar to that of his Gurkha neighbour, for he too had his
 uncomposed border quarrels.
    When the Governor-General announced his intention to make
war, the immediate concern of the Kathmandu durbar was to gauge
his sincerity, obtain intelligence of his preparations and delay their
implementation. To this end, it pretended to be unaware that a
state of hostility existed. An envoy was loaded with presents and
sent down to Calcutta, ostensibly to submit the Gurkha Raja’s
formal congratulations to the new Governor-General on his
accession and to resume negotiations concerning the frontier dis¬
pute. Bhim Sen Thapa instructed Parsa Ram Thapa, a suba on the
frontier, to supply escort and bearers, and urged the agent to pro¬
ceed speedily. ‘Delay is improper. Whatever may pass in conversa¬
tion, or whatever you may observe, hear and understand, do not
write openly, but secretly and under disguise.’13
    Bradshaw took advantage of the rainy months of July and August
to occupy the twenty-two villages on the Saran frontier, whence
the Gurkhas tried to dislodge him by poisoning the wells. At the
end of August the first skirmish of the war took place, with the
capture of a Gurkha thana called Kachurwa. It was therefore with
some astonishment that Bradshaw learned of the arrival at Parsa
                         13P.R.N.W., p. 371.
                    The Quarrel with the British                    53

Ram’s headquarters of a Gurkha vakil with gifts of gold, silks,
trinkets and elephants for the Governor-General. On instructions
from Headquarters he refused to allow him to proceed farther. No
friendly missions could now be received; only agents with plenary
powers to sue for peace. The vakil, called Chandra Sekhar
Upadhyaya, was told that he was at liberty to return to Kathmandu.
But Chandra Sekhar ignored the intimation, and tried surrep¬
titiously to obtain a passport. He was unsuccessful, but still re¬
mained on the frontier, with the ostensible design of meeting the
Governor-General, then touring the upper provinces, and the
covert purpose of obtaining intelligence. The Gurkhas, after such
a long sequence of unimplemented threats and confident of the
strength of their natural defences, were probably still unconvinced
that the Governor-General really intended to invade Nepal. It
seems that, at the most, they expected him to seize the lands so long
contested on the plains.
    In Palpa, the arch-sponsor of Gurkha defiance prepared for war
with the febrile enthusiasm of the moribund. Alone among men of
military experience in the state, General Amar Thapa had been
flagrantly averse to compromise. With his son, Bhim Sen Thapa,
determination to resist derived more from youthful impulsiveness
 and vanity than from reflection and experience. But with the General
himself it was reasoned conviction which urged him to canvass
war. He had supreme confidence in his carefully nurtured Palpa
battalions, which were fully equal to the most brilliant corps d’ elite
 in Kathmandu. He coveted the influence and the prestige which
would accrue to the Gurkhas in the eyes of every native power in
India if they could but successfully resist the legendary might of
the East India Company; and he remained assured that if the worst
 came to the worst the Gurkhas could always retire from the con¬
test on their own terms, since they could never be defeated out¬
right in the mountains. Then, at the end of October 1814, the old
 General died, having launched his country on the most strenuous
contest in its history.
                                  Ill

 THE MATTER OF HIMALAYAN TRADE

O      N 2 December 1814 the Governor-General was at Morada-

        bad, on the plains near the border of Kumaun. A heavy
        shower had just cleared the air, and looking northwards
Hastings could see the Himalayas quite clearly. He was moved by
the view, and wrote in his diary:
There was an odd sensation in contemplating a spot in the globe where
the foot of man never trod, nor was ever likely to be planted. This
immense barrier would seem sufficient to limit the concerns of India;
yet at this moment I am speculating on the trade which may be carried
on beyond it, should the present war with the Gurkhas leave us in
possession of Kumaun. From that province there are valleys between
the hills which afford a passage of not much difficulty, and greatly fre¬
quented, into Tartary. The holding of Kumaun would give us the
exclusive purchase of the shawl wool, to be paid for in cutlery, broad¬
cloth, and grain.1
   The ambition to trade across the Himalayas, and thereby link
the British territories in India with the vast regions of Tibet and
China beyond, was not new and had, at its inception, been con¬
nected with the idea of a war against Nepal.
   In 1767, when Prithvi Narayan Shah of Gurkha led his army
into the Valley of Nepal and set about destroying its three king¬
doms, the Calcutta government decided that its own commercial
interests were sufficiently menaced to justify an attempt to contain
the Gurkhas by military intervention. Consequently, in June of
that year Captain Kinloch marched to the assistance of the Raja of
Kathmandu with a force of 2,400 men. The government’s more
immediate reason for sanctioning this step was because it wanted
to preserve the local trade between north Bengal and contiguous
districts of Nepal—a trade which the Gurkha career of conquest
was upsetting; but wider ambitions were stirring even then. It was
not only reasoned that old patterns of trade would be preserved,
but speculated that new ones might be created. Why should not
                     1 Bute, Private Journal, i, p. 246.
                     The Matter of Himalayan Trade                            55
Nepal be used as a channel to Tibet? So the notion was born, con¬
ceived of need and ignorance: need for new sources of precious
metals, to counterbalance the drain from India caused by the de¬
mands of the East India Company’s establishments in China;
ignorance of almost everything relating to Nepal and Tibet. The
expedition was a failure, not to say a disaster, with only a third of
the troops returning. The immediate enthusiasm for a conflict with
Nepal diminished, and Kinloch was not permitted a second try.
However, the attractive assumption that a trans-Himalayan trade
was possible persisted, grew and flourised. The idea soon became
the subject of discussion in India, and of inquiry in dispatches from
London. Why should not the looms of Halifax provide woollens for
the inhabitants of windswept Tibet and distant China? There was
something epic in the conception. As the idea became familiar, so
it seemed more natural; and soon it seemed so natural that the
Company’s statesmen in India began to wonder why the Hima¬
layan passes were not thronged with merchants carrying up English
broadcloth and metals into Tibet and returning with wool from
the mountain goat, gold, musk and borax. It seemed ordained by
the logic of commerce that mutual needs should be so satisfied.
From the premise that a particular state of affairs naturally should
exist, it is only a short step to the inference that such a state of
affairs at one time did exist; so it comes as no surprise to find a
famous enthusiast of the cause of trans-Himalayan trade, Brian
Hodgson, later referring to ‘that great commerce which naturally
ought to, and formerly did subsist between the vast cis and trans-
Himalayan regions’.2 The idea that new trading connections might
be created had become transformed into the argument that old
ones should be revived. Because the Gurkhas were building their
empire across the eastern Himalayas at the time when the thinking
of the British was evolving in this fashion, it was inevitable that
they should be held responsible for the obstruction which the British
theory postulated. By the time Warren Hastings3 became Governor
of Bengal in 1772, the rationalization of the East India Company’s
commercial problem had been neatly completed. Formerly (accord¬
ing to the theory) the trade between Bengal and Tibet, via Nepal,
had been very considerable. But with the wars and oppressions of

   2 Selections from the Records of the Government of Bengal, xxvii, p. 12.
   3 Not to be confused with the Marquis of Hastings, Governor-General at the
time of the 1814-16 Nepal War.
56                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade

the Gurkhas, the rhythm of interchange had been broken, mer¬
chants deterred, and the trade all but destroyed. This was the
interpretation which Warren Hastings adopted with eagerness, be¬
cause the outflow of treasure from Bengal was unabated, and he was
something of a romantic where unknown horizons were concerned.
Armed with this well-rehearsed argument, and with some presents
of English produce to enhance its attractiveness in the eyes of the
Tibetans, an amiable Scotsman called George Bogle was sent to
Tibet in 1774, by way of Bhutan. His mission’s object was to pro¬
mote commercial intercourse between Bengal and Tibet by arrang¬
ing for merchants from both places to meet regularly in Bhutan. He
was particularly instructed to acquire specimens of the goat which
provided the wool for the famous shawls of Kashmir, and of the
Himalayan yak, the fibres of whose tail were used in Europe to make
lace.
   In a word, Warren Hastings’s policy was to bypass the Gurkhas.
The idea of attacking them and forcing open a passage for trade
was still canvassed, but events occurring since the abortive Kinloch
expedition had offered the chance to try another route. The
Bhutanese had come down from their mountains and attacked
Kuch Bihar; and the molested Raja having solicited aid, Warren
Hastings, as we have seen, sent a force to help him, determining at
the same time to use the opportunity to acquire Kuch Bihar for the
Company. Captain Jones’s men had a hard time of it, what with
malaria and the ferocious resistance of the Bhutanese; but by
April 1773 the enemy had been sufficiently alarmed to seek outside
help. Bhutan,4 as a Buddhist country, had a close religious and
cultural affinity with Tibet, and ethnographically was at one with
that country. While the Deb Raja5 dealt with mundane administra¬
tion, the Dharma Raja concerned himself with religious affairs, and
held himself the spiritual vassal of the Dalai Lama of Tibet. It was
natural, therefore, that in her plight Bhutan should look to Tibet
for support. The most important pontiff in that country after the
Dalai Lama was the Panchen Lama, whose see was at Tashilunpo6
in southern Tibet. It was the Panchen Lama who now intervened,
by sending to the Governor at Calcutta a letter in which he sug-
   4 Correctly Bhutant, meaning the end of Tibet. Bhot is the Sanskrit name for
Tibet.
   5 Deba is a Tartar title, corresponding to governor, or viceroy.
   6 For this reason he was often referred to by English writers as the ‘Teshoo’
Lama. Tashilunpo was also known as Shigatse.
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                    57
gested the expediency of clemency towards the truculent Bhutanese.
With great diffidence he offered a few presents. These were most
interesting. They included sheets of Russian gilt leather, talents of
gold and silver, bulses of gold dust, bags of musk, Tibetan woollen
cloth and Chinese silk. The gifts were conveyed in chests of pro¬
fessional workmanship, with dovetailed joints. Here were proofs of
‘an extensive commerce, internal wealth, and an advanced know¬
ledge of the arts of common life’.7 The opening afforded by the
Lama’s address was not to be missed, and Bogle was sent to return
the compliment and at the same time blaze a trail for merchants and
traders. The opening of Bhutan would be the British riposte to the
Gurkhas’ closure of Nepal.
    Thus, at first glance, it appears that the sentiments expressed by
Lord Hastings at Moradabad in 1814 betoken the survival of a policy
which was half a century old; they would seem to indicate that it was
the continuing desire to open channels for commerce through the
Himalayas which contributed to cause a second and much more
serious war against the Gurkhas in 1814. An attractively simple
theory—but dangerous: a sure enticement to error. There are
flashes, which warn of dangerous rocks beneath the calm surface.
    In the first place, events had come to pass in that half-century
which made it quite unrealistic to suppose, in 1814, that a war with
Nepal could facilitate access to Tibet. Even in Warren Hastings’s
time, indeed, it had been unrealistic to suppose so much. Had the
 Company’s servants been less predisposed in favour of convenient
assumptions, they would have sensed the futility of their aspirations.
Warren Hastings implied that his scheme for a trans-Himalayan
trade was in no way revolutionary. All that was involved was the
 removal, or the circumvention, of artificial obstructions which the
 Gurkhas had put in the way of the commerce which under normal
conditions would circulate across the Himalayas, linking central
Asia and Hindustan. But on closer inspection it seems that he had
no grounds for such an assumption. The idea of a flourishing former
trade through the eastern part of the Himalayas, at least, was
 probably chimerical.
    There can have been little to suggest that Nepal, previous to the
 Gurkha conquest, had been a great and thriving entrepot of trade
between Bengal and Tibet. Some interchange had been carried on,
of course. Since the mid-seventeenth century Patna, the biggest
                     7 S. Turner, Embassy, pp. xii-xiii.
58                The Matter of Himalayan Trade

 town in Bihar, and the most renowned for commerce, had attracted
 merchants who carried on a trade with Tibet through the passes of
 Nepal. There was always someone at Patna who would barter gold,
 borax, yaks’ tails or musk from Tibet for coral, betelnut, nutmeg,
 cottons and woollens; but probably the volume of such trade never
 exceeded a feeble trickle. It was a peddling business in luxury goods,
 carried on mainly at the behest of the wealthy and the curious.
    The severest discouragement to a direct intercourse between the
 high Tibetan plateau and the plains was the dramatic contrast in
 climate between the two regions. The mountain passes were open
 only in the months of summer, when the lowlands of India were
 either seared by heat or drowned by the solstitial monsoon. Nothing
 could then draw down the inhabitants of Tibet, who dreaded the
 climate of Hindustan at the best of times. If contact was to be made
 at all, they were therefore best met half-way, at a place where the
 climate was not too extreme for either party. The eastern area of the
 Himalayas was the least suitable for such a meeting. Because of
the malaria, merely to walk in the Tarai during the hot and rainy
seasons was death; so at the very time when the mountain passes into
Tibet were open and busy, the southern belt of jungle was silent and
deserted. There were no roads leading into Nepal, and the rivers,
deceptively broad and slow near the plains, soon led travellers back
to a pristine confusion of chasms, gorges and cataracts. No wide
river valleys found natural highways here. When Francis Hamilton
went to Nepal with the British embassy in 1802, he followed a route
to Kathmandu which was reckoned to be one of the most practicable.
Even so, the difficulties were formidable and in one defile eighteen
miles long the winding Rapti river had to be forded no fewer than
twenty-two times. Such topography was typical of the whole
southern slope of the eastern Himalayan range, from Bhutan to
Kumaun in the west. Roads were rare, and where they did exist, as in
Kumaun, they were intended and were suitable only for pilgrims.
The natives of Bengal, smothered in the caress of a sultry climate
and enervated by the spontaneous fertility of their soil, were loath to
endure the rigours of cold and danger in the mountains, and only a
few intrepid speculators undertook the whole journey to Tibet
themselves. Such were the Kashmirians and Armenians who had
establishments at Patna. Their expeditions were fraught with
alarming hazards, as well as with the great expense incurred by the
unavoidable use of human carriers. The peripatetic gossains (Hindu
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                   59

friars) also found their way into Tibet by way of the Nepalese
hills, and peddled in drugs, spices, dried fruits, precious stones,
pearls, coral and perhaps a little cloth—‘articles of great value and
small bulk’.8 Otherwise, the inconvenient coinciding of the seasons
and the natural difficulties of the way meant that any trade between
Bengal and Tibet had to be carried on by the agency of middle men,
like the Newar entrepreneurs in Nepal and the hill peasants in
Kumaun. In Kumaun, indeed, the trade had to pass through two
agencies, the migratory peasants of the southern slopes acting as a
medium between the fairs on the plains and the Bhotias, who in¬
habited the high hollows of the ghats, or passes, leading into Tibet.
By ancient usage, only the Bhotias had the privilege of direct com¬
munication with traders from beyond the passes. Tobacco, glass
beads, hardware, coarse local textiles and grain were loaded by the
hill people on to short-legged goats and mountain sheep, who alone
could manoeuvre the rugged pathways with confidence. Fine manu¬
factures and expensive articles were brought up only when previously
bespoke. From the Bhotias they received the usual trans-Himalayan
products—borax, salt, musk, and various drugs and spices.
Checks, obstructions and risks not only tended to restrict com¬
merce to articles of smallest bulk and greatest value; they also
 raised Indian prices to a level which made them uncompetitive in
the increasingly crowded luxury market of Tibet. Coral beads from
Bengal had always been notoriously expensive in Tibet, and by the
beginning of the nineteenth century were being undersold by
imports from Russia. European commodities from Bengal suffered
a similar fate; Russian traders could sell cloth from France, for
example, at a rate below the cost of English woollens from India.
Such were the consequences of goods from the plains having to
pass through so many pairs of hands. Additional inhibitions of a
political nature prevented the development of a trade in shawl wool
across the eastern Himalayas. By a treaty dating from the end of the
seventeenth century, the state of Ladakh, an erstwhile province of
Tibet situated in the valley of the upper Indus and separating
Tibet from Kashmir, was possessed of a strict monopoly in this
commodity; and the Kashmirians in turn had the unique right
of purchase from the Ladakh dealers. It was consequently very
difficult for strangers to buy wool, or to obtain specimens of the
shawl-wool goat.
                 8 Markham, Bogle and Manning, p. 125.
6o                    The Matter of Himalayan Trade
     Trade through the eastern Himalayas before the Gurkha con¬
 quests cannot, then, have been a ‘great commerce’. The very fact
 that it came to a halt under the slight pressures imposed by the
 Gurkhas betokened a feeble circulation in these constricted arteries.
 A really healthy trade would have survived much more than that. It
 is true that Tibet had strong commercial ties with Kathmandu. She
 relied on the Kathmandu mint for her coinage; Nepalese artisans
and traders settled in considerable numbers in Lhasa; and the route
from the Valley to the passes into Tibet was well trodden by traders
from the north. Similarly, the scope of the trade of north India
extended to the Nepal lowlands, and a considerable interchange in
timber, rice and other local produce was carried on between the
Tarai, the Morang, and neighbouring districts in India. But it was
as if these two points—the Kathmandu Valley and the Nepal low¬
lands—were the extremities of two separate commercial systems.
     The British were looking at things from the wrong standpoint.
Having familiarized themselves with the eastern sea approaches,
built up Calcutta and come to know Bengal, they did not at first
appreciate that the internal trade of north India was traditionally
centred in the north-west, the natural emporium of Hindustan
being where its political and cultural focus had always been—in the
Punjab and Rajputana. The plains of the north-west were the
meeting place for merchants who came by land from Tibet and
Kandahar, or by sea to the ports of Gujarat. If we would know how
India got her shawls, her salt, and the borax and musk of which
Tibet was the richest source in the world, we should look towards
the western Himalayas, where the valley of the river Sutlaj pro¬
vided a broad natural highway directly linking the Punjab with the
plateau of western Tibet. The small state of Basahar,9 in the
Punjab hills, had acquired great importance as a convenient half¬
way stage on the route from Ladakh and Tibet; and it was at
Rampur, the capital of that state, that sellers from Kashmir,
Ladakh and Yarkhand came down to meet the lowland traders and
exchange the precious merchandise of central Asia for the wheat and
manufactures of the plains. The inhabitants of Basahar betrayed
by their politeness and probity a long tradition of commercial
experience. In the words of an English traveller10 of the second
decade of the nineteenth century, they had become the ‘commercial
   9 Known alternatively as Kunawar.
   10 James Baillie Fraser, Journal of a Tour, pp. 264, 489.
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                    61

carriers between Hindustan and Tartary, as also between Tartary
and Kashmir, frequenting the routes from Leh in Ladakh to
Lhasa and Shigatse and Nepal, on trading speculations’. It was by
the Sutlaj route, no doubt, that Indian merchants travelled, when
they went to the great annual fair at Gartok, capital of western
Tibet, where every September traders from Ladakh, Kashmir,
Tartary, Yarkhand, Tibet and China haggled, bartered and bar¬
gained, filling the streets with cacophony and colour. This was the
area where the very best shawl wool was produced—a fact which,
together with the monopoly enjoyed by Ladakh and Kashmir,
made the western Himalayas the natural centre of the trade in this
immensely profitable commodity. The Punjab hills between the
Indus and the Sutlaj were laced with roads, pathways and river
valleys—a plexus of ramifications from arteries of commerce which
led to the Punjab in the south, to Attock and Peshawar in the west,
to Kashmir and Ladakh in the north, and to Tibet in the east.
Whenever the Patna merchants quarrelled with the Imperial
customs officers at Gorakhpur, they would abandon the route
through Nepal in favour of a journey far to the west, where they
could meet merchants from all quarters at Kabul. The commerce
pursued through Nepal by the Kashmirians at Patna was in any
case but of ancillary importance: a digression from the main east-
west orientation of their trade. The principal caravans plied the
lateral valleys which run between the Himalayan ranges and link
Ladakh and Kashmir with east Tibet, taking made-up shawls
mostly, and bringing back raw wool and Tibetan produce. Certain
subsidiary enterprises had inevitably germinated by the wayside.
The Patna merchants were only minor agents, engaged principally
in collecting otter skins for the China market from Dacca and the
maritime provinces in the Ganges and Brahmaputra deltas.
   So the anxiety of the British, in Warren Hastings’s time, to vindi¬
cate the policy of promoting trade with Tibet through the eastern
Himalayas caused them to invoke precedents which had no founda¬
tion in reality. That great commerce linking Tibet, Nepal and
Bengal was a tempting mirage in the uncharted tracts of the past.
The same anxiety was also creating what we might call the tradi¬
tional view of the part played by the Gurkhas in this phase of
Himalayan history, which attributes to their pugnacity a state of
affairs really created by something else.
   In the final analysis, the Gurkhas in Nepal and the British in
62                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade

 north India were pursuing parallel policies with regard to Tibet.
 The ultimate aim of both was to foster their own commercial con¬
 tacts with that country. Just as the British were convinced that the
 opening of the trans-Himalayan markets was vital to their com¬
 mercial welfare, so the Gurkhas realized that the prosperity of
 Nepal depended on close economic ties with Tibet. The exchequer
 derived very little income from the land, because by the Gurkha
 system the greater part of the rent due to the crown was assigned
 as payment to the army. The state therefore relied all the more on
the Tibetan trade for its money income. Not only was this a
vehicle for taxation; it was also a source of direct profit, because
returns were made largely in bullion which merchants were com¬
pelled to exchange for Nepalese currency at the mint in Kathmandu.
The government secured a clear profit of some 8 per cent on these
transactions. Further profits were derived from the privilege which
Kathmandu had acquired of minting currency for circulation in
Tibet. The Nepalese crafts of refining and working the precious
metals depended for their sustenance on the custom and raw
materials of Tibet, and many were the Nepalese residing in Lhasa
as goldsmiths and silversmiths, plying their trade in dim-lit base¬
ment workshops beneath the Gurkha emblem of the sun and
crescent moon.11 Finally, the Gurkhas depended on Tibet for their
salt, a vitally important commodity, which was not found in their
own dominions.
    It was therefore of great importance to the rulers of Nepal not
only that Tibet be kept open for a free commercial interchange, but
that what trade there was from the plains to Tibet be confined to
the channels through Nepal. There was not sufficient to be shared,
and far from obstructing such a commerce, the Gurkhas did their
utmost to encourage it. The very beneficial treaty which had given
Kathmandu the right to mint Tibet’s currency had also closed the
Sikkim route to the plains by levying heavy customs duties on
goods going that way. It was with considerable concern that the
Gurkha Raja heard of Mr. Bogle’s expedition to Bhutan and
Tashilunpo, for it was obvious that its object was to divert traffic
from his own country. He straightway wrote a stern letter to all

    11 By 1816 the number stood between two and three thousand—see ‘Notices
Respecting Tibet’: Sec. Cons., 16 March 1816, no. 48; E. Hue, Souvenirs d’un
Voyage, ii, 262. Hue calls them Peboun, which, presumably, is the Tibetan
designation for the Nepalese.
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                   63

the chiefs of Tibet, including the erring Panchen Lama, requiring
them to have nothing more to do with theferingis [Europeans], but
to ‘follow the ancient custom’. He desired marts for the sale of
Bengal goods to be built on the northern borders of his own king¬
dom, indicating that he would offer no obstruction to ‘the common
articles of commerce’.12 It is quite clear from his letter how seri¬
ously he viewed this attempt to side-step Nepal. He declared that
he had no wish for war, but reminded the Tibetans that he was a
 Rajput, and well prepared. It is true that the Gurkhas’ efforts to
enhance their kingdom’s importance as an entrepot of trade were
not all calculated to have the desired effect. The new rulers in
Kathmandu had but primitive notions concerning the wealth of
nations and, considering trade as a vehicle of taxation rather than
as a means to national wealth in itself, tended to favour a system of
trading monopoly which facilitated the levying and collection of
imposts. The taxes were often high—but this was nothing new.
Musk had been subject to a duty of 25 per cent at Gorakhpur for
over a century. Compared with states such as Tibet and Bhutan,
whose governments reserved all trade to themselves, Nepal under
the Gurkhas appears in fact to have been relatively favourable to
commerce. The intention to encourage foreign trade was certainly
there, even if the monopoly system and inadequate judicial safe¬
guards tended to hinder its full realization. If the Gurkha state was
reluctant to welcome British merchants as residents, the Calcutta
government had only itself to blame. By invading Nepal in 1767,
when the Gurkha empire was in the impressionable stages of
infancy, it had created an anti-European complex, which thence¬
forth always had the edge over the desire to receive European
traders and residents. The Kinloch expedition caused an abrupt
cessation of Raja Prithvi Narayan Shah’s tolerant attitude towards
the Capuchin missionaries in Nepal, and they went the way of the
gossains—expelled in disgrace as foreign spies. Thereafter the
Gurkha durbar could never overcome the fear that any encourage¬
ment to British merchants might open the way for the Company’s
army; but there is nothing to suggest that it was averse to facili¬
tating trade by means of Nepalese agencies.
    British attempts to open other routes to Tibet merely served to
complement mistrust with apprehensions for Nepalese commercial
interests. Bogle’s mission was not an isolated instance, but was
                 12 Markham, Bogle and Manning, p. 157.
64                   The Matter of Himalayan Trade

followed by several more embassies, the last being Captain Samuel
Turner’s of 1783. Such perseverance gave cause to fear that the
English would ultimately seize by force what they could not win by
diplomacy, and it is not unlikely that a determination to forestall a
similar move by the East India Company was partly responsible for
the Gurkha decision to invade Tibet in 1788. It is a fact that in 1814
Amar Singh Thapa evinced such a way of thinking, by declaring
that only by conquering Tibet once and for all could Nepal hope
to put an end to British ambitions in that direction, for Tibet had
ever been the true object of their cupidity. But Gurkha commercial
interests in Tibet were not being threatened by the British alone.
Developments in Tibet itself had long been working to frustrate
the customary intercourse with Nepal—and these developments are
important, because they confute both the idea of an earlier eigh¬
teenth-century Himalayan trade and the contention that the
Gurkhas were the main impediment to the existence of such a trade
after the middle of the century.
   Access to Tibet from the south had never been easy. In addition
to the natural obstacles of the journey up from the plains, there
were the Tibetans’ mistrust of aliens and pagans and their in¬
veterate dread of smallpox to make entry difficult for the low-
lander. Ever since the extinction of the Buddhist dynasties of north
India by the Muslims, in the twelfth century, and the attempts by
the pagans to penetrate even to Tibet itself, they had shunned
intercourse with Hindustan. As contacts with India weakened, so
Tibet’s awareness of her cultural and religious identity with China
grew, fostered by the conciliatory policy of successive Chinese
dynasties towards the lama hierarchy. When the Manchu dynasty
was established in 1655, an unwritten concordat was created be¬
tween the new Emperor and the doyen of the reformed sect of
Buddhists, the Dalai13 Lama. This rapprochement enabled the
reformed14 Buddhists to complete their spiritual victory in Tibet,
and facilitated the Emperor’s political control of Mongolia. Hence¬
forth Chinese Emperor and Dalai Lama existed on a relationship of
symbiosis, each in large measure dependent on recognition by the
other.

   13 Dalai, from the Tartar word tale, means ocean. It signifies the omniscience
and unlimited wisdom of the Lama.
   14 The reformers were called the Yellow Sect, after the colour of their dress.
The old Buddhists wore red vestments.
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                    65

   Seditious influences from Mongolia soon compelled the Em¬
peror to exercise the temporal functions of defender of the faith,
and in 1720 Imperial forces enthroned the Sixth Dalai Lama at
Lhasa and excluded a pretender. In 1728, civil war in Tibet caused
a second Chinese military expedition, and this time when the tide
withdrew it left an alluvium in the form of two Chinese Residents
(Amban) and a permanent garrison. The revolutionary activities of
certain political groups still persisting, an Imperial force marched
into Tibet a third time in 1750. The position of the Residents was
consolidated, and the Dalai Lama and state council thenceforth
had to consult them on all questions concerning temporal govern¬
ment. As the Chinese hegemony intensified, so Tibetan policy
began to betray a Chinese outlook. For example, the notorious
Manchu jealousy of Europeans was clearly behind the expulsion of
the Capuchin missionaries from Lhasa in 1745.
   It would seem that closer political control over Tibet was
accompanied by an increase of Chinese influence in Tibet’s com¬
mercial life. Tibet had always relied almost exclusively on China
for the things she did not produce herself—a trading connection
that had its origin in the regular tribute caravans from Lhasa to
Peking, which would return laden with rich reward from the
Emperor. Tibetans had also bartered their horses for Chinese tea,
from very early times. Later, it was from China, rather than India,
that they obtained even European goods; and by the end of the
eighteenth century the greater proportion of Tibet’s trade was
carried on via the garrison town of Siling, on the borders of
western China. Furthermore, the Tibetans themselves, although
possessing a flair for barter, tended to trade on an ad hoc basis to
serve personal needs, and were so lacking in the spirit of association
that members of the same family would often pursue their com¬
mercial interests independently. Consequently organized trade
came to be almost exclusively in the hands of Chinese merchants
and retailers.
   Chinese control of Tibet’s economy and trade relations naturally
followed the assumption of political power, since commerce was
traditionally a prerogative of the government and no trade existed
but by privilege or sufferance. This was why the Chinese presence
was constantly invoked by the Tibetans as an obstacle to any closer
commercial ties with outside countries. Bogle grumbled that this
was a stumbling block which crossed him in every path. That
66                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade

fostering trade was not as simple as bypassing the Gurkhas was
shown by the failure of the experimental fair at Rangpur, in north¬
east Bengal, which, in the 1790s, was established as a mart for the
Tibetan trade. Both Bogle and Turner had been satisfied that the
arrangements concluded with Tibet and Bhutan had removed all
serious impediments, and that nothing remained to hinder the
trade. But the merchants did not come. Despite the Company’s
abolition of all duties and its willingness to pay the expenses of the
caravan, the spark of life was never there, and the fair soon lan¬
guished into insignificance. Turner especially should have realized
that such expectations were futile, for it had been made quite clear
to him that similar attempts by the Russians had been thwarted by
the jealous Chinese. So long was the Chinese shadow, that it was
whispered in the bazaars of Nepal and Tibet that the Panchen
Lama, who had died of smallpox while paying his respects to the
Emperor in Peking in 1780, had in fact been deliberately disposed
of because of his friendship for the English.
    It was surely not entirely a coincidence that about the time of
Bogle’s mission the currency arrangement between Nepal and
Tibet became disturbed. It appears that the authorities in Tibet
suddenly insisted that the Tibetan coinage, which was debased
with copper, should be considered as equal in value to the purer
silver currency issued by the Kathmandu mint. The Gurkha
government demanded that the debased coinage be recalled, as it
was a source of disadvantage to its own merchants, or that, at least,
a fair rate of exchange be established between the two currencies.
Negotiations were protracted for nine or ten years, but the Tibetans
would not yield. A period of crisis followed, when Nepalese coin
was withdrawn altogether, and trade between the two countries
suffered a great decline.15 In addition, the Gurkhas were exas¬
perated by the Tibetan habit of selling adulterated salt, and by their
levying of excessive and arbitrary duties on Nepalese merchandise.
That their complaints had been justified in the latter instance was
fully confirmed later, when a member of the Tibetan council of
state evinced his culpability by committing suicide to escape the
effects of Imperial displeasure.

    15 Nepalese and Chinese sources agree on this interpretation: cf. Kirk¬
patrick, Nepal, pp. 339-40 with Li, Tibet, p. 244 n. 154. According to Bogle’s
information, and to that of Moorcroft’s informant, it was the Nepalese coinage
which had been debased. See Markham, op. cit., pp. 128-9; P-R-N.W., p. 91.
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                     67

    The situation must have borne the appearance of an urgent
crisis to the Gurkhas because, although their field army was fully
occupied in the western hills, they decided to risk Chinese retribu¬
tion and make a punitive expedition into Tibet. This was in 1788.
T. he gamble was not so ill-advised as it might seem. Their attack
was unexpected, and the principal of the three generals sent by the
Emperor to advise the importunate Tibetans preferred not to press
the issue to a trial of strength. Instead, he came to a secret under¬
standing with the Gurkhas and sent a false report to the Emperor.
The Nepalese were promised a yearly tribute from the monastic
authorities. The bond was not honoured, and in 1791 the Gurkhas
invaded again. The Chinese Resident withdrew the new infant
Panchen Lama from Shigatse, the treasurer of the Tashilunpo
Monastery fled and the lamas, pleading divine injunction, refused to
resist. While the Gurkha army pillaged the monastery, the Imperial
 reinforcements ordered from Szechwan dallied; the principal
 Chinese general drowned himself; and all Tibet was in commotion.
    When the Emperor learned what had happened, he had the
timorous Resident of Shigatse shackled with a cangue, and sent his
 best Manchu general, Fou-kang-an, at the head of an immense
 expeditionary army to chastise the Gurkhas. Meanwhile, the Gurkha
 force, gorged with plunder, had withdrawn into Nepal, leaving
 detachments to guard the passes. During June 1792 the Chinese
 army expelled the last Gurkhas from Tibet and prepared to invade
 Nepal. The Kirong pass was negotiated by Fou-kang-an himself,
 while detachments on either flank diverted the enemy’s attention.
 The Gurkhas were pursued to the banks of the river Tadi, only
 twenty miles from Kathmandu, where they turned and made a
 desperate stand. It is said that the Chinese general, in a fury, drove
 forward his men by turning his own guns on them from the rear,
 and overwhelmed his adversary with a human avalanche. The
 Gurkhas, dismayed by their failure to secure aid from the British,
 had no resource save submission. They surrendered their plunder
 and their prisoners, and agreed to send a regular tribute to Peking,
 as vassals of the Celestial Empire. The old economic dispensation
 was cancelled, and money struck in Kathmandu was thenceforth
 banned in Tibet, where a new mint with Chinese experts was set
 up. All foreign trade with Tibet was subjected to the strictest
 regulations, and Tibetans were allowed to trade with outsiders only
 under licence and by approved routes. The Chinese Residents were
68                The Matter of Himalayan Trade

 made the sole medium of communication with other countries, and
 measures were taken which subjected ingress by foreigners to close
 official control. The Gurkhas’ attempt to frustrate the closure of
 Tibet by the Chinese had merely precipitated that event. The
 Gurkhas did not relinquish hopes of retrieving their old privilege
 of minting currency for Tibet, but the tone of their solicitations in
 1814 was markedly different from their earlier pugnacious demands.
    The Gurkhas had received the painful and unequivocal warning
 that Tibet was claimed territory; but the admonition was clearly
 intended for the British as well. The military successes of the Com¬
 pany in India had made it an object of apprehension and mistrust
 even in Bogle’s day, and now its failure to afford assistance to
 Fou-kang-an when so requested did not go unnoticed at Peking.
 Unknown to the British, the Gurkhas had completed the vitiation
of the Company’s reputation by their practice of dressing their
own soldiers in red uniforms. Misled by the costume of the Nepalese,
the Chinese general reported to the Emperor that not only had the
 British refused to help, they had also sent troops to aid the enemy.
Lord Macartney was on an embassy at the Court of Peking when
the Emperor received this intelligence, and shortly after was given
an audience of leave. A letter was written by the King of England
to the Emperor in 1795, explaining that in fact the British had
attacked the Gurkhas in the rear. This did not impress the Chinese,
who apparently assumed it to mean that the Company had taken
advantage of the situation to further their own plans for conquering
Nepal. A close watch was kept on English activities in northern
 India from then on, and officers on the Tibetan frontier were
ordered to admit no Europeans. The Chinese Deba, or viceroy, of
Gartok who was responsible for allowing the expedition led by the
English traveller Moorcroft to enter Tibet in 1812 was summoned
to Lhasa in disgrace. Irritating though it was to the British, in the
eyes of the Chinese both Europeans and Gurkhas were tarred with
the same brush. Nor perhaps were they so unjustified in their re¬
fusal to differentiate. The Gurkhas were emulating the British in
every way; not only in the discipline and dress of their army, but
also, in this instance, in determining to preserve economic privi¬
leges by force of arms. The war fought against Tibet by the
Gurkhas in 1788 had not a little similarity to the one fought by the
British at the other end of the Chinese Empire in 1842.
    While, therefore, in the 1770s it had seemed that a war against
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                    69

Nepal could open access to Tibet, by 1814 it had become quite
clear that it would be unrealistic to suppose that any form of
military activity in the Himalayas could achieve that object. Events
in the meantime had demonstrated that the principal artificial
obstacle to trans-Himalayan trade was not the presence of the
Gurkhas in Nepal, so much as the jealousy of the Chinese guardians
of Tibet. The fact had been brought home with startling clarity to
the British in Calcutta by ‘the extraordinary spectacle of a numer¬
ous Chinese force occupying a position which probably afforded it
a distant view of the valley of the Ganges and the richest of the East
India Company’s possessions’.16 There were, moreover, no grounds
for supposing that the Chinese would have been less hostile towards
the British had the Gurkhas not aroused their resentment. The
Manchus’ suspicion of outsiders was inveterate, and it was obvious
that Europeans were the last in favour of whom they would dis¬
criminate. In the final analysis, the consequences of the Gurkhas’
efforts to open Tibet had served less to embarrass the British than
to enlighten them as to the inevitable outcome of a similar policy on
their own part.
   As the British became more powerful in India, they became
more knowledgeable; but sometimes knowledge came too late to be
of positive use. Such was the case with facts about the shawl-wool
trade, which came to light after British sway had been extended
westwards to the Sutlaj river. Textiles were the oldest and most
important of the industrial arts of India, and the artisans of
Kashmir were second to none in skill and fame as weavers. The
gossamer softness, the beauty and durability of the long decorated
wraps produced by the looms of Kashmir were admired by em¬
perors of India, sovereigns of Persia and, not least, by merchants of
England—who were no bad judges when it came to something
made of wool. In the eighteenth century the Persian word shal,
corrupted to ‘shawl’, passed into the English language. It was
known that the great secret of the shawls lay in their raw material,
which was more a down than a wool, being protected by the
exterior coarse hair of the animal. The shawl-wool goat was found
only in Tibet, and early attempts to introduce it into India and
Persia failed. As we have seen, Warren Hastings was particularly
anxious that Bogle should bring back some specimens of the animal.
In the event it was Turner who managed to send some emasculated
                       16 Kirkpatrick, Nepal, p. vi.
yo               The Matter of Himalayan Trade

goats to Calcutta, but the unfortunate creatures expired in the
suffocating heat. The trade would obviously have to be tapped at
its natural source; but full facts concerning the commerce were not
available until 1812, when William Moorcroft went to western Tibet.
    Moorcroft, Superintendent of the East India Company’s Stud,
was thinking how best to improve the strain of the indigenous
cavalry horse of Hindustan. This had become necessary because
political events (the consolidation of Ranjit Singh’s power in the
Punjab and the withdrawal, after 1806, of British protection from
the petty states below the Punjab in Rajputana) had made it
difficult to continue acquiring horses from west of the Indus, where,
in Kabul especially, fine-blooded animals were bred. For some
years the Company had been compelled to rely on horses from its
own territories for its cavalry mounts, and these beasts were small,
weak, and vicious. In 1812 Moorcroft, in company with Hyder
Hearsey, made a journey into western Tibet, travelling through the
Gurkha province of Garhwal, ostensibly in search of better horses
for breeding purposes, but in reality also in quest of the shawl-wool
goat. It was the beginning of a private crusade for Moorcroft, a
solitary, restless man with wild ideas, whose lifelong ambition was
to open to the British the trade and resources of trans-Himalayan
Asia. During his journey of 1812 he learnt about the Kashmirian-
Ladakh monopoly, the location of the best wool-growing areas,
and the organization of the trade. He brought back more than fifty
shawl-wool goats to Moradabad, with hopes of introducing the
breed into Scotland or Wales and, even more of a triumph,
succeeded in buying wool in markets which were the preserve of
the Ladakhis. This, he decided, was the beginning of a new epoch
in British trade. But it was not so. Moorcroft’s revelations came
too late to draw the interest of his employers to the western hills,
because while they had been dallying with Nepal and Bhutan in the
east, Ranjit Singh had been forging a Sikh empire in the Punjab
which took the shawl-wool trade into its embrace. He had made his
designs on Kashmir obvious, and had so far established his
eligibility to participate in the trade that merchants from Amritsar
were allowed to buy wool in Gartok. Roads had been built, leading
direct from Ladakh to Amritsar, which were causing the decline of
the old route along the Sutlaj valley through Rampur and drawing
the bulk of the shawl-wool trade through Sikh territory.
    It seemed obvious, then, in 1814, that any attempt by the British
                     The Matter of Himalayan Trade                               71

to capture a share of the shawl-wool trade would prove objection¬
able to Ranjit Singh; and the political situation at this time made it
something of a priority to avoid offending the Sikhs. British states¬
men were having to reconsider all old ideas on the subject of the
defence of India. In the time of Warren Hastings they had felt
secure, confined as they were to Bengal and the Deccan, bounded
by the sea in front and the territories of the Moguls and Marathas
behind. Since then, however, frontiers had been pushed back, and
states under British protection were found as far west as the left
bank of the Sutlaj. Sea power alone could no longer defend the
Company’s possessions from external aggression, and thought had
to be devoted to the problem of protecting the land routes which
debouched into north-west India. The Hindu Kush passes were
like the wings of a vast theatre, through which the prominent actors
in Indian history had made their entry onto the ancestral stage of
the Punjab plain. Conciliating the power which had control of the
Punjab was an essential first step to preventing the drama of
another invasion. Napoleon Bonaparte, fascinated by India, had
definite plans to make the attempt in alliance first with Russia, then
with Persia; and it became the primary object of British diplomacy
to thwart his designs by making treaties with Persia, Afghanistan,
Baluchistan and the Sikhs. The Sikhs were a special object of
British vigilance, because Moorcroft had discovered that Russian
agents were active in Kashmir and helping to discipline Ranjit
Singh’s infantry.17 This caught the attention of the Court of
Directors, which asked to be regularly informed of developments
across the Sutlaj.
    So far, we have examined political developments in India and
Tibet which by 1814 would seem to have compelled a drastic
modification, not to say the reversal, of the Himalayan policy con¬
ceived by early Governors of Bengal. But politics are only one side
of the coin. Being primarily a trading concern, the East India Com¬
pany might have risked the impolitic to secure the economically
beneficial. It is therefore important to demonstrate that, simul¬
taneously with political developments, changes had occurred in the
    17 In his letter of 7 Sept. 1812 to the Political Secretary (Pol. Cons., 18 Dec.
1812, no. 29, paras. 30-2), Moorcroft expressed his conviction that France was
using Russia’s ambitions in Central Asia as a means of promoting her own plans
to invade India; and that the oppressed and ineffectively defended Gurkha
provinces in the western Himalayas would be the natural corridor for a Franco-
Russian incursion.
72                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade

economic interests and outlook of the Company, which made trans-
Himalayan trade commercially unimportant.
    The East India Company had originally been interested in
trans-Himalayan trade for three reasons:
    First, because the drain of treasure from India was a cause of great
 concern, and Tibet was known to be a rich source of precious metals.
    Second, because Tibet and the trans-Himalayan countries
promised a natural and unlimited market for English woollen cloth,
whose appeal in the tropical and sub-tropical peninsula was
obviously limited. It was held that foreign trade should justify
itself by creating an increase in the national store of treasure, and
the East India Company was regarded as being under a special
obligation to meet its liabilities in India as far as possible by the
sale of English staple produce, rather than by the exportation of
specie. In 1708 the United Company of Merchants trading to the
East Indies accepted the obligation to export goods to the value of
.£100,000 annually, in return for its monopoly of the East Indian
trade. The first war with Nepal and the early attempts to open
Tibet were products of the Company’s mercantilist tradition—the
tradition of opening new markets and fostering new demands for
English staples by exercising the power of arms and taking the risks
which the privilege of monopoly postulated. Such quasi-scientific,
quasi-commercial expeditions as those undertaken by Bogle and
Turner were expressions of a type of enterprise which traced its
origins back to the time when the old Merchant Adventurers first
weighed anchor. Warren Hastings expressed this attitude when he
wrote:

. . . it is impossible to point out the precise advantages which either the
opening of new channels of trade, or in obtaining redress of grievances,
or in extending the privileges of the Company, may result from such an
intercourse; like the navigation of unknown seas which we explored not
for the attainment of any certain or prescribed object, but for the dis¬
covery of what they may contain. In so new and remote a search, we can
only propose to adventure for possibilities. The attempt may be crowned
with the most splendid and substantial success; or it may terminate in
the mere gratification of useless curiosity.18

   Third, and finally, because a trans-Himalayan commerce would
provide access to the shawl-wool trade. Such a unique and profit -
   18 Quoted by Alistair Lamb, ‘Tibet in Anglo-Chinese Relations, 1767-1842,
Part T; Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, parts 3 & 4: 1957, pp. 165-6.
                     The Matter of Himalayan Trade                            73


able commodity would have attracted the attention of a trading
government under any circumstances, but from the 1770s the East
India Company had a special reason for being interested. It was
finding it increasingly difficult to transfer funds from India to
England. Large sums of money were required in London. After
paying dividends on East India stock, the Court of Directors
needed funds to cash bills of exchange drawn on it in the possession
of creditors and servants who wished to remit their assets from India
to England; to provide for the upkeep of the Company’s various
establishments at home; to pay retirement pensions to the Com¬
pany’s servants; and to buy the English goods sent out to India and
China as exports. As profits from the China trade, which were
realized in London, were insufficient to meet these requirements,
it became necessary to remit to England part of the assets which the
Company realized in India. The export of bullion from India was
deprecated, and the usual mode of remittance, that of buying goods
in India and selling them in England, was becoming unprofitable.
The produce brought from India, which constituted the Company’s
annual investment, was mainly cotton piece goods, which the Com¬
pany manufactured itself in its own factories. But from the 1770s,
the growth of the English cotton industry was reducing the home
market for Indian cotton goods, and as a vehicle of remittance the
trade in piece goods was transferring money to London only
inefficiently, and running at a loss as a purely commercial enter¬
prise. It is not possible to ascertain the exact state of the import
trade from India, because the liabilities incurred on account of the
India and China trade were not kept separate in the Company’s
books; but even according to the Company’s estimates the import
trade from India occasionally indicated a deficit, and it is probable
that in fact the immense profits of the China trade were disguising
a more considerable loss on the Indian. What nobody could dispute
was the fact that funds realized in London from all sources did not
meet expenses, and that the English establishment was running at
a heavy loss.19 The Company had on several occasions had to apply

     19 Mins, of Ev., 1813, p. 485. It was impossible to define with certainty the
nature of the loss. In conformity to its mercantilist ethos the Company made up
its accounts as a balance of resources between England and India, maintaining
no separation between its trading and its political operations. Hence, the figures
could only show with certainty that the balance of payments was in favour of
India (ibid., pp. 485, 505). In order to decide whether trade was subsidizing
territorial administration, as the Company claimed, or territorial revenues trade,
74                    The Matter of Himalayan Trade

to the Treasury for loans. Under such circumstances, a new Indian
article of investment which promised to be not only a vehicle of
remittance but also a means to profit was bound to arouse a lot of
interest. This explains in great measure the sustained interest in
the shawl-wool trade and in plans to manufacture shawls for the
English and European markets.
    Here are three reasons, then, as they existed in the last decades
of the eighteenth century, to explain the prevailing concern to
extend the limit of British commercial interest across the Hima¬
layas. In 1814, these reasons no longer existed.
    By the outbreak of the Nepal War in 1814, the main channel by
which treasure had been flowing out of India—the channel to
China—had been blocked. Sending Indian bullion to China to pay
for the Company’s tea investment had latterly been an annual
practice, dating from 1757. The procedure had been necessary
because few English commodities could be sold profitably enough
in China to make it possible to pay for tea with exports alone. The
practice continued for some thirty years, before it was realized that
the produce of India could be used to finance the China investment.
Indian raw cotton found a ready market in China, and by exploiting
the demand for this commodity the flow of bullion out of India was
soon stopped. The other product of India which the Chinese
needed was opium, and this they absorbed with insatiable vora¬
city.20 Its importation was illegal, but private ‘country’ merchants
as its critics maintained, it would have been necessary to regard Britain and
British India as a single field of economic operation and recast accounts as a
balance between trade and territorial administration. This is precisely what
Parliament ordered the Company to do in 1813; and when the affairs of the
Company were re-examined in 1832 the new method in its books made it clear
that the profits of commerce not only covered the payment of dividends, but
supplied up to 25 per cent of a territorial deficit (1832 Report, pp. 51-3, 60). But
the enormous commercial profits derived entirely from the China trade, not the
Indian (ibid., p. 73).

    20 Michael Greenberg, British Trade and the Opening of China, 1800-42,
p. 9. The importation of opium into China gave so much alarm to the Chinese
government, that a further Imperial Decree banning the drug was published
in 1800. The Company had long since prohibited the traffic in its own ships
(Morse, Chronicles, vol. ii, p. 327), but the volume imported from India by
pirates did not abate (Greenberg, op. cit., p. 221), and this illegal traffic was
all to the advantage of the Company. Most of the opium was paid for with
bullion, and much of this found its way back to India and into the Calcutta
Government’s treasuries, since the Company retained the monopoly of the
internal trade in opium from its own territories, and derived enormous revenue
from the excise thereon {Mins, of Ev., 1832, Sec. 2, pp. 35, 45).
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                     75

—that is, those engaged in the local trade of the Indian Ocean and
China Sea—did not scruple to carry on a pirate trade, and in a short
time the exploitation of this black market swung the balance of the
trade from China’s advantage to India’s. The opium being paid for
largely in bullion, treasure was soon flowing from China to India—
a trend which was well established before the end of the first
decade of the nineteenth century. In 1814, the outflow from the
Bengal exchequer had by no means ceased, and the Governor-
General complained of the demands for bullion from England,
Mauritius, Ceylon, Java and the embassy in Persia; but shortages
were transitory and the problem was by no means so urgent as it
had been in the 1770s. Treasure was no longer scarce in India. So
much is shown by the fact that loans could easily be raised to pro¬
vide the government with cash—in excess even of its needs.
   Eagerness to open new markets for English woollens had
languished by 1814. Economic thinking still placed importance on
the prosperity of the old staple industry, it is true. British woollens
enjoyed preferential tariffs in Indian ports until 1845, and the pro¬
hibition on the export of raw wool from England was not repealed
until 1825. ®ut the East India Company had made it quite clear
that its share of the good work would continue only so long as
it retained its monopoly and privileges. ‘If the private traders
under new regulations should interfere with the Company’s
regular trade . . . the Company must be obliged to reduce their
exports of the raw materials of the country, and the woollens of the
country, in some degree . . .’, said the Company’s Accountant-
General in 1813, and his reasoning is evident. The successful pro¬
motion of the sale of English goods in India depended on a careful
nurturing of the market, and this was made possible only by the
instruments of monopoly and privilege. Yet faith in monopoly and
privilege was increasingly sapped by the spreading popularity of a
new gospel—that according to Adam Smith, who had little to say
in favour of the East India Company. The Company was forced to
make its first concessions in 1783, when it undertook to supply a
certain amount of freight annually for private traders; and there¬
after the clamour of private merchants, who wanted to export to
India on their own terms and in their own ships, became loud and
persistent. The question of the renewal of the Company’s Charter,
due to expire in 1813, engrossed the attention of Parliament for a
period five years before the event, during which the Company’s
76                     The Matter of Himalayan Trade

 apologists fought an eloquent defence; but there was no disguising
the fact that the whole system of restriction, monopoly and
 privilege was moribund, and it is no wonder that the old eagerness
to open markets beyond the Himalayas declined pari passu. After
 1813, when the Indian trade was finally made open to all private
traders, to have invoked the principles of Warren Hastings—
intellectual curiosity, moral obligation, adventure—would have
seemed quaint and outmoded. The opening of the Indian market
registered a change in outlook among the British concerned with
affairs of India. The servants of the Company were becoming more
involved in collecting revenues, guarding frontiers and dispensing
justice than in trading; and the men who inherited the legacy of
commerce knew no debt to the old traditions of exploration,
pioneering and willingness to risk all for the tale of an eldorado
beyond. They acted more as merchants, less as adventurers, ex¬
ploiting already established markets, calculating maximum profit
and minimum risk, and treating the whole idea of trans-Himalayan
trade with increasing scepticism.
    So the inspiration and the sense of obligation to open new
markets in India was fading; but, let it be at once admitted, so too
was the necessity. The fact is that British woollens had not been
faring too badly in India, though one would never think so, to read
the evidence of witnesses called before the House of Commons in
1813. One after another they asseverated that the Indian market for
British goods was glutted; that Indians had neither the inclination
nor the means to buy European goods; and that the warehouses
were already overflowing with unsold imports from England. They
spoke impressively, and from experience; but a brief glance at the
figures reveals a different situation:
     Date         Value of European goods            Value of European goods
                  imported into India.21             left unsold in Indian
                                                     warehouses at the end of
                                                     the year.22
     1791-2           £206,791                          £4OI>512
     1808-9           £615,982                          £1,181,718
     21 See Appendix 5 to Illrd Report, 1811 (this shows the invoice value of goods
and stores imported); and Appendix 35 to IVth Report, 1812 (invoice value of
stores alone). By subtracting the latter figures from the former, the invoice value
of goods alone is obtained. The prime cost, as given in the text, is obtained by
dividing the result by 110 and then multiplying by 100.
   22 Reckoned as two-thirds of the whole, as given in Appendix 2 to Illrd
                     The Matter of Himalayan Trade                           77


   This single comparison of two years discloses a state of affairs
that was typical. The proportion of goods remaining unsold at the
end of successive years stayed in almost constant relation to the
amount of goods imported. This means that the Indian market for
English woollens—which comprised the bulk of the imports—was
steadily expanding. This is not surprising, because more and more
sections of the Indian population were coming into the sphere of
British influence, and more native princes seemed to be dressing
their soldiers, after the British fashion, in red broadcloth. Probably
the agency of private traders helped, between 1793 and 18x3, to
reduce the price of English goods and extend their sale, but their
shipments consisted mostly of wine and beer. It was the Company
which, even after its monopoly was withdrawn in 1813, continued
to export by far the greater part of the English woollens which
found their way to India, and these were sold for increasingly
higher profits as mechanization reduced the prime cost. The Com¬
pany finally stopped exporting English commodities in the 1820s,
but only because it did not wish to continue realizing assets in
India while it remained so difficult to transfer them to London, and
because its ships were becoming too full of troops and stores to
carry goods for sale as well. The situation was, then, that a new
fashion in economic thought, and a spontaneous extension of the
Indian market had changed the whole nature of England’s trade
with India in the period between George Bogle’s mission to Tibet
and Lord Hastings’s reverie in December 1814. The profoundest
change—the supersession of woollens by cotton goods as the staple
British product—was yet to come; but still, enough had happened
by 1814 to make the attitude of Warren Hastings outmoded, and
his Himalayan policy irrelevant.
   On the other hand, the export trade to China was a cause of
grave concern. The Company still felt an obligation to push the
sale of British staples in China, because Parliament continued to
allow it an unmitigated monopoly of the trade with that country.
But it was proving a vexatious duty. The Company seems to have
experimented persistently and diligently with new varieties of
woollens and metals, and the amount of English goods actually

Report, 1811 (where the prime cost is presumably stated). Goods and stores from
Europe were not accounted for separately from those purchased in India. The
estimate of two-thirds of the one to one-third of the other was that used by the
Company’s own accountants.
 78                The Matter of Himalayan Trade

  exported to Canton steadily increased. They were sold, too—but
  only at a considerable loss. In the books of the Company’s factory
  at Canton, for the seventeen seasons from 1792 to 1809, the accounts
  of only three show a net profit, and the total deficit over the whole
  period amounted to close on a million sterling. Even then, the
  profits on tea were disguising losses incurred by selling British
  produce. Until 1810, the Company’s agents at Canton had bartered
  their woollens for tea—this being the only way of inducing Chinese
  merchants to accept them. Such a way of dealing in effect increased
  the price of tea, because the Chinese naturally expected a favour¬
  able exchange when accepting goods which were so difficult to sell
  on the Chinese market. So a thousand pounds’ worth of woollens
  bought much less tea than a thousand pounds in cash. By paying
  partly in goods, the Company was foregoing a portion of its profits
  on tea, and affording a subvention to British staples which did not
 show on the accounts, where the woollens sold were rated at their
 barter price, and not at their market money value.
     By 1814, the port of Canton had become the focus of the East
 India Company’s trading activities, and the economic priority of
 the day was to widen the Chinese market for British and Indian
 goods, and improve the conditions under which English merchants
 operated in China. English interests in the China trade were at this
 time of crucial importance. India’s potentiality as a tea-growing
 country was unknown, and the United Kingdom relied exclusively
 on China for its supplies of what had become its national beverage.
 An approximate average of one and a half millions sterling was in¬
 vested in tea every year, and the returns hovered around the two
 and a half million mark. These were astronomical sums at a time
when the national revenue did not exceed about sixteen millions.
Yet, to carry on a commerce of such magnitude, the agents of the
East India Company were allowed access to only fourteen specially
licensed Chinese merchants, and their sole establishment on
 Imperial territory was a modest factory at Canton, where they were
suffered to reside only during the season of business. The buying
and selling, the bartering and chaffering once finished, and the
ships once laden and under weigh for England, the Supracargoes,
as the Company s agents were called, were obliged to retire to the
Portuguese island colony of Macao, where they carried on their
affairs until the opening of the ensuing season. They were forced
to trade under the most frustrating and vexatious conditions. The
                    The Matter of Himalayan Trade                   79


benefit of open market competition was precluded by associations
of Chinese merchants, and the local officials denied the English all
access to the machinery of legal redress, manipulating the com¬
merce in a spirit of private interest and petty despotism. It was a
rankling thought that the prohibition of opium had reduced the
guarantee of security for an essential trade to the corruptibility of
local mandarins. The problems of the British merchants trading to
China were matters of national concern, requiring to be handled by
royal ambassadors rather than emissaries from a mere trading cor¬
poration. Thus it was that Lords Macartney and Amherst journeyed
to Peking, the first in 1792 and the second in 1816, to plead the case
of British merchants before the Celestial Emperor by authority of
credentials from the King. The war with Nepal, intruding upon
this delicate and crucial process of ingratiation, was an inconvenience
and an embarrassment. Sir George Staunton, one of the Supra-
 cargoes, affirmed in 1813 that the trade with China was on a pre¬
 carious footing, and ‘liable to be disturbed by provocations which
might be considered of a slight nature’.23 It was not forgotten that
 Nepal was now, in theory at least, a vassal of China, and it seemed
that an attack on her might well qualify as such a provocation and
jeopardize Britain’s most vital commercial interests in the East.
 Lord Hastings took care that the Supracargoes were given full de¬
tails concerning the causes of the war and the attitude of the
 Calcutta government, so that an equitable case might be presented
to the Chinese authorities. Major Bradshaw, Political Agent with
the main invading force, was instructed to inform any Chinese
officers who might confront the army that the British objectives
were entirely punitive and not acquisitive; and it was his reluctance
to offend the Chinese which helped determine Lord Hastings not
to annex Nepal after her defeat. Recognizing that the maintenance
of peace and amity with Peking was of ‘such vast consequence to
the commercial interests of the Company and indeed of the United
 Kingdom’, he was furthermore prepared to withdraw the British
 Residency established in Kathmandu, and even to give tacit
acquiescence to an Imperial occupation of Nepal, if this would
mollify the Chinese.24 Lord Castlereagh, the Foreign Secretary, took
pains to brief Lord Amherst on the British position vis-a-vis Nepal
before the departure of the Ambassador for China, and enjoined
   23 Minutes of Evidence, 1813, p. 439.
   24 Sec. Cons., 14 Sept. 1816, no. 43.
8o                      The Matter of Himalayan Trade

‘great circumspection and discretion’ if the topic was raised.25 The
only way in which it was suggested the war might help improve
British commerce was by opening a trans-Tibet access to Peking,
whereby direct representation might be made to the Emperor and
the Canton officials circumvented. This notion was proffered by
the Supracargoes, but only after they had heard that plans for the
invasion of Nepal had been made. There is no question of its having
influenced the government’s determination to go to war. The idea
seems to have gained no currency in Calcutta, where there was so
little reason to expect that Imperial officials in Tibet would be any
less obstructive than those in Canton, that the possibility was sub¬
sequently never even put to the test.
    So far we have shown that of the three reasons which induced
the Calcutta government to adopt a Himalayan policy in Warren
Hastings’s day, two had been superseded by 1814. The flow of
treasure had been reversed by the development of the China trade;
and the need to extend the Indian market for British staples had
been eclipsed by the urgent necessity of removing obstacles which
were impeding the sale of British and Indian produce in China. The
shift of interest away from India to China not only made it seem
less important to breach that mighty wall of snow and ice which
separated India from Tibet; it made it seem prejudicial to com¬
mercial interests to try to, because the risk of offending China was
involved. The third reason why the East India Company became
interested in Himalayan trade was, it will be remembered, because
it offered the possibility of making available another Indian com¬
modity—shawl wool—which the Company would be able to use as
a vehicle for transferring funds from India to England profitably.
The days of cotton piece goods as a means of remittance, numbered
even in Warren Hastings’ time, were virtually over in 1814. English
cottons had captured the home market, and the re-export trade,
having enjoyed a brief prosperity after the 1799 Warehouse Act,26
when almost all the calicoes from India were re-exported, had been
killed by the Berlin Decrees, by which Napoleon closed almost all
Europe to goods from England. Even private traders, after giving
a slight stimulus to the import trade from India, had lost interest,
and it became difficult to remit funds to England by buying, in

     25 Morse, Chronicles, iii, p. 282.
   26 This exempted goods destined for re-export to Europe from all but a
small warehouse duty.
                     The Matter of Himalayan Trade                         81

India, bills of exchange on the London branches of private houses
of agency. The investments of these houses, chiefly in indigo, silk
and sugar, were simply not large enough to require substantial
advances from the Company in India. The Company continued to
import raw silk and indigo at a loss, solely because there was no
other way (apart from exporting bullion) of transferring resources
directly from India to England.27 Under these circumstances, in¬
terest in the shawl-wool trade did persist: to gain a share of it, to
establish shawl manufactories, and to send a new and exotic luxury
for sale in England seemed just the treatment to galvanize a jaded
commerce. In 1815 it was decided to build a factory at Kotgarh on
the Sutlaj, designed to attract some of the trade which was tradi¬
tionally confined to Ladakh and Kashmir—though without success,
it appears, until the final subjugation of Kashmir by Ranjit Singh
in 1819 sent a number of refugee weavers into British territory, and
even then obtaining wool remained an almost insuperable problem.
However, the remittance problem had also been transformed and
diminished by commercial developments. True, it was still difficult
enough to transmit funds directly from India to London; but since
 1774 a way of remitting indirectly had been discovered. This in¬
volved selling the Indian investment in China, buying tea with the
proceeds, and realizing the profit on tea in London, in the usual
way. In other words, assets were remitted to England via the agency
of Canton. Thus while the sale of Indian opium in China by private
merchants brought great quantities of treasure into India, the sale
there of Indian cotton by the Company provided an alternative solu¬
tion to the problem which at first had aroused interest in the shawl-
wool trade. After all its other factories had been closed, an establish¬
ment was kept in operation at Bombay by the Company for the
provision of cotton wool for the China market. The sale of Indian
cotton became so important as a means of buying tea, that, later, it
even began to be feared lest any increase in the sale of English twist
and piece goods at Canton should adversely affect this means of
remitting funds from India.
    So, for the third and final time we find that a problem which in
 1774 had led people to regard trans-Himalayan trade as desirable
led them in 1814 to be more concerned about the security of the

   27 Mins, of Ev., 1832, Sec. 2, p. 126. Saltpetre was also imported, in con¬
formity to the requirement of Parliament. Indian raw cotton, because of its
coarseness, was not favoured in Britain (ibid., pp. 276-7).
82                The Matter of Himalayan Trade
 East India Company’s commerce with China. The trade routes
linking London with Canton were the spinal nerves of the body
 economic, and upon their soundness depended its whole health.
 Free access through all the high passes into Tibet would have been
 less valued than was a passport to China and an audience vouch¬
safed by the Son of Heaven. No journeys through the frozen wastes
of central Asia were as momentous as those to Peking in a palan¬
quin, pertaining as the latter did to the fate of a commercial empire
and involving as they did the harshest of all privations—that of an
Englishman of his dignity. Whether or not Lord Amherst should
kotow to the Chinese Emperor was an issue of much more import
than whether William Moorcroft was dead or alive somewhere out
in Turkestan. Wherever men pondered the issues of the day—in
brown-panelled rooms in Leadenhall Street; behind classical white
porticos in Calcutta; and over madeira and cheroots in English
houses in Macao—on one point they were always agreed, namely,
that the China trade must not be jeopardized. The English were in
no position to bargain or blackmail, because the Chinese did not,
in their own view, depend at all on foreign trade, and they made it
clear that trading facilities were in the interest only of those to
whom they were granted. They were no acknowledgement of
Chinese need, only a token of Imperial magnanimity. No, the only
way to retain trading privileges was to avoid studiously all policy
which might give umbrage to the Imperial court; and to extend
those privileges required conciliation and cajolery.
    By 1814, then, British Indian diplomacy was being dictated by
two priorities: first, the necessity of good relations with the Sikhs;
second, the indispensability of a benevolent Chinese court. A
Himalayan policy was incompatible with both, and if we glance
over British diplomacy in the quarter century before the Nepal War,
we can see how such a policy was abandoned as the political and
economic processes which we have been describing developed.
    In 1792 the Gurkhas agreed to sign a commercial treaty with the
Company, probably in the expectation that they would in return
receive help against the Chinese, who were at that time hammering
at the walls of Kathmandu itself. However, the Governor-General
of the time, Lord Cornwallis, made it clear to the Nepal govern¬
ment that he could not endanger the Company’s commercial in¬
terests by fighting the Chinese. The most he dared to do was to
insinuate a British agent as peacemaker. This was Captain William
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                    §3
 Kirkpatrick, the first English official to visit Kathmandu. Peace was
 made before he arrived, but he went on just the same in order to
 spy out the land and to supervise the implementation of the com¬
 mercial treaty. The commerce in question was the purely local one
 between the Nepalese lowlands and northern India; the treaty
 made no mention of Tibetan trade. A subsequent native agent,
 Abdul Qadir, sent to Kathmandu by Sir John Shore in 1795,
 gathered useful information about it and suggested the setting up
 of marts for Tibetans in the coldest parts of the Company’s
 dominions. It was soon after this that the government took
 measures to encourage the resort of Tibetan merchants to Rangpur;
 but no further effort was made to carry out Abdul Qadir’s proposal.
    In 1800, after the palace revolution in Nepal, the Raja, Rana
 Bahadur, was obliged to have recourse to the age-old expedient of
 the personae non gratae of Indian politics—a pilgrimage to Benares,
 on the Ganges. Exiled ex-rajas were irresistible playthings to the
 new Governor-General, Lord Wellesley, who had a penchant for
 intrigue, and he sent off an agent, Captain Knox, to Benares.
 Wellesley’s idea was to act as arbiter in the political quarrel in
 Nepal, and restore Rana Bahadur as a puppet of the Company.
 There was no hope of this being accomplished, because the quon¬
 dam Raja had no intention of being manipulated by the British;
 but the interest shown by the Company in the fugitive at Benares
 had a useful effect on Damodar Panre’s government in Kathmandu,
 which agreed to a new treaty and an exchange of Residents with
 Calcutta. It seemed that the Company had at last acquired a foot¬
 hold in Nepal. But the whole affair smacks of opportunism, and
was really no part of a consistent Himalayan policy. Although the
 Nepalese durbar signed the treaty from a fear that the British would
 forcibly reinstate Rana Bahadur if it refused, the Governor-General
had no such intention; and he was particularly careful that all
 clauses which might offend the Chinese were deleted from the
treaty. Captain Knox went to Nepal as the first British Resident in
 1801, and was instructed to obtain the maximum amount of infor¬
mation while arousing the minimum amount of suspicion. The
very comprehensiveness of his instructions betrays extempore and
opportunist thinking. He was required to investigate the possibility
of facilitating commerce with Tibet through Nepal; but the in¬
junction was given no particular emphasis, and was rather lost
among the detailed instructions designed to promote local trade,
 84               The Matter of Himalayan Trade

 especially in timber, between the Nepalese Tarai and north India.
 As it happened, the embassy was rather a shambles. From fear of
 offending China, Knox was enjoined to use no threats and, helpless
 before the obstruction and the prevarication of the durbar after the
 sudden and dramatic return of the senior queen from Benares, was
 left no resource save that of withdrawing with some show of pique.
 Had the British been sincerely interested, they could have retaliated
 instead by setting up their own government in Nepal. The occasion
 had never been more propitious for the extension of British hege¬
 mony into the eastern Himalayas. The political confusion in
 Kathmandu was such that even prominent Gurkhas desired to
 become vassals of the Company, and at about the same time the
 Raja of Sikkim appealed to the British for aid in expelling the
 Gurkhas from his country. But the Calcutta government took no
 heed of these opportunities. Knox withdrew, the treaty was
 dissolved and Sikkim was left to its fate. Had China been offended,
 the advantages would just not have been worth the price.
    Thereafter, the Company’s government’s main concern was to
 avoid all involvement in Himalayan projects and politics. Calcutta
 appears to have been somewhat nonplussed by the home authorities’
 approval of Thomas Manning’s plan to voyage to Lhasa from India.
 Manning was an eccentric, who had learned Chinese at Canton. He
 seems to have had no motive apart from private curiosity. After a
 bizarre journey disguised as a Chinese he did in fact become the
first Englishman to reach Lhasa and set eyes on the Dalai Lama;
but it does not appear that he received any support or assistance
from Calcutta. At about the same time, Ochterlony tried to per¬
suade the government to take up the cause of the hill Rajas of
Garhwal and Sirmur, who had been dispossessed by the Gurkhas—
only, as we have seen, to find that Lord Minto was distinctly cool
towards the idea. Similar circumspection characterized Minto’s
handling of the border disputes with the Nepalese in north Bengal,
where he showed that his inclination was rather to appease than to
stand firm. When Moorcroft, footsore but triumphant, returned
from Tibet in 1812, he did not receive the official acclaim he
expected. There had been an unfortunate brush with the Gurkha
authorities on the return journey through Garhwal, and his party
had been arrested and roughly handled. The Nepalese Raja pro¬
fessed himself offended by such an intrusion into his territory by
men who were uninvited and in disguise. Minto was all the more
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                    85

irritated by Moorcroft’s expedition because it had been undertaken
without sanction from Calcutta. Moorcroft was reproved for his
cavalier and clandestine conduct, and told that if official permission
had been requested it would not have been granted, seeing that
such an expedition was dangerous, offensive to Nepal and directed
to objects which were outside the prescribed duties of Superinten¬
dent of the Stud.
    It might at first seem that the annexation of Kumaun after the
Nepal War confutes the argument advanced above. Lord Hastings’s
interest in the province was undoubtedly stimulated by the fact
that it offered access to Tibet and the shawl-wool trade; but if we
examine the circumstances under which the decision to annex was
made, we shall see that the attractions of a trading connection with
Tibet were not present in the minds of members of the government
when they determined to go to war. Preparations were being made
for a conflict from the middle of June 1814, the plan being to com¬
mence operations at the beginning of the ensuing cold season. The
idea that the Gurkha territories west of the Kali river might, if
captured, offer passages into Tibet, evolved from the extensive
inquiries of the interim period. One of the government’s informants
was Hyder Hearsey, and in memoranda of his was mention of the
Niti and Mana passes, which lead from Garhwal into Tibet. This
caught the attention of government, and Hearsey was asked for
further details. On 24 August he wrote supplying more informa¬
tion, and described Garhwal with its rich valley, Dehra Dun, as a
potentially thriving entrepot for trans-Himalayan trade. The
Governor-General was now intrigued by the possibilities which the
province offered, and he contemplated annexing Garhwal ‘not so
much with a view to revenue as for the security of commercial
communications with the country where the shawl wool is pro¬
duced’.28 Soon, however, it became obvious that Kumaun offered
even better access to Tibet than did Garhwal. Knowledge of
Kumaun’s rich natural resources had already determined Hastings
to claim the province as part of the just prize of war, and as it was
clear that Kumaun offered the better trade routes as well, it was no
longer necessary to consider annexing Garhwal. Only Dehra Dun
would probably be retained, for purely strategic reasons.
   There was no question of the war with Nepal’s being undertaken
in order to secure the trade routes through the western Gurkha
                          ™ P.R.N.W., p.65.
86               The Matter of Himalayan Trade

provinces. As preparations for war evolved, information came to
light, and it became apparent that the war could be given an
additional justification by the acquisition of such trading advan¬
tages. It became obvious later that Hastings’s interest in trans-
Himalayan commerce was subordinate to his conception of strategic
and political necessities, and it would be quite unconvincing to
suggest that he inherited Warren Hastings’s willingness to make
war for the sake of that commerce. War once decided on, however,
it would have been unnatural to forgo such incidental opportunities
as promised to make it more worth the trouble and expense. By
annexing Kumaun, several such opportunities were realized.
Besides a corridor to Tibet, the province offered mineral and timber
resources of great richness and a position of major strategic im¬
portance. The Sikhs had already shown an inclination to cross the
Sutlaj on the plains, and it was arguable that they would not have
resisted much longer similar temptations farther up, in the hills,
where the Gurkhas had been proving troublesome to them. The
Governor-General considered that, by establishing the Company’s
military presence in Kumaun, he had removed the threat of the
Sikhs invading the cis-Sutlaj hills and ‘taking in flank one of the
most valuable and important positions of our northwest frontier
line’. If he tended to expatiate more on the shawl wool theme, it
was probably because he appreciated that reasons of commerce
were still likely to appear more cogent to the London authorities,
whose aversion to further annexations had to be borne in mind, and
who viewed the war strictly as a means of preserving existing rights.
But his real interests were not commercial. It is significant, for
example, that at the outset of the war he told Major Bradshaw7 that
a trade agreement with Nepal was to be considered as a dispensable
part of the provisional peace treaty, and that at the end of the war
he showed no enthusiasm at all for the commercial treaty with
Sikkim, who now found herself freed from Gurkha domination.
Sikkim was a natural gateway to Tibet, separated as she was from
Bhutan on the east by the Chumbi Valley, a long finger of Tibetan
territory which reaches over the Himalayan crest and points down
to Bengal. Yet Captain Latter, in charge of negotiations with
Sikkim, received no instructions concerning a commercial clause in
the Company’s pending treaty with that state until he announced
that he had suggested to the Sikkim officers that they would derive
advantage from a trade with north India—‘[in order] that by the
                      The Matter of Himalayan Trade                           87

sale of mangeit,29 beeswax, ivory and other articles the Raja might
be furnished with funds for the payment of his troops’. The
Governor-General’s reaction to this modest design was very
nonchalant. ‘It might be proper,’ Latter was informed, ‘as it
seems ... to be expected, that an article should be inserted in the
proposed arrangement, for encouraging a free commercial inter¬
course between the two states.’ Then again, the following extract
from a letter to Canton, dated June 1816, has a tone which con¬
trasts strongly with the zeal of his letters to London:

The approximation of the British territories and of states subject to its
[sic\ [? protection]30 to the dominions of China, will probably lead to a
more or less extended commercial intercourse with the provinces of the
latter state near the Himala range. It will [? not be]30 in the [? nature of]30
our policy to endeavour to force this intercourse, but we shall of course
feel disposed to give every fair encouragement to it.

   Actions were in fact even more cautious than the most guarded
words; and far from ‘every fair encouragement’, the Governor-
General displayed a diffidence which must have caused sad
disappointment to those who had hoped the war would promote
trans-Himalayan trade. William Moorcroft could hardly wait for
the fighting to end to exploit the openings provided by the acquisi¬
tion of Kumaun. He was well acquainted with Ahmed Ali, one of
the Kashmirian merchants at Patna, who offered his services as
gomastha (agent) should government wish to test the possibilities of
a commercial communication with Lhasa. Moorcroft was eager to
send him on an experimental expedition there, by way of Kumaun
and the Garhwal passes, ostensibly as a private merchant (to avoid
suspicion), but in reality under the government’s sponsorship. This
idea was redolent of the experiment of 1795, when Abdul Qadir
was sent to Kathmandu to test the market for British goods. But
the government now, fearing lest the agent should exceed his
powers and compromise its position, was not all at keen to repeat
the device. Ahmed Ali was given permission to go, but only as a
private individual. The government undertook to find suitable
samples of British merchandise, but only on the understanding
that their value should constitute a loan at 6 per cent, without

   29 Mangeit, or Munjeet, is Bengal madder, whose roots are used in dyeing.
   30 Words omitted in India Office transcript, Sec. Cons., 15 June 1816, no. 17.
But the sense is clear.
88                The Matter of Himalayan Trade

liability on the agent’s part for losses incurred. Ahmed Ali chose
not to accept these terms, and the project lapsed.
    Hastings had not forgotten that any attempt actually to exploit
the advantages he had so warmly invoked could easily endanger
the success of the more fundamental policy of propitiating China
and Ranjit Singh. The Imperial authorities at Lhasa had been
manifestly perturbed by the British invasion of Nepal, and Hastings
had no intention of deepening their suspicions either by sending
agents to Lhasa, or by hastening to utilize the passes to Tibet in the
western hills. Hastings ignored Moorcroft’s suggestion that Ahmed
Ali should use the route through Kumaun and recommended in¬
stead that he travel by way of Sikkim. Captain Webbe was even
required to suspend his surveying operations on the Kumaun
border because they had brought him into contact with the Chinese
officials of Tibet. Lieutenant Ross, in charge of relations with the
cis-Sutlaj hill states afforded British protection after the war,
suggested that the government should probe the possibilities of a
commercial connection with the Raja of Kulu, a small state across
the Sutlaj which straddled the main trade route from Ladakh to the
Punjab. He pointed out that the trade in shawls and shawl-wool
could be tapped in Kulu, and drawn off into the Company’s
territory. But in the view of the Governor-General, the plan was
‘liable to considerable objections . . . since it might be viewed by
Ranjit Singh as an attempt ... to form a connection with the
countries lying on the other side of the Sutlaj and as justifying any
measure on his part to renew his intercourse with the Sikh chiefs on
this side . . .’
    Perhaps no one was more dismayed by the transience of the
revived interest in trade through the Himalayas than William
Moorcroft. He brooded over lost opportunities, and resolved either
to vindicate his convictions or crucify himself in the attempt. In
1819 he set off through Kumaun on an expedition to Bokhara,
encumbered with British merchandise which he hoped to dispose
of in the trans-Himalayan countries, thereby fostering new markets
for British goods. The government reluctantly sanctioned the
scheme, because again its ostensible object was to procure horses
for the stud; but it refused Moorcroft official designation and a
letter of introduction to the King of Bokhara. Fears of offending
Ranjit Singh undoubtedly weighed heavy with the government.
According to Hyder Hearsey, who refused to accompany Moorcroft
                  The Matter of Himalayan Trade                    89

on this occasion, it would have been more favourable had he agreed
to adopt the route from Bombay, via Persia, as suggested by
Hearsey himself—presumably because this would have avoided
contact with the Sikhs. Certain it is, that by subsequently interfer¬
ing in the affair of Ranjit Singh’s claims to Ladakh, Moorcroft
brought down upon himself the severest official castigation. His
mission was a failure. He reached Bokhara—disowned by his
government, despoiled by bandits, chagrined and exhausted—but
never returned. His fate remains mysterious. Trebeck, his com¬
panion, who also failed to return, wrote announcing his death in
Afghanistan, in September 1825; but the French missionary, Hue,
when in Lhasa in the 1840s, obtained convincing evidence of
Moorcroft’s arrival in that city, disguised as a Kashmirian, in 1826,
and of his sojourn there, incognito, for a period of twelve years. It
is just possible that in his mortification he chose to commune in
exile with the shades of Warren Hastings, George Bogle and
Samuel Turner, rather than return to the humiliation and disgrace
which, he had been convinced, would await him in India if his
expedition failed.
    British Himalayan policy in 1814 was therefore fashioned by two
types of necessity: that created by local border problems, and that
deriving from more basic economic and strategic issues; and the
two, like the surface and the deeper currents in a river, had ceased
to pull in the same direction. The Nepal War was an interesting
exercise in the art of diplomatic navigation, because it was an enter¬
prise favoured by superficial but opposed by deeper forces; coming
about because of the one set of exigencies, but in spite of the other.
It was made acceptable by the need to define and secure the
northern boundary of the East India Company’s possessions, and
to vindicate the Company’s raison d'etre as a government by
defending the subjects under its protection; but at the same time it
was made unwise by the more fundamental requirement of amity
with the Chinese and the Sikhs. It was in the profounder forces of
necessity that a metamorphosis had been wrought since 1774, the
date of the first British expedition in quest of Himalayan trade.
Their direction had ceased to correspond with that of superficial
expediency. They now created powerful reasons against fighting
another war with Nepal, and made it much more difficult to prevent
such a war from turning into a diplomatic disaster.
                                   IV

                  THE BENGAL ARMY

T     he East India Company had three native armies, one at each
        of the three Presidencies of Madras, Bombay and Bengal.
        Each had its own British officer corps, general staff and
commander-in-chief; but all were ultimately subject to the head
of the Bengal force, who was Commander-in-Chief for all British
possessions east of the Cape of Good Hope. These armies were
regarded by the Company, and even by many of its critics, as
wonders of their time. The high standard of loyalty and discipline
inculcated in such large bodies of Asians by a tiny group of British
officers was an object of pride and an habitual theme of self-
congratulation. But by the time of the Nepal War complacency
had outlived its justification. Serious flaws had begun to endanger
the structure behind the variegated and impressive fafade.
   In 1814, the Bengal army was the largest of the East India Com¬
pany’s three. Robert Clive had formed the nucleus of a standing
force in 1757, when he embodied and drilled a few hundred sepoys1
according to the European method, in order to protect the Com¬
pany’s trading posts on the Bengal seaboard. Since then, the
Company had become a dewan in its own right in north India, with
territorial revenues to collect, frontiers to defend, and powerful
rivals to intimidate; and the original small band had grown into an
army of some 68,000 men. One of the most notable facts about its
development was that it had latterly involved a shrinkage not only
in the proportion, but in the gross amount of Europeans. When
Clive had reorganized the army in 1765, he balanced a battalion of
European infantry against every seven of sepoys, and in 1786
Cornwallis, convinced that the European contingent was ‘the
foundation upon which all [the Company’s] power and dominion
in this country must in many possible cases stand or fall’, insisted
on increasing the proportion to one to every six, thereby bringing
the total of the Company’s European infantry to about 6,000 men.
These six single-battalion regiments had been reduced to three in
      1 Native infantrymen. From the Persian word ‘sipahi’—a soldier.
                             The Bengal Army                          91

  I79^, and later to two; and in 1814 only one of these was serving in
 Bengal. Meanwhile the twenty-four native infantry battalions of
  I7^5 dad risen to fifty-four. The European foot artillery had re¬
 mained constant, at three battalions. The native cavalry had in¬
 creased from two to eight regiments,2 while the only mounted
 European corps in 1814 was the single regiment of horse artillery.
 In numerical terms, the regular Bengal army on the eve of the
 Nepal War amounted to roughly 68,250 men of all ranks, of which
 the corps composed of Europeans accounted for about 3,200. The
 European contingent was thus only one-twentieth the size of the
 native army.3 In government circles at home this ratio was regarded
 as quite unacceptable—Castlereagh, when President of the Board of
 Control, had reckoned that even one-seventh was too low—and
 over the years since 1788 the relationship had been rectified by the
 presence of royal regiments in India.
    Partly because of technical difficulties (its recruiting officers did
 not bear King’s commissions, and it had no recourse to martial
 law), and partly because of negligence and a failure to offer
 sufficient incentive, the Company’s European corps had always
 been incomplete in numbers and wretched in quality. Cornwallis
 had been so alarmed by its inadequacy that he had adopted the
view that all European troops in India should be employed by the
 King. The Court of Directors, however, had opposed augmenta¬
tion of the royal troops in its territories, first because it would in¬
crease the jealousy of their own officers, over whom all Crown
officers of the same rank were given precedence; and then because
King’s men were so much more expensive than sepoys, in whose
fidelity the Court always affected to have an unshakeable confidence.
The consequence had been that in 1788 Henry Dundas, President
of the Board of Control, instigated legislation which compelled
the Court to accept and pay for, within a certain limit, such royal
troops as the Board deemed essential for the security of the Indian
possessions, at the same time obviating one of the Court’s objec¬
tions by having a local King’s brevet granted to all Company
officers. Thereafter, the number and significance of soldiers of the
Crown in India had grown in steady proportion to the increase in
the size of the native armies. In 1787 there had been only six King’s
regiments in the peninsula—roughly 5,500 officers and men. In
   2 Each of 3 squadrons or 6 troops. A troop had 80 horsemen.
   3 See Appendix 2.
92                           The Bengal Army

 1811 there were twenty regiments, or about 20,000 men, which was
the greatest number for which the Company was liable to pay by
the terms of the act of 1788.
    That act leaving it no option concerning the employment of a
certain proportion of British troops, it is not difficult to understand
why the Company chose to fulfil its obligation by receiving Crown
regiments rather than by increasing its own European corps (which
it was now entitled to do to the extent of 12,000 men). It would
have been enormously expensive to maintain such a large European
contingent. The service life of British troops in India was rapidly
terminated by death, debility or insanity. Dipsomania was so rife
among them, that they had to be kept constantly sequestered for
fear lest they terrify the population by their drunken rampaging.
But confining them to cantonments where their barracks were
dark and foetid, where clubs, libraries (for the very few who were
literate) and organized recreations were unknown, and where
bazaar women and drink were the only diversions, merely hastened
their deterioration. Most European soldiers had native concubines,
and were reckoned to be responsible for the alarming growth in the
half-caste population; and it was very difficult to prevent their
acquiring crude ‘country’ liquor, or arrack, in addition to their
allotted daily half-pint of rum. ‘Rack’, which could be had for as
little as a few pence the quart, was often made even more noxious
by the admixture of drugs. Their degeneration was consequently
appallingly swift. It was estimated that a European soldier in the
Company’s service was fit only for a pension or a place on the
invalid establishment after ten years’ service; and in the 1820s it
was considered necessary to deny King’s troops the option of re¬
maining with the regiments in India once they had passed the age
of thirty. Many did not even survive that long. The annual death
rate among European troops during the first half of the nineteenth
century maintained an average of about one in fourteen, as a result
more of alcoholic poisoning, disease and suicide than of battle
casualties. Even communal suicides were known. The annual
casualty rate from all causes, including invaliding, discharging and
desertion, reached an average of one in seven.4 In 1815, of 1,116
corporals and privates in the Bengal European Regiment, 922,

   4 Figures in this section are from Sir J. Ranald Martin’s Sanitary History,
and from the Bengal Annual Military Statement 1814-15, in the National
Archives of India.
                          The Bengal Army                           93


or 83 per cent, had served less than 7 years. In the foot artillery the
proportion was 63 per cent, and in the horse artillery 47 per cent.
The advantage of using King’s troops under such circumstances is
obvious. They were regularly replenished and relieved by fresh
consignments from home, and the Company was spared the cost of
recruiting and training a constant supply of replacements. This
saving undoubtedly more than covered the extra expense created
by the higher pay of royal troops.
   Consequently, there were in 1814 two cavalry and six infantry
regiments of the King’s army in Bengal alone—a total of some 7,000
officers and men. Their presence increased the size of the European
force in this Presidency to just over one-sixth that of the native;
and it meant that that European nucleus with which the final re¬
sponsibility for the safety of the Indian empire was believed to rest,
and which was expected to provide a standard of loyalty and
bravery for the natives to emulate, had ceased to be a part of the
Company’s own army.
   While this increase in the size of the King’s army in India had
done much to mitigate the problem of expense, it had also, as the
Directors of the Company had foretold, done much to aggravate the
jealousy of their own officers. In Bengal and Madras in 1786 there
had been about thirteen officers and men in the Company’s pay
for every one in the King’s; but by the end of the first decade of the
next century the ratio was only eight to one. As their numbers and
significance had augmented, so too had the self-importance and
snobbery of the officers of the Crown. The Company’s officers
had been made increasingly aware of the panache, the mystique,
the prestige attaching to the King’s army, and left in no doubt that
the military service of a mere trading corporation was decidedly
inferior. Furthermore, King’s officers still enjoyed advantages and
privileges which they did not share: such as senior rank at an
earlier age, the highest positions, and honourable distinctions and
decorations. Company officers were often commanded by King’s
men ten or fifteen years their junior, because the pace of promotion
in their own service was so slow. They were now at last eligible
(since 1813) for the rank of lieutenant-general; but there was no
precedent to suggest that this would afford them access to principal
staff positions and commands-in-chief at the various Presidencies,
all of which had hitherto been the preserve of King’s officers.
Decorations from the Crown were extremely rare. Sir John
94                       The Bengal Army

 Malcolm, of the Bombay establishment, who had been made
 Knight of the military Order of the Bath early in 1814, was the only
 Company officer ever to have received the accolade. Brooding on
 their grievances, the Company’s men had come to envisage them¬
 selves as the victims of a cruel prejudice, like ‘a kind of Roman
 Catholic, and subjected to disqualification without having under¬
 gone the ceremony of conversion’.5 Many were of the opinion that
 the Company’s armies should be transferred to the Crown; but the
 contrary argument—namely, that the Court of Directors could not
function as a controlling body if it was deprived of the power of
appointment and dismissal—had so far carried the greater weight,
and the policy had never got beyond the stage of discussion. So the
situation persisted, in Bengal as in the other Presidencies, where
the military assignment was shared between two distinct officer
corps, divided by tensions which, like the force repelling identical
magnetic poles, imposed contact only intensified.
    Dissension among the officers was only one of the weaknesses
resulting from the type of expansion which the Bengal army had
been undergoing. Another arose from the fact that the rate of
expansion had failed to keep pace with the accumulation of Com¬
pany territory. Until the early 1780s the growth of the Bengal army
had been progressive; but by then a fundamental change was being
imposed on the Company’s attitude towards its Indian possessions.
In Pitt’s India Act of 1784, a clause whose preamble affirmed that
it was ‘repugnant to the wish, honour and policy of this nation’ to
‘pursue schemes of conquest and extension of dominion in India’
had removed the freedom of the Company’s agents in India to
make war arbitrarily. This legislation postulated a fully grown
empire in a state of rest, a conception radically different from the
notion—that the British territories in India were trading establish¬
ments in search of security—which had hitherto underlain policies
of aggrandizement. A diminution of the Bengal army, and a re¬
definition of its purpose, had not unnaturally followed this trans¬
formation of outlook. Its normal function no longer being conceived
as offensive warfare, but defence and internal security, extensive
reductions had been made in the army in 1786 and a military peace
establishment instituted. Further increases had been implemented
subsequently, in response to the threat or the outbreak of war.
There were enlargements on the occasion of the Mysore War in
                      5 Mins. ofEv., 1813, p. 173.
                         The Bengal Army                         95


1790, and during the period 1797-1805, which saw the second
Mysore War in southern India, the threat of invasion from Kabul
and the Maratha War in Hindustan; but the army had not been
maintained on a war footing once the crises had passed, and
decreases had been made in 1796 and 1806. On the latter occasion,
as well as reductions in the size of the regular force, the disband¬
ment of various ad hoc bodies of irregular horse and foot, formed
to relieve the regulars of internal duties, had been ordered. Each
reduction being less than the amount of the previous augmentation,
even the peace establishment had continued to maintain an overall
expansion; but in the years before the Nepal War it had become
obvious that this establishment was both unsuited in nature and
inadequate in numbers for the functions it was expected to perform.
   The reduction of nearly all the irregular levies in 1806 meant
that the comparatively small regular army had recently been re¬
quired to sustain the burden of such tedious and unprofessional
duties as guarding jails, escorting stores, treasure and prisoners,
supervising convict working parties and occupying police out¬
posts. The infantry had had to be broken up into small detach¬
ments and dispersed over the whole area of the Bengal Presidency,
which had been greatly enlarged in 1806 by the acquisition of
extensive territories from the Marathas in Bundelkhand. Most of
the men had been kept constantly on duty without regular reliefs or
intervals of rest, and had besides been so thinly spread that whole
districts in the north, contiguous to Nepal, had been devoid of
regular troops. The cavalry was absurdly inadequate for the
demands which had come to be imposed on it. Deterred by the
relatively enormous expense of this arm—the monthly upkeep of a
trooper’s horse alone cost three times the amount of a sepoy’s
wages—the Company maintained in all Bengal but 6,000 regular
cavalrymen, King’s dragoons included. Yet there were now 2,500
miles of frontier to defend, of which vast stretches in the south
were exposed to the depredations of Pindari chiefs who counted
their horsemen in tens of thousands.
   Sir George Nugent, Hastings’s predecessor as Commander-in-
Chief, had warned the Calcutta government that a serious deteriora¬
tion in the discipline and morale of the army was being caused by
such a severe overtaxation of its patience and resources. He wrote
of ‘the relaxed habits and occasional irregularities of detached
parties, which from the great want of troops cannot be regularly
96                         The Bengal Army

relieved and [which] are therefore kept from under the eyes of
their officers much longer than is for many reasons desirable’; and
he complained that field exercises had become impossible:
Of the benefit of acting and manoeuvring in bodies this army is altogether
deprived by its limited establishment being incessantly employed in
internal duties, leaving no troops disposable for the purpose of forming a
large permanent cantonment or an occasional camp, and by the scattered
description of the forces over the surface of a vast territory . . . and
yet the constant or at least frequent assemblage of troops in considerable
divisions, or, on the lowest scale, to the extent of a brigade or two, is
deemed indispensable to the proper organization of any regular army
intended for the defence of great continental dominions.
   The sepoys, finding it increasingly difficult to obtain the leaves
of absence on which they depended for the settlement of their
domestic and legal concerns, had been applying for discharges and,
when unsuccessful, deserting in alarming numbers. ‘Battalions
thus became incomplete [and] a constant succession of expensive
recruiting and of drills for recruits takes place to supply the loss . . .
of formed soldiers, many even of the oldest and best of whom are
known to seek their discharges or desert.’ Nugent had expressed
the opinion that the army needed to be increased by eight squadrons
of cavalry (1,280 men) and three regiments of infantry (nearly
5,000 men).
   By 1814 certain of the mistakes of 1806 had been rectified, and
supplementary irregular corps were again in existence. They
totalled some 14,500 men, and comprised a few bodies of quasi¬
military police, such as the Delhi Najibs, the Calcutta Militia and
the half-dozen Provincial Battalions—all with only a European
commander and adjutant; the Ramgarh Local Battalion, instituted
by Nugent on an experimental basis, with a European officer to
each company, to help defend the northern border; and two corps
of irregular cavalry, constituted after the native manner, with the
men supplying their own horses, uniforms and accoutrements in
return for a monthly lump sum, and commanded by two of the
officers who had come over from the Maratha service on the out¬
break of the war in 1803 and who had since been entertained as
pensioners by the Calcutta government. One was the renowned
and dashing half-caste, James Skinner, and the other was an
Englishman, William Gardner.6 But there were still too few of
                            6 See Appendix 2.
                           The Bengal Army                               97

these bodies for them to be efficient. In April 1814 the command¬
ing officer of the Patna Provincial Battalion wrote to the Patna
Magistrate that he had had only between sixteen and twenty men
(out of nearly a thousand) present in the lines during a period of
five months, and that it had consequently been impossible for him
to relieve the outposts in that period. Skinner’s Horse was cele¬
brated for its virtuosity as an ensemble; but in February 1815
Gardner told the Adjutant-General that it had been impossible for
him to train his men even in the rudiments of collective discipline:
‘They have been dispersed in parties of seldom more than 5
troopers, and such has been, from the first formation of the corps
 [in 1809], the pressure of duty, that as soon as a recruit was en¬
listed he was detached on command, by which many have scarce
seen a drill or parade.’
    As a result, when the horsemen were finally required to work
together as a group to defend part of the northern border during
 the Nepal War, they proved restive and even mutinous and created
 more havoc than they averted.
    To provide for the present emergency, the regular army had
 been put onto a war footing. Each company of sepoys had been in¬
 creased from eighty to ninety privates, and the grenadier com¬
 panies of battalions not actually in the field had been withdrawn
 and embodied into seven grenadier battalions, preparatory to being
 replaced by recruits.7 By these means it was expected that some
 9,500 extra men would eventually be available. Furthermore, the
 magistrates of frontier districts had been authorized to raise
 temporary levies of barkandaj (militiamen) to perform internal
 guard and police duties while the war was in progress. Hastings,
 however, was determined to use the occasion to increase the Bengal
 army’s permanent establishment. He proposed the creation of three
 new infantry regiments; but the essence of his plan was the
 augmentation of the irregular part of the force, so that the regular
 army could be relieved altogether of interior duties and refurbished
 as a professional instrument. He demanded three more local
 battalions, nine additional provincial battalions, two new corps of
 irregular horse, and the expansion of Skinner’s Horse from 1,000
 to 3,000 men. His proposals became the issue of a strenuous con¬
 troversy, and while the fighting went on in the mountains, a bitter


      7 An old-fashioned practice, now discontinued in the royal army.
98                             The Bengal Army

 dispute raged between the Governor-General’s itinerant Head¬
 quarters and the Vice-President’s circle in Calcutta. Because
 Nugent had urged their necessity before Hastings’s arrival, Edmon-
 stone was prepared to accept the three additional regiments of
 infantry; but he vigorously jibbed at the policy of permanently in¬
 creasing the irregulars, and insisted that the proposed corps should
 be treated as temporary expedients only. He argued that it was
essential to maintain regular troops in the interior; but his real
objections stemmed from a far more fundamental antipathy.
 Hastings, under the influence of Wellesley’s disciples, such as John
Adam and Charles Metcalfe, justified his military policy by invok¬
ing the indispensability of British paramountcy in India, or the
maintenance of a military establishment sufficient to defeat all
possible combinations of potential enemies. Military expansion was
essential to ensure the preservation of what had already been won.
It was an important tenet of this school of thought that para¬
mountcy would in large measure pay for itself by creating a state of
stability in which existing revenue assets could be more completely
realized; but its adherents did not hesitate to draw the inference
that territories and revenues should, if necessary, be expanded in
order to provide for the predetermined level of military strength.
Advocates of paramountcy therefore rejected the premise that the
British Indian empire was normally in a state of rest—a premise
which Edmonstone conceived as hallowed and which he made it
his mission to defend. He questioned the practicability of a com¬
bination of all potential enemies, and argued that it was not only
unnecessary but gravely impolitic to fix a scale of military strength
in order to provide for what was at present a purely theoretical con¬
tingency. Such martial demonstration, suggesting eagerness to
expand territorial sway, was the one thing which would cause the
native rivals of the British to band together. Military augmenta¬
tions would therefore precipitate the very danger they were
designed to obviate. The Nepal War once finished, he saw no
reason to apprehend subsequent altercations with any of the native
states, provided the Company made it clear that it had no acquisi¬
tive ambitions. Security could be guaranteed only by a state of rest,
so the regulator of military strength should be the actual extent of
dominion and the existing level of income.8
  8 Sec. Cons., 21 March 1815, nos. 1, 17; 4 July, no. 1, 30 Aug., no. 36.
Metcalfe’s views are in Kaye, Life, i, pp. 400-5, 445-6; Selections, pp. 78-9, 146.
                         The Bengal Army                         99


   But Hastings refused to give way, and after the war he rescinded
only those increases which he had intended should be temporary.
His points of difference with Edmonstone were submitted to the
Court of Directors.
   While the process of expansion had been accentuating the
internal weaknesses without alleviating the external pressures which
were vitiating the Bengal army’s efficiency, other measures,
designed to rationalize the army’s organization, had begun to be
applied. Their success was so far at best dubious or incomplete;
and in one important respect their effect had been far more
deleterious than beneficial—largely because of the jealous and
parsimonious way in which they had been conceded by the Court of
Directors. By the period of the Nepal War the old-style and the
new-style Bengal armies were rather like the two worlds which
Matthew Arnold described himself as moving between—the one
dead, and the other powerless to be born.
   The condition was well exemplified by the state of the commis¬
sariat. Until the beginning of the nineteenth century, the army had
been clothed, fed, and transported by private contractors—
generally civilians. The system had long proved inadequate and
unthrifty. Contractors had invariably furnished inferior materials,
and they had frequently failed to meet their obligations. The short¬
comings of the system had become especially manifest in the state
of the ordnance cattle and their drivers. Contractors would buy the
cheapest bullocks, and then confide them to native sub-contractors
whose chief concern was to increase their own profits. Conse¬
quently, whenever it had been necessary to send a battering train of
heavy artillery with an army in the field, the cattle had been found
so emaciated and weak as to be incapable of keeping pace with the
infantry. The drivers found by the contractors had been wretchedly
underpaid and troublesome. They had ill-treated the animals and
continually deserted. Delay and frustration from these causes had
been so apparent in 1809, when a force was ordered to the west to
deter Ranjit Singh from crossing the Sutlaj, that Hewitt, the Com-
mander-in-Chief of the day, had become convinced that essential
provisions and services must henceforth be supplied by a depart¬
ment of the army itself. A commissariat had therefore been insti¬
tuted in December 1809, and given charge of the victualling of all
European troops; the purveyance of boats; the provision and
feeding of ordnance cattle, and of elephants and camels for camp
IOO                        The Bengal Army

equipage and stores; the supply and upkeep of horses for the
cavalry and horse artillery; and the maintenance of carriage cattle
and hackeries for the soldiers’ personal effects. At about the same
time attendants for the ordnance cattle had been subjected to
military discipline, arrangements being made to have them provided
partly by the commissariat and partly by a regular corps of
 ordnance drivers.
    So far, the new arrangements had given much cause for satis¬
faction. Considerable savings had been realized in each department
of the commissariat, compared with the cost of similar services
from contractors, and on the occasions of punitive expeditions
against the fortresses of Kalanjar and Rewa, in Bundelkhand, the
ordnance bullocks had been so much improved that the heavy guns,
with their carriages and tumbrils of ammunition, had kept pace
with the infantry ‘on the longest marches, over the worst roads,
and in the hottest weather’. Resort to the temporary expedient of
hiring cattle and carriage had not been necessary. Impressed,
Nugent had expressed the opinion that ‘no single improvement
ever introduced into the Indian armies was of greater importance
to their efficiency or more conducive to the general interests of the
state than the Commissariat’.
    Hastings shared this view. In his estimation the Bengal com¬
missariat had a considerable advantage over even that at home,
because its Commissary-General was not a civilian, but a military
man, familiar, through personal experience, with the nature of the
demands he was called on to satisfy. By 1815 several assignments
had been added to his province, including the provision of tents and
camp equipage; the purveyance of hospital and medical supplies;
and the hiring and paying of bearers to carry the doolies for the
sick and wounded, drivers for the hackeries, and the various coolies
and carriers needed for the paraphernalia of the European and
native soldiery.
    But in its hours of trial the commissariat did not fulfil all the
hopes it had inspired. Its resources bore little relation to the size of
the army it was meant to serve. While it was capable of discharging
its functions in times of peace and desultory warfare, it was unable
to supply the needs of large divisions preparing for active service.
The native soldiers were almost always left to provide their own
carts and bullocks, and public establishments of coolies and porters
were insufficient even for the provisions and ammunition for cam-
                           The Bengal Army                         IOI

paigns such as those in Nepal, where the difficult ground precluded
the use of cattle. Furthermore, the commissariat did not assume
even nominal responsibility for the transportation of the baggage of
native and European officers. They were required to apply directly
to the magistrates for their coolies and hackeries, and were expected
to maintain enough bullocks and camels to enable them to move
instantly at all times. Few of them did. One major-general of the
Bengal army admitted, before the Select Committee of the House
of Commons in 1832, that, although an officer was supposed to keep
baggage animals, ‘you never press[ed] him to have them unless he
actually requir[ed] them’ because they were easily hired. Even
then, another officer affirmed that the Company’s were better pre¬
pared than King’s officers, ‘who tend[ed] not to keep up carriage,
which [was] a most expensive article, and reified] on having time
to muster animals when orders to march arrivfed]’. The upshot
was that when orders to march did arrive, no one was ready and
there was the utmost confusion while officers, men and commis¬
sariat all competed and bargained for animals, coolies and carts. It
was reckoned that, even under normal conditions, detachments of
the Bengal army required three weeks to put themselves into
motion, and the delay was correspondingly longer when the service,
as that in Nepal, demanded carriage of an unusual description.
     It cannot be denied that part of the blame for the army’s
 dinosaurian ponderousness attached to the Bengal officers’ own
 reluctance to rationalize their habits. They continued to expect to
 live as luxuriously in the field as in cantonments, with china, plate,
 table linen, condiments and wine. One major in the Meerut division
 of the Nepal force required four camels for his spare liquor alone,
 ‘viz: 10 dozen [bottles] of Madeira; as much beer; 6 dozen of port;
 all the old claret without breaching the new chest that there may
 be; 2 dozen of brandy; \\ of cherry brandy; and half a dozen of
 French liqueurs’. Continuing his letter of instructions to his wife,
 he added: ‘a few bottles of sauces, mustard, etc., etc., would also be
 acceptable. These wants strike me more freshly as I had last night
 a party of 14 who drank 22 bottles out of my small stock of one
 liquor or another.’9 This now seems preposterous; but in fact there
 was a genuine need for enormous quantities of drink, because
 methods of purifying water were uncertain and drinking wine
 and beer was the only sure way of avoiding cholera. Generally
                  9 John Ludlow to his wife, 25 Oct. 1814.
102                       The Bengal Army

speaking, extravagance was only half the problem. There were special
requirements, which the commissariat was incapable of accom¬
modating.
    The other main source of supply for the army was the clothing
agency—another department which owed its inception to the cause
of rationalization, but which was already finding its growth stunted
and its efficiency impaired partly by the dead weight of habit and
partly by the inveterate parsimony of the Directors. The old mode
of clothing the army had been to issue contracts to civilian entre¬
preneurs, who had been paid from the off-reckoning fund. This
fund was formed by the stoppages which were made from each
soldier’s pay. The amount remaining after the contractors’ accounts
had been settled would be shared among the staff and regimental
officers, in amounts varying according to their rank. That the
system had led to abuses is readily understandable. The officers
had been interested in keeping the cost of contracts as low as
possible; and the contractors in their turn had made up the uniforms
as cheaply as they could in order to increase their margin of profit.
The result had been that when the soldiers received their coats they
fitted abominably and were cut so sparingly that they would not
meet across the chest and belly and ended considerably short of
the wrist in the sleeves. Contractors had often failed to deliver, and
instead of the annual new jerkin to which he had been entitled, the
soldier had had to make do with one every two or three years. The
situation had become particularly deplorable after 1801, when a
committee sat at Fort William to devise ways of reducing the price
of clothing. Thereafter, entrepreneurs had still remained so anxious
to secure contracts and finger the advances that they took them at
quite unrealistic rates. Some had defaulted and absconded; others
had been ruined. Compensation, made available to the troops when
they failed to receive the clothing due to them, had been paid out
on six occasions between 1801 and 1808. Finally, in 1809, the con¬
tract system had been abolished and the army’s own clothing
agencies set up. There had originally been three, administered by a
principal Agent and two Deputies, who had each received a fixed
salary. But removing the contracts had solved only half the prob¬
lem. The old method of financing still persisting, the Agents had
soon found themselves at loggerheads with the colonels concerning
the distribution of the off-reckoning fund. Rather than abolish the
whole invidious system whereby the same fund, provided by the
                           The Bengal Army                         103

troops, was required both to furnish an important emolument of
the officers and to pay for the army’s uniforms, long-term efficiency
had been sacrificed as usual on the altar of immediate economy.
Compensation for the loss of off-reckonings, in the form of in¬
creased pay, being unthinkable, the new system had been modified
in order to preserve the old form of perquisite. In 1811, one of the
agencies had been abolished,10 and for the salary attached to the
two remaining ones a share of the off-reckoning fund had been
substituted, obviously with a view to dissuading the Agents from
being too generous when providing for the manufacture of uni¬
forms. Officers’ off-reckonings had consequently not been affected
by the operation of the agency system, and the uniforms of the men
had been but marginally improved, the agency coat having about a
sixth more cloth than the contract one. So the Bengal army re¬
mained shoddily dressed. However dashing they might have
appeared to the casual glance, closer scrutiny would have shown
the sepoys to be cramped into ill-fitting coats and tight shorts,
which restricted movement so much that it was actually impossible
to sit, or stoop to pick anything from the ground, without un¬
buttoning somewhere. In 1816 Hastings decided that long panta¬
loons, instead of the customary shorts, must, for the sake both of
the comfort and of the smartness of the troops in the cold weather,
be made a permanent part of the Bengal uniform; but in order to
preserve the off-reckoning surplus the arrangement had to be made
whereby they were issued not in addition to the jackets, but in lieu
of them every other year. Still in the interest of those who shared
the residue of the off-reckoning fund, all articles of dress were
made in three sizes only and fitted to the men as best they could be
by regimental tailors. In the King’s regiments, on the other hand,
every garment was virtually re-made to suit the individual to whom
it was issued. The cheap and shabby turn-out of the Company’s
Bengal troops was commonly admitted to be the consequence of
having the business of clothing administered by those who shared
the profits.
   Inferior workmanship extended to more vital things than
uniforms. Although the Court of Directors would not allow
muskets to be made in India, on the ground that neither the timber
nor the workmanship was equal to that of Europe, the small arms
which it consigned from home could not be compared to those
         10 The two remaining were at Fategarh and Fort William.
 104                      77ze Bengal Army

 supplied to the King’s army. General Horsford, of the Bengal
 Artillery, recalled that the locks of the muskets were badly sprung,
 making the triggers stiff, the aim unsure and the hammers difficult
 to re-cock. He considered the finish of the wood and iron work in¬
 ferior. The bayonets he had found too short, with points so thickened
 (for strength and long life) that they would not pierce the quilted
jerkins often worn by Indian enemies. Muskets frequently arrived
 from Europe with flawed barrels and split stocks, and swords with
 temper so soft that they snapped on trial. A special committee had
 been appointed to look into the state of the Company’s weapons in
 1809, but it seems to have contented itself with a perfunctory com¬
 parison of the King’s and Company’s arms in use with the Presi¬
 dency guard at Fort William. Even so cursory an investigation had
 confirmed that the locks of the Company’s muskets were ‘rather
 inferior’, but the committee had attributed this to the age of the
 pieces, finding that those in more recent assignments did not exhibit
the same deficiency. They had reported favourably on the general
state of the Company’s small arms, leading the Commander-in-
 Chief to conclude that ‘the arms supplied for the Honourable
 Company’s service appeared] to have been much improved of
late years, and to be now nearly, if not quite, as good as those
supplied for H.M. troops.’ The state of the weapons received in a
consignment from England in 1811 had soon confuted his optimism.
The Secretary to the Military Board had reported that numbers of
these muskets had injured locks, broken sights and damaged
ramrods. Many of the bayonets were cracked and broken in their
weakest parts. The Board had found it impossible to attribute all
the damage to the rigours of the journey, because there was no
indication that the arms had been inadequately packed; but only
guardedly had it dared to hint at ‘bad workmanship’ and to suggest
that the arms were ‘indifferent and liable to injury in a most
essential part’. It had recalled that the Directors did not take
kindly to having bad arms returned and were extremely sensitive
to ‘animadversions on the conduct of tradesmen under their im¬
mediate directions’. When giving evidence before the House of
Commons in 1832, the Company’s Inspector of Military Stores
insisted that there was nothing whatever wrong with the muskets
provided by Birmingham tradesmen for consignment to India. Such
was not the opinion, however, of other witnesses, one of whom
(Captain Macon, in the Bengal army since 1806) roundly declared
                          The Bengal Army                          105

them to be the worst he had ever seen. In truth, the situation prob¬
ably was that most of the Bengal army was using weapons of in¬
different quality made worse by age and shoddy maintenance. In
infantry corps, repair of arms was at the discretion of commanding
officers, who were supplied with monthly sums for the purpose. As
they were allowed to keep any surplus, it is not really open to ques¬
tion that repair work, when authorized, was often carried out with a
stricter regard for economy than for efficiency.
    In the case of ordnance, the Directors’ parsimony had combined
with laxity in the upper ranks of the army itself to allow a deteriora¬
tion in effectiveness. Of late, the standard of discipline and
technology in the armies of the native princes had risen. European
advisers—usually French or English deserters and adventurers—
had become an indispensable part of the military establishment of
every ruler with some pretension to importance. The Maratha,
Sikh and Gurkha princes had formed forces drilled and armed in
close imitation of the English model, and the Company’s invinci¬
bility could no longer be taken for granted. If its armies were to
retain their margin of superiority, they needed to raise their own
criteria of efficiency; and this was something which they had failed
to do. There was, in the Bengal army especially, a prevailing atti¬
tude of swaggering self-confidence. The language of the camp
knew no reservations, no misgivings regarding the certainty of
swift and easy victory. Anyone who voiced a doubt, who counselled
caution, was jeered and called a ‘croaker’. This disposition was
especially manifest in the reluctance to make full use of guns, and
in the dislike which military men had of being reminded that the
English cannon had become proverbial in India. Despite the
mystique which attached to artillery in the minds of all native
soldiers, they preferred to attribute their victories to discipline,
valour and the innate excellence of the British character. Neverthe¬
less, this disparagement was undoubtedly also due in some
measure to the fact that artillery was so cumbersome. Bengal’s
establishment of horse artillery was much too small. In 1815 it con¬
sisted of one regiment whose total strength was 312 and the light
field pieces or ‘gallopers’ which were attached in pairs to each
cavalry regiment. The foot artillery had to rely on teams of bullocks,
which, although the commissariat had improved their quality, still
remained slow and inflexible. They made even light field guns
more a hindrance than an aid in the heat of battle, when swift and
io6                       The Bengal Army

 complex manoeuvring was required. Elephants, which were also
 used for the draught of heavy ordnance, were timid and unreliable
 under fire. They were terrified by the report of small arms, and
 liable to become unmanageable on difficult or uneven ground. The
 poor construction of the gun carriages further complicated the use
 of artillery. They were of solid teak and sissoo, and had to be made
 heavier than the gun itself to withstand the repeated shock of recoil.
 This meant that even a light field piece, a six-pounder, complete
 with carriage and with ammunition in the limber boxes, weighed
 about a ton. The design of the carriages, especially those in use
 with the six-pounders, and of the ammunition tumbrils was bad.
 Nugent had complained that those in use with the horse artillery
 endangered the drivers and distressed the horses. Designs do not
 appear to have been based on standard patterns. When giving
evidence in 1832, one Bengal artillery officer asserted that two guns
might be moving side by side in the field without the spare parts of
one carriage being able to supply the other. It was often quite
impossible to replace wheels and axle trees in cases of accident.
Until Hastings instituted a transport train, shortly after the Nepal
War, native mortar carriages had to be hired for the occasion when¬
ever an expedition was planned. These constantly failed under the
weight of the pieces, and made them more an impediment than an
asset. This circumstance, together with the government’s reluc¬
tance to make the outlay for expensive shells and platforms, had
meant that mortars, which should have been an essential part of
any siege train, had seldom been present in sufficient numbers to
provide more than a widely spaced, and therefore ineffective, fire of
shells.
    Scientific knowledge in general, as well as guns in particular, was
under-exploited in the Bengal army, because its practitioners
laboured under disadvantages deriving from the Directors’ stingi¬
ness. The engineers were the only officers (besides the artillerists)
who were in any sense technical specialists. These officers were, in
the first place, overworked. There were only thirty-one of them in
the Bengal army at the time of the Nepal War, their number having
slightly more than doubled since 1764, while the size of the army
itself had more than tripled. One of Hastings’s first recommenda¬
tions on his arrival in India had been that the number of engineers
must be increased. The second disadvantage was related to the
first. Because the corps was so small, the contingent of high-ranking
                               The Bengal Army                                 107
 officers was minute, and most engineers were only subalterns or
 captains.11 It was very rarely indeed that even the chief engineer
 with a division on service was a field officer. All those with the
 Nepal divisions were captains. This was a grave handicap in a
 service where (as we shall see) commanding officers were invariably
 old men who, because seniority alone was the qualification for pro¬
 motion, placed more value on length of service than on expertise
 and who, because their arrogance had generally increased with their
 senility, felt it intolerably degrading to consult and be guided by
 officers considerably junior to themselves.
    Over-confidence, a shameful inadequacy of artillery and an
 impatient disregard for professional guidance had already, by the
 time of the outbreak of the Nepal War, contributed to cause several
 costly military failures. The most spectacular had been at Bharatpur,
 a Jat settlement surrounded by some eight miles of mountainous
 mud wall, about 100 miles south of Delhi. In 1805 Lord Lake, the
 Commander-in-Chief, had interrupted his campaign against the
 Maratha chieftain Holkar in order to attempt to capture this place,
 because its raja had renounced his allegiance to the British and
 declared himself an ally of the enemy. Both Lake’s force and his
ordnance had been absurdly insufficient for the task. He had had
less than 8,000 men; and while his heavy artillery had been sufficient
to make a breach, his supplementary field pieces and mortars had
been far too few to match the artillery which the enemy had been
able to bring to bear in their own defence. Yet the premise which
underlay the theory of siege warfare was that a greater force of
artillery can be amassed on the perimeter of the larger than that of
the smaller of two concentric circles. It follows that besiegers
can take advantage of their position on segments of the larger
circle to destroy the guns of the defenders on the perimeter of the
smaller, and thereby enable the processes of breaching and storm¬
ing to proceed unopposed. Lake had disdained to seek the advice of
his engineers, the chief of whom was only a lieutenant. As Lake was
no engineer himself, the results had been catastrophic. He would
not delay to enable the nature of the difficulties to be ascertained,
and the technical operations of the siege had been marred by haste
and a disregard for even the most elementary rules of procedure.

    11 In 1815 the Corps of Engineers consisted of 1 colonel commanding, 2
lieutenant-colonels, 2 majors, 9 captains, 8 lieutenants, 8 ensigns, and 2 cadets:
Bengal Annual Military Statement, f.155.
108                       The Bengal Army

 The wall had been opened three times in different places; but every
 time, instead of being the final object attained prior to the storm,
 the breach had been the primary achievement; and, as the mortars
 and field pieces, firing grape and shells, had been too few and too
 distant to prevent its being repaired during hours of darkness, pend¬
 ing the completion of other essential measures, on each occasion
 troops had been sent to the assault before even the most basic pre¬
 parations and reconnaissance had been carried out. Four attempts
 had been made to storm the place, and all of them had failed be¬
 cause of these deplorable omissions. Plans to carry Bharatpur by a
 coup de main had finally had to be abandoned, and the rebel raja
 forced into submission by a blockade. The wages of impatience,
 arrogance, and rashness had been heavy: 2,500 men wounded,
 nearly 450 killed, and a severely impaired military reputation.
    In so far as the Bengal army had taken the field at all during the
 period between the end of the Maratha and the beginning of the
 Nepal War, it had been employed in desultory siege warfare against
the strongholds of various recusant zemindars in Bundelkhand, a
wild and beautiful tract on the southern bank of the Jumna river,
retained as part of the Bengal Presidency after the peace of 1806.
 Most of these feudal fortresses had been stormed successfully; but
on three occasions, at Badekh, Komona, and Kalanjar, the mortify¬
 ing experience of the failures at Bharatpur had been echoed. Each
repulse had been on too small a scale to cause great disquiet; and as
each had been followed by the surrender of the besieged, on all
three occasions the reassuring conclusion had been drawn that the
assaults had not so much failed as had a delayed effect. Taken
together, however, they constituted an ominous indication that the
mode of conducting sieges had been making freakish not defeat, but
victory. On each occasion, as at Bharatpur, there had been a
proneness to pin hopes less on guns than on men; an eagerness to
hurl forward troops to accomplish what the engineers had scarcely
prepared for. Kalanjar was a fort on the summit of a massive rock,
and in order to gain the breach, the storming party had found
themselves required to scale first a perpendicular rock face about
twenty feet high and then thirty feet of broken wall. Ladders had
been used to climb the rock, but as the men clung to the wall,
where ladders could not be placed, fumbling for crevices and pro¬
jections to gain a footing, they had been flicked off like insects by
boulders and shot from above. Only one or two had reached the
                         The Bengal Army                         109

breach. The survivors had bitterly declared, what should have been
obvious at the start, that such a fort could never be taken; and a
later observer, himself a military man,12 was astonished that it had
ever been possible for any of them to climb as far as the breach. ‘To
us’, he wrote, ‘who journeyed for amusement up its stupendous
sides, the ascent was most difficult and by the time we had gained
the summit we were exhausted.’ The King’s 53rd Regiment, now a
part of the Nepal force, had provided the storming party and had
had 14 men killed and 128 wounded in this rash enterprise.
   But perhaps the most baneful consequences of cut-price
rationalization were the corrosion of morale and the sense of
grievance among the European officers. In response to the changing
climate of opinion, these officers had been given new standards of
respectability to observe. The principle of Parliamentary control
over the Company, expressed by the Acts of 1774 and 1784, the
impeachment and trial of Warren Hastings for oppression and the
appointment of Cornwallis as Governor-General with a brief to end
corruption in 1786, had signalled a new solicitude for regularity,
purity and efficiency in the government of the Indian possessions.
The day of the buccaneer and freebooter was over. The change was
caused partly by a growing humanitarian concern for the welfare of
the people of India, and partly by anxiety on the part of East India
stockholders and the Ministry lest undisciplined Company servants
should destroy the goose which laid the golden eggs. The early
years of the Company had been the classic age of venality and
moral laxity, and its military and civil servants alike had enjoyed
power without responsibility. Remuneration had been provided
more by a dubious process known as ‘shaking the pagoda tree’ than
by prescribed salaries and allowances. Commanding officers had
been minor despots, dressing and administering their regiments
much as they pleased and working in close collaboration with their
native officers, with whom they shared the irregular perquisites of
power. But the new pressures had wrought changes, designed to
improve the tone and decrease the independence of the Company’s
servants. Officer recruitment had been regularized, and the old-
style ‘country’ cadets, who used to come out to India in some civil
guise and wheedle their way to a commission after their arrival, had
become extinct. It was now essential for candidates to secure their
commissions from the Directors in London, and cadetships in the
                        12 John Shipp (p. 245).
 no                           The Bengal Army
 Company’s service had come to be regarded as a respectable pro¬
 vision for younger sons. Regiments had been numbered, uniforms
 standardized and regulations drafted to cover almost every aspect
 of military administration. A series of measures culminating in the
 major reorganization of 1796 had been implemented with a view to
 defining the position of the officers and making them the servants
 instead of virtually the masters of the army. Salaries and allowances
 had been prescribed to take the place of illicit gains—such as those
 secured by faking payrolls—and old-style emoluments such as the
 bazaar duty.13 Furlough arrangements had been introduced in
order to strengthen their ties with home and discourage the notion
of settlement in India, and pensions provided that they might be
freed from the necessity of making private fortunes. To protect
officers from abuses of patronage, it had been decreed that promo¬
tion was to be strictly by seniority: up to the rank of major in the
regiments, and thereafter in a single line. To prevent invidious
supersessions, the practice of buying and selling commissions,
which prevailed in the King’s army, had been forbidden. Much
more emphasis had lately been placed on seniority in the promo¬
tion of native officers,14 especially in the commissioned ranks.
    Although the European officers had themselves been among the
most strenuous advocates of such measures as seniority promotion,
paid leave and retirement pensions, it had not been long before
they felt that they had made a bad bargain in surrendering their old
advantages in exchange. Niggardliness in London had precluded
the successful operation of the new regulations from the outset. The
scale of pay and allowances had been pitched too low for the
minimum rates to have any realistic relation to the costs actually
incurred by young officers. In Bengal, where caste-consciousness
was strong, Europeans could not avoid comparatively heavy
domestic expenses, because each servant’s caste closely limited his
function and large establishments were unavoidable. The cost of
military equipment was very high and almost always beyond the
means of newly-commissioned officers. Most subalterns were con¬
sequently forced to borrow money—at rates of interest of up to
24 per cent if from native usurers—and remained burdened with
    13 A duty levied on liquor, tobacco, and drugs, which had been a perquisite
of commanding officers.
    14 Native ranks were: naik (corporal); havildar (sergeant); jemadar (3rd
commissioned rank); subadar (2nd commissioned rank); and (after 1814)
subadar-major (1st commissioned rank).
                             The Bengal Army                               111

debt until well into their careers. It was very rarely that an officer
was able to save money before he attained the rank of major; so
although they were now allowed three years’ furlough after ten
years’ service, most officers found that it was not until they had
been in the army for thirty years that they could muster the
enormous sum required for the passage home. It is a fact that
an officer was comparatively fortunate if he could contemplate
taking his leave after a period of service which was supposed to
qualify him for a pension. An officer was permitted to retire on the
basic pay of his rank after twenty-two years’ actual service; but
promotion was so slow that he could expect to be only a captain at
the most after that time, and certainly in no position to think of
retiring. The Court’s parsimony was throwing out of gear the
whole mechanism of seniority promotion, which could work
effectively only if officers had sufficient inducement to retire on
reaching a suitable age. But retirement was something which few
Indian officers, however high their positions, could afford to con¬
sider. Aged general and senior field officers clung to service, often
long after they had ceased to be fit for command, blocking the
channels of promotion to those waiting in the lower ranks. Although
twenty-five years (including three years’ furlough) was considered
to be the maximum period of effective service, most officers served
double that time before they reached the rank of major-general. The
general stagnation raised the age and depressed the quality even of
lieutenant-colonels and majors to an appalling degree. When
Nugent inspected the Bengal army in 1812, he had found two
infantry lieutenant-colonels who were demonstrably senile, and
had had to remove them to the invalid establishment. No fewer
than fifteen lieutenant-colonels and majors had appeared ‘alto¬
gether incapable, from age and increasing infirmity, of performing
the duties expected of them’, but these he had forborne to remove
both from fear of increasing the expense of the invalid establish¬
ment, and from reluctance to offend the old officers, ‘whom an
indulgent but pernicious usage [had] hitherto suffered to remain
unnoticed in the effective ranks of the army’. Death and subsidized
retirement were virtually the only modes of egress from the army.15
The latter was possible because the prohibition on the sale of
commissions was not rigorously enforced. It was the custom for the
    15 There was no system of retirement on half-pay, as in the King’s army, to
relieve congestion.
112                          The Bengal Army

junior officers of a regiment to subscribe sums of money to time-
expired senior officers to induce them to retire. But the method
could relieve a corps of one or two officers every year at the most,
and did little to accelerate promotion. When it was decided, in 1816,
to grant the brevet rank of captain to lieutenants of fifteen or more
years’ standing, no less than fifty-nine subalterns qualified for the
award, of whom fifty-two had served sixteen years or more. One
had been in the army for nineteen years. It must still have taken
them several years to qualify for the pay and allowances of their
new rank, because on an average it took twenty-three years to
proceed from the rank of cornet or ensign to that of captain; eight
years from captain to major; six years from major to lieutenant-
colonel; and a further twelve years to full colonel. Until 1808 cadets
had been commissioned at the age of fifteen, so in 1814 most of the
Bengal army’s general officers were in their middle sixties—and
this in a climate which Sir Henry Lawrence asserted made Euro¬
peans ‘old men at forty’.
    Small wonder that the enthusiasm of most young officers soon
gave way to apathy and despair. It was not long before they
realized that they had as good as sold themselves into bondage. For
the vast majority, a career in the Company’s military service meant
exile for life. Out of every 100 who went to India, about forty
actually survived twenty-two years’ service, but only six ever re¬
turned home to enjoy their pensions.16 It was an exile made all the
more insupportable by the refusal of the new public opinion to
sanction anodyne for its harshest privations. As confidence in the
superiority of western culture and technology grew, reinforced by
the Evangelicals’ denunciation of Hinduism as a force of darkness
and turpitude, so intolerance of the Englishman who tried to
reconcile himself to expatriation by seeking a new identity in an
Indian way of life mounted. Lady Nugent had not been able to
disguise her disapproval when she met the two young Assistants at
the Delhi Residency, Fraser and Edward Gardner (brother of
William), because neither shaved (whiskers were an exclusively
Indian habit at that time) and both were vegetarian. Such eccen¬
tricities were increasingly rare in the army, and where they did
persist were the objects of censure or derision. There was on the
Bengal establishment in 1814 a major-general called Charles Stuart,
    16 Badenach, Inquiry, p. 37; Mins, of Ev., 1832, Sec. 5, p. 49; E.I.U.S.J.,
vol. viii: 1836, pp. 112-13; Calcutta Monthly Journal, xxviii, pp. 372—3.
                               The Bengal Army                                   113

who was known as ‘Hindu Stuart’ because of the enthusiasm with
which he studied the languages, manners and customs of north
India. An anonymous contemporary in the King’s army, who
published his impressions of a tour of India17 in the early 1820s,
was revolted by such habits, and he stigmatized Stuart in no un¬
certain terms: ‘He is not treated as a madman, but would not, per¬
haps, be misplaced if he had his idols, fakirs, bedas, and shasters in
some corner of Bedlam, removed from its more rational and
unfortunate inmates.’
    Every obstacle was put in the way of officers’ strengthening their
ties with India. They were not allowed to buy land, and marriage
with Indian women was a fact of life whose existence was simply
not acknowledged. Military, like civil servants who did seek con¬
solation in such liaisons (and they were in the majority in these
days before the advent of the English ‘memsahib’) had to endure the
unhappiness of seeing their wives and children the victims of a
cruel proscription. Native women were ostracized by European
society; and the position of Anglo-Indians, or half-castes, was
miserable in the extreme. They were barred from Company em¬
ployment and denied most forms of legal and social recognition.
    The Court of Directors, ever seeking ways to economize, had
little sympathy for pleas of hardship. It impatiently brushed aside
the argument that it was impossible for a subaltern to avoid in¬
curring debt, affecting to believe that this was a false generaliza¬
tion based on the extravagance and improvidence of a few. Already,
by the time of the Nepal War, it had drawn up a revised scale of
allowances, which would reduce officers at certain stations to half
batta (allowance) and abolish most of the perquisites remaining to
commanding officers. Not for the first time, the Bengal officers
embarked on a long and acrimonious wrangle with their employers,
contesting every clause of the new plan in language of unmeasured
contumacy. They had reacted in the same way to the regulations
promulgated in 1796, so perturbing the Governor-General of the
time, Sir John Shore, that he had modified the plan in accordance
with their protests. In a pique, the Court had dismissed him; but
    17 Sketches of India, Written by an Officer for Fireside Travellers at Home, 225.
Stuart is not named, but there is no doubt that he is the officer referred to—cf.
his entry in Hodson’s List, part 4. Kincaid, in British Social Life in India, p. 1x8,
notes that during Wellesley’s incumbency ‘it was no longer fashionable in
Government House circles to profess an interest in Persian poetry or Hindu
metaphysics.’ See also Spear, The Nabobs, pp. i37~43-
 114                           The Bengal Army

 had nevertheless been forced to accept his alterations. Encouraged
 by the success of their recalcitrance, officers had treated the new
 regulations with contemptuous disregard. Studied defiance and
 organized protest were becoming part of the way of life of the
 Bengal officer; and, as one witness remarked before the House of
 Commons in 1832, ‘where officers of an army meet, form com¬
 mittees, appoint delegates, subscribe funds, talk of “rights in¬
 fringed”, “compacts broken”, “bad faith” of their rulers ... it is
 idle to talk of military subordination.’ The exasperation of the
 officers of the Madras army had already simmered to the point of
 mutiny when, in 1809, they had felt that they were being petulantly
 victimized by the civil authorities for objecting to various measures
 of military retrenchment; and it is possible that a similar trauma
 would now have convulsed the Bengal army, had the latest plan for
 reductions not been published at a time when the officers’ energies
were absorbed by the struggle against Nepal, and had Hastings not
 postponed its implementation and submitted it to an officers’ com¬
mittee for consideration. But on this occasion the effect of resis¬
tance was more to delay than to modify the scheme, which the
Court was obviously determined not to be browbeaten into
abandoning, and its final application in 1828 was to be the signal
for a fresh outburst of virulent indignation.
    Acerbity and insubordination often gave way to lethargic in¬
difference when the prospect of active service arose. Joseph
O’Halloran was a talented and popular officer in the infantry, and
he had completed thirty-four years’ service by 1814. Yet he was
still a major, and only twentieth in the line of succession to a
lieutenant-colonelcy. It was difficult for him to feel much en¬
thusiasm for the pending campaign. He wrote to a friend: ‘I expect,
in a few days, the command of a battalion ... to join the expedi¬
tion against Nepal—a point about which I am perfectly indifferent,
for my zeal has subsided into sullen apathy, from the disappoint¬
ment of my hopes’.18 Others turned to drink, to gambling, to
beating up the Indians and to insulting and fighting each other.
Plunged as they were, without any training, into the strange and
claustrophobic military stations of India at the age of seventeen,
sixteen or even fifteen, and allowed power and freedom when they

   18 Quoted by Mr. Hume during a debate at East India House—Asiatic
Journal, vol. i, 1816, p. 70. O’Halloran is not named, but he is the only officer
who fits Hume’s description.
                             The Bengal Army                                115

most needed discipline and guidance, it is not surprising that many
officers throughout their lives showed signs of arrested psychological
development. Some never outgrew the adolescent’s association of
virility with depravity, and gambled, drank or duelled their way to
disgrace and death. In an existence with long periods empty of
duty or distraction, the most trivial incidents were inflated into
dramas and the slightest irritation was fostered into factitious rage.
Animosities were deliberately cultivated and exaggerated to leaven
the dead weight of ennui and fill out the vacant hours. Almost all
officers, even the most cautious and best-tempered, received
challenges to duels at some time in their careers, which it was
better for them to quit the army than refuse. Many sudden
deaths were ascribed to cholera which in fact had less natural
causes.
   Most competent officers found a refuge from regimental life, and
a means of adding to their pay, in extra-regimental appointments;
and the corps were being drained of their best talent by the growth
of the general staff, by the increase in the number of local and
provincial battalions and by the practice of employing military
men in political capacities. Nugent claimed that an establishment
which assigned the same number of officers (forty-five) to an in¬
fantry regiment of two battalions as was allowed to a single¬
battalion regiment in the King’s army was even in theory too low.
He reckoned that every infantry company and cavalry troop should
have a captain at its head, as in Europe; instead of which the ratio
in the Bengal army was only three captains to a cavalry regiment of
six troops, and four to an infantry battalion of ten companies. Even
this low complement was never full. It was not unusual for more
than half of a regiment’s lieutenants and captains to be absent on
local leave, extra-regimental duty or sick pay, at the same time.19
The reorganization of 1796 had fixed the proportion of just over
two European commissioned officers to every hundred men in the
native infantry regiments. It was calculated that during the Nepal
War the ratio stood in practice at one to a hundred.20 This attenua¬
tion was all the more pernicious because the officers who were left
    19 Nugent’s Report of 20 June 1813: Sec. Cons., 6 Aug. 1813, no. 4, para.
74; Badenach, op. cit., pp. 9-10; Nugent to Torrens, 26 Sept. 1813: Nugent
MSS, f. 174. An essential defect in the system was that officers absent on leave
or extra-regimental appointments remained on the paper strength of their
regiments.
    20 Military Sketches of the Goorkha War, p. xi.
116                       The Bengal Army

 in the regiments were generally the least able, the most inex¬
perienced and the most discontented.
    It was becoming very unusual for officers to take personal in¬
terest in the welfare of the native soldiers, and most had great
difficulty in communicating with them even on parade. None was
required, and few bothered, to have knowledge of the native
languages. The Adjutant of a regiment was supposed to act as
interpreter, but even he was not required, at this stage, to undergo
an examination to test his linguistic capability. He generally knew
enough Urdu to read orders and translate commands; but as his
pronunciation was often bad, and as Urdu was an unfamiliar dialect
to the Hindi-speaking sepoys, he was hardly a medium by which
the officers could know their men or the men their officers. The
regiment was in fact ceasing to have any real significance as a cadre.
The junior Europeans were frustrated, indifferent, prefectorial and
incomplete in numbers; while the seniors were mere birds of
passage, who happened to alight in a regiment only because it
offered the vacant rank to which they were entitled. Under these
conditions even regimental officers’ messes were impracticable.
   The essence of the tragedy of the Bengal army is that this
deterioration in the quality of its regimental officers happened at a
time when other processes were affecting the discipline of the native
ranks and making it imperative to improve that quality. While the
administration of the army was being rationalized, the attitude of
the mass of the native soldiery was being altered by contrary in¬
fluences. Evidence suggests that the sepoys were becoming more
sensitive about the precepts and tenets of their castes, and less
amenable to even the basic requirements of a European military
system.
    The Company had always preferred to recruit for the Bengal
army from among the brahmins and ksatriyas, the highest of the
four groups into which the multiplicity of castes in Hindu society
is divided; and in particular from among the brahmins and ksatriyas
of Bihar and Oudh. Bihar was a province of the Company, and
Oudh a protectorate; and in enlisting high-caste Hindus whose
families comprised the majority of landowners in these territories,
the Company was pursuing the ideal of a ‘yeoman’ army whose
members would have a personal interest in the preservation of the
government they served. The high-caste Hindu from these pro¬
vinces also had the advantages of an imposing physique, a keen
                            The Bengal Army                            117

sense of honour, and a sober and tractable disposition. By 1814
they constituted a large majority of the Bengal sepoys. Muslims
were extremely few in infantry regiments, but tended to pre¬
dominate in the artillery and cavalry. As a result of the recruiting
techniques of commanding officers, infantry companies were even
more homogeneous than the larger divisions. Battalions were
usually raised at once in a single area, and when additions were
required for the component companies,21 the sepoys’ relatives
present at headquarters were generally enlisted. Otherwise, when
he wanted a few men, a company commander would tell the sepoys
about to go home on furlough to bring back their relations. In May
1814 Lieutenant Thomas Thackeray, commanding a company of
the 2nd Battalion, 26th Native Infantry, had written an interesting
letter to his brother, describing both the consequences and the
purpose of this type of recruitment:

I am at great pains to fill up the vacancies which occur in my company
by brothers of the best sepoys, and seldom entertain a recruit who is
not in some way related to a man already in the company. I have suc¬
ceeded so well that I have now four full brothers of one family, three of
another, and out of ninety men I have not twenty who are not connected,
either by consanguity or marriage, with some of their comrades. Men
naturally become attached to the service in which they have so many
ties.22

   The infantry company was therefore developing a double
identity: on the one hand it was acquiring new significance as part
of an institutionalized army (for the forces tended to be distributed
in companies rather than in battalions); and on the other, it was
developing into something of an institution in itself. The gravity of
the situation lay in the fact that the two identities were the results
of virtually contradictory processes. The self-perpetuating groups
which the infantry companies were becoming were far from being
moulded by the rationalization which was being applied to the army
as a whole. They were defined by caste regulations and a system of
social precedence which had nothing whatever in common with
such military concepts as rational distribution of labour and
hierarchy determined by rank. A moral dilemma was coming to

    21 There were 10 companies in a battalion.
    22 J. T. Pryme and A. Bayne, Memorials of the Thackeray Family, p. 488.
Cf. Mins, of Ev., 1832, Sec. 5, p. 23.
118                      The Bengal Army

 dominate the native soldier’s existence. Military duty and ethical
 obligation were incompatible and competing for his loyalty. The
 one demanded compliance with the exigencies of the service and
 deference to its system of rank; the other forbad travel by sea and
 the performance of manual labour, and required lower-caste
 native officers to bow in submission to brahmin privates. All the
 while this type of recruitment was preferred, the predicament was
 bound to exist, because the sepoys became more self-conscious
 about their standards of conformity as their companies developed
 into coteries of their own neighbours and relatives. The crucial
 problem was how to prevent the Hindu, irrational, personality of
 the infantry corps from subverting their rational, military one. It
 was a case of schizophrenia which only two therapies could cure:
 one was tightening the attachment of the sepoys to their European
 officers; and the other making battalions and companies more
 heterogeneous by recruiting from among a wider selection of tribes
 and religious groups.
    Rationalization was by its very nature making it increasingly
 difficult for the first cure to operate. It deprived commanding
 officers of their old instruments of influence. From princely dis¬
 pensers of patronage and favour, objects of veneration and pro¬
 pitiation, they had been reduced to mere overseers, enforcers of
 written regulations. Until 1805, a commanding officer had been
 permitted to address civil judges on behalf of his men, and this
enabled the latter to circumvent the cumbersome formalities of the
legal machinery and secure swift attention for their suits. The
privilege had been abolished in 1804 for sepoys residing in the
Company’s own territories, and those hailing from Oudh were to
lose it in 1815. The channels of justice were so cluttered, and so
jealously guarded by venal native acolytes, that now that sepoys had
to pursue their claims in the normal way even the most indulgent
furlough was insufficient to complete a process. With this dispensa¬
tion had been removed not only a principal reason for sepoys’
deference towards their commanding officers, but one of the
fundamental attractions of service with the Company. Land-
owners large and small had made it a policy to have one son at
least in the army precisely in order to enjoy this benefit; and
it had undoubtedly been a greater incentive to enlistment than a
monthly wage of seven rupees (about 14s.) which had been fixed in
1779 and not thereafter significantly altered despite the steady rise
                             The Bengal Army                               119

in the cost of living,23 and a pension which, though available after
fifteen years’ service, was not adequate to live on until thirty or
forty had been completed.24 This change in the status of com¬
manding officers had been bound to produce an introspective
tendency among the body of sepoys: a relapse into the more in¬
stinctive and less materially inspired sense of attachment to their
social and religious leaders. To arrest this process those very
qualities were needed in the generality of regimental officers which
the parsimony of the Court was making impossible. If regimental
duties had been made the most instead of the least rewarding aspect
of service with the Company; if the best instead of the worst
officers had stayed to lead and be in daily contact with the men, the
situation might have been retrieved. The conduct of the British
 Indian armies, more perhaps than that of any others in modern
 history, was a reflection of the quality of their regimental officers. The
 Hindu soldier, though proud, was most content to manifest his
 pride in steadfast loyalty to the officer who had won his respect and
 affection. When serving under such men, sepoys of the Bengal army
 could be devoted, brave and eager to a degree incompatible with
 caste conformity. That their behaviour varied according to the
 quality of their officers is demonstrated by the very unpredicta¬
 bility of their reactions when required to embark for foreign service.
 On several occasions they had been prevailed upon to undergo sea
 journeys—to Madras in 1758 and 1768; to Sumatra in 1789 and
  1791—which, as well as being nauseating physical experiences,
 were officially tabu for Hindus of caste. At other times, certain
 groups had refused. Between 1782 and 1784, four regiments had
 had to be disbanded for unsoldierlike conduct when required to
 embark for Madras; the army had been purged of another battalion
 for a similar reason in 1795 ; and in 1824 a regiment mutinied when
 required to embark for service in Burma. It is significant that the
 court of inquiry set up to probe the last affair censured the
 lieutenant-colonel commanding. ‘He had not the art of gaining
 esteem, but seemed to have an unhappy factious disposition.
 On parade he managed ill, got angry, and harassed the men by
 continually doing the same thing, and by keeping the corps out
    23 Barat, Bengal Infantry, p. 304.
    24 Mins, of Ev., 1832, Sec. 5, p. 178. The sepoy’s 7 rupees, which included
full allowance and from which a deduction was made for the off-reckoning fund,
was higher than the wage received by the peasantry, but lower than that received
by many natives employed as servants by Europeans—ibid., p. 41.
 120                           The Bengal Army

 unusually long in hot weather.’25 The regiments now needed
 qualities of leadership which were far in advance of those which the
 average regimental officer could provide. They needed men
 sympathetic and imaginative enough to manipulate simultaneously
the two forms of organization—Hinduism on the one hand,
European military embodiment on the other—which the army
 paradoxically represented; who had sufficient skill and knowledge
to cause them to mesh and work together as a single entity. Very
few officers ever evinced such understanding, mainly because they
 lacked even basic knowledge about the men with whom they were
 dealing. It is not that it was omitted to impress officers that they
should respect the ‘prejudices’ of the natives. On the contrary, the
injunction was reiterated with tireless insistence. It seems to have
found its way into every order, every dispatch, every commentary,
in one form or another. Apparently, what nobody realized was that
in order to respect prejudices it is necessary to know exactly what
they are. Cadets were given no formal instruction whatever in the
history, culture, or religions, and only the most cursory in the
languages, of India, before being posted to their regiments. The
subjects with which they were expected to have some acquaintance
were mathematics, science, classics, topographical drawing,
chemistry, swordsmanship, and French. Hindustani (Urdu) was
on the curriculum at Addiscombe,26 but instruction was woefully
inadequate, and it was almost unknown for a cadet to be able to
express himself intelligibly to his servants on arrival. The
experiment had been briefly tried of giving cadets language training
on their arrival in India. A college had existed for the purpose at
Baraset, just outside Calcutta, for seven years.27 But the place had
been in a state of continuous riot, and had had to be closed for lack
of order and discipline. So ensigns and cornets were now again sent
straight to their regiments, with the vague hope that they would
somehow acquire essential knowledge on the job. Yet even when
with his regiment, there was little in the duties of an officer which
made familiarity with the habits and language of the sepoys either

    25 Quoted by Barat, op. cit., p. 217. Dr. Barat also makes the significant
observation that when 6 more regiments mutinied, the colonel commanding
was in no case present with his corps.
   26 A military Seminary founded by the Company in 1803. The majority of
cadets ‘educated themselves’ and then applied for certificates of proficiency from
professors at the Woolwich Academy.
   27 1801-11, with a break during the Maratha War.
                           The Bengal Army                          121

imperative or convenient. Courts-martial for sepoys were composed
of native commissioned officers, and the main body of Europeans
took no part in the trials, which must have been one of the best
sources of instruction about the lives, habits and language of the
men. It was easy for the regimental officer to continue to make the
same mistakes, to go through his career without accumulating
enough knowledge and experience to provide him with criteria for
his own conduct. Those officers who did, from natural curiosity or
concern, acquire such knowledge, soon found the opportunity to
take their skills to staff or political appointments. In most cases, the
very fact of an officer’s having remained long with his regiment was
an indication of his deficiency in the sort of aptitude which that
regiment most needed. Sir John Kaye, in his history of the mutiny
of 1857, wrote of regimental officers as ‘men who could scarcely
call for a glass of water in the language of the country, or define the
difference between a Hindu and a [Muslim].’ They were frustrated,
bored and bewildered, and often added unpopularity to their in¬
competence by affecting to despise the Hindu ‘prejudices’ which
in reality they did not understand.
    The regimental officer had been the talisman of his sepoys, the
receptacle of their loyalty and their link with authority. His eclipse
had left a gap which not only insulated them from the object of
their allegiance, but also encouraged private fantasy, speculation
and fear. The sepoys had no sense of devotion to the Company it¬
self, whose nature was too abstract and foreign for them to grasp
(though they had at one time endowed it with the personality of an
old woman), and their fidelity, in their new isolation, depended
increasingly on the satisfaction of their superstitions, on the
favourable augury of success and on cabalistic assurances of the
continuing benevolence of fortune (iqbal). The native commis¬
sioned officers were not in a position to compensate for the deter¬
ioration in the number and quality of European regimental officers.
They are curiously shadowy figures in the history of the Indian
armies before 1857. The senior ones were liable to be commanded
by the most callow subaltern, and it was never even made clear that
they had authority over the two European sergeants attached to
each native battalion. As current opinion was that all Indians were
corrupt, their opportunities for important independent command
had almost vanished; and they found themselves unqualified for
staff positions which, in an increasingly institutionalized army,
122                      The Bengal Army

demanded high standards of literacy. Some European officers
scorned them as clumsy and uneducated, and it appears that far
less courtesy was now shown them than had been the case in the
old days. If they were no longer received into officer society,
neither were they accepted by the sepoys as being truly in the
interests of the men and, consequently, in any crisis in the relation¬
ship between officers and soldiers they merely stood aside, and
had little part.
    The most serious indication that the medium of communication
between authority and the ranks was collapsing had occurred not in
Bengal, but in Madras. Here, in 1806, attempts to introduce
innovations in dress and discipline (all in the cause of rationaliza¬
tion) had engendered a panic of fear and resistance. The new
Commander-in-Chief, Sir John Cradock, had ordered that
whiskers were to be trimmed in a uniform manner; that a leather
cap was to be substituted for the turban; that caste marks were not
to be worn on parade; that sepoys on guard duty should even
answer the calls of nature in a military fashion, by waiting until
enough men were in the same condition and then being marched
down in a party—and so on. The policy had been silly and un¬
necessary, but hardly exceptional in a military context. In some
regiments the new regulations had been enforced without trouble,
but in the garrison at Vellore they had led to open mutiny. More
than anything else, the rebellion had been a symptom of the crass
 incompetence of officers at regimental level, and it was afterwards
suggested that had they been able to communicate with the men in
their own language, the innovations would have caused no trouble.
Without the necessary assurances from their officers, the sepoys
had been bewildered and alarmed by regulations whose purpose
they did not understand, a prey to agitators who disseminated the
 idea that they were part of some sinister plan to enforce mass
 conversion to Christianity; and the officers, at first unable to
 communicate and then themselves unable to understand, had
 succumbed in their turn to exaggerated apprehension and vicious
 reprisal.
   The dangers inherent in the practice of restricting recruitment
to the high-caste Hindus of Bihar and Oudh were not appreciated
until it was too late to make changes. It appears that with the
decline in the influence and capability of commanding officers, con¬
trol over recruitment passed out of their hands. When, several years
                             The Bengal Army                     123

  after the Nepal War, the experiment was tried of mixing other
  groups (chiefly Sikhs) into the infantry regiments, the Oudh and
  Bihar men refused to accept them, and bullied them out of the
  army. Bishop Heber mentions the case of a naik who was removed
  from the army by the government because he had become a
  Christian. There seems to be good ground for suggesting that the
 almost pathological fear of offending native ‘prejudices’ which pre¬
 vailed in high quarters after the Vellore mutiny combined with the
 general ignorance among regimental officers of the exact nature of
 those prejudices to undermine the whole reality of European
 authority. More than one commentator of the first half of the nine¬
 teenth century insinuated that the superficial amenability of the
 Hindu sepoy was disguising the fact that control not only over
 recruitment, but also over a much wider aspect of the army’s
 functioning, had ceased to be vested in its nominal masters; and it
 was complained that many indulgences were allowed the sepoys on
 the justification of caste precept which in reality had no such
 sanction. ‘We should respect their casts’, declared one critic28 in
 1821, ‘but not descend with them to the indulgence of mere
 childishness—of things not meant or demanded by their faith, but
 assumed and imposed on our weakness and mistaken liberality.’
 ‘The assumptions of vanity and laziness are too extensively admitted
 in the Bengal army’, wrote another,29 the following year. When
 giving evidence before the House of Commons in 1832, Captain
 Macon claimed that ‘the most trifling alteration in dress [was]
frequently made an excuse for discontent, and [that] this [was]
 artfully worked on by the natives of caste, such as the brahmins or
 priests’. Even Sir Henry Lawrence admitted that the ordinary
sepoy was ‘pampered and petted’.
     By trying to treat the rationalization of the Bengal army as the
justification for immediate economies instead of the means to long¬
term ones, the Court of Directors had brought that army into what
can only be described as a state of arrested transformation. Rationa¬
lization had been allowed in principle and had even begun to be
applied, but had then found itself stalemated by parsimony. The
financial means and the local initiative necessary to bring it to
completion were being denied. In 1814 the tragic paradox which
was the gravest result of such myopic policy was already apparent.
  28 ‘Camaticus’, Asiatic Journal, vol. xi, no. 65: May 1821.
  29 Author of Military Sketches of the Goorkha War(p. 53).
124                      The Bengal Army

The quality of regimental officers was becoming seriously impaired
by the grudging manner in which rationalization was being applied;
yet it was only by means of superior officers at this level that the
process itself could hope to be successful. Regimental officers were
the only agency which could give meaning, in the eyes of the
sepoys, to the injunctions of anonymous authority: they were the
nerves essential to interpret the European mind of the army to its
Asiatic body.
                                   V

                PREPARING FOR WAR

H      astings’s strategy for the invasion of Nepal shows him to
         have been abreast of the most recent developments in
         military thought. He appears to have had a certain know¬
ledge of the ideas of Bourcet, the advocate of calculated dispersion
in mountain war, and of Guibert, whose panacea was mobility1—a
knowledge he could have acquired either by academic study or by foll¬
owing the campaigns of Napoleon, the theorists’ most famous pupil.
   He had to take account of the limited time available to an army
based on the plains. Troops could not cross the Tarai until late
October, and would have to be back in India by the beginning of
the following April. After that time, malaria raged in the lowland
jungles and marshes, cutting communications. Because time was so
limited, both a conventional assault on the enemy capital and a
Napoleonic-style attack on the enemy field army (leaving the
capital to succumb more easily or even spontaneously later) were
out of the question. Hastings reckoned that their mobility, and the
ruggedness of their country, would enable the Gurkhas to avoid
that decisive battle on which a single concentrated attack must rely
for its success. Instead, therefore, of choosing between the enemy
capital and the enemy field army, and leaving time to do the rest, he
decided to divide his resources and launch independent but
simultaneous attacks against them both. He was confident that the
country could in this way be subjugated during a single campaign.
The strategy of division would, besides preventing the enemy from
prolonging resistance, considerably simplify the manipulation of
the offensive force. It was known that valleys in the mountains
were generally barren and often so constricted that it was imposs¬
ible to dress a line of a thousand men. By dividing the army, prob¬
lems of logistics would be minimized and increased rapidity of
advance assured.
   Extending the principle of diffusion even further, Hastings
determined that each of his objectives—the army under Amar Singh
      1 See Liddell Hart, The Ghost of Napoleon, Chapter Two, passim.
126                          Preparing for War

  Thapa, and that in Kathmandu—must be attacked not by a single
 force, but by two co-operating columns. This would prevent the
 two areas of operation from merging, by pinning down and keeping
 separate the two victims. He reasoned that if the advance on Amar
 Singh Thapa was supplemented by a column on its right, which
 could occupy the Dehra and Kayarda Duns and block the ghats
 across the Ganges and the Jumna, the field army would be pre¬
 vented both from retreating towards the capital and from receiving
 reinforcements from it; while, if the main column advancing on
 Kathmandu was supported by a thrust on its left, this would bar
 the way to and from the west, making it impossible for the army
 in the capital to withdraw into the impenetrable hills of the Gurkha
region or to receive assistance from the field army or Palpa.
    Hastings selected the river Kali as the line dividing the eastern
 from the western theatre of war. In the eastern theatre, two columns
were to march into the hills. The principal column of 6,500 men
was to be commanded by Major-General Bennet Marley. His base
and rendezvous was to be Dinapur, and his assignment the capture
of the hill fort of Makwanpur, just south of the capital, and of
 Kathmandu itself. On Marley’s left, a much smaller force, com¬
prising somewhat less than 4,000 men, was to advance under Major-
 General John Sulivan Wood from Gorakhpur and occupy the
disputed frontier lands in Siuraj and Butwal. The immediate aim
of this force was to create a diversion in favour of the Kathmandu
column, but if circumstances permitted it was to proceed to the
capture of General Amar Thapa’s headquarters at Tansen, the
occupation of the town of Palpa, and the severing of the lines of
communication between Kathmandu and the west.
    In the western theatre, two forces were to converge on Amar
Singh Thapa. The right-hand column, under Major-General Rollo
Gillespie, consisting of about 4,500 regulars, was to move from
Saharanpur into Dehra Dun and Kayarda Dun, occupy these
valleys and the ghats on the Ganges and Jumna, and then veer left
to support the activities of the second or left-hand column. This
was to be under the command of Ochterlony, now promoted
Major-General. He was given 6,000 men, and required to push
forward from Rupar on the Sutlaj against the main army of Amar
Singh Thapa. Once the two columns had coalesced, Gillespie was
to assume the over-all command.2
   2 Hastings’s   own   summary   of his   plan   is   in   P.R.N.W., pp. 702-3.
                             Preparing for War                              127

   That, basically, was the plan. Again following a Napoleonic
precedent, Hastings labelled his four columns ‘divisions’. Each
was organized as a brigade and a reserve and each had supporting
artillery. Hastings had it in mind to throw forward yet a third
column into the western theatre, to the east of the other two,
against Kumaun, but intended to wait until the enemy was fully
occupied in other quarters. In the meantime, however, a corps of
najibs (irregulars) was to be raised in Rohilkhand in preparation for
the projected operation. Gurkha recruiting agents had already been
active among the fierce Muslim Pathan tribesmen of north Rohilk¬
hand, and Hastings judged that enlisting them for the British effort
would have the additional recommendation of denying the enemy
the benefit of their services. Who better qualified to raise and
command the force than Hyder Hearsey? Moorcroft had brought
him to the notice of government as an informant of local knowledge
and military experience; and Hearsey, overjoyed at the possi¬
bilities offered by a war with Nepal for the realization of his secret
claim to Dehra Dun, had eagerly solicited a part in the projected
conflict with the Gurkhas. Early in November he was instructed to
raise a corps of 1,500 najibs in Rohilkhand. The Governor-General’s
remaining concern was to provide for the defence of the frontier of
Purnea and Rangpur, bordering the far eastern provinces of Nepal.
This task was entrusted to the new Rangpur Local Battalion, with
a few companies of regulars, under the command of Captain Barre
Latter. His headquarters were at Titalia, on the flat watery low¬
lands directly south from Darjeeling.
    To make assurance double sure, Hastings fixed the strength of
each principal column at twice the amount which his advisors
estimated as necessary, and thereby mustered a force of 21,000 men
to oppose an enemy whose strength he correctly estimated as 16,000

Careful collation of available assessments gives these approximate figures. A
comparison of the figures given by Hastings in P.R.N.W., pp. 703, 708, 712, and
715 with the details concerning the composition of each force given in ibid., pp.
195, 196, 197, and 433, shows that his figures are roughly correct only for
Ochterlony’s column. In the case of Gillespie’s force the figure 2,343 for native
infantry must be a misprint for 3,243, and no allowance is made for the regiment
of native cavalry and the detachment of King’s cavalry. The assessment on p.
715 for Marley’s force (7,989) is too high. The Return for 23 Dec. 1814 gives
the total combatant force as 6,686 (pp. 518-19). The figure for Wood’s column
on p. 712 is an overestimation. The Calcutta Monthly Journal, vol. xxv, Dec.
1814, p. 381, computes the force at 3,700. This seems much more likely. By
March 1815 some 35,000 regulars and 13,000 irregulars were involved in the war.
 128                     Preparing for War

  at the most. He took care to include a good proportion of European
 troops in the invading columns. It was a common conviction that
 sepoys were most confident when they had a European example to
 emulate, and such encouragement was obviously going to be all the
 more necessary in the unknown country of the hills, which super¬
 stitious dread and religious awe made them reluctant to enter, and
 where there would be no room for cavalry support or the familiar
 and reassuring textbook dispositions of infantry. Generals Marley,
 John Wood and Gillespie each had a battalion of King’s infantry
 with his force, besides European artillery. Ochterlony did not have
 any European infantry, doubtless because his force was to be
 joined by Gillespie’s at an early stage. Ordnance was provided on a
 generous scale, and Hastings advised his generals not to hesitate
 to make use of it. But he was convinced that mobility would be their
 most useful attribute, and he personally designed a howitzer
 carriage which could be dismantled and carried in separate por¬
 tions. A similar pattern was adopted for the carriages of light
 cannon.
     Special clothing was ordered to be issued to the troops at govern¬
 ment expense. The customary thigh-length shorts of the sepoys
were demonstrably unsuited to the cold weather and rough country
of the hills, so both clothing Agents were instructed to make large
quantities of cloth pantaloons. The orders were not placed until the
middle of August, but somehow the second Agent, at Calcutta, was
able to produce 7,000 pairs of pantaloons and an equal number of
flannel banyans (waistcoats) by the beginning of October. This was
sufficient to supply Marley’s column, but John Wood was still
waiting for his complement to be made up at the beginning of
December. The provision of the two eastern columns proceeded
even more slowly. The first Agent, at Fategarh, had in store cloth
sufficient only for 4,000 pairs of pantaloons, and he had to apply to
Calcutta for replenishment. He was still waiting in the middle of
October. His pantaloons were apparently intended for Gillespie’s
column, but they could not have been ready in time to accompany
the force. They were probably sent after it. Short ankle boots, with
hobnails, and special caps were also prepared.
    Persuaded that the army could not hope to feed itself from the
country, Hastings ordered the formation of frontier depots, each
with provisions for six months. Grain was plentiful at that time of
year, and by prudent management was bought cheap. Each maga-
                          Preparing for War                         129

zine on the frontier was made sufficiently small to avoid creating a
local rise in price, and then supplemented by the formation of four
similar depots at regular intervals in its rear. On the withdrawal of
grain from the frontier, its stock could be made good by a requisi¬
tion on the depot behind, which in its turn could be replenished
from the third, and so on. To carry provisions into the hills, mules,
tanyans (mountain ponies), elephants and camels could be used,
but the traditional bullocks would ultimately have to be replaced by
human porters, who cost half as much again to hire, and were only
perhaps a third as efficient. For this reason, every effort was made
to prune the convoys of superfluities. Forty Europeans were
assigned to each tent, instead of the normal sixteen, and no tents
at all were issued to the sepoys, fn all the columns save the main
Kathmandu one, the system was adopted whereby the normal
foreign-service ration of the sepoys, which was over ample, was to
be halved in amount but offered free, and whereby provisions for
fifteen days, instead of a month, were to be carried. For easier
transportation, the Europeans’ salted beef and spirits were put up
in small kegs, better adapted to human carriage. Throughout the
five months preceding the commencement of operations, dispatches
flew by express to and from the itinerant Headquarters of the
Governor-General, plans were drafted, troops were mustered at
their respective rendezvous, information was sifted, supplies were
gathered. Hastings surveyed the bustle and was well pleased:

I cannot conceal my having formed the highest expectation of a brilliant
and rapid termination of the war. The several divisions were, in numeri¬
cal strength, fully equal to any opposition which the resources of the
enemy could subject them to encounter, and were, I may venture to say,
on a footing of efficiency in every branch of equipment unknown in
former wars. In the important article of supplies, for which it appeared
probable that the troops would be obliged to depend on our own depots
with little assistance from the country, the most able arrangements were
made by the Commissariat, and every article of necessary consumption
provided on a scale of utmost amplitude.3

   On one issue only did he still have misgivings. The defences of
the whole Bengal Presidency were going to be dangerously weakened
by the withdrawal of troops who were scarcely sufficient for the
task of defence even when present in full strength in times of peace.

                         3 P.R.N.W., pp. 722-3
130                     Preparing for War

The war in the hills would naturally be followed with close interest
by the Marathas and Ranjit Singh, and the merest hint of British
embarrassment might precipitate irresistible attacks on the Com¬
pany’s denuded frontiers. This risk made it doubly essential that
the hill campaigns be over as swiftly and as brilliantly as possible.
    Remaining doubts about the adequacy of his invading columns
to secure their communications and garrison captured forts were
removed by a plan which, Hastings was confident, would bring
hordes of supernumaries flocking to the British standard. All his
informants assured him that, if he promised them liberation from
the Gurkhas and the restoration of their ancient rulers, the sub¬
jugated hill peoples would be eager to provide active support for
the invasion. Under this impression, he determined to court the
allegiance of all available hill chiefs.
   Although the plan had its origins in military considerations, it
could not have been better calculated to solve the Governor-
General’s dilemma concerning the disposal of the territories which
he expected to conquer in the hills. Their restitution to the Gurkhas
would be out of the question if that troublesome race was to be
prevented from recommencing its aggressions; yet on the other
hand ‘the annexation of the conquered country to the possessions
of the Honorable Company [appeared] to be entirely inexpedient in
every point of view in which the Governor-General [had] been able
to consider the question’. Reinstating the exiled hill chiefs was
obviously the answer, and it was decided to apply this policy to all
the Gurkha territories except the Nepal Valley, the province of
Kumaun and the Tarai lowland. The first the Gurkhas were to be
allowed to retain; the last two Hastings resolved the Company
should annex, as reparation for the war.
   The man most obviously qualified to raise local rebellion was the
indefatigable Harak Deva Joshi. Now nearly seventy, he was led at
last out of obscurity into the light of official notice by Hyder
Hearsey, who described him as ‘the Earl of Warwick of [Garhwal
and Kumaun] ... a perfect instrument whose name the Gurkhas
dread’. Hearsey claimed that he had 6,000 men at his command in
Kumaun and a great influence over many of the exiled hill rajas.
Hastings hoped that Harak Deva would be able to organize a force
to seize the passes on the Jumna above Dehra Dun, thereby
thwarting any plans which Amar Singh Thapa might contemplate
for retreat to the east by the rugged routes of the north. Though
                          Preparing for War                        131

  fully aware of the government’s intention to keep Kumaun,
  Harak Deva agreed to exert all his influence in favour of the British
  invasion. It was feared lest the head of the Phartiyal faction of
  Kumaun, Harak Deva’s old rival Lai Singh, now at Kashipur,
  should sabotage the Company’s plans, especially since the Gurkhas
  in Kumaun had taken pains to conciliate the Phartiyals; but in the
 event he gave no cause for apprehension, and seems to have
 abandoned politics for a life of piety and religious contemplation.
  Once plans to annex Garhwal had been abandoned in favour of the
 decision to keep Kumaun, the heir to Garhwal (Sudra Sen Shah),
 now in exile at Farakabad, was invited to join the British force in
 Dehra Dun ‘to add his personal encouragement to the popular
 effort against the Gurkhas’. He was assured that his exertions would
 be rewarded by his restoration, and a proclamation was issued to
 his erstwhile subjects promising emancipation from Gurkha
 oppression.
     Krishna Singh was a scion of the Sirmur royal family, and had
 been a leader of the revolt against the imbecile Raja Karman
 Prakash. Hyder Hearsey’s private scheme for the invasion of the
 western hills, the notes for which were submitted confidentially to
 government by Moorcroft, assigned him a role as a partisan.
 Ochterlony was also acquainted with him, and suggested that if he
 was given money to purchase arms and pay his men he might
 raise a considerable body of auxiliaries—1,000, perhaps, or even
 4,000. The proposition was readily agreed to, and the Resident at
 Delhi was instructed to advance funds to Krishna Singh for this
 purpose. The political settlement of Garhwal was to involve the
 perpetual exclusion of Karman Prakash, and the installation of his
 young son on the gaddi with Krishna Singh as regent. Ochterlony
 was confident that Ram Saran Sen of Hindur, now a Company
 protege in the lowland remains of his once-extensive kingdom,
would provide two or three hundred armed supernumeraries and
a greater unarmed force to clear roads, carry supplies and act as
guides, if promised a patent of restoration. The pledge was sanc¬
tioned, and a proclamation was addressed to all the other hill chiefs
of this region, offering reinstatement under British guarantee in
return for aid against the Gurkhas. Ochterlony further hoped that
Raja Sansar Chand of Kotoch would volunteer to co-operate with
the British. Sansar Chand had a considerable body of infantry
trained and commanded by a wild and bibulous deserter from one
132                      Preparing for War
 of the King’s Irish cavalry regiments, called O’Brien, who was
known to Ochterlony and who now professed to be anxious to help
the Company. Ochterlony was sure that Sansar Chand would be
eager to avenge the loss of Kangra, indirectly the fault of Amar
 Singh Thapa, by allowing O’Brien to cross the Sutlaj and attack the
 Gurkhas simultaneously with the British. The government was
enthusiastic at the prospect, seeing that Sansar Chand would be in
a position to prevent Amar Singh’s retreat westwards across the
 Sutlaj. But on no account was he to be encouraged to utilize the
British invasion as a screen for the recovery of Kangra—a move
which would offend Ranjit Singh and possibly furnish him with an
excuse to enter the conflict on the side of the Gurkhas.
    In the eastern theatre, General John Wood was instructed to
invite the co-operation of the Raja of Tulsipur, whose old hill
estate of Dang was now under Gurkha sway, and supplied with the
draft of a proclamation encouraging rebellion among the inhabitants
of the lands previously ruled by the Twenty-Two and Twenty-
Four Rajas. The heir to the Palpa dominions was to be approached
and encouraged to muster and arm as many followers as he could.
Bradshaw was to urge the Raja of Ramnagarh to assert himself for
the recovery of his ancient possession of Tanhu in the hills. But the
most sanguine expectations of all were held of the heir to the
Makwanpur dominions. In its heyday, the Makwanpur empire had
stretched to the border of Sikkim and included the Kirata settle¬
ments of the Kosi basin, but it had then suffered tripartite division
among members of the royal family. The prince of Makwanpur was
the sole survivor of this family, and heir to the whole of its domin¬
ions. The government assumed that Makwanpur subjects now in
the Gurkha army would ‘readily flock to the standard of their
ancient princes’; and Captain Latter, in command on the frontier
east of the Kosi, was instructed to embody all the Kiratas who it
was anticipated would rush to aid the cause of their legitimate chief
and the Company. The Magistrate of Rangpur was requested to
attempt to communicate with the Raja of Sikkim, still defying the
Gurkhas from Gangtok.
   Hastings had great confidence in his strategic and political
schemes, and could not conceive the possibility of prolonged
resistance from the Gurkhas. He devised a peace treaty which was
designed to leave them ‘a substantive power—however reduced in
dignity, character, and resources’. The terms which Bradshaw, as
                              Preparing for War                                 133
Political Agent, was to offer were: submission, due atonement for
the outrage in Butwal and surrender of the officers responsible,
relinquishment of all claim to the disputed lands, indemnity for the
expenses of the war, recognition of all engagements made by the
Company with the hill chiefs and the abandonment of all rights in
lands captured by the British. In the first days of the war, Bradshaw
was approached by the two surviving nephews of Damodar Panre,
who were living as exiles in India. They hoped to secure the Com¬
pany’s support for an attempted revolution in Nepal; but this
much Hastings refused to countenance. The overthrow of the
present Kathmandu government would be a project fit for con¬
sideration only in the event of protracted resistance—‘an extremity’
he told the Court of Directors, ‘which I did not contemplate’.4
   Few people expected a serious war. ‘Private advices, on the
authority of which considerable reliance is placed, hold out reason
to hope that the war will be speedily brought to a satisfactory and
bloodless conclusion, by the entire submission of the Raja of Nepal
to all the stipulations demanded of him’, the Calcutta Monthly
Journal assured its readers in November 1814. Such was certainly
the tenor of opinion at Headquarters. Hastings even envisaged the
possibility of a submission so hasty as to ‘prevent the actual com¬
mencement of hostilities’.5 His confidence caused him to be almost
casual when selecting his commanding officers. He put each
‘division’ under the officer already commanding in the district
where it was to be assembled, and forbore to lead one of the
columns himself—thereby yielding to a wish to be fair towards his
generals and to ‘a natural repugnance to appear as if I were seeking
petty opportunities for distinguishing myself’.6
   The source of the Governor-General’s optimism was his con¬
viction that ‘the difficulties of mountain warfare were greater on
the defensive side than on that of a well-conducted offensive
operation’7—and this, as Napoleon could have told him, and as the
war was to demonstrate, was a major misconception.
   4 P.R.N.W., pp. 257-8, 721.         5 Ibid., p. 134.
   6 Aspinall, Letters of George IV, ii, p. 14.     7 Summary of Operations, p. 132.
                           PART II



                                VI

                FIASCO IN GARHWAL

   after the termination of their so-called military road, which
  ZA led from Kathmandu to Srinagar in Garhwal, the Gurkhas’
JL A    route to the west was known to pass through three main
points, all fortified. From Srinagar, the route went to a ghat on the
Song river, which flows across Dehra Dun and joins the Ganges in
the south-west corner. This point was protected by the fortress of
Kalanga. From Kalanga, the route struck west across Dehra Dun
to the Jumna. On this there were serveral fords and ghats, but all
were dominated by the important position of Kalsi, situated in the
angle formed by the confluence of the Tons and the Jumna. Beyond
the Jumna, in Sirmur, the route lay through Kayarda Dun and past
the town of Nahan at its western extremity. From there it continued
to the Sutlaj, through hidden alpine byways. Before joining
Ochterlony, Gillespie was to sever this line of communication.
First, Dehra Dun, Kalanga and the Jumna passes were to be
occupied; then he was to cross the Jumna into Sirmur, and capture
Nahan.
   Robert Rollo Gillespie, of H.M. 25th Dragoons, was the most con¬
troversial military officer in India. A diminutive, truculent and con¬
ceited Irish aristocrat, he was the cynosure of circles where duelling,
drinking and sadistic sport were prescribed conduct and where his
lust for fame could masquerade as a sense of honour. During a wild
and scandalous youth, he had on several occasions fallen foul of the
law. The story of his altercation with eight nocturnal desperadoes,
who broke into his quarters in San Domingo to murder him, in
which he fought them off single-handed and killed six, had carried
his name into all the drawing-rooms of London. But it was as the
Hero of Vellore that Gillespie was best known. In July 1806, within
                         Fiasco in Garhwal                        135
fifteen minutes of news of the mutiny at nearby Vellore reaching
Arcot, where he was in command, Gillespie had roused a squadron
of his regiment, saddled, mounted and set off to the rescue at a
furious pace, while the rest were limbering the guns and preparing
to follow. The gate of Vellore fort being in the hands of the muti¬
neers, he had entered by climbing a rope let down the wall by the
European survivors, then rallied the remnants of the garrison and
kept the enemy at bay until the guns arrived from Arcot and blew
open the gates, admitting the relieving force.
    In October 1814, however, this dazzling reputation was in
danger. Disgrace and humiliation were threatening Gillespie.
    The trouble had begun with the decision to expel the Dutch from
Java in 1811. Gillespie had played his usual conspicuous part in the
operations, and had then been appointed commander of the British
occupation force. He had soon quarrelled violently with the civilian
Lieutenant-Governor, Stamford Raffles, whose measures of
military retrenchment he opposed and whom he despised on
personal grounds as a churlish upstart. Fretting to be free, he had
pestered the Commander-in-Chief, Nugent, with requests for a
transfer. Finally, another officer had been found to take his place in
Java and Gillespie was given command of the Second Division,
Field Army, in Bengal. In the euphoria of release, he had made
effusive demonstrations of reconciliation with Raffles, and the two
had parted in October 1813 apparently on the best of terms.
    Now on board the Troubridge, bound for Calcutta, had been Mrs.
Blagrave, who hated Raffles. She was the wife of an acting secretary
to the Java government, whom Raffles had dismissed for dishonesty,
incapability and insubordination. Blagrave’s appointment in Java
had in any case only been temporary; but instead of proceeding to
Amboina, for where he was professedly bound, he had challenged
Raffles’s power to dismiss him without reference to the supreme
government, and gone to Calcutta to seek redress. The fact that he
was in considerable debt no doubt increased the grudge that he and
his wife bore against Raffles. What had happened on the Troubridge
can only be surmised; but it seems that Mrs. Blagrave had got the
ear of Gillespie and by a judicious use of backstairs gossip and
tearful accusation (and, perhaps, amorous favours) had revived all
his old detestation of Raffles. On arriving at Calcutta he had
consulted Blagrave and then submitted a formal indictment of
Raffles’s administration, concentrating on the matter of the sale of
                                                       Khiri




                               ,Saharanpur


Map 2. Illustrating the operations in Garhwal and Sirmur in 1814-15
l3*                      Fiasco in Garhwal

government lands in Java and the Lieutenant-Governor’s partici¬
pation as a private purchaser. Raffles had easily refuted the charge
of venality, and had made Gillespie look a fool for good measure.
He had pointed out that Gillespie had been in Java during the
whole episode, had known of it, yet had said nothing. Among the
minor heads of indictment, Gillespie had accused Raffles of exces¬
sively debasing the new Java coinage; yet the records showed that
Raffles had in fact advocated a nearer approximation to the Cal¬
cutta rupee, only to be overruled by members of his Council—
including Gillespie. Raffles had then made counter-charges, which
purported to expose Gillespie as a slave-driver and a lecher. The
first charge related to the impressment of unpaid labour for the
construction of Gillespie’s private house at Chipanas; the second,
to the appearance one night, at the orphan school in Samarang, of a
man employed by Gillespie, who demanded a virgin. These
accusations had shocked the Calcutta government, and Hastings
had admonished Raffles for tasteless recrimination. But Raffles was
angry, and instead of withdrawing the charges had added another.
Apparently, on a further occasion, Gillespie had actually sent sol¬
diers to seize a slave girl from the house of Mr. Sluyster, in
Batavia.
    By now, the whole sordid affair was an embarrassment to the
government, which was anxious to silence Raffles. ‘After all, what
is to be done with Gillespie? There is no competent tribunal here
to take cognizance of his conduct as a military man’, said the
Government Financial Secretary to Charles Assey, who had gone
to Calcutta on Raffles’s behalf. Assey, reporting this to his chief,
wrote: ‘If we are to judge from the secretaries of the sentiments of
the Governor-General himself, it is the question of disgrace on the
Major-General which forms a great obstacle in the judgement of
the present case; it is satisfactory however, to recollect that if such
should be the inclination in Bengal, there is an ulterior tribunal...’
    On the eve of his departure for Nepal, Gillespie was probably
not completely sane. The head wounds he had received at Cornelis
may well have unbalanced a mind already unsettled by megalomania
and alcohol. Even before their first quarrel, Raffles had remarked
on his strange starts and wild freakish behaviour; and Lady Nugent,
who had ‘long and many conversations with him’ after his arrival
in Bengal, was convinced that ‘his mind was certainly sadly dis¬
turbed.’ ‘I could not but see’, she wrote in her Journal, ‘that
                            Fiasco in Garhwal                              T39
natural impetuosity and his extraordinary vanity and love of fame
had led him into false ideas and errors that would embitter his
future life.’ Then, on top of all this, had come Raffles’s accusations,
threatening him with ignominy that he had not the moral courage
to face and filling his sick brain with a craving for the fresh glory
that was its only certain antidote.
   The troops moving up from Meerut were delayed by the usual
lack of baggage animals, and it was not until late on 19 October
that Gillespie’s division was assembled on the sultry plains north of
 Saharanpur. It consisted of about 4,400 fighting men, 900 of them
Europeans. Besides the King’s 53rd Regiment of Foot1 (1st
 Battalion), the latter consisted of a troop of the 8th, or Royal Irish,
 Dragoons, and a detachment of horse artillery. The native comple¬
ment comprised about 3,000 sepoys, 138 pioneers, some 200 gun
lascars2 and ordnance drivers, a regiment of native cavalry and a
risala (troop) of Skinner’s Horse. Cavalry was provided for use on
the level spaces of Dehra Dun, where it was hoped it might con¬
found the Nepalis, who were unaccustomed to contending with this
arm. Non-combatant public servants swelled the force to some
 10,000; and then there were about 5,000 camp followers and officers’
private servants. In response to strong recommendations, officers
had reduced their baggage to what they considered to be a mini¬
mum; but this was obviously not going to involve any spartan
self-denial. Major John Ludlow, commanding a battalion of native
infantry, still needed six camels even before he had packed his
supply of spare liquor.
   Gillespie was not satisfied that his force was adequate—especially
since Hastings’s plan required the establishment of numerous
detached posts. The Governor-General agreed to provide another
battalion of native infantry, but this could not be expected to
join the division until Dehra Dun had been occupied. Gillespie
sensed that Hastings was perhaps underestimating the difficulties
in prospect, and privately he even admitted presages of disaster
—an uncharacteristic sentiment. While waiting for his force to
congregate, he was restless and irritable, and he began to put his


   1 Later the King’s Shropshire Light Infantry.
   2 Each company of European artillery (composing several details, one to each
gun) had native gun lascars attached. Their function was to man the drag ropes,
guard and serve out the ammunition, and carry the match. They were not
supposed, for political reasons, to serve the gun itself.
140                          Fiasco in Garhwal

instructions into operation even before all the troops had arrived at
Saharanpur.
    There were two principal passes into Dehra Dun through the
Siwaliks, as the foothills in this area are called: the Timli pass in the
west, and the Mohan pass in the east. On the morning of 19
October Lieutenant-Colonel Carpenter, already at Saharanpur
with his battalion of native infantry, was sent with his sepoys and
three pieces of light artillery to force the Timli pass and secure the
Jumna. At daybreak the following morning a detachment of about
1,000 men, including two companies of the King’s 53rd and the
native cavalry, was sent under Colonel Sebright Mawby of the
53rd to march into the Dun via the Mohan pass and seize the
fortress of Kalanga. Hastings had suggested that the Kalanga
column be sent without artillery; but Gillespie, more wary,
decided to send the two cavalry ‘gallopers’ (six-pounders) with
Mawby. He obviously expected the passes to be heavily defended,
because on the 21st the remainder of the 53rd was ordered off to
the village of Jaundra, below the hills and equidistant from both
passes, so that it could support either detachment in case of need.
As it happened, the Timli pass, at least, was not guarded at all.
Carpenter cleared it on the morning of the 20th, moved up the
Jumna posting pickets at the main ghats, and reached Kalsi un¬
opposed, the Nepali garrison having withdrawn to the fort of Birat,
further north.
    As Carpenter entered Dehra Dun, Mawby left Saharanpur. He
made his way through fine flat country where the rice crop was ripe,
until within view of the jumbled crags and humps of the Siwaliks.
The detachment camped for the night at the ruined town of Khiri,
on a marshy riverside, then on 21 October made a four-mile march
to the hills through a sparse jungle of stunted trees and grasses,
disturbing game of every description. The Mohan3 pass was in fact
the route of a river bed—now almost dry, and very stony. The
main force halted below the hills while Captain Fast, on his own
offer, pushed forward with two companies of sepoys to secure the
top of the pass. It was not unguarded. The Nepalis had strongly
 stockaded the crest, but Fast was easily able to scatter the few
 defenders. At midnight he sent down word that he had got posses¬
 sion of the top.
   The rest of the detachment began to move up an hour before
          3 Sometimes called the Khiri pass, after the town at its foot.
                          Fiasco in Garhwal                        141

daylight. The pass was only three and a half miles long, but so
entangled in trees and cacti that the troops had to march on the
river bed itself. This was not only painful, but also dangerous, be¬
cause the stones and boulders had no hold in the sand, and rolled
underfoot. The cavalry were compelled to dismount, and the guns
had to be dragged up by men. It was eleven o’clock before the
ascent was completed. Two hours later, Mawby’s force marched
into the little town of Dehra, situated in a wilderness of high grass
with groves of sal and sissu, and abounding with tigers, elephants,
peacocks and every other variety of game.
    Once camp was pitched, the Colonel and his staff rode about five
miles to the north-east to reconnoitre Kalanga fort, but by the time
they approached the hill on which it was situated the light was
failing and it proved impossible to form a useful impression of the
position. About midnight, a letter was sent to the castellan, Bal
Bahadur Singh, demanding the surrender of the fort. Tradition
recounts that he tore it up, observing that it was not his custom to
deal with correspondence at such unseasonable hours. Early on the
23rd Mawby and his officers, this time with an escort of light
 infantry and cavalry, went again to reconnoitre. Their examination
 of the ground was very cursory, because Mawby was fearful of
 being cut off by prowling enemy detachments. He nevertheless felt
 he had seen enough of the position to plan a full-scale attack, to take
 place the following morning. That night, Carpenter arrived in
 Dehra, thus increasing Mawby’s force to 1,300 infantry, 300
 cavalry, and 5 light guns.
      Kalanga fort, also called Nalapani, was on the highest point of
 one of the low spurs which jut southwards into the Dun from its
 northern rim of mountains. On its western side, the Kalanga spur
 plunges almost vertically for 1,000 feet to the valley floor. The
 eastern flank slopes away more gently until, about a mile from the
 summit, it suddenly drops 600 feet to the Song river. The most
 accessible approach is the southern, which is still marked by a
 stony road from Dehra. This climbs steadily, but not too steeply,
 for about three miles, before reaching the so-called table land. This
 is a narrow strip of fairly level ground 200 feet below the summit,
 and separated from it by the deep furrow of a watercourse (the
 Nalapani) which comes down from the north and then turns west
 in its descent to the valley. The summit itself is thus in the form of
 a knoll naturally moated on two sides. Its slopes formed a glacis for
142                       Fiasco in Garhwal

 the fort, which perched on its highest point. The spur was then, as
 now, thickly planted with birch and poplar, save in the vicinity of
 the fort, where it was clear like a tonsure. The fort was irregular in
 shape, following contours of the ground. Its outer defences, no
 more than twelve feet high, consisted of a double palisade filled
with stones, surmounting a mud rampart. This glorified stockade
 was reckoned to harbour some 600 people, of whom not more than
 half could have been in any sense soldiers.
    At half-past four on the morning of 24 October, Mawby ad¬
vanced his infantry and guns to the foot of the southern aspect of
the spur and sent the cavalry round to the village of Raj pur, north
of the fort, to intercept the enemy if they should attempt flight. At
dawn, the infantry climbed to the table land without opposition—
save for the harmless fire of a few small cannon from the fort. A
 fatigue party of the 53rd then went down for the two six-pounders,
and dragged them up within an hour. The guns were opened on the
fort soon after, and continued their fire for several hours; but by
eleven o’clock they had not made any impression on its defences.
Mawby decided that they must be got nearer, and had one pushed
up the table land along the road leading to the fort. But it was then
discovered that, at the end of the table land, the road turned sharply
left, dipping severely to cross the watercourse. This obstacle, and
the fact that enemy outposts were dispersed over the whole dis¬
tance, induced him to abandon the operation. His artillery was
obviously too light to make a breach, and he considered the place
too strong to be attacked without preliminary cannonade. The
force therefore returned to camp that same afternoon. Mawby’s
decision was in perfect consonance with Hastings’s instructions,
which strictly enjoined that Kalanga was not to be assaulted without
heavy artillery should reconnaissance show its use to be expedient.
    When he heard of the safe arrival of Carpenter and Mawby in
the Dun, Gillespie was relieved, and imagined the most tricky part
of the first stage of his operations to be over. He wrote to Ochter-
lony, making him a provisional promise of collateral aid in Sirmur
about 1 November, and ordered the dragoons and three light com¬
panies of sepoys to march from Saharanpur to a position on the
east bank of the Jumna, near the foot of the Timli pass, where they
would be ready to cross the river. He then took a small escort and
briskly followed Carpenter up the Timli pass into Dehra Dun to
inspect Kalsi, Birat and the Jumna ghats. It was on 25 October,
                         Fiasco in Garhwal                        H3

while engaged in this examination, that he received Mawby’s
report of the unsuccessful attempt against Kalanga. He had not
reckoned on having to give his own attentions in that direction, and
was vexed at having his plans interrupted by what he thought was
Mawby’s timidity. But Kalanga was a stumbling block and would
have to be removed—removed quickly, too, if he was to keep his
promise to Ochterlony. On the 25th he sent word to Mawby that
he would join him at Dehra the next day, and ordered those parts of
his army still on the plains to march without delay into the Dun.
    For the dragoons and light infantry on the Jumna, and for the
corps at Saharanpur, the journey to Dehra Dun was relatively easy
and quick. The former were already at the foot of the Timli pass,
and the latter had only to follow the main route from Saharanpur
to the Mohan pass—well trodden by now. But for the eight com¬
panies of the 53rd at Jaundra the march was much more difficult.
They had to move eastwards to reach the Mohan pass and, as the
nullas draining down from the foothills flow in a southerly direc¬
 tion, the route lay across the numerous watercourses, instead of
 parallel to them. The road was, furthermore, bad and very tortuous.
 The force broke ground at 5 a.m. on 28 October, and trudged
 about twenty miles in the course of the day, crossing no fewer than
 five running streams. It was hot, and the column straggled badly,
 the luggage and sick taking all night to reach the camping ground at
 Khiri. Here the tents had to be pitched on low marshy ground
 beside a nulla, where water oozed out of the soil in the footprints of
 the camels. The troops lay in the damp all night and the baggage
 became soaked. Gillespie, not aware of these difficulties, sent a
 liverish note to Lieutenant-Colonel Buckland on the 29th, requir¬
 ing him to make haste. Camp was struck at one o’clock, but before
 the march was many hours old many men had collapsed by the
 roadside. Not more than four or five miles had been covered by
 dusk and that night camp had to be pitched in the pass itself, on the
 stony river bed where there was no level ground and no place to
 drive a tent pin. It was nearly noon the next day before the sick and
 all the stragglers had come up. Because of the heat and the
 exhaustion of the troops, it was ordered that the march be halted
 until moonrise; but the officers caused chaos by trying to send on
 their baggage and private servants in advance. The public bearers
 and camp followers drifted after them, pursued by swearing soldiers.
 As the sides of the ravine converged to form the narrow summit of
144                         Fiasco in Garhwal

the pass, the camels and their attendants were forced together into
a suffocating mass. Many animals fell, blocking the road, and the din
was stunning. It was dark before the baggage was out of the pass,
and ten o’clock before all the men had followed. When the force
was finally in some sort of muster order, the march to Dehra was
resumed. The distance was about ten miles.
    Bruised and tired out, they reached Dehra at midnight, only to
find it deserted. Fresh tent marks were visible in the moonlight;
but there was no sign of the army and by some oversight no guide
had been left to indicate where it had gone. The men had to wait
for three hours while the acting Quartermaster probed around
gingerly for signs of the vanished army. Finally he found the new
ground, which was three or four miles to the north-east, at the base
of Kalanga hill. Wearily, the men trekked forward again and finally
stumbled into camp just as the clocks were striking four. Only the
native cavalry were there to explain what was happening, because
operations against Kalanga had already begun and all the infantry
had taken up positions round the fort. A few hours later, when the
dawn was breaking, the sound of gunfire echoed around the valley;
and soon after, just as the men were thinking that they could get
some rest at last, an urgent order arrived from General Gillespie.
Three companies of the 53rd were to march to the table land im¬
mediately.
   Gillespie had joined Mawby on the morning of the 26th, in no
sweet temper. Early on the 27th he went out to examine the fort
and spent an exhausting day reconnoitring. He appreciated the
strength of the position, but did not doubt his ability to take it.

   Here I am [he wrote breezily to Major-General Grant Keir] with
as stiff and strong a position as ever I saw, garrisoned by men who are
fighting pro aris et focis in my front and who have decidedly formed the
resolution to dispute the fort as long as a man is alive. The fort stands on
the summit of an almost inaccessible mountain, and covered with an
impenetrable jungle, the only approaches commanded, and stiffly stock¬
aded. It will be a tough job to take it; but by the 1st proximo I think I
shall have it, sub auspice Deo\4

   He chose an advanced position for the camp, nearer the foot of
the hill, and ordered the preparation of fascines, gabions and scaling
ladders. By 29 October the dragoons and light infantry from Timli

                       4 Printed in the Memoir, p. 219.
                         Fiasco in Garhwal                         HS

and the infantry from Saharanpur had reached Dehra with the rest
of the artillery; but there was still no sign of the remaining com¬
panies of the 53rd. Gillespie, determined to have the fort by 1
November, made plans to act without them. The available force
was divided into four columns and a reserve, which were to attack
Kalanga simultaneously from all accessible quarters—the north,
the east and the south. After a preliminary bombardment, Captain
John Fast was to close in from the village of Lakhaend, on the
north-west flank of the spur; Major Kelly from the village of
Karsalli, on the crest of the spur about two miles north of the fort;
and Captain John Campbell from the hamlet of Asthal, on the
eastern ridge near the brink of the Song river ravine. The main
force with the scaling ladders, under Carpenter, and the reserve
under Major Ludlow were to attack from the table land. At day¬
break on 30 October the Major-General ordered camp to be moved
to the advanced position, preparatory to a commencement of
operations the same afternoon.
    At three o’clock, Carpenter’s column made for the table land.
The Nepalis opened a fire from the fort, but it was ill-directed
and erratic, and did little damage. Ludlow then followed with the
reserve, and after him came the pioneers and the guns. As the guns
were all comparatively light—there were two brass twelve-pounders,
two six-pounders and a couple each of small mortars and howitzers
—they were taken from their carriages and strapped to the backs of
elephants. The strength and perseverance of these animals were
titanic. They disliked steep or uneven ground; yet they now
mounted the pathway to Kalanga carrying loads of six and even
twelve hundredweight. By working all through the night, the
pioneers had the guns in battery by daybreak, facing the southern
defences of the fort across the watercourse.
    At about midnight, while these preparations were going for¬
ward, Gillespie at last received news of the approach of the 53rd
and, before retiring to his tent, he left orders that they were to re¬
main in the camp for its protection. In the early hours of the morn¬
ing of the 31st, the first stages of his plan were carried out. Kelly
left camp for Karsalli at two o’clock, and Fast and Campbell moved
to their respective rallying points an hour later. Each had synchro¬
nized his watch with the Major-General’s and all had been carefully
briefed. A signal was to be fired exactly two hours before the assault,
the purpose of this interval being to give each officer time to
146                           Fiasco in Garhwal

 correct his distance from the fort—for it was anticipated that the
 guides might be unreliable. The signal was to be the discharge of
 five guns preceded by a silence of five minutes; and Gillespie,
 expecting a breach to be ready by noon, gave his officers to under¬
 stand that they should listen for the signal at about ten o’clock. In
 his field orders he laid great stress on the importance of simul¬
 taneity in the various attacks, of compactness in the columns, of
judicious use of bayonets and, above all, of composure: ‘Let
 emulation actuate all; but corrected by steadiness and coolness—no
 breakings of ranks or running for who is to be foremost in the con¬
test—each column must be a mutual support—and every soldier
actuated by the principle of cool and deliberate valour will always
have the advantage over wild and precipitate courage.’5 Never can a
man’s example have belied his precepts so blatantly as Gillespie’s
was to do, that day.
    He rose at five o’clock, and at the first glimmer of day rode up to
the table land. At sunrise the guns exploded into action. After they
had been open for an hour and a half it had again become obvious
that field artillery could do little damage at so great a distance.
Shot after shot either fell short, or flew over the fort; and the
few that landed on target had too little impact to damage. Gillespie
fidgeted and fumed and decided that he must put an end to all this
futile fumbling by another spectacular escalade. Was he not the
acknowledged past master of the art of daring assault? By eight
o’clock, dudgeon and vanity had destroyed all self-control and he
ordered the signal for the attack to be given.6 His officers were
aghast, and besought him to delay until the appointed time, urging
that a breach could yet be made in the four hours remaining. But
the Major-General irascibly waved aside such counsel, and the
prescribed discharges had to be made: three at intervals of a minute,
and then two in rapid sequence. This was Gillespie’s first blunder.
The officers with the supporting columns, thinking that they did not
need to pay special attention to the pattern of gun fire for another
two hours, did not recognize the signal.7

   5 Printed in the Memoir, p. 224.
   6 The Memoir says seven o’clock, but this agrees with no other account. It
is obviously calculated from the time of the assault, and is based on the assump¬
tion that no culpability attached to Gillespie.
   7 Mawby’s dispatch (P.R.N.W., p. 439) says that they did not hear the signal
—but this can hardly mean that the guns were inaudible to them. The sound of
ordnance travelled so well in the hills that when this division was before Nahan,
                            Fiasco in Garliwal                          H7
   Just before nine o’clock, a party of Nepalis, which had moved
out of the fort during the night to a position on the eastern end of
the table land in order to harass the parties working at the batteries,
moved up with the obvious intention of taking the guns in flank. In
great excitement, Gillespie ordered a howitzer to be turned on them.
A dose of grapeshot checked the party; and when charged by a
group of sepoys at bayonet point, they dispersed and began to re¬
treat. To Gillespie, already devoured by feverish impatience, the
retreat of this party was an irresistible cue for action. He commanded
Carpenter and Ludlow to pursue and enter the fort on its tail. This
was his second, and inexcusable, error. Only one hour had elapsed
since the signal; and even though it might have been argued that
the time of the signal itself had been fixed only approximately and
was liable to variation according to circumstances, the lapse of two
hours between the signal and the storm was the essential ingredient
in the plan of operations. But this did not deter Gillespie, who
fancied he could change the plan even at this late hour. He sent
urgent missives to the officers in charge of the supporting columns,
commanding them to attack immediately. But that very contingency
which the two-hour lapse had been designed to compensate had
materialized, and their guides had led the supporting columns
astray. Gillespie’s orders, though sent in duplicate by different
routes, never reached their destinations. It was at this stage that the
Major-General sent down for three companies from those of the
53rd which had just arrived in camp. Here was another capricious
order which, conflicting with a previous one, failed to have the
desired effect. Instructions having been left that these companies
of the 53rd were to remain in the camp for its protection, disposi¬
tions had been made accordingly. The arrival of fresh orders found
the regiment quite unprepared, as well as jaded, and the officer
designated to lead the detachment to the table land, Captain
Wheeler Coultman, could not be found. Three companies were
hastily put under arms and paraded, but for about half an hour the
utmost confusion prevailed and no move was made. Part of the
summit of Kalanga spur being visible from the camp, the troops
were actually the spectators of an action in which they were
supposed to be taking part.

the guns of Ochterlony’s column, some 30 miles away, were audible to it. The
Memoir says that Kelly and Fast did not hear—but this hardly explains Camp¬
bell’s failure to arrive.
148                           Fiasco in Garhwal

    Once begun, that action unfolded swiftly to a half-ludicrous,
 half-tragic, climax. Carpenter’s force consisted of about 600 men,
 including the two companies of the 53rd which had arrived in the
 Dun with Mawby and 50 dismounted Royal Irish Dragoons. It
was supported by Ludlow’s, originally 900 strong, but now reduced
to 136 sepoys and 50 dragoons as a result of successive detachments
made during the night. The dragoons were put at the front of the
 combined column of attack, and it soon became obvious that this
was a grave mistake. They had splendid brio as they sprinted down
the table land, veered sharply left to cross the watercourse and
 surged up the eastern glacis of the fort in pursuit of the retreating
 Nepalis; but it was a pace which the infantry, encumbered with
knapsacks and muskets, and the pioneers, labouring under the
 scaling ladders, could not equal. When between sixty and eighty
yards from the fort, the dragoons reached some huts protected by
a semicircular stockade. They chased the enemy from this position;
but now that they were almost up with their prey they found them¬
selves much too far in advance and entirely unsupported. Nepali
soldiers were swarming over the walls of the fort to support
their comrades. Khukuris unsheathed, they engaged the oncoming
dragoons in a fierce hand-to-hand struggle, thrusting within the
point of the sabres and parrying every swipe before it could be
completed with shields borne on the left arm. These they wielded
with dazzling dexterity. ‘There was no end to the damn pot lid’,
recalled one dragoon later, ‘no getting over, nor under, nor round
about it. It was like bad luck—everywhere!’8 Within a few minutes,
fifty-eight dragoons were lying wounded and four dead. The on¬
slaught had been checked, and the Nepalis clambered back into
the fort, ready to resist the next wave of assailants with shot,
arrows and stones.
    The pioneers and the infantry battled their way grimly through
this cascade of missiles. Lieutenant Ellis of the engineers sprang
ahead, to encourage the pioneers, but was shot dead while placing
the first ladder against the wall. The pioneers wavered and then
fell back-in disorder to the huts, abandoning the ladders as they
retreated. The infantry, headed by the two companies of the 53rd,
advanced, but were soon forced to retreat and take cover behind
the stockade. At about this time the huts caught fire. The scaling


      8 Letter signed ‘Parry’: E.I. U.S.J., vol. viii, April 1836, pp. 274-6.
                         Fiasco in Garhzval                       H9
ladders were destroyed in the blaze and all means of entering the
fort lost.
   Hearing of this check, Gillespie became frantic. Notwithstanding
that there was no breach in the defences, that none of the support¬
ing columns had made its appearance and that the three companies
of the 53rd ordered up from the camp an hour ago still had not
arrived, he refused to give up the assault. The idea of failure made
him giddy with rage. He dashed off a note to Carpenter, exhorting
him to keep his post to the last extremity for he intended coming
up to command operations himself, and sent another furious
summons to camp for the dithering three companies of the 53rd.
Meanwhile all fire was ceased.
    It was now about ten o’clock. In the dim forest around the fort,
the officers heading the supporting columns, after having led their
men all through the night and morning by widely circuitous and
almost impenetrable pathways at the behest of treacherous guides,
called a halt, took out their watches and listened. For half an hour
no firing was heard from the batteries; and when it recommenced
there was only a confused cacophony of sound. Artillery, musketry
and some unidentifiable explosion could be heard, but nothing
recognizable as the anticipated signal. Concluding that Gillespie
was not yet ready to forewarn them of the assault, they adjusted
their positions and waited patiently.
    At half-past ten, Wheeler Coultman and the three companies of
the 53rd at last arrived on the table land with two horse artillery
six-pounders, drawn up by the men. Gillespie harangued them for
their delay. He swore loudly that he would take the fort or be killed
in the attempt, and ordered them forward with the guns. The troops,
who hated Gillespie for his vicious strictness in matters of drill and
dress, advanced morosely, pulling the guns by the drag ropes. They
went down the table land to the point where the road turned left
to cross the watercourse, then down one side of the channel and
up the other to the eastern glacis of the fort, where the two assault¬
ing columns were still sheltering behind the stockade from a heavy
fire. Here Gillespie and his staff came up, and there was a hasty
council of war. One of the dragoons of Ludlow’s detachment had
discovered, in a north-western wall, a gateway to the fort, in which
was set a wicket. He offered to guide the General to the spot.
Gillespie eagerly consented and, accompanied now by Ludlow,
the three companies pressed on, leaving one of the guns at the
'5°                      Fiasco in Garhwal

stockade to cover the advance. They had to pick their way among
the dead and wounded strewing the ground; but the huts were still
burning and the smoke provided a screen for the movement. Turn¬
ing right close under the walls of the fort, the party proceeded
round to its north-western side. There, sure enough, was the wicket;
but Bal Bahadur, expecting an attempt to force it, had left it open
and constructed barricades of stones and logs in the gap. Across
this formidable obstacle appeared the nozzle of a cannon.
    Lieutenant Kennedy of the horse artillery ran on ahead to select
a position for the six-pounder, which he managed to bring within
thirty or forty yards of the wicket. One or two rounds were fired and
they apparently crippled the enemy gun. Gillespie ordered Ludlow
to lead the 53rd to the assault. As they advanced there was a flash in
the wicket, and a discharge of grapeshot killed seven men and
wounded many more, showering the air with blood and lumps of
flesh. The troops recoiled. Ludlow tried to rally them, while
Gillespie sat transfixed by rage, watching them grope and flounder
helplessly under an avalanche of shot, arrows, darts and stones,
fired and hurled furiously from the defences by children and
women as well as men. Ludlow himself was struck by a stone on
the thigh. Then, seizing their opportunity, the Nepalis again
clambered out of the fort, rushed up to the six-pounder and, with
great aplomb, silenced it by cutting the only sponge staff in two.
    Gillespie, finally roused from his paroxysm, ordered a retreat,
and violently abused the troops for having failed. He seemed liable
to order them to go back, but Ludlow remonstrated, insisting that
it would be senseless to attack again in front. He suggested that the
gun might instead be taken in flank, by moving a column obliquely
to it. Gillespie’s reaction was not coherent, but Ludlow saw that he
‘seemed to approve’. The two companies of the 53rd which had
formed part of Carpenter’s column had by now arrived from the
stockade, and Gillespie ordered Ludlow to lead them down the
right flank of the gun while he formed a second detachment to send
in from the left. The Major mustered his men; but they had already
seen too much of the punishment inflicted on their comrades, had
already been too long exposed themselves and loathed Rollo
Gillespie too intensely to act with any confidence. Ludlow saw
that no sooner had they moved than they edged farther to their
right, into the shelter of a depression in the ground. Rather than
interrupt the advance, he tried to accommodate the deviation by
                          Fiasco in Garhwal                        r5i

inclining with them, but the men ducked into the depression and
started sniping. When Ludlow neared the wicket, he had only four
soldiers with him. He turned and pleaded with the others, crying
out that if only eight men more would come on he would enter the
fort; but he was ignored. ‘I addressed a sergeant, which was the
only person of authority I found in advance,’ he recalled, ‘but he
turned a deaf ear to all I could say.’ He was convinced that this
attempt could have been successful, because the vigour of the
defenders’ resistance now seemed to be slackening. The men of
the 53rd stubbornly spurned their opportunity. They had deter¬
mined to destroy their hated general—even, if necessary, at the
price of destroying themselves.
    Their dogged restiveness sent Gillespie berserk. He had cheated
danger so often, that he had come to regard his life as charmed.
There was no instinctive check to the impulse of rage and despair.
Screaming and waving his sword, he dashed forward into the
torrent of fire. A musket ball struck him in the chest and brought
him sprawling to the ground. He died before he could utter another
word. Lieutenant O’Hara, Ludlow’s adjutant, fell almost at the
same time and Captain Byers, Gillespie’s aide-de-camp, was
wounded in the leg. Both these officers had rushed after the Major-
General—though whether to support him or restrain him is not
clear.
    It was just before 11.15. A short distance away, in the forest to
the rear, Captain John Campbell was at the village of Asthall, still
waiting for the signal gun. For some time he had heard confused
firing, but, remembering Gillespie’s emphatic injunctions, dared
not move in anticipation of his cue. He grew increasingly uneasy,
however, as the sounds of commotion continued and the signal
still was not fired. Finally, fearing that there had been some mistake,
he decided to advance. He arrived on the scene of action just as
Ludlow was giving the order to retire and, if a few minutes too late
to be of any use to Gillespie, was at least able to cover the retreat
and bring down the gun, which was in danger of being lost.
    The command now devolved on Mawby, who immediately with¬
drew the army from the hill, resolved to relinquish all plans for a
further attack until he had heavy battering ordnance. Bal Bahadur
permitted the dead and wounded to be brought down from the hill;
but many of the corpses had already been stripped of their clothing
and were horribly mutilated. When the reckoning was complete, it
*52                          Fiasco in Garhwal

appeared that of the European officers, 5 had been killed and 18
wounded; of the men and native officers, 30 killed and 210 wounded.
    Gillespie’s body was preserved in spirits, and at four o’clock on
the morning of 1 November a small cortege bore it down to Meerut.
On 6 November it was interred with full military honours and
minute guns, one for each year of his life, thundered out at Cal¬
cutta. But he was not lamented. The officers of the 53rd were frankly
glad that he had gone. ‘It is the general opinion here’, wrote Henry
Sherwood, Paymaster to the regiment, ‘that Gillespie’s death has
saved the army ... As long as he had lived, the Europeans would
have remained unresisting to be killed.’ In Meerut, the ladies
giggled at his funeral, so tickling was the idea of his having been
laid in spirits—‘a pickle when alive, and a preserve when dead!’
   When Hastings heard of the disaster, his immediate reaction was
to blame Gillespie. Even while making suitable decent acknow¬
ledgement of Gillespie’s merits, he could not disguise a surge of
irritation at the thought of ‘the discredit to our arms and the baneful
influence which this reverse must have upon the future operations’
—especially as it had apparently been caused by the very im¬
petuosity against which he had so earnestly cautioned the Major-
General. On 10 November he wrote to Lord Bathurst:

The good fortune which had attended him in former desperate enter¬
prises induced him to believe, I fear, that the storm of the fortress of
Kalanga might be achieved by the same daring valour and readiness of
resource whereby he had on other occasions triumphed over obstacles
apparently insuperable.
   The assault, in which he was killed at the foot of the rampart, in¬
volved, as I conceived, no possibility of success; otherwise the courage
of the soldiers would have carried the plan notwithstanding the deter¬
mined resistance of the garrison.9

   Such was the obvious interpretation of the evidence available to
Hastings at this stage—that is, his own knowledge of Gillespie’s
character and the official dispatch submitted by Mawby. Informa¬
tion in the dispatch was incomplete, because Mawby had not been
a witness of the final assault, Gillespie having ordered him to re¬
main on the table land to receive yet another two companies of the
53rd summoned from camp. In subsequent weeks, Hastings re¬
ceived private accounts of the day’s events. His principal informants
    9 Quoted in Robert H. Murray, History of the 8th King’s Royal Irish Hussars,
vol. i, p. 371.
                         Fiasco in Garhwal                      *53
were Captain John Sparks Byers, of the Royal Artillery, who had
been Gillespie’s A.D.C., and John Ludlow. Byers had seen the
 perfidy of the 53rd, and was never likely to forget it. Mawby un¬
 suspectingly referred the Governor-General to him for further
 information, and Byers was soon on his way from Saharanpur
 (where he had gone to recuperate from his leg wound) to Head¬
 quarters, at Lucknow. John Ludlow was an intimate of George
 Fagan, the Adjutant-General, and through Fagan he made known
at Headquarters his own version of events. When Hastings had
heard these reports, his assessment changed and his high opinion
of the 53rd became transformed into disgust. Henceforth that
regiment and its commanding officer, Colonel Mawby, were, as far
as he was concerned, on trial. Should they fail or falter again, he
 could not be expected to be indulgent.
    Sebright Mawby was a graduate of the Royal Irish Regiment of
 Foot; handsome, courteous, brave and experienced. He had served
with the 53rd since 1804, when he had been appointed Lieutenant-
 Colonel in that regiment, and had commanded the first battalion
during all its ten years’ service in India. That the men esteemed
him well enough to follow him even on the most daunting service
had been proved by their outstanding behaviour at the storm of
Kalanjar in 1812. Mrs. Sherwood, an astute judge of character,
 always wrote of the Colonel and his wife in terms of respect and
affection. But the misbehaviour of his regiment at Kalanga
naturally reflected on him and his fellow officers, earning them the
contempt of Company officers like Ludlow, in whose view the
King’s regiment had cravenly betrayed Gillespie.
    Mawby withdrew the camp to a position about a mile and a half
in advance of Dehra. He considered that Gillespie’s ground, wild
and jungly, gave the enemy too many opportunities for ambuscades
and night attacks. He also felt compelled to abandon attempts to
straiten the fort, because his force had been reduced by over 1 000
men as a result of casualties and the detachment of troops to rein¬
force the garrison at Kalsi. Furthermore, that assistance from the
local populace on which Hastings had taught his officers to reckon
had in the event proved unforthcoming. Dehra Dun itself was
virtually deserted—Ludlow affirmed he had never seen a country
so devoid of population—and all the efforts of William Fraser, the
Political Agent, to arouse the zemindars of the northern regions of
Garhwal had proved abortive. Deprived of their arms and cowed
154                     Fiasco in Garhwal

by the threat of Gurkha reprisals, the inhabitants had chosen to
await the result of the operations at Kalanga before committing
themselves to the British cause. The ensuing fiasco had obviously
done nothing to banish their diffidence, and Nepali foraging parties
could still roam the northern areas without harassment. Fraser had
had the idea of compensating for the lack of spontaneous local
support by organizing a corps of partisans, including ‘people em¬
ployed as guides, deserters from the enemy, and mountaineers
volunteering their services’. But recruitment was slow, and by the
end of November not enough men had been collected even to police
the Dun and collect its revenues.
   For three weeks there was consequently little activity, but,
despite a certain boredom, spirits in camp remained high. No one
doubted that the campaign in the Dun would be brought to a swift
and decisive conclusion once the battering guns had arrived, and
meanwhile the army basked in the lingering warmth of a mild
autumn. The salt provisions failed; but this was more a blessing
than otherwise, for the slaughter of cattle was authorized and the
Europeans enjoyed the rare luxury of fresh meat. There were
besides game, fruit and nuts in plenty.
   The battering train arrived on 24 November. There were four
eighteen-pounders and two eight-inch mortars. With them came
the extra battalion of native infantry which Hastings had promised
Gillespie, two more companies of light infantry and the remainder
of Carpenter’s battalion (the ist/iyth Native Infantry), which had
been left at Meerut for its protection. Mawby now put into opera¬
tion his plan for a third assault on the fort of Kalanga.
   Early on 25 November he deployed troops round the fort to
prevent the escape of the garrison. Ludlow was sent with a force to
the table land, Major Baldock to the watercourse on his right,
Captain Bucke to Lakhaend and Captain Coultman to Asthal
village. The tents in the camp were left standing in order to confuse
the enemy. The guns in the fort fired on Ludlow’s detachment as it
ascended to the table land, but again did little damage. This time,
the main column ignored the main road and pushed round the
skirt of the spur, in the direction of the Song river, to mount its
south-eastern flank. The way was longer and much more difficult
than the road, but entirely out of sight of the fort. The column then
proceeded along the eastern ridge and encamped under Kalanga
village, about a mile north-east of the fort on a level some 500 feet
                         Fiasco in Garhwal                       *55
below it. Here its rear was protected by the majestic ravine of the
Song. Captain Carmichael Smyth, the engineer sent to replace the
wounded Ensign Blane, had, after a careful reconnaissance, wisely
decided to abandon the table land as a position for the batteries. By
approaching from the north-east, the guns could be pushed much
nearer the fort, for the watercourse was only about 200 yards
distant from the eastern walls. If he could but get the guns from
the new camp to the watercourse—a distance of nearly a mile, all
uphill—the old difficulties concerning aim and impact would be
eliminated. The eastern approaches of the fort were cleared by a
small advance guard composed of men of the 53rd under Captain
Parker. By four in the afternoon, they had moved to within 250
yards of the north-eastern aspect of the fort, where, throughout the
night of the 25th, Carmichael Smyth supervised the construction
of batteries. The heavy howitzers and two twelve-pounders were
placed in position during the night, and by seven the next morning
the four eighteen-pounders had been dragged up. The batteries
opened fire at noon. Even at this range, many shells missed the
small enclosure of the fort, and not until one o’clock on the 27th,
after nearly six tons of eighteen-pound shot had been discharged,
was the breach reported ready. Mawby examined the gap in the
defences through his glass. It looked wide, and the slope up to it
was gentle. He had no doubt that the moment to storm had come.
   Major Ingleby of the 53rd was to command the storming party.
The grenadiers of the 53rd were to lead, followed first by a bat¬
talion company of the same regiment and then by the grenadier
companies of the native battalions. All were instructed to move
with muskets unloaded and to carry the breach with the bayonet.
Equal divisions of the light company of the 53rd were to move up
on both sides of the column and slightly in advance, with their
pieces loaded. Their task was to cover the advance of the storming
party and pick off defenders in the breach or on the walls.
    Ingleby did not get far. He was wounded early in the action and
forced to withdraw. Captain Parker took his place at the head of the
53rd grenadiers. Once they had crossed the watercourse, the ascent
of 200 yards or so up the eastern glacis was easy, and within a few
minutes Parker and his men were below the great gash in the fort’s
outer wall. They clambered over the debris as far as the breach,
and then halted in consternation and horror. The breach was cut
high in the parapet of the fort’s defences, and by scooping out the
J56                      Fiasco in Garhwal

rampart behind the enemy had made a drop of about five feet. The
surface of the pitted rampart was thickly planted with sharpened
stakes. Behind these was another sharp drop, for the body of the
fort was sunk like a gravel pit into the rock, where Nepalis crouched
with spears and muskets, ready to repel all intruders. It seemed that
if anyone leapt down, he was bound to impale himself and then be
shot like a stuck pig. In their brief moment of hesitation, all the
grenadiers who had mounted the breach were either killed or
wounded, and Parker drew back to warn the others. Lieutenant
Harrington was just behind him and, not realizing why he faltered,
savagely elbowed Parker aside, determined to save the impulse of
the charge. Parker caught him by the sash.
    ‘It’s useless! We can’t get in.’
    ‘I must go!’ Harrington tugged himself free. But he was too late.
The rest of the storming party, seeing the unexplained disconcert¬
ment of the European grenadiers, had slowed their advance and
hung back. The momentum was lost. Harrington, in a defiant
effort to reanimate the men, drew his sword and clambered onto
the breach. He in his turn stopped short, when he saw why the
grenadiers had faltered. Turning, he ran along the whole width of
the breach looking for a point of entry and then, facing the men,
was seen to raise his hands in a gesture of hopelessness. A second
later he was shot in the back.
    Scores of defenders now strafed the glacis with bullets, stones
and arrows, but the Europeans kept formation and did not turn. In
contravention of their instructions they loaded their muskets and
began returning the fire. The sepoys, who dreaded arrows even
more than musket balls, which at least were invisible, readily
followed their example. All movement ceased, and the operation
degenerated into a sniping contest. There was little cover on the
glacis, and casualties were heavy. Dejection and apathy took a hold
on all the troops. One keen young subaltern of the 53rd, still not
aware of what was causing the stoppage, called out eagerly to his
men: ‘Go on, my boys, go on!’ ‘Go on yourself, and we will follow
you’, came the surly rejoinder. The superstitious Muslims attached
dark significance to a third failure; and one group of native grena¬
diers, those of the ist/6th Native Infantry, had their morale badly
shaken by the loss of their favourite officer. Captain John Campbell,
a stalwart of six foot three, the most popular officer in the regiment,
was shot by an arrow as he stood on the glacis after surviving the
                            Fiasco in Garhwal                              157
storm. Long after, one of his sepoys10 still remembered how the
surgeon said that on account of its broad point the arrow could not
be removed; how, in his agony, Campbell wrenched it out himself
from a frothing wound; how they carried him down; and how the
whole battalion became steeped in sorrow. ‘I never expected to
see my Captain Saheb recover. He was so loved by the men of his
own company and in the regiment was such a great favourite, that
his absence was hard to bear. The regiment had lost its champion.
[Campbell] Saheb was sent to England.’ Campbell in fact died.
‘How deeply do I deplore his loss’, sighed Ludlow, his commanding
officer. ‘Ending sure, the poor fellow preserved his wonted good-
humoured smile to the last and uttered fine kind thanks to the
friends he was parting from. Alas I Poor Campbell . . .’
    Mawby, not realizing that the reluctance of the troops was
caused by something more than the determined resistance of the
defenders, ordered Lieutenant-Colonel Buckland to take the
remaining companies of the 53 rd to reinforce the storming party.
He gave strict orders that they were to ascend to the breach with¬
out firing a shot. Because of the hail of missiles, only a few of the
fresh detachment managed to mount the breach and return, and
they too pronounced the descent to be impracticable. Just before
three o’clock, Buckland sent a message to Mawby to say that if a
twelve-pounder and a howitzer could be brought nearer the breach,
something might be done. Presumably his intention was to clear
the breach of defenders and make it lower, so that the men could
get on to the rampart behind. In great haste, two pieces were taken
out of the battery and conducted across the watercourse and up to
the glacis by Lieutenant Luxford of the horse artillery. The
howitzer was brought to the foot of the breach itself, but before it
could even be fired Luxford had been fatally wounded and eleven
of his men felled. By now, the nature of the difficulties had been
 explained to the Colonel, who was mortified to think that he had
kept the troops futilely exposed for close on two hours. He immedi¬
 ately ordered a retreat, regretting only that he had not done so
earlier. He had no complaint to make concerning the conduct of
   10 ‘Sita Ram’, in From Sepoy to Subadar, pp. 19-20. The way in which its
account tallies with those of other sources seems to reinforce this work’s claim
to authenticity. It renders the captain’s name as Burrumpeel, which is probably
a printer’s misreading for Kurrumpeel—a phonetic rendering of Campbell.
Sita Ram’s corps can thus be identified as the Grenadier Company of the ist/6th
N.I. This battalion became the 3rd N.I. in 1824.
158                     Fiasco in Garhwal

 the army. On the contrary, he warmly praised ‘the great gallantry
 of men who were exposed till 3 o’clock to a most galling fire of
 musketry and matchlocks . . . showers of stones, spears and
 arrows’.
    It was now felt that the only recourse left was to continue the
 batteries open until the whole eastern face of the fort had been
 razed. Seven hundred rounds of eighteen-pound shot had been
 expended, and only 500 remained. To husband the supply, the
 bombardment was continued at a slower rhythm. Meanwhile, the
losses were counted. Four officers had been killed and seven
wounded. Of the men and native officers, 36 were dead and 431
wounded. This made a total of 478 casualties, of which almost half
had been sustained by the 53rd. Losses for both attacks amounted
to nearly 750, which was appalling, because the total number of
enemy did not exceed 600. Thirteen bodies were retrieved on the
morning of 28 November with Bal Bahadur’s permission. They
had again been barbarically mutilated. Harrington’s had both legs
torn from the trunk.
    The guns thumped on, and by nightfall on the 29th had done so
much damage that there was nothing left for them to aim at. They
were therefore silenced at last, preparatory to being moved in front
of a fresh target further to the left.
    At about two o’clock in the morning, there was a sudden clatter
of musket fire as Captain Bucke, guarding the wells on the southern
glacis, was attacked by a party of the garrison which had crept out
desperate for water. Bucke’s men returned the fire and drove them
back into the fort. All was silent for about half an hour; then, at
about three o’clock, another, larger party streamed out of the
breach and down the southern glacis. This time they were ob¬
viously intent on escaping, under cover of the jungly water course.
A large number were killed, wounded, and captured, and only a
small group of about 70 got away. Major Kelly, commanding in the
trenches before the battery, listened for sounds of movement in the
fort; but nothing stirred. He ordered forward a force of grenadiers,
who advanced cautiously, for it was a known ruse of the Gurkhas
to inveigle their victims into a position by inducing them to think
it abandoned. But an impatient drummer boy ran forward to the
breach ahead of all the others. He peered into the dark interior,
then turned round crying that the fort was empty {khala hai!
khala hai!). The men began shouting and cheering, and the drums
                           Fiasco in Garhwal                          159
beat out the grenadiers’ march. Kelly then entered the fort and
took possession. It was four o’clock on the morning of 30 Nov¬
ember.
   The inside was still dark, but the sickening stench and the
terrible moaning forewarned the victors of the scale of their des¬
truction and the price of the garrison’s defiance. Lights were
brought, and they gazed in horror on a miniature Golgotha. They
had to enter carefully, for fear of treading on the dead and dying.
Henry Sherwood was one of the first to visit the fort, and he was
overcome with nausea and compassion:

The fort was very small, and the whole place covered with bodies. On
my right in a small redoubt were two small brass guns; one of them in a
space not above ten feet long and six feet broad, and there lay seven
bodies across each other. In going from one enclosure to another (for the
place seemed all small enclosures) the same kind of objects appeared.
Within the body of the fort we heard groans and cries of ‘Pani! Pani!’
(‘Water! Water!’) and on descending, never was anything so shocking.
The fort itself was trenched across in every direction, and these trenches
were about two feet deep; in them the unhappy people had endeavoured
to find shelter. There were 86 dead bodies lying in this small place. The
wounded were in a most wretched state. Those who could in any way
move had attempted to get out: but others were calling for water, and
our officers were assisting, as well as they could, by pouring water out to
them. Some of the poor creatures had lain there for three days with their
limbs broken. I shall never forget one young woman with a broken leg,
lying among the dead. She was partly covered or entangled among dead
bodies, and as she could not move, she held her mouth open for water
so anxiously that there is no describing it. We could not get near her,
but Heathcote poured water at her mouth from a distance, which she
received. There was another woman, herself unhurt, but she had a
wounded baby at her breast. She seemed dreadfully distressed, but the
child was taking its food, and did not seem to mind it. There was a
soldier-like looking Gurkha also lying on a bed in the fort. His wound
had been in his head, and had taken away his senses. He was making
figures in the bloody dust with his fingers. The most affecting sight was
two little girls, one about four years old, the other about one. Their
father and mother had both been killed. They were both taken care of,
but the elder screaming very much, fearing she should be separated from
the younger.
    When I again visited the fort, it was partially cleared. 97 dead bodies
had been burnt, but this was only a part, for all around the fort you
might see the marks of imperfect burials. The ground was rocky, and it
i6o                         Fiasco in Garhwal

was difficult to dig into it, so that I could still count 30 bodies lying only
half buried, in many cases having a leg or an arm above the ground.
   This day I saw the horrors of war; and indeed, horrible it is.11

    He reckoned that Kalanga could never have been captured. ‘I
 do not see how it is possible to take such places, if properly
 defended; for although you knock down the wall, yet the body of
the fort being sunk within the rock is not to be destroyed; and of
the shells very few entered the fort, although it seems to be the
fashion to say otherwise.’ John Ludlow disagreed. ‘Thank God’,
he wrote, ‘the place is ours on almost easy terms; for after seeing
 the interior . . . I’m persuaded that our army, or rather the eastern
part of it, never would have taken it—though I declare to God that
 I saw no obstacles which ought to have deterred brave men from
getting in.’
    The informant of the Calcutta Monthly Journal reported that
‘the physical obstacles at the breach were found on examination to
be less formidable than had been supposed.’ There is no doubt as to
which opinion weighed most with Hastings. In his view Kalanga
was ‘a place certainly of no great strength or extent, destitute of a
ditch, laid open by a breach up which a carriage might have been
driven, and defended by a garrison whose only means of resistance
consisted in their personal gallantry’. He blamed Mawby and the
53rd for the failure.
    His judgement was inferred from two premises. The first was
that the failure of the second attempt was caused not, as thought at
first, by the temerity of Gillespie, but by the delinquency of the
53rd Regiment. In this, it must be admitted, there was a substance
of truth. The second premise was that the breach had been practi¬
cable on 27 November; and from the two he deduced that the
participation of the 53rd was the common cause linking both
failures. But the second assumption was not sound. It was based
on the information of private advisers, of whom Ludlow was
undoubtedly one, and it must be remembered that no one except
the officers and men of the 53rd had been in a position to examine
the breach at the time of the storm. All subsequent inspections,
including Ludlow’s, had taken place three days later, under circum¬
stances quite different from those experienced by the assaulting
party and when the breach had been considerably enlarged by a
    11 An amalgam of the account in the MS. journal and that contained in a
letter to his wife, printed in Kelly, Life of Mrs. Sherzoood, pp. 465-7.
                              Fiasco in Garhwal                        161

further 500 rounds of eighteen-pound shot. All things considered,
it seems reasonable to assume that on 27 November entry into the
fort had been as impracticable as those who looked into the breach
maintained. But the Governor-General was not feeling reasonable.
A letter which he wrote to the Prince Regent’s Private Secretary in
January 1815 makes it quite clear how his assessment of the 53rd’s
behaviour in the second assault had changed; and how his new
knowledge of that event, taken in conjunction with reports con¬
cerning the state of the breach on 27 November, made him ignore
the probability that the presence of the 53rd at both failures was no
more than circumstantial.

. . . part of the troops who have behaved remarkably ill [in the second
attempt] [he wrote] vindicated their shyness by expatiating on the un¬
exampled courage shown by the enemy—as if there were any peculiar
degree of valour in the continuing on the top of a high rampart when the
assailant has not the possibility of getting at you. This opinion of the
enemy became so current, that when the [third] assault took place, or
rather was ordered, there was no getting the soldiers to follow their
officers to a breach up which a coach might have been driven.12

Reports in this vein wrecked Mawby’s reputation in the Horse
Guards.
I am sorry to hear so bad an account of the 53rd [wrote Sir Henry
Torrens, Private Secretary to the Duke of York,13 in a letter to Hastings
later the same year]. The Duke was very partial to this corps—and he is
convinced that their misconduct is entirely owing to the apathy and
worthlessness, as an officer, of Colonel Mawby. It will not be easy to
prevent this officer from experiencing the ill-effects of your report, tho’
you so kindly endeavour to qualify it.

   Hastings prided himself on his chivalry, and his indignation
against the 53rd was so much the greater because he had inadver¬
tently blamed the dead and defenceless Gillespie for the failure of
31 October. To redeem his injustice, he now began to emphasize
Gillespie’s positive qualities. ‘Had he survived’, he told the Prince
Regent’s Secretary, ‘he would have prevented his division from
duping itself into fear.’ He announced his intention of erecting a
cenotaph in memory of the Major-General, and his attitude towards
Raffles, whose charges against Gillespie he had been investigating,

   12 Printed in Aspinall, Letters of George IV, ii, p. 14.
   13 Commander-in-Chief of the British Army.
162                        Fiasco in Garhwal

became virulently hostile. It was discovered that Raffles, before
making his charges against Gillespie, had actually received a report
from the Resident at Samarang which apparently cleared the
Major-General of one of the charges of abduction, at least. This
incensed Hastings, who told Raffles: ‘You appear to have given
currency to a gross charge against a meritorious and highly
esteemed officer when, as far as appears, you had the means of
refutation in your power.’14 He demanded an explanation.
   But it was not only from a concern to rectify an unfair traduce-
ment that Hastings defended the dead Major-General. He had
reasons of state, too. At the time of his death Gillespie had become
a patriotic symbol. In recognition of his exploits in Java he had, in
January 1815, been gazetted Knight Commander of the Bath; and
when the news of his death reached England it became the occasion
of various poetic tributes in the Byronic style, of a vote in Parlia¬
ment for a monument in St. Paul’s, and of a panegyrical Memoir
dedicated to the Prince Regent as ‘the history of a soldier whose
VALOUR could only be surpassed by his LOYALTY, and who
closed his career of labour and glory by devoting himself at the
moment of perilous extremity as an example to inspirit his troops’.
Hastings must have been acutely aware that if Gillespie’s reputa¬
tion was posthumously sullied the Prince Regent would be
ridiculed, the etat-major both in India and at home made an object
of derision and the dignity of the British administration in India
compromised.
   Raffles was difficult to hold at bay. He refused to withdraw his
accusations, pointing out that the report of the Resident at Sama¬
rang related only to the first charge of abduction and was in any
case not conclusive. On the matter of the second charge, he did no
more than refer the Governor-General to the records of the Bench
of Magistrates for confirmation of the fact that a slave girl had been
forcibly removed from Mr. Sluyster’s house and transferred to
Gillespie’s. Hastings refused to admit that Raffles’s explanations
were satisfactory; but as both he and the Calcutta Council had
publicly acknowledged that Gillespie’s indictment of Raffles had
been totally unjustified, the latter had no further personal motive
for pressing a case against his dead antagonist and was content to
forget the whole unsavoury business. If the stain on his private
character had not exactly been removed, Hastings was now sure that
         14 Quoted by Eric Wakeham in The Bravest Soldier, p. 239.
                           Fiasco in Garhwal                      163

Gillespie’s professional reputation could be preserved. Probably
it was with the intention of rendering this service, as well as of
castigating the 53rd for their having sabotaged his own precious
strategy, that he took the rash step of announcing that a court of
inquiry would be set up to examine the causes of the failures at
Kalanga. Despite the general terms of its commission, it became
commonly known that the object of this court was to investigate
the conduct of Colonel Mawby and the 53rd. No official censure
could be pronounced until the court’s findings were known; but
Hastings disguised his own sentiments so ill, and conducted the
whole affair in such a way, that innuendo and gossip had achieved
the destruction of the reputation of the 53rd even before the court
had convened. Gillespie, meanwhile, became exalted as a hero.
‘The gallant Gillespie would, I am sure, have carried everything,
had he not been deserted by a set of cowardly wretches’, wrote
Charles Metcalfe in June, 1815, expressing a sentiment which had
become widespread.15
   The officers of the regiment, recalling its sacrifices at the siege
of Kalanjar in 1812, the vainglorious selfishness of the man its
reputation was being sacrificed to vindicate and the heavy losses
and adverse circumstances attending the third assault on Kalanga;
and experiencing the undissembled hostility of a Governor-
General who was flagrantly prejudging an issue he had instituted a
court to investigate, not unnaturally became embittered and resent¬
ful. Knowing that however well they might acquit themselves in
subsequent operations they would still in the end be subjected to a
degrading scrutiny, their enthusiasm for the present service gave
place to apathy and inhibition. For the debacle which followed from
this collapse of morale, Hastings had only his own persecution of
the regiment to blame.
   For some days before the evacuation of Kalanga, a body of about
300 Nepalis had been seen moving about the hills on the other side
of the Song river. This was assumed to be a reinforcement sent to
the fort from Nahan. Mawby’s concern after the flight of Bal
Bahadur was to prevent his joining this party, and at half-past two
on 1 December Ludlow set off with a party of about 450 sepoys to
intercept him. They arrived back in camp at nine o’clock the next
morning, dusty, tired and with lacerated feet; but triumphant.
They carried two captured stands of colours, with which Mawby
               18 Printed in Kaye, Life of Metcalfe, i, p. 409.
164                      Fiasco in Garhwal

was ‘mightily pleased’. After crossing the gorge of the Baldi river
and clambering up a shrunken track with deep chasm on either
side, they had descried the enemy camp fires by night, when the
land was transfigured by moonlight. A short sharp raid with
bayonets by a courageous vanguard of three officers and 100 men
had been sufficient to disperse the combined force of Nepalis, and
 Ludlow estimated that about sixty must have been killed. His own
casualties were no more than four seriously wounded.
   This little victory, the work of the native troops and their
officers alone, coming so soon after the humiliating setbacks at
Kalanga, served to strengthen Hastings’s conviction that the King’s
troops had so far set a harmful rather than a salutary example to the
sepoys. Mawby was instructed to offer the Commander-in-Chief’s
thanks to the officers involved and to make a gratuity of 100 rupees
to Guru Singh, Ludlow’s intrepid spy.
   Although considerably weakened, the Nepali band was still at
large in the hills north-east of Dehra Dun, and the zemindars in
contact with Fraser soon made it known that it had retreated through
Saklayana district, plundering as it went, and taken post in the
strong fort of Chamur, situated on the west bank of the Baghirati
river. Here it was joined by another group, this time from Srinagar,
which swelled its number to 400. Fraser urged that if the inhabi¬
tants of interior Garhwal were to be encouraged to assist the British,
this enemy eyrie would have to be captured, for it overawed all the
eastern section of the province. Hastings, however, was anxious for
the main force to push westwards into Sirmur and reduce Nahan,
now that the essential part of its work in Dehra Dun had been
accomplished. The occupation of Kalanga had been followed by
the enemy’s evacuation of Birat, the strong fort just to the north of
Carpenter’s position at Kalsi, and this had completed the British
domination of the central section of the line of communication
between the eastern and western sections of the Gurkha empire.
Letters subsequently intercepted at Birat revealed that the opera¬
tion had been completed none too soon. Ranjor Singh Thapa,
commanding at Nahan, was expecting a reinforcement of two or
three hundred men from the east by way of Srinagar, which was an
important magazine for the manufacture and deposit of military
stores. The garrison of Birat had, unfortunately, also escaped into
the hills, and it was expected that it too would make its way to
Chamur. But Hastings felt that the reduction of this place could
                         Fiasco in Garhwal                        165

safely be left to Carpenter, appointed to command the Dun
occupation force. He was to be assisted by all the irregulars that
Fraser could spare, and the Political Agent was authorized to
increase the levy of these auxiliaries as far as he thought expedient.
Mawby was now ordered to take the main army to Nahan—but
not by way of the Kayarda Valley. It was thought that this route
would prove too obstructed, and he was directed to use the road
along the foot of the hills instead. One of his last tasks in the Dun
was to supervise the destruction of Kalanga fort. True to his
instructions, Mawby had every vestige of the place erased, and
scarcely a stone now remains on the hilltop as a monument to the
bones that are buried there.
   The army, which had moved back to its old camping ground
near Dehra on 3 December, now began to make preparations for a
move. On the 6th, the heavy guns and field artillery left camp; but
before the rest of the force could follow, the dry autumnal warmth
gave place to cold persistent rain, which fell as snow on the nearest
range of hills. For two days Mawby delayed his departure, hoping
for better conditions; but by the 9th there was still no sign of an
improvement and, instructions from Headquarters being so
peremptory, he decided he could wait no longer. The troops
marched at seven that morning, up to their knees in mud as they
passed through Dehra. Labouring under the weight of sodden
tents, the camels slipped and slid uncontrollably. Progress was slow
and uncomfortable, and the army did not enter the Timli pass
until 11 December. A whole day was occupied in manoeuvring the
pass itself, which was thirteen miles long. Happily, the road had
been repaired for the preceding artillery, and by one o’clock the
main part of the force had at last quitted the territory of Garhwal
and arrived in Company territory once more, at Fyzabad, on the
plains.
   Here junction was made with the artillery train, and the whole
force (save the horse artillery and two of the eighteen-pounders,
sent back to Delhi) trailed ponderously down the eastern bank of
the Jumna, looking for somewhere to ford the river, which had
been swollen by the recent heavy rain. It was not until 13 December
that a ferrying place was discovered, about four miles above
Chilkana. But there were only six boats, and to bring the whole
army and ordnance across in these took four days. Crossing the
commissariat and bazaar was a labour of Hercules. The camels were
166                      Fiasco in Garhwal

terrified of the boats and violently refused to enter them, hooting,
grunting and shedding their loads into the river. In the turmoil,
many were either killed or lamed. Later, a place shallow enough to
ford was found a few miles up river, and the majority were taken
across there.
   Once the Jumna had been cleared, the army began its march
along the skirt of the foothills, through the lush, well-cultivated
country of the protected Sikhs. On the morning of 17 December,
when the weather was suddenly bright and clear, officers caught
their breath as they had their first glimpse of their next objective—
Nahan, the capital of Sirmur. It was a cluster of miniature white
cupolas, towers and minarets, shining among the clouds on the
grey hills to the north like something from an Arabian romance.
   On 18 December, after the arrival of Major Kelly’s battalion
from Dehra Dun, the army struck northward from the town of
Sedaura, and after about ten miles began to ascend the hills into
Sirmur. Climbing first in the defile of the Markanda river, and then
branching to the right up the course of a subsidiary nulla, the force
came to the village called Mojamand, which was about six miles
south from Nahan. The river-bed made a bad road: very stony,
and littered with large rocks and boulders. It was nightfall on the
19th before all the guns had been brought up to the camp.
   At seven o’clock that same evening a guard of honour was drawn
up to greet Major-General Gabriel Martindell, of the Company’s
service, appointed successor to Robert Gillespie.
                                VII

             STAGNATION IN SIRMUR

M        art indell’s was a very different character from Gilles¬
          pie’s. He was courteous, gentle, unaffected, and so with¬
          drawn in his social habits that he seldom visited or
entertained. In his younger days he had shown vigour and per¬
severance, if not much imagination, and the battalion of native
infantry which he had raised and commanded as a major had been
generally recognized as one of the best in the service. Appointed to
command in turbulent Bundelkhand in 1804, he had done useful
work of pacification and earned the ‘approbation and applause’ of
the Governor-General.
   But by 1815 the effects of forty years in the Indian climate, of
which the last four or five had been soured by failure and the loss
of the confidence of his superiors, had begun to show. His ardour
had become dampened; his self-assurance sapped. His siege of
Kalanjar of 1812, although counted a success, had nevertheless
involved the repulse of the storming party with severe loss; and it
seems that from this time the ageing officer had begun to lose all
taste for responsibility and to become a prey to vacillation and
excessive caution. In 1813 he had been ordered to advance with a
force of over 6,000 men into Rewa, a principality in east Bundelk¬
hand whose Raja was refusing to honour the terms of his alliance
with the Calcutta government. The Political Agent in Bundelkhand
having sent an ultimatum to the Raja, Martindell had been
instructed not to delay his march and his operations against the
fortress for anything less than the arrival of the Raja or his deputies
in his camp, for the season was advanced and the rains imminent.
Martindell had reached Panna, his rendezvous, on 8 April; but
instead of advancing forthwith, as ordered, had dithered there in a
state of nervous consternation because his spies had brought
reports, which were obviously false, that the Pindaris were intend¬
ing to create a diversion by invading the Company’s territory in
another quarter. He had then been sent the ‘most urgent and
positive orders of the Commander-in-Chief to proceed . . .
168                      Stagnation in Sirmnr

without any reference to external circumstances which were . . .
beyond the sphere of his cognizance’. Yet still he had dallied, now
waiting for an artillery train from Ajaigarh—‘although he was in
possession of the Commander-in-Chief’s unqualified opinion that
his march ought not to be delayed on that account’. On 23 April
he had moved at last, ‘having . . . remained inactive at Panna
during the period of a fortnight at the most critical season of the
year, and when the delay of a single day might have hazarded the
success of the expedition’. To crown this display of ineptitude,
Martindell had waited in advance of the fortress of Rewa for the
arrival of the Raja or his agents and the junction of reinforcements
from Mirzapur, ignoring strict instructions to chastise some of the
Raja’s particularly contumacious zemindars; and had then nego¬
tiated and concluded, entirely without authority, a treaty with the
Raja. This had caused considerable embarrassment. The whole
business of negotiation had had to be reopened and the military
operations against the zemindars held over until the following
season. Official approval and thanks had been publicly withheld
from Martindell on this occasion, and he had been permitted to
relinquish command of the Rewa force.
   In March 1814, at the age of fifty-five, he had resigned his
command in Bundelkhand and withdrawn to Cawnpore.
   Hastings’s reasons for withdrawing Martindell from his semi-
retirement to command the army in Sirmur were hardly flattering.

The selection of Major-General Martindell for the command [he told
the Secret Committee of the Court of Directors], was founded on the
general character which he had acquired in a long course of service; the
hope that the occurrences attending his command at Rewa in the year
1813 would have stimulated him to exert himself in regaining the ground
he had lost in the public estimation on that occasion; and, more than
all, the difficulty of finding any other unemployed officer of rank suffi¬
cient to exercise so large a command.1

   But there was little reason to hope that Martindell would prove
able to seize this opportunity to repair his dilapidated reputation.
His disgrace had made him self-doubting and subservient, and his
command in Sirmur could only have succeeded had he been
surrounded by purposeful subordinates. Instead of that, the
officers of H.M. 53rd, whom he knew well and on whose advice

                           1 P.R.N.W., p. 737.
                       Stagnation in Sirmur                    169

he was therefore most inclined to rely, were discouraged and diffi¬
dent. As a result of their double failure at Kalanga and the
Governor-General’s vendetta, they shrank from all projects which
seemed to involve the slightest risk of another repulse. Company
officers like John Ludlow, on the other hand, quickly grew
impatient of policies which they considered to be supine and timid.
They fretted for a more dynamic leadership. Subjection to two
contradictory influences made Martindell hopelessly uncertain and
bewildered, and he found it more and more difficult to make
decisions.
   Having commanded in Bundelkhand for a considerable time, the
Major-General was as accustomed as any officer in India to moun¬
tain warfare; but the scene of his present operations surpassed
in difficulty anything even in his experience. Nahan nestles
compactly on a plateau, which rises some 3,000 feet above the level
of the lowlands, and which is shielded to the north by a massive
ridge of hills. The Markanda hugs its north-western skirts, taking
a route down through the hills and across the mottled plains that
is visible for miles when winter rains have purged the air. There
are occasional groves of pine, shisham and wild fruit trees on the
surrounding slopes, but the vegetation is mostly scrub and flower¬
ing thorn, spread sparsely, so that the light ochres and lunar
textures of the ground show through. The eastern part of Nahan,
round the citadel, is walled, and then seemed immensely strong.
The camp site of the British army was six or seven miles to the
south, and separated from the town by the valley of a tributary of
the Markanda. The road ascending from this nulla to the town was
about five miles long. It was a mere track scratched on to the
surface of the rock, all sharp angles and hairpin bends, and so
narrow and steep that it seemed impassable for any animal. It was,
furthermore, defended at almost every turn by a stone redoubt in
the shape of a star. Hastings, appreciating that the army must be
dispirited after the repulses at Kalanga, had advised Martindell to
blockade the place, rather than risk an assault; but such a recom¬
mendation, in view of the inaccessibility of Nahan, seemed super¬
fluous. A storm must have been suicide.
   Martindell made up his mind to move the camp to a spur
farther to the north-east, which was only about four miles from
Nahan ridge, and ordered Ludlow to occupy the position with a
small force. Soon after Ludlow had left, intelligence was received
170                      Stagnation in Sirmur

that Ranjor Singh Thapa had abandoned the town and retired to
the fort of Jaithak in its rear. This seemed too good to be true, but
Ludlow was instructed to probe his way forward to test the truth
of the report. The journey was an exhausting half-day’s work, and
some of the camels fell and were dashed to pieces; but not a shot
was fired in resistance as the troops walked into the neat and narrow
streets of Nahan. By one o’clock, the British flag was flying over the
citadel.
   Henry Sherwood marvelled that the enemy had ever allowed the
advance to reach the town, which seemed as though it might have
been defended for ever. ‘The Gurkhas at one moment defend
themselves well, not only with bravery but with judgement; and at
another, neglect the commonest means of defence’, he wrote. But
then he had not yet seen Jaithak.
   Artillery might conceivably have been brought to bear on
Nahan; but to bring it to bear on Jaithak, whither Ranjor Singh
had now retired on the advice of his father, Amar Singh Thapa,
was apparently a physical impossibility. This stone fort was rec¬
tangular, with bastions at each corner, and tiny. It measured only
about twelve yards by eight. Clinging like a swallow’s nest to a
pinnacle, it seemed invulnerable. To bombard it, guns would first
have to be brought up to Nahan—which seemed hardly practicable,
for a start—then somehow directed at a target which was not only
three miles distant as the crow flies, but some 1,600 feet higher
again.

It stands altogether detached [wrote Henry Sherwood, in despair], and
is of so great a declivity that we have no idea how we are top roceed . . .
It is doubtful whether, with all our exertions, we shall ever be able to
make a road for the guns and mortars even to Nahan . . . Even if this
is done, can they proceed farther? And even if they do, can they find a
spot to throw shells from (for a mortar cannot throw at above 45 degrees
elevation)? ... As for the great guns, they appear out of the question.

   He thought that the only hope lay in a scheme of protracted
investment, because the fort was reputedly short of water. ‘How¬
ever,’ he added, ‘take it ever so easy, even without the loss of a man,
I think it one of the most ill-judged, ill-conducted enterprises ever
heard of.’ His feelings seem to have been shared by most of the
other officers of the 53rd.
   If he had decided to act in the spirit of their assessment and
                        Stagnation in Sirmur                     171

tried to starve Jaithak into surrender, Martindell would have been
acting in full harmony with Hastings’s instructions. But he reckoned
that his force was too small, his maps too inaccurate, and the
approaches to the fort obviously too many and too dispersed, for a
blockade to be effective. He became sure, in fact, that the position
of Jaithak made it better suited to bombardment. It perched at the
angle of two rising mountainous ridges, which converge to form an
arrow-head pointing towards Nahan. It obviously could not be
bombarded from Nahan; but it could conceivably be bombarded
from one or both of these ridges. True, the guns would have to be
brought to the ridges; but after his experiences at Kalanjar,
Martindell was no novice in the art of moving heavy ordnance to
seemingly impossible places, and dogged perseverance was one of
his old qualities which he still retained. He therefore resolved to
 brave the misgivings of Mawby and the officers of the 53rd and
 opt for bombardment. Hastings was quite happy to defer to this
 decision. It was first necessary to bring the guns to Nahan, so the
 pioneers and fatigue parties were set working to widen the road
 which led up from the artillery park, at the foot of Nahan hill.
 Knowing this would be a protracted operation, Martindell decided
 to establish a position on each of the ridges in the meantime.
    During the night of 26 December, two columns were formed for
 this purpose, the intention being to seize the two ridges simul¬
 taneously, each force causing a diversion in favour of the other.
 Ludlow, with about 800 men, was to take the left, and Major
 William Richards,2 with about 500, the right ridge. Acting in con¬
 cert, these forces would, it was reckoned, outnumber the Nepalis,
 who were estimated to be about 1,000 strong. Each column had a
 couple of six-pounders and two small howitzers, carried on ele¬
 phants ; and it was reckoned that both should reach their positions
 before daylight. Richards, having farther to go, set off at about
 a quarter to eleven that night. Ludlow moved at one o’clock the
 next morning, and engaged the enemy first.
    The enemy’s main water supplies were derived from wells on
 these ridges, so they were heavily guarded. They lent themselves
 well to defence because they were both dominated by the pinnacle
 of Jaithak. Their crests were, furthermore, jagged, and almost every
 peak along them was crowned with a picket or a stockade.
    Ludlow’s destination was a peak about a mile from the fort on
                   2 Later General Sir William Richards.
172                        Stagnation in Sirmur

the left ridge. The distance from Nahan was some six miles, ‘but
equal to twenty from the ruggedness of the road’. Dawn was already
breaking when he began to climb up the side of the ridge; and the
column, hampered by the ponderous elephants, had become widely
scattered. When about two miles from the point at which they were
aiming, the front half of the column, which comprised the grena¬
diers of the 53rd and some companies of native light infantry,
passed under the enemy’s first position on the crest, which was a
stockade. They had now lost the cover of darkness and were within
range. The Nepalis in the stockade shot at them, but Ludlow
commanded his advance guard to reserve its fire—unless warmly
engaged—until it reached the crest. The force passed under two
more posts,3 each of which opened fire, but the men, well covered
by the uneven ground, pressed on obediently and did not stop to
retaliate.
   By eight o’clock, the advance was within 200 yards of the summit.
The fourth and principal enemy post was just ahead—strong, and
generously garrisoned. Ludlow was still under good cover, and he
called a halt to enable the column to consolidate. While he was still
waiting for his own battalion, the ist/6th Native Infantry, which
was toiling a long way behind, a guide brought word that consider¬
able enemy reinforcements were on their way down from the fort.
Ludlow now had about 400 men at hand and, after a rapid assess¬
ment of the alternatives open to him, he decided to try to take the
unreinforced post with the men he had, instead of waiting to attack
it with his whole force, which would give the enemy reinforcement
time to come up. He gave the order, and the European grenadiers
and native infantry charged with fixed bayonets up the remaining
section of the ascent, scattering the enemy from the post. John
Ludlow was an energetic and impulsive officer. In taking this
position on the crest, he had done what he had been ordered to do;
but his men were eager and the Nepalis in disarray, and in such a
situation it would have taken more than the letter of his instructions
to restrain him. He urged his men to give chase, so that once they
had reached the crest they did not stop, but turned sharply right
to push their adversaries back up the ridge. The next peak in the
direction of the fort was topped by the ruined village of Jampta,
where the enemy had their third post. The grenadiers of the 53rd
   3 Circular depressions in the ground still mark the sites of these stockades,
but the ridge is now considerably more wooded than it was then.
                        Stagnation in Sirmur                       173

reached it first, and the Nepalis, still unformed and unsteady, fell
back to their second position to make their stand. Down went the
grenadiers again, and up to the second post, a picket. Here the
struggle was savage; but the Nepalis, still winded and dazed, were
finally forced to retreat yet again, to their first post, which was the
stockade. Behind that lay the cantonments of the fort itself. It was
now about half-past eight. Faces gleaming with sweat, buoyant with
triumph, tendons taut and trembling, the grenadiers and their
officers turned eagerly to Ludlow for the word to charge the stock¬
ade. This time, the commander hesitated. His better judgement
warned him that it was strong and already reinforced; that his own
force was small; and, his rear being so far behind, that he was with¬
out support. But he was too grateful for the valour of his men, and
too excited by their success, to be resolute and stern, as they
surrounded him, clamouring, beseeching and reproaching. ‘Why,
sir, there ain’t more than eight or ten men in the stockade, and bye
and bye there’ll be as many hundred!’ Instead of positively order¬
ing his men to halt, as he later admitted he should have, Ludlow
could only implore them to spare themselves. ‘You have already
done more than I expected. Why not take breath awhile, and wait
for the others and the guns? Let them come up, and then we’ll see
what can be done.’
    Even as he was speaking, two or three of the grenadiers roared
out huzza! and part of the light infantry leapt forward. Ludlow
could still have stopped them, but he succumbed to the fever which
forces winning gamblers to go on when it is obvious that they should
stop. He consented to the charge, trying to convince his better self
that, since even a positive command could not then have restrained
the men, this was the only way of sparing them the stigma of
disobedience.
    It was a lapse that he lived to regret bitterly. The men rushed
ahead. The Nepalis, strengthened by reinforcements from the fort
and steadied by a few minutes’ respite, allowed them to come close.
Then they sallied out on either side of the stockade and charged
them, with khukuris drawn, from both sides and from the front
simultaneously. Ludlow’s party reeled away—not down the crest of
the ridge the way they had come, but sideways, over the flank of
the ridge. The Nepalis followed noisily, forcing them to stumble,
slip and slide down the precipitous mountainside. Ludlow managed
to rally them for a few minutes farther down; but ammunition was
174                     Stagnation in Sirmur

 low and it was impossible to keep up a consistent fire. The enemy,
 increasing in numbers all the time, poured over the crest like spilt
liquid, and Ludlow had no option but to retreat again.
    In this, his moment of greatest need, he was forsaken by his own
corps, which formed the rearguard of his column. When the van¬
guard was repulsed, the sepoys of the ist/6th Native Infantry had
come as far as Jampta; but then, instead of moving forward to
support the grenadiers and light companies, which, because their
communications were entire, they were well able to do, they became
so terrified by the sight of events in front that they refused to form
and began to back away. Officers shouted and swore, struggling to
make themselves heard above a rising babble of fear: but all their
efforts to impose order were made vain by the crucial defect in the
military system which this crisis exposed. Casualties at Kalanga
had so depleted the battalion’s small complement of European
officers that only three were on duty, and this was simply not
enough to allay the panic of 400 men. The military machine could
not accommodate Ludlow’s human error of allowing the column
to become too extended. The men of the ist/6th, instead of
advancing to succour comrades who were fighting for their lives,
took to their heels and fled.
    Ludlow, on the side of the ridge, worked desperately to hold a
position. Twice more he rallied the men; but twice he had to yield
his ground. On the last occasion, his musketry spluttered into
silence. There were no more cartridges and, as he still received no
support from the ist/6th, he had no choice but to order an un¬
covered retreat. It became a rout. Breaking formation entirely, the
men partly ran, partly fell and partly jumped down the rocky
slopes, crashing through the tussocks and wildly clutching at
branches to control their descent. So precipitate was their flight,
that the remains of the detachment were back in camp by ten
o’clock. The casualties amounted to 151, of whom about a dozen,
including one officer, Lieutenant Munt, were killed. Ludlow him¬
self reached Nahan unhurt, save for a sprained ankle, but he burned
with shame. ‘I should have thought it a friendly ball that had
brought me to the ground’, he wrote to his wife. He blamed his
own unmastered greed for triumph for the repulse at the final
stockade; but for the fiasco into which it had needlessly developed
he blamed the lack of European officers and the reluctance of his
own ‘raggamuffin set of a corps’ to meet khukuri with bayonet.
                          Stagnation in Sirmur                          175

   Hastings was disturbed by such grave misconduct on the part of
native troops, especially since he had been in the habit of indirectly
reprehending the King’s men by paying the sepoys marked compli¬
ments and praises. Nevertheless, his inclination was still to treat
this behaviour as altogether exceptional—‘a circumstance almost
unheard of in the Bengal army’—and he forbore, in view of ‘the
peculiar circumstances of the public service . . . and of [Martin-
dell’s] detachment in particular’, to inflict condign punishment. All
he ordered was that the European officers who had been command¬
ing the corps should report any instances of cowardice on the part
of the native officers which they had noticed, and that all so accused
should be immediately dismissed. He feared the effects of stronger
punishment on native troops already subjected to the unusual
stresses of mountain war—and not without reason. Even his mild
censure and the few courts martial which followed it seriously under¬
mined the morale of the ist/6th, and in subsequent weeks the
corps lost over 100 men by desertion. Hastings, as Commander-in-
Chief, could not avoid officially expressing his regret that the
column had not moved more slowly and that Ludlow had not been
able to restrain the men in advance; but George Fagan, the
Adjutant-General, privately assured Ludlow that his personal
reputation had not suffered:
I read extracts and parts of your letter where descriptive of the scene
and of your own feelings to Lord [Hastings], who has been pleased to
allow me to tell you privately ‘that it has not in the slightest degree
impaired his good opinion of you; and that the misbehaviour of troops,
whether proceeding in one case from blind and precipitate rashness, or
in the other from backwardness, often ruins the best conceived hopes of
success and renders every effort of their leader vain’. Do not then suffer
yourself to be depressed, my dear friend; you have already established
sufficient claims to public favour and approbation and to the confidence
of your superiors, and you will continue to increase them.
   Poor 53rd! Nothing they could do was right. At Kalanga it had
been their shirking and now it was their ‘blind and precipitate
rashness’ that was responsible for failure. Officers of the 53rd
deeply resented this last judgement, and it long remained an issue
of controversy in Indian military circles. Critics of the native army
attributed it to a blind prejudice in favour of the sepoys and their
officers among servants of the East India Company.4 This was not
           4 S ze Asiatic Journal, vol. xi: London, May 1821, p. 432.
176                    Stagnation in Sirmur

its real cause, however. Ludlow was partly responsible, because he
admitted his own error with the sort of manly frankness which was
especially calculated to put Hastings into a forgiving mood, and at
the same time implied that he had risked his own reputation in
order to spare that of the men; but there is no doubt that, more
than anything else, it was the deep grudge he had borne the 53rd
ever since the incidents at Kalanga that influenced Hastings’s
attitude.
    While Ludlow dealt with the left, William Richards marched
north-east towards the right-hand ridge. When he left Nahan, at a
quarter to eleven on the night of 26 December, there was not
enough ammunition in camp for his column to be supplied with
spare cartridges, so the men left with only those they had in pouch.
A sergeant’s party was left to bring on the extra rounds when they
had arrived from the park. This party followed with the spare
cartridges in the early hours of the morning, but by some negligence
was not provided with a guide. In the darkness it lost its way, and
the sergeant had to leave the ammunition with the coolies in a con¬
venient village while he went back to Nahan for help. He returned to
the village just before dawn, only to find that Nepali prowlers had
bagged the ammunition. 60,000 cartridges had been lost.
    Richards’s march was sixteen miles. The stony pathway plunged
and mounted, and was never more than wide enough for single files.
He was always having to call a halt, to enable the rear and the
ordnance elephants to come up. The last two and a half miles were
unremitting steep ascent, and it was not until eight o’clock in the
morning of the 27th that the advance guard reached the crest of
the ridge. Fortunately, the point where it ascended, a peak about
two and a half miles from the fort, was not defended. As there was
water close by, Richards halted for two hours, to allow the strag¬
glers to come up and to take some rest. Then he advanced along a
narrow footpath on the northern side of the ridge, taking possession
of successive peaks, and finally reached a pinnacle which was only
about 1,000 yards from Jaithak. He was greeted by musket and gun
fire from the fort; but this did little damage, and by noon he
was firmly established in this position, which was called Peacock
Hill.
   Near one o’clock, the Gurkha drums beat to arms, and a con¬
siderable force assembled and paraded under the walls of the fort.
Richards could tell from their number, which was about 1,500, and
                        Stagnation in Sirmur                        177

from the silence in the direction where Ludlow was supposed to
have ascended, that something had happened to upset the plan for
concerted action. He thought that Ludlow must have been recalled
for some reason—which meant that his own 500 men had the
undivided enemy force to deal with. Soon after, the Nepalis moved
down from the fort and began an attack with guns and musketry.
Their fire was directed against Richards’s advanced post, which was
on the slope before the summit he occupied; but its position was so
well protected that casualties were trifling.
    Towards four o’clock, however, when the spare ammunition
still had not arrived and when there was still no sign of activity on
 Ludlow’s ridge, Richards’s anxiety began to mount. He wrote a note
for Martindell describing his situation, and had two sepoys disguise
 themselves and take it to Nahan. Meanwhile, finding that the
 British fire was slackening, the Nepalis became bolder and made
 several attempts to storm points in his position. Deciding he must
 concentrate his resources, Richards called up a party which he had
 posted to guard the well in a hollow some 300 yards below his left,
 and to husband the remaining ammunition, gave strict orders that
 all fire be reserved until the last possible minute. It was a notorious
 weakness of the sepoys that they could seldom be made to do this.
 They would always squander their cartridges by firing before they
 could have accurate aim. But on this occasion the instruction was
 scrupulously obeyed, and the men eked out their precious cartridges
 with stones.
     Soon the light began to fail, and the enemy edged nearer. Again
 and again bands of them tore up to the breastwork which the
 pioneers had built in front of the advanced post and tried to force
 their way in; but each time they were repulsed. The European
 officers spared no effort to inspirit the men. Even the surgeon,
 Darby, took a musket, slung a cartridge box over his shoulder and
 made good use of both whenever he could snatch a few minutes
 from medical duties. Lieutenant Thomas Thackeray, commanding
 the light company of the 2/26th Native Infantry, still could not use
 his right arm, which had been wounded at Kalanga; but he made
 Richards promise that he might deal with the enemy if they
 charged again. He was an uncle of the future novelist, William
 Makepeace, who was at that time a small pale boy of four living in
 Calcutta. Soldiering was a vocation which claimed the passionate
 and exclusive devotion of this twenty-five-year-old subaltern, and
 178                    Stagnation in Sirmur

 his ambition to realize its best ideals in his own conduct burned
 with brilliant and destructive intensity. He had already crammed a
 decade of campaigning into his short life, crossing swords with the
 Marathas and the rebellious rajas of Bundelkhand. His men revered
 him as a paragon, and all immediately volunteered to repel the
 next attack. When the Nepalis assaulted again, for the eighth or
 ninth time, Thackeray and his company careered lustily at them and
 swept them back down the hill.
    By half-past seven it was quite dark, and the enemy muskets
 spurted luminous tongues. Ammunition was almost spent, but
 Richards remained confident. His situation was strong and his losses
no more than about twenty killed and wounded, and he reasoned
that by now a reinforcement must surely be at hand. Then, almost
simultaneously, he received two messages from Martindell. They
were both to the same effect, and he could hardly believe that he
had read them right. The General had sent no ammunition and no
reinforcement; only curt and peremptory orders that he was to
return to camp at once.
    At half-past nine that morning, when he received news of
Ludlow’s defeat, Martindell immediately wrote to Richards,
ordering him to return to camp. Now that it would not have the
benefit of a diversion on the left ridge, he feared that, if it was
allowed to continue, the column would be destroyed. By another
oversight, the guide and intelligence staff had failed to make
arrangements for messengers to be posted along the route of the
column, so these instructions never arrived. This was soon apparent
to all officers in camp, because Peacock Hill was fully visible from
Nahan and Richards’s movements could be closely followed
through telescopes. There was no way of signalling, because no
code of flags had been arranged. Martindell therefore sent another,
very urgent note.
   Then, soon after noon, two things happened, which completely
changed the whole tactical situation. First, news arrived that
Richards’s spare ammunition had been lost; and then the engage¬
ment on Peacock Hill began. The spectators in Nahan were
sickened by their powerlessness to avert what seemed certain
tragedy. But soon a buzz of excitement broke the agonized silence.
They realized that Richards was holding his position. There was
perhaps still time to send fresh ammunition from camp. Soon it
was obvious not only that he could be saved, but also that he could
                        Stagnation in Sirmur                       ijq

be given the means of securing a victory. Eagerly, a young subaltern
called Robert Stevenson volunteered to take a couple of companies
with spare cartridges to Peacock Hill. But events had moved too
fast for the General. Incredibly, he declined the offer, and merely
continued to send Richards orders to retreat.
    Martindell’s reflexes were so paralysed and his imagination was
so impoverished, that he was completely incapable of grasping the
significance of the developments on Peacock Hill. Having begun
with the assumption that Richards could succeed only if Ludlow
succeeded, his mind remained prisoner to that idea and simply
refused to register the visible evidence, which plainly indicated that
Richards could succeed in spite of Ludlow’s failure, provided he
was sent reinforcements and ammunition without delay. It never
occurred to him that the failure of the operation on the left ridge
only made it the more essential to exploit the success on the right,
and that by continuing to send orders to retreat instead of men and
cartridges he would not only ruin a splendid opportunity but
probably bring about a disaster. With egregious stupidity, he took
no heed of the likelihood of one of his missives arriving after dark
and compelling a party of exhausted men without ammunition to
 retreat blindly, by hair’s-breadth mountain pathways, with an
 enemy three times their number in pursuit.
    It is axiomatic that in all tactical withdrawals the most dangerous
 role is that of the covering party. For them, success in a gamble
against overpowering odds is only the prelude to even greater
jeopardy, because their acutest peril comes only after they have
held the enemy at bay for the benefit of the main party, when they
have to withdraw themselves. Richards was now faced with the
invidious task of selecting a corps to fulfil this suicidal function.
He chose Thackeray’s company, because they still had most of their
ammunition unused, this having been kept in reserve for any
accident. It is said that Thackeray ignored the pleas of some of his
 men, who urged him to make his way back to camp and leave them
to do the job alone. He and William Wilson, the twenty-two-year-
old Ensign of his regiment, were devoted friends. They had made
wills in favour of each other to symbolize their attachment. In¬
spired by Thackeray’s determination, Wilson insisted on staying
too. They were joined by Ensign Stalkert of the ist/i3th Native
 Infantry, and by William Turner, Ensign of the ist/27th. Stalkert
 and Turner were supported by a good proportion of sepoys from
 180                    Stagnation in Sirmur

  their own companies, but all told there were scarcely 200 men to
  resist 1,500. Thackeray formed two squares on heights command¬
  ing the escape route. He and Wilson remained with the one in
  advance, while Turner commanded the one to the rear. The men
  fixed their bayonets and performed prodigies of valour in an effort
  to stem the enemy advance until the main force was clear. Behind
  them, there was a frenzied stampede as the narrow pathway down
  from Peacock Hill became choked with men. Mercifully, the night
 was fine and the way lit by a brilliant, brittle disc of moon.
     The covering party managed to keep the Nepalis at bay for half
 an hour, but then Thackeray’s group was forced to retreat, in a
 desperate bid to escape encirclement. Soon half of them had been
 shot down, and the rest were surrounded. As they made a dash and
 tried to cut their way free, Thackeray was hit in the chest by a
 bullet, and collapsed. Realizing that he was finished, he told Wilson
 to take command; but Wilson himself was soon felled by a musket
 ball which shattered his thigh. The Nepalis swarmed everywhere.
 Men not killed were captured, and only seven of Thackeray’s
 company escaped. The command now devolved on Turner, who,
 realizing that there was nothing more he could do, shouted to his
 men to disperse. They fled in every direction, running and stumbling
 to the limit of their strength into the night.
     The first men of the main column limped into Nahan at one
 o’clock the next morning, giddy from hunger and fatigue; but the
 remnants of the covering party straggled in for days afterwards.
 One group had fled northwards, to the Giri Ganga river, where
they were found by friendly villagers, who fed them and guided
them back to camp. Another forty were taken prisoner. Despite the
threat of death, they refused to enter the enemy service and were
finally released on parole the following day. Ranjor Singh sent in
the wounded, a courtesy unknown in India; but many of the bodies
recovered had been mutilated. Wilson had been helped away by
Turner but, weak from loss of blood, had been unable to go far.
Turner had gone on alone to find help. He had soon been accosted
by a small party of Nepalis, and threw himself down a precipice and
crawled into a cave to escape capture. Thereafter he had wandered
lost and hungry in the jungle for two days. At last he was found by
an old peasant woman, who fed him and had her son lead him back
to Nahan. Turner never forgot her kindness, and had a pension
settled on her for life. He gave some indication concerning Wilson’s
                       Stagnation in Sirmur                      181

whereabouts, but the Ensign was not found alive. Thackeray’s body
was not recovered for several days. All the officers of the camp, in¬
cluding the Major-General, were at his funeral, and none could hide
his emotion. The surviving sepoys of his company defied the
strictest rules of caste to bury him with their own hands. Moved as
he had seldom been in all his long military career, Hastings issued a
special Order in honour of Thackeray, ‘whose heroic spirit and
personal example animated his little band to as daring an effort of
zeal and courage as ever distinguished any portion of the Bengal
Native Infantry, and, His Excellency may say, any description of
troops whatever’.
    The total of Richards’s casualties was 306—well over half his
force. Of these, eighty-one, including three officers (Thackeray,
Wilson and Stalkert), were killed. Hastings was amazed by Martin-
dell’s behaviour. ‘The Commander-in-Chief concludes’, ran a
sarcastic letter from the Adjutant-General, ‘that some insuper¬
able objection must have intervened to prevent your supporting
either column, or taking measures to cover its retreat, after you
were apprised of the failure of Major Ludlow’s attack’. It was
later learnt that, had Richards persevered, the enemy would have
abandoned Jaithak early the next morning.
    This double calamity was all the more vexing because it made it
essential to strengthen the Sirmur division. By virtually denuding
the stations of Hansi and Rewari and by detaching a battalion from
his own escort, Hastings was able to muster a reinforcement of
twenty-one companies of infantry, or nearly 2,000 men. But
casualties, desertions, sickness and the detachment of troops for
the occupation of Dehra Dun had reduced the original strength of
the force by over a half, and even after the arrival of eleven com¬
panies of his reinforcement Martindell had only 2,700 effective men
at his disposal. True, he also had Fraser’s irregulars, but he placed
little faith in them. Nervous and downcast after the disaster of 27
December, he complained that his force was too small for its
assignment. Jaithak was, he knew, expecting reinforcements, be¬
cause Bal Bahadur Singh had left Chamur and gone to a new
stronghold at Jauntgarh, on the east bank of the Jumna behind
Dehra Dun, whence Major Baldock, with a party of troops from
Dahra, had failed to dislodge him. It could only be a matter of
time before he reached Jaithak. Dispatches in this querulous vein
elicited no sympathy from Headquarters.
182                      Stagnation in Sirmur

Hitherto [observed the Adjutant-General acidly] it has not been the
habit of Company officers to calculate whether they have a numerical
superiority to the enemy. The introduction of a principle so novel and
so infallibly destructive to our Empire can never be admitted by the
Commander-in-Chief. But his Lordship directs me to say, that were
this species of computation allowed, he apprehends it could not apply in
your case, as he believes your numbers to be considerably beyond those
of Ranjor and Bal Bahadur Singh united. When you represent the
advantages of Ranjor Singh’s position, His Lordship thinks it escapes
you that a situation which presents peculiar difficulties of approach must
be one to which the means of egress and communication are equally
embarrassing when the skill of an antagonist is deployed in availing
itself of these obstacles.
    I am instructed to say that it is the province of the Commander-in-
Chief to weigh the possibility of the enemy’s receiving reinforcements.
To you, His Lordship looks for the vigorous employment of such force
as the ability of the state affords the means of furnishing to you. Did you
feel the nature of your command too embarrassing to you, which His
Lordship would be deeply loath to imagine, it would be incumbent on
you to express it; for in holding it . . . you are pledged to your country
to aim with your utmost energy at the fulfilment of its objects.

   Martindell was quite crushed by this rebuke, and he offered his
resignation. The offer reached Headquarters within a fortnight;
but no reply was sent for another two weeks, and it was not until
the end of March that Martindell knew of the Commander-in-
Chief’s decision regarding it. The sense of uncertainty under which
he worked in the meantime hardly helped to make his leadership
more assured.
   In the first weeks of the New Year the weather turned very cold,
and there were some stormy nights. The army’s misery was
worsened by inertia, because all activity now ceased, pending the
arrival of reinforcements and the transportation of the heavy guns
to Nahan. The road from the park to the plateau was pronounced
ready on 31 December, but experience proved otherwise. After
prolonged efforts to get the guns up this pathway the attempt had
to be abandoned as hopeless, because there were too many turnings
to give scope for even pull. A new, straighter road had to be started
on another part of the rock, and was not expected to be ready until
the end of February. Meanwhile, the Nepalis strengthened their
defences by constructing another stockade on the left ridge.
   While Martindell awaited his reinforcements and his guns, he
                        Stagnation in Sirmur                         183

had all the approaches to Jaithak reconnoitred, only to find them
apparently impassable for artillery. This confirmed him in his
resolution to suspend all operations until the heavy guns had
arrived at Nahan—though quite how he expected this to alter his
predicament it is difficult to understand, if all roads from there to
the heights were reckoned impracticable. He can hardly have con¬
templated bombardment from Nahan, over three miles’ distance,
when at Kalanga it had failed over 800 yards. As Ludlow saw it, he
had become so obsessed with silly fears concerning the safety of his
guns that he was incapable of thinking of anything else until he had
them in the town, and all his attentions had become engrossed by
the progress of the road. Probably he found a welcome means of
escape from the real problems of command, without, however,
abandoning all semblance of involvement, by busying himself with
preparations for the removal of the artillery park. Ludlow confessed
he had no idea what the Major-General’s ultimate plans were, and
‘positively had the fidgits’ as he waited for evidence of some tactical
purpose to emerge from his dithering.

There is but one road now by which we can get up decently [he wrote
to his wife on January 30th] and from this we may be cut off, or, what
is worse, perhaps obliged to attempt it with great loss, if we give the
enemy more time to defend it ... I know you must have been in
expectation of something decisive having taken place ’ere this, whereas
we are less prepared to set about it than we were on the 29th of last
month, the day on which I would have followed up the first attempt be¬
fore any additional defences were made. In my humble opinion, these
great delays are the causes of all our failures; they not only betray the
poverty of our resources, and give the enemy time to strengthen theirs;
but they moreover damp the spirit of our troops from the very inaction
incident to them.

   William Fraser, the Political Agent, was even more exasperated
by Martindell’s procrastination. Never were two characters less
compatible. Fraser, a young laird of Inverness, was garrulous,
opinionated and highly extrovert. He was destined to die at an
assassin’s hand, as unconventionally as he had lived. Although he
had chosen to make his career in the Company’s civil service,
temperamentally he belonged to its army. An intimate friend of
James Skinner, he loved to pose as a military expert, and modelled
himself on the old-style ‘Hindu’ officers, more common in the days
of Clive than now, who wore whiskers in imitation of their sepoys,
184                    Stagnation in Sirmur

abjured pork and beef, and hunted big-game on foot. Irresistibly
attracted to any affray, he had accompanied Gillespie to the assault
of Kalanga on 31 October and received a serious arrow wound in
the neck. Metcalfe, whose Assistant he was at the Delhi Residency,
found him ungovernable and full of wild ideas; but the younger
and more zestful Company officers, Ludlow and Frederick Young
 especially, readily accepted him, for there was usually a substratum
of sound reasoning to his outspoken views. His imagination and
 vitality would have operated as healthy antidotes to Martindell’s
diffidence had not the General been unresponsive to all advice save
that of the officers of the 53rd, and had Fraser’s own manner not
been so much less persuasive than outrageous.
    Finding the inhabitants of northern Sirmur (of the provinces of
Jubal and Jaunsar especially) to be more spirited and seditious than
those of Garhwal, Fraser planned a partisan army for the interior,
with himself as commandant. Krishna Singh, now in camp, whom
he found ‘a remarkable character for activity and bravery’, he
proposed should be his assistant; but after the disasters of 27
December Headquarters cancelled both this project and all plans
for the detachment of regular troops into the interior. Martindell
was nevertheless instructed to provide whatever irregulars he could
spare to support the rebels, and to encourage them to harass forag¬
ing parties from Jaithak.
    The irregular force, the brainchild of Fraser and commanded by
his close friend, Lieutenant Frederick Young, was by now over
4,000 strong. But less than half werepaharis (hill men). The failure
of the local inhabitants to come forward in larger numbers was, in
Fraser’s opinion, a clear indication that the British had done more
harm than good to their cause by advertising their policy of
restoration. As far as he could see, the presence of the son of the
dispossessed Raja of Sirmur in the British camp, with several of the
royal family’s civil officers, was, far from encouraging local resis¬
tance to the Gurkhas, tending to confirm the people in their
present allegiance. This was especially so in the case of the inhabi¬
tants of Jubal, among whom enthusiasm for the Company’s war
was tempered by the fear that in the event of its victory they would
be made subjects of the Sirmur house—a prospect they dreaded
even more than domination by the Gurkhas. Even in Sirmur
proper Ranjor Singh Thapa was far more popular than the old
royal family. The upshot had been that recourse had to be made to
                        Stagnation in Sirmur                      185

lowlanders of various descriptions—Sikhs, Pathans and Mewatis
mostly—to swell the numbers of the irregular contingent. It was
therefore a tatterdemalion band, hastily raised, hardly trained,
racially and religiously heterogeneous, and, what is more, issued
with ancient matchlock muskets, loaded cumbrously with separate
shot and powder, instead of modern flintlocks and cartridges.
Martindell can hardly be blamed for having had little confidence in
them.
   Nevertheless, it was a band of these irregulars which broke the
long tedium of inactivity and set the army in motion again, by
means of a minor but notable success against the enemy. Some
375 were posted on an eminence called Boneta, about nine miles
west of Nahan, to help intercept Nepali foraging parties. At day¬
break on 31 January, they were attacked by about 250 of Ranjor
Singh’s choice warriors. They acquitted themselves splendidly, not
only repulsing the enemy, but also killing twenty-three and wound¬
ing many. Ludlow waited restlessly for Martindell to react to this
opportunity; but the General pondered and dithered, and it seemed
that it must be lost. On 1 February, however, the irregulars actually
moved forward to the western end of the ridge and occupied, un¬
aided, a prominent height called Nauni, which was about three
miles from the fort. Reassured by this unexpected performance,
Martindell finally made up his mind to venture another attempt to
occupy the left ridge. At eight o’clock the same night he sent
Lieutenant-Colonel Kelly to Nauni with 1,200 men. Two small
mountain guns, transported by bearers, were sent after him—but
no field ordnance, because the road was reckoned impracticable for
elephants. It was a gruelling march; only between eight and ten
miles in length, but of full eighteen hours’ duration. At about
eleven o’clock on the following morning, all the troops remaining in
camp were turned out and paraded under arms on the north¬
eastern point of the Nahan plateau, in order to draw the enemy’s
attentions from Kelly. The feint was successful, for the Nepalis
hurriedly made a stockade in the supposed path of this force and
Kelly joined the irregulars on Nauni unopposed. ‘This move I
heartily rejoice at, for I was afraid our general was asleep and would
have given time to the enemy to prevent our getting up at all’,
Ludlow told his wife with a sigh of relief; ‘I think, my dear girl,
there is every chance of our getting possession of Jaithak within ten
days,’
186                       Stagnation in Sirmur

    But fortune never smiled on Martindell. No sooner had the
movement been completed than a change in the weather threatened
to thwart his hesitant initiative and drive him back even deeper into
his limbo of despondency and disappointment. The wind rose, the
sky darkened, the temperature dropped, and it began to rain. It
rained continuously for three days and nights. It was heavy, glacial
rain, driven by raging winds. Tents were dragged down; notepaper
became so damp that the ink would not dry; the light was so bad
that at three o’clock in the afternoon it was impossible to write or
read without a candle; and all the time, everywhere, was the sound
of running water.
    On bleak Nauni hill the sufferings of the sepoys were pitiful.
Kelly had marched in haste, without tents or spare provisions, and
it proved impossible to send these up to him while the vile weather
lasted. His men huddled abjectly under makeshift shelters, which
they formed by throwing their blankets over bars supported by
crossed sticks at either end, like roasting spits; but the kamals
were made of coarse wool and absorbed the wet like blotting paper.
There was little fuel for cooking, and even the few scraps of timber
that were found proved too damp to ignite. By the third day
twenty sepoys and twelve bearers had died of exposure and scores
were seriously ill.
    Martindell grieved, and wrung his hands. He would probably
have abandoned the position altogether had he not received a note
from Major Baldock on 5 February, which said that Bal Bahadur,
whom Baldock had been trailing, had eluded him altogether and
crossed the Tons river—the last major obstacle in his progress to
Jaithak. This meant that a reinforcement of between five and six
hundred men was about to reach the fort. The weather cleared for
a few hours on the same day, and John Ludlow, with his own
battalion, a six-pounder and two mountain guns, was sent to
relieve Kelly. Kelly’s drenched and shivering detachment arrived
back in camp that night, thirty of the men on stretchers.
   At about eight that night, after Ludlow had reached his destina¬
tion, the deluge began again.

I have not got your daily despatch to me, [he wrote to his wife on 7
February] nor could I well expect it in such weather aswe have had, it never
having ceased for a moment to rain ever since wre have been up here. It has
been very trying for the troops, especially those who have been exposed to
it without any covering at all [probably the irregulars]. Thank God today
                          Stagnation in Sirmur                           187

we have had a few hours of dry weather, and as the sun is peeping out I
trust it will favour us with its genial influence, for never did poor fellows
want it more. Many of the servants as well as sepoys have fallen sacrifice
to the inclemency of the weather, and I had just now a report of one of
my poor bearers, a Bangywalla, having died coming up. With regard to
myself, I never was better, although I have been without a bed and have
not changed my clothes these three days. This is not weather that
severely injures the constitution of Europeans, but natives cannot stand
such cold. I’m told that it snowed here for an hour last night, but as it
lay not on the ground ’till morning I did not witness it.
    I feel much more contented up here than I was below ... I have
the honour to maintain a post here with 400 men which has been pre¬
viously held by 1,200. It is a very strong one indeed, and provided the
elements do but favor us would be impregnable to any force the Gurkhas
would send against us. We have, besides my own force, 1,100 irregulars
which will prove of merit and [? — illegible] in case of attack. But the
enemy know the strength of our position too well and have too much
dread of our guns to make any such attempt. They are withal full 3 miles
distant from us with a large dale between us and them.
   On the 8th, the rain turned first to hail and then to snow, which
soon lay three inches thick on the tents and in drifts of three feet
on the ground. At Nahan, the Europeans were in their element,
pelting each other with snowballs; but the natives, who had never
seen snow before, were flabbergasted and miserable. Nor were the
lowland sheep and cattle of the commissariat any happier. ‘The
cattle are dying and lying in all directions’, wrote Sherwood; ‘800
sheep are reported dead belonging to our regiment.’ On Nauni hill
the snow was even deeper, and Ludlow’s force became completely
cut off. Supplies and reinforcements could not be sent to it for five
days.
Since 4 o’clock yesterday [he told his wife on the 9th] we have had
neither snow nor rain, but an exceeding hard frost; and the snow is now
on the trodden roads so many cakes of solid ice. The stupendous hills
around all covered with snow present to Europeans a grand and con¬
genial sight—but not so to the natives. Fuel as you may suppose is
exceedingly scarce, and it is here so especially, there being no other tree
but the fir, which is not particularly numerous . . . There is this advant¬
age in fir, that it burns readily green, from the quantitity of turpentine
which is in it. I am greatly in hopes from the clear appearance of the
weather, and [it] being withal new moon today, that all bad weather is
at an end. Most sincerely do I trust so on account of the troops, who
have suffered every privation, and I must say with unexampled constancy.
i88                     Stagnation in Sirmur

    Finally, the sun came, and the sound of trickling water was
heard again. On io February the road was considered passable, and
a reinforcement of 450 sepoys, with another three six-pounders,
was sent to Ludlow under Captain Watson. The paths, however,
were still very slushy, and two elephants slipped over precipices and
were killed. ‘The road is difficult beyond measure; everyone [is]
wishing that Lord [Hastings] would look at it’ wrote Sherwood
feelingly. After the junction of the reinforcement the spirits of the
troops at Nauni were high, and his men told Ludlow that if he
would lead the way to Jaithak, they would follow.
   But there was little likelihood of his doing that. Martindell had
no intention of allowing Ludlow to burn his fingers twice. Now
that he had, almost in spite of himself, got artillery on to one of the
ridges, the bombardment of Jaithak again seemed feasible and his
decision to reduce the fort by this means appeared justified after all.
From now on, Martindell clung to the notion of bombardment with
a desperate faith and refused to be distracted by any incidental
opportunities for other forms of tactics. He simply ignored the fact
that, to be successful, bombardment needed to be combined with a
blockade; that unless the enemy were prevented from escaping, the
guns might merely drive them to another hill to the rear, where it
would perhaps be impossible to attack them.
   The Nepali defences on the left ridge were now increased to two
stockades, and the Major-General had to obliterate these before he
could move his guns up the ridge and bombard the fort. On 12
February, all the light infantry companies were sent up to Nauni
with two heavy mortars, and Ludlow was instructed to advance
about 1,100 yards to an eminence called Black Hill, which, it was
judged, would be a good position for a battery. Irregulars under
Frederick Young were left to guard Nauni. But before the bom¬
bardment of the stockades could begin, two things happened. Bal
Bahadur finally entered Jaithak, and Ranjor Singh’s men occupied
Peacock Hill, the important position on the right ridge which
Richards had been ordered to abandon on 28 December.
   Bal Bahadur reached the fort that same evening, 12 February.
‘He ought to have been prevented long ago’, grumbled Ludlow,
who witnessed the entry from Black Hill. Estimates of the strength
of this reinforcement varied. Pessimists of the 53rd, like Sherwood,
reckoned that the force was 700; while Fraser, less alarmist,
realized that the number could not exceed 400 at the most. When
                        Stagnation in Sirmur                       189

Headquarters demanded to know why Bal Bahadur had not been
intercepted, Martindell blamed Major Baldock.
   It is a fact that he derived little collateral co-operation from the
force in Dehra Dun. As far back as December, Lieutenant-Colonel
Carpenter, left in charge there, had been told to give priority to an
attack on Chamur, where Bal Bahadur was then lodged. But
Carpenter’s force was so small—only just over 200 strong—that he
had felt compelled to wait for reinforcements before beginning
operations. In the meantime Bal Bahadur had moved west to
Jauntgarh and here, in early January, had successfully resisted the
efforts of 400 regulars and 600 irregulars under Major Baldock to
dislodge him. Soon afterwards he had moved on again, still west¬
wards, towards Jaithak. He had been harassed by some local
partisans of Jaunsar district on his way to the Tons river; but
Baldock’s force, hampered by deep snow and the ruggedness of the
country, had been too far behind to afford any support, so the
elusive Gurkha had crossed the river with little trouble. Troops
from the Dun did not attack Jauntgarh again until 11 March, when
the remaining garrison of about 300 withdrew eastwards across the
Baghirati river. Chamur was not attacked by a British force until
20 March, when its occupants too retreated across the Baghirati.
Both the expelled groups made their way to Srinagar in east
Garhwal, now become the new enemy rallying point.
    Now that the fort had had its garrison increased, mastery of
Peacock Hill, which commanded the wells on the right ridge, was of
crucial importance to Ranjor Singh Thapa, and he sent men to
fortify the peak. ‘It ought to have been taken possession of by us
long ago’, seethed Ludlow; ‘I wish in Heaven the General would
show a little more activity and not give the enemy time to add to his
defences.’ He wanted to open his mortars to distract the Nepalis’
attention from their stockade-building, to which proposal Martin¬
dell reacted by announcing that he was coming up to Black Hill to
examine the position for himself.
    His visit was made on 14 February, when, in consultation with
Mawby, now his alter ego, he fixed on a spot at the foot of Black
Hill, about 300 feet below Ludlow’s present position and some
thousand yards distant from the nearest Nepali stockade, as the
site for the batteries. The emplacements were duly constructed that
night, but Ludlow received no orders to put the guns in. The
Major-General had been suddenly distracted by a report that 500
190                     Stagnation in Sirmur

 Nepalis from Amar Singh Thapa were on their way towards
 Jaithak. Trembling for the safety of his artillery park, he suspended
 all operations on the left ridge and even recalled a reinforcement
 which had just been sent there. Ludlow described news of this
 recall as ‘the most discouraging information based on the strangest
 reasoning [he] ever heard of’, because the route of the Nepalis was
 supposed to lead them directly by his own position, while the Major-
 General had a force at least four times their estimated number in
 Nahan. No confirmation being received of the report, two six-
 pounders were carried down to the batteries on the 16th. Fire was
 opened on the 18th, when the two mortars were also in position;
 but by then Martindell, advised by Mawby and Captain Battine,
the artillery officer, had decided that the distance of the batteries
from the stockades was too great for light ordnance to have any
effect and that the eighteen-pounders would have to be brought up.
    At this stage, the battering guns were not even as far as Nahan,
and it was only on the 19th that the road on which the pioneers had
been labouring for three weeks was pronounced ready. It took 200
men two days to get both guns up, so the operation, an object of
general wonder and interest, was not completed until the evening
of 20 February. Work on continuing the road to Black Hill was
started on the 18th.
    Meanwhile, the reinforcement from Amar Singh Thapa was
again reported to be approaching and Frederick Young, with
Krishna Singh and 2,000 irregulars, was sent from Nauni to inter¬
cept it. They left Nauni on the morning of 19 February and struck
due north, making for the Sain range of mountains, stretching
horizontally behind Jaithak, where Young expected to encounter
the enemy party. After a march of forty-eight hours, he finally
caught up with his prey at nightfall on the 20th, at a place called
Chanalgarh, 15 miles from Jaithak and overhanging a deep chasm
through which the Jelal river tumbled in noisy cataracts. He
scribbled a hasty note to Ludlow: ‘I am at length up with the
enemy, but he has got such a post I really know not what to do. His
force does not consist at present of more than 500 fighting men and
a number of followers. We have upwards of 2,000. Is it not a shame?
But I fear if I was to order an assault the men would not go on—at
least so Krishna Singh says. I am really so tired I cannot keep my
eyes open, so excuse this short epistle. We had the Devil’s own
march . . .’
                        Stagnation in Sirmur                      191

    Krishna Singh had in fact lost his nerve, and far from being of
assistance to Young was nearly the cause of his destruction. The
irregulars held the enemy party in check during the night, but on
the morning of the 21st the Nepalis made a sudden effort to break
the blockade. They fired a few volleys and then drew their khukuris,
to try to cut their way free. Suddenly the rumour flew around the
ranks of Young’s force that a reinforcement of 2,000 enemy troops
from Jaithak was at hand. The notion was absurd. Jaithak was fully
fifteen miles away, and there were not that many troops in the
place; but it wrought panic among the irregulars, who threw down
their arms and fled. They were hotly pursued. Many fell to their
death over precipices; others were either slaughtered or mutilated
by the Nepali knives. 180 were killed and 273 wounded, and nearly
 1,500 deserted either there and then or subsequently. Krishna
 Singh attempted to extenuate the flight by claiming that the enemy
had numbered between 1,200 and 1,400; and there was little reason
to doubt that he had been the author of the pernicious rumour
concerning reinforcements.
    This unfortunate affair widened beyond repair the rift between
 Fraser and Martindell. Fraser refused to abandon the irregulars,
and arrogantly reaffirmed his faith in them. Fie laid most of the
 blame for the catastrophe on Krishna Singh, ‘who’, he claimed,
 ‘from incorrect information or personal apprehension fabricated and
 used a mischievous falsehood’. Young said that such a heterogeneous
 and inadequately trained band should never have been employed
 without a seasoning of regulars to inspire and support them, but
 Fraser disagreed. He even disputed the superiority of the Nepalis’
 flintlocks over the irregulars’ old matchlocks. Martindell, on the
 other hand, was vexed and mortified to think that he had ever been
 led to trust the irregulars. ‘I can no longer place any dependence on
 the few troops of this description who remain,’ he wrote firmly, re¬
 fusing to listen to Fraser and discriminate in favour of the mountain
 soldiers at least. The Political Agent went off in a huff, and con¬
 ducted his own inquiry into this affair. He submitted a question¬
 naire to Young, and then, having embellished Young’s replies with
 his own comments, sent the document to Fleadquarters without
 bothering even to inform the Major-General.
    At the end of February, Fraser heard that the elders of Jubal
 province were at last stirring and needed arms and men. He
 suggested that a force of irregulars be sent, proposing to accompany
192                      Stagnation in Sirmur

them himself; and Martindell, glad to be rid of him, agreed.
Departure was delayed for some time by the demoralized and re¬
fractory state of the irregulars. New levies were no sooner added
than droves more deserted, reducing the mean strength of the corps
to about 1,400, and detachments showed themselves timid and un¬
steady in face of even the most trivial hazards. When Fraser finally
left camp, with 450 men on 15 March, Martindell heaved a sigh of
relief. But his respite was short. Hastings was growing very
disturbed at his fecklessness, and began to bombard him with un¬
pleasant missives. On n February, the Adjutant-General wrote:

The Commander-in-Chief . . . [expresses] . . . his anxiety that
Colonel Ochterlony should derive the aid of a more active cooperation
from the force under your command, and His Excellency trusts you will
speedily endeavour to afford it to him after the First Battalion, the 15th
Native Infantry shall have arrived.

On 25 February he wrote:

His Excellency cannot but view with increasing anxiety the appearance
of continued inactivity in your proceedings. The reinforcements which
have been sent to your division at such an inconvenience to the public
service, and the large addition which has been made through the zeal
and activity of Mr. Fraser to the irregular force . . . amounting, His
Excellency understands, to about 3,684 men, have authorised the
expectation of results commensurate to so great a preponderance of
strength.

And on 1 March:

The Commander-in-Chief observes that your last is dated from Nahan,
and not being aware of any advantages which that place affords as a
headquarters while operations are going on . . . requests to be informed
of the reasons which induce your remaining so long at that place. As a
position it appears to His Excellency to engross an undue share of
solicitude, as well as a much larger portion of your force than circum¬
stances seem to warrant or require.
   The advanced state of the season; the little expectation your des¬
patches hold out of any speedy commencement of active operations,
notwithstanding the large force at your disposal, cannot but fill the
mind of the Commander-in-Chief with unusual anxiety for the public
interests so deeply involved in the success of the army under your com¬
mand. In the absence, therefore, of all positive and specific information
as to your present plans and intentions, I am directed by the Com-
                        Stagnation in Sirmur                       193

mander-in-Chief to request you will state fully and explicitly what you
propose to do towards the accomplishment of the service which has
been specially entrusted to your direction.
    Wearily, Martindell strove to impress on his unfeeling chief the
nature of the difficulties and deficiencies with which he was having
to contend—poor, even useless intelligence; terrain difficult beyond
the conception of those who did not actually see it; and, worst of
all, lack of men. He insisted that he must guard Nahan, because it
was his magazine, depot, treasury and link with the plains, and he
claimed that he had no troops to spare for the occupation of the
heights north-east of Jaithak, which was essential if the place was
to be blockaded until it could be bombarded. The badness of his
intelligence and the obstructions of the ground cannot be disputed;
but it was absurd to plead insufficiency of troops. By this time he
had at his disposal some 6,000 regulars alone, while Ranjor, with all
his reinforcements, could not have had more than 2,000 men of all
descriptions. The principle behind his operations was, he repeated,
bombardment; but by now he was so nervous that as his plans
matured, his confidence in them drained away. Calculations of
success began to change into prefigurations of failure and he be¬
came inhibited by false premonitions. ‘The ground along the whole
ridge is very unfavourable, being so narrow as not to admit a
 company to form abreast’, he observed in his dispatch of 1 March,
 ‘and the point on which Jaithak is built is of such steep ascent that
 in the event of a breach being effected the result of an assault will
 be very doubtful.’
    It was his misfortune that he was surrounded by King’s officers
 who, instead of providing opinions against which he could measure
 his own and find them false, shared his lack of confidence and so
 gave a semblance of corroboration to misgivings which were in fact
 quite unjustified. On 6 March he again asked to be allowed to
 resign his command if the explanations he had provided proved
 unsatisfactory. Hastings made it plain that they did prove so; but
 he forbore to dismiss Martindell ‘because’, the Adjutant-General
 explained coldly, ‘there would be no explaining the procedure so
 that it should not carry with it, to the conception of the public, an
 unqualified condemnation of your conduct’. Dissatisfied as the
 Commander-in-Chief was, he intended his admonitions more as a
 private stimulant than as a formal verdict. But the plain truth was
 that Hastings had no option but to bear with Martindell, because
194                     Stagnation in Sirmur
 there was no officer of sufficient rank available to succeed him.
     The progress of the road from Nahan to Black Hill was be¬
 devilled by vacillation. It was begun along a route designed to
 utilize part of the course of the Markanda river, but on 23 February
 some bearers and camp followers were cut off and plundered in the
 ravine between Nahan and Jaithak by a party of Nepalis using the
 watercourse as shelter. This mishap persuaded Martindell that the
 route was too hazardous, so it was abandoned for another, more to
 the west. After two days this was found to be even more exposed to
 enemy raids. Work was therefore resumed on the first road, much
to Ludlow’s exasperation. ‘I like not this chopping and changing in
 a commander. It bespeaks so much indecision—a quality which I
 expected not to find in General M, tho’ I now perceive he has it in
 an impardonable degree. In truth his whole command has been a
 comedy of errors throughout—or perhaps a tragicomedy you may
term it.’ The next day, the 27th, two engineers went down to
examine the road and were promptly fired on by a lurking party of
Nepali snipers. They consequently reported the road to be far too
dangerous, and yet another was begun, this time about midway
between the two abandoned ones. For some days work continued
uninterrupted, but officers of the 53rd were still uneasy, maintain¬
ing that the road passed too closely under the enemy stockades on
the crest of the ridge for comfort. As always, the Major-General
finally came round to their way of thinking, and on 2 March he
ordered the engineers to turn the road to the left ‘to save the troops
 [from] being unnecessarily exposed’. So the pioneers and fatigue
parties laboured on, always expecting some fresh, capricious change
of plan, and now sweltering in warm weather. Spring in the north
Indian hills is the nearest thing to paradise that sinful man can
know, and in the exiled Briton the wild apple blossom, the awakened
bees, the returning cuckoos and the aromatic breezes evoke a
poignant, bitter-sweet nostalgia. But for the Britons campaigning
in 1815, these things all had an ominous significance. They were
warnings that the season was waning fast: advanced harbingers of
the monsoon, during which all operations would have to be
abandoned.
  While the road for the eighteen-pounders was being made, the
Nepalis constructed yet a third stockade on the left ridge, in
advance of the second and just their side of the ruined village of
Jampta. The distance was still too great for the British ordnance to
                          Stagnation in Sirmur                           195

hinder them, and the arrival of the battering guns was awaited on
Black Hill with mounting impatience. John Ludlow found an
escape from the boredom of inactivity by continuing to unburden
himself in letters to his beloved and devoted wife at Meerut, to
whom he described how the road finally approached completion.

                                           Camp, Black Hill, 7th March.
      I am happy to say that the General is now working most seri¬
ously and with effect on the road for the 18 pounders. They have
not as yet got to the next rocky part, but hopes are entertained that if it
cannot be cut through . . . the road may be so brought over the sum¬
mit of the hill that an 18 pounder may eventually be got over it. If this
even can be managed, a month instead of two would then finish the
work—nay, if he increases the working party with Europeans, which he
yesterday did, it may be got through perhaps quicker . . . But under
any circumstance, the delays are most impolitic, [as] evidenced by the
enemy throwing up their today’s stockade. It will cost more lives to
drive them from this than we could have lost in bringing up the guns by
a road more direct.

                                      Camp, Black Hill, 8th March, 1815
    I am happy to say, my Love, that a hint from Head Qurs has made
our General exert himself a little, and he has further 3 days past put
upwards of 500 men as a working party on his favorite road. By dint of
exploring and perseverence they will manage I hope to get the guns over
the pinnacle of a rocky hill which it would have been in vain for them
[to attempt] by the regular footpath. There may be some danger in
bringing the guns over after the road is made, owing to the narrowness
of the ridge; but of the practicability of this I shall be better able to tell
you tomorrow, as Smith, the Chief Engineer, is gone down to look at it,
and I shall have his report tonight about it. Stevenson seems to think it
may be finished in ten days . . . That will be quite a relief to us, for
when these fine guns are up matters wfill go on famously—provided only
that our commander takes advantage of circumstances and does not
permit the enemy to retreat to other ranges of hills further back, which
they have already contemplated and will do if not hindered.

                                         Camp, Black Hill, March nth.
   The road is very nearly finished: but there are yet two places in it so
steep and rugged that the artillery officer, Captain Battine, thinks the
guns cannot be brought over them without some alteration. This
possibly may occasion a few additional days’ delay. I suspect the General
will be wishing bye and bye that he had commenced on the road more
direct, for that would have been finished many days ago, and the guns,
196                      Stagnation in Sirmur

by reason of its gradual ascent, very easily got up. But the working party
getting through the road [as] they have done, have performed wonders.

                                 Camp, Black Hill, Sunday, March nth.
   Our road for the guns is again subject to some alterations, and it will
depend on the General whether this alteration shall take a fortnight or
two days’ additional work. The General, without seeing the road, has
ordered it to be turned—i.e., taken round the rugged part; whereas the
engineers have recommended it to be scalped—i.e., the pinnacle to be
taken off. The latter will require two days to execute, so that in 6 days
altogether it might possibly be finished.

   The engineers apparently prevailed this time, because the road
was pronounced ready on 13 March. It was five miles long, with
many high humps and low dips after it quitted the Markanda
valley and zigzagged across the craggy skirt of the left ridge. Many
parts were little more than spaces cleared of vegetation and loose
stones, where hollows in the ground had been filled up and
smoothed; elsewhere it was a footpath widened by cutting back the
bank and artificially raising the outer edge. Its ascent up the flank
of the ridge, following the straightest of possible routes, appeared
from a distance almost perpendicular and dizzily precipitous. In
one place it followed the narrow spine of a rocky spur which jutted
out from the ridge like a natural buttress, with an immense cavity
on either side. ‘It may reasonably be doubted’, wrote James Baillie
Fraser, brother of the Political Agent, who arrived in camp on
14 March, ‘if ever till this period it had been contemplated to drag
guns of such heavy metal up precipices so high and rugged, and
over so many of them.’
   The eighteen-pounders were moved from Nahan at daybreak on
14 March, 200 soldiers of the 53rd and a party of gun lascars
allotted to each gun. Martindell was in agonies of apprehension for
their safety. The whole army was put under arms and Colonel
Kelly sent with a battalion of sepoys and two six-pounders to
cover the road—‘and for what? Because, forsooth, our General was
fearful the Gurkhas would come and run away with them!’ snorted
Ludlow. In truth, the General need not have imposed such an
additional strain on the army. The Nepalis were far too engrossed
by the spectacle to interrupt it. Hundreds came out of the fort and
watched the operation, as if mesmerized into a state of horrified
fascination. First the guns were let down the northern face of
PLATES
PLATE 1
PLATE II




a. Sir Jasper Nicholls       b. Sir Robert Rollo Gillespie




c. The Marquis of Hastings   d. William Fraser
PLATE III
                                                                                                PLATE IV




Kalanga Hill, from the south east. The depression to the right is the ravine of the 'Nalapani
                                          PLATE V

Jaithak pinnacle, from just below Nahan
PLATE VI




Jaithak pinnacle, with the ruins of the fort, from the west
                         Stagnation in Sirmur                        197

Nahan Hill, each held back by its team of Europeans, and guided
by lascars with levers on either side. They were then moved along
the course of the Markanda, the easiest stretch of the route, and
brought to the road proper, which branched away towards the ridge.
Progress was painfully slow, and the guns were brought only half¬
way on the first day. During the 15th the army was again kept
under arms while the operation was completed. James Baillie
Fraser watched from a distance as the first gun moved up to the
crest of the spur:

Main strength was necessary to drag it up the straight road which,
viewed at a distance, seemed perpendicular; and the men in detail,
with the ropes and guns attached, appeared right up and down on its
face. On the edge of steep precipices, again, more caution was necessary;
for then, had the huge engine swerved the least to one side, it must have
tumbled down to the gulf below, whence it could never have been
recovered, and probably many lives must have been lost with it. Several
times I trembled as I saw it verge towards the edge and the ground
crumble beneath it; but it moved on majestically, following the mass of
men that drew it . . . and on the morning of the next day the two heavy
guns were placed in battery.5

    They opened fire on the morning of 17 March, aimed at the
nearest stockade, and continued open for two days. On the evening
of the 18th the stockade was still standing and a deserter reported
that the total of the enemy’s casualties did not exceed half a dozen.
Bombardment was again being beset by the problem of aim. The
stockade emerged only some five feet above the ground, and any
hits on so small a target at 800 yards were due more to luck than to
science. But the artillerists persevered, and by the next evening
some elfect was at last visible. The stockade itself appeared to be in
ruins, and his more vigorous officers advised Martindell to assault.
The Major-General refused, insisting that the trenches, which
extended from each side of the stockade over the flanks of the ridge,
were still too strongly defended. Instead, he ordered the construc¬
tion of another battery for the eighteen-pounders at a point about
350 yards from the nearest stockade and to the right of Jampta
village. A special path had to be cleared along the ridge for this
purpose, and the first gun could not be moved up until daylight on
the 20th. By the evening the stockade was a pile of smoking debris;

                        5 Journal of a Tour, p. 88.
198                     Stagnation in Sirmur

 but there were still Nepalis in the trenches and the gun parties
 were now within range of their musketry. Twenty-two casualties
 had already been sustained, and the Company officers urged
 Martindell to waste no more time and storm the position immedi¬
 ately. Again he refused. Instead, he ceased all fire for the night in
 order to make a road for yet another battery—this time for the
 six-pounders, in advance and to the left of Jampta, at a point which
 was only 200 yards from the remains of the stockade. In the morn¬
 ing he was quite surprised to discover that the enemy had repaired
 their defences during the lull in the bombardment. They had
 re-erected a breastwork at the back of the demolished stockade,
 and dug a new trench behind that—thereby turning their old rear
 into a new front. Ludlow had warned Martindell of the likelihood
 of their doing precisely this, and was sick with exasperation to find
 his prediction fulfilled. ‘I have more and more reason to be dis¬
appointed at the faults and blunders caused by insupportable
procrastination ... I suppose the General will not allow another
night to pass without molesting them. If he does there is no saying
what may be the consequence, for nothing is so dispiriting to
troops as to let a favourable moment pass by without taking
advantage of it.’
    But that night, 21 March, there was still no attack, much to the
disgust of the men, who wanted to repay the enemy in kind for the
discomforts of trench duty. The positions at the advanced batteries
were so exposed that, with all their shot and shell, the British were
unable to inflict more casualties than they suffered.
    The next afternoon, a few irregulars who had been sent to act as
sharpshooters took advantage of a slackening in the enemy fire to
creep up the glacis of the stockade almost to one of the flanking
trenches. Spontaneously aided by a few sepoys who were at hand,
they plunged in among the enemy and soon seemed on the point of
gaining the trench and turning the position. James Baillie Fraser
was convinced that they could even have captured the stockade.
But when their action was pointed out to the Major-General, he
was shocked by their rashness and immediately had them called
down.
   Martindell’s disastrous circumspection was less an expression
of personal timidity than a result of the counsel of officers of the
53rd, who persistently eschewed assault as too risky. Mawby was
Martindell’s eminence grise: always at his elbow and completely
                        Stagnation in Sirmur                       199
dominating his meek and submissive personality. ‘Unluckily’,
wrote Ludlow, whose own advice was constantly ignored, there
are advisers at our fountainhead who ruin everything in the way of
enterprise and who, I firmly think, expect the enemy will surrender
at discretion without our attacking them.’ We have only to note
that Captain Chepmell, Mawby’s Major of Brigade, described the
eagerness of the sharpshooters as ‘foolish’ to confirm the identity of
these advisers. Prevented by influences of this nature from escap¬
ing the trammels of self-doubt, humbled by successive bastinados
from Headquarters; and bemused by the problems of warfare in
such inaccessible country, the unhappy Major-General lapsed into
a state of complete mental deference to the King’s officers. Four days
later, after three precious months and untold quantities of stores
and ammunition had been spent in preparation for the exercise, he
made the extraordinary decision that he would not, after all,
attempt to take Jaithak by assault. He suddenly decided that ‘the
hill on which the fort [was] situated [was] not to be carried by
assault if defended’. Weak and tired, he surrendered at last to the
pressures of more powerful personalities. ‘I did not deem it neces¬
sary’, he told the Adjutant-General, ‘to call for the opinions of the
senior engineer and artillery officers . . . especially when I adverted
to their periods of service compared with my own and those of other
officers under my command’ (author’s italics). The allusion speaks for
itself. He now announced that he had decided to reduce the fort by
blockade, and invoked Ochterlony’s example in a pathetic attempt
to reconcile the Governor-General to his change of plan. Hastings
was incredulous, and at a loss to understand why the grounds for
this decision had not been obvious from the start. Angrily, he
accused the Major-General of having squandered months of time
and labour as well as huge quantities of valuable stores and ammuni¬
tion.
    Martindell’s first move in his new scheme of operations was to
send William Richards back to the right-hand ridge, whence he
had been so prematurely withdrawn on 27 December. With 1,100
sepoys, about 600 irregulars under Frederick Young and Krishna
Singh, and two small mortars, he left camp on the morning of
31 March. This time his operation was completely successful. With
a small advance guard and his own battalion, he drove a Nepali
force 1,000 strong from Panjal peak, slightly south of Peacock Hill.
His casualties were only eight killed and fifty-one wounded, and
200                      Stagnation in Sirmur

the whole operation was a clear vindication of the worth of the
native troops, even in mountain warfare, when properly handled.

 It is indeed a success which ought to inspire you with a just confidence
in the officers and in the troops under your command [the Adjutant-
General told Martindell]. The Commander-in-Chief trusts you will have
availed yourself of the obvious advantage afforded to you by this defeat
and discomfiture of so large a part of the force opposed to you. The
consequent division of the remainder of it will have presented to you a
most favourable opportunity for restricting the enemy’s movements and
really establishing that close blockade on which you have placed your
dependence for the reduction of the fortress. His Excellency will await
with considerable impatience the accounts of your further proceedings,
as your views must undoubtedly have become more distinct and defined
through the important success of that division, on which you would not
have calculated when you intimated the outline of your plan.
     His Excellency will also hope to hear that you have seen cause before
this to reduce the force you have hitherto kept in inactivity at Nahan. In
the position of the division of your command relatively to that of the
enemy, His Excellency conceives no apprehensions could be enter¬
tained for the security of the town of Nahan were it left to the protection
of a corps far short of that which is now allotted to its defence.

    Hastings should by now have known better than to expect so
much of Martindell. Having switched his attentions to the tactics
of blockade, Martindell pursued them with somnambulistic
inflexibility and had absolutely no heed for contingent advantages
if they seemed to require tactics of assault. The evening of 2 April
was the ideal time for an attack on the stockades of the left ridge,
since it was known that the pick of the Nepali troops had been with¬
drawn to support the force attacked by Richards; but no move was
made—either then, or in the days and weeks succeeding. ‘If the
Genl. would take the stockades to the west, I could then close in on
this side, and we might do something’, cried Richards. ‘We must
have patience, I see; but even that is almost exhausted. I know mine
is, although I believe I have as great a stock as most people.’ The
Major-General ceased to react in any professional sense to the
events going on around him. He moved through each day in a
semi-comatose state, making a few motions of command, but in
reality avoiding all decisions and doing nothing more than mechani¬
cally forbidding any measure which involved the slightest risk.
John Ludlow made himself very unpopular by repeatedly advo-
                          Stagnation in Sirmur                          201

eating more assertive measures, and Martindell always tried to edge
away when he went to make reports.

I went to him only two days ago [wrote Ludlow to his wife on 12 April]
and told him I observed 50 to 60 men with a chief descending from the
most southern stockade to interrupt some working parties of ours half¬
way between this and Nahan, who came shooting up and destroying the
company. I asked him if I should detach a company or two from my post,
which was nearest, to endeavour to cut them off from the fort, which
might easily have been done, as the Gurkhas had got quite down into
the nulla and were much nearer this than the fort is. The old gentleman
began to shy about, asking continually where they were, and I as fre¬
quently pointed out several of them. He at last told me there would be
no use in sending after them, and he should direct Kelly [in charge at
Nahan] in future not to risk his working parties so near. Fraser also
reported the same evening that a party of 150 Gurkhas had gone out to
the north-west to forage and that they would not return until the follow¬
ing night: but this was by him taken as little notice of as my report. Major
Ingleby of the 53rd I hear last night proposed to reconnoitre the trenches
of the stockade as he believed there were few men in them. The General
thanked him for his zeal, but would not risk valuable lives. I hope he
gets many of these hints, if only to convince him of the general senti¬
ment which prevails in this army. I confess my military ardour is begin¬
ning very much to evaporate; and whose could not when matters are so
ill-conducted? If we do stay out the rains, which please God we may not
yet, all of us so doomed will have no one to thank for it but the man who
commands us.

    The army on Black Hill groaned under the tedium of an
unbroken routine of trench duty at the batteries interspersed by
listless periods of relief in camp. The guns continued a desultory
cannonade against the stockade, and by the end of the second week
in April over 3,000 rounds of ammunition of one kind or another had
been expended. Reliable sources represented the enemy force as
200 at the most in the nearest defences and 300 in the post behind.
These 500 were the only troops they had on the southern side of the
fort. Martindell had, with his irregulars, upwards of 9,000 men
lying idle before it. One day a Nepali deserter came into Ludlow’s
post at the batteries, bringing with him as a propitiatory offering
five British six-pound cannon balls. He explained that Ranjor Singh
Thapa now had an immense store of these. The atmosphere in
camp grew very strained. William Fraser, recalled from Jubal by
the resumption of operations against Jaithak, was no longer on
202                     Stagnation in Sirmur

 speaking terms with the Major-General and treated him with
 undisguised contempt. On 4 April (false) reports were circulating
 that Bal Bahadur Singh had been severely wounded in Richards’s
 action, so Fraser sent a note to Jaithak under a white flag, offering
 medical aid. Ludlow, who was then commanding in the trenches,
 saw that the messenger, whom he thought sent by the Major-
 General, had been received by the enemy and that they had stopped
 firing. He therefore ordered the British guns to cease until the
 exchange had been completed. Martindell, whom Fraser had not
troubled to consult or even inform of the measure he had taken,
was surprised when the batteries were suddenly silenced without
his orders, and he asked for an explanation. Yet such was the man’s
torpidity and so complete his loss of self-respect, that he did not
even complain at what was, after all, an inexcusable impertinence
on the part of the Political Agent. Only one section of the officers
professed to believe in some inscrutable wisdom behind the com¬
mander’s behaviour, and that was the group which surrounded
Mawby. ‘If we are to go by appearances we are not one step nearer
taking the fort than we were a month ago,’ wrote Henry Sherwood
to his wife at the end of April, ‘but I believe the General knows
what he is about.’ The entry in his journal for 25 April reads thus:
‘We are building small redoubts on the top of Black Hill and
Nauni as protection to our rear. The younger men laugh at the
precaution and give them ridiculous names; however, it is but
prudent to be secure, for the enemy may have 6,000 men while we
have not 2,000 in any one [section of the] army.’
     Such an estimate of the enemy’s force was demonstrably
fatuous. Even at its greatest extent the garrison of Jaithak could not
have exceeded 2,000 fighting men, and how many of those could
have been trained soldiers is a matter for conjecture. After the
beginning of April Ranjor’s force was furthermore dwindling all
the time, because deserters came into the British camp every day.
Yet wildly exaggerated conceptions of the enemy’s strength
continued to cripple enterprise not only before Jaithak, but in
Dehra Dun as well. On 1 April the Major-General received a
dispatch from Lieutenant-Colonel Carpenter, who complained that
there were not enough troops in Garhwal to garrison the four main
captured fortresses (Kalsi, Birat, Chamur, and Jauntgarh) as well
as to guard all the ghats on the Ganges and Baghirati rivers.
Lieutenant Menteith, commanding at Chamur, had reported that
                          Stagnation in Sirmur                           203

a force of 600 Nepalis from Srinagar was prowling on the eastern
bank of the Baghirati, and had complained that it was quite impos¬
sible for his 250 irregulars to guard all the ghats over a thirty-mile
stretch of river. Martindell immediately wanted to send extra
irregulars to Carpenter, and he requested Fraser to increase the
levy. For Fraser, this was the last straw. He diagnosed the request
as a symptom of the appalling credulity, ineptitude and lack of
imagination which had bedevilled the campaign from its inception.
He took his pen to reply to Martindell, and drove it at a furious
pace. He poured scorn on the absurd estimates of the enemy’s
strength current among British officers, who had allowed themselves
to be duped by ‘arrays of rusticks, ploughmen, carriers, camp
followers, women, boys, and old men’.
   Menteith’s supposed 600 from Srinagar, he disdainfully demon¬
strated, must be more like 215, or 300 at the most; and with
indisputable cogency he argued that had that officer but thought, or
been allowed, to organize his force as a single mobile unit instead
of dispersing it into small fixed parties, it could have moved swiftly
to any place where the Nepalis threatened to cross the river and
would have been more than adequate to stop them. He attacked the
supine tendency to attribute physical as well as numerical superior¬
ity to the enemy:
On the point [of] . . . the physical and moral superiority the Gurkhas
are said to possess over our troops I shall say little, and I could wish that
the general impression in their favour was less prevalent. But supposing
that it does exist, is superiority in equipment, in discipline, in members
to be quite overlooked? Will no species of superiority be admitted in
our favour? Will not the boldness of the enemy increase in proportion as
we fail in confidence, enterprise and success, and their assurance and
energy grow up as diffidence and indecision mark the steps of our
troops?
   Hastings was entirely on Fraser’s side, and considered his views
‘just and luminous’; but he nevertheless felt that, in deference to the
declared opinion of the commander of the division, the levy of
irregulars should be increased. Martindell wanted 7,000, but
Fraser subsequently reported that it was proving difficult to bring
the levy, which stood at just over 6,000, to this amount. To make
good the deficiency, he wanted to arm and embody the Nepali
deserters, of whom there were now nearly 500 in camp, derived
partly from Jaithak and partly from Chaupal, a fort in Jubal which
204                       Stagnation in Sirmur

had been forced to surrender. They had provided willing and
invaluable instruction to the engineers in the art of making stock¬
ades. ‘I am of opinion that they will be found trustworthy and
faithful, and always a hardworking and serviceable body’ wrote
Fraser. Martindell opposed the idea; but Headquarters supported
Fraser, and so one of the British Gurkha regiments was born.
    Soon after, Fraser and his brother quitted the camp and went to
Jubal again, taking another motley body of irregulars to reinforce
those already there. The main object of the expedition was to incite
the inhabitants to attack the various Nepali garrisons scattered
between Jaithak and the scene of Ochterlony’s operations; but as it
happened, the timely defection of the Basahar Raja, which led to
the defeat and dispersal of the enemy army of the interior under
Kirti Rana, made its services unnecessary. The Frasers were never¬
theless not disposed to return to camp. Leaving a part of their force
to occupy Chaupal, they embarked on a tour of the cis-Sutlaj
Himalayan states which was quite a voyage of discovery. James
Baillie described the journey in a book which earned him the
admiration of Sir Walter Scott. His brother’s conduct in the cam¬
paign was later rewarded, at his own request, by the grant of the
brevet rank of Major in the cavalry corps of his friend, James
Skinner.
   Meanwhile, Martindell made cautious and feeble efforts to
straiten Jaithak. On 12 April he sent Captain Wilson and a bat¬
talion of sepoys to occupy a peak about a mile to the left of Black
Hill and almost immediately behind the fort. From here, a clear
view was had of the rear of the nearest stockade, which had been
built into the back of the one destroyed.

They have erected strong sheds made of large timbers to keep them from
the shells [wrote Ludlow after a visit to Wilson’s post] and have others
lower again, nigh the stockade, which look more like dog kennels than
anything else. In [the] rear of and about their trenches each man seems
to have a hole or cave, like bears’ and wild beasts’ to retire into from the
effects of the shells. Their number, however, is truly contemptible, and
very few of them are real Gurkhas.6 Indeed, the deserters say there that
there are not more than 20 Gurkhas in the first stockade and trenches.

     6 The men whom the British knew as ‘real Gurkhas’ are described by J. B.
Fraser as having ‘broad Chinese or Tartar-like physiognomy . . . small eyes,
flat nose, and meagre whiskers . . . stout square make, and sturdy limbs’—
from which it is obvious that they were not Gurkhas at all, but Mongolian hill-
                           Stagnation in Sirmur                           205

    A few days later, Wilson moved round still farther and another
force was sent to occupy the hill he vacated, so that Jaithak was
completely surrounded. But by now Ranjor Singh had the measure
of the man against whom he was pitted and had little difficulty in
breaking his blockade whenever he wished. If he wanted to send
out a party to forage for grain, he would circulate a report through
the British spies in his camp that he intended to attack one of the
British positions. Alarmed, Martindell would then immediately put
all his men under arms and order them to the defence of their posts,
thus leaving the Nepali party free to roam abroad. The only retort to
this stratagem which he could devise was the destruction of all the
grain, now fully ripened, within a ten to fifteen mile radius of
Jaithak—a cruel and odious measure, which can hardly have helped
to popularize the British cause among the local farmers and
peasants. It was clear from the large number of deserters who came
into the British camp each day after the last weeks of April that the
measures to starve the garrison were beginning to have some effect;
but at Headquarters they despaired of ever seeing the fort com¬
pletely succumb under the Major-General’s palsied grip.* * 7 He was
sent another reprimand, and with it a solemn warning:

It appears to the Commander-in-Chief that the posts you have estab¬
lished are at much too great a distance from the place you mean to
invest, as well as too few in number; and that you do not detach parties
sufficiently often to endeavour to intercept the supplies which it must be
obvious the enemy has it in his power to receive from the country—
particularly by night.
     The very advanced state of the season; the glorious successes which
have attended the British arms under Major-General Ochterlony in
Hindur and under Colonel Nicolls in Kumaun, contrasted with the
little apparent advancement of public interests in your quarter render
the state of our operations before Jaithak highly detrimental to the
interests of the state, a source of continued anxiety to the Commander-
in-Chief, and, His excellency fears, of discredit to our military character.

men—Magars and Gurungs. Real Gurkhas were similar in appearance to the
native Khas of Sirmur, with whom Fraser mistakenly contrasted them.

    7 On 12 April Ludlow wrote to his wife: ‘You are right in supposing me no
favorite at headquarters here, tho’ I have given no reason for displeasure,
excepting, it might be, in a way which I thought it was my duty to deliver my
opinions and to recommend while I held the command on these heights some¬
what more activity. In these suggestions I have entirely met the concurrence of
the Hd. Qur. folks, which to me is quite sufficient.’
206                      Stagnation in Sirmur

    You spontaneously . . . took upon yourself the formidable responsi¬
bility of abstaining from attack upon the positions which your instruc¬
tions directed you to attempt reducing. By that act you pledge[d]
yourself to effect the surrender of Jaithak through starving the garrison.
You ought to be apprised that should Ranjor Singh now come to a con¬
vention for the evacuation of the fort and country (a measure not
attributable to your operations but to our conquest of Kumaun) a rigid
enquiry will not the less be made into the measures taken by you for the
prosecution of that plan which you had engaged should prove effectual;
and were it to appear that those steps which could alone make a blockade
successful had been omitted, the consequences would be very distressing.

    Barely a week later, in a dispatch dated 17 May, came the
 dismissal which was now too late to be a coup de grace. Ochterlony’s
 operations to the west being almost at an end, he was instructed to
 proceed, as soon as Amar Singh Thapa capitulated, to assume the
 command at Nahan. Martindell was informed that he might pro¬
 ceed to Sahanranpur, Moradabad or Bareilly, as best might suit
himself, to await further instructions. He was in fact spared the
ignominy of actual supersession. Before the arrangement could
become operative, the war in Sirmur had come to an end. On
21 May, when violent winds and hail announced the advent of the
 rainy season, Ranjor Singh Thapa, deserted by all his best soldiers
and convinced, after receiving news of the Gurkha collapse both to
the west and to the east, of the futility of further resistance,
formally surrendered. The campaign had lasted slightly more than
five months.
    Henry Sherwood went to examine the enemy defences, and was
‘astonished at the weakness of the works’. He nevertheless added
that the natural strength of the position was ‘very great. . . almost
insurmountable’. The Field-Engineer, Captain Carmichael Smyth,
whose opinion regarding the practicability of bombardment and
assault Martindell had declined to seek, had other views. After
inspecting the fort and the defences before it, he gave it as his
judgement that the very confined terreplain of the fort ‘precluded
the possibility of protracted defence after our guns were once placed
in a situation to bear upon the walls’. The only obstacles to their
gaining such a position had been the stockades on the left ridge,
‘which had they been attempted, must unquestionably have been
in our possession in the course of twelve hours’. In his view,
therefore, ‘no difficulty or obstacle whatever existed to the posses-
                         Stagnation in Sirmur                          207

sion of the whole of the enemy’s position which might not have been
very readily and easily surmounted.’ Such was the conclusion
dictated by technical data. In fact, the fort could never have
resisted at all. It was full of loose ammunition and gunpowder, and
a single shell would have blown it sky-high.
    The subsequent fate of Gabriel Martindell forms a most elo¬
quent indictment of the military system of which he was a product.
Despite his demonstrable mental exhaustion and lack of self-
confidence, he was neither induced to retire nor even removed to
the invalid establishment. On the contrary, he continued to hold
posts of high responsibility—the charge of a column in the Pindari
war in 1818 and the command of the First Division, Bengal Field
Army from 1820. He died a lieutenant-general, still on the active
list, in 1831, aged seventy-six. The inquiry into his conduct of the
siege of Jaithak which Hastings had threatened does not seem to
have taken place. The reason for this may lie in the fact that the
Major-General was in 1815 included among those Company officers
who were made Knight Commanders of the Bath.8 Hastings was
probably apprehensive lest publicly disgracing Sir Gabriel should
compromise the dignity of the Prince Regent. Perhaps he realized
too that the delinquency of a single senior officer could only be, in
the final analysis, but a symptom of fundamental defects—defects
which were sapping the whole military system of the East India
Company and which even he must despair of rectifying by super¬
ficial measures of chastisement.
    The misconduct of a King’s officer, however, was a different
matter, and Sebright Mawby was not spared the deserts of his
regiment’s malefaction. The 53rd left Nahan early in June and
proceeded to Fort William in Calcutta, where it was joined by some
officers from its second battalion. The new arrivals, who had been
on service in Spain, jeered their comrades for their failure to take
the paltry hill fort of Kalanga, mocking and deriding ‘Indian’
troops and old soldiers. The atmosphere of the mess became highly
charged. There were violent arguments, and two duels even took
place. Untold damage was done merely by the prospect of the court
of inquiry, even though such courts did not conduct any form of
trial. Their object was merely to gather the information necessary

    8 The Order of the Bath, hitherto consisting of one class only, was now
divided into Grand Crosses, Knight Commanders and Companions. Several
Company officers, including Ludlow, were made Companions in 1815.
208                     Stagnation in Sirmur

to determine whether prosecution under the terms of military law
was justified or not in a particular case. They passed no judge¬
ment and did not even give an opinion unless expressly ordered
to.
    The one appointed to examine the circumstances of the failures
 before Kalanga remains, alas, almost wholly mysterious. The
 meagre scraps of information concerning it which have so far come
 to light indicate that the court initially convened in January 1815,
but was then adjourned on some point of legal procedure. It
assembled again at Meerut, the following year, under the presidency
of Jasper Nicolls, then Quartermaster of the King’s Troops in India.
 The indications are that Hastings had had second thoughts con¬
cerning its expediency in the meantime. In October 1815, Sherwood
had noted in his journal that ‘Lord Hastings [was] aware now of his
injustice, and appear[ed] to wish to forget it’, and his contention is
supported by the fact that the Governor-General had become
especially anxious that the court should be held in secret. When
Mawby agreed to secrecy, Hastings was very relieved.
    The court, which began its sittings on 24 January 1816, was
therefore closed from the outset. A search among the records in
London and in Delhi has failed to uncover its proceedings, and its
opinion, which was asked for, is not known. The court’s minutes
must have been voluminous, for, according to Chepmell, it was not
until July that Hastings received them and ‘determined to read
them throughout’, and with them is undoubtedly lost much valu¬
able information concerning the strange history of Gillespie’s last
hours and the third failure to take Kalanga. All that is now known
about the court is contained in the few sparse jottings made by
Captain Chepmell in his diary. From these it appears that the
inquiry began unfavourably for the Colonel and the regiment, but
that there was a general sense of relief when Nicholls was replaced
as President by Lieutenant-Colonel Need, another King’s officer,
in February. ‘I feel glad of that circumstance, as I consider Nicolls
a prejudiced man.’ But it is possible to make a reasonably confident
conjecture concerning the nature of the court’s findings. It is known
that Mawby did not suffer as a result of the inquisition. There is no
record of a court martial, he was promoted major-general in 1819
and he died a lieutenant-general in 1851. It is therefore almost
certain that the court exculpated him. Did it do more? Did it
uncover unpleasant truths concerning Gillespie’s mental state and
                       Stagnation in Sirmur                     209

conduct? Or had Hastings in that year’s interval uncovered such
truths himself, which made him regret his rash promise to scrutinize
the behaviour of Mawby and the 53rd and anxious that the whole
business should be brought to a conclusion as quietly and incon¬
spicuously as possible? It is an interesting and possibly relevant
fact that from about October 1815 Hastings’s attitude towards
 Stamford Raffles began to change. In that month he recorded his
official minute recognizing that Gillespie had been totally unjusti¬
fied in traducing Raffles’s moral character; and later his manner
towards Gillespie’s old adversary became almost gracious.
                               VIII

      THE COLLAPSE OF THE EASTERN
              OFFENSIVES

M         ajor Bradshaw remained in possession of the twenty-
          two disputed villages on the frontier of Saran during the
          1814 rains, when the rivers swirled down from the moun¬
 tains clouded by millions of tons of silt, and flocks of aquatic fowl
 resorted to the flooded rice fields. He had with him three companies
 of sepoys, a detachment of the Champaran Light Infantry (a new
 local battalion) and about 150 troopers of Gardner’s Horse,
 commanded by his young brother-in-law, Cornet John Hearsey.
This small force was distributed about the village of Ghorasahan,
where he had set up headquarters. Although fully twenty miles
from the edge of the Tarai jungle, the site was very unhealthy; and
during the steamy autumn warmth which followed the monsoon,
the men became feverish and sickly. As soon as the waters had
subsided, Bradshaw planned an attack on the enemy post at Bar-
harwa, some dozen miles to the east, where Parsa Ram Thapa was
encamped with 300 men. His object was to clear the approaches to
the hills in preparation for the advance of the main army under
Major-General Bennet Marley. Marley’s force, assembling at
Dinapur, was not expected to cross the Ganges until 15 November;
and aware that a premature offensive would be risky, Bradshaw
waited until the 17th before requesting the reinforcement which
would enable him to put his plan into operation. Marley then sent
forward two detachments. One, consisting of local infantry and
pioneers, he dispatched under Major Roughsedge to occupy the
frontier of the department of Tirhut, which adjoined Saran on the
east; the other, comprising five companies of regular sepoys, went
to join Bradshaw. But he warned Bradshaw not to advance too far,
because the main army was not yet ready to march to his support.
    Hastings planned that a chain of military posts should be in¬
stalled in front of the passes into the hills. They would protect the
occupied lowlands and preserve the army’s communications with
the plains. He intended that they should be established after the
               The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives           2X1

army had entered the mountains and claimed the main attention
of the Gurkha commanders; but Bradshaw, now that his force was
to be increased to battalion strength, became over-ambitious and
determined to occupy the proposed sites at the same time that he
attacked Barharwa. Instead of moving his force to the frontier
along a single line, he decided to advance along three, which
diverged and described an arc some forty miles wide at their
northern extremities. While the right-hand detachment moved to
Barharwa under Captain Sibley, the centre column under Captain
Hay was to attack Baragarhi, a mud fort about twenty miles to the
west, and the left-hand force, under Lieutenant Smith, was to
march on Parsa, a ruined stronghold some twenty miles to the west
again. This project was put into operation on the night of 24
November, after the junction of the reinforcement from Dinapur.
    Sibley left camp for Barharwa at midnight, with 270 sepoys and
Hearsey’s risala of irregular horse. They marched silently and
neared their destination, which was on the west bank of the Bagh-
mati river, before daylight. A clammy counterpane of river fog
lingered on the country: not high enough to cover the summits of
the mango trees, but obscuring the surface of the ground. Sibley
formed his detachment into three columns and attacked the Nepali
encampment, taking the enemy completely unawares. They had
no time to form and fired blindly through the matting of their
huts. Parsa Ram Thapa emerged and engaged in personal combat
with Lieutenant Boileau, wounding him by a sabre thrust in the
thigh; but a quick-thinking sepoy, Rama Sahai Singh, immediately
swiped at the Gurkha Snba from behind. When Parsa Ram turned
to deal with this new opponent, Boileau brought down his sword
and cleft the Gurkha’s skull. All the principal Nepali officers were
wounded and, deprived of leadership, the enemy troops scrambled
back towards the Baghmati, hoping to escape by crossing it. But
while the infantry had been attacking from the west, Hearsey and
his horsemen had dashed round their northern flank, got between
the encampment and the river, and sunk all their boats—a daring
and dangerous move, which exposed them to the fire of their own
comrades. The Nepalis gathered in great consternation inside the
river bank, and then made for the jungle and the hills to the north.
Again they were checked by Hearsey’s men, who dismounted and
blocked their path. Some threw down their arms and begged for
quarter; others plunged into the deep icy river and were shot or
Map 3 (west). Illustrating the campaigns in the Eastern Theatre in 1814 16
Map 3 (east). Illustrating the campaigns in the Eastern Theatre in 1814-16
214              The Collapse of the Easter?i Offensives

 drowned while trying to swim to safety. It was estimated that about
 fifty Nepalis lost their lives in this way alone. The total killed was
 reckoned at seventy-eight, and twenty-three were taken prisoner.
     Among the latter was the vakil Chandra Sekhar Upadhyaya, who
 was captured early in the action. All the property in his possession,
 including the presents destined for the Governor-General, was
seized as plunder and shared among the troops of the detachment;
and Bradshaw, thinking that he might prove a useful diplomatic
pawn, decided to retain Chandra Sekhar himself in his camp. The
vakil earnestly assured him that neither he nor his masters had
ever seriously expected a British invasion, and he begged to be
allowed to write to the Raja to inform him of the gravity of his
situation. Permission was granted, and under Bradshaw’s invigilation
he penned a forlorn dispatch, describing the calamity at Barharwa
and counselling the Raja to open negotiations immediately.
     But the durbar at Kathmandu, apprised of British reverses in
Dehra Dun, was less pessimistic. Bhim Sen Thapa’s reaction to the
news of the attack on Barharwa was not to sue for peace, but to
affect an attitude of high indignation. He shrilly resented Brad¬
shaw’s seizure of the vakil and his property, claiming that it
constituted a scandalous violation of the basic ethics of diplomacy.
Hastings dismissed these protestations. Chandra Sekhar had been
informed of the nature of the relations between the two countries,
apparently possessed no authority to treat for peace, and had been
given ample time to withdraw to Kathmandu. By remaining on the
frontier he had forfeited all right to diplomatic immunity.
    Baragarhi, the objective of the centre detachment under Captain
Hay, was about twelve miles in advance of Bradshaw’s head¬
quarters. It was a large rectangular mud fort, of some importance
since it was the winter residence of the Suba of Makwanpur.
Although it was known to be garrisoned by only fifty or sixty men,
it was appreciated that its high ramparts and deep ditch would be
formidable obstacles, and a field gun was placed at Hay’s disposal.
The route, though short, was intersected by numerous nullas, and
it was not until eight in the morning that Hay reached the place.
Its occupants were on the ramparts, apparently intending to resist,
so operations were postponed until the six-pounder arrived. Mean¬
while Hay parleyed with the Faujdar,1 and while their leader was
   1 An official subordinate to a suba, combining the functions of magistrate
and revenue collector.
               The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives             215

thus engaged, all the Nepalis in the fort absconded by scaling the
back wall. The gun was not necessary after all.
    Lieutenant Smith, who marched to occupy Parsa, twenty miles
to Hay’s left, did not even see the enemy. When he arrived at the
mud fort, after a march of twelve hours, he found its dilapidated
works ghostly and abandoned—though spies soon brought word
that there was a Nepali force lurking in the forest a couple of miles
in front. With the capture of this post Bradshaw’s plan was all but
accomplished, and it only remained to tidy his row of advanced
posts by moving forward two companies of sepoys from Barharwa,
which was on a latitude somewhat behind that of the other two
positions, to the village of Samanpur, which was more nearly
aligned with them. This done, Bradshaw declared the Tarai of
Saran to be occupied, and called on the inhabitants to submit to
the Company’s authority.
    Despite its immediate success, the wisdom of Bradshaw’s
tripartite advance was very dubious. His three advanced posts—
Parsa, Baragarhi and Samanpur—were widely separated; they had
no support, because the main army had been delayed and had not
yet even crossed the Ganges; and they were in continuous danger
of attack from enemy bands prowling in the jungle. By setting up
these positions at this stage in the campaign, he had exceeded the
letter of his instructions and had, furthermore, infringed a regu¬
lation of 1806, which decreed that field guns should always be
 detached in pairs. There was a single six-pounder with each of the
 detachments in advance. Nevertheless, he and the officers under
 his command were publicly congratulated by the Commander-in-
 Chief on their success.
     It was not long before the serious dangers of Bradshaw’s arrange¬
 ment became apparent. Early in December, Lieutenant Smith, in
 charge of the western post at Parsa, became positive that he was
 about to be attacked by a superior enemy force, and he hurriedly
 withdrew to join Hay. His arrival was timely, because on 7 Decem¬
 ber the pickets in front of Baragarhi were involved in a skirmish
 with the enemy, and three sepoys were killed. But as the main army
 was by then at last approaching the frontier, Bradshaw decided not
to abandon any of his positions. He made a march along the fron¬
 tier, re-deploying his force so that Captain Blackney was left in
 charge at Samanpur, Captain Hay at Baragarhi, and the post at
 Parsa re-established with a stronger force under Captain Sibley.
2l6             The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

Then he formally surrendered his military command to Marley
and turned southwards to meet the Major-General.
   Major Bradshaw in Saran and Major Roughsedge in Tirhut
having already deprived him of some 1,750 men, Marley’s army
was less than 5,000 strong when he finally left Dinapur. Of these
approximately 900 were Europeans, comprising artillerists and the
King’s 24th Regiment of Foot.2 To this army was assigned the
most important role in the Governor-General’s grand strategic
scheme. It was to seize the enemy capital and impose those terms
of submission which the Calcutta government had judged essential
for its own security. The route of its advance was left to Marley’s
discretion; but it would be an important object in his operations to
secure the three forts in the first range of hills which commanded
the principal passes to the plains—Hethaura, Hariharpur, and
Makwanpur.

The service now entrusted to you [wrote the Adjutant-General] is of a
peculiarly important nature. We are about to engage in hostilities with
a new power, whose insolence and aggression have defied us to arms.
The maintenance of the established renown of our country in Asia, the
future security of a vast proportion of our dominions, and the prevention
of future wars of a similar character will greatly depend on a speedy and
successful issue to the approaching contest. Of all the operations now in
progress against Nepal, none can more effectively contribute towards
bringing about such an issue than the accomplishment of the important
and honorable part assigned to you in the general plan.

   At first it was considered both impracticable and unnecessary to
send heavy battering ordnance with Marley’s column; but further
information representing the road to Makwanpur to be less difficult
than had been supposed and a prudent lesson being drawn, no
doubt, from events in the west, a siege train was ordered from
Cawnpore to Betiya. Marley was to use this if the need became
apparent after he had entered the hills.
   The supreme importance of his mission naturally caused
Hastings to follow Marley’s progress with special attention; but
this was not the only reason for his scrutiny. While it is true that his
choice of generals had been very limited, there nevertheless
remained in Calcutta a very eligible officer, whom Hastings
personally preferred to Marley but whom he had felt bound to pass

                    2 Later the South Wales Borderers.
               The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives             217

over because he was Marley’s junior and not on the general staff.
This was Major-General George Wood, known after forty-three
years’ prominent service in the east as ‘the Royal Bengal Tiger’.
His part in the capture of Java had been less conspicuous only than
Gillespie’s and had earned him a gold medal and the praise of the
Prince Regent. He was a much more impressive figure than Marley,
an obscure old general who had risen without drama or special
distinction, merely as a result of the inexorable workings of the
seniority system. Hastings was distinctly predisposed in Wood’s
favour. ‘Let me assure you that your character is too well known to
me for it to be possible that I should not have you in contemplation
when I look forward to Staff appointments’, he wrote to him in
November 1814.3 It seems certain that the principal command in
Nepal would have been given to Wood had the Governor-General
not been concerned to avoid an invidious supersession.
   But if Hastings was not the man to allow personal predilections
to outweigh the preference due to seniority, neither was he one of
those men whose concern to act with scrupulous fairness makes
them distrust even their own judgement where the object of their
prejudice is concerned. On the contrary, his sympathy for George
Wood made him eager to discover such lapses in Marley’s conduct
as might justify his replacement.
   As luck would have it, Marley’s army was detained at Dinapur
for two weeks beyond the date fixed for its departure. Its supply of
treasure was late in arriving at the rendezvous, and Marley did not
care to march until he had the means of paying his men. Hastings
chafed at the delay, complaining of Marley’s dawdling, and asked
George Wood to hold himself in readiness for immediate service.
‘Wherever you may be placed, I can assure you of my full depen¬
dence on you.’4 He obviously did not expect that it would be long
before an opportunity to dismiss Marley presented itself.
   Marley finally crossed the Ganges at the end of November,
aiming to move to Baragarhi, the central point in Bradshaw’s
advanced line of defences. To save time, the field guns, stores and
engineering equipment were sent directly to the western end of this
line, by way of Betiya, because it was Marley’s intention to enter
the hills with his main force through the Bichakori pass, which was

   3 Printed in Mrs. F. M. Montague, Memorials of the Family of Wood of
Largo. Both Marley and Wood were Company officers.
   4 Ibid.
2l8            The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

just in front of Parsa. The army arrived at the southern bank of the
Great Gandak on 6 December. Because the rains had been so late,
the river was still about ioo yards wider than normal, and even the
elephants could not ford it. As there were only seven or eight boats
at the ghat, getting the army across might have taken many days
had it not been for the ingenuity of the Field-Engineer, Captain
Tickell, and the co-operation of a local indigo planter, Mr. Moran.
With the help of large coils of rope, cast-iron weights, large slabs of
rock from the indigo factory vat and plenty of manpower—all
provided by Mr Moran—a long pier-head was constructed to join
a bridge laid over the boats and the whole force with all its baggage
and camp followers brought across the river in one and a half days.
By 19 December it was encamped at Lautan, two miles from the
forest and slightly west of Baragarhi.
   Marley was preoccupied as he approached the frontier. News of
the harassment of the advance posts convinced him that he must
enter the hills quickly; but at the same time he was very reluctant
to do this without the battering train, which would not arrive at
Betiya for over a week. The root of his predicament was Bradshaw’s
premature establishment of the line of frontier posts. Marley felt
that he had insufficient troops to reinforce them, and he would
rather have protected the Tarai by advancing into the hills with his
whole force and monopolizing the enemy’s attentions. Bradshaw,
however, having issued a proclamation to the border inhabitants
which pledged them British protection, was now unwilling to have
the posts withdrawn, and the Major-General was not resolute
enough to contradict an officer whom he had been specially in¬
structed to consult. He therefore silenced his misgivings, hoping
that the confident reports of the officers in advance were well
founded, and allowed the posts to remain as they were pending the
arrival of the battering train. They were to serve as bases for his
projected three columns of invasion. But after he had entered the
hills they were to be garrisoned by a levy of irregular militia.
   On 30 December, when the heavy ordnance had at length joined
the field train at Betiya and the whole of the artillery was preparing
to move forward to Parsa, news was received from Captain Sibley,
in charge of that post. He wrote that the enemy were gathered in
some force in his front and seemed to be meditating an attack. The
tone of Sibley’s note was almost casual, and apparently he did not
even request a reinforcement; but the Major-General’s suppressed
               The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives           219

apprehensions at once revived, and he immediately sent four
companies of sepoys to strengthen him. Under the command of
Major Greenstreet, they left camp at three o’clock in the morning
of 31 December.
   Henry Sibley was brave and very cocksure. He was so confident
of his ability to drub the Nepalis that when he received a note from
 Greenstreet on 31 December, informing him of the approach of the
reinforcement, he did not even bother to send a reply. Greenstreet,
who was as obtuse as Sibley was self-assured, consequently saw
no reason to hurry, and halted on the road for the night.
   Sibley’s force consisted of about 360 men, including fifty of
 Gardner’s Horse. Besides the six-pounder, he had a small one and
a half-pounder mountain gun. Finding the mud fort of Parsa too
small to accommodate all his men, he had neglected altogether to
use this, and taken up a position farther north. His camp was
spread along the western bank of a deep nulla. Serried sal forest
enclosed it to the front and left. No situation could have been more
manifestly perilous; yet Sibley had remained there for two weeks
without taking any measures to make it more defensible. No
trenches had been dug; no forest had been cleared. He had not even
posted look-out men in the trees. The enemy had excellent cover
to well within gunshot of the camp on both its northern and western
approaches. The advanced pickets, in fact, were merely a few yards
from the forest. The only precaution he had taken on the night of
31 December, when Lieutenant Smith warned him of an imminent
enemy attack, was to put all his men under arms. He was too busy
with New Year’s Eve celebrations to do more.
   What appeared to be myriads of Nepalis emerged from the
jungle half an hour before daybreak on 1 January. Officers later
swore that they had counted five battalions of regulars alone. There
were also numerous elephants mounted with jinjals (large match¬
locks on pivots, each throwing a two-pound ball). The main body
swept round the left flank and attacked the British rearguard, which
contained the officers’ tents, the magazine and the bazaar, but
which was protected only by the fifty irregular horsemen. These
were soon overpowered, and the enemy rushed among the tents
and grabbed the stores and ammunition. Simultaneously, other
parties attacked the advance guard and inserted themselves between
the right flank and the nulla. Smith was commanding the pickets in
front, which were pelted with an obliterating fire. He called up the
220             The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

 small gun, but the thing was of experimental design and the cart¬
 ridge shells proved too large for the barrel. Only a few rounds had
 been discharged before the gun was overturned and crippled by a
jinjal shot. Sibley, who had come forward to assess the situation,
 turned to hurry back to the main camp, which was being attacked
 from both flanks as well as from the rear, but he was wounded twice
 during his journey: first in the leg, and then much more seriously
 in the chest. He remained conscious, but incapable, and a sepoy
 ran forward to tell Smith that the command had devolved on him.
 On arriving back at the main camp, Smith found Lieutenant
 Matheson, the artillery officer, trying to clear the ground at the
 rear with the six-pounder. But the Nepalis remained inaccessible
 in the forest, and the shot merely ripped bark from the trees, while
 his own artillerists had no cover and were falling at an alarming
 rate. Seeing that the sepoys refused to advance and reoccupy the
 ground of the rearguard and that the pickets in front had been
 overpowered and were falling back on the main body, Smith
 decided that his only resource was to make a circle, and in this
 formation the force defended itself for another hour. The European
 artillerists and native lascars sweated courageously at the gun.
 Four Europeans of the detail were killed, and nine wounded.
 Matross William Levey was wounded twice, in the arm and leg;
 but he persevered until the priming pouch was blown from his side
 and he was forced to sit down, cramped with pain and weak from
 loss of blood. Matheson then seized the ramrod and the sponge
 staff and worked the gun himself, stoically assisted by a native
 lascar called Salari, whose hand and foot were lacerated. But after
 an hour all ammunition was spent, and with it all hope. Smith and
 Matheson, grimy with gunpowder, held a hurried discussion and
 agreed that they must withdraw to the old mud fort. Gun, baggage
 and stores were all abandoned. The Nepalis could have massacred
 the fugitives; but they were more intent on plunder. Sibley, who
 was still alive, had to be carried on the shoulders of four grenadiers.
 But there was no respite at the fort. It was full of Nepalis; and as a
 last resort, Smith ordered his men to retreat across the eastern
 watercourse. As the river was high and glacial, few of the enemy
 pursued and those of the British force who managed to swim to the
 eastern bank escaped. Smith himself could not swim, but two
 strong sepoys managed to bring him across. Sibley, like the rest of
 the helpless wounded, was abandoned. If his agonies were intense,
                 The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives               221

they cannot have been long, because the enemy gave no quarter.
   Early that morning, Major Greenstreet, ambling easily along the
route to Parsa, was startled to hear the sound of heavy firing. He
speeded his advance; but when within about three miles of the
scene of action the sight of a horde of drenched and bedraggled
survivors coming to meet him told him only too plainly that it
would do little good to hurry now. Officers who came up warned
him that his small force could do nothing against such a multitude,
so he halted to receive the survivors and gave up the idea of march¬
ing to Parsa. Casualties were reckoned at 121 killed, 134 wounded
and three missing.
   When he received Greenstreet’s report, Marley was shocked and
alarmed. His depot and artillery train were actually on their way
from Betiya to Parsa and unless swiftly intercepted might be
attacked by the enemy or even led straight into the captured post by
their unsuspecting officers. He wasted no time. Within a couple of
hours the whole of the main army was on its way eastwards. Before
he left Lautan the Major-General sent orders to Blackney, com¬
manding the western post at Samanpur, and to Major Roughsedge,
coming from Tirhut, to withdraw at once to Baragarhi.
   Then came a second blow. Two hours after leaving camp the
Major-General received a hurriedly scribbled dispatch from
Lieutenant Strettel, Blackney’s second-in-command. The detach¬
ment at Samanpur had been attacked and dispersed at five o’clock
that morning. Strettel reckoned that the enemy strength had been
2,000 men and twenty guns:


 Captain Blackney and all the officers of the wing did their utmost en¬
 deavours to bring our sepoys to the charge, which failed in every attempt
from the very destructive fire which opposed them. It is with the utmost
sorrow I am to mention, that after the action had continued about ten
minutes with equal ardour on each side, we were deprived of the assist¬
ance and directions of Captain Blackney and Lieutenant Duncan (who,
I fear, are both killed, having been very severely wounded and disabled).
On the fall of these two gallant officers, the sepoys became quite dis¬
pirited, and began to retire with some confusion upon which the enemy
advanced upon and destroyed our tents by fire. The village of [Saman¬
pur], in which was the commissariat depot, was burnt in the commence¬
ment of the action by the enemy. Finding that the detachment had
suffered most severely, added to the great numbers and strength of
the enemy, it was judged most prudent to retire; and as the enemy had
222             The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

taken possession of the road to Baragarhi, we directed our course to
[Ghorasahan], at which we have just arrived. I am unable to state the
exact loss of the detachments, as the stragglers are coming in every
minute.

    Apart from the two officers, no men were listed as dead; but of
 the seventy returned as missing it seems few escaped alive, for
 when John Shipp visited the site of the engagement over a year later
 the ground was strewn with skulls, bones and even whole skeletons.
    Assuming that the enemy had kept in reserve a force at least
 equal to each of those which had been detached to attack the out¬
 posts, Marley, Bradshaw and Lieutenant Joshua Pickersgill, the
 Surveyor, agreed that the number of Nepali troops between the
 British army and Kathmandu must be something near 13,000; and
 there were in addition reports of reinforcements on their way from
 Tirhut and from the west. Wondering how he could possibly
 overcome such a force with the means at his disposal, Marley
 continued towards the high road linking Betiya to Parsa, and
 encamped between the two places to await the guns. On 3 January
 he sent his light infantry and pioneers north to Parsa, to bury the
 dead and bring away any wounded who were still alive. The remains
 of Sibley, of the European gunners and of the native Christian
 drummers were recovered and brought back to the camp, where
they were buried with military honours. On the 4th reports were
received from Major Mason, conducting the artillery train from
 Betiya, that enemy parties were hovering around him, and Marley
quickly moved his force southwards to escort him for the rest of his
journey. Much to his relief, he met the artillery without incident
later the same day. On the 6th, the completed army moved forward
again, and encamped about one and a half miles south of Parsa.
    Hastings blamed no one but Marley for the calamities at Parsa
and Samanpur.

While he was delaying at Dinapur [he wrote to Colonel McMahon] the
country in his front was cleared for him by a successful attempt of
Major Bradshaw’s. Instead of profiting by the event and making rapid
movement forward, he sends in advance two weak detachments. He
stations them at forty miles asunder; and he leaves them without any
support within twenty five miles of either. He remains utterly inactive
in his retired camp for three weeks, during which term these two posts
continued under the enemy’s nose in the skirt of a forest without a work
                The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives                  223

of any kind to cover them. At length the enemy appeared to have been
shamed into the resolution of attacking these sacrificed parties.5

   This was very uncharitable. Hastings knew full well that the
advanced detachments had been stationed not by Marley but by
Bradshaw, during the time of his independent command, and he
omitted to state that the measure had received his own approval. He
told McMahon that the affair was ‘very vexatious, though nothing
more’, but the language in which he castigated Marley for it was
quite out of harmony with such a judgement. The Adjutant-
General was instructed to tell the Major-General:

Your reports . . . are in every point of view unsatisfactory. [They bear
the appearance] of your not estimating these occurrences as they really
affect the state and yourself. It seems at present as if you were not aware
of the heavy responsibility attaching upon you for the loss incurred; nor
do you intimate any sense of the mischievous consequences of this
triumph given to the enemy, so . . . that a hope may be entertained
of your striving instantly to counterbalance them by energetic effort.
    Of the imprudence of making these detachments at all (unless
suitably protected) no doubt exists in His Excellency’s mind; but the
the danger and [dis] advantage of extending and advancing them was
greatly increased by your remaining inactive in a position so remote and
from which no timely support could be given in the event of information
that the enemy meditated an attack . . .
    It was never the Commander-in-Chief’s intention, nor agreeable to
any of his instructions, that your force should be divided and dispersed
over the Tarai. The Corps under your orders had a specific destination
... A reserve follows you for the purpose of establishing posts, cover¬
ing your rear, and protecting communications. There is therefore no
call for . . . detachments. To an injudicious distribution His Excellency
primarily attributes the disasters which have befallen these two de¬
tachments.

   Scornful of the startling figures which had begun to appear in
Marley’s dispatches, Hastings warned him against overestimating
the enemy’s strength. The main army of the Gurkhas was known
to be fully engaged in the west, and they had had neither the time
nor the means to increase the force before Kathmandu. All this
was sound enough. In fact, the enemy troops operating on this part
of the frontier were probably not regulars at all. Both Parsa Ram
Thapa and Krishna Bahadur Rana, the instigator of the attacks on

              5 Printed in Aspinall, Letters of George IV, ii, p. 15.
224             The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives
Marley’s outposts, were subas (civilian revenue and judicial officers),
who normally had only local militia and police under their authority.
But the officers with Marley in the field remained unconvinced. To
make matters worse, troops and camp followers began to desert in
large numbers. The 1,000 militiamen raised by the Raja of Betiya
had to be dismissed for unreliability. The other Company zemindar
in the area, the Raja of Ramnagarh, refused to help, and became so
evasive that he was suspected of conniving with the enemy. The
Magistrate of Tirhut set out to raise 1,000 militiamen, but finally
had to report that he had managed to enlist only seven.
    The discouragements seemed unending, and Marley’s sense of
quandary bacame acute. It was clearly impossible for him to
protect the Tarai and to advance to Kathmandu while his force
remained so small. On Bradshaw’s advice, he put the issue to his
brigadiers. They both expressed the view that his army was
inadequate for the calls on its strength which an advance as far as
Kathmandu would entail. To protract the Tarai of Saran and
Tirhut; to guard the grand depot at Betiya; to form smaller ones at
Hethaura, Hariharpur and Makwanpur; and to furnish convoys for
lines of communication would, they conceived, require all the
4,000 effective troops at his command even before provision was
made for an advance from Makwanpur to the enemy capital. His
own convictions thus fortified by their concurrence, Marley
abandoned all intention of advancing beyond Makwanpur during
the present season. He then withdrew his camp to Binjara Pokhra,
fifteen miles south-west of Parsa, so as to be nearer his depot until
reinforcements arrived. To lighten the artillery and commissariat
departments considerable quantities of shot and engineering
materials were sent to be lodged at Betiya; and as a measure of
economy all the coolies of the engineering department, whose
services would only have been required in the hills beyond Mak¬
wanpur, were dismissed and replaced by bullocks.
    The Major-General’s change of plan cost him much misgiving,
despite the support which the opinion of his brigadiers afforded;
but events of the subsequent weeks, before Hastings’s response was
known, must have satisfied him that had it been well founded. After
Major Roughsedge had joined the main army in Saran, when there
was not a single sepoy of the line in the whole of Tirhut, the
Magistrate received a report from his frontier police that four
Nepali regiments had arrived at Janakpur—the post in the Tarai
               The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives            225

which Roughsedge had evacuated. Mr. Sealy trembled, and pre¬
pared to meet his doom. At his entreaty, Marley ordered Colonel
Gregory, who was at Dinapur gathering reinforcements for the
main army, to take an infantry battalion and two six-pounders into
Tirhut. Owing to desertion among his bearers and to the difficult
country (‘no regular roads and nothing but rice fields’) the forty-
mile journey to Muzafferpur, the civil station of Tirhut, took him
almost ten days. Sealy, meanwhile, became almost hysterical. Every
day brought fresh news of villages being pillaged and terrorized;
and his thanadars reported the strength of the Gurkha border force
first at 8,000, then 10,000. He made no attempt to assess the truth
of these accounts, which Gregory quickly realized were highly
exaggerated. There was indeed a Nepali force at Janakpur, which
he estimated at 5,000 or 6,000 men; but the frontier disturbances
were traceable to the activities of bands of five or six people, who
burnt villages and stole cattle. Even these incidents Gregory was
inclined to attribute to the zemindars themselves, who, he knew,
were not averse to destroying their own villages in time of war in
order to get their rent assessments reduced. Sealy disputed this;
but there is no doubt that the alarms derived more from instances
of banditry in one form or another than from acts of war. The Tarai
jungles were infested with fugitives from justice who took advan¬
tage of the general disruption to rustle and plunder. Even in the
district of Saran, where the main British army was encamped, the
 Magistrate received daily accounts from his thanadars of villages
 being fired and cattle driven off; and here the problem was compli¬
 cated by a moral obligation towards the inhabitants, who had been
 promised the protection of the Company’s government. The
criminals and vagrants in its lowland territories were thus proving a
valuable additional resource to the Gurkha government. Their
activities were a harassing distraction to the main British army and
 they confused the attempts of British commanders to estimate the
strength of their enemy. ‘It is confidently asserted, and may readily
be believed’, Bradshaw told Headquarters, ‘that many of the
inhabitants of the lowlands joined in the attack on our troops at
 Parsa.’ It was undoubtedly the presence of these uncounted super¬
numeraries which created the impression of such a swollen enemy
force on this and other occasions. It should not be overlooked that
the collapse of law and order on the frontier was hastened by the
 Company’s own subjects and servants, who made private reprisals
226            The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

against depredators from across the border. Cases were reported of
thanadars having applied to indigo-planters for armed men to
repulse marauders and conduct retaliatory excursions into the
enemy’s territory.
   Marley, still hoping that he would be able to march as far as
Makwanpur that season, worked hard to raise a corps of 2,000
militiamen, so that his regular troops might be relieved of the police
duties which were at present detaining them at Betiya and on the
frontier; but by the end of the third week in January not a single
recruit had enlisted. He was therefore glad to take up the offer of
Mr. McEntee, a local indigo planter, to raise 1,000 irregular
infantrymen, and advanced him money for the purpose. The offer
of Mr. Cracroft, an attorney of Ghazipur, to furnish a body of horse
and foot was also accepted; and the Resident at Lucknow, the
Agent at Benares and William Moorcroft were all asked to recruit
men. These expedients were also frustrated. Mr. Elliot, the
Magistrate of Saran, strongly objected to Marley’s unorthodox
measures and reported them to the government. Calcutta then
censured Marley for employing such unsuitable agents as indigo-
planters. The troops supplied by private individuals were ordered
to be dismissed forthwith and the Collector of Bihar was instructed
not to honour, for the time being, drafts on his treasury issued by
Mr. Moorcroft.
   But these were matters for the attention of Bennet Marley’s
successor. When Hastings heard of the Major-General’s conference
with his brigadiers, and of his resolution not to advance to Kath¬
mandu, his patience was exhausted and he reckoned that he had
more than sufficient justification for replacing him by George Wood.
He complained to McMahon that Marley had countenanced ‘every
childish rumour about myriads of regular troops opposed to him’
and ‘terrified his officers (who supposed him to have correct
information) by the exhibition of his own alarms.’ Marley was
directed to surrender his charge to George Wood and then proceed
to Berhampur, to assume the command at that station and of such
troops as it might be deemed advisable to assemble there in reserve
for future objects. George Wood was at the same time appointed to
the staff of the Bengal army. Elaborating the reasons for his dis¬
missal, Hastings accused Marley of disobeying his instructions. It
had never been intended that his force should protect the Tarai.
The risk of enemy incursions had been appreciated and advisedly
                The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives              227

 incurred, in the hope that the advance to Kathmandu would dis¬
 tract the Gurkhas from such enterprise. For any consequences
 resulting from the insufficiency of his force Marley himself would
 not have been held responsible. The present commotion and
 paralysis derived from his initial blunder of distributing his force in
 weak and unsupported detachments. As for delaying to await the
junction of the heavy artillery, this had never been authorized. His
 army had been furnished with special portable light artillery with
 the express purpose of expediting its march to Kathmandu. The
 battering train had been provided only as a reserve to be called on
 in case of proven need. Subsequent investigation revealed a further
 lapse of Marley’s. It transpired that during the period between his
 assumption of the command and the repulses at Parsa and Saman-
 pur, the Major-General had never once inspected his division or
 seen any corps of it under arms.
    Marley was numbed by the news of his disgrace, and made
 absolutely no attempt to defend himself. Appalled by the prospect
 of public humiliation, his only wish was to go away and hide. He
 told nobody about his dismissal; but rumours began to circulate
 the camp, and soon the wretched officer could hardly bring himself
to show his face. On the morning of 10 February, his second-in-
command, Lieutenant-Colonel Dick, was astonished to learn that
the Major-General was not to be found and had left no indication
why or whither he had gone. He had issued only the briefest
morning order, directing that all reports of the camp were to be
made to Dick until further notice, and the Colonel could only
suppose that he had absconded, in a moment of mental abstraction.
What had in fact happened was that Marley’s sense of humiliation
had finally become too much for him. Hearing of the approach of
George Wood, he had slipped secretly out of camp with the inten¬
tion of meeting his successor at Betiya and surrendering his com¬
mand as surreptitiously as possible. Hastings was flabbergasted, and
very nettled, by the news of Marley’s extraordinary behaviour. He
was not persuaded that the Major-General was insane; but he did
not doubt that he was inexcusably insubordinate and criminally
irresponsible. Marley was removed from the general staff in Bengal,
where Ochterlony was appointed in his place; and at the same time
the station of Berhampur, to which he was banished and which,
being so near to Calcutta, was in the nature of a sinecure, was
annexed to the Presidency command and declared to be no longer
228             The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

the headquarters of a general staff officer. By these two measures
Hastings intended to

apprize all officers who may hereafter hope to attain [general] rank and
the honorable distinction of the Staff, that it [was] not altogether a
reward for length of service to be enjoyed in ease and inactivity . . .
The liberal policy of the Court of Directors has not overlooked the
claims of unemployed officers who are no longer capable of fulfilling the
active functions of command. But the General Staff has high and ardu¬
ous duties annexed to it, which must be faithfully and zealously dis¬
charged . . . The Commander-in-Chief will proceed to take into his
earliest consideration the further course of military procedure which it
may be necessary to pursue in the case of Major-General Marley.

   No further measures were in fact taken. Marley’s mansuetude
prevented his ever attempting to exonerate himself publicly; but he
wrote privately to Hastings, earnestly assuring him that his
behaviour had been dictated not by contempt of authority but only
by a sense of acute embarrassment. Hastings, while he had perhaps
been indecorously eager to publicize the justification of his own
conduct towards Marley, was not by nature vindictive; and as
Marley’s explanation implicitly admitted that justification, he
professed himself satisfied with it and decided that the Major-
General had already suffered punishment enough. Marley was
never again employed either on active service or on the general
staff; but he remained on the army active list as commandant first
at Berhampur and then at Allahabad. Assured of a comfortable
obscurity by the tender mercies of the seniority system, he was
promoted lieutenant-general in 1821, and full general in 1838. He
was then eighty-five years old.
   Marley’s was not the only head to roll. Shortly after his dis¬
missal the timorous and credulous Mr. Sealy was relieved of his
post because of his palpable ‘unfitness for the charge of a frontier
district in time of war’.

Major-General John Sulivan Wood6 had been directed to advance
through the district of Gorakhpur, along a route about eighty miles
west of Marley’s. He was to quit Gorakhpur town, his rendezvous,
as soon as possible after 15 November and re-establish the Com¬
pany’s authority in the disputed frontier departments of Siuraj and

                      6 No relation to George Wood.
               The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives              229

Butwal. He was then to attempt to force or turn the Butwal pass
and, should he succeed in entering the hills, to march to Tansing,
the military station in Palpa province which had served as General
Amar Thapa’s headquarters. A full-scale invasion of the provinces
of Palpa and Gurkha was not expected of him, because his resources
(he had some 3,700 men and a few pieces of light artillery) were
recognized to be inadequate for the penetration of such difficult
country. His main objects were to create a diversion in favour of the
army bound for Kathmandu and to help constrict the Gurkhas’
channel of communication with their armies in the west.
   John Wood was a King’s cavalry officer. He was a pleasant man
to have dealings with: modest and urbane. As a commander, his
flair was for administration, and his weakness the usual concomitant
of an over-fastidious mind—a lack of imagination. He was delayed
at Benares until the middle of November while the commissariat
searched for coolies for the public stores, and company com¬
manders, whose responsibility it still was at this time, struggled to
collect sufficient bearers for the doolies (hospital stretchers). Mean¬
while, the Nepalis took the initiative and made menacing movements
along the frontier of Gorakhpur, causing great commotion among
the population. To stay the alarm, the Major-General ordered
Captain Heathcote, who with five companies of sepoys had gone on
to Gorakhpur in advance of the main force, to proceed northwards
to Lotan, a village in the Tarai south of the Butwal pass. He found
the going very heavy. While Saran, across the Gandak river to the
east, was one of the most intensively cultivated and prosperous
districts in the Company’s dominions, Gorakhpur was one of the
most wild and desolate. The whole area north of the district
capital was a malarial wasteland of swamp and jungle. The frontier
was lost in a wilderness of elephant grass and forest, which extended
from the foot of the hills to within 300 yards of the sepoy canton¬
ments of Gorakhpur town itself. At this time of the year, wide
expanses of the country were waterlogged, and Heathcote had to
make long detours.
   Wood, with that part of his force which had been stationed at
Benares, arrived at Gorakhpur on 15 November. Here he was
joined by the King’s 17th Regiment of Foot,7 from Ghazipur,
and a troop of the 8th Native Cavalry, from Partabgarh. A certain

                   7 Later the Leicestershire Regiment.
230            The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

delay was inevitable, because a lack of bearers meant that the stores
and ammunition had to be transported from Benares by cattle;
but John Wood was fanatically meticulous, and his insistence on
having all his arrangements completed to the most intricate detail
before moving increased the length of his stay at Gorakhpur from
the expected week to a whole month. The inadequacies of his
commissariat stimulated no talent for improvisation. Never was
there a more helpless victim of the military system of supply, whose
slow and ponderous machinery required weeks of precious time to
complete the preparations which he regarded as the sine qua non of
any military enterprise. He dallied for porters, even though he
already had 1,000 by the end of November, and notwithstanding
the Magistrate’s assurance that a further 2,000 would be available
once he had occupied the Tarai. In any case, porters would not be
required until the army had actually entered the hills. By the end
of the first week in December he had collected nearly 2,000, the
medical authorities were satisfied that the climate of the Tarai was
now safe and some 350 carts had arrived from Allahabad; but even
then he did not move. He decided he must wait for the fifty
elephants and five companies of infantry promised by the Nawab of
Oudh, and was still dissatisfied with the state of his consignment
of warm clothing. Only 2,300 woollen waistcoats and pairs of
pantaloons had arrived and, as he disliked the idea of partial distri¬
bution, he set his commissariat to work to make good the deficiency.
These, again, would be of no use at all until the troops had entered
the hills. He assured the Adjutant-General that he was making the
utmost effort to advance as quickly as possible, but explained that
if he did not ensure that his arrangements were complete before
leaving Gorakhpur he would only have to wait at the foot of the
hills, consuming supplies which could not easily be replaced. It was
typical of his thinking that the possibility of a problem concerning
supplies outweighed the certainty of military advantage. By
14 December the native infantry from Oudh had at last joined; but
the Major-General would have delayed even then, for the elephants,
for more porters and for his chief surgeon, had he not received an
urgent dispatch from Captain Heathcote.
   This informed him that a force of Nepalis, estimated at 8,000,
had come down in advance of Lotan and was preparing an attack
for the night of 16 December. It left the Major-General no choice:
he was compelled to act. A reinforcement w'as sent to Heathcote,
               The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives            231

and the rest of the army followed on the 15th. As it happened, there
was no attack; so, instead of resuming his march, Wood waited at
Lotan, which was still thirty miles from Butwal, for the bullocks
with the commissariat and stores. They arrived on the fourth day,
when Wood announced that he would move forward again—but
slowly, so that the pace of the bullocks would be accommodated
and the elephants on their way from Lucknow not be left too far
behind. He took ten days over the journey to Siura, a distance of
no more than thirty miles. Wood also had intended to establish
three posts to protect the Tarai: Palli, in Butwal department, to his
right; Lotan to his front; and Mynari, in Siuraj department, to his
left. But these positions too were far-flung, covering a fifty-mile
extent of frontier, and for this reason he had decided not to occupy
them until his main force was menacing the foothill passes and
engrossing the enemy’s attention. When he left Lotan, he had sent
Lieutenant Anderson to the west, with a force of about 700, to seize
the ruined fort of Mynari; but on reflection it had seemed that his
remaining force—twenty-six companies and a few guns—was
insufficient to enable him to garrison Palli as well. Instead of
sending a detachment to the east, he had therefore written to
Bradshaw, asking him to send a force across the Gandak for that
purpose. This now left all his remaining resources available for a
concentrated attack on the Butwal pass.
   The old and derelict town of Butwal was situated on the west
bank of the Tenavi river, whose defile formed a passage for the
main route to Palpa from the plains. The pass itself was protected
by the fort of Niakot, which overlooked it from the heights a few
miles north-west of the town. Originally, Wood had planned to
besiege the fort by ascending the hills to its right and moving along
successive peaks to attack from the west; but now he revised his
tactics on the advice of his principal informant, a brahmin called
Kanaka Nidhi Tewari. This man was a member of the family who
had served as counsellors to the old rajas of Palpa, and he had been
recommended to Wood by Francis Hamilton, whom he had
assisted in the researches for his book on Nepal. Kanaka Nidhi said
that the country to the west of Niakot was too inaccessible to make
the Major-General’s plan practicable, and that in any case there
was no water outside the fort within a radius of three miles. He
suggested that the force should instead turn the Butwal pass by
advancing into the hills by a less known route to the east, occupy
232            The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

Palpa, and then attack Niakot from the rear. Struck by the ingen¬
uity of this idea, John Wood determined to adopt it and submitted
trustingly to the guidance of the brahmin. Kanaka Nidhi then
explained that there was a Nepali post at a place called Jitgarh,
which was at the southern foot of Niakot hill. It might perhaps be
more advisable to reconnoitre and attack this place from the plains
before moving round to take the main fort from behind. He
assured the Major-General that it was only a redoubt and would
give little difficulty, being in an exposed position at the far end of
some 700 yards of clearing in the forest.
   Wood acquiesced without hesitation and on 3 January moved
northwards with the greater part of his army, leaving only five
companies and a gun to protect the camp at Siura. For a few miles
the march was along the eastern bank of the Tenavi. Just below
Butwal the army crossed the river and struck westwards through
thickets and jungle grasses on a route parallel to the skirt of the
hills. About two miles past the river a party under Major Comyn
turned right, climbed over the tumbled folds of the lower foothills
and made to turn the left flank of the post at Jitgarh. Wood and the
rest of the force continued westwards for another three miles, and
then turned into the glaucous recesses of the sal forest, which grew
thick where the foothills curved away to form an extensive bay.
Kanaka Nidhi directed the way forward for about two miles. The
march was very poorly organized. No light infantry flanking or
preceding parties were detached, with the consequence that the
General and the three companies of the advance guard were
startled to find themselves suddenly in a narrow glade, at the far
end of which, only fifty paces ahead, was a kind of wall, made of
large loose stones and almost concealed by grasses and creeper.
Wood was nonplussed. Immediately behind the structure the hills
rose up, crowned by the fort of Niakot, so it was impossible to go
farther; but the nature and location of the edifice ahead gave it no
resemblance to the one which had been described to him. He
summoned Kanaka Nidhi; but the brahmin, foolishly left un¬
guarded, had vanished, and was nowhere to be found. There was
no sign of life ahead; but the disappearance of his guide made the
commander uneasy. He sent forward Ensign Stephens of the
engineers with a small party to reconnoitre. Stephens was soon
convinced that the place was empty, and was on the point of order¬
ing his men to enter when there was a sudden familiar sound, as of
                The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives              233

green wood split by burning. One or two men fell, but most of
Stephens’s party scrambled back to the body of the advance guard
unhurt, because the enemy were aiming too high. John Wood was
very cool and courageous. He marshalled the vanguard into forma¬
tion, and ordered them to return the fire until the rest of the column
and the guns should arrive. They fought at a great disadvantage.
They were fully exposed, while the Nepalis were concealed by the
jungle. Only occasional glimpses could be had of the enemy as they
sidled round the flanks of the detachment. Bullets, fortunately
badly aimed, sped in every direction. Wood himself was bruised on
the chest by a ricocheting ball.
    When the head of the main body came up, led by H.M. 17th,
they approached the redoubt boldly, while the grenadier and two
battalion companies of the 17th struck out to the right of it,
herding enemy snipers before them up the steep flanking slopes of
the bay. Captain Croker, who headed this group, killed Suraj
Thapa, a Gurkha chief, in personal combat. His men successfully
established themselves on the slopes in a position commanding the
 redoubt, which was meanwhile flushed of its inmates by Europeans
and sepoys. All the officers and men realized that the Nepalis had
lost their initial advantage, and they were confident of victory. But
Wood was not happy. He could conceive success only in the terms
 of his own preconception. The sharp contrast between the Nepali
 post as he had envisaged it and as it really was, added to the un¬
 explained elopement of Kanaka Nidhi, had disconcerted him
 and disposed him to expect failure, for victory in his philosophy
was the fruit of carefully laid plans and the reward of accurately
 anticipating eventualities. He had no notion of improvised success.
 He turned helplessly to Colonel Hardyman and asked him what
was to be done; and when Hardyman replied ‘Support Captain
 Croker, or withdraw him’, he took the line of least resistance and
ordered a general retreat, convinced that this was the only way to
avoid a ‘fruitless waste of lives’. In fact the position could have been
 held and even advanced—perhaps as far as Niakot itself, which
 Major Comyn had successfully approached by the eastern flank.
As it was, the retreat caused great danger and confusion. Most of
the porters threw down their loads and fled, and the ammunition
boxes had to be brought away by the soldiers. Even so the British
casualties were only 119, of whom nineteen were killed, while it was
calculated that the enemy had lost at least 500 killed and wounded.
234            The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

But the Major-General’s inopportune withdrawal gave the Nepalis
the feelings of vanquishers. When Vazir Singh, the Gurkha com¬
mander, was later applied to for the dead and wounded, he replied
in the insolent tone of a conqueror. ‘I have issued orders to the
troops of this victorious state not to molest your wounded men . . .
any attempt to commit unjust aggression on this powerful state
will be severely punished by its gallant army.’
   Despite his assurance, many of the corpses brought into camp
had been shockingly mutilated. The fate of Kanaka Nidhi remained
unknown. ‘If he is with the enemy, I can have no doubt of his
treachery’, wrote Wood, with exquisite inanity.
   John Wood retreated first to Surajpur, a few miles south of
Jitgarh; and then, when the water there had become contaminated,
marched east, back to Lotan, where he arrived on 20 January. He
was now firmly convinced that the Butwal pass was too strongly
guarded to be penetrated by the troops at his disposal. Some
reports represented the enemy force protecting it to be 16,000
strong, and he was gullible enough to allow such estimates to
discourage him. Expectations of assistance from the exiled pre¬
tender to the throne of Palpa had, furthermore, ended in dis¬
appointment. It had become plain that he and his entourage had
been too long from the hills and had too little notion of the precise
sort of information required by military officers, to be of any use;
while the royal family’s erstwhile subjects were too awed by fear of
Gurkha vengeance to rebel spontaneously. His original intentions
completely upset by these frustrations, Wood tried to think of
something else to do. He heard that the passes farther to his left—
especially those west of Tulsipur, which debouched into the
dominions of the Nawab of Oudh—were less carefully protected
by the Gurkhas. He therefore decided to march to Tulsipur, by
way of the department of Siuraj. Such a move could fulfil more
than one purpose. The inhabitants of the western frontier of
Gorakhpur were unsettled and affrighted, because Lieutenant
Anderson’s party had been recalled from Mynari (following
reports that 3,000 Nepalis were about to attack it) and the reappear¬
ance of a British force would restore calm. It would also be possible
to prevent the cultivation of the Tarai in that quarter, thus depriv¬
ing the enemy of resources for a second campaign. The Tharus
could be removed from the frontier and resettled in the waste areas
of the Company’s territory in Gorakhpur. Depopulation would
               The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives              235
hinder cultivation and would, besides, arrest the illicit trade in arms
and military stores which was known to be conducted between
northern Oudh and Nepal. These suggestions were approved at
Headquarters and orders were issued that the rest of the 8th
Native Cavalry should be sent from Partabgarh to Wood’s camp,
to assist their implementation; but despairing of ever seeing him
accomplish that urgent punch into the enemy’s flank which had
been his assignment, Hastings had already resolved that the
Major-General must be removed as soon as an opportunity arose
—under the pretence of entrusting him with another command, if
possible.
   As John Wood prepared for his march to the west with his usual
time-consuming fastidiousness, taking a week to complete arrange¬
ments for having his wounded sent to Gorakhpur, it began to dawn
on him that he was being surrounded. No longer held in check by
his presence before Butwal, the enemy had begun to move down on
both his flanks. On his right, they were intruding from the north¬
east corner of Gorakhpur. There were no troops to hinder them,
because Marley, his division already overworked, had been
unable to spare men to garrison Palli. By the end of the first week in
January reports had arrived from the police at Palli of Nepali
incursions and looting; and before long similar dispatches were
coming in from Nichlaul, farther south. Martin, the Magistrate of
Gorakhpur, told Wood that if he moved westwards as planned, the
enemy might well march in from the east and attack Gorakhpur
town itself. Eight hundred of them, with two guns, were said to
have arrived at Nichlaul. This was only forty miles north east of
the district capital, where there were only 435 sepoys and three
officers.
   Simultaneously came alarming reports of Nepali intrusions on
his left. Colonel Baillie, Resident at Lucknow, sent word that the
enemy had occupied the passes in front of Tulsipur and were
threatening to overrun the plains. There was an additional cause of
apprehension in this quarter, because the allegiance of the Tulsipur
Raja himself seemed uncertain. He had from the start shown little
enthusiasm for the Company’s cause, and even the promise that he
would be restored to his old hill possession of Dang if he contributed
to its success had failed to dissipate his scepticism. In his opinion
the strength of European armies lay in their artillery and cavalry,
and these arms, he predicted, it would be impossible to convey
236            The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

across the ‘thick jungles, deep ravines and stupendous torrents’ of
Nepal. He had so far failed to respond to Wood’s repeated appeals
for a diversion in his quarter and had not even bothered to reply
when Lieutenant Anderson, before quitting Mynari, had asked him
for assistance. The Nawab of Oudh sent his vassal a sharp admoni¬
tion; but meanwhile the Nepalis set about destroying the frontier
posts in Siuraj and menaced the whole area north west of the
British army with invasion.
    Threatened from the front and from both flanks, John Wood’s
first concern was for the safety of Gorakhpur town, and he sent
1,200 men to reinforce the garrison there. But he could not decide
what he should do next. To move westwards would expose the
district capital to attack; to stay at Lotan and allow the enemy to
plunder with impunity seemed equally ill-advised. Completely
nonplussed, he appealed to Headquarters for fresh instructions to
match his ‘new and embarrassing situation’. Meanwhile, he
resolved to make one of his favourite creeping marchs towards
Bansi, twenty-five miles west, in the hope that he would receive the
Commander-in-Chief’s directions on the way.
   Hastings’s annoyance at this fecklessness was acute. In a very
frosty dispatch, he made it clear that when the government
entrusted an officer with a distant command, it did not expect to
have to spell out instructions for every eventuality, but counted on
that officer’s own resourcefulness. In his view, all present embarrass¬
ments sprang from the Major-General’s having allowed himself to
be delayed for trivial reasons at the outset. He had thereby lost the
initiative on which the whole success of the general strategic plan
depended. He was told that his primary concern now must be the
safety of Gorakhpur town. If he remained at Lotan, he was to
organize the force in the capital into a mobile column able to strike
at the enemy marauding parties—for although the Nepalis may
well have had an appreciable force in his front, the demonstrations
on his flanks were assuredly the work of small detachments intent
on propagating an exaggerated idea of their own strength. If he
advanced to the hills, he was to leave a strong force for the pro¬
tection of Gorakhpur. But as Hastings had no real hope that the
latter was the course which the Major-General would adopt, he
instructed him to send the King’s 17th Regiment into Saran
forthwith, where George Wood would have better use for it.
   John Wood left Lotan on 28 January and arrived at Bansi,
               The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives           237

twenty-five miles to the west, on 3 February—having covered, on
an average, between three and four miles a day. While he was at
Bansi further troubling reports arrived from the east, where the
town and thana of Nichlaul had been sacked. Then a torrential rain
set in. It continued for several days, and so swelled the nullas and
flooded the country that Wood declared that it would be impossible
for him to move again until several days after it had ceased.
   The weather cleared; but then more time passed while he waited
for the 8th Native Cavalry, moving up from Partabgarh, and for
reinforcements called from Lotan and Gorakhpur. It was not until
 17 February that he finally struck camp. The old fort of Mynari
was only twenty-five miles to the north, but it took Wood no less
than twelve days to arrive there. Once in Siuraj, he began to
devastate the country, destroying the crops on the ground and
inciting the camp followers to pillage the hamlets, which had been
evacuated on his advance. Within twelve days he had razed some
two hundred villages and burnt immense stores of grain. Meanwhile
measures were taken to re-settle, in the more southerly areas of
Gorakhpur, the wretched Tharus who were deprived of their lands
and homes by this odious but essential operation.
    In the second week of March it became known that ill health
among his men had compelled Vazir Singh, the local Gurkha
commander, to retire from Niakot with six companies of his force
and station them in the higher and cooler regions of Palpa. The
news inspired Wood to contemplate another attempt on the
Butwal pass. There were of course long delays before the thought
was translated into action. He dallied first for Captain Robertson’s
force from Balrampur, and then for the contingent of Gardner’s
Horse which had been put at his disposal in place of the 8th Native
Cavalry (now also sent into Saran). He found that he could not quit
Siuraj until Gardner’s Horse had arrived there, because, having
inflicted havoc on the Gurkha territories in the area, it was neces¬
sary to leave cavalry to protect the Company’s subjects from enemy
reprisals. Unforeseen circumstances delayed the departure of
Gardner’s Horse from Cawnpore (their commander complained
that when he joined them they were in a state of virtual mutiny)
and they did not arrive on the frontier until 4 April. Even then
they proved totally unsuited for their duties, because instead of
allaying local panic they inflamed it by ransacking and looting
themselves.
238            The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

    Wood did not arrive back at Lotan until 6 April. By then the
healthy season was waning fast and the weather had become
dangerously sultry. Yet still no sense of urgency spurred the amb¬
ling General’s progress. He dithered at Lotan for three days and
then, with twenty-four companies of infantry and 200 irregular
horsemen, trudged north up the east bank of the Tenavi river. Now
hindered by heavy artillery—he had two eighteen-pounders, sent
from Gorakhpur, as well as four light pieces—he managed to cover
only four miles a day. On the morning of 17 April, having suffered
no molestation, despite the thickly wooded country, he arrived at a
position on the river bank directly opposite Butwal town. There
was some sporadic firing from one or two guns in Butwal, but these
were soon silenced and it appeared that the town had been
abandoned. Some carcasses were thrown, but these failing to set
the town on fire Wood ordered a party of light infantry to cross the
Tenavi and enter the place. They had waded half-way when
renewed musketry fire from the town’s defences wounded a few
men and forced the others to withdraw. Wood’s big guns gave
short shrift to the Nepali sharpshooters, while his men still held
their musket fire in reserve; but closer inspection had revived and
confirmed the Major-General’s conviction that the pass was impreg¬
nable. He therefore decided that his object had not, after all, been
to force an entry to the hills, but merely to make a demonstration.
Having thus retrospectively modified his intention to match his
accomplishment, he called off the troops, limbered the guns and
marched back to Siura, congratulating himself upon a success.
    He lingered on the frontier for a few more weeks, but passed the
time planning the distribution of his army for the monsoon.
Hastings contained his displeasure, because he appreciated that by
making Wood’s instructions so imprecise he had disarmed himself
in advance for the eventuality of the Major-General’s incom¬
petence. If Wood had abused the spirit of his orders, he could
nevertheless claim that he had created that diversion which had
been prescribed as the guiding principle of his operations. Hastings
had been reluctant to shackle any of his generals with fussy direc¬
tions, only to discover to his cost that to allow latitude for initative
is to risk that it will, with impunity, be used for ineptitude. Wood
combined a mania for method with such a lack of imagination that,
after having spent weeks perfecting arrangements which could
only have been of use in the mountains, he adhered slavishly to the
                 The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives                    239

letter of his instructions and never really made a serious effort to
leave the plains.8

While John Wood crawled aimlessly up and down the frontier of
Gorakhpur, to his right, across the river Gandak, in Saran, the
main division of the army lay waiting at Binjara Pokhra for its new
commander, Major-General George Wood. The area around the
camp was by now a scene of absolute desolation. Independently of
the depredations of the enemy, the presence of the British army of
5,000 and the attendant public servants and camp followers who
swelled the total to nearly four times that number had been
sufficient to lay waste the surrounding country over a considerable
area. All the local inhabitants had fled and the deserted villages been
torn down and used for firewood.
   The new Major-General arrived at Binjara Pokhra on 21
February. He found the troops in good heart. Their appetite for
action had been whetted by an exciting altercation with the enemy
only the day before, at the village of Pirari, seven miles north. Five
or six hundred Nepalis had attacked a reconnoitring party under
Surveyor Pickersgill, only to find themselves routed by an oppor¬
tune reinforcement from Binjara Pokhra. Almost 100 had been
killed and wounded, at the cost of only eighteen British casualites.
    George Wood was a bilious old officer, known as ‘the Tiger’ as
much because of his growling and swearing as because of his
courage. He abhorred risking his reputation, which he hoarded like
a miser. When he examined Hastings’s instructions, he at once
smelt a rat. The Governor-General apparently required him not
only to undertake a dangerous assignment, but also to bear the
blame for any failure. Hastings had made it quite clear that Wood
had been appointed in order to resume active operations; but his
official instructions were very vague. Pointing out that the malarial
season was expected to begin in the first weeks of April, the
Adjutant-General merely suggested that an advance as far as
Makwanpur might still be attempted. The final form of his opera¬
tions was left to Wood’s own discretion. To the Major-General,
     8 Wood was not again employed on active service, but this was probably no
more than the inevitable consequence of his returning to Europe soon after the
Nepal campaign, where the British army fought no wars in the remainder of his
lifetime. There is no evidence that he had forfeited the confidence of the Horse
Guards. He was promoted in lieutenant-general in 1819, and full general in
1836. When he died in 1851 he was Governor of the Tower of London.
240             The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

this seemed to imply that if he did advance and his army was in
consequence decimated by disease, his judgement would be pro¬
nounced faulty and himself be held responsible. Imputing his own
cunning in matters concerning reputation to the Governor-General,
he concluded that Hastings had advisedly made the instructions
imprecise in order to insure himself against culpability in the event
of failure. He immediately dropped any idea of taking his division
into Nepal. He told the Adjutant-General that he could not
advance. His discretion warned him that it was too late in the season
to do so without endangering the health of his army. Instead, he
said, he would devote his attention to expelling the enemy from
their advanced positions on the plain.
   Hastings seethed with indignation when he heard of this
‘unfortunate and extraordinary decision’. Here was an officer who,
having obviously been appointed in order to resume active opera¬
tions and possessing the ‘apparent means of inducing the enemy to
submission in a month’, was calmly prepared to subject the Company
to the expense of six more months of inactivity and to afford the
enemy time to strengthen their defences. Wood was sent a very
angry rebuke, and left in no doubt that he would not be commanding
the division in the campaign of the following season.
   The Major-General thereupon lost his temper, and retorted
that invasion had not been specifically enjoined because it was
desired that all the blame for any failure should accrue only to
himself. He was in effect accusing the Governor-General of moral
cowardice and hypocrisy, and even the Bengal Tiger, when his
passion had subsided, realized that this was going too far. Hastily, he
wrote a private letter of apology to Hastings, asking that his indis¬
cretions be forgiven and forgotten. But this letter which, far from
evincing contrition, invoked the Governor-General’s ‘undeserved
imputations’ as the cause of his ill temper, instead of mollifying
Hastings, made him furious. He disdained to be offended by insults
whose vulgarity was now apparent even to their author; but he ful¬
minated against the idea that his original imputations had been un¬
deserved. He was so incensed that he waived protocol, sending Wood
a reply over his own signature instead of the Adjutant-General’s:
I had with great pain to myself been constrained to subject Major-
General Marley to the disgrace of a removal from the command of the
Saran Division . . . That fact alone was sufficient to point out to his
successor that energy was expected and required of him. You were the
                The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives                241

person selected by me for the command; and when you were substituted
for Major-General Marley professedly that you might repair the mischief
entailed by his inactivity, I should have thought it an unworthy im¬
peachment of your character had I by any special orders for exertion
insinuated that you might not feel the necessity of it.
    You assumed your command at a moment when the spirits of the
enemy had been remarkably affected by the brilliant success of our
irregular cavalry against a detachment of their infantry; you further
found yourself strengthened, beyond any hope that had been held out
to you, by the addition of the King’s Seventeenth Regiment to your
army. Every circumstance concurred to urge your attempting that
impression stated in the letter of February 2nd as so important for the
public interests.
    Had you, in this situation, informed me that you deliberately weighed
my representation of the benefits to be gained by inflicting a severe blow
on the enemy, but that you thought they would [be] purchased too
dearly by exposing the troops to a pestilential malady on penetrating
through the forest, and that you would therefore limit your enterprises
to . . . attacking the enemy in their several fortified positions on the
plain, I should have had no impalatable remark to make. I should have
lamented that you saw cause to forgo what appeared a most advantage¬
ous opportunity; but I should have given you credit for acting from an
upright conviction of expediency, and I should have applauded you for
the vigor with which you projected the expulsion of the enemy from the
advanced stockades.
    Nothing of this sort is even the most remotely intimated by you.
. . . Do not deceive yourself. Your neglecting to give me, your Com¬
mander in Chief, whose other plans were to be modelled accordingly,
satisfaction on that point, was no venial oversight. It was substantially
culpable . . . My selection of you for the command manifested my
opinion of your character and my personal disposition towards you. I
must not, however, suffer my partialities to betray me into a parley with
insubordination. I desire you as a soldier to say conscientiously how I,
your General, ought to act in the case which I have detailed to you.

    Hastings’s anger was all the more intense because his information
indicated that, had Wood taken the trouble to seek professional
medical advice on the issue, he would have found that enough time
still remained for him to penetrate as far as Makwanpur. If neces¬
sary a force could have been maintained there during the ensuing
hot and rainy seasons; but the Governor-General’s own persuasion
was that this measure, in conjunction with Ochterlony’s successes
in the west, would have been sufficient to cause the Kathmandu
242             The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

government to sue for peace. Furthermore, the lower provinces
 of the Bengal Presidency had been mulcted of troops in order to
 reinforce Wood’s division; and by the beginning of March an
 additional ten companies of infantry, a specially constituted eight-
 company battalion of sepoy grenadiers, and two King’s regiments
 (the 14th and 17th Foot) had either joined or were about to join his
force. These made a total of some 3,000 men, and brought the
strength of his army to about 8,000. This, moreover, was exclusive
of an extra battalion of native infantry which was sent to join
Colonel Gregory in Tirhut. After all these detachments had been
made, only 2,500 troops of the line remained in Calcutta for the
duties of the Presidency and the lower provinces, and two bat¬
talions of the Madras army had to be moved up into Cuttack to
relieve them of the pressure of duties on the southern frontier.
The 8th Native Cavalry had also been sent from Gorakhpur to
reinforce the Saran army; but on learning of Wood’s supine dis¬
position Hastings countermanded the order, deciding that the
services of cavalry were too precious to be wantonly squandered.
    Dispatches travelled very slowly then, so by the time Wood’s
quarrel with the Governor-General had reached its climax the
plan which he had devised was already in operation and the season
was too far advanced for alterations to be ordered. Having waited
about two weeks for his force to assemble, Wood then proceeded
to divide it. Roughly a half was left for the protection of the camp
and of the depot at Betiya, while the rest, with six guns, was led on a
hundred-mile march along the borders of Saran and Tirhut to clear
the jungle approaches of enemy stockades and pickets—a measure
which was, as far as the disgusted Governor-General could see, no
less hazardous to the health of the troops than a penetration of the
hills would have been.
    The detachment, headed by George Wood himself, left Binjara
Pokhra on 3 March. He planned first to oust the Nepalis from their
post in the forest north of Baragarhi; but they heard of his approach
and withdrew into the hills before he arrived. The defences of their
position were then destroyed by Roughsedge, commanding at
Baragarhi. Wood continued eastwards, past Samanpur. There was
no road, and the pioneers had to make one for the carts and artillery
as the army went along. High jungle grasses had to be cut away
and innumerable channels of nullas filled with branches and bundles
of grass to prevent the gun-carriages from sinking into the mud and
                The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives                    243

sand. Each operation drew torrents of swearing from the General.
At night, he pitched a very small tent in front of the whole army, so
as to be first into the fray if the enemy attacked. As there were no
other mounted troops with the force, the small band of Gardner’s
Horse, under jaunty Cornet Hearsey, had to control the baggage
train the whole length of the way.

I scarce had a night’s rest the whole way [grumbled Hearsey]. I did not
know what it was to take off my clothes, long boots or sash at night, or
to take any sleep. I was obliged to be on horseback at eleven p.m.,
guarding with my men the only road to prevent its being blocked by
baggage. When the force moved I had to precede the column on its
march, and to prevent the elephants, camels, bullocks and camp fol¬
lowers from obstructing it ... I seldom got any food, except what I
carried in my haversack, until 5 o’clock in the afternoon, and very
frequently not then ... I had all the arduous duties of baggage master
to perform, and this disagreeable and incapable old general would not
even enter my name in orders as ‘Baggage Master’ to increase my
Cornet’s allowance of pay.9

   The army reached the Baghmati on 9 March, having ascertained
that no Nepalis remained in the Tarai of Saran. Across the river, in
Tirhut, the situation was the same as far as the neighbourhood of
Janakpur. Rupitagarhi, three miles south of that place, was known
to be occupied by an enemy garrison, reported by local inhabitants
to be 12,000 strong. Hearsey wanted to gallop ahead and beleaguer
the place until the rest of the army could move up to the attack; but
Wood would not consent, and the enemy, hearing of his approach,
made good their escape. Hearsey chafed that such a good oppor¬
tunity had been lost. The Nepalis were known to be still at large in
the neighbourhood, but instead of staying to seek them out, the
Major-General, after only three days at Janakpur, turned about and
marched all the way back to Saran, taking a route slightly south of
that by which he had come. Colonel Gregory was left to deal with
the enemy still remaining in the north-east corner of Tirhut. ‘I
swept the whole of the eastern Gurkha territory, destroying several
stockades,’ Wood later boasted. True, he fired the odd deserted
enemy outpost; but he never saw a single Nepali and his main
achievement was to exhaust his army and swell its number of sick.
   Once back at Betiya, he busied himself with arrangements for
the dispersal of his force during the rains. The native part of the
        9 Hearsey’s ‘autobiography’ is printed in Pearse, The Hearseys.
244             The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

 army and the King’s 24th were posted in selected positions at
 suitably retired distances from the forest, while the rest of the
 Europeans were remanded to cantonments. This accomplished, he
 hurried away to Dinapur, pleading ill health, but probably also
 because he wanted to avoid the indignity of being superseded at the
 start of the next campaign. Paris Bradshaw quitted the army on
  14 April, and retired to the village of Segauli, where he built himself
 a bungalow for the monsoon.
     Gregory, joined by his reinforcement from Calcutta, under
 Joseph O’Halloran, flushed the Tarai in Tirhut of the remaining
 pockets of enemy troops before settling his men at Nathpur, on the
 west bank of the Kosi, for the rains.
     So ended the first campaign of the grand army. The Tarai of
 Saran and Tirhut had been cleared of the enemy, and the occasion
 taken to declare its annexation to the dominions of the East India
 Company; but such a timid intrusion into the Nepalese lowlands
 fell far short of the spectacular climax so confidently envisaged by
 Hastings. The army was hardly nearer Kathmandu than it had
been five months earlier. All its time, though hardly all its energies,
had been consumed in retrieving the consequences of an initial
 blunder. Hastings must himself bear a large share of the blame for
the debacle. He had switched commanders half-way through the
campaign more in deference to personal partiality than to military
judgement, and had thereby replaced an indifferent commander by
one much worse. Marley had fumbled and hesitated, it is true; but
it must be remembered that at the very outset of his command he
had been upset by a double calamity for which he was not princi¬
pally to blame, and that throughout he had been assisted by second-
rate subalterns and misinformed advisers. His own tactical ideas
had been perfectly sound, and it is quite possible that, had he been
given an opportunity to collect his wits, he would have attempted
that advance on Makwanpur which, had it been successful,
would (as Hastings himself admitted) probably have brought the
Gurkhas to their knees. Whether it would have been successful is
another matter. The main pass, the Bichakori, was in fact impreg¬
nable, and it was only by extraordinary good luck that a vastly
better general with a much larger army managed to turn it and
reach Makwanpur the following year. Perhaps, in refusing to
advance, Wood had done the right thing. But the fact remains that
he had done it for entirely wrong reasons.
                  The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives                        245

   His fondly treasured reputation did not suffer. Together with
Gillespie and Martindell he was gazetted K.C.B. in April 1815,
and in 1821 he was promoted lieutenant-general. But during the
remaining half-dozen years of his service life in India, Hastings
never again gave him a field command.
   There was one crumb of consolation for the Commander-in-
Chief. Captain Barre Latter, entrusted with the defence of the
frontier beyond the Kosi, surpassed himself. The Gurkhas had a
major military station at Vijaypur, and it was feared that they would
swoop down into the fen of reeds, brushwood and moist grasses
that was northern Purnea. According to a knowledgeable brahmin
prisoner, the enemy had some 7,000 musketeers and 5,000 archers
in the eastern hills. To hold this force in check, Latter had only
1,200 men at first, and no more than 2,700 ultimately, of whom
about half were irregulars of the new and untried Rangpur Local
Battalion. On top of this, he found the civil authorities unhelpful
and even downright obstructive. Mr. C. R. Martin, the Magistrate
of Purnea, was so abusive and unco-operative that the government
had to remove him, and his successor, Mr. Halhed, had no idea of
how to behave in time of war. He inflamed the general agitation
along the frontier by chasing up and down with two local indigo-
planters and their henchmen, by sending peasants into Nepalese
territory to recover property allegedly seized by the enemy and by
propagating the most absurdly exaggerated estimates of the
enemy’s strength. He upset Latter’s dispositions by detaining at
Kursa Kanta a reinforcement destined for a threatened post at
 Sissugatchi. Yet despite these frustrations Latter managed not only
to hold the Gurkhas in check, but also to wrest from them large
segments of the Morang. He attacked their lowland posts at
Dhanpura10 and Jhapa, whence they withdrew eastwards across the
Mechi to Bansgaon. This post was only a few miles north of
Latter’s own headquarters at Titalia. With the aid of a spyglass he
was able to assess the strength of their accumulated forces as

     10 Koilia, or Koileah, is the name featuring in the MS dispatches, which
corresponds to no name on available maps. It is clear, however, from references
to its position, that this post was somewhere in the neighbourhood of modern
Birathnagar and Rangeli. Kumar Swami, a Vijaypur brahmin captured in the
Morang in February, referred to the same enemy post as being at Dhunpalna
(sic, in Enclosures to Secret Despatches from Bengal, vol. 9, no. 394). It was there¬
fore probably at Dhanpura, marked just north of Birathnagar on Percival
Landon’s map.
246             The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives

something near 4,000. Early in March, Latter made plans to call in
all his detachments and mount a concentrated attack on Bansgaon;
but then, soon after noon on 8 March, all the troops there with¬
 drew into the forest, apparently having decided that they were not
strong enough to resist a British attack. Almost the whole of the
 Morang was now controlled by the Company.
    The operations in Latter’s quarter were all the more gratifying
to Headquarters because their effect was not confined to the low¬
lands. It was in the eastern hills that there at last occurred a stirring
among the mountaineers in support of the British effort. Not that
this co-operation came whence it had most confidently been
expected. The heirs of the quondam Makwanpur empire had
proved as ineffectual as all the other exiled hill chiefs, and the
rather naive expectation of Hastings—who was imbued with
the legitimist ideas fashionable in contemporary Europe—that
the Kiratas would flock to the standard of their ancient princes had
proved sadly lacking in foundation. Bradshaw had sent the brother
of the surviving pretender to Latter’s camp, but his efforts to raise
a force of Kiratas had proved as futile as Latter had predicted, and
he had been sent crestfallen back to Betiya. The hill chief who rose
to the occasion was the young Raja of Sikkim, who, with his old
Lepcha general, Lepcha chagzod (minister) and band of loyal
retainers, was still flouting the Gurkhas from Gangtok. Quite
spontaneously, the minister wrote to Latter, enclosing a letter from
his master to the Governor-General, suggesting that if the British
occupied themselves with conquering the lowlands, their men would
attack the Gurkhas in the hills. The only help they asked for was
gunpowder and musket flints. Latter eagerly responded. He sent
ten seers (about 20 lb.) of gunpowder and 200 flints, and advised
the Sikkimese leaders to direct their efforts against the fort of
Nagri. This was a stronghold in the hills about twenty-five miles
north of Titalia, in a position of great strength and traditionally the
residence of the headman of the Lepcha tribe. Yuk Namchu, the
brother of the Raja’s minister, having died, this office was now filled
by the minister’s young son who was kept as a virtual prisoner at
Nagri by his Gurkha coadjutor, Gentri Khatri. The Raja’s emis¬
saries had been confident that if Nagri was taken, all the Lepchas
with Gentri Khatri would desert.
   At first, Latter had been keen to make plans for concerted
action with the Sikkimese, undertaking to attack Nizamtara while
               The Collapse of the Eastern Offensives            247

they dealt with Nagri; but news of the reverses suffered by Marley’s
army caused him to abandon the idea, and he warned the Raja’s
agents that their people should only assault Nagri if they felt strong
enough to succeed alone. Notwithstanding this caution, the Raja’s
minister insinuated himself into Nagri in the place of his son, who
was spirited away to Gangtok, and then worked to undermine the
Gurkha position from within, while the Raja’s troops awaited their
opportunity at a short distance outside. After his own successful
advance on Nizamtara and Bansgaon, Latter encouraged the Raja
to exploit this diversion to press home his attack. The Sikkimese
army assaulted Nagri, but found itself outnumbered, the garrison
having been reinforced by troops from Bansgaon. There was a
contest which lasted three days, but little impression could be
made with bows and arrows against Nepali firearms, and a request
for assistance was sent to Titalia. At the beginning of May, Latter
decided to make a personal inspection of the scene of operations;
but his strength was already undermined by months of overwork,
 and now that the hot weather had arrived he swiftly fell a victim to
some jungle fever or infection. He was forced to go to Rangpur to
 recuperate. David Scott, the Magistrate of Rangpur, assumed
 charge of the correspondence with the Sikkimese, and in July sent a
 consignment of muskets to the force before Nagri. He had heard
 that the Raja’s army was now blockading the place, with the help of
 200 soldiers from Tibet. Soon after, however, the rains set in, and
 the messenger sent with the muskets found that the besiegers had
 been forced to withdraw into the mountains.
    So here too operations fizzled out; but enough had been achieved
 to compensate in some measure for the puny efforts of the generals
 in command of the two principal columns. It had been demonstra¬
 ted that even the Gurkhas’ regulars, on the plains at least, were far
 from formidable antagonists when confronted with well-armed
 troops incisively led and shrewdly disposed; and this made it
 doubly shameful that the main invading columns had been con¬
 founded by mere police and militia levies, supplemented by mobs of
 scavengers who were scarcely clothed, let alone armed.
                                IX

      THE TRIUMPH OF OCHTERLONY

T     he more westerly of the two ‘divisions’ formed to act in the
        western theatre of the war was commanded by Major-
        General David Ochterlony. Acting on what was the remotest
periphery not only of the East India Company’s possessions,
but also of known southern Asia, its purpose was to attack the
Gurkha field army under Amar Singh Thapa. This lay in the hill
station of Arki, deep within the fastnesses of the freshly conquered
Gurkha colonies between the Jumna and the Sutlaj. Hastings deter¬
mined that the army must be destroyed, dispersed or compelled to
surrender before it could move eastwards to assist the defenders of
Kathmandu. Assuming that his tactics would be those of pursuit
rather than of siege, the Governor-General did not anticipate that
Ochterlony would need heavy ordnance; but his own discretion
was to be the Major-General’s guide in this matter.
   Ochterlony’s record was impressive. He had fought as a subal¬
tern under Coote, in the Carnatic, where he had been captured
and deprived of an eye. As a major, he had commanded a battalion
under Lake in the Maratha campaign of 1803 and, after the capture
of Delhi, had been appointed British Resident at the Mogul court.
His defence of the city against Holkar had been brilliant and had
checked the Maratha in the full swell of his jubilance after the dis¬
comfiture of Monson. But Ochterlony’s military talent and instinc¬
tive flair for leadership were combined with a proneness to
pessimism and an easily aroused sense of grievance. His removal
from the Residency at Delhi by a Governor-General who wished to
make room for a more senior civilian had left a permanent strain of
bitterness in his character and heightened his sensitivity to adverse
criticism. His appointment at Ludhiana, where he was Agent for
relations with the protected Sikh states, dated from 1808. It had
signalled fresh recognition of his talents and given him fresh
interests; but he remained temperamental and difficult to deal with.
In moods of enthusiasm he would show eagerness, independence
and even arrogance; while in his melancholy or sense of discourage-
                        The Triumph of Ochterlony                            249
ment he would descant on his own foreboding and make a parade
of his despair.
    Despite his previous keenness to march into the hills and chas¬
tise Amar Singh Thapa, he regarded the Governor-General’s plan
for a full-scale war against the Gurkhas with apathy and misgiving.
He decided that the restoration of the hill chiefs (which he had
himself previously advocated) was not a good idea after all, and he
wrote at length to the government to ‘deprecate the extension of an
expensive and harassing protection to ingrates who, if relieved
from their present oppressors, or restored to their ancient posses¬
sions will, by their own petty internal disputes in all probability
furnish an endless source of trouble and vexation to the government
which has exercised itself for their deliverance’. It was now his view
that it would be much wiser to abandon the policy of restitution.
‘If we do attack, it should be avowedly in the first instance to
conquer for ourselves.’1 He no longer had hopes of assistance from
the exiled hill chiefs—‘men who now literally subsist on charity’—
and he began to disown his own earlier assessment of the enemy.
There was no more mention of ‘ill disciplined barbarians’; instead,
he became cautionary and even grudgingly appreciative of the
Gurkhas’ qualities.
   This change of attitude is not difficult to explain. Ochterlony
disliked Hastings, for a start, and had been depressed by the depar¬
ture of his old friend, Lord Minto. ‘I do not like this new viceroy’,
he wrote confidentially to Metcalfe, the Delhi Resident, in January
 1814. ‘All noise and emptiness, like a drum ... I believe the old
one was worth a dozen such.’ Secondly, he was disappointed for
personal reasons with Hastings’s arrangements for the invasion. He
was fifty-six, and had been waiting for thirty-five years for an
important independent command; and now, when a project he had
made his own and which he was better qualified than any officer in
India to conduct was at last put into operation, he found that he
was assigned a subordinate role, as second-in-command to Gillespie,
a King’s officer nearly ten years his junior. His sourness is not to be
wondered at. It typified the state of mind induced in many officers
by the frustrations and humiliations of service with the Company.
   There was no apparent reason why the Governor-General should
have any special regard for Ochterlony. His promising youth was
long past, and he had had no dazzling career in Java to renew his
 1 Ludhiana Records, pp. 392-3. See also Kaye, Life of Metcalfe, i, p. 386, fn.
Maf^4- Illustrating Ochterlony’s operations in 1814-15
                    The Triumph of Ochterlony                    251

reputation. He was not on the Bengal general staff, and had for
five years been absent from the main sources of influence and
patronage, exercising a rather obscure political function at the very
extremity of the Bengal Presidency. Hastings therefore felt no
qualms about giving him a modest role. He was merely to occupy
Amar Singh Thapa for a few weeks, until the second western
division could join him. He was then to surrender his command to
Gillespie. His army contained no European troops and, as
Hastings for some reason reckoned that the scene of his operations
presented ‘comparatively fewer difficulties’ than territory further
east, he decided not to furnish him with ‘the same description and
extensive scale of equipment’. This seems to have meant that
Ochterlony’s men had to do without even warm clothing, because
the records seem to contain no mention of their having been issued
with pantaloons and waistcoats.
    Ochterlony consequently had to pin all his hopes on the unaided
merits of his sepoys and to rely on whatever extraordinary re¬
sources he could improvise himself. His force consisted of four and
a half battalions of native infantry, two troops of native cavalry,
two companies of pioneers and a company of foot artillery—
making a total of between 5,500 and 6,000 men, including gun
lascars and ordnance drivers, of whom only the commissioned
officers and sixty-two artillerists were Europeans. He had in
addition some auxiliaries provided by Ram Saran, the exiled Raja
of Hindur (in whose old hill territories he was to operate) and by
the lowland Sikh rajas under the Company’s protection, among
whom the Raja of Patiala was the most unstinting contributor.
These amounted to about 4,000 men. His aggregate force therefore
outnumbered that of his adversary, the total of whose army he
estimated as 7,000 men, but which in fact was probably more like
5,000. The Sikhs were most impressive. With their tall athletic
physiques, long glossy beards, multicoloured turbans, broad
scimitars and proverbial matchlocks, they looked ready to eat the
Devil. But it was doubtful that they would prove reliable in
mountain warfare. Their traditional mode of combat was as free
cavaliers, and they had no experience of fighting as disciplined
infantry.
   In addition to the troops, there were about 3,000 public servants
and 6,000 camp followers, so the concourse which assembled at the
town of Rupar, on the eastern bank of the Sutlaj below the foothills,
252                   The Triumph of Ochterlony

 finally comprised something in the region of 18,000 people. The
 number of servants was so relatively small because the lowlanders
 half dreaded and half revered the hills as the abode of the gods.
 They would not volunteer for service as coolies, and those impres¬
 sed continually deserted. Anxious to avoid initial delays, Ochterlony
 made up his mind to use bullocks for transportation at the outset
 of his campaign, and his commissariat department collected 5,000
 of these. He counted on being able to recruit porters, who would be
 essential in the difficult country of the interior, after he had entered
 the hills. Perspicaciously, he made up his mind to take heavy guns.
 Hastings, assuming that Amar Singh Thapa’s first concern would
 be to rush his force to the defence of Kathmandu, had inferred that
 Ochterlony’s operations would take the form of pursuit and inter¬
 ception; but Ochterlony himself was becoming increasingly con¬
 vinced that his tasks would in fact be siege and dislodgement. ‘It
may be concluded’, he wrote as early as August 1814, ‘that either at
the entrance of the Nalagarh pass, or in some chosen strong
 position on the way to Arki, [Amar Singh Thapa] will make his first
and principal stand with every man he can collect and with every
defensive art of stockade etc., which they have in use.’ Making use
of the latitude which the Governor-General had accorded him, he
therefore decided to equip himself not (as had been recommended)
for the pursuit of a mobile enemy, but for confrontation with a
stationary one who would have to be expelled from hilly fortresses
by shot and shell. Two eighteen-pounders, ten six-pounders, two
heavy howitzers and two heavy mortars were summoned from the
magazines at Karnal and Agra.
    The army left Rupar shortly before the end of October. Its
march lay north-eastwards. The mountains of Hindur stretched
across its path in successive massive ridges, heaving progressively
higher towards the farthest ranges of peaks, which glistened like
freshly broken alabaster. Each ridge was buttressed by hefty spurs,
which thrust at irregular intervals and haphazard angles into the
interjacent valleys. Well within this immense and multiple
barricade lurked the old Gurkha general: resolute, defiant, and at
his ease. His defences at Arki were strong; the approaches well
guarded; and his communications with his client state of Bilaspur,
lying across the Sutlaj to the north-west, well secured. Its puppet
Raja, Maha Chand, acting under the vigilant eye of Shiva Dat Rai,
the Kaji’s personal agent, had so far proved a complaisant ally. He
                     The Triumph of Ochterlony                   253

was keeping the Gurkha army well supplied and had obediently
complied with Amar Singh’s request for 1,000 soldiers. Ochterlony
arrived at Palasi, the lowland capital of the Hindur Raja, on 31
October, and halted a day to pay the troops and jettison superfluous
baggage. On 2 November he resumed his march, striking due east
along the route to Arki, through thickly tufted forest. Occasional
glimpses could be had of the first range of hills and, on a high
forward-jutting bluff before it, the fort of Nalagarh.
   This was known as the key to Hindur. It was of irregular shape,
matching the contours of the ground, and seemed like an excresc¬
ence of the rock itself. Its bastions and walls were high, with para¬
pets, and punctured all over with loopholes; but it did not, on
inspection, give an impression of great strength. The approaches,
however, presented formidable difficulties. The only access was by
a steep, narrow pathway, which was intercepted by numerous
watercourses. These were now dry, but littered with boulders and
obstructed by rocky projections. The whole ground was covered
with a matted jungle of spiky bamboos. It was impossible to pitch
camp any nearer than three miles from the fort, but Lieutenant
Peter Lawtie, the Field-Engineer, immediately took a small
party, by a widely circuitous route, to reconnoitre the adjacent
heights. He found a site suitable for a battery near the ruins of the
abandoned town of Nalagarh and only 225 yards from the walls of
the fort, and this position was occupied the same night (2 November)
by seven companies of sepoys under Lieutenant-Colonel Thomp¬
son. The Nepalis in the fort kept up a brisk fire from muskets and
jinjals while the detachment prepared the ground, wounding a few
men and killing a sergeant of pioneers. The following morning,
while the battery was being constructed, the two eighteen-pounders
and two six-pounders were moved from the camp by fatigue parties
of sepoys. There had been no time to make a proper road, and it
would have been impossible to drag up the heavy guns had it not
been for the elephants. Ochterlony had been warned by native
informants that the mountain paths were impassable for all four-
footed animals save the hill pony; but when he heard that an ele¬
phant had once been sent as a present from Nahan, in Garhwal, to
Basahar, he had reasoned that these beasts must be capable of
manoeuvring the ground if carefully handled. The performance of
the elephants on this occasion amply vindicated his judgement. The
eighteen-pounder barrels, made of iron and each weighing over a
254                  77ze Triumph of Ochterlony
 ton, were too heavy to be carried on the backs of even these powerful
 animals; but wherever there was room two elephants followed
 each mounted gun and, at a command from the mahouts perched
 on their necks, bent their foreheads to the backs of the carriages
 and thrust the machines bodily up the slope, while the men at the
 drag ropes guided them along. When a wheel lodged in a rut or
 cavity, an elephant would either mould his trunk to the outer rim
 or entwine it around a spoke and lift the whole engine free with an
 impressive combination of finesse and strength. They showed little
 hesitation so long as low overhanging branches were cut away.
 The ordnance pieces were at the summit by dusk and in battery by
 eight o’clock the next morning, 4 November.
    The hills reverberated and birds soared up as they opened fire.
 At first, the six-pounders wrought great havoc. The Nepalis had
 piled stones on their ramparts, ready to assail a storming party, and
 a few well-aimed balls sent the whole lot showering into the fort,
 lethal as grapeshot. But the walls themselves proved more resistant
than had been expected. Although the eighteen-pounders were at
reasonably close range, it took them twenty-four hours to hammer
 down sufficient fabric to make a breach. At about nine o’clock on
the morning of the 5th, when preparations were at last being made
for an assault, two brahmins appeared in the breach to parley.
After some negotiation, the garrison surrendered as prisoners of
war and relinquished their arms. A small outpost to the north-west
capitulated at the same time, bringing the total of prisoners to
ninety-five. These were sent to Ludhiana, escorted by one of the
troops of native cavalry. So the first of Amar Singh’s fortresses fell
to Ochterlony—at the cost of much labour and patience, but with
few casualties. Apart from the sergeant of pioneers, none of the
British force was killed and only about half a dozen wounded.
    The road to Arki meandered over the shoulder of the Nalagarh
spur to a village called Goela, where it crested the first ridge of
hills. From Goela, the road plunged 1,000 feet into the valley of a
small river, and then climbed up the western flank of the second
hilly range. This second ridge maintained a general altitude of
between 4,000 and 5,000 feet above sea level, save opposite Goela,
where there was a wide gash, 800 feet deep. Through this, like a
very fine strand lost in the eye of a huge needle, threaded the Arki
road. Guarding the gorge from its northern side, sprawling astride
the crest of the ridge, was the fort of Ramgarh.
                    The Triumph of Ochterlony                     255

   On the night of 4 November, Ochterlony had heard that the
main body of Amar Singh Thapa’s army had left Arki and its sub¬
sidiary post of Subathu and advanced to Ramgarh. Anxious to
forestall any fresh advance, Ochterlony directed his reserve, com¬
manded by Thompson, to move on immediately to secure the road
in advance of Nalagarh. By the morning of 5 November Thompson
had reached Bariyan, en route for Goela, without having encountered
the enemy. Meanwhile Ochterlony lightened his column as much as
possible, in preparation for his own advance. His heavy ordnance,
however, he kept, persuaded that his forecast concerning the nature
of the impending warfare had been confirmed. ‘It would seem that
the character and operations of the war should be changed’, he told
the Adjutant-General, ‘and instead of being composed of small
detachments with light artillery, our force should be concentrated
on certain points; and however tardy their progress . . . [none]
should move without a gun or guns sufficient to throw open these
barriers . . . It is not my intention to relinquish the battering guns
if any strength, labour or exertion can get them forward.’ He
resigned himself to a slow but sure advance. ‘Manual labour,
strength and perseverance seem our principal dependencies in
these alpine regions. Our progress will be slow, but I trust it will
be certain; and I hope His Excellency will approve a determination
I have formed not to be hurried into any attempt that will occasion
more eventual delay than the very tedious advance I now anticipate.’
   Hastings had many faults as a Commander-in-Chief, but he was
neither meddlesome nor dictatorial. Not being on the scene of
action himself, he did not presume to question the decisions of
deputies who were, provided always that those decisions were
cogently argued and genuinely influenced by local circumstances.
Privately, he was dismayed by the loss of speed which Ochterlony’s
proposals would entail; but having allowed the commander to use
his own discretion and devise his own tactics, he did not now
hesitate to honour the spirit of the permission. Publicly, he fully
endorsed Ochterlony’s argument.
    So the pioneers set to work to prepare the road for two eighteen-
pounders, four six-pounders and a couple each of heavy howitzers
and mortars. They were diligently assisted by artisans and labourers
supplied by the Raja of Hindur. Trees had to be felled and rocks
blasted to clear the way. Labyrinthine pathways had to be
widened, borders scarped, pot-holes filled, declivities banked and
256                   The Triumph of Ochterlony

 parapets raised to prevent the heavy engines from toppling over the
 brinks of precipices. The ordnance was got forward to Thompson’s
 position at Bariyan by 10 November, and Ochterlony then pre¬
 pared to follow with the line. Thompson again moved ahead of the
 main force and arrived at Goela at sunset on the nth—which was
 none too early, because he disturbed a party of Nepalis who had
 already begun to stockade the position. He was now on the crest
 of the first ridge of hills. From Goela he could look across the valley
 to Ramgarh fort on the second ridge. Here lay Amar Singh Thapa,
 with the flower of his army—nearly 3,000 men, besides his Bilaspur
 auxiliaries. His dextrous soldiers had already been busy, stockading
 the spurs below and the heights adjacent to the fort, so that his
 position now straddled the gorge through which the road to Arki
 passed. Ramgarh guarded the passage from the north; while just
 over a mile south of it a peak called Kot, which was 200 feet higher
 again than Ramgarh, had also been occupied and fortified. Between
 these two posts were five stockades: four on the crest of the ridge,
 and one in the gorge astride the Arki road itself.
    The Major-General arrived at Goela with the rest of the army on
 12 November. It needed only a glance through his telescope to
convince Ochterlony that the Gurkha’s position was unassailable
from the front and north; but it did seem that Kot stockade could
be attacked by a force moving up the crest of the ridge from the
south. The next day, therefore, he augmented the reserve and sent
it across the valley and up the flank of the ridge to a settlement
called Kahanani. This was on the crest of the ridge about two miles
south of Kot, and was situated on ground broad enough to give
sufficient camping space.
    Thompson arrived there without mishap, and Field-Engineer
Lawtie, who had accompanied the reserve, then embarked on an
intricate inspection of the vicinity of the Gurkha position. Every
night for a week he roamed into the rugged and uncharted crevices
of the Ramgarh ridge, producing invaluable maps and sketches of
country hitherto untrodden by Europeans. The front and southern
flanks of Amar Singh Thapa’s position he confirmed were inacces¬
sible; but in the valley to the Gurkha’s rear, on the other side of the
ridge, he discovered the settlement called Nori. This was on an exten¬
sive plain, and Lawtie reckoned that an attack could be launched
against Ramgarh from here. Ochterlony readily accepted his assess¬
ment, and resolved that the fort must be assaulted from behind.
                    The Triumph of Ochterlony                    257
   Peter Lawtie was only twenty-four, and youth was no recom¬
mendation in an officer cadre where rank was determined by
seniority. But Lawtie was a brilliant engineer, modest and charming,
while Ochterlony was never one to suffer his feelings to be
dictated to. He took to Lawrie at once, made him an A.D.C., and
was happy to rely on both his professional skill and his friendship.
   When he transferred his base to Nori, Ochterlony would, of
course, considerably extend his line of communication and supply;
but he did not reckon that this need increase significantly its
vulnerability. He had already learnt, from studying the Nepalis’
own tactics, how effective the stockade was as a mode of defensive
war, and he shrewdly calculated that the enemy would hesitate to
attack his detachments if these were defended after their own manner.
Inevitably, more detachments would entail a dispersal of his army
and reduce the number of men he could bring against Ramgarh;
but he acted with the hope that the advantages of ground on the
eastern side of the ridge would sufficiently compensate for this
decrease by enabling him to bring his artillery into play. Even
failing this, there would always be the advantage in the move that it
would place the British army between Amar Singh Thapa and
Arki, his main base, and thereby enable it to harass the enemy
supply lines.
   As a ruse designed to mask his main manoeuvre, he decided that,
for the time being, he would leave his two eighteen-pounders and a
couple of pieces of light artillery in the valley below the western
approaches to Ramgarh, under the charge of a battalion of native
infantry. A convenient position once established on the heights by
an assault from the east, these could then either be brought
through the Ramgarh gorge or taken up the western flank of the
ridge and over the crest.
   The most daunting obstacle to the main movement was the
appalling difficulty of the road. It was as well that Ochterlony had
prepared his men for the expenditure of ‘manual labour, strength
and perseverance’, because the campaign could never have pro¬
ceeded had the army given these qualities grudgingly. The
pioneers had already been busy clearing the descent from Goela,
and all the artillery was moved down to the valley by the evening of
7 November; but the route from there over the hump of the ridge
into the valley beyond was still impassable for carriage cattle.
Determined to economize every hour at his disposal, Ochterlony
258                  The Triumph of Ochterlony

had each of the field-guns selected to accompany the principal
force taken from its carriage and lashed to the back of an elephant.
7,000 coolies were put to work to drag the empty carriages and carry
the ammunition. In this fashion the force and its ordnance were got
as far as Thompson’s position at Kahanani, on the crest, by night¬
fall on 19 November; and simultaneously the battering train, with
a battalion of sepoys under Lieutenant-Colonel Adams, had made
its way north up the valley to a site below the western face of
Ramgarh. All the baggage and the bazaars were left temporarily at
Goela, under the protection of a party of Patiala Sikhs, until the
road to Kahanani had been made practicable. Fortunately, as the
army had moved into the interior, certain of his old zemindars had
joined the Hindur Raja, and these were now bribed to set their
people working on the road. They worked hard, and by the evening
of the 20th the stores and baggage had begun to arrive at Kahanani.
The position here was meanwhile defended by an elaborate
Gurkha-style stockade. But before the army could descend the
eastern flank of the ridge and move to its new ground at Nori, this
part of the route had also to be cleared. It was not until the 23rd
that the movement was resumed, and not until the 24th that camp
was finally pitched in the valley at the rear of Ramgarh.
   The new position of the British army was a level plateau in the
beautiful valley of the Gambar river, about one and a half miles
north of and some 500 feet below the gorge of the Ramgarh pass.
The valley was well watered, and richly wooded with shrubs and
wild fruit trees. As soon as he had understood Ochterlony’s inten¬
tions, Amar Singh Thapa had set his men to defend the eastern
approaches to his position, so the spurs jutting into the Gambar
valley were already pimpled with stockades and stone redoubts.
Ochterlony had a battery for his field-guns constructed in front of
the foremost enemy stockade by 26 November, and early that
morning an attempt was made to bombard the structure. It soon
became apparent that the guns were too far from and below their
target. At about half-past nine, the Major-General asked Lawtie to
reconnoitre the ground farther forward. The Field Engineer left the
battery about an hour later, accompanied by 100 sepoys. The
detachment proceeded towards a hill which had been designated as a
possible site for a new battery. It had to pass through a small gully,
and before this had been cleared enemy marksman opened fire from
the heights on both sides. Lawtie thought quickly. The hill was not
                     The Triumph of Ochterlony                     259

far ahead and, although it was crowned by an occupied stone
breastwork, he judged that a rapid advance to assault it would
involve no greater hazard than a retreat through the gully; while if
the hill was gained, it would be a good position in which to await a
reinforcement. He therefore divided his force and sent fifty men
forward immediately to the attack. Ensign Symes led them up the
hill to the breastwork, which they easily captured. They wanted to
charge the stockade, which was about 300 yards behind, and took
cover under the breastwork only after repeated urging from their
officer. Meanwhile Lawtie came up with the remainder of the force,
which he deployed to the right and the left of the position to ward
off the snipers still on its flanks. After about ten minutes a crowd of
Nepalis emerged from the stockade with drums, trumpets and
colours, and bore down on the small party at the breastwork.
   When Ochterlony heard the sound of firing, he immediately
ordered forward a reinforcement under Lieutenant Williams; but,
because of a cruel contretemps, its assistance came too late. Before
the main body of the reinforcement could reach them, Lawtie’s men
were without ammunition and already in retreat. Cartridges were
supplied in wooden boxes, which were like cigar cases joined end to
end at their bases and designed to fit into the sepoys’ leather
ammunition pouches. The cartridges were pulled lengthwise from
their tubular cavities by small tags. When all the cartridges in the
one section of the box had been used, it had to be lifted from the
pouch, reversed and re-inserted so that those in the lower tier were
uppermost. But on this occasion the sepoys at the breastwork found
that when their upper rows of cartridges had been expended it was
impossible to lift the boxes from the pouches and get at those below.
Variations in the climate had shrunk the leather or swollen the wood,
or both. Fingers tugged and tore in vain. Emboldened by the
slackening of their fire, the Nepalis came on faster. Even so, it was
only when the accessible supply of cartridges had failed altogether
and when the enemy were hardly twenty paces away that the party
withdrew. With fire coming from both flanks and the rear, to which
there was no means of replying, the retreat threatened to become a
rout, and only the timely arrival of the bulk of the reinforcing party
enabled Lawtie’s men to complete it in reasonably good order.
Williams lost his life while supervising the covering operation in the
defile. Forty-one sepoys also were killed, and thirty-three injured.
   Lawtie was full of praise for the courage of his men, and insisted
260                 The Triumph of Ochterlony

that any blame for the reverse must attach to his own misjudgement.
But Ochterlony reproached only himself, for having entrusted the
operation to a weak reconnaissance party instead of making it a
regular and concerted attack.
    The repulse, although minor, had grave implications. It made it
seem that the move to Nori had been unprofitable after all. While
certain advantages of ground had indeed resulted from it, the
detachments from Ochterlony’s main force which it had demanded
had none the less made it impossible for these advantages to be
exploited. Furthermore, as the weeks slipped by it became increas¬
ingly apparent that the manoeuvre would produce only slow and
uncertain effect by way of straitening Ramgarh. Amar Singh was
now beleaguered on three sides, it is true; but his communica¬
tions with the north were still secure and he continued to draw
supplies from Maha Chand and Shiva Dat Rai in Bilaspur.
Ochterlony had hoped that Raja Sansar Chand of Kotoch, the
Gurkha’s erstwhile rival contender for Kangra fort, would attack
Bilaspur from west of the Sutlaj, and his failure to do so was the
cause of fresh disappointment. Sansar Chand’s military commander
was, it will be recalled, an Irish deserter from the 8th Dragoons,
calling himself O’Brien, who had professed to be willing to use his
influence to help the British. At the beginning of November he had
written to Ochterlony to assure him that Sansar Chand had placed
all his troops in readiness to enter the war, whereupon Ochterlony
had requested him to attack Bilaspur. But instead of allowing his
army to march, Sansar Chand had sent his excuses, affirming that
he dare not move it for fear lest Ranjit Singh (to whom he now
professed allegiance) should attack his territories in its absence.
Convinced that the Raja was merely prevaricating, Ochterlony had
sent a letter to Ranjit Singh making it perfectly clear that his
suzerainty over Kotoch was not questioned, and renewed his efforts
to persuade O’Brien to co-operate. He had extended to him the
promise of a free pardon, and the prospect of even further reward.
But Ochterlony’s letter found O’Brien flat on his back in an
alcoholic stupor, and when he was sufficiently sober to raise the
matter again with the Raja, the latter was enraged by this un¬
authorized correspondence with the British. The quarrel between
the two men became very violent, and at the end of December
O’Brien offered to desert with 1,500 men and eight pieces of
ordnance in return for a free pardon for himself and ‘a Nother
                     The Triumph of Ochterlony                    26i

European’, called Charles Macdonald. But then a month went by
without further news, and in the meantime a dispatch from Head¬
quarters instructed Ochterlony to use O’Brien as a free agent only
as a last resort. Even then, while he was left free to resume attempts
to influence the Raja through O’Brien, it was stressed that the
Raja’s co-operation would not be worth the ill will of Ranjit Singh.
Thus discouraged on the one hand by hedging and hesitation in
Kotoch, and inhibited on the other by doubts and second thoughts
at Headquarters, Ochterlony finally concluded that it would be idle
to hope for assistance from Sansar Chand’s army, and resigned
himself to fighting the war alone.
   This was not the only source of disheartenment. Ochterlony was
finding himself increasingly hamstrung by his lack of information.
He knew almost nothing of the country in which he was operating,
and local guides had absolutely no notion of accurate information.
They reckoned distances, for example, in terms of the ‘coss’, which
could mean anything between three-quarters of a mile and two
miles; and they were incapable of descriptions of terrain which had
any meaning in military terms. He was therefore entirely without
the means of knowing what natural strategic advantages his posi¬
tion afforded. The exact location of Arki was unknown, and the
number of forts and the nature of the routes between that place and
Ramgarh only guessed at. He was circumscribed by uncharted
territory and could not plan beyond the range of his telescope—
which was not very far in country composed of mountains and
glens, of which twice as much was always concealed as was sur¬
veyed from any single vantage-point. Then again, the proclamation
inviting the co-operation of the hill chiefs and their people had
produced only a very limited response, and not enough porters
could be found for even the most essential purposes. Finally, there
was the deeply disturbing knowledge that three attempts to take
the contemptible hill fort of Kalanga had failed. News of the last
repulse arrived on 2 December, just as Ochterlony was contemplat¬
ing another attempt to gain an advanced position for his field-
battery, and the information made him throw up the idea in despair.
   During December the campaign remained in a state of impasse.
It now seemed most unlikely that the projected joining of forces
with the other western division would ever take place; but in his
pessimism Ochterlony claimed that even with reinforcements he
would be unable to do more than embark on the long and wearisome
262                  The Triumph of Ochterlony

expedient of starving the Nepalis into submission. Despondency
pervaded the British camp in these dull dank days about the winter
solstice, when the mountains were half-dissolved in mist and
human breath hung visible in the air. The sepoys began to fall ill,
and by the middle of the month almost 600 out of 4,600 infantry
were returned as sick. The nights were frosty, and many of the
invalids were probably suffering from the effects of the cold,
against which they can have had little protection if, as seems likely,
they had not been supplied with warm clothing. But primitive
sanitation must also have played its part in causing the general
debility. When in the field, Indian armies, like medieval royal
households, were compelled to keep moving in order to escape
the diseases engendered by their own garbage; and now that
the troops and all the attendants and followers of the army had
been using them for a month, the various camp sites around Ram-
garh must have been like open latrines. Seeing the sickness and
dejection of his men, Ochterlony was oppressed by qualms and
dark presentiment. He began to think that the Bengal sepoys were
physically incapable of withstanding the duresses of mountain
warfare, and he doubted that success was even possible.
   A reinforcement of a battalion of sepoys (the 2nd/7th, ‘one of the
finest in the service and nearly complete’) had been promised
Ochterlony soon after the outset of the war, and would have
reached him early in the campaign had its progress from Lucknow
not been delayed by civil disturbances in Moradabad. It was not
until the third week in December that the corps, commanded by
Lieutenant-Colonel Lyons, finally arrived below Ramgarh. Here it
relieved Adams of the eighteen-pounders and escorted them over
the ridge, arriving in the main camp at Nori on 27 December. At
about the same time two field-howitzers and four light mortars, all
with collapsible carriages of the type which Hastings had personally
designed, arrived from Cawnpore.
   Ochterlony’s effective regular infantry force now stood at about
5,000, of whom just over 3,000 were in the main camp at Nori, and
he felt strong enough to try to close the northern gap in his encircle¬
ment of Amar Singh Thapa’s position.
   On the crest of the ridge, about four miles north of Ramgarh,
was a fort called Mangu, possession of which would, Ochterlony
reckoned, serve his purpose well. It was approached by a two-mile-
long spur, which jutted from the ridge into the Gambar valley and
                     The Triumph of Ochterlony                     263

which was defended by a stone redoubt called Tibu at its eastern
end. Soon after dusk on 27 December, Thompson left Nori with
fourteen companies of sepoys, 1,000 auxiliaries, two six-pounders
and two howitzers to occupy this spur and attack Mangu.
   The night was fine, and the distance not great; but the ground
was so broken and inhospitable that it was eight o’clock the next
morning before Thompson began to climb the flank of the spur. He
reached the crest with his advance about 700 yards in front of Tibu,
and was at once assailed by musket fire from a party of the enemy
which had emerged from the redoubt and advanced to a position
near the end of the spur. He immediately ordered his advance
guard to turn left and repel this party, which they did, driving the
Nepalis back along the crest of the spur and into the redoubt. The
post itself, he decided, was too strong to attack without artillery, so
he waited for the gun-bearing elephants to arrive before resuming
operations. At about four in the afternoon the two six-pounders
opened fire at 500 yards, but made little impression. Thompson
decided that the battery must be pushed nearer, and he asked the
pioneers to make extra fascines and gabions.
   By now, however, Amar Singh Thapa had fathomed Ochter-
lony’s intentions, and he determined to bring every man he could
spare into an effort to dislodge Thompson. During the night he
withdrew all his troops from the stockades south of Ramgarh and
moved them into fresh positions on the crest of the ridge to the
north. He transferred his own headquarters to Mangu. About a
quarter of an hour before sunrise on 29 December, the largest force
of Nepalis so far seen, estimated at between 2,000 and 2,500 men,
streamed out of Mangu and came in full career towards the peak on
which the British camp was perched, at the eastern extremity of the
spur.
   There followed a ferocious and confused engagement, which
lasted for nearly three hours. The enemy, sword in hand, attacked
Thompson’s position with reckless disregard for the impractica¬
bility of its approaches. It seems, indeed, that it was to the general
inaccessibility of their ground and the command it gave them over
the various assailing detachments, that Thompson’s party owed
their deliverance. The mere sight of the khukuris again made the
sepoys pusillanimous, and they refused to parry them with bayo¬
nets. Several fled in terror, and were ripped to shreds by the
flashing enemy knives. But because almost all the directions of their
264                  The Triumph of Ochterlony

assault could be enfiladed by musketry, few Nepalis actually
reached the camp and great numbers were killed and wounded in
the attempt. The main party grimly persisted in their effort to
scale an escarpment raked by fire from above, but were finally forced
to retreat bearing many wounded and leaving sixty dead. It was
estimated that the total of their casualties must have reached 250
wounded and 150 killed. Thompson had nine men killed and
forty-four wounded.
   As soon as it got dark the Nepalis in the intermediate redoubt
at Tibu abandoned their posts and retired to Mangu. It was im¬
mediately occupied by Thompson’s light infantry pickets, who
discovered that it had been so deeply excavated as to be virtually
impregnable by artillery.
   Amar Singh Thapa had suffered a repulse, but he had neverthe¬
less successfully forestalled Ochterlony’s attempt to turn his
northern flank. By abandoning his posts to the south of Ramgarh
and establishing new ones to the north, he had in effect shifted his
position farther up the ridge, so that it still outreached Ochterlony’s
in the direction of the Sutlaj and the crucially important area of
Bilaspur. He might thwart further attempts to outflank him simply
by repeating the manoeuvre. The contest would then develop into a
race to the north, in which Ochterlony could have no hope of over¬
taking his adversary, because every step forward would manifoldly
increase his difficulties of communication and supply. The road
even to Tibu was impracticable for bullocks and, although only
three miles long, required three and a half hours’ marching even
under the most favourable conditions. The troops there had no
tents, and the officers only small canvas shelters open at both ends.
Ochterlony could now have bombarded Ramgarh from the south,
since all its outlying positions on that side had been evacuated and
he already had a post at Kahanani on the crest—but this would have
done no good. The effect would still only have been to drive the
elusive Gurkha farther up the ridge towards the impenetrable
wilderness of Bilaspur, and a decisive issue to the campaign would
have been as far off as ever.
   So it seemed that there was deadlock. Assault was futile; block¬
ade impracticable. The contest threatened to become a war of
attrition in which time was on the side of the enemy. There is no
need to explain what would have been the reaction of Martindell
or John Wood under circumstances such as these. Ochterlony was
                     The Triumph of Ochterlony                     265

just as liable as they were to express a sense of helplessness; but the
difference was that with him it was no reflection of real incapacity.
 It was only a plea for sympathy. Ochterlony had rich reserves of
talent which were released by adversity and stimulated by the
solicitous attention of his superiors; and now that his difficulties
were most complex and the despondent concern of his Commander-
 in-Chief most gratifying, he revealed his full brilliance as a
 strategist.
   All the while he remained in his present situation, Amar Singh
Thapa was immune from assault and straitenment. The only way
to destroy his immunity was therefore to draw him into another
position, where he would be deprived of his a priori advantage of
unrestricted access to the north. Behind Ochterlony’s camp at
Nori, parallel to but yet higher than the Ramgarh ridge, lay a third
range of hills, dominated by the fortress of Malaun. That, Ochter¬
lony decided, was where he wanted the Gurkha. Lawtie set to work,
and after a month of crippling exertion had collected enough
information about the layout of the Malaun ridge to enable his
commander to devise a bold and ingenious plan.
    Ochterlony’s idea was to seal the eastern, southern and northern
approaches to this ridge, inveigle Amar Singh Thapa into quitting
the Ramgarh range and concentrating his army in Malaun, and
then attack the cornered Nepalis as opportunity might best dictate.
The crucial assumption in the plan was that Amar Singh could be
induced to move to Malaun, and at first glance it seems that
Ochterlony was so sanguine as to expect his adversary to walk into
what would obviously be an ambush. But in fact the plan’s mechan¬
ism would be less apparent than that. The move to block the
northern end of the Malaun ridge would not take place until the
Kaji had actually entered Malaun fort. In its first stages Ochterlony’s
manoeuvre would bear the appearance simply of a preparation to
attack Malaun from the east, which it was hoped would cause the
Kaji to move all his men to defend the fort. Here Ochterlony was
gambling on Amar Singh’s concern for his treasure and his
youngest son and kinswomen, all, as was known from intercepted
letters, left in Malaun. However, there was the possibility that he
would guess Ochterlony’s ultimate intentions and march im¬
mediately to Bilaspur to protect the source of his supplies and con¬
serve his access to the north. The plan was therefore designed
to accommodate this eventuality. While the main force and the
266                 The Triumph of Ochterlony

auxiliaries moved, under Ochterlony’s own command, round the
southern end of the Malaun ridge and up into the Gamrola river
valley on its eastern side, Colonel Arnold was to be left with the
force at Tibu to see how the Gurkha reacted. If he moved across
the Gambar and entered Malaun, Arnold was first to expel any
remaining detachments from the Ramgarh range, then move up the
Gambar valley to the town of Bilaspur in the plain beyond its
northern end, overawe the Raja and secure a position on the
northern extremity of the Malaun ridge. If, on the other hand,
Amar Singh marched north to Bilaspur, Arnold was to follow.
Ochterlony planned to have a force moving northwards up the
Gamrola valley simultaneously, so that when the Nepali army
arrived at Bilaspur it would be caught in a pincer movement by a
pursuing column and one emerging from the eastern side of the
ridge. The enemy would be forced into an engagement on a plain,
where all their best-tried tactics would be useless.
   The operation was set in motion on 16 January, and in one swift
movement Ochterlony successfully accomplished his own manoe¬
uvre. He crossed the Gambar river south from Nori, continued
round the southern end of the Malaun ridge, turned north into the
Gamrola valley and finally halted near the village of Barog, which
was on a latitude slightly south of that of Malaun fort itself.
Lieutenant Ross, with 2,000 Hindur auxiliaries, then continued up
the bank of the Gamrola for Bilaspur. The Hindur troops, used to
this sort of ground, covered the distance in a trice, relishing the
opportunity of dealing a blow at the Bilaspurians, who were their
mortal enemies. They occupied the Bandela heights, which over¬
look the town of Bilaspur, and then moved on to attack a force
assembled under Shiva Dat Rai himself. This they triumphantly
dispersed. Trembling for his life, Raja Maha Chand scuttled across
the Sutlaj, convinced that his capital was about to be sacked by the
Hindur troops, who were baying for blood. But Ross had strict
orders to restrain his men from inflicting this final indignity. In
Ochterlony’s view, consigning the town to destruction would have
been both repugnant to humanity and contrary to policy. He was
relying on its granaries to replenish Arnold’s stock of provisions,
which was sufficient only for a week; and he was besides anxious to
coax Maha Chand into actively supporting the British, which might
be done it they showed themselves to be forbearing deliverers, but
not if they descended on him like butchers.
                     The Triumph of Ochterlony                     267

    Meanwhile, back in the Gambar valley, Arnold had awaited the
reaction of Amar Singh Thapa to Ochterlony’s movement. As had
been anticipated and hoped, the Kaji’s immediate concern was for
the safety of his treasure and family. As soon as he perceived the
direction of the Major-General’s march, he reduced the garrisons in
Ramgarh and three other main positions along the ridge to a com¬
pany each, gathered his men about him, quitted Mangu and
hurried across the valley to Malaun. It now only remained for
Arnold to complete the British ambush of that place by joining
Ross at Bilaspur. On 18 January he sent men to occupy the deserted
fort at Mangu; then, leaving Lieutenant-Colonel Cooper with the
heavy guns and a force of sepoys to reduce Ramgarh and the re¬
maining occupied posts on the ridge, prepared to march north up
the Gambar valley.
    It was at this stage that the whole plan was menaced by disaster.
That brisk advance on Bilaspur which Ochterlony had prescribed
for Arnold’s force became in effect an agonizing crawl. First the
march was delayed by desertions among the coolies and porters;
and then the route up the left bank of the Gambar river, over the
spreading feet of the spurs which buttressed the western face of the
Malaun ridge, was found to be atrocious beyond anything that
local informants had implied. Finally, to fill the cup of frustration
and disappointment, the weather turned viciously wintry. A heavy
fall of snow obstructed the march for two days and made the road
to Bilaspur even more inhospitable; and when the sepoys at last
 moved on, they trudged through lashing sleet and freezing slush.
 Nepali snipers still prowling on the Ramgarh ridge added to their
 tribulations. Ochterlony, tired and trembling for the success of his
 plan, began to show signs of strain. He became edgy and peevish,
 and carped at Arnold for petty things—such as the style of his
 reports. These unforeseen difficulties turned his plan into a danger¬
 ous gamble. All the while the British army remained into two un¬
 connected sections, divided by a ridge in the possession of the
 enemy, its vulnerability was extreme. Had Amar Singh Thapa
 decided to attack, the odds would have been heavily in his favour.
 Ochterlony, having noted the Gurkha’s persistent reluctance to
 take the offensive, had incurred this as a calculated risk; but he had
 not reckoned on such a prolongation of the enemy’s advantage,
which obviously made it more likely that that advantage would be
 perceived and exploited. These three weeks were Amar Singh’s
268                 The Triumph of Ochterlony

time of both great danger and supreme opportunity. A plan was in
operation whose completion would ensure his defeat; but until it
was complete, he derived overwhelming benefit from the move¬
ments Ochterlony had been compelled to make. Inaction was
bound to have disastrous consequences; whereas action would offer
the possibility of decisive victory. Luckily for Ochterlony, Amar
Singh did not act, and thereby forfeited his claim to be a good
general as opposed to merely a brave soldier and patriot. Either his
mind was too slow to follow Ochterlony’s intentions, or he failed to
appreciate that his fortresses could not withstand the British
artillery. Arnold marched on without molestation, save that offered
by sporadic discharges of musketry from the Ramgarh ridge. He
reached the northern end of the Malaun range by the second week in
February and established himself in a position within three miles
of Bilaspur. His men were exhausted and wretched, but the turning-
point in the campaign had been passed.
   Now that Arnold’s force was safely in the vicinity of Bilaspur,
only a few of Ross’s auxiliaries were needed on the Bandela heights,
so Ochterlony transferred the greater part of the Hindur troops,
together with all the pioneers and 200 sepoys, to Cooper, still at
Nori. Cooper then made preparations to eject the troops which
Amar Singh Thapa had left in the main forts on the Ramgarh ridge.
   There were still Nepali garrisons in Ramgarh fort itself, and in
the less elaborate stone sangars at Jorjoru, Taragarh and Chamba,
which were widely spaced along the crest of the ridge farther north.
Ramgarh contained about 100 men; Jorjoru about 160; and the
others about 100 each. Cooper first concentrated on getting a
position on the crest between Ramgarh and Jorjoru. Lawtie and
600 auxiliaries left camp to climb the ridge in the small hours of 12
February. The ground was rough, steep and hard with frost; but
this was the Hindur soldiers’ own country, and they had reached
the crest by daylight, unseen by the enemy. They took up a position
about 750 yards north of Ramgarh.
   Soon members of the garrison were seen scurrying among the
clutter of huts and ramshackle outworks under the walls of the fort,
intent on protecting their three guns, which were in a stone
emplacement in front of the northward-facing main gateway. A
party advanced, khukuris unsheathed, as if to give battle; but the
Hindurians immediately riposted with a menacing movement
forward, striking up their own martial tune. The Nepalis thereupon
                     The Triumph of Ochterlony                    269

halted and, taking cover behind rocks and bushes, resorted to
sniping. The guns in front of the gateway were also occasionally
discharged; but their shot, of which the heaviest was only 3 or 4 lb.,
invariably went wide. By four in the afternoon Lawtie had coaxed
up an elephant with a six-pounder strapped to its back, and he set
up the gun to give cover to the pioneers who were now on the crest
busy constructing two batteries—one for mortars at 300 yards, and
one for the eighteen-pounders at between 500 and 750. Meanwhile
parties of auxiliaries took possession of all the pinnacles between
Ramgarh and Jorjoru. All had been stockaded by the Nepalis, who,
on evacuating them, had left the defences conveniently intact.
 Several reinforcements were sent from Nori, and by nightfall 1,200
auxiliaries were posted along the heights.
    The batteries were ready by ten o’clock the next morning, and
work was begun on preparing a road for the eighteen-pounders
from Nori to the crest of the ridge. The pioneers dug, blasted,
felled trees and built parapets all through the day and night, while
the six-pounder and two small mortars already aloft maintained a
slow and regular fire to prevent the enemy from removing their
guns from the emplacement. The eighteen-pounders were trundled
from the park at Nori at noon on 14 February, with three complete
companies—270 men—assigned as a working party to each. Yard
by yard they were hauled up the 1,200-foot ascent. Only a third of
the distance was covered that day, and not until ten o’clock on the
morning of the 15th was the first piece in battery. It was aimed at
the Nepali gun emplacement. An hour later it discharged its first
ball with an explosion that was heard thirty miles away, in Nahan.
Fifty rounds had been expended by one o’clock, and two of the
enemy guns buried under a pile of rubble. One embrasure was
still intact; but the Nepali artillerists were so encumbered by
masonry and continuing fire, that they could make no use of the
cannon inside. The second eighteen-pounder arrived in battery at
three in the afternoon. Both guns were then aimed at the wall of the
fort itself, but before they opened the garrison was given a chance
to surrender. Liberal terms were offered, because Ochterlony,
anxious not only to spare the lives of his own men, but also to in¬
crease the difficulties of supply in Malaun, had instructed that the
garrison of each fort was to be allowed to join Amar Singh Thapa
with all its arms and property. The Ramgarh garrison nevertheless
rejected such terms, and prepared to resist a storm. Stones were
270                  The Triumph of Ochterlony

gathered and piled in heaps on the bastions, ready to be rolled down
on an assaulting party.
   At dawn on the 16th the same terms were again offered and were
again rejected. Consequently, at eight o’clock, the heavy guns were
reopened. Two hundred rounds were discharged before any effect
was noticeable. Then the walls began to split, loose stones began to
tumble and crumbled mortar began to cascade. Still the solid iron
balls thumped into the flank of the fort—50, 100, 150 more.
Suddenly, at three in the afternoon, with a loud roar and a rushing
sound the whole curtain opposite the battery collapsed into a single
heap. At last there was a breach; but it was not wide enough to
storm. The shot flew on, now fragmenting the ragged fringes of the
gap and shaking down great masses of masonry both outside and
inside the fort. To intensify the destruction shrapnel shells were
occasionally fired from the six-pounder.
   Great commotion was now visible in Ramgarh. At four o’clock
a messenger appeared in the breach waving a white flag. The guns
were silenced while he discussed terms with Lawtie. Finally, at
sunset, after a long conference, a treaty was signed. The garrision
of Ramgarh was permitted to march to Malaun with all its arms,
colours, musical instruments and public and private property,
including cannon; and it was agreed that all belongings which
could not conveniently be carried away at once should be preserved
until they could be sent for. In return, the Subadar commanding
consented to try to persuade the garrison of Jorjoru to surrender on
the same terms. He was as good as his word, and that fort capitu¬
lated at noon the following day.
   Thus two formidable strongholds were captured without the
loss of a single life—virtually, in fact, without a single casualty, be¬
cause the only wounded man in Lawtie’s force was a Sikh auxiliary
who injured himself while attempting to plunder some caves. The
Field Engineer had managed the whole operation with tact, judge¬
ment, and unflagging endurance. After the treaty was signed he
quitted the battery for the first time in seventy-two hours.
   At Headquarters, everyone was relieved to hear of the fall of
Ramgarh, and Hastings paid handsome tribute to Ochterlony’s
enterprise and to the ‘cheerful patience’ shown by his sepoys under
such abnormal stresses. But the success did not dispel his mis¬
givings. He remained convinced that the rains would set in before
the war in this quarter had reached a conclusive issue. On the scene
                        The Triumph of Ochterlony                            271

of operations, the way of thinking of one person at least was in
harmony with the Governor-General’s—and that was Amar Singh
Thapa. Never for a moment did he relax his posture of self-
assurance. The attitude of his own government, supine and dis¬
posed to sue for peace after the loss of Kalanga, exasperated him
and made him even more defiant. Seeing that the administration in
Kathmandu, having committed the initial error of provoking the
war, was now contemplating the even greater blunder of a pre¬
mature and disastrous peace, he envisaged himself as the sole re¬
maining cantilever of the Gurkha empire: its isolated guardian,
appointed by the gods to fight not only a strong enemy without,
but also weak and foolish ministers within, and preserve it inviolate.
On 23 December the Raja had sent Ranjor Singh, Amar Singh
Thapa’s son (who was, it will be remembered, defending Jaithak),
a letter enjoining him to treat for peace. He was authorized to sur¬
render all the disputed lowlands. If that was insufficient to buy
peace, he was to offer as well the whole of the Tarai and Dehra Dun;
and if this was still not enough, he might cede in addition all the
mountainous country from Dehra Dun to the Sutlaj.2 Ranjor sent
a copy of this missive to his father, who agreed to negotiate on the
basis of the surrender of the disputed lowlands, but flatly refused
to offer more. This was tantamount to saying that he would fight on
regardless of instructions from Kathmandu, because, having
already tried to propitiate the British with them and failed, he knew
full well that his terms would never end the war. The further con¬
cessions he emphatically deprecated, since in his view they were as
extensive as the worst sacrifices that defeat could entail, which it
would be shameful to offer before defeat was even a reality. On
2 March he sent the Raja a long reply (which, being intercepted by
the British, never arrived in Kathmandu). It was a mixture of can¬
tankerous reproach, grim warning and urgent reassurance. He
upbraided him for his folly in instigating a war for trifles; warned
that appeasing the British by such large concessions would merely
 inflame their cupidity (he advised the Raja to ponder the fate of
 Tipu Sultan of Mysore); and bade him take heart, for the East
   2 The instructions are summarized in Amar Singh Thapa’s reply of 2 March
1815 to the Raja. This letter was intercepted and is to be found printed in its
entirety in several places, e.g.: P.R.N.W., pp. 553 et seq.; J. B. Fraser, Journal
of a Tour, Appendix V; H. H. Wilson, History of British India, vol. ii, Appendix
A; Prinsep, op. cit., vol. i, Appendix B. A MS. version is in Home Misc., vol.
653, ff. i79> etseq.
272                      The Triumph of Ochterlony

India Company was not invincible—as was clearly proved by its
failures at Bharatpur—and the Sikhs and Marathas were but
waiting for a Gurkha victory as the signal for joining a grand
coalition against it.3 He counselled conciliation of the brahmins as
a means of mollifying the gods and suggested that the Raja, acting
in his capacity as loyal vassal of the Emperor, invoke the aid of
China by representing the British intention to be the conquest of
Tibet.
    It was a stirring exhortation: the war speech of an informed
rhetorician, rich with that speciousness which a dextrous manipula¬
tion of historical references and a cunning presentation of enticing
possibilities can give. Amar Singh had in fact received no indica¬
tion that the Sikhs were prepared to join the Gurkhas. Ranjit Singh
had made it clear that he would not ally himself with them while
his relations with the British remained friendly; but the Kaji, him¬
self an opportunist par excellence, obviously believed, and perhaps
with reason, that if the British were brought to the point of sub¬
mission an entirely new political situation would arise which such
opportunist powers as the Sikhs, the Marathas and even the
dynasty of Oudh would be unable to resist exploiting to the detri¬
ment of the Company.
    Convinced that the defeat of Ochterlony was not only essential
for the preservation of the Gurkha empire, but also the means of
creating a situation which would favour its expansion, he refused
to allow himself even to contemplate failure, and stifled symptoms
of it with the tyranny of a religious bigot whose creed is assailed.
The Ramgarh garrison had their ears and noses cut off as a punish¬
ment for unjustified surrender, and the castellan was shackled with
irons. The Subadar in charge of the force would have been sum¬
marily executed had not Bhakti Thapa, the Kaji’s more humane
principal lieutenant, interceded on his behalf. It would be a mistake
to think that Amar Singh Thapa was wilfully deceiving himself. He
had been informed of the dispatch of a large reinforcement from
Kathmandu, said to amount to twenty-seven companies of 100
men each. This was known to have almost reached Kumaun, and
he confidently expected that it would join him in Malaun within a
few weeks. He judged that when it arrived he would have enough

   3 The expression he used was ‘the Chiefs of the Deccan’. It is unlikely that
he was referring to the state of Hyderabad. Deccan is probably used in its
general sense of ‘south’ here, the reference being to the Marathas.
                     The Triumph of Ochterlony                     273

men to launch a decisive counter-attack against Ochterlony. Mean¬
while, he made a determined effort to redeem the worst conse¬
quences of the capitulation of Ramgarh by reinforcing the troops
still in Taragarh and Chamba.
   When he heard of the arrival of these extra men, Cooper,
hitherto occupied in strengthening the defences of Ramgarh, which
now replaced Nalagarh as the principal British depot, made pre¬
parations for reducing the two remaining forts. The eighteen-
pounders bombarded Taragarh for more than twenty-four hours
without making a breach. At daybreak on the 12th it was discovered
that the fort had been evacuated during the night. When Cooper’s
men occupied it, they found that the wall facing the battery had
been lined, so that the total thickness was twelve feet at the bastions
and sixteen feet at the curtain.
   It now only remained to reduce Chamba, six miles still farther
north. The auxiliaries under Lawtie pushed forward to take up a
position about 350 yards before the fort, and the pioneers set to
work yet once more to make a road. The Bengal Pioneers or Sappers
were not without their critics. They were said to have malingered
in Java, and to have refused to bury the dead. But there is no in¬
dication that indolence or caste-consciousness ever affected their
performance in any of the Nepal campaigns. In fact, they were a
mainstay of Ochterlony’s effort. By 16 March an eighteen-pounder
had been set up before Chamba, and it opened fire at half-past
eleven. This time the effects were swift. After only an hour one
complete bastion had been reduced to rubble, and the garrison
surrendered. There were only fifty men in the fort, the rest having
already absconded. So greatly did they dread the wrath of their
commander, that they begged for quarter as prisoners of war, which
was granted. Seeing that they remained very apprehensive lest in
his vindictiveness the Kaji should make their families atone for the
capitulation, Cooper agreed to continue firing blank cartridges, so
that Amar Singh should not guess what had occurred, while two of
their number went to Malaun to bring away the prisoners’ women
and children.
   So were the enemy dislodged from their last footholds on the
Ramargh ridge. Only small detachments of auxiliaries were needed
to man the captured fortresses, and the 1,100 regulars under
Cooper were made free to assist Ochterlony’s measures against the
main Gurkha army in Malaun.
274                  The Triumph of Ochterlony
    When Amar Singh Thapa realized that Chamba had surrendered
 and its garrison defected, he was enraged. To give vent to his vexa¬
tion and to reanimate his troops, whose morale was flagging under
the inertia caused by Ochterlony’s blockade, he at last made up his
mind to take the offensive. But he planned only a token attack,
whose virtue was sure success rather than tactical purpose. He
selected as his prey not one of the detachments of regular troops in
the Gamrola valley, but a party of Sikh auxiliaries who had taken
post on the western flank of the Malaun ridge, above the Gambar
river. Late on 19 March, he sent a party of 400 men from Malaun.
They crept towards the unsuspecting Sikhs in the half-light of the
evening, and then lay quiet until the moon had gone down. 300
 Sikhs were in an outwork and some 900 below, in the main
stockade. The Nepalis assaulted in three groups, screaming their
war cry. There was a noise like that of ripping tarpaulin as the first
body discharged a volley; then the second and third attacked the
outpost and stockade simultaneously. The Sikhs, taken completely
unawares, made only feeble efforts to defend themselves. Those in
the outpost were literally made mincemeat of, and only sixty
survived. In the stockade there was pandemonium, and all the
occupants fled, long hair loose and streaming.
    But this cheap triumph can have caused only transitory exulta¬
tion among the troops in Malaun, because it had no important long¬
term consequences and was not dazzling enough to disguise the
grave portent of other events to the north, south and east. Slowly, a
cordon was tightening around them.
    Maha Chand of Bilaspur, at last convinced that the grand
Gurkha vessel was doomed, had lowered himself hurriedly into the
modest lifeboat proffered by the British. For a fortnight he had
resisted Ochterlony’s summons to change his allegiance, hoping to
barter his support against a recognition of his claim to the Twelve
Lordships; but at the end of February, hearing of Arnold’s advance
towards his capital and aware of the new posture of affairs, he had
attached himself ‘heart and soul to the British Government’ in re¬
turn for a sanad which confirmed to him only the territories which
he then possessed on the eastern bank of the Sutlaj. He became a
protege of the East India Company, but was exempted from
tribute. When he received news of the Raja’s tergiversation, Shiva
Dat Rai fled across the Sutlaj into the territories of Ranjit Singh,
and Amar Singh Thapa’s remaining influence in Bilaspur was
                      The Triumph of Ochterlony                        275

destroyed. He lost the services of his 1,000 Bilaspur auxiliaries,
while Arnold’s force was furnished with plentiful supplies and
given access to the stronghold of Ratanpur, which was on the
Malaun range and barely two miles north of Malaun fort itself. The
Kaji’s passage to the north was at last stopped, and the co-operation
of O’Brien, who still had not sent Ochterlony a final reply, was made
a matter of little consequence. This was just as well, because it
seems that that extraordinary character had composed his quarrel
with Sansar Chand and given up the idea of deserting. Probably, in
one of his few moments of sober reflection he had realized that he
would have made a poor bargain by exchanging the princely powers,
the unlimited liquor and the copious harem which he enjoyed in
Kotoch for the dubious advantages of a free pardon from the
Governor-General.4 On 1 April, Amar Singh Thapa’s access to the
south was also blocked. On that day, Colonel Cooper, with the
troops from the Ramgarh ridge, occupied a hill on the southern end
of the Malaun range. In its new position his force was only a mile
or two below Surjagarh, the fort south of Malaun which was
occupied by Amar Singh’s best officer, Bhakti Thapa. Meanwhile,
in addition to his accumulating advantages of ground, Ochterlony
had begun to derive great benefit from his own corps of Nepalis.
This was composed of deserters and prisoners of war. At the
beginning of April there were 324 of these in the British camp, and
they had quite won over the Major-General by their sunny nature,
their industry and their eagerness to gratify. He resolved to form
them into a separate battalion of three companies. ‘I shall with the
sanction and approbation of His Excellency call it the “Nasiri
 [friendly] Paltan” and consider myself their commandant and
 patron. These trifles have great weight; and I must confess myself
sanguine in my hopes of their not discrediting my favour.’ It was
this body which formed the nucleus of the regiment later called the
1 st Gurkha Rifles.
    The steady trickle of deserters from Amar Singh Thapa’s camp
was a sure indication that the policy of blockade was beginning to
have an effect. Time, however, was running short. By early March
the pear trees in the Gamrola valley were already in blossom. The
Himalayan spring, in the urgency of its parturience, had pushed
winter violently aside; and within a couple of months it too would
   4 When William Moorcroft visited Kotoch in 1820, O’Brien was still in the
Raja’s employ.
276                  The Triumph of Ochterlony

 be unceremoniously displaced by the rains, when all military
 operations would be impracticable. Determined to deprive his
 adversary of the advantages of such respite, Ochterlony devised a
 complex and daring maneouvre, which, if successful, would give
 him a position on the Malaun ridge from which he could hammer
the fort into submission. As soon as he had finished his work in the
vicinity of Ramgarh, Peter Lawtie began making an intricate re¬
connaissance of the hills around Malaun. Ochterlony afterwards
acknowledged that it was entirely to his ‘intelligent mind, diligent
inquiry, and personal observation’ that he owed the information
essential for the construction of his plan.
   The Malaun ridge rises four and a half thousand feet above the
level of the sea and two thousand above the Gamrola stream, which
flows in a deep channel along its eastern base. The spine of the ridge
is narrow and jagged. The ground falls steeply from it, in places
precipitously, to swell out into broad spurs, on whose level ledges
stand little hamlets. Scraggy vegetation sprouts here and there; but
generally the slopes are arid, gaunt and brutally scarred by water-
worn furrows. On a commanding height towards the northern
extremity was the stone fort of Malaun: long, with square bastions,
and deprived of apparent height by the massive proportions of the
rock on which it sprawled. The cantonments were outside the fort
—a clutter of huts huddling under its eastern walls, protected by a
semi-circular stockade. Bhakti Thapa’s headquarters were about
four miles farther south, in the fort of Surjagarh. The Nepali forces
were concentrated in and about these two centres. Stockades and
redoubts, scattered over the different levels of the ridge, clustered
around them like electrons around nuclei. But the two configura¬
tions did not meet. Between their outer orbits on the crest there
was a vacant space, called Raila Peak by the British.
   Equipped with a thorough knowledge of the ground, Ochterlony
completed his plan. Although it involved several simultaneous
movements, it was basically very simple. His aim was to establish
two positions on the crest of the ridge: one at Raila, to hold Bhakti
Thapa at bay; and one on a vacant site within the system of defences
around Malaun, south of the fort and separated from it by two
intervening stockades. For easy identification, this site was labelled
Dionthal.
   Starting from different positions in the Gamrola valley, three
columns were to advance up the eastern flank of the ridge on con-
                    The Triumph of Ochterlony                   277

verging lines, finally to meet at Raila Peak. At the same time, two
columns were to leave the valley from points farther north and
converge on Dionthal. Such were the main movements of the plan.
But in addition, in order to distract Amar Singh Thapa’s attention
from the columns advancing to Dionthal, a feint attack on the
Malaun cantonments was organized. One party was to advance on
them from the Gamrola valley, while another approached from the
north, so that the two lines of attack were at a right angle. The
northern column was to come from Colonel Arnold’s position at
Ratanpur, and would have to cross the thousand-feet-deep ravine
which separated that fort from Malaun.
   All these movements were to begin on the morning of 15 April,
at a prearranged signal. This was to be given by the central column
of the Raila operation, when it had reached its destination.
   The Raila operation was accomplished without a hitch. The
three columns which were to converge on Raila can be labelled the
left (southernmost), the central, and the right.
   The central column moved first. Led by Lieutenant Fleming, it
quitted the village of Patta in the valley late on the night of 14
April. It consisted of 1,100 men, and included 300 of the Nasiri
Battalion under Lawtie. This was the first occasion when ‘Gurkha’
troops went into action as British mercenaries, and they immediately
impressed their officer by the closeness of their files and their
perfect silence, both maintained over even the most difficult
ground. The column reached Raila Peak at one o’clock in the morn¬
ing of 15 April, having encountered no opposition, and made the
signal flare. This was answered from a hill in the rear of Ochter-
lony’s camp, and the other columns immediately moved. On the
right, Major Innes with the Grenadier Battalion and two six-
pounders moved from headquarters and ascended to Raila ‘in
admirable order’. The left-hand column, led by Lieutenant
Hamilton, moved from a small village called Jainagar on the lower
slopes of the ridge below Surjagarh. It was composed of troops from
Cooper’s post at Lag Hill, at the extreme south of the ridge, who
had moved to their starting position during the night. The column
was fired on from an enemy stockade as it marched up the flank of
the ridge; but the men pressed on in perfect composure and
reached the summit without mishap. Meanwhile Raila Peak had
been stockaded by a group of pioneers, enthusiastically assisted by
the Nasiris, who seemed oblivious of the musket fire from the fort.
278                  The Triumph of Ochterlony

     The Dionthal operation was the focus of Ochterlony’s plan. Two
 columns marched up to the site: Major Laurie’s on the right (400
 auxiliaries), and Colonel Thompson’s on the left (1,300 regulars,
 300 auxiliaries, and two six-pounders). The heads of the columns
 arrived at Dionthal almost at the same time, but the guns still
 lagged a long way behind. A patter of firing to the north telling him
 that the diverting columns had begun their work, Thompson
 mustered his three companies of light infantry and, leaving the rest
 of the combined columns under Laurie to wait at Dionthal for the
 guns, marched boldly northwards up the crest of the ridge to seize
 a position for a battery nearer Malaun. Enemy musketeers, sniping
 from behind rocks and bushes, tried unsuccessfully to check him.
 But as he approached the nearer of the two stockades which com¬
 manded his path to the fort, a party of Nepalis threw themselves
 from it with khukuris drawn. The sepoys, steadfast enough under
 invisible musket shot, shrank at the sight of knives whose lightest
 stroke drew blood. They greatly outnumbered their antagonists;
 but their officers cursed and cajoled in vain. They would not use
their bayonets. Breaking formation, they fell over themselves in
their anxiety to get back to Dionthal, where Laurie and his men were
luckily prepared to cover their retreat. The Nepalis did not attempt
to assault the Dionthal position, but took cover behind rocks and
trees and began sniping. The pioneers worked feverishly to raise a
breastwork; but enemy marksmen were everywhere and because of
the ruggedness of the ground had cover to within twenty yards of
the position. Soon the sepoys were visibly flagging, ammunition
and water were getting low, the six-pounders still did not arrive
and pioneers were being picked off at an alarming rate. Crichton,
the Surgeon, could not cope with all the wounded, and made an
urgent request for assistance. Thompson feared that he would be
unable to strengthen his post sufficiently to withstand the attack
which he was sure must come during the night. Ochterlony was in
agonies of anxiety, and told him to fight to the last man. If his posi¬
tion was lost, the whole plan would be wrecked. During the after¬
noon the Major-General withdrew two companies of infantry from
Raila and transferred them to Dionthal; and Ram Saran, the Raja
of Hindur, provided men to replenish the depleted ranks of
Thompson’s pioneers. Nevertheless, for the rest of the day it re¬
mained touch and go whether the force at Dionthal would be able to
hold its position. The elephants carrying the six-pounders arrived
                    The Triumph of Ochterlony                  279

on the crest late in the afternoon, but there were only eight Euro¬
pean matrosses to serve the guns, and before long one of these had
been wounded. At dusk Thompson was still in possession of his
ground, but the hours of darkness were a time of terrible suspense.
All the troops knew that the worst was yet to come, because it was
certain that sooner or later the Nepalis would make a full-scale
attempt to dislodge them.
    It was a mercy that the diversion had long averted from Thomp¬
son’s detachment the brunt of the Nepali resistance.
    Captain Charles Showers, who led the column from Ratanpur,
was an earnest young officer who combined magnificent courage and
chivalry with a puritanical sobriety. He had sworn that he would
never accept a challenge to a duel, and always said that he trusted
to his profession to provide him with a more appropriate claim to
the title of soldier.
    At the head of the battalion (the ist/ipth Native Infantry) of
which he had assumed the command at the outset of the war, he
marched from Ratanpur early on the morning of 15 April. He had
first to descend the slopes which plunge into the ravine between
Ratanpur and Malaun, and then cover the long and difficult ascent
to the Nepali cantonments. Its climb took his column by an enemy
stockade, which was on a ledge to its left, about 100 feet below
Malaun fort. This was passed without incident; but at about half¬
past ten, when the force was half-way between the stockade and its
objective, a party of the enemy issued from the cantonments and
came down to the attack. Showers, seeing that they were numeric¬
ally considerably inferior to his own column, commanded his men
not to load but to scatter the pack with their bayonets. The first
part of his order they obeyed. The second part they did not.
Showers had forgotten what had been demonstrated time and time
again: that the Bengal sepoy’s musket was his fetish. His men
hung back, chilled with fear. Striving to inspirit them by his own
example, Showers drew his sword and ran forward alone, out¬
stripping even his orderlies. A Gurkha officer came towards him.
Showers coaxed him forward with taunting gestures, and soon had
him on a desperate defensive. Then, with a sudden vigorous lunge,
he killed the Gurkha. As he struggled to pull out his sabre, he
swayed under the weight of the corpse, which was on higher
ground. Seeing him encumbered, the Nepalis sprang forward and
stabbed him to death. Horrified, his sepoys receded. The enemy
28o                 The Triumph of Ochterlony
took up the pursuit, gaining confidence as the momentum of their
descent increased. Some sepoys turned about and ran; and as
others followed their example the retreat became a general flight
down the crumbling contours of the gorge. Not until they reached
the plateau of a small village 1,500 feet below did Lieutenant
Rutledge, on whom the command had devolved, manage to halt
and rally the men. Once they had had time to load their muskets
they became more amenable, and responded obediently when
Rutledge ordered them to chase the enemy back up the hill. Colonel
Arnold had been watching operations from Ratanpur, and when he
saw Showers killed and his men routed, he immediately ordered
forward a third column of diversion. In a stockade called Tipnu, on
the eastern side of the ridge below Ratanpur, there was a party of
Sikh auxiliaries and a Subadar’s party of regulars. Arnold directed
these troops to advance on that enemy stockade below the canton¬
ments which Showers had passed on his ascent. This they did with
exemplary enthusiasm. The Subadar was killed; but the leader of
the Sikhs, Ghoshi Ram, led the party right up to the stockade and
would probably have entered it had not some of his men wavered
at the last minute. Rutledge’s fresh advance to their right now
afforded this party support and cover for its retreat.
   Meanwhile, farther south, Captain Bowyer, leading the second
diverting column from the valley floor, had reached Malaun village,
which was about 1,000 feet below the fort. At about eleven o’clock
came news of Showers’s death and the overpowering of his column.
Bowyer persisted at his post for another hour and then, deciding
that action against the Malaun cantonments with his limited re¬
sources alone was bound to be abortive, he ordered a withdrawal to
the Tipnu stockade. The retreat was performed with field-day
precision, one half of the detachment retiring to a rear position
and the remainder then following under cover of its fire. It was
during their retreat that the sepoys of this detachment finally
derived support from the other diverting column, Arnold having
ordered Rutledge to incline to his left to help cover Bowyer’s
movement. The detachment finally reached the Tipnu stockade
with no more than fourteen casualties.
   Despite their failure to penetrate the enemy cantonments, the
diverting columns had fulfilled their main purpose. For several
crucial hours during the morning they had almost monopolized
Amar Singh Thapa’s attention and thereby greatly lessened the
                     The Triumph of Ochterlony                      281

opposition with which the Dionthal columns had had to contend.
But their achievement had been costly. In an army in which their
importance was so exceptional and their numbers so inadequate,
the loss of any European officer was no light matter; but when the
officer was ‘most zealous, brave, and excellent’, which is how
Ochterlony described Showers, the loss was especially grave.
However, Showers had proved his merit as a soldier, even in the
estimation of his enemy. In the East, it is a gesture of respect for a
brave foe to cover his remains. When the bearers went up the next
day to retrieve Showers’s body, they found it laid on a bed of leaves,
wrapped in fine cloth.
    Thus ended the grand concerted manoeuvre of 15 April. When
night fell Amar Singh Thapa was brooding within the walls of
Malaun, conscious that he had reached the most critical emergency
of his career. If the British were not expelled from the post they had
gained at Dionthal, Malaun must be either strangled or bombarded
into submission. Early in the night, Bhakti Thapa decided that his
own post, Surjagarh, must be sacrificed in an attempt to preserve
his chief’s headquarters. Prevented from attacking Thompson from
the south by the intervening British post of Raila, his force was of
no more use to Amar Singh than a severed limb. He therefore
mustered his men and, proceeding stealthily below the crest on the
western flank of the ridge, made for Malaun. He hoped to pass
Innes’s and Thompson’s posts unobserved, or at least unimpeded.
But his design had been anticipated, and Lieutenant Murray, in
charge of the Hindur auxiliaries at Raila, had placed himself and
his men in a position commanding the Gurkha’s route. Falling
pitilessly on their inveterate enemies, the Hindurians turned
Bhakti’s progress to Malaun into an ungainly tumble.
    Bhakti Thapa was the bravest officer in the Gurkha army, and
the most popular. When he arrived in Malaun, Amar Singh
appointed him to lead a dawn attack against Thompson’s position.
He assigned to his command the elite of his army: 2,000 warriors,
all in scarlet broadcloth. It is said that Bhakti delivered his son into
the Kaji’s care, and solemnly swore that he would return victorious
or remain dead on the field. Shortly after four o’clock on the
morning of 16 April, having adjured his two wives to be prepared to
sacrifice themselves on his funeral pyre, he led his men from the
fort. Silently, they took up positions on the narrow ledges around
Dionthal, clustering thick as bristles on a hairbrush.
282                 The Triumph of Ochterlony

    At a given signal they attacked, with a satanic din of war-cries
 and trumpets. Musketeers opened fire from close range on the
 northern front and both flanks of the post at Dionthal, but their
 main offensive was directed against Thompson’s two six-pounders.
 Bhakti knew that if he could but silence these, the proven superior¬
 ity of his men in close combat would be decisive. The guns had
 been placed in embrasures commanding the smooth ground on the
 western side of the position, which was the only approach free of
 natural impediments. Naked khukuris in the right hand, loaded
 muskets in the left, the Nepali assaulting party surged out of the
 darkness, straight towards the cannon. There was a vivid flash, a
 crash, and red-hot blasts of grapeshot dispersed them. So many
 Nepalis were killed and crippled that their charge could not be
 completed, and Bhakti was forced to withdraw the party to make
 good the losses. There were only seven British gunners. They
 worked with fanatical haste to recharge the pieces, but were falling
 one after another under the fire of the encircling enemy snipers.
 Again the Nepalis charged; and again the hilltop shuddered and
flared briefly into brilliance as they were blown away from the
mouths of the guns. Their defiance of these impassive artefacts had
an ecstatic nobility. Still once more the Gurkha chief rallied and
re-formed his men. Behind him, on a hill within musket range of
Dionthal, was Amar Singh Thapa himself. He stood conspicuously
by a stand of colours, urging on his troops. Again Bhakti Thapa
ordered his men to charge the guns, and again they obeyed
magnificently. In the British battery Lieutenant Cartwright of the
artillery now had only one gunner undisabled, and with him was
loading one of the pieces himself. The other was being served by
Lieutenant Armstrong of the pioneers and Lieutenant Hutchinson
of the engineers, with the help of two pioneer sergeants. Before the
next discharge could be made, one of the sergeants spun away, shot
through the head. It seemed, for a second or two, that the battery
was lost. But then, when the Nepalis were only yards away, the
guns finally recoiled and disgorged, and swept them flat. Thwarted
in this design, yet still sustained by his adamantine courage,
Bhakti Thapa collected the remnants of his storming column and
marched them over the crest to the eastern flank of the ridge, with
the intention of assaulting the British position from that direction.
Here Major Laurie and the Hindur Raja’s auxiliaries were posted
with a body of sepoys in a small outwork. Thompson decided that
                     The Triumph of Ochterlony                     283

this was the moment to counter-attack, and he ordered Laurie’s
detachment to make a sortie with swords and bayonets. If the
sepoys had misgivings, the Hindur troops had none. They rushed
among Bhakti’s men, and the sepoys, inflamed by their example,
followed close after. For nearly two hours, the enemy disputed every
yard of ground. Masses of combatants ebbed and flowed in the slow
straining rhythms of battle. No advantage was gained by either side
until suddenly, when light was beginning to turn the gunsmoke
yellowish grey, it was as if an invincible weariness quelled the
Nepalis. In trance-like abjection, they began to retire. The Hindur
troops followed up their advantage, and accomplished a massacre
just as the sun was rising.
    Amongst the grisly debris littering the windswept crest was
the corpse of a Nepali in the full-dress uniform of an officer. It was
brought into the camp at Dionthal for identification, and the Nasiris
sorrowfully confirmed that it was that of Bhakti Thapa. The reason
for his men’s sudden surrender to despair in the middle of the
battle was now apparent. Ochterlony ordered that the body be
covered with shawls, and sent with an escort to Malaun. That
night, as Charles Showers was being buried with military honours
in the valley, there was a bright glow on the heights. It was Bhakti
Thapa’s funeral pyre, into the flames of which, in full sight of the
British troops on the ridge, the Gurkha hero’s distraught widows
flung themselves.
   When the muster roll was called, it was found that Thompson’s
force had suffered 253 casualties—but of these only 30 were fatal.
Amar Singh’s losses were much greater. 150 dead were left on the
field alone, and it was reckoned that his total casualties must have
reached at least 500.
    But the Gurkha Kaji had lost more than his best officer and a
quarter of his army. He had never commanded the affections of
his men; and from this time he was deprived even of their loyalty.
Large numbers deserted every day, despite his brutal efforts to
prevent them. To add to his troubles, the expected reinforcement
from the east had been detained in Kumaun by Brahma Shah and
did not now seem likely ever to arrive in Malaun. Then another of
his subject allies, the Vizir of Basahar, defected to the British. This
minister, who had formed a part of Amar Singh’s retinue since the
subjugation of cis-Sutlaj Basahar in 1811, had come into Ochter-
lony’s camp to proffer his allegiance even before the battle of
284                  The Triumph of Ochterlony

Malaun, and on 13 April had left to promote rebellion in his own
country. Within a few weeks news arrived from William Fraser that
the Nepali occupationary force in Basahar, led by Kirti Rana, had
been attacked and dispersed. Meanwhile, Ochterlony’s cordon
round Malaun had continued to tighten. One by one all the
enemy posts around Malaun surrendered and were occupied,
and work began on clearing a way for heavy ordnance. On 7 May
two brass twelve-pounders, strapped to elephants, arrived on the
 crest.
    As the situation outside Malaun became so ominous as to leave
 no room for hope, the spirit of mutiny increased within. When they
 saw the arrival of the twelve-pounders, all his principal sirdars, or
 lieutenants, presented Amar Singh Thapa with an ultimatum. They
 demanded either food for their men, or some decisive line of con¬
 duct. But Amar Singh, powerless to attack again, yet withheld by
 stubbornness and pride from opening negotiations for surrender,
 refused to stir from a state of taciturn inactivity. Peevishly, he
 ordered his officers to await events; but they had no patience for
 futile temporizing. They gathered their men, amounting to nearly
 1,600, left the fort and pledged their allegiance to the British. To
 Amar Singh’s army, reduced already to half its original 4,000 by
 casualties and desertions, this was the death blow. The old man in
 Malaun now had about him only 250 fighting men. At last he sent
 an ungracious note to Ochterlony, demanding to know his wishes;
 but the Major-General replied that according to usage all proposals
must come from him. Thereupon the Kaji relapsed again into
sullen silence, struggling with his pride and—who knows?—
perhaps still clutching at the hope of a last-minute intervention by
 Ranjit Singh. It appears that he made another application to the
 Sikh about this time; but Ranjit, while confessing himself surprised
at the swiftness of his defeat, had too many problems of his own to
help redeem it.
    By 9 May emplacements for the twelve-pounders and mountain
howitzers had been constructed within battering distance of the
southern aspect of the fort, and on the following morning, at seven
o’clock, the pieces opened fire. The bombardment continued all
day, save for a few intervals during which notes were exchanged.
The effect of the twelve-pounders was perceptible, but slow; and
the mountain howitzers, because of the flimsiness of Hastings’s
collapsible carriages, tumbled over like toy cannon every fourth
                      The Triumph of Ochterlony                    285

 round or so. Ochterlony therefore decided that he must bring up
 the eighteen-pounders; and it was the sight of fatigue parties labour¬
 ing up the flank of the ridge with these instruments of sure destruc¬
 tion that finally wrung from Amar Singh Thapa a surly concession
 of defeat.
    His youngest son, Ram Das, came to tell the British that his
 father was willing to negotiate on the basis of the surrender of the
 fort; and in reply Ochterlony offered liberal terms. Malaun and all
 the forts west of the Jumna, including Jaithak, were to be evacuated,
 and such members of their garrisons who did not choose to take
 service with the British would be allowed to march unmolested
 back into the eastern provinces of Nepal with all their private
 property. In addition, Amar Singh Thapa and his kinsmen would
 be permitted to march with all their arms and accoutrements.
 Ochterlony’s forbearance is all the more apparent when it is
 recalled that he and his army, according to the usages of war, were
 entitled to the contents of Malaun (which included the Kaji’s re¬
 putedly immense store of treasure) and of all the other captured forts
 as prize money. His motive in conciliating the Gurkha was to
 induce him to use those powers, which he was known to possess but
 which he not so far exercised, to negotiate for a general peace
 treaty. His hopes in this direction, however, were thwarted by
 Hastings, who had other plans. Brahma Shah, governor of Kumaun,
and a known opponent of the Thapa administration in Kathmandu,
had signified his desire to the Gurkha negotiator. The Governor-
 General reckoned that he would be both more amenable and more
 sincere as an agent than Amar Singh Thapa, and fancied that if the
Thapas were denied the prestige attaching to the conclusion of a
satisfactory peace treaty, their ruin, already half-assured by the
disastrous issue of the war, would be completed, and the way
prepared for a return to power of the pro-British Panre party.
Ochterlony was therefore informed that the settlement with Amar
Singh should embrace no more than the conditions of the latter’s
own immediate surrender.
    Smarting with chagrin and humiliation, Amar Singh resigned
himself to relinquishing the territories which it had taken him a
decade of hard campaigning to acquire. He was not noble in defeat.
At the last minute, a letter arrived from Brahma Shah, who was
ignorant of the latest developments in the west, announcing his own
capitulation and advising Amar Singh to follow suit. The Kaji
 286                 The Triumph of Ochterlony

  thereupon insisted that a clause be inserted into Ochterlony’s
  convention, stating that he agreed to its terms only at the behest of
  the governor of Kumaun; and when informing the Raja of his
  capitulation, he expressly stated that he had agreed to it on the
  authority of Brahma Shah’s letter. It was a shabby stratagem,
  dictated equally by vanity and malice. It was calculated not only to
  remove the obloquy attaching to his own defeat from himself, but
 also to transfer it to his hated political enemy.
     So he left Malaun, body ailing and mind poisoned by wormwood,
 and made his way slowly back to Kathmandu. The empire which he
 had laboured so long to build had collapsed around him, and the
 army which he had so proudly and magisterially led had rejected
 him to serve his enemy. No fewer than 2,000 Nepali soldiers had
 elected to stay with the British.
     As for Ochterlony, he had snatched celebrity while on the brink
 of obscure old age. From being one of the least known he had
 become one of the most famous of Bengal officers and an acknow¬
 ledged favourite of the Governor-General. It had been intended
 that he should return to his old command at Allahabad at the
 conclusion of the campaign; instead it was Marley who was banished
 to that obscure backwater, vacating a place on the general staff
which Ochterlony was appointed to fill. In a flattering dispatch
from Headquarters, he was asked to proceed to Nahan and assume
command of the division under Martindell; but it so happened, as
we have seen, that Jaithak surrendered before this appointment
 became operative.
    Ochterlony had, together with Gillespie, Martindell and
George Wood, been gazetted K.C.B. early in 1815, before news of
his success reached England; and when the Court of Directors of
the East India Company heard of the resounding victory that he
had achieved, they supplemented the award with a pension of
f 1,000 a year, ‘to enable him to live in a style commensurate with
the dignity bestowed on him by the Prince Regent’.
    Ochterlony’s satisfaction was great; but it was not complete,
for the comrade he had come to love like a son never knew of the
victory for which they had both worked so hard. The death of Peter
Lawtie of a typhus infection, only a few days before the surrender
of Malaun, cut him to the quick. He requested all the officers of his
division to wear mourning for a month—a gesture unprecedented
for someone so young.
                       The Triumph of Ochterlony                            287

   It was by the division from which least had been expected that
most had been gained. Hastings was right to attribute the victory
above all else to Ochterlony’s brilliant quality as a commander—
but in what, particularly, did that quality consist? A list of his
merits would include all those of a good general—imagination,
opportunism, courage, audacity and caution, compounded in
exactly the right proportions. But more than in any of these, his
quality consisted in that perspicacity which had enabled him to
foresee the necessity of guns, and in that calm patience and dogged
determination which had enabled him to eschew flashy exhibition
of prowess and concentrate with absolute seriousness on making
use of them. Without the use of artillery he could not have won the
contest. Of that there is no doubt.
   His infantry had been poor. The Bengal sepoys had made a show
that compared very unfavourably with that of their antagonists.
There had been, as ever, individual instances of bravery and hero¬
ism; but time and time again they had demonstrated that in the
particular art of close combat which mountain warfare demanded
they were quite unable to match the courage and skill of the men
against whom they were pitted. An anonymous civilian5 who
accompanied the expedition was appalled by the lack of confidence,
the trepidation and the apathy which he had observed on their part.
It caused him to draw some alarming conclusions concerning the
worth of the Bengal army. ‘They turned’, he wrote, ‘almost
uniformly from the contest before a blow had been struck, under
the influence of a moral impulse which deterred them from proving
the badness of the ground and the inferiority of the bayonet.’
And again: ‘The physical mass of the army bent or broke like a
useless weapon whenever a blow was to be struck.’
   These are severe strictures and perhaps, in his desire to shock
the authorities at home from their complacency, he exaggerated

    5 Author of Military Sketches of the Goorkha War (p. xiv). W. G. Hamilton
has suggested (J.U.S.I.I., xli, no. 189: Oct. 1912, p. 456) that this was Captain
Edmund Cartwright, Ochterlony’s Major of Brigade. This is certainly not so.
The author, in his preface, distinctly states that he is a civilian and that he
returned to England six years after the war. Cartwright is disqualified on both
counts. It is possible that the author was Ochterlony’s own Eurasian son, R. P.
Ochterlony. He held an official position as Assistant to his father until July
1815, so it is more than likely that he accompanied him during the first cam¬
paign. He announced his intention of resigning his post in July 1815, but could
have accompanied his father ex officio on the second expedition in 1816. See
Ludhiana Records, pp. 135, 349, 45^. for references to this person.
288                  The Triumph of Ochterlony

 somewhat. It is a fact that his accounts of engagements tend to
 differ from those contained in official dispatches, in that they present
 a much less flattering picture of the behaviour of the sepoys. This
 could be partly tendentious denigration; but, on the other hand, it
could be because his view, as a civilian, was less clouded than that
of the army officers, whose partiality and complaisance were the
subject of more than one commentator’s criticism. But the essential
truth of his complaint is indisputable. It is attested by Ochterlony’s
own views, and by his consistent avoidance of full-scale infantry
engagements. Infantry had never formed the spearhead of his
offensives. There had been no escalades, and the foot soldiers had
played a secondary role in the capture of every fort. The most
 important attribute throughout had been his artillery.
    But it was not only the particular and local circumstance of the
poorness of his infantry which had induced Ochterlony to rely most
heavily on his guns. He had discovered principles which enjoined
their use in mountain warfare in general.
    The first of these principles was that in mountain warfare it was
much less important for an invader to equip himself to pursue than
to equip himself to dislodge his enemy. It had been assumed by
many, including the Governor-General, that the Nepalis’ main
advantage would be their mobility. The premise which underlay
Hastings’s planning was that his divisions would have to deal with an
elusive antagonist. He had expected Amar Singh Thapa to try to
move either eastwards, or northwards, across the Sutlaj, and had
thought it likely that the main Kathmandu army would try to
escape to the west. For this reason, he had urged his commanders
to make lightness and mobility their primary attributes. But
Ochterlony had doubted, from the outset, that this was accurate
reasoning. He had therefore equipped himself to fight a static, forti¬
fied enemy; and the event had completely vindicated his policy. It
had transpired that in practice the Gurkhas treated as their main
asset not their elusiveness, but their inaccessibility. They had shown
themselves very unwilling to budge from positions they had occu¬
pied, and only abandoned them as a last resort. It was his under¬
estimation of the advantages which defenders derive from mountain
topography which had caused Hastings to suppose that the Gurkhas
would try to concentrate their forces. Unlike Ochterlony—and
Napoleon—he failed to realize that in mountain warfare the
attacker is at a disadvantage, since his main task must be to oust
                       The Triumph of Ochterlony                          289

his adversary from positions which are virtually immune to assault.6
It was the Nepalis’ reluctance to move, their stolid defence of every
yard of ground, which had rendered artillery indispensable. Even
with the best soldiers in the world, it seems unlikely that Ochter¬
lony could have taken their hill forts without it.
    The second principle which Ochterlony had discovered and
illustrated was that in mountain warfare the delays which artillery
causes need not increase the likelihood of the invaders’ being
attacked. It was commonly believed then, and later, that they must.
Twenty-five years after the Nepal War, Sir Jasper Nicolls sent a
body of infantry to force the Khyber pass without guns, arguing that
they would delay the column and increase its exposure to fire.
Yet if there was one precept for which military theorists were
beholden to Ochterlony it was that in mountain war such delay was
no liability, because the invader can partake of his adversary’s
principal advantage—inaccessibility. By adopting the mode of
defending advantageous ground with stockades—an expedient
entirely novel in the Bengal army—he had virtually eliminated the
 risk of counter-attack. Only twice during the whole campaign had
detachments of his army had to sustain a major offensive while
waiting to bring guns into play—at Tibu and at Dionthal—and on
both occasions they had been saved by a combination of natural
 and artificial defences.
     On the occasion of the Gurkhas’ defeat, ‘a prominent native’ is
 reported to have remarked to a Bengal staff officer: ‘Of what use is
 it to fight with the English? Beaten or successful, they are always
 conquerors!’7
     It is easy to see what he meant. It had not been granted to any of
the British divisions to deserve success; but they had nevertheless
won, because it had been in the power of Ochterlony’s guns to
 command it.

   6 Napoleon wrote as follows on the subject: ‘Dans la guerre de montagnes,
celui qui attaque a du desavantage . . . Dans la guerre de montagnes, obliger
l’ennemi a sortir de ses positions pour attaquer les votres, c’est ce que nous
avons dit Stre dans le genie et dans la bonne conduite de cette guerre . . . Ne
jamais attaquer les troupes qui occupent de bonnes positions . . . mais les
debusquer en occupant des camps sur les flancs ou leurs derrieres.’ (Quoted by
Hough, The Englishman, 16 Oct. 1846.)
  7 Quoted in the Asiatic Journal for May 1816, p. 428.
                                   X

         THE CONQUEST OF KUMAUN

H       asting s’s original strategy included an attack on Kumaun.
         He appreciated that its position on the west bank of the Kali
         river would make this province a foothold and base for any
reinforcements which Kathmandu might send to the western
theatre of the war, and the incentive to invade it was the more
especially strong as it promised to succumb very easily. The num¬
ber of troops in Almora, the capital, was estimated by reliable
informants as between 300 and 600 only; and the disaffection of
Brahma Shah, the Gurkha governor, was well known at Head¬
quarters. Francis Hamilton, Hyder Hearsey and William Fraser
were all of the opinion that he would forswear his allegiance to the
Thapa government in Kathmandu if sufficient inducement was
offered. It was therefore determined that while Hyder Hearsey was
busy raising the corps of irregulars which was to help effect
military occupation of the province, overtures should be made with
a view to encouraging the Gurkha to apostatize. He was to be
offered a jagir (estate) under the protection of the Company—
possibly in the Gurkha province of Doti, on the eastern bank of the
Kali, of which his brother, Hasti Dal, was at present governor.
   Thomas Rutherfurd, the Assistant-Surgeon at Moradabad, who
had extensive interests in Kumaun hemp, rather fancied himself as
a diplomat. Without any authorization from the government, he
sent an agent to Brahma Shah and invited him to join the British
cause. Rutherfurd’s efforts were not appreciated at Headquarters.
Much to his disappointment, he was scolded for meddling and told
that it was not the Governor-General’s intention to appoint him
Political Agent for the affairs of Kumaun. Hastings, deeming it
‘advisable that the conduct of this important branch of our
measures should be vested in an individual of more approved
talents, judgement, and political experience’, selected the Honor¬
able Edward Gardner1 for the post. Gardner was William Fraser’s
fellow Assistant at the Delhi Residency. Like his colleague, he
   1 Not Gardiner, as given in the D.N.B. (s.v. William Linnaeus Gardner).
                       The Conquest of Kumaun                        291

 permitted himself eccentricities. In common with Hindu and
 Muslim society, he wore immense whiskers and abjured pork and
 beef; but his equable temperament and courtly manners made him
 better suited to diplomacy than was Fraser. He had a flair for
 oriental languages, and had qualified with distinction in Persian
 and Hindustani at the College of Fort William in 1802. Reaching
 Moradabad in the middle of November 1814, Gardner made his
 own soundings and discovered fewer encouraging signs than he had
 been led to expect. Brahma Shah’s enigmatic reception of Ruther-
 furd’s agent had, it was true, evinced a certain indecision; but
 other intelligence represented the Governor to be raising troops
 and making preparations for resistance. Gardner was personally
 inclined to discredit reports of the Gurkha’s infirm loyalty, but he
 suggested that it was possible that the presence of Amar Singh
 Thapa’s officers was preventing him from divulging his true dis¬
 position. He recommended that some form of military demonstra¬
tion be made at once against Kumaun, as a means of provoking
 Brahma Shah into disclosing his true sympathies.
    But the calamities in Garhwal meant that all available regular
troops were now occupied, and Hastings did not at this stage
contemplate sending irregulars alone into Kumaun. Early in
 December, however, his tour of the upper provinces brought him
to Moradabad, and Gardner, who was very keen to satisfy the
expectations of military assistance which had been aroused among
the recalcitrant inhabitants of Kumaun, was able to exert direct
persuasion on members of the Governor-General’s suite—
especially on John Adam, the Political Secretary, who was a
personal friend. Perhaps even more decisive was the presence at
Moradabad of Lieutenant-Colonel William Gardner, Edward’s
cousin. This was a remarkable character. Beginning his military
career in the King’s service, he had served under Hastings (then
the Earl of Moira) at Quiberon, in 1795. Some time afterwards he
had quitted the King’s army in order to try his fortune as a free¬
lance in India. He had entered the service of Holkar, the Maratha
prince of Indore, and when on a mission to Cambay had sought and
obtained the hand of the thirteen-year-old Begam, thereby becom¬
ing brother-in-law to Hyder Hearsey. After a quarrel with
Holkar, in which he made to cut the Maratha down, he had fled
Edward Gardner was a brother of Alan, 2nd Baron Gardner—see Lady Nugent’s
Journal, ii, pp. 6, 9.
Map 5. Illustrating the operations in Kumaun in 1815
                     The Conquest of Kumaun                      293

from Indore and taken service with Amrit Rao, adoptive brother of
the Peshwa of Poona. Gardner made a spectacular escape from the
clutches of this prince in 1804, when he clambered down a fifty-
foot precipice, swam a river in full flood and disguised himself as a
grass-cutter in order to join Lord Lake. He had been in the
Company’s employ ever since, latterly as the commander of the
corps of irregular horse which bore his name, though he was only a
pensioner and his rank was purely nominal, or local.
   William Gardner was in very easy circumstances in 1814,
enjoying, by special dispensation, possession of the considerable
estate near Agra which had been bestowed on his wife by the
Emperor of Delhi; and he had no material object to seek in the
command of an expedition into Kumaun. But he was still only in
his early forties, and had far from exhausted his superabundant
energy. Hastings, for his part, admired the experience and
expertise of the eighty or so ex-Maratha officers now on Company
pensions, and respected the patriotic motives which had induced
them to forsake positions of great power and remuneration and
join the British in 1804. He was always pleased to grant them some
favour in return. It was no doubt this disposition, together with
characteristic feelings of generosity towards an old fellow cam¬
paigner, which caused him to change his mind and consent to a
‘hazardous’ military expedition, which was cast more in the old
Maratha then the modern Company mould. Gardner, assisted by
such of the ex-Maratha officers as appeared eligible, was per¬
mitted to raise a corps of 3,000 irregular infantry from Rohilkhand.
This, together with Hearsey’s corps, was to commence the invasion
of Kumaun, pending the availability of a supporting force of regu¬
lars. Gardner was to be furnished with a couple of six-pounder field
guns, a few elephants and Mr. Rutherfurd as chief medical officer,
commissary, postmaster, chief of intelligence and general factotum.
   Hastings was right to describe it as a ‘hazardous effort’. The
martial populace of Rohilkhand consisted of Afghan immigrants,
mostly of Pathan extraction, who, although individually intrepid,
were instinctively cavalry rather than infantry soldiers, were not
susceptible to discipline and unlike Hindus, were not renowned for
loyalty to their salt.
   There was no shortage of volunteers. Both Gardner and Hearsey
recruited in the neighbourhood of Rampur, the estate of a semi¬
independent Muslim nawab, whose capital was the resort of the
294                  The Conquest of Kumaun

 thousands of Pathans who came down from Afghanistan every year
 in search of employment as mercenaries. By the beginning of
 January 1815 Gardner had collected 1,600 men. Soon after, he was
joined by the body of Pathans who had taken service with the
 Gurkhas at the outbreak of the war, and these swelled his corps to a
number in excess of its permitted limit. The 500 surplus troops
were put at the disposal of the exiled Raja of Doti, who, it was
 decided, should be encouraged to make a diversion into his old
territories. This would prevent Hasti Dal from crossing the Kali and
going to the assistance of his brother in Kumaun. As an extra
insurance against this eventuality, it was arranged that Hearsey’s
force should move up the western bank of the Kali and secure the
ghats. Harak Deva Joshi arrived at Gardner’s headquarters at
 Kashipur early in January. At the invitation of Edward Gardner,
who was struck by his intelligence and persuaded that his local
knowledge and influence could be turned to good account, he
agreed to accompany the expedition.
    Gardner left Kashipur on 11 February, after having been delayed
first by lack of porters and then by tempestuous weather. His
advance to Almora, over snow-covered hills and through dark and
dripping deodar forests, was arduous, but largely uneventful.
Always remembering that the morale of a force such as his could
not survive the shock of a defeat, his constant concern was to avoid
direct confrontation with the enemy and proceed by outwitting
rather than by thrashing them. Never did he take unnecessary
risks for the sake of personal glory. He constantly (though un¬
successfully) urged Hearsey to attack Almora from the east while
his own activities distracted Brahma Shah’s attentions to the west,
and did not covet that opportunity for himself.
    The main trade route to Almora from the plains followed the
Kosila river, which approaches Almora from the south-west. In
order to confound the enemy, Gardner decided to take a longer and
much more difficult subsidiary path, which stretched across
country by way of Ranikhet and Ryuni and approached Almora
from the north-west. As soon as he learnt of the direction of his
march, Brahma Shah sent about 1,500 men, almost the whole of his
force, to oppose Gardner at Ranikhet. This is a small shrine,
situated at the northern end of a long mountainous ridge which
rises some 6,000 feet above the sea and stretches like a natural
barrier across the western approaches to Almora. Gardner deftly
                      The Conquest of Kumaun                     295

 foiled this attempt by sending a lightly equipped detachment,
 comprising almost half his force and led by Mohan Singh, a native
 officer of his own corps of horse, to turn the southern end of the
 ridge and occupy a summit called Sihayi Devi, which lies between
 Ranikhet and Almora. Fearful of being cut off, the Nepalis
 abandoned their positions on the ridge and hurried back to Almora,
 leaving the northern route open again. Despite assurances to the
 contrary from the guides, this path proved too difficult for the
 elephants. Gardner had to leave them and have the guns dragged by
 teams of hillmen from Rutherfurd’s commissariat establishment.
 The force left Ranikhet on 25 March, and took until late on the
 29th to cover the sixteen-odd miles to Katarmal. This is a hill
 on the western bank of the Kosila, almost facing Almora, which is
 on the eastern bank. It was occupied by an enemy force when
 Gardner approached, but they decamped during the night of 28
 March.
    Having secured a position whence he could effectively impede all
 Brahma Shah’s contacts with the west, Gardner was content to
 beleaguer Almora until the regulars came. His magnanimity was
 appreciated at Headquarters, and Hastings commended him for ‘so
generously spurning the temptation of assaulting the city before
 Colonel Nicolls should come up, and availing himself (though at
the hazard of the public interest) of what might have proved a
brilliant opportunity for himself’. Before long there was evidence
to show that his blockade, in which the local landholders and
peasants enthusiastically co-operated, was very effective. Spies,
deserters and intercepted correspondence all told the same story.
The Nepali troops were without pay and so straitened for pro¬
visions that they were having to plunder the adjacent villages. Most
of its civilian inhabitants had abandoned the town—in response to
Brahma Shah’s orders, according to one report.
    The main source of disquiet at the British headquarters was the
various rumours to the effect that Brahma Shah’s second brother,
Hasti Dal Shah, had crossed the Kali and was on his way to Almora
with a large additional reinforcement. At first there was little fear
that he would be able in any event to reach the capital, because
Hearsey was known to be operating in eastern or Kali Kumaun
with the express purpose of preventing such a juncture; but on the
night of 5 April a feu de joie was fired from a fort on the Almora
ridge, which informants said was in celebration of a victory gained
296                    The Conquest of Kuniaun

by Hasti Dal over Hearsey on 2 April. The worst fears were con¬
firmed the next day, when Edward Gardner received the following
note from Brahma Shah:
You will have been informed that my brother Hasti Dal, being on his
march hither from Doti, met me on the road after crossing the Kali,
with Mr Hyder Hearsey who, having opposed and engaged him, was
wounded and made prisoner. My brother has sent for surgeons to
attend him; and Mr Hearsey having observed that his own medicines
were best suited for the cure of his wounds, my brother has sent for his
private servants and his own medicines, and has kept him comfortably
accommodated near himself.

Hyder Hearsey’s background was similar to Gardner’s, but he had
nothing like the same ability and modesty as a commander. Among
other functions, he had fulfilled that of lieutenant to George
Thomas, the Irish adventurer who was for some years at the end of
the eighteenth century the ruler of his own private empire in
Sirhind. It had been largely owing to Hearsey’s bad judgement that
Thomas’s army, of which he was in effective command while
Thomas himself was prostrate from the effects of alcohol, was
defeated by the forces of his rival Perron at Georgegarh in 1801.
He was very flamboyant, and struck people as boorish. ‘Very
ingenious, but uneducated’ was Lady Nugent’s opinion. He made
no secret of the contempt in which he held the Gurkha army.
Hearsey had had three months in which to raise and train his corps,
as opposed to Gardner’s one; but even with this advantage, he was
unable to draw from his men a performance that bore comparison
to that given by the force under his brother-in-law.
   He was instructed to force the Timla pass, which led into eastern
Kumaun from just north of Pilibhit, and then secure possession of
the ghats on the Kali, so as to prevent Hasti Dal’s crossing the river
from Doti. But from motives of vanity, of revenge against the
Gurkhas for the rough treatment he had suffered with Moorcroft in
Garhwal in 1812 and, no doubt, of inspiring in government a
gratitude which would cause it to favour his claim to Dehra Dun,
Hearsey privately made up his mind to widen his operations and
win greater eclat. Instead of devoting his resources to guarding the
river ghats, the function for which they were intended, he under¬
took the siege of forts in the interior as well, thereby frittering away
his troops and making them insufficient for either purpose. He paid
                      The Conquest of Kumaun                      297

no heed to Gardner’s anxious dispatches, which stressed that the
securing of the Kali ghats was his essential object, and after occupy¬
ing Champawat, the old capital of Kumaun, he turned his main
attentions to besieging Katalgarh. It was a senseless undertaking.
Katalgarh, five or six miles to the north, was the strongest fortress
in Kumaun. Its position precluded its being completely surrounded,
while Hearsey had few men and not a single gun.
   At the beginning of March, the greater part of Hearsey’s force
was distributed between Brahmadeo, at the foot of the Timla pass,
the forts at the top of the pass, Champawat and Katalargh. He
spared only the remainder, amounting to hardly 300 men, to guard
the river ghats. Ignoring all directions to divert his own troops for
the purpose, he asked government to organize a separate incursion
into Doti in order to contain Hasti Dal.
   On 31 March, intelligence was received by Hearsey, then at
Champawat, that 500 of the enemy had crossed the Kali about four¬
teen miles upstream and, harassed by a body of local troops, was
attempting to make a stockade on the western bank. His guide,
knowing that this part of the country was the stronghold of the
Phartiyal faction, propitiated by Brahma Shah and implacably
opposed to Harak Deva Joshi, warned the Captain that this was
probably a ruse and advised him not to engage the force. But
Hearsey fancied he knew better, and in a fit of irritation sent the
guide to Katalgarh in order to be rid of him. He marched that night
with 270 men, and reached the scene of action the next morning.
Judging that the enemy could not be driven back without a rein¬
forcement, he sent to Katalgarh for 400 extra troops. That evening
the scorned guide’s warning was only too well vindicated. It was
learnt that at three o’clock in the afternoon Hasti Dal had taken
advantage of Hearsey’s preoccupation to cross the river below the
scene of the engagement with a force reported to be 1,500 strong.
Hearsey at once marched his force south again, in a desperate bid to
intercept the wily Gurkha. Hot with haste, tired, and thirsty, and
with no ammunition save that which they had in pouch, they
finally accosted the enemy early on 2 April at Khilpati, about five
miles north east of Champawat. The battle was fierce, and Hearsey’s
men had soon expended all their cartridges. The Captain was
severely wounded in the thigh, and when he fell all his men fled.
Most were cut to shreds by pursuing Nepalis. It is a tradition in the
Hearsey family that Hyder would have been decapitated as he lay
298                   The Conquest of Kumaun

on the field, had it not been for the timely intervention of Hasti Dal.
The two men were not strangers. Hearsey had met Hasti Dal when
on an official expedition, whose purpose was to survey the upper
reaches of the Ganges, in 1808. According to the family story, that
encounter had been the occasion of his saving the Gurkha from
being killed by a wild bear. Hasti Dal now recognized his deliverer
and repaid his debt of gratitude.

 In view of Hearsey’s failure, it was lucky that a reinforcement of
 regular troops was already on its way to join Gardner. In Hastings’s
view, the collapse of the British offensive in the eastern theatre had
made the possession of Kumaun indispensable. Once the Gurkhas
had been relieved of the threat of an attack on Kathmandu, it was
 essential to prevent their diverting their unexpectedly available
reserves of manpower to bolster the defensive in the west. Acting
on this conviction, Hastings had, early in March, requested Lieuten¬
 ant-Colonel Nicolls, a King’s officer of the 14th Foot, to prepare
for active service. The force which could be put at his disposal was
very modest. It consisted of two battalions of native infantry, a
detachment consisting of flank (grenadier and light) companies
from Dehra Dun, four six-pounders, two small mortars and a few
pieces of heavy artillery. According to paper estimates, the
strength of the infantry was 2,035 men; but these took no account
of men sick and ‘on command’ (detached on extra-regimental
duties), and the number which actually took the field with Nicolls did
not exceed about 1,300. Of these, only thirty artillerists were
European.
    Nicolls wasted no time at Moradabad, his rendezvous. His force
was barely half-assembled by the end of March, and no word had
been received from Captain Leys, commanding the detachment
from Dehra Dun. Nevertheless, the Colonel marched on the 29th
with two six-pounders and a vanguard of three companies, leaving
the remaining segments of his column, with the rest of the ordnance
and the elephants, to make their own way into the hills. There had
been no time to acquire and distribute greatcoats, long pantaloons
or tents, and the men were going to have to improvise protection
against the cold with their kamals (blankets). It had been impossible
to collect an adequate number of hill porters, and the arrangement
had to be made whereby all spare provisions and supplies were left
in a depot at Dhikuli. It was hoped that porters sufficient for moving
                      The Conquest of Kumaun                        299
these forward would be enlisted later. Meanwhile the sepoys had
to carry their own equipment and five days’ provisions, which
together weighed little less than eighty pounds. Nicolls had had to
choose between two evils—delay or a deficient commissariat; and
although he had decided that the former was the greater, he never
lost sight of the insufficiencies he had been unable to remedy before
marching. Although spring was well advanced, the weather re¬
mained capricious in the hills and there were periods of heavy
rain. Anxious to provide against the worst discomforts of these and
of the monsoon season proper, which was expected in a few weeks,
the Colonel asked for greatcoats and pantaloons for the men, which
the Adjutant-General promised would be provided. News of the
defeat of Hearsey’s detachment made Nicolls fear that the local
populace might cease to provide victuals should his own column
suffer any mishap, and he made an urgent request to the Magistrate
of Moradabad for 1,000 bearers, to bring up supplies from the
depot.
    The Magistrate, Mr. Oldham, had to impress men for the
service, paying them an advance of one rupee in return for a
promise not to run away for twenty-five days. Needless to say,
most of them pocketed their rupees and absconded even before
they had reached Dhikuli. The lack of means of bringing forward
his provisions remained a major problem for Nicolls throughout
the campaign.
    He reached the camp before Almora with the advance on 9 April,
and the other sections of his force, including the artillery, arrived at
various intervals over the next ten days. The new arrivals, who, with
camp followers, numbered more than 3,000 souls, had soon con¬
sumed available stores of grain, and poor Rutherfurd was at his
wits’ end to feed the army. One observer wrote that ‘not unfre-
quently the men, after toiling all day over the hills, had no better
evening fare awaiting them than a few ears of wheat, which
happened to be ripe, gathered in the fields, [and] roasted over a
fire.’2
    Jasper Nicolls, who was only thirty-seven, was an officer who
had partaken to the full of the opportunities for military experience
available during the years of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic
Wars. He had served with distinction in the West Indies, in the
Peninsular, in Hanover and at Buenos Aires, and had returned for
                    2 E.I.U.S.J., vol. iii, 1834, p. 249.
 300                   The Conquest of Kumaun

  a second spell in India in 1813, when he assumed the staff appoint¬
  ment of Quartermaster-General to the King’s Troops. Lean, dark¬
  eyed and prematurely balding, he was, unless roused, a man of tact
  and delicacy of feeling. He was at great pains to spare Gardner any
  sense of embarrassment at having been superseded, and treated him
  in all things as an equal. But he had no sympathy for the errant
  Hearsey. ‘I have never approved of Captain Hearsey’s grand views
  and great extension of his force’, he grumbled to the Adjutant-
  General on receiving news of the calamity in eastern Kumaun; ‘but
  I arrived too late to confine his exertions.’ He did not estimate the
  consequences of the defeat lightly. ‘We may fairly suppose that the
  enemy’s defence of the capital will [now] be greatly prolonged’, he
 told the Magistrate of Moradabad. For his own part, Hearsey
 detested Nicolls until the end of his life, and ever afterwards
 insisted on disparaging his achievement in Kumaun.
    On the evening of 12 April, guns were fired from Almora in
 salute. There was no doubt in the British camp that this signalled
 the arrival of the triumphant Hasti Dal with his prisoner. Intelli¬
 gence reports represented his force to be no greater than 300 to 400,
 of whom only between 125 and 175 had matchlocks. This suggests
 either that Hasti Dal had left the greater part of his men in Kali
 Kumaun, which seems unlikely, or that estimates in Hearsey’s
 camp had been wildly exaggerated. Informants from the fort
 assured Gardner that the total force at Brahma Shah’s disposal did
 not exceed 2,000 men, and that they were all ‘distressed for want of
 provisions and rather down in the mouth, the few remaining
 inhabitants running off for want of food’.
     On April 22, when his column, including the two iron twelve-
 pounders and the two eight-inch mortars by which he set great
store, was at last complete and when he was waiting only to improve
his stock of provisions, Nicolls heard from Rutherfurd that Hasti
Dal had left the ridge before Almora with 200 or 300 men, and was
making for Gananath. This was a mountain about fifteen miles
north of Almora, between the Kosila and the Kali. The Colonel,
knowing that Rutherfurd’s intelligence was not always reliable,
doubted that the Gurkha could in fact have made such a rash move;
but subsequent information confirmed the news, and Nicolls could
only assume that Hasti Dal had gone to meet the ammunition and
treasure expected from the west. In fact, as was afterwards learnt,
his only concern was to retain possession of the northern perganas of
                      The Conquest of Kumaun                      301

 Kumaun, in order to safeguard communications with Kathmandu.
    Nicolls acted quickly. At midnight, Major Patton was sent in
 pursuit with ten companies of infantry, a company of irregulars and
 a day’s supply of victuals. After a hot and thirsty march, he caught
 up with his prey on a conifer-clad ridge near Gananath and, at the
 cost of only two of his own men killed and twenty-six wounded, took
 about eighty enemy lives. Hasti Dal’s was among them. He was
 shot through the temple and died on the way back to Almora.
    Although his provisions were still seriously inadequate, Nicolls
 decided that he must take the tide at the flood, and attack Almora
 before the enemy had time to recover from the shock of this
 reverse.
    Almora was a small town by European standards, but ranked as
 considerable in the north Indian hills. It stretched for about three-
 quarters of a mile along the crest of a mountain ridge, in a north¬
 west—south-east direction. There was one main street, naturally
 paved with slaty rock and lined with houses. These had open
 ground floors of whitewashed stone, fitted out as shops, and wooden
 upper storeys. There were two citadels. One, Fort Almora, was in
 the centre of the ridge. The other, then called Lai Mandi, but later
 renamed Fort Moira in honour of the Governor-General, was at its
southern extremity. They were not impressive, being little more
than glorified circular sangars, constructed of unhewn stones
embedded in clay. Their walls were not above about eight feet in
height, but the scarped knolls on which they stood increased their
elevation considerably. A narrow col ran to the west, connecting the
Almora ridge with a parallel range, which rose from the eastern
bank of the Kosila. This range formed a natural bulwark against
attack from west of the river, and was sprinkled with stone breast¬
works. The most considerable of these was at the northern extremity
on the pinnacle called Sitoli. It formed Brahma Shah’s principal
outpost, and seemed almost immune to attack. The ground fell
steeply from its walls, and a mountain slightly to the north, called
Kalimath, overlooked the position and commanded the approaches
to it. In general aspect, the landscape here was rather bleak. The
highest reaches of the mountains were then devoid of trees, and
their stony sides were cut into terraces to make more room for
cultivation.
   The five flank companies under Captain Leys returned from
Gananath at nine o’clock on the morning of 25 April, and four hours
302                   The Conquest of Kumaun

 later Nicolls launched an attack against the enemy outposts on the
 Sitoli range. He marched in person at the head of the flank com¬
 panies and the ist/4th Native Infantry, with the aim of establishing
a position on the northern end of the range and expelling the Nepalis
 with mortar fire. Gardner advanced with the irregulars on a parallel
line to his right, directing his effort against the defences on the
southern part of the range. Those who remained in camp at
 Katarmal watched the columns march down together, and found it
a stirring spectacle.
    But the road was rough and narrow, and made it impossible for
the columns to remain compact. As soon as he had crossed the
Kosila, here a small mountain stream with deep pools and fordable
shallows, and reached a small level spot on its eastern bank,
Nicolls halted for about half an hour to allow the men to collect
and to re-form his column. He asked his two artillery officers to give
the enemy a few shells. A howitzer was unloaded and mounted
within five minutes; but appearances were deceptive, and the
enemy breastworks were found to be much too distant for the shells
to have any effect. Then came the order ‘Move on!’, and the long
climb up the flank of the Sitoli range began. It took two hours to
reach the crest. As Nicolls’s troops got nearer, a gun opened on them
from the breastwork most immediately above, but the hill was too
steep for it to bear with any accuracy. By comparing their height
with that of some enemy soldiers who had earlier been standing
outside them, Nicolls had been able to ascertain that the breast¬
works rose no more than four or five feet above the ground. This
fact, and the eagerness of his men, determined him not to wait for
the mortars, but to take the positions by coups de main. Appreciating
that the flank companies must be tired after their recent exertions, he
put the ist/4th Native Infantry in front. Led by Lieutenant Wight,
one group of four subalterns and some sepoys with fixed bayonets
dashed at the first breastwork. It was about four feet wide, with an
embrasure in the centre, cut to within about two feet of the ground.
As the barrel of the enemy gun obstructed this, only one person
could enter at a time. Wight was first in. He was immediately cut
down, and lay dangerously wounded; but another officer, clamber¬
ing after, saved him by felling his adversary with a swingeing blow.
The Nepalis were overpowered within three minutes. Abandoning
the gun, they left their position by the rear, which was open, and
fled down the opposite side of the ridge.
                     The Conquest of Kumaun                     303

   The two breastworks to the left were carried almost simult¬
aneously. His bravery in one of these encounters earned a sepoy
named Dokal Singh special mention in Detachment Orders as ‘a
hero, who, though wounded in five places, refused, when lying
disabled on the ground, to surrender his musket to several of the
enemy, who would have wrested it from his hands’. The flank
companies, under Leys, now reaching the crest of the ridge,
Nicolls directed them to pursue the ejected enemy. They promptly
divided, and hounded them by five different routes down the eastern
side of the range. Meanwhile the ist/4th easily ousted the occupants
from the four or five breastworks to the north, including that on
Sitoli mount itself. The enemy post on Kalimath was thus com¬
pletely cut off from Almora. Gardner’s men seized the three
breastworks on the southern end of the crest at about the same time.
   This was the first time that Nicolls had commanded native troops
in action, and their bravery had made the occasion unforgettable
for him. T congratulate His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief’,
he wrote to Headquarters, ‘on the glorious result of the noble
exertions of the troops, whom it will be a source of pride to me, to
the end of my life, to have commanded’. More than anything else,
the behaviour of the sepoys on this occasion demonstrated the
decisive influence of the presence of an adequate number of
European officers. Because the column had been disorganized by
the badness of the road, almost all the officers were in front when
the engagement began, and there were five subalterns with the
party which attacked the first breastwork alone.
   The Sitoli range once secured, an advance party was pushed
across the connecting col to the northern end of Almora ridge.
Headquarters were established in a quadrangular fort, about sixty
yards square, which had been abandoned by the enemy.3 About
250 men of the ist/4th and flank companies were then sent south¬
wards into the town itself. They occupied a pagoda, called Dip
Chand temple, and set up two howitzers on its terrace. The first
shells were fired at about six o’clock. They were aimed at Fort
Almora, which was 300 yards farther south, beyond the Raja’s
palace.
   Meanwhile, all was quiet on the Sitoli range. Then, at about
eleven o’clock, the Nepalis still at Kalimath attacked Lieutenant
Costley and the eighty sepoys on Sitoli mount. A local story is that
                    3 Later called St. Mark’s Tower.
304                   The Conquest of Kumaun

 they covered their advance with a drove of cattle carrying firebrands
 on their horns. Nicolls immediately sent a reinforcement of about
  150 sepoys under Lieutenants Browne and Whinfield to aid the
 overwhelmed party. Gardner, who was with Nicolls at headquarters,
 volunteered to go with them, taking Mohan Singh and a company of
 irregulars. The reinforcement met Costley and his men at the foot of
 Sitoli mount, fleeing before the Nepali onslaught. Browne,
 Whinfield and Gardner then drove the enemy at bayonet point
 back up the hill. So ferocious was their offensive, in which they
 did not fire a shot, that Sitoli had been retaken in ten minutes. But
 the Nepalis would not concede defeat, and contested the post
 stubbornly throughout the night. The British officers and their
 native troops, with equal pertinacity, refused to yield, and three
 charges were repulsed. The valour of Browne and Mohan Singh was
 especially conspicuous. In honour of the former, the hill was later
 named Mount Browne; and the latter was presented with the sword
which Hastings had entrusted to Nicolls with the instruction that it
 was to be given to the sirdar of Gardner’s levy who proved himself
most worthy. ‘He headed three successive and successful charges of
 the Pathan levies’, ran his citation, ‘and taught the Gurkha chiefs
that at night, their favourite hour of conflict, and with the sword,
their favourite weapon, they were unequal to face our gallant troops
with any hope of success’.
    The noise of battle from Sitoli acted as a summons to the enemy
 in Fort Almora, who attempted to dislodge the advanced post and
battery at Dip Chand temple. They made a sortie and sprinted up
the main street of the town. The wall of the temple enclosure was
only five or six feet high. This they lobbed stones over, with leather
slings, and tried to vault. Several were shot or bayonetted on the
wall, and one was killed actually inside the enclosure. The rest were
beaten off. Work meanwhile continued on the placing of eight-inch
mortars, and these opened on the fort about midnight.
    The night was murky, and it was impossible to distinguish
objects even at ten yards’ distance. Throughout, the repetitive
crepitation and orange flashing of musketry continued, and there
was incessant skirmishing, which added considerably to the
casualties on both sides. It was reckoned that many of Nicolls’s
losses were caused by his own men, firing blindly. Early in the
morning of 25 April, Lieutenant Tapley, at Dip Chand temple, lost
his life. Each time an enemy party had been repulsed, he insisted on
                      The Conquest of Kumaun                        305

going outside the wall of the enclosure ‘to watch when they were
coming again’. Lieutenant Field, commanding the post, repeatedly
urged him not to expose himself so needlessly; but his warnings
were ignored, and about two o’clock Tapley was shot by a musketeer
in one of the houses which overlooked the temple.
   Mental strain and hunger made the night seem interminable.
Nicolls was restless with worry; but when at last the hills were
streaked with light, all his positions were still secure, and the
Nepalis slunk back into their lairs. The British commander’s first
concern now was for the comfort of his men. Remembering that
they had not eaten for twenty-four hours, he mustered a group of
his own servants and some coolies, and personally visited each post
with bread and butter and bottles of warm tea for the officers, and
gram and sweetmeats for the sepoys. As he spoke little Hindustani
he asked Lieutenant Hay to tell the men how pleased he was with
them. Needless to say, Jasper Nicolls was ever afterwards a
favourite of the Bengal army.
   At about half-past eight, when extra cartridges had arrived from
Katarmal, operations were resumed. Field was directed to take his
party from the temple down the main street of the town and seize
the palace, which intervened between his present position and Fort
Almora. It was a spacious, square, upper-storeyed building, sur¬
rounded by an eight-foot stone wall. The Nepalis in the place
peppered his men with bullets, but they vaulted the wall, entered
the building and ran up the main staircase. Eight or ten of the
enemy were shot or bayoneted; the rest fled down a back staircase
and escaped to the fort. Field waved his cap as a signal and Bell
and Wilson of the artillery brought down a couple of six-pounders.
They knocked embrasures in the rear wall of the palace compound,
which was only about seventy yards from the fort, and set up a
battery.
    Meanwhile, the mortars at Dip Chand temple had continued to
fire, and despite the great distance, several shells landed in the fort.
Soon large numbers of the enemy were seen leaving the place by a
door in the eastern wall and making for Lai Mandi fort behind.
Nicolls ordered Lieutenants Field and McGregor to try to enter
while the enemy were coming out. The two officers took a small
party of sepoys and ran up the side street which led to the entrance;
but on reaching it they found that the enemy had been leaving
through a wicket, which was slammed shut as they approached.
 306                   The Conquest of Kumaun

   They could not force it open and, being showered with stones and
  shot from the walls of the fort, were compelled to withdraw.
     The contest, however, was all but over. Brahma Shah had neither
  enthusiasm nor energy for further defiance. He had never under¬
  stood the expediency of the war; and now that his troops were
  hungry, unpaid and increasingly disgruntled, he saw no merit in
  prolonging it by futile self-immolation. Having made as honourable
  a resistance as his means permitted, he resolved, in consultation
  with his chief officers, that it was his duty to end the contest on the
  most favourable terms that he could get. At the end of March,
  Edward Gardner had offered him and his men a safe conduct to the
  eastern bank of the Kali in return for the surrender of the capital.
  At nine o’clock on 26 April, he sent a note to the Political Agent,
  under a flag of truce, requesting a suspension of hostilities on the
  same terms. Nicolls and Edward Gardner had no inclination to
 flaunt their victory by demanding stiffer terms, and William
  Gardner was sent to meet Brahma Shah and negotiate the sur¬
 render. There was some delay before a convention was signed,
 owing to the Gurkha’s insistence that the troops originally intended
 for Amar Singh Thapa’s army in the west should be allowed to
 continue their journey; but finally, on 27 April, realizing that the
 Colonel was adamant in his refusal, he gave up this condition and
 agreed to release Hearsey and withdraw with all his men to the
 eastern bank of the Kali within ten days. On the 28th, Nicolls and
 Edward Gardner paid Brahma Shah a visit, and the reasons behind
 his concession became clear. He wanted to retain control of negotia¬
 tions for a general peace, and had ‘projects of inducing the British
 Government to assist the Raja’s party in regaining their power and
 overturning that of the Thapas’. Gardner felt bound to decline
 discussing such issues at this stage; but he found it impossible not
to feel considerable sympathy for this tall, stout, affable Gurkha,
whose looks belied his seventy years, whose nervous speech
impediment somehow removed all doubts concerning his sincerity,
and whose competent Hindustani made it possible to address him
with reasonable ease and informality.
    On the night of 31 April, Brahma Shah quitted Almora, taking
with him such of his army as had remained loyal. This must have
included the great majority of his regular troops, because only the
irregular Kumauni soldiers had taken service with the British—and
even they did not number more than about 300.
                      The Conquest of Kumaun                       307

    As the news of the surrender of the capital spread through
Kumaun, the other Gurkha garrisons scattered throughout the
province spontaneously capitulated. Edward Gardner thereupon
declared the territory annexed to the dominions of the East India
Company, and assumed the functions of civil administrator. The
cost of the acquisition had not been great. British casualties during
the operations of 25 and 26 April did not exceed 50 killed and 161
wounded; and the total of casualties for the whole campaign was
not greatly in excess of those figures.
    Nicolls attributed his success to ‘the daily miracle of feeding the
troops in such a poor country’ and to ‘the efficient service of our
eight-inch mortars’, which ‘considerably hastened’ the fall of
Almora. The latter conviction confirmed Ochterlony’s experience
of the necessity of heavy artillery in mountain warfare and makes
it all the more surprising that Nicolls, when Commander-in-Chief,
sent a column to the Khyber Pass without guns. The response of
the sepoys under his command appears to have been far more
impressive than that of those under the other commanders of the
war, Ochterlony included; but it must be remembered that the
Kumaun detachment had been in the hills for barely a month when
its first and only major engagement took place—a month, moreover,
in which the weather had been at its kindest. The other two divi¬
sions in the western theatre had had to endure all the rigours of a
mountain winter.
    Considering their notoriety, and the circumstances under which
they had been raised, the performance of Gardner’s corps of
Pathans had been nothing less than remarkable. More than any¬
thing else, this had been a testimony to the talent and personality
of the man who commanded them. He had transformed untamed
brigands into disciplined, tractable and steadfast soldiers. No one
else could handle them. No sooner had Gardner returned to the
plains than the Pathans, left in the hills to garrison the various
acquired strongholds, again reverted to an unruly rabble. They
deserted in droves, helping themselves to Rutherfurd’s stores of
grain and terrorizing local villages. Nicolls fully appreciated the
measure of Gardner’s contribution to the success of the campaign.
With characteristic generosity, he made his acknowledgement the
subject of a separate dispatch to Headquarters; and on his recom¬
mendation Gardner’s monthly pension was raised from 300 to
1,000 rupees.
                                XI

                        INTERLUDE

D      uring    the hot and monsoon seasons of 1815, the troops
        acting in the eastern theatre had the unenviable task of
        defending the frontier of the newly acquired territory in the
Tarai and the Morang. Time hung heavy on their hands, because
the Nepalis knew better than to enter the region at this deathly
period of the year; but casualties in these divisions were neverthe¬
less greater than they had been during the whole period of active
operations. The prevalent symptoms—violent fever and delirium—
indicate that the principal malady was malaria; but its effects were
complicated by all the various disorders caused by primitive sanita¬
tion, contaminated drinking water and the well-intended but
horrifyingly unscientific antics of contemporary surgeons. John
Wood’s division was distributed between three posts on the border
of Gorakhpur. By the middle of May more than 1,200 men were
sick, and had had to be withdrawn. There being no hospital in
Gorakhpur town, they were lodged in the bullock sheds, which can
hardly have hastened their recovery. H.M. 24th Foot was the only
European regiment on the frontier, the others having been re¬
manded to cantonments. They were posted at Amowa, just south of
Segauli. 135 men out of 751 were seriously ill in June, and between
the end of March and the beginning of September sixty died. At
Nathpur, farther east, Colonel Gregory was in charge of some
2,500 native infantry. In the middle of August his force was in ‘a
dreadful sickly state’. ‘In less than a month’, he wrote, ‘I lost four
European officers; nearly 300 men are absent on sick certificate,
and an equal number are now in the hospital; and the men who
have recovered from the Tarai fever have not yet regained their
strength, and are perfectly useless . . . added to which I have
only one medical man in charge of the sick of two and a half
battalions.’ This last fact may have been less a liability than he
thought.
   While the troops suffered, the diplomats talked. Serious negotia¬
tions began at the end of May, and lasted until the end of the year.
                               Interlude                           3°9
During the latter half of his tour of the upper provinces, and in the
first months after his return to Calcutta in October, hardly a week
passed without the Governor-General's receiving a formidably
bulky dispatch concerning peace discussions, and without his
dictating an equally elaborate one in reply.
   A few days after Brahma Shah had crossed the Kali and entered
Doti, he was joined by his surviving brother, Rudra Vir, who was
governor of Sallyana province, beyond Doti to the east. William
Gardner, who had escorted the garrison of Almora to the river,
met Rudra Vir and had a long informal conversation with him.
During the course of this, it became clear that great political
significance attached to the selection of a Nepalese negotiator. The
Gurkha assured Gardner that ‘whoever was charged with arranging
a treaty with the British Government would hereafter have the
greatest weight in the Nepal councils.’
    There were three contenders for the commission. They were
Brahma Shah; Gajraj Misr, the erstwhile guru of the royal family,
who had approached the Governor-General with an offer to
mediate; and Amar Singh Thapa. Hastings, having no wish to in¬
crease the political influence of the last, did not contemplate
negotiating through him; but he was prepared to conclude a treaty
with whichever of the two other parties offered the indemnification
he demanded. He reasoned that if either of them was deputed to
treat, it must be with powers to grant all the territorial sacrifices he
required, because the durbar at Kathmandu was not ignorant of
their scope. Bradshaw, in his exchanges with Chandra Sekhar, the
captured vakil, and with Gajraj Misr, had made it known that the
Company would insist on retaining all the lands it had conquered,
and would demand a treaty which guaranteed it compensation for
the cost of the war and security from fresh aggression. If either of
the two contenders, therefore, offered less than the decided price,
it could only be in order to increase his own prestige and influence.
It followed that acceptance of a reduced offer would be tantamount
to abetting the ambitions of a particular individual or political
party, and such behaviour was, in Hastings’s view, beneath the
dignity of the Company. But neither of the Nepalese agents under¬
stood that this was the British attitude. As they saw it, the prime
purpose of the Company must be not territorial indemnification,
but the establishment of an influence in Kathmandu. This was why
Gajraj Misr emphasized that it was his especial desire to recover
3IQ                           Interlude

the office of royal guru and exercise it under the protection of a
British Residency; and why Rudra Yir Shah urgently stressed to
 Gardner that their securing the peace negotiation would enable his
brother and himself to overthrow the low-caste usurping Thapas,
whom he contemptuously referred to as ‘Khasias’, and re-establish
the power of their own party, which had always been the pro-
British one. Neither seems to have taken the British demand for
indemnification in territory seriously at first, and the two govern¬
ments negotiated at cross purposes for many months.
   Because he was the first to secure the appropriate authority,
negotiations were begun with Gajraj Misr. Since the palace revolu¬
tion of 1803, this brahmin had been living in exile at Benares, on
the proceeds of a jagir provided by the Company. Motivated partly
by a desire to reingratiate himself with the durbar and recover his
lost position, and partly by a genuine concern to open the Raja’s
eyes to the peril of his situation and save his kingdom from destruc¬
tion, he had offered his services as a mediator. Both governments
had welcomed the tender. Hastings had recalled his previous
adherence to the pro-British party in Kathmandu and his efforts
to promote the success of the Kirkpatrick and Knox missions; and
the durbar was anxious to employ an agent who was in favour with
the British and able to inform it of the true nature of the Governor-
General’s conditions of peace. In response to an invitation from the
Raja, he had left for Kathmandu early in May, accompanied by
Chandra Sekhar Upadhyaya, whom Bradshaw had repossessed of
his private property in order to foster an auspicious atmosphere.
   Both men returned to Bradshaw’s headquarters at Segauli on
18 May. Gajraj Misr produced an authorization under the Raja’s
red seal, and declared that he was empowered to accept whatever
terms the victors in their mercy might require. But, confident in
his assumption that what the Company really sought was the
institution of himself as guru in Kathmandu, Gajraj had given the
durbar to understand that the price in territory would not, when it
came to the point, be as high as had been threatened; so when
Bradshaw informed him that the Gurkhas were required to re¬
linquish all colonies west of the Kali and the whole of the Tarai and
Morang, he was aghast and incredulous. He was forced to confess
that he had no mandate to accede to such stringent demands, and
asked to be allowed to make further reference to Kathmandu.
Hastings, on the other hand, was disposed to think that he must
                              Interlude                           311
have received plenary powers with his commission, and that he was
bargaining well within their limit with a view to improving his
personal standing. He therefore retaliated by ordering a suspension
of negotiations in this quarter and informed Edward Gardner that
he might begin discussions with Brahma Shah.
    The Shah brothers were desperately eager to be acknowledged
as negotiators by the British. Brahma had been edgy and nervous
ever since his capitulation, because he dreaded the effects at
Kathmandu of Amar Singh Thapa’s misrepresentations. It had
taken all the kindly expostulation of William Gardner to induce
him to cross the Kali and enter Nepalese territory once more. On
Edward Gardner’s advice, he had applied to Kathmandu for
authority to treat, and while waiting to know the result of his
solicitation had been in such a state of agitation (earnestly affirming
that if he failed to be appointed negotiator he could expect nothing
but death from the despised ‘Khasias’) that William Gardner had
been moved to compassion. At his suggestion, Brahma and his
brother were offered the chance to seize the Gurkha province of
Doti and rule it as Company proteges. But they had declined the
invitation, Brahma’s reason being that he could not endanger his
many relatives still within the reach of the Thapas.
    On 4 July, Brahma Shah informed Edward Gardner that he had
received a favourable answer from Kathmandu, and the following
 day Edward Gardner’s own instructions to open negotiations
arrived. Brahma being ill, it was Rudra Vir Shah who crossed the
 Kali to confabulate. He was more aggressive and stronger-willed
 than his brother, and when he heard Gardner’s demand for the
 whole of the Tarai he flatly refused to entertain such a sacrifice.
 With great emphasis he told Gardner that he was authorized to
 cede no more than the western hill provinces, and that the Tarai
 was the most vital source of the wealth of his state. Take away the
 lowlands, he insisted, and national penury would ensue. Uncondi¬
 tional powers to treat subsequently arrived, but Rudra Vir refused
 to change his attitude. He had several more interviews with Gardner,
 some of them in company with his brother, and at all of them
 he reiterated the same arguments in a tone increasingly acrimonious.
 At the last he became almost violent. He informed the Political
Agent
that others might negotiate on these grounds; but that for himself he
would not accept of a commission for that purpose . . . That it was
312                             Interlude

what would never be consented to at Nepal, and was a subject, in fact,
he had received no orders or authority to treat of . . . That if this
point were insisted upon, it would occasion a popular war in which every
subject of Nepal would personally engage; that hitherto many of the
chief people had kept aloof through party feelings and disapprobation
of the contest the Thapa faction had involved them in; but no sooner
should it be known that we insisted on the dismemberment of the whole
Tarai, than all party faction would be forgotten in the general cause, and
everyone unite in the general defence.

 Even the normally mild and timid Brahma Shah was infected by
 his brother’s vehemence, and met all Gardner’s remonstrances
 with steady pertinacity.1
    Such a reaction was not, in fact, unreasonable. The Tarai estates
 were the main source of income for the Gurkha government and
 nobles, all other land being assigned to the army in lieu of payment.
 But Gardner knew nothing of this, and was convinced that all these
 protestations were subterfuge; that the Shah brothers were holding
 in reserve concessions which they had been authorized to make, in
the hope of securing a cheap peace. This would not only enhance
their political prestige; it would also, in the case of Rudra Vir, at
least, who possessed extensive estates in the Tarai, preserve per¬
sonal interests. Hastings was of the same opinion, and he agreed
that Rudra Vir probably greatly exaggerated the importance of the
lowlands in the national economy. Nevertheless, if the Gurkha’s
demurring had failed to persuade him that a relaxation of his
demands concerning the Tarai was necessary in order to secure a
settlement, it had convinced him that such a relaxation would make
the settlement, once concluded, more permanent. Above all else, he
was anxious to avoid extorting from the Gurkhas a treaty which
they would dishonour as soon as his back was turned. Events during
the early period of the Bengal army’s preoccupation in the moun¬
tains had, to his mind, presented a striking portent of the situation
which might arise if the British challenged the Maratha powers of
central India before the Gurkha threat had been exorcised. There
had been simultaneous and ominous stirrings among all the
Company’s potential antagonists. Ranjit Singh, had, in November
1814, marched his army to precisely that point whence he had in¬
tended to cross the Sutlaj in 1808, while the whole British force on
the east bank of the river consisted only of the two squadrons of
                         1 P.R.N.W.,pp. 802-9.
                                Interlude                         3*3
native cavalry at Ludhiana. Sindhia, the Maratha Raja of Gwalior,
had taken the first step towards a revival of the Maratha confederacy,
by concluding an alliance with Berar in contravention of the treaties
of 1805. Amir Khan, the leader of the Pathan mercenaries of central
India, had collected an army said to be 30,000 strong on the
borders of Jaipur, in Rajputana, only twelve marches from Delhi,
while Sir William Keir Grant, commanding the remainder of the
2nd (Meerut) Division of the Field Army, had little more than a
single battalion of native infantry with which to oppose him.
Disquieting reports had arrived from the north-east to the effect
that Gurkha vakils had been received in Bhutan, and that Bhutanese
troops were accumulating in the passes of the Bhutan-Nepal
boundary. Finally, the long-truculent King of Burma had been
known to be watching events in India with interest, and to have
made secret communication with Nepal. ‘The cloud which over¬
hangs us is imposing’, the Governor-General had noted in his
Journal; and Metcalfe, surveying the scene from the Delhi Resi¬
dency, had been convinced that the end was at hand. ‘I, who have
always thought our power in India precarious, cannot help thinking
that our downfall has already commenced.’2 So pressing had been
the emergency, that urgent requests for European troops had been
sent to Ceylon, the Cape of Good Hope, Mauritius and even to
 England.
   During the ensuing months the immediate crisis, it was true,
had passed. Ranjit Singh had been distracted by a recrudescence of
his quarrel with the Amir of Kabul; Sindhia’s generals had fallen
to fighting among themselves; Berar had been effectively overawed
by the dispatch of an army of observation, 10,000 strong, from
Madras to the northern border of the dominions of the Nizam of
the Deccan; and apprehension concerning the intentions of the
Deb Raja of Bhutan had been dissipated. Relations with this last
monarch had, in fact, become so promising that the British authori¬
ties were disposed to think, for the moment, that they had found a
new ally rather than a new enemy. He had most convincingly
disavowed inimical intentions, and had agreed to an exchange of
vakils, whose purpose was both to settle the boundary disputes be¬
tween the Company and Bhutan, and to afford a medium for
British explanations concerning the war to the Chinese authorities
in Lhasa.
                     2 Kaye, Life of Metcalf e, i, 402.
3H                                Interlude

   But, however transitory, these menaces had buttressed the
Governor-General’s conviction that there existed an incipient
danger of collaboration among the native states which must be
nipped in the bud by the establishment of an effective British
hegemony, and his main concern throughout the negotiations with
Nepal was to secure a peace which would indispose the Gurkhas to
re-enter the conflict when British energies were absorbed in central
India. To make this object sure, he now realized that he would have
to make concessions; but he equally realized that the concessions
must be granted from a position of strength—that is to say, after
the Gurkhas had eaten humble pie and agreed to the terms origin¬
ally proposed. To grant concessions before they had avowed sub¬
mission would, by giving an impression of weakness, merely whet
their appetite for revenge. As a reward, therefore, for submission,
Gurkha nobles nominated by the durbar were to be offered either
iagirs in the Tarai or pensions, for life.
   Hastings had no serious apprehensions that the Gurkhas would
reject his terms of pacification; but he nevertheless took the pre¬
caution of ordering preparations to be made in every department
for a renewal of the war.
   It soon seemed that his optimism was justified. No sooner had
they learned of the collapse of negotiations in Brahma Shah’s
quarter, than Bhim Sen Thapa and the Raja hastened to reopen the
communication through Gajraj Misr. Wrote Bhim Sen to the guru:
‘All our hopes rest on you. This state will agree to whatever you
may do, and I charge myself with the ratification of it . . . Bring
the subject to a conclusion by whatever means it can be effected,
consistently with the public interest and your own reputation.’
Towards the end of August, Chandra Sekhar, who had gone to
Kathmandu to report the negotiations with Bradshaw in greater
detail to the durbar, returned with more letters for Gajraj Misr.
Their tone was in harmony with that of the previous one. Wrote
the Raja: ‘The country towards Kumaun in the west, and the
Tarai, have lately been conquered by the British Government.
With regard to those conquests, whatever may be the result of your
negotiation will be approved by me.’ Wrote Bhim Sen: ‘The
sentiments of the Bharadars3 to the west are these: “If, for the sake
of peace, you will give up to the British Government our territory
   3 Title given to the twelve most senior officers in the realm, members of the
council of state.
                               Interlude                            3r5
hill and plain, east of the Sutlaj to Kumaun, we will not be parties
to such a policy. Rather than with our hands and voice surrender
that territory, we consent to sacrifice our lives in it.” But the senti¬
ments in this quarter are, that with regard to our territory west of
Kumaun and the Tarai, which have lately fallen into the hands of
the British Government, whatever you shall do or say, we will
advocate the same before the Raja, and obtain a confirmation of it.’4
Gajraj Misr showed these letters to Bradshaw, whom they satisfied
that the last impediment to peace had been removed. The Governor-
General was of the same persuasion. He forthwith ordered the
discharge of the extra troops who had been enlisted for the war
emergency, and shortly afterwards commissariat preparations for
renewed hostilities were countermanded.
   The tone of the letters from Kathmandu was a source of great
relief to Hastings. In his view it was sufficiently humble to con¬
stitute that submission which he had required as the precondition
of concessions, and he now felt able to demonstrate his generosity,
conciliate the Gurkhas and bring the whole business to a close. In
government circles, uneasiness at the prospect of another campaign
was growing. Edmonstone and the Council, in Calcutta, had be¬
come so hostile to the idea that they had publicly dissociated them¬
selves from the Governor-General’s conditions of peace and
counselled ‘a relaxation of our demands to the extent solicited by
the Court of Nepal’. Hastings was furious because, after a previous
unbroken silence which he could not but interpret as assent, they
had chosen to register disagreement in an official dispatch, thereby
evading responsibility for measures which had not even been the
subject of discussion between them and himself; but although he
took exception to the mode of their dissent, there is no doubt that
he felt the force of its content and was becoming aware that by
insisting on indemnification he was perhaps prejudicing the success
of the main purpose of the Gurkha war. Consequently, now that he
was offered the opportunity to modify his original terms without a
blatant sacrifice of dignity, he did not hesitate to grasp it. Bradshaw
was instructed to alter the draft of the treaty so that it provided for
the retention by Nepal of all the lowlands as far west as the Gandak
river which were at present unoccupied by the British; the grant of
pensions for two lives to selected nobles; and the relinquishment of
the demand for the surrender of the Gurkha official responsible for
                         4 P.R.N.W., pp. 824-6.
3l6                            Interlude

 the atrocities in Butwal in 1814. Thus revised, the treaty5 was not
 thereafter altered; but Bradshaw was given latitude to modify it
 still further. Should he judge that such concessions would be the
 means of averting its rejection, he was to commute the pensions for
jagirs, tenable for one life, in the Tarai east of the Rapti river, and
 to delete the article stipulating an exchange of Residents.
     The new draft was submitted to Gajraj Misr. Despite the ap¬
 parent plenitude of his mandate, he refused to sign it until he had
 made further reference to Kathmandu. His reluctance was prob¬
 ably not completely unexpected at Headquarters. Edward Gardner
 had been having more conference with Brahma Shah, who was
 informed of events at Kathmandu, and he had reported that
 according to the Gurkha there was no real authority behind the
guru’s commission. Still, it seems, British demands for territorial
 compensation were not taken seriously at the durbar. The Gurkhas
were hoping that a show of willingness to make sacrifices would
prevent their actual extortion, and the guru was chary of using an
authority which he was only meant to flourish. His fresh applica¬
tion to Kathmandu elicited an answer which manifestly perturbed
him, and which he refused to show Bradshaw. After some pre¬
varication, he offered to sign the treaty provided the temporary
pensions were exchanged for a permanent restitution of lands of
equivalent value in the Tarai east of the Gandak. Bradshaw refused,
and Gajraj pleaded for time to consult the durbar once more. But
the British agent was adamant and told him (presumably having
judged that the further concessions he was authorized to offer
would not alter the guru’s attitude) that he was at liberty either to
sign the treaty as it was, or to terminate negotiations and withdraw
to Kathmandu. Gajraj Misr chose the second alternative and left
 Segauli, with Chandra Sekhar, on 3 November. On departing, he
assured Bradshaw that he would return within twelve days with the
Raja’s acceptance of the peace terms, or not at all.
    This was a grave setback, and Hastings ordered a resumption of
the commissariat preparations which he had suspended in Septem¬
ber. Sir David Ochterlony was requested to assume command of
the main division as soon as George Wood had absented himself on
sick leave; Jasper Nicolls was asked to hold himself in readiness to
proceed to Sitapur and lead a column into the hill provinces west of
Kathmandu; and a corps of observation was ordered to be assem-
                           5 See Appendix i.
                              Interlude                            317
bled at Lautan, on the frontier of Butwal, under Major-General
John Wood.
    It was Hastings’s professed belief that this show of determination
would bring the durbar to its senses. Bradshaw was authorized to
make yet another concession, if it appeared that it would tip the
balance in favour of peace. As the final extremity, short of war, the
Company would agree, in so far as it could do so without dis¬
honouring assurances of protection given to the inhabitants of the
Tarai, to restore permanently estates in the lowland tract between
the Kosi and the Gandak instead of granting pensions.
    It was the end of the month before Gajraj Misr and Chandra
Sekhar arrived again at Bradshaw’s headquarters. They had letters
for the Political Agent and for the Governor-General from Bhim
Sen Thapa and the Raja. These contained no concrete proposals,
but their tone seemed not to admit a doubt concerning the dur¬
bar’s final resolution to accept whatever terms the British would
impose. Gajraj Misr was importunate, but as he did not again
mention the commutation of pensions, Bradshaw did not raise the
subject and confined his assurances to general promises to use his
limited influence in favour of the Raja’s hopes and expectations.
Gajraj Misr then agreed to sign the treaty. The ceremony took
place on 2 December. Two copies were signed. One was then sent
to Calcutta, for ratification by the Governor-General in Council,
and the other to Kathmandu, for ratification by the Raja of Nepal.
    Hastings breathed again. Once more the commissariat officers
were instructed to ‘discharge all establishments and discontinue
all expenses’ connected with preparations for renewed hostilities.
A special Council was summoned for the purpose of ratification,
and the signed treaty was hurriedly sent back to Bradshaw. But the
months of hesitation, protest, and indignation on the part of the
Gurkhas had not been without their effect on the Governor-
General. He realized that the treaty had been wrung from an
unwilling and unconsoled foe, and appreciated that it was therefore
liable to be disavowed at the first provocation. Motivated by this
fear, and also by the consideration, prominent after the recent
sufferings of the troops, that its climate would make the Tarai
more a liability than an asset, he now framed more concessions.
These were to be offered as ‘a gratuitous and liberal relaxation from
conditions already acceded to’, after the ratified copies of the treaty
had been exchanged. As a substitute for pensions, Bradshaw was to
3i8                             Interlude

 grant permanent estates in the originally disputed Tarai as far west
 as the Rapti. Hastings would probably have gone even further and
 offered estates in the Tarai west of the Rapti, had he not already
 earmarked that territory for a special purpose. The Nawab of Oudh
 had been persuaded to ‘volunteer’ to lend the Company two crore
 (20,000,000) of rupees—equivalent to £2,500,000. This had formed
 Hastings’s war fund. He now planned to liquidate half the loan by
 granting the Tarai on the Oudh border to the Nawab. Even the
 prospect of mollifying the Gurkhas could not deter the Governor-
 General from this project, which, for personal reasons, he contem¬
 plated with great satisfaction. Edmonstone had been sending to
 London what Hastings considered to be mischievous complaints
 concerning the expense of the war, and discharging half the Oudh
 loan in this manner would enable him to claim that the war had not,
 in fact, cost the Company a single shilling.
    The ratified Nepalese copy of the treaty was confidently awaited;
 but time slipped by and it was not brought. Then, only a few days
 before the interval fixed for its receipt had expired, events took a
dramatic turn. Hot with haste, the son of Chandra Sekhar arrived
from Kathmandu with a message for Gajraj Misr. It was from
 Bhim Sen Thapa, who warned the guru that there had been a hitch.
Amar Singh Thapa, summoned to endorse the treaty, had arrived
in Kathmandu with his judgement, it seems, still warped by-
acerbity, and was striving to incite the chiefs of state to reject it. He
had virulently attacked the clause relating to pensions, and stigma¬
tized those willing to receive them as potential puppets of a foreign
power. In order to allay the scruples he had aroused, Bhim Sen
needed a firm assurance that, after the treaty had been ratified, the
pensions would be exchanged for territory. Considering that this
was a situation which called for the revelation of the special con¬
cession which he held in reserve, Bradshaw promised the messenger,
the guru, and Chandra Sekhar that such a modification would
subsequently be sanctioned. Chandra Sekhar’s son then returned
to Kathmandu, followed on 28 December by Gajraj Misr and
Chandra Sekhar, who went to receive the ratified instrument.
    These were the last dealings they had with Bradshaw. Early in
January 1816 he was relieved of his functions as Political Agent.
Ochterlony was henceforth to exercise both military and political
authority. At the same time, Hastings privately determined that
Bradshaw should be removed from his post of Head Assistant at the
                                   Interlude                                3*9
Lucknow Residency as soon as a favourable occasion arose.6 His
conduct had been a cause of dissatisfaction for some time. As
administrator of the occupied Tarai, he had insisted on having
soldiers preserve the crops from possible enemy raids against the
advice of officers commanding on the frontier, who, remembering
the unfortunate result of his dispositions the season before, were
strongly averse to detaching small unsupported bodies of troops. In
addition, his manner as negotiator had been high-handed and
hectoring. The occasion of his dismissal was a quarrel with Ochter-
lony. Bradshaw complained that Ochterlony was supercilious, and
Ochterlony accused Bradshaw of being obstructive. There was a
measure of justice in both charges; but Bradshaw’s stock was by
now too far fallen, and Ochterlony’s was too high, for there to be
any doubt about whom Hastings would support. Bradshaw received
the news of his supersession with a very bad grace. He adhered to an
absolutely literal interpretation of his instructions, and thereby kept
Ochterlony in the dark concerning the state of negotiations until the
last possible minute. It is unlikely that Bradshaw’s shortcomings
had caused any serious damage to the negotiation; but it is in¬
disputable that his replacement by Ochterlony, who, with his
insight into and sympathy for the oriental character was an incom¬
parably better diplomat, was a salutary change.
    On 23 January, Gajraj Misr returned crestfallen from Nepal and
told Bradshaw that he had not got the ratified treaty. In his absence
adverse councils had prevailed, and the durbar now demanded that
the whole of the Tarai between the Gandak and the Kosi be sub¬
stituted for the proposed pensions. He was referred to Ochterlony,
who informed him that he might return either to Kathmandu or to
Benares, as best his fancy dictated.
   There is no reason to question the essential truth of the reason
given by Chandra Sekhar’s son for the treaty’s failure to gain

    6 A private letter from Richard Strachey to John Adam, dated 16 Dec. 1815,
concerning the post of Head Assistant at Lucknow, has this pencil note jotted
in the top left-hand corner: ‘to be considered when Bradshaw is removed’. See
I.O.L. MSS EUR/D/585, f. 161. Bradshaw returned to England on furlough
when his dismissal from the Lucknow Residency was announced (probably in
1817) in order to protest before the Court of Directors. His representations were
successful, and he returned to India in 1821 to assume the post of Resident. But
he never reached Lucknow. He died at Patna the same year. It was rumoured at
the time that he had been poisoned with diamond dust at the instigation of the
Nawab of Oudh. See Pearse, The Hearseys, pp. 218-20; Hodson’s List, Part 1;
Political Letter from Bengal, 4 May 1822.
320                               Interlude

 acceptance in the durbar. Information obtained by Edward
 Gardner confirmed that Amar Singh Thapa had been summoned to
 Kathmandu on business of state; and Chandra Sekhar, on his re¬
 turn from Nepal in August, had told Bradshaw that the Kaji,
 bitterly opposed to the terms of peace, had been recalled to court.
Amar Singh Thapa’s counsel must have been the weightier be¬
cause, by a freak of circumstance similar to that which had obtained
on the eve of the war, his avowed political enemies, the Shah
brothers, were in fundamental agreement with it. The ‘Bharadars to
the west’ mentioned by Bhim Sen Thapa probably included Bra¬
hma and Rudra Vir Shah, as well as Amar Singh Thapa. So much
would seem to be indicated, at least, by the tenor of their represen¬
tations to Gardner, and by the fact that neither again gave any
cause to suppose that his allegiance to the durbar was shaky.7
Bhim Sen Thapa himself appears to have been an unstable and
ineffectual figure at this critical juncture of his country’s history.
The instructions sent to Ranjor Singh Thapa after the fall of
Kalanga, enjoining an attempt to secure peace by extensive sacri¬
fice, show that he was still far from defiant and resilient in the face
of defeat, so his professed desire for an acceptance of the treaty
had therefore probably been sincere. But he was very impression¬
able. Thus while the moderating influence of Gajraj Misr pre¬
vailed, he had been disposed to throw himself on the mercy of the
conquerors; but after the return of his uncle, now the elder states¬
man of Nepal and the symbol of her resistance, he had neither the
self-possession nor the prestige to prevail against his fiery exhorta¬
tions.
    Amar Singh’s belief in miracles had been strengthened by
adversity. He clung to the idea that China might be induced to
help, even though repeated applications to the Imperial authorities
in Lhasa had failed to evoke any sympathy. It is known that an
application for aid had been sent to Lhasa, for the purpose of being
forwarded to Peking, by the Nepal Raja early in 1815. It had been
couched in the form of an accusation against the British, the
gravamen of which was that they were seeking to force a passage to
Tibet. Accounts differ concerning the fate of the petition. When
   7 It is known, from various casual references, that Brahma Shah remained in
the west as governor of Doti province. See, for example, Richard Strachey to
John Adam,   19 November 1816: I.O.L. MSS EUR/D/585, f. 212. Rudra
Vir’s subsequent career is so far unknown. It is probable that he remained
governor of Sallyana.
                                    Interlude                                321

the two Chinese Ambans in Lhasa wrote to the Rangpur Magistrate
later in 1816, they haughtily scorned the idea that they should ever
have sent such a contemptible missive into the august presence.
‘What has befallen us that we should communicate the unsuitable
petitions of the Gurkha Raja, or of anyone else to the Emperor, or
to trouble His Majesty with such misrepresentations?’; and, in a
letter later intercepted by the British Resident, the Nepal Raja
complained that no attention had been paid to his petition, which
had been returned from Lhasa. But other sources and subsequent
events show that this apparent indifference was mere dissimula¬
tion. The Ambans had, in fact, secretly forwarded copies of the
application to the Emperor, together with the Rangpur Magistrate’s
explanation of British procedure. The result had been a refusal to
aid the Gurkhas; but the Emperor had nevertheless felt the need to
investigate the whole situation in the Himalayas a little more
thoroughly, and he had ordered an agent, called Shee Chan Choon
in the English records, to advance from Peking to the southern
frontier of Tibet with an army said to number thousands. But
nothing was known of this in Nepal when the treaty was rejected.
The Emperor had ordered the Lhasa authorities not to divulge
their communication with himself—probably because he did not
want to encourage the Gurkhas in their conflict with the British.8
     It appears from the report of Kishen Kant Bose, Company vakil
 in Bhutan, that Nepalese attempts to acquire the support of the
 Deb Raja had been no more successful. A Gurkha ambassador
 resided at the court of Bhutan and special messengers had, in
 addition, been sent there from Kathmandu late in 1814. But Kishen
 Kant found no evidence to suggest that there was any formal
 alliance between the two governments. His suggestion was that the
 Deb Raja was detaining the Gurkha agents only in order to make
 the British more tractable in the matter of his border disputes with
 Company zemindars. A Gurkha embassy was sent to Burma,
 either later in 1814 or early the following year, which must have
 seemed more promising, because Anglo-Burmese relations had
 been disturbed ever since 1785, when the King of Burma had
 conquered Arakan and made his territories contiguous to those of
 the Company; but there is no doubt that, in so far as Amar Singh

   8 Sec. Cons., 25 Nov. 1815, no. 24; 16 Mar. 1816, no. 51; 22 June, no. 30;
13 July, no. 17; 27 July, no. 12; 10 Aug., no. 15. See also E. H. Parker’s article
in Imperial and Asiatic Quarterly Review, vol. vii, 1899, p. 178.
322                           Interlude

Thapa and the Gurkha durbar were induced to reject the treaty by
promises of co-operation, it was the machinations of Sindhia, the
Maratha Raja of Gwalior, which were their main source of en¬
couragement. Information obtained by the British in the latter
half of 1815 showed that Amar Singh Thapa’s expectations of
assistance from the Marathas were not entirely fanciful. The
British newswriter at the court of Ranjit Singh reported that
Sindhia had sent vakils to try to persuade the Sikh leader to help
the Gurkhas and thus contribute to the success of a grand plan for
the conquest of Hindustan; and in September 1815 British infor¬
mants in Benares reported the passage through the city of a mes¬
senger from the Gurkha vakil at Gwalior. He was carrying a letter,
from Sindhia to the Nepal Raja, which information represented as
‘of a nature inimical to the negotiations now pending between the
British and the Nepal states, urging the latter to spin out time by
negotiation and not to make peace, in which case they would be
assisted by the Marathas’.
   True, there had been such promises before, which had not been
kept; so perhaps the Gurkha nobles did not really have much faith
in Sindhia. But even if they did, the receipt of such assurances was
probably less the cause than the occasion of the rejection of the
treaty. It seems unlikely that a majority in the durbar was recon¬
ciled to it. Rudra Vir Shah’s attitude had been unequivocal, and no
doubt typical. ‘He acknowledged’, Gardner had written, ‘that if the
war were prosecuted it might terminate in their ruin; but that the
result was in the hands of Providence and that they would stand
the hazard of the issue.’
   Hastings had therefore accomplished only half his aim of leaving
a substantial and conciliated Gurkha state. By merely disfiguring
instead of crippling Nepal he had incensed her leaders without
making them incapable of retaliation. It had become clear that a
greater demonstration of his strength was necessary if the Gurkhas
were to appreciate the measure of his leniency. But he had reason
to be grateful, at least, that the incompleteness of his policy had
been made apparent while there was still time for further measures.
The Gurkhas could have lulled him into a false sense of security by
ratifying the treaty and then rejecting it at a later opportunity more
favourable to themselves, on the ground that it had been extorted
under pressure—an expedient at which nations professedly more
civilized and sophisticated have not baulked. Pride, fortunately,
                              Interlude                          323

has many aspects. Stubbornness, ungraciousness and intolerance
are among them; but so is honesty. ‘Lands transferred under a
written agreement cannot again be resumed’, Amar Singh Thapa
had written in his intercepted letter to the Raja of March 1815.9 If
negotiations for peace collapsed because of his adherence to this
principle, at least the collapse contained a promise that peace, once
attained, would not be destroyed by guile.

                          9 P.R.N.W., p.554.
                               XII

              THE FINAL CAMPAIGN

H      astings saw no reason to change his plans for the main
         invading division. Captain Casement, who had been in
         charge of the guides and intelligence department of the main
force during the first campaign, had assured him that Marley’s
instructions, had they been carried out, would have produced
success. No new information had come to light which suggested
that any of the recommended passes across the foothills was im¬
practicable. The only new idea, adopted at Casement’s suggestion,
was that one of the columns of the main division should advance
from Ramnagarh into the Rapti valley, considerably to the west of
Kathmandu, which was reckoned to be ‘the interior Tarai of Nepal’.
Otherwise Ochterlony’s instructions were the same as Marley’s: to
penetrate the foothills below Kathmandu; to occupy the three forts
of Hethaura, Makwanpur and Hariharpur within the first range
of hills; and then, if submission was still delayed, to advance into
the Nepal Valley and attack the Gurkha capital itself.
   It was already very late in the cold season, and only two clear
months remained for military operations. In 1814 Francis Hamilton
had written to the Political Secretary: ‘It cannot be too earnestly
recommended that the troops should reach the approaches to
Kathmandu by the 1st of December, so that they may have time
before the return of the unhealthy season, which often begins by
the 1 st of April, and usually by mid-May.’ If Ochterlony was to
remain true to the lessons of his first campaign, he would have to
ensure that he always had heavy artillery at hand to dislodge the
Nepalis from roosts on ridges and pinnacles. But whereas, in the
previous year, he had had six months at his disposal, he now had
only slightly more than that number of weeks. His well-tried tactics
of slow but sure advance would now be inapplicable. Somehow, he
was going to have to combine heavy firing power with exceptional
mobility. It was an almost absurd task that he had been set, because
the two requirements were obviously incompatible.
   Hastings compensated for Ochterlony’s lack of time by increas-
                            The Final Campaign                           325

ing his division to four brigades—a total of almost 20,000 men—
and no fewer than eighty-three pieces of ordnance. The nucleus of
the force was composed of men who had served in the eastern
divisions during the first campaign; but the additions were drawn,
wisely, not from corps tired after serving in the western theatre, but
from those which had either remained in the interior during the
previous year or recently arrived from Mauritius. No troops had
been sent from England in response to the Governor-General’s re¬
quest. Some had been on the point of embarking, but had then been
retained because of minatory events in Europe. Hastings had him¬
self rescinded his requisition for troops from the Cape and Mauritius
as far back as May, when the situation in India had become less
disquieting; but the order had arrived too late to have effect in
Mauritius, and troops from the island had disembarked at Calcutta
in August 1815. Among them was H.M. 87th, the Prince’s Own
Irish Regiment of Foot,1 which was now ordered to the frontier to
join Ochterlony’s division. Sir David had besides two other King’s
regiments: the 24th Foot, which had formed part of the main
eastern division the previous year, and the 66th Foot,2 up to strength
after the recent arrival of three companies from Ceylon.
    But even this force, which was almost equal in size to the
original four divisions in combination, did not satisfy Hastings.
 Determined that prolonged resistance by the Gurkhas must be
 prevented, he prepared to overwhelm them with a human avalanche.
 On Ochterlony’s left, John Wood, reprieved from threatened
 supersession by present necessity, remained in charge of the divi¬
 sion he had commanded the previous year. Now 5,000 strong, with
 a small artillery train, this was to complete the occupation of the
 Tarai north of Gorakhpur, thereby creating a diversion in favour of
 the principal operations and, if circumstances permitted, to
 advance to Palpa, Tansing and the provinces immediately west
 from the Nepal Valley. On Wood’s left Jasper Nicolls was to
 march into Doti, now the most western Gurkha province, with
 6,500 men and 20 pieces of ordnance. Edward Gardner was to ac¬
 company him and make another attempt to buy the allegiance of
 the Shah brothers with promises of the independent sovereignty of
 the territories they administered. Nicolls’s advance was to be supple¬
 mented by a thrust from Kumaun, organized by Lieutenant-
 Colonel Adams, to the flank of the enemy positions in the west.
   1 Later 87th Royal Irish Fusiliers.   2 Later the Royal Berkshire Regiment.
326                     The Final Campaign

Finally, at the other extremity of the line of operations Barre
Latter, now recovered, was to resume command at Titalia. His
function, as before, was to be essentially defensive; but he planned
to encourage the Sikkimese to renew their siege of Nagri. Alto¬
gether, some 35,000 men of the regular army and more than 100
pieces of ordnance would take the field for the second campaign.
   It is a wonder that the main division was ever mobilized in time.
The commissariat officer at Dinapur, after having received four
sets of instructions in six months, alternately ordering and counter¬
manding the resumption of preparations, can hardly have known
whether he was coming or going. In response to orders of n
December, all extra field establishments of coolies, bullocks and
carriage cattle had just been discharged again; and now yet a fifth
set of instructions enjoined the immediate recruitment of carriers
and cattle sufficient for an army of 20,000 men and 80 guns. For¬
tunately, followers had been so recently dismissed that large
numbers of them were still at Dinapur, and by dint of great energy
on his own part and of unstinting co-operation on that of the
Dinapur commissariat and the Magistrate and Collector of neigh¬
bouring Patna, Ochterlony was able to send the artillery train
across the Ganges on 13 January. He followed them north, with
H.M. 24th, on the following day. Because the expense would have
been so enormous and because peace had, until very lately, seemed
likely, no pantaloons had been prepared for the sepoys this season,
and only the Europeans were provided with tents. Arrangements
for the comfort of the native troops being so inadequate, it was in
one sense lucky that the worst of the winter was past.
   The rendezvous for Ochterlony’s division was near Balwi, a
hamlet on the frontier of Saran about six miles from the edge of the
Tarai forest. Troops had been accumulating there since the end of
November, and the normally desolate area had become trans¬
formed into a sprawling, teeming shanty town, clamorous with all
the noise and bustle of an Indian military encampment. Both
officers and men were in good spirits. Sickness had declined with
the hot weather and provisions were plentiful. ‘As one proof of the
goodness of our fare’, wrote Walter Henry, Surgeon to H.M. 66th,
‘I may mention that at the mess we had green peas in abundance,
that had been carried in baskets on men’s shoulders, all the way
from Dinapur.’ The troops were regularly turned out an hour
before dawn and kept under arms until it was light; but the enemy
                        The Final Campaign                       327

made no attack, so the days were free to be devoted to the amuse¬
ments of the camp—the bazaar, the nautch girls, the jugglers, the
musicians, the performing bears and monkeys, the wonder-workers
and the edifying spectacle of sadhus deformed by expiatory contor¬
tion. The European officers would take their fowling-pieces and ride
out to shoot mallard, teal, widgeon and snipe.
    Ochterlony planned to divide his force and cross the foothills
(here called the Churia range) at three points. The central column,
under his own direction, would comprise the third and fourth
brigades, consisting of H.M. 87th and seven and a half battalions of
native infantry—about 9,500 men, including the gun lascars and
ordnance drivers. This would force the Bichakori pass, which was
known to be defended, and advance to take Hethaura and Makwan-
pur. Thirty miles to the west, Lieutenant-Colonel Nicol, of H.M.
66th, was to lead the second brigade, consisting of his own corps and
four native battalions and totalling about 5,000 of all ranks, into
the Rapti valley by way of Mahajogi, and then march east to join
 Ochterlony. Colonel Kelly, in charge of the first brigade, would
 operate with H.M. 24th Foot and 4,000 natives on a line some
 thirty-five miles to Ochterlony’s right. He was to march up the
 ravine of the Lakanda nulla, an eastern tributary of the Baghmati,
 and deal with the fort of Hariharpur.
    On 3 February, Ochterlony led the third and fourth brigades
 forward some six miles to Simra Basa, on the edge of the forest.
 Here he had a strong stockade constructed, designed as the second
 heavy artillery depot. At seven o’clock on the morning of the 9th,
 the column began to move from Simra Basa with four six-pounders
 and four three-pound mountain guns. Striking north, the advance
 guard led the way through matutinal mists into the primeval jungle
of the Tarai.
    It seemed certain that they must meet resistance. No territory
lent itself better to defence. Sal and sissu trees of huge girth and
height, draped with weird vegetation, utterly still, and receding ever
farther like the reflections in facing mirrors, shut out the sunlight,
stifled every echo and confused all sense of direction. For nine
miles the army crept up the western bank of a dry river channel,
encumbered by dense tropical undergrowth. The pioneers often had
to clear a passage by chopping and firing, and then the screams of
startled parakeets broke the silence; but there was neither sight nor
sound of enemy soldiers. The march was twelve miles long, and it
328                     The Final Campaign

 was not until late in the afternoon that the vanguard reached
 Bichakori, a hamlet of about a dozen huts in a clearing under the
 foothills. Camp was pitched in the dry bed of a nulla, whose channel
farther up formed the Bichakori pass. Ochterlony was astonished
that he had been allowed to come so far unmolested.
    He remained at Bichakori for five days, gathering information
about the enemy defences in the pass and seeing to the fortification
of a large, square, brick building, which was apparently a caravan¬
sary. This he had decided to use as a depot and hospital. The
information of scouts and spies concerning the obstacles in the
Bichakori pass allowed only one conclusion. Despite all the
assurances of the Commander-in-Chief, it was impregnable.
Enemy preparations had turned it into a death-trap. But Joshua
Pickersgill, now acting Quartermaster, told Sir David that there
was an alternative route across the Churia range slightly to the west,
which was ‘unguarded and practicable, though difficult’. It was a
passage well known by smugglers, and seems to have lain about
half way between the Bichakori pass and the modern road from
Amlekhganj. Satisfied that Pickersgill must know what he was
talking about, after spending months surveying the border country,
Ochterlony decided to try to penetrate by this passage with the
third brigade and then, by attacking the Gurkha defences in the
Bichakori pass from the rear, open the main route for the fourth
brigade and the heavy guns. He commanded the operation in
person and moved from camp when the moon rose, at nine o’clock
at night on 14 February. He had two six-pounders, carried by
elephants, and 3,000 men. Tents at Bichakori were left standing,
and immediately occupied by men of the fourth brigade, in order to
conceal the movement.
    Ochterlony’s detachment followed the dry channel of the Bali
river. Where this began climbing into the hills, its banks were
steep and rugged, thick with overhanging trees which trailed long
tresses of wild ginger. In the deep colourless night, it seemed like
the entrance to a cavern. The men moved in files, with the silence
of a funeral procession. The only sounds were the thudding of axes,
as the pioneers moved trees grown or fallen across the path, and the
crashing of a distant cataract. Above, fractured turrets of rock
were transformed by the moonlight into mythological sculpture.
After five or six miles the path branched off into the ravine of a
narrow watercourse, whose bed was hard and flinty. White baboons
                        The Final Campaign                        329

peered from the foliage, causing hearts to pound; but there was no
enemy to be seen. When dawn broke, the men were aching and
parched with thirst, but, feeling the brisker air of the mountains,
they knew that the march must be almost over.
    Almost; but not quite, and the part remaining was ten times
more difficult than all the rest. The incline of the path suddenly
increased sharply, as the channel of the watercourse began to climb
a steep 300-foot cliff-face. For the moment, Ochterlony was sure
that they could not continue. Angry and disappointed, he rebuked
Pickersgill for having misled him. Pickersgill remonstrated and
said that if he thought that, he should go back; but he urged that if
the passage was cleared the enemy would be bound to evacuate the
Bichakori pass, to escape being attacked from behind. Ochterlony
knew that the season was already too far advanced for the campaign
to be halted and replanned, and that to postpone it until the following
year would involve crippling expense and imponderable political
consequences. He therefore wasted no more time by arguing,
but took a deep breath and gave the order to move on.
    The scree was so steep that the men had to haul themselves up by
means of bushes and branches. The Major-General, who had
walked every yard of the way to encourage his troops, was helped
up by the artillerists, who tied their sashes together to make a life¬
line. While the main body of the brigade was negotiating this stretch
of the pass, the advance moved on in search of water and eventu¬
ally bivouacked in a small wooded valley near a running stream,
 about five miles farther north. The last of the rearguard did not join
them until nine that night—fully twenty-four hours after leaving
 Bichakori. By now the men were a sorry sight. Their clothes had
 been torn to tatters and their toes protruded from lacerated shoes.
 But nothing could dampen the spirits of the 87th, who were up in
the trees and lopping off branches almost as soon as they had
arrived. Then they set to work building huts for their officers,
themselves, and ‘Sir David Maloney’. The bivouac was on a small
 hill, protected by an arc of outlying pickets. The Major-General
 and the men remained without tents for four days, until the baggage
 had been brought through the pass. They were even without food
until the morning of the 16th, when the first supplies of liquor and
biscuit arrived. Outwardly, Ochterlony remained buoyant and
good-humoured; but inwardly he was still numbed by dreadful
uncertainty, because even all his previous experience of hauling
330                     The Final Campaign

artillery over mountains could not persuade him that it was possible
to bring the elephants and the guns over that last stretch of the
pass.
   As had so often been the case in his first campaign, it was to the
virtuosity of his pioneers that he owed the achievement of the
seemingly impossible. Commanded by Captain Baines, they
laboured from late on 15 February until early on the 17th, and
turned the ascent into a rough flight of steps. First, the hill was cut
away and made less steep; then trees were felled, and laid trans¬
versely up its whole length. His mahout coaxed the first elephant to
try the ascent with a six-pounder strapped to his back; but it was
too steep for him to be able to balance with this extra weight. There
was a moment of acute suspense as he swayed, trumpeted, and
almost toppled over; and there was nothing for it but to remove the
gun. Both animals then ascended—slowly, and never taking a step
before testing the strength of the tree trunk or projection in front.
The guns had to be dragged up by hand, mounted on their
carriages. The hill was made, as far as possible, a succession of
direct ascents. Next, fox wedges were driven into the bank on either
side, and down the centre of the path. Pulleys were attached to the
side fixtures, and ropes from each side of the gun carriage passed
through them. Working parties then descended, pulling the ropes,
and the gun moved upwards for a few yards. As soon as it had
reached the level of the pulleys, the machine was made fast by
tying its preventer rope to one of the central wedges, and prepara¬
tions were made to repeat the process higher up. A subaltern of
artillery sat astride the gun to direct the operation. In this way both
the six-pounders were hauled up the slope, followed on subsequent
days by the bullocks and tumbrils with the ammunition and stores.
   Describing his manoeuvre in a dispatch, Ochterlony wrote that
the assurance he had received that the pass was practicable had
been ‘founded on an erroneous estimate of our resources, powers,
and means’. He added: ‘that the movement had been effected is to
be ascribed to great good fortune, as well as to the most persevering
labour, the greatest exertion, and most persevering fortitude.’ It
was chillingly obvious that had the enemy learnt of his manoeuvre
in time to interrupt it, they could have inflicted an historic exter¬
mination. There is no doubt that Ochterlony would never have
attempted the manoeuvre had he been aware of the difficulties. It
was not in his nature to gamble with catastrophe. For once, he had
                        The Final Campaign                       331

acted without good information, and had come near to paying
dearly for his ignorance.
    During the night of 16 February, the enemy detachments in the
Bichakori pass learnt that Ochterlony had turned their position,
apparently by some magic. Unnerved, they at once withdrew to
join the main Nepali force before Makwanpur. When Lieutenant-
Colonel Burnet heard of this, early on the morning of the 17th, he
had brought the fourth brigade as far as the lower reaches of the
Bichakori pass. He now sent forward a party to seize the top.
    It was plain that the enemy had placed their greatest faith in the
impregnability of this passage. As well as constructing three
stockades, each immensely strong, they had heaped rocks and
stones on surrounding eminences, ready to be rolled down on the
invaders, and had even poisoned the mountain pools, using some
toxic plant. Five elephants of Burnet’s detachment bellowed and
 shrieked with agony after drinking, and had to be destroyed.
 Ochterlony’s breathtaking movement, by nullifying all these
 elaborate precautions, threw the Gurkhas off balance. It was an
 eventuality for which they were psychologically unprepared, and
 they never recovered sufficiently to make the most of the advantages
 they still retained.
    Burnet was now delayed for nearly a week, engrossed by the
 formidable task of bringing the artillery, including two eighteen-
 pounders from the depot at Simra Basa, through the Bichakori ghat.
 Ochterlony did not wait for the fourth brigade to join him, but
 resumed his march to Hethaura as soon as he had learnt on 15
 February that the main pass had been secured.
    His route lay north eastwards, over open, gently rolling country,
 intersected by watercourses and powdered with early spring
 flowers. The march could not be hastened, because the path was
 narrow and much prickly brushwood had to be cleared away.
 Slightly to the south of Hethaura the Karara river, a branch of the
 Rapti, flowing from the east, crossed the route. The buildings of
 Hethaura could be seen on its northern bank. They consisted of
 two converted and fortified caravansaries, rather like the one at
 Bichakori but larger and stronger. The river was forded without
 difficulty, and the light company of the 87th pushed on to beleaguer
 the enemy posts. There were soldiers in the buildings, but they
 offered no resistance, and fled into the forest at the rear on the
 approach of the British force. Ochterlony remained encamped at
332                     The Final Campaign
 Hethaura for over a week, while one of the caravansaries was con¬
verted into a depot, and it was here that Burnet’s brigade and the
battering train finally caught up with him.
     On 25 February, Sir David received a visit from Chandra Sekhar
Upadhyaya, who earnestly assured him that the treaty had been
ratified, and was now at Makwanpur, in the possession of Bhakta-
war Singh, brother of Bhim Sen Thapa. Bhaktawar was ready to
surrender it, and was only waiting for the arrival of Gajraj Misr,
whom the Raja had summoned from Sagauli. Ochterlony sternly
declined to allow his advance to be delayed, and said that he must
have the treaty in his own hands before he could enter into discus¬
sions and grant an armistice. Secretly, he wished that he was able
to believe Chandra Sekhar, because the moment seemed propitious
for a lenient peace, and he viewed the prospect of a prolonged
campaign with weariness and misgiving. ‘Protracted war’, he told
Headquarters, ‘can only produce enormous expense, which the
most successful results cannot indemnify, but may as in our
western provinces, burden us with territory without revenue, and
with troops without resources to maintain them.’ But he dared not
trust the Gurkhas until he had irrefragable evidence of their
sincerity. It could well be that they were temporizing, with a view
to halting his operations until the hot weather compelled him to
withdraw on their own terms. When he left, the vakil said that he
would do everything in his power to bring Bhaktawar Singh into
the British camp that same day; ‘but’, remarked the Major-General,
‘it seem[ed] impossible to place any dependence even on assurances
which seemfed] dictated by self-interest.’
    Nothing more had been heard by the morning of 27 February,
when Ochterlony’s arrangements at Hethaura were complete, so he
ordered camp to be struck. Seven companies of native infantry
were posted to guard the depot, and at seven o’clock the rest of the
combined third and fourth brigades moved westwards for Makwan¬
pur. The third brigade, under Ochterlony, led the way, while the
fourth, with the heavy ordnance, followed. The distance was only
about six miles, but there were extensive tracts of woodland to be
crossed, in which Ochterlony insisted on probing his way with the
utmost circumspection. So it was three o’clock in the afternoon
before the first troops arrived before the fort of Makwanpur.
    They found themselves in an exquisite valley, which was bisected
by the Karara. On the southern bank of the river there were broad
                        The Final Campaign                        333
green pastures, inclining gradually to the stream. To the north the
ground rose more sharply and culminated in a hefty ridge of sandy
hills, some 1,500 feet high. It was a different world from the Tarai.
Foliage had lost its waxy patina, trees and grasses moved and
breathed, partridges and woodcocks flickered through the sunlight,
and the water was transparent.
   The army encamped in a long line of deserted huts on the
northern strand of the river, which were apparently enemy
summer quarters. All the Gurkha forces were now concentrated in
and about Makwanpur, a fortress in itself unimpressive but
situated in a position of great strength. It was on a high and steep
hill beyond the eastern extremity of the ridge of cliffs. The main
enemy outpost was a small village of about twenty huts, called
Sikhar Khatri, which was at the western end of the ridge slightly
below the crest. It was connected to Makwanpur by a road which
ran eastwards along the crest of the ridge, dropped to cross a
considerable indentation and then, at a point about one and a half
miles from the village, turned sharply to the north. A large stockade
straddled the road about a mile beyond the turning, and the emin¬
ence carrying the fort of Makwanpur rose just behind it. West of the
hollow, the ridge was bare; but its eastern half was covered with
luxuriant deciduous forest.
    When day broke the next morning, there was no sign of the
enemy colours and troops which had thronged Sikhar Khatri the
afternoon before. Ochterlony had not yet formed his plan of action
and had reckoned on waiting for the arrival of Colonel Nicol and
the second brigade, whom latest dispatches reported to have
successfully penetrated to the Rapti valley and to be only two or
three days’ marching from Makwanpur, before starting operations.
But his instinct prompted him to grab the abandoned site. He
reckoned that he might be able to turn it to good account sub¬
sequently, and thought that in any case it would afford a good view
of the enemy’s defences. Three companies of sepoys and forty
men of the 87th were instantly sent up the ridge to seize the village.
    Once they were ensconced among the huts, Captains Tickell
and Pickersgill took a small escort and went out to reconnoitre the
road along the crest. The party had occupied two more breastworks
to the east of the village, and had crossed the hollow and entered the
forest beyond, when, at about half-past twelve, a substantial enemy
force emerged from the woods below and began to ascend the
334                       The Final Campaign

northern side of the ridge. Their intention was obviously to cut off
the reconnoitring party from Sikhar Khatri. Seeing that it was
already too late to regain the village, Tickell, Pickersgill and their
party made their escape by clambering dowrn the southern flank of
the ridge and making for the main camp. Before they had got far,
the enemy were swarming on the crest, and eight sepoys were
killed and one wounded by a spray of musket shot. The Nepalis
then turned their attention to the British in front of the village.
They made khukuri charges against the two advanced positions,
overwhelming them and forcing their inmates back to Sikhar
Khatri. Here the troops were rallied by Lieutenant Tirrell, the
Adjutant of the Company’s Marine Battalion,3 who, intent on gain¬
ing experience of active service, had obtained leave from his corps
and arrived in camp only a few days before. The enemy, now seen
to be a good thousand strong, surged up to the hamlet from four
different directions successively, but each onslaught was repulsed
by what one observer called the ‘astonishing intrepidity’ of the
young Lieutenant and his men. Ochterlony, who was watching the
engagement from the main camp below, ordered a reinforcement,
consisting of a full battalion of native infantry and the light com¬
pany of the 87th, to speed to Tirrell’s assistance; but the path to the
village was half a mile long, and very steep and strangled. The
men could advance only slowly, and in single file. Tirrell was dead
before they could reach him. But the troops of the reinforcement
compensated for their tardiness with their fortitude. Imitating the
enemy’s style of combat, they covered the last stretch of the ascent
not in formation, but in an extended line, so that they could take
advantage of the irregularities of the ground. Resolutely, they
inched their way up to the village, nudging the Nepalis forward
almost at point-blank range. But then trumpets pealed in the main
stockade, and 2,000 more of the enemy, with several small guns,
poured along the crest of the ridge. Realizing that the Gurkha
commanders were, for some reason, making a major issue of retak¬
ing a post which they had recently spontaneously abandoned,
Ochterlony threw a further battalion of sepoys, four more com¬
panies of the 87th, and two six-pounders on elephants into the
conflict. As this second reinforcement was moving up to the village,
under Lieutenant-Colonel Miller, Ochterlony turned out his line
and commanded the artillery to play on the enemy troops as they
           3 The 1 st Battalion, 20th Regiment of Native Infantry.
                         The Final Campaign                          335

advanced along the crest of the ridge. Their commander immediately
retaliated by turning his own guns on the British camp. Ochterlony’s
tent was pitched well within their range, and his flag and the red
and white plumes of his and his staff officers’ cocked hats were
conspicuous targets. The Major-General only narrowly escaped
death when a shell exploded near him, killing the servant who was
holding his inkpot.
   The action was now a battle. Miller determined to try to rout the
Nepalis from the village with a bayonet charge. The Europeans of
the 87th led, and among them was Ensign John Shipp, an irrepres¬
sible Englishman who was one of that rare breed of officers who had
won their commissions from the ranks. Soon he was engaged
‘hammer and tongs’ with Krishna Bahadur Rana, the Gurkha Suba
who had been responsible for the attacks on Parsa and Samanpur
the previous season.
He was a strong, powerful man [wrote Shipp], protected by two shields,
one tied round his waist and hanging over his thighs as low as his knees,
and the other on the left arm, much larger than the one round his waist
. . . He cut as many capers as a French dancing master, till I was quite
out of patience with his folly. I did not like to quit my man, so I tried
other extremities; but he would not stand still, all I could do. At length
I made a feint at his toes, to cut them; down went his shield from his
face, to save his legs; up went the edge of my sword smack under his
chin, in endeavouring to get away from which he threw his head back,
which nearly tumbled off, and down he fell.
The enemy flinched under the impact of the assault, and recoiled
beyond the hollow. Miller’s men streamed into the village and
formed a convex line round its eastern approaches; but the enemy
rallied once they had crossed the hollow and formed a correspond¬
ing line on its opposite brink, which outflanked the British on
either side. Thus deployed, they maintained a stubborn fire and
even brought up a gun to the edge of the hollow. Miller thereupon
called for his own six-pounders, but an accident had delayed one of
the elephants and only one gun was at hand.
   It was now late in the afternoon, and Ochterlony realized that
Miller must have yet more men if he was to finish the action before
sunset. The Nepalis were astonishingly resilient; but they had been
fighting without respite for the whole afternoon, and when the
2nd/8th Native Infantry, fresh and unscarred, joined the conflict,
the scale was turned decisively against them. Under Major Nation,
336                      The Final Campaign

the 2nd/8th made a bayonet charge along the crest of the ridge,
 across the hollow and up its eastern slope. Their assault was furious
 and irresistible. Milling in confusion, the Nepalis blew up their
 ammunition and threw their advanced gun into the hollow. Then
 they retreated eastwards along the ridge, to the shelter of their main
stockade. They left hundreds behind, strewn all over the ground. In
 the hollow, their dead and wounded lay in masses, and John Shipp’s
last impression, before the light failed, was of hacked and bloody
bodies in a pit, some squirming, some jerking, and some attempting
to rise, and falling back again.
    The British casualties were 45 killed, 175 wounded and 2 mis¬
sing. The enemy were reckoned to have lost 800 killed and wounded.
The gun they had abandoned was later recovered from the bushes
in the hollow, and was found to be ‘of beautiful construction, and
equal to our mountain ordnance, being in every point exactly
similar’.
    The Gurkha effective force now amounted to just over 2,000
men, all of whom were jaded and dejected. Taking account of the
detachments made to guard the depots along his line of communica¬
tion, Ochterlony had some 6,000 fighting men at his disposal, of
whom about 2,500 were still untried. His artillery, the arm which
had proved decisive in his first campaign, had hardly yet been used;
and a couple of days later, on 2 March, Nicol arrived from the west
with the second brigade and thirteen pieces of ordnance, consisting
of twelve-pounders, six-pounders, mortars, howitzers, and light
mountain guns. But for all this, he knew that the odds were not so
overwhelmingly against the Gurkhas as appearances suggested.
They still held the eastern and strongest part of the ridge, where
their main defences were intact; and a powerful and insidious agent
was working in their favour among the British ranks—dysentery. It
was spreading quickly, and every day Ochterlony became more
anxious to end the war and quit the hills.
    Spurred on by his commiseration, by that vague distaste which,
for all the personal prestige he had gained from it, the war against
Nepal never ceased to inspire in him, and by the knowledge that
time was running short, the Major-General intensified his efforts to
bring the confrontation to a conclusive issue. On 3 March, H.M.
66th Foot, which had arrived with Nicol the day before, a battalion
of sepoy grenadiers and four elephants with two field guns were
sent to the captured village. From there they advanced along the
                            The Final Campaign                             337
crest of the ridge, crossed the hollow and pushed forward to a
point only about 800 yards from the principal enemy stockade,
while all the troops remaining below made a parallel movement
along the valley, so as to be able to provide support in the event of
an attack. A temporary redoubt was built for the guns, pending the
construction of a battery, and a road begun from the camp for the
eighteen-pounders.4
   The same day, Ochterlony received a letter from Bakhtawar
Singh. It explained, in the urbane understatements of a practised
diplomat, that he had intended to send the ratified treaty on
28 February, but that ‘owing to the unexpected occurrence of your
troops having ascended the hills, and the conflict that ensued ... a
delay of two or three days was occasioned.’ He now requested per¬
mission to send Chandra Sekhar to the British camp with the treaty.
   The Gurkhas had at last decided to submit—but not solely as a
result of their repulse from Sikhar Khatri. The last straw had been
news from the east, as yet unknown to Ochterlony, that Kelly,
leading the first brigade, had reached Hariharpur, attacked it from
the west and compelled the Gurkha garrison of 1,000 men, under
Ranjor Singh Thapa, the hero of Jaithak, to flee.
   Ochterlony now found himself in a dilemma. Instructions from
the Governor-General enjoined him to alter the treaty and insist on
the unconditional surrender of the whole of the Tarai ‘in the event
of a renewal of hostilities unaccompanied by the early submission
of the enemy’. Obviously, surrender after a full-scale engagement
could not be qualified as ‘early’. On the other hand, his own strong
wish was for an acceptance of the treaty as it stood. He wanted to
forgo the tiresome process of renewed negotiation, which would not
only retain his ailing army in the hills, but might, in the event of a
fresh collapse, compel it to reduce Makwanpur and even march
against Kathmandu. He resolved the problem with a typically
imaginative compromise. He received Chandra Sekhar the follow¬
ing afternoon, but at first declined to accept the treaty and roundly
harangued him for the ‘duplicity, folly, and perfidy’ which had

   4 Shipp (pp. 204-5) says that a cannonade was begun. Either his memory
deceived him, or he was heightening his narrative, because there is no mention
of any guns actually having opened in any contemporary account. Generally
speaking, his book is enjoyable, but often exaggerated, and occasionally quite
fanciful. Eighteen-pounders become twenty-fours; and when describing the
enemy casualties (of whom official reports reckoned 128 to have been killed), he
says ‘eleven hundred were committed to the grave’!
338                     The Final Campaign

marked every stage of the durbar’s conduct. The unfortunate vakil
wilted before this tirade and made no attempt to defend his
government. Almost cringing with contrition, he pleaded the youth
and inexperience of the Raja and humbly begged Sir David to be
merciful, as became the powerful. Ochterlony, still feigning reluct¬
ance, said that he feared the displeasure of the Governor-General,
who was determined to inflict condign punishment, and agreed to
accept the treaty only if it was accompanied by a written declara¬
tion, signed by Chandra Sekhar and Bhaktawar Singh, which
registered unconditional acceptance of the stipulated terms and
disclaimed all hope of subsequent modification. Eagerly, the vakil
promised that this should be provided, and hurried away. Work on
the road still continued, and Tickell selected a sight for a breaching
battery only 500 yards from the principal stockade. Chandra Sekhar
returned at about half-past two the next morning, 5 March, when
the eighteen-pounders were actually in position before the stockade,
and laid the required declaration before the Major-General.
Satisfied that, after such an overt signal of humility, the British
government could grant the original terms of pacification without
losing face, and secretly deeply thankful for that satisfaction,
Ochterlony received the copy of the Treaty of Segauli which had
been signed by the Raja, and surrendered that ratified by the
Governor-General in Council.
   So the war with Nepal came to an end. That it had not led to the
extirpation of the Gurkha dynasty was due in the last analysis to
Ochterlony’s integrity and humanity. Had avidity for the fabled
treasure of Kathmandu outweighed his desire for a politically
expedient peace and his solicitude for the health of his troops, he
might, both in perfect consonance with his instructions and with
confidence in his own superior strength, have demanded terms so
severe that the enemy would almost certainly have rejected them
and enabled him to march against their capital. Hastings was out of
patience with the Gurkhas and had made it plain that his own
preference was the subversion of their government; while the Major-
General, following the successes of Nicol and Kelly, had at his
command between 12,000 and 14,000 effective men and a formid¬
able array of artillery. In the army, hopes of prize money had been
high, and the troops were disgruntled that an early peace had
thwarted their expectations; but the temptation of private fortune
never seems to have influenced their leader.
                       The Final Campaign                       339

   When Ochterlony told Chandra Sekhar Upadhyaya that he
feared the displeasure of the Governor-General, he had not been
bluffing, because he was still not sure that his compromise would
satisfy Hastings. ‘I am in a terrible fright lest Lord [Hastings]
should be angry’, he wrote to Metcalfe a few days after the con¬
clusion of peace; ‘but new negotiations, with the necessary cessa¬
tion of hostility, were in my mind worse than the acceptance of the
old, ready cut and dry.’ However, he need not have worried. The
Governor-General was grateful that his initiative had made
extreme lengths of chastisement unnecessary and in his relief he
even indulged a little humour at the expense of George Wood, then
recuperating from jungle fever (awl): ‘Ochterlony has done admir¬
ably’, he wrote to Jasper Nicolls. ‘I fear Sir George Wood will die
of the owl when he hears to what profit less time than he had at his
disposal has been turned!’
    So swift and incisive had been Ochterlony’s advance, that the
separate divisions under John Wood, Jasper Nicolls and Colonel
Adams had hardly begun to move at the time of the Gurkhas’
capitulation. Only in the extreme east had there been time for any
collateral operations, where the Raja of Sikkim and his generals had
again acted as enterprising and plucky allies. They had even sent
troops beyond the Mechi river and occupied the abandoned Gurkha
posts at Ilam and Phae Phae. Latter had invited the Gurkha Stiba of
 Nagri, Genti Khatri, to desert to the British. Peace had been made
before his answer was received; but it was an answer which made it
clear that he would never have contemplated such a step.
    Ochterlony emerged from the war in a blaze of glory. He was
feted and toasted all over India. In December 1816, he joined the
 few Company officers who had been created baronets and became
the first among them to receive the Grand Cross of the Order of the
 Bath. When bestowing these decorations, Hastings told him that
 Company officers had now at last come into their own: ‘You have
obliterated a distinction painful for the officers of the Honorable
 Company, and you have opened the door for your brother officers
in arms to a reward which their recent display of exalted spirit and
invincible intrepidity proves could not be more deservedly extended
to the officers of any army on earth.’5
    This proved an accurate prognosis, because Company officers
were thereafter decorated by the Crown with fair frequency. But
                 5 East India Military Calendar, i, p. 368.
340                       The Final Campaign

 their merits, however outstanding, never became sufficient to
 secure them the reward of promotion. When he died, nine years
 later, Ochterlony was still only a major-general.
    Nevertheless, he had become a legend in the Bengal army, and
 for years afterwards hill chiefs and sepoys alike spoke fondly and in
 wonder of ‘Loney Ackty’ and his eighteen-pounders. In his last
 years, he discharged the combined functions of Resident in Delhi,
 Malwa and Rajputana, and many tales were told of his wealth, his
 princely hospitality, his harem and his vast entourage. He became
 a last lingering example of the old ‘nabobs’ of the East India
 Company, whose mode of existence was a happy compromise
 between oriental and western styles and who exercised an almost
viceregal authority. Before his death, opinion was already running
strongly against such licence, and Amherst, who became Governor-
 General in 1823, was not so prepared as Hastings had been to let
 Ochterlony have his own way. The old Major-General quarrelled
 bitterly with the new authorities in Calcutta and soon resigned with
his pride irreparably injured. He died in 1825—of a broken heart,
according to his friends.
    These last nine years were perhaps Ochterlony’s most con¬
spicuous, but it is doubtful that they were his best. If he has a place
in the pantheon of the early heroes of British India, it is less because
of his achievements in peacetime than because of his leadership in
war. As an administrator, he lacked the breadth of vision and the
penetration which emotional and scholastic commitment to India
gave men like Malcolm, Munro, Metcalfe and Mountstuart Elphin-
stone. He moved among the Sikhs and the Rajputs for many years,
but no romantic imagination was ever stirred, no intellectual
curiosity awakened. In spirit, he remained a conscientious and
upright European civil servant, seeking only the applause of his
seniors in Calcutta as the final authentication of the worthiness of
his opinions and conduct. He was unable to draw sustenance from
deep personal convictions and weather the storm of official
castigation in a determination to earn the approbation of a higher
tribunal. Ochterlony came to despise Tod, who was his Assistant in
Rajputana, precisely because of the latter’s emotional involvement
with the Rajput past and his apparent indifference to the esteem of
his superiors.
  Cunningham, in his History of the Sikhs, indirectly criticized
Ochterlony for his shortcomings as a provincial governor, but he
                       The Final Campaign                        341

also acknowledged his merits as a soldier. ‘Sir David Ochterlony’,
he wrote, ‘will long live in the memory of the people of northern
India as one of the greatest of the conquering English chiefs; and he
was among the very last of the British leaders who endeared himself
both to the army which followed him and to the princes who bowed
before the colossal power of his race.’
   That is no shameful epitaph.
                         PART III



                         EPILOGUE

F    o R a few anxious months, it seemed that the victory over Nepal
      was going to cost a serious confrontation with China. Late in
      May, Shee Chan Choon, the Emperor’s special envoy, arrived
in Lhasa with his army. He sent a letter, by way of Sikkim, to
Captain Latter, explaining that he had come to investigate the
situation in the Himalayas and would shortly arrive at Tingri, a
pass on the Nepal-Tibet border. The agent of the Sikkim Raja told
Latter that his army was commanded by five generals and
amounted to between 12,000 and 16,000 men. ‘You can safely assure
His Lordship’, wrote Latter to the Political Secretary, ‘that the
Chinese vizir is an officer of high rank, and that the army which is
under him has actually come from China.’ At about the same time,
the envoy informed Bhim Sen Thapa of his arrival and required a
deputation of senior Gurkha officials to wait on him. The Prime
Minister replied that the Gurkhas had been forced to submit to the
English, who had deprived them of all their old provinces, and that
an agent was being sent to explain at greater length. ‘Pacify and
talk smoothly to the Raja Lama,1 the Shee Chan Choon and the
Ambans’, he instructed his agent, ‘to draw down their compassion
and favour on us, and return with suitable answers.’
   Such was the situation when Edward Gardner arrived in
Kathmandu as British Resident, at the end of June. He soon
learned how matters stood, both from his spies and from Chandra
Sekhar and Gajraj Misr, who acted as go-betweens for himself and
the durbar. From these last two he received news of the death of
Amar Singh Thapa at Nilkanth, a shrine five days’ journey north of
the capital, where, they hinted, he had been engaged in negotia¬
tions with the Chinese. Gardner did not doubt the substance of
their intelligence, but suspected, probably with reason, that they

                        1 i.e. the Dalai Lama?
                              Epilogue                            343
were exaggerating the Chinese menace in order to alarm the
British and induce them to relax the terms of the treaty.
    But then affairs suddenly began to look critical. The durbar
received a note from its agent at Tingri, stating that the Chinese
envoy had left Lhasa and marched south to Digarche and advising
that vakils and presents be sent to him at once. Shaken to find that
the Chinese were apparently sincere, the Gurkhas abandoned all
ruses. Gajraj Misr and Chandra Sekhar implored Gardner to
advise them, and begged to know what the attitude of the British
government would be in the event of hostilities. The Resident,
realizing that their apprehension was real, became very uneasy
himself.
    Early in December, the durbar received further news that some
Imperial troops had advanced to the Kirong pass, by which the
Chinese had invaded Nepal in 1792. Shee Chan Choon had re¬
mained at Digarche at the instance of the Lama and officers of
Tibet, but would not hesitate to move forward if the expected
deputies did not quickly arrive. In desperation, the Gurkhas sent
three senior Bharadars to the envoy, with instructions to reiterate
Nepal’s allegiance to the Emperor and to inculpate the British as
aggressors.
    The Calcutta government was determined to avoid a rupture with
 China at all costs. A detailed explanation of British policy was sent
to Lhasa through Sikkim and Gardner was instructed to adopt an
attitude of strict neutrality. He was to withdraw to India immediately
if hostilities ensued. The view in Calcutta was that the Residency
was not worth the resentment of China and that even the extension
 of Imperial hegemony over Nepal, while regrettable, would not be
 sufficient to justify a quarrel with Peking.
    Fortunately, the cloud passed. The Chinese envoy received the
 Governor-General’s explanations shortly before the arrival of the
 Gurkha deputation, and professed himself completely satisfied.
 His mind at rest, he would, he replied, duly forgive the Nepalese
 Raja for his transgressions. The Gurkha deputation was received at
 Digarche, and treated with great indignity. But that was as far as
the envoy’s chastisement went. The Bharadars returned to Kath¬
 mandu humiliated, but unscathed and much relieved.
    On receiving the Governor-General’s assurances, Shee Chan
 Choon remanded his troops to China; but the matter did not quite
 end there. The Gurkha representations and the establishment of
344                            Epilogue

 the British Residency in Kathmandu had combined to engender a
 lingering mistrust in the envoy’s mind, and he politely requested
 that the Residency be withdrawn. Calcutta expostulated, pointing
 out that some restraining influence over the Gurkhas was necessary,
 and agreed to recall its own agent only if the Chinese sent a replace¬
 ment. The reply was that it was not the custom of the Imperial
 court to depute ambassadors, and with that the incident was closed.
 The Chinese had maintained a temperate, if haughty, tone through¬
 out; but their sensitivity concerning their interests in Tibet had
 been sufficiently obvious to cause the British to make their own
 presence in the Himalayas as inconspicuous as possible for the
 time being.
     The business of implementing the Treaty of Segauli was im¬
 peded by evasion and chicanery on the part of the Gurkhas.
 Gajraj Misr, still secretly convinced that the British would be
prepared to sacrifice important acquisitions in return for an
influence in the Kathmandu durbar, had assured the Prime
Minister that if he was reinstated as Raj Guru he would be able to
secure retrocession of the Tarai and abolition of the Residency.
Bhim Sen thereupon reinvested him with his old office and had the
 Raja inform Lieutenant Boileau, Acting Resident pending Gard¬
ner’s arrival, that the durbar now confidently awaited the indul¬
gences promised by Colonel Bradshaw. The truth was, of course,
that Gajraj Misr’s was now a correct calculation of the ulterior
concern of the Governor-General who, although rather reluctant
to forgo the Residency, still intended to exchange the stipulated
pensions for extensive tracts of the Tarai in order to ensure the
goodwill of the durbar. Gardner was obliged, as a matter of principle,
to secure strict adherence to the letter of the treaty before he
broached this subject; but he was enjoined to proceed with ‘the
utmost conciliatory and temperate . . . tone of conduct . . .
and the greatest care to avoid everything capable of being mis¬
interpreted to the disadvantage of the British Government or
[hazarding] the interruption of the growth of that confidence which
it is the hope of the Governor-General in Council will arise between
the two governments after the irritations arising from past events
shall be allayed’. Pleading various excuses, the Gurkhas delayed
evacuation of the lowlands for some weeks; but finally, seeing that
Gardner was adamant and also, it seems, receiving a warning from
their vakil at Gwalior that no help could now be expected from
                                  Epilogue                                    345

Sindhia, they ordered their troops to be withdrawn and negotiations
concerning the demarcation of a permanent frontier began.
    By December, a settlement had been made. The British govern¬
ment surrendered, in commutation of the pensions, the whole of
the occupied Tarai between the Kosi in the east and the Rapti in the
west, with the exception only of areas which had been the subjects
of dispute before the war. The Tarai west of the Rapti was retained to
be made over to the Nawab of Oudh in extinction of half his loan.
The new boundary was then surveyed and marked with pillars of
masonry.
   The Treaty of Segauli set Nepal firmly apart from the native
states of whom the British demanded tribute, feudal obligations
and abstention from foreign relationships in return for protection.
The only permanent liability with which Nepal was encumbered,
apart from amity with the British and the acceptance of their
Resident, was forbearance to employ Europeans.2 The British, for
their part, undertook to protect the Gurkha dynasty neither from
external nor from internal aggression. This meant that the position
of the Resident in Kathmandu was fundamentally different from
that of Residents elsewhere, whose obligations to uphold native
governments drew them increasingly into the sort of political
interference which they were, paradoxically, required to eschew.
He was, in fact, an ambassador, whose professed impartiality was
not liable to redound to the existing government’s advantage. Thus
was Nepal defined as a sovereign state outside India—a status which
she still retains.
   It did not always seem that that status would survive. Hastings’s
hope for a cordial relationship with Nepal was not immediately
realized. The death of Guru Gajraj Misr, while on an embassy to
the Governor-General in 1817, removed a salutary influence from
the durbar and for many years thereafter intrigues in Kathmandu
remained a cause of constant concern at Calcutta. While Nepal
escaped the anomalies which caused the collapse of the subsidiary
system and the annexation of Indian states, it was not spared the
sort of scrutiny which fears inspired by Russian ambitions caused
British statesmen to bestow on states beyond the Indus; and for
some time in the 1830s and 1840s it seemed that Nepal must fall a
victim to the same policy which led to the expedition to Afghanistan
and the annexation of Sind and the Punjab. It was not until the
    2 Nepal was not bound to abstain from foreign relationships until 1839.
346                               Epilogue

two rival parties, the Panres and the Thapas, had finally destroyed
each other in a gory political struggle, which lasted for a decade
from the fall of Bhim Sen Thapa in 1837, that a firm tradition of
Anglo-Nepalese alliance was established. Only then did a minister
emerge, called Jung Bahadur Rana, who abandoned imperial
ambitions and made friendship with the British the keystone of
his policy.
   Although Hastings forsook the style of treaty dear to Wellesley
when dealing with the truncated state of Nepal, his settlement of
the hill states from which the Gurkhas had been expelled bore the
clear imprint of Wellesley’s influence. The Governor-General’s
policy was ‘to restore the ancient chiefs in all cases in which
special reasons did not exist against it’, and then afford them protec¬
tion in return for feudatory obligations—such as submission to the
Company’s arbitration of disputes, the furnishing of troops when
requisitioned and the provision of a free passage for merchants.
These principles were applied to Sikkim, whose Raja was restored
to all his old hill territories east of the Mechi river, and to all the
hill states west of the Kali river except Kumaun, which remained
annexed to the Bengal Presidency. Hastings’s extreme reluctance
to burden the Company with direct responsibility for remote hill
territories made him unwilling to disqualify any chieftain, and in
the event not even the Thakurs of Bhagat and Kionthal, two of the
Twelve Lords who had refused to renounce their allegiance to Amar
Singh Thapa, were completely excluded from the benefits of his
scheme, though the greater part of their patrimonies was sold to the
lowland Sikh Raja of Patiala. In cases of escheat, it was planned to
transfer the lapsed estates to neighbouring chieftains.3 Some rein¬
stated sovereigns were required to cede small portions of territory,
which the British wished to retain either for strategic reasons or as
payment for subsidiary forces. Thus Malaun, in Hindur, and
Subathu, in Kionthal, were both kept as British fortresses. The
restored Raja of Sirmur, infant son of Karman Prakash, was com¬
pelled to cede Kayarda Dun and accommodate British garrisons in
Jaithak and Nahan; and the Raja of Garhwal was deprived of Dehra
Dun and all lands east of the Alaknanda river.4 Hyder Hearsey was
   3 The only territory of any note involved was the thakuri of Pandur, which
was transferred to Kionthal.
   4 William Fraser was made Commissioner for the Settlement of Garhwal.
His function was the same as that of Residents at native courts on the plains—
guidance without excessive interference.
                              Epilogue                            347
naturally vexed on discovering the government’s intention to annex
Dehra Dun. Flourishing his title deeds, he pushed himself forward
as zemindar and proprietor and proposed that he farm the revenues.
He based his claim on the principle that ‘a king or raja expelled by
force loses no rights or pretensions’, which was absurd and which
the government justifiably rejected. As far as it was concerned, the
Garhwal heir had sold to Hearsey something which he no longer
possessed.
   It was intended that political relations with Bhutan should
cease after the war, and the native agent sent by the Magistrate of
Rangpur was recalled. But demarcation squabbles and border raids
kept the two governments quarrelling for many years, until in
1865 a war was undertaken against Bhutan in circumstances simi¬
lar to those which had led to the invasion of Nepal half a century
before.
   The annexations in the western Himalayas were justified by
Hastings on strategic and economic grounds; but their greatest
significance in the history of British India was to pertain to neither
of these considerations. In a letter to Jasper Nicolls, dated Almora,
April 1816, Captain Raper wrote: T think in the course of a year or
two . . . this place will become a fashionable resort in the hot
weather.’ He thereby prophesied a phenomenon which ultimately
transformed the whole of the social life of the British in India.
Recognizing the value of the place as a sanatorium, the government
had before long built special hospital bungalows in the vicinity of
Almora, and the hill station was thus born. Obscure mountain
hamlets near the battlefields of the Nepal War became, within the
space of a quarter of a century, as well known as Calcutta, Delhi,
Bombay and Madras. Such were the village of Mussoorie, only a
few miles north-west of the spot where Gillespie fell in 1814; the
spa called Naini Tal in Kumaun; and the hamlet of Simla, in the
mountains just north of the scene of Ochterlony’s final combat with
Amar Singh Thapa in 1815. When Lord Amherst moved to Simla
for the hot weather in 1827, he began a custom that soon trans¬
formed it into the bustling summer capital which Kipling immort¬
alized in Plain Tales from the Hills. The contribution which the
hill stations made to the consolidation of British rule in India must
have been considerable. By providing such a respite from the
devastating climate of the plains as had hitherto been obtainable
only from a voyage home, they made India more accessible to
 348                                 Epilogue

Europeans than it had ever been before and helped make European
 family life possible.
    The hill stations were a legacy of the Nepal War which the
 British retained until they left India, 130 years later. Another legacy
 of that war they did not relinquish even then, and have still. This is
 the 2nd, King Edward VII’s Own, Gurkha Rifles—a regiment
 raised in 1815 as the Sirmur Battalion.
    By the time the war in the west ended, in 1815, about 4,650
 soldiers of the Gurkha army had deserted and sought service with
 the Company in response to the invitations of the British com¬
 manders. It was the Governor’s-General intention to group these
 men into provincial battalions: some for the occupation of the
 acquired hill territories, and some for the use of the restored
mountain chiefs. The available soldiers in Nahan and Hindur
greatly exceeded the estimated need; so, as Hastings was anxious
to honour the pledge of employment which all the deserters had
been given, he was compelled to reject Ochterlony’s plan for a single
regiment of two battalions and order the embodiment of three
battalions, each consisting of eight companies of 120 privates. They
were denominated the 1st and 2nd Nasiri Battalions and the Sirmur
Battalion. A similar corps was organized in Kumaun and called the
Kumaun Battalion. To each was attached a European commandant
and adjutant, and the monthly pay of each private was five and a
half rupees less off-reckonings. The uniform of the four corps was
to be ‘clove green jacket without facings, red cuffs, collar and
trimmings.’5 The value of these new battalions was quickly made
apparent. The regular sepoys detested the climate of the hills, and
it was not long before sickness and desertion were seriously
depleting the ranks of those in Kumaun. At first, the Governor-
General was not disposed to humour this dislike, because in his
view, ‘it would not ... be wise or politic ... to unaccustom the
native troops altogether to hill service. ’ But by the middle of 1816, he
had relaxed this attitude and found it expedient to replace a part of
the regular infantry stationed in Kumaun by the 2nd Nasiri Battalion.

   5 The strength of each battalion was to be allowed to diminish to ioo privates
per company, by the effect of retirement and casualties. The 2nd Nasiri Battalion
was absorbed into the ist in 1829, and the corps became the 66th Native Infantry
in 1850, when the name ‘Nasiri’ was given to another, non-Gurkha, battalion.
   It should be noted that these four corps were originally modelled on the pre¬
war provincial battalions (see above, p. 96), but in contemporary correspon¬
dence the designations ‘provincial’ and ‘local’ seem to be used interchangeably.
                              Epilogue                            349
   The ‘Gurkhas’ have become legendary by virtue of their service
with the British, but it was in fact a long time before the British
made use of them. Successive Commanders-in-Chief in India recog¬
nized the potential worth of the hill corps, but fear of offending the
high-caste sepoys, parsimony and prejudice against short men long
operated to prevent their being brought into the regular army,
while distaste for the idea of employing mercenaries precluded their
being replenished or supplemented with bodies of recruits from
Nepal proper. The Sikhs were far more enterprising than the
Company in this regard. Ranjit Singh had followed the progress of
the war with close interest, and the resistance offered by the Gurkha
army to the British convinced him of the importance of skilled
infantry. Almost as soon as hostilities were over he had Shiva Dat
Rai (Amar Singh Thapa’s old mentor—now a refugee in Sikh
territories) send an agent across the Sutlaj, who was to try to
entice the men of the 2nd Nasiri Battalion to forsake the Company’s
service for his own. This particular design was unsuccessful, despite
his offer of high pay; but Nepali mercenaries did enter his army in
increasing numbers as time went on. They even included Bal
Bahadur Singh, the hero of Kalanga. To this day, the Nepali word
for mercenary is lahure (one who goes to Lahore). Most hill corps
in the Company’s service had to make do with inferior status and
the same miserable pay for fifty years. It was only in 1861, after
they had shown steadfastness during the Mutiny of 1857, that the
hill corps (save the Nasiri Battalion, made regular in 1850) were
finally brought into the line and that the prejudice against mercen¬
aries from among the tribes of Nepal was abandoned. Now called
Gurkha regiments, the original number had been increased to ten
by 1947, of whom four, including the Sirmur Battalion under its
modern title, remained with the British Army. The others became
part of the Army of the Republic of India.
    Hastings did not receive many thanks for his victory over the
Gurkhas, because he had influential detractors in the Court of
Directors. The Court was required by the Board of Control to
approve his dealings with Nepal in principle, but its Chairman,
Charles Grant, a venerable figure with immense experience of
Indian affairs, was too implacable an opponent of Hastings’s martial
pretensions to neglect to find some way of deploring the scale of the
war. Under his guidance, the Court resumed its favourite theme
and complained of the enormous expense involved, which it
350                               Epilogue

 attributed to the Governor-General’s elaborate strategy. A second
 campaign might have been avoided, it insisted, had the British
force not been divided into so many small columns initially.
    This was a common criticism, and it almost certainly originated
with Nugent, who had arrived back in England still harbouring his
grudge, and ready to support Edmonstone’s lamentations about
 expense with on-the-spot recrimination. Hastings had no difficulty
in confuting the Court, because the war had, in fact, been con¬
ducted with remarkable economy. The expenditure incurred during
the first campaigns had been scarcely more than a third of the
original estimate, considerably less than the charges involved in
either of the campaigns of 1803-4 and 1804-5, and less than a third
of the expense of any former war in India for a corresponding length
of time. In any case, the total cost of the war, which was roughly
estimated at six and a half million rupees,6 was more than covered
by the half of the Oudh loan which was to be liquidated with
acquired territory.
    The Court was obliged to modify its attitude. It conceded that
the arrangements for the final campaign had been ‘very judicious,
both in a military and in a political point of view’ and expressed its
satisfaction at the economies which the commissariat had realized.
But no real gratitude lay behind its formal phrases. Besides the
intense distaste of men like Grant for all acquisitive enterprises,
there was a general apprehension in London lest Hastings’s policy
should embroil the Company with China—if not directly, then in
the long run, by making the British territories contiguous to those
of China in an area where the frontier was almost bound to be a
cause of altercation.
   While the Directors were eager to expatiate on the ruinous
expenses created by the war, they were by no means ready to adopt
those measures which it had plainly indicated would lead to long¬
term economies. Still paralysed by a petty cash mentality, they
remained incapable of balancing immediate sacrifices against the
prospect of ultimate gain. Hence, although they recognized that the
commissariat had saved considerable expense, they refused to allow
that department to profit by its recent experiences and perfect its
organization. Hastings warned that ‘satisfactorily as the duties were

     6 See Appendix A to the copy of Hastings’ Summary printed in the volume of
Papers Respecting a Reform in the Administration of the Government of his Ex¬
cellency the Nawab Vizier {1824).
                               Epilogue                            351


fulfilled, the machine was evidently too feeble.’ He continued: ‘the
individuals whom I temporarily lent to the commissariat, though
deserving of applause for zeal and activity, were avowedly ignorant
of details, and might have been found deficient had the enemy been
skilful enough to comprehend the consequence of intercepting
convoys.’ He therefore proposed increasing the permanent staff of
the commissariat by five officers, making a total of twenty-four. The
Directors refused to sanction the increase, and complained that
they saw no reason why it had ever been necessary to add to the
original staff of eight. Fearful lest such augmentations should lead
to understaffing in the regiments, they commanded that ‘the utmost
attention be paid to confining the number of officers employed on
the commissariat both in peace and war, within the narrowest
practicable limits.’ At the same time, they prescribed measures
designed to stifle the department’s independence. Normally, all
applications for government funds in Bengal had to be screened by
the Military Board. This was a committee of the seven senior staff
officers of the Bengal army, to whose ‘unbiassed opinions’ the
Court professed itself ‘accustomed to look with confidence in all
cases of military expense’, but which, in the opinion of a later
 Governor-General, Dalhousie, ‘managed everything and marred
everything’, It had been intended in Calcutta that the Commissary-
 General’s operations should be facilitated by allowing him to sub¬
mit his applications for money through the Military Auditor-
 General; and it had been reckoned that, as his own department
would therefore not be liable to the scrutiny of the Board, he might,
 in recognition of the importance of his office, be given a seat on that
 body. But the Directors objected. They did not understand the
 commissariat to be independent of the Board at all. Not only did
 they take exception to his having a seat on that body; they further¬
 more instructed that he was to have no official status whatever.
 In 1817, they directed first that the Military Board make an annual
 report on the commissariat’s accounts, and then that the Com¬
 missary-General be made directly subordinate to the Board,
 through which he was thenceforth to submit all his applications for
 funds. The consequence of all this jealous restriction was that the
 commissariat never became capable of fulfilling its functions. In
 1824, Sir Edward Paget, the new Commander-in-Chief, com¬
 plained, very much as Horsford had done ten years before, that
 ‘the efficiency of the army would be destroyed were the troops
352                             Epilogue

 taught to depend on the commissariat for the carriage of their
 private baggage.’7
    It was the branch of the army concerned with guides and intelli¬
gence whose reputation had been ruined by the war. Instances of its
inefficiency were manifold and almost every calamity of the war
was caused in some measure by its failings. Treacherous guides had
taken Gillespie’s columns astray at Kalanga and led John Wood
into a trap. No guide had been provided for the party with Richards’s
spare ammunition on 26 December 1814, and no messengers had
been posted along his route. Inaccurate intelligence had upset
Martindell, confused Marley, terrified the frontier magistrates,
caused Hastings to pronounce negotiable a pass that was in fact a
death trap, and led Ochterlony into a defile from which he had
emerged only by miraculous good luck. Again, the basic mischief
was stinginess. An army gets only the intelligence it pays for. The
King’s army had recognized this and set up a special fund called
secret service money, and general officers were allowed to account
for its disbursement on oath, without divulging the names of
informants. In India, there was no separate intelligence organiza¬
 tion. Securing information and guides was a function of the Quarter¬
master-General’s department, which was allowed so little money
for the purpose that no useful spy could be induced to sell his
services. During the war in the Carnatic in 1780, when a man, at the
risk of his life, had brought Sir Hector Munro information con¬
cerning the position of Colonel Baillie’s detachment, Sir Hector had
given him sixteen shillings. The situation was still much the same
sixty-six years later, when one Bengal officer complained: ‘In
India, you can . . . easily get intelligence if you pay well; but no
man will risk his life for 16 shillings ... It is probable that for
every rupee we save by low payments, we lose hundreds or
thousands of rupees and many valuable lives.’8
    With regard to the size of the army, even the Directors were
compelled to admit than an increase was necessary; but, concerned
above all else with immediate economy, they allowed only ‘the
establishment of provincial corps to a certain limited extent’, and
the formation of ‘some local corps in the hilly districts lately
acquired from Nepal’. They sanctioned the augmentation proposed

  7 Quoted by Barat, Bengal Native Infantry, p. 203.
  8 The Englishman, 30 Oct. 1846. The (anonymous) author was Major William
Hough.
                               Epilogue                            353


by Hastings for the corps of irregular horse only on the condition
that no additions were made to the regular cavalry. His three extra
regiments of regular infantry they regarded merely as temporary
expedients for the emergency of the Nepal War. ‘We therefore
trust that no impediment will arise to their being disbanded at an
early period.’ Their wish was never acted on, because war with the
Marathas and their Pindari henchmen had broken out before the
dispatch reached India; but from then on the use of ad hoc local
and provincial bodies of troops as cut-price substitutes for new
regular battalions became well established. The army grew mainly
by means of them, and within a decade there were something like
thirty battalions of irregular infantry and eight regiments of
irregular cavalry in Bengal.
   This method of augmenting the military establishment had one
grave disadvantage: it made the shortage of European officers even
more acute, because each irregular corps required between two
and eight officers of the line. The experience of the Nepal War,
combined with the effects of this new drain on the army’s contin¬
gent of regimental officers, led critics to press for an increase in
their number, and in 1825 the Calcutta government made a formal
request to that effect. But the Court had no intention of nullifying
the economies realized in one sector by increasing expenditure in
another. It insisted that any deficiency in the number of regimental
officers was caused only by the indiscriminate allotment of military
men to political functions, and it stubbornly refused, until the very
end of its existence, to authorize any significant increase.
   War is bound to expose weaknesses in any military organization;
but the dismissal, for professional ineptitude, of three out of the
four Company major-generals employed in the invasion of Nepal
indicated nothing less than the fatal deficiency of the Company’s
method of promotion. Yet no attempt was ever subsequently made
to remedy even the worst abuses of the seniority system by making
retirement compulsory or financially enticing, or both, at a suit¬
able age. Until the Mutiny of 1857 there remained ‘brigadiers of
seventy, colonels of sixty, and captains of fifty’—to say nothing of
generals of eighty-five, like Marley. Lord Roberts wrote in his
memoirs:
It is curious to note how nearly every military officer who held a com¬
mand or a high position on the staff in Bengal when the Mutiny broke
out, disappeared from the scene within the first few weeks, and was
354                              Epilogue
never heard of officially again. Some were killed, some died of disease,
but the great majority failed completely to fulfil the duties of the posi¬
tions they held, and were consequently considered unfit for further
employment. Two Generals of divisions were removed from their
commands, seven Brigadiers were found wanting in the hour of need,
and out of the seventy-three regiments of Regular Cavalry and Infantry
which mutinied, only four commanding officers were given other
commands, younger officers being selected to arise and command the
new regiments.9

It was not only that seniority promotion made responsible officers
old and tired; it also completely divorced rank from merit and
made the whole military hierarchy ridiculous. By the time he died,
Ochterlony had been superseded in rank by both the officers
(Martindell and George Wood) whom he had been appointed to
replace in the war of 1814-16.
   Other lessons of the war were disregarded because of a callous
concern to preserve vested interests. Perturbed to hear of the part
which the sepoys’ cartridge boxes had played in the defeat of
Lawtie’s detachment on 26 November 1814, Hastings and the
Military Board turned their attention to improving the design of
this article and requested the Court to send no more from England.
The Directors made no reply to this communication, but, eighteen
months later, informed the Calcutta government that they had been
disturbed by a private report concerning an engagement in the late
war, in which ‘a party of infantry were cut off under a Captain
Williams . . . owing to the cartridges sticking in the pouch boxes’.
They had, they explained solicituously, ‘deemed the rumour to be
of sufficient importance to enquire whether any such incident did
occur and, if so, the grounds from which it appeared to proceed’.
Would it be preferable, they wondered, to send tin cartridge boxes
in future? ‘This article of military store has at different times led to
much discussion and engrossed much more of the time of our
survey department than any other.’ In reply, Calcutta patiently
reiterated its wish that all such consignments from England be
stopped. ‘This article of military equipment . . . can at all times
be prepared here at trifling expense, of a quality equal to those sent
from Europe . . . We understand that a cartridge box on an im¬
proved plan, particularly calculated for the service and climate of
India, has been prepared by the commissariat and approved by His
                    9 Forty-One Years in India, i, p. 436.
                                    Epilogue                                  355


Excellency the Commander-in-Chief.’ But the Court had no inten¬
tion of transferring any of its contracts for military stores from
England to India and, Calcutta having intimated that the substitu¬
tion of tin for wood would not solve the problem, it simply con¬
tinued to send boxes of the old type. They were still in use twenty
years later, when a writer in The East India United Services Journal10
complained: ‘The “office men” by whom these things have been
regulated continue to issue these worse than useless, because
dangerous equipments.’ He stated that they had become so dis¬
reputable, that the sepoys in action at the final siege of Bharatpur
in 1826 had carried their cartridges loose in their pouches. All the
boxes had been left in a pile under the protection of a sentry, to be
replaced when the fighting was over.11
    Circumstances made it easy for the Court to be remiss towards
its armies. It was very difficult for the Directors to share the sense
of urgency which caused men on the scene to place such importance
on efficiency in their military arrangements. Most had never been
to India, and they formed their policies in the remote calm of East
India House, with its solid furniture and imperturbable clocks,
from the evidence of long copperplate dispatches and complacent
newspaper reports that had taken five or six months to arrive. In
such an atmosphere private ideals, mania for economy and fear of
strengthening the hands of the Company’s critics by infractions of
the spirit of Pitt’s India Act were bound to get more attention
than the local realities of Indian politics. Even the memory of the
American experience was insufficient to awaken the Directors to
the possibility of their Indian possessions being lost. It is note¬
worthy that even Hastings, a soldier who had been directly involved
 in the struggle to retain the American colonies, had, earlier in his
 career, been as ready as anyone to condemn the military pretensions
 of Indian statesmen. It was only when he arrived in India that his
views changed and he became the most martial of them all. But
news of the worst calamities of the Nepal War still failed to trouble
the Court’s equanimity. ‘The only objects which, in our situation of

    10 Vol. iii, Aug. 1834.
    11 Military Letter to Bengal, 22 Mar. 1816; Military Letter from Bengal,
27 Sept. 1816, para. 125; Mil. Cons., 13 Sept. 1816, nos. 41, 42; anecdotes
entitled ‘From my Notebook’: E.I.U.S.J., vol. iii, Aug. 1834, p. 91. By 1846 the
design had been changed to ‘a tin with three divisions, to contain ten rounds each,
and a wooden former to rest on the tin, to contain twenty-six rounds more’:
The Englishman, 30 Sept. 1846.
356                               Epilogue

pre-eminent power maintained by most expensive establishments,
could render a war proper with the poor and mountainous country
of Nepal, were the preservation of our honour and the integrity of
our territories’,12 it pronounced with unshakeable self-assurance, at
the end of 1815. Yet it was, in fact, precisely the lack of pre-eminent
power which that war had by then served to demonstrate. Although
members of the government in India argued whether pre-eminence
was necessary, none of them ever pretended that it actually existed.
They were too close to the evidence to delude themselves so far.
The Bengal army had proved itself so inadequate, in one way and
another, for the type of war it was fighting, that other frontiers had
had to be denuded in order to reinforce it and urgent recourse had
to other colonies for extra British troops. When success was finally
achieved, every nerve was strained and every resource exploited.
There was no power in reserve, because Europe was again in ferment
and no troops could be spared from home. Had the Sikhs and the
Marathas, or either, joined their strength to that of the Gurkhas,
it is hardly debatable that the British would have been expelled
from northern India.
    The reality was not, then, a pre-eminence of power; and in so
far as there was a balance of power, it was a fortuitous one, main¬
tained by political events outside British control. The British
victory against Nepal was not the ineluctable, predetermined con¬
sequence of British might. It was not achieved by the crude
appurtenances of power—by numbers, wealth, weapons and
superior military organization—alone; but by these plus good
luck and the extraordinary ingenuity, dynamism, devotion and
courage of a handful of European officers. An anonymous civilian13
who accompanied Ochterlony on both his campaigns reckoned that
the officers had been the saviours of the army. ‘The General owed
the execution of his designs entirely to the unyielding resolution
and ability of the officers, qualities which were auspiciously mani¬
fested when they had to keep their ground or throw up fortifica¬
tions in the face of a victorious enemy.’
    He ascribed the unsteadiness of the sepoys to fundamental
defects in the native character. They had no notion of disinterested
honour and were deficient in mental energy. He drew the inference
that more European officers were essential, as the only source
   12 P.R.N.W., p. 548. My italics.
   13 Author of Military Sketches of the Goorkha War.
                                 Epilogue                                357


whence they could imbibe such qualities. This is, of course, an
unsound diagnosis. It was afterwards estimated, by a reliable
judge,14 that in addition to sustaining some 3,000 battle casualties,
the Bengal army had lost about 2,000 men as a result of sickness
and desertion during the Nepal War. This indicates that lack of
training for such a novel type of warfare and the demoralizing
influence of inadequate clothing, sanitation, equipment, shelter
and what Hastings himself called the ‘constant, harassing and
unmilitary duties imposed on them even in times of peace’, were
the real causes of their infirmity. The presence of British officers
was not, therefore, a panacea for the army’s ills; but there is no
 doubt that the example of the best of them was still of immense
 importance as a palliative.
    To modern eyes, these officers seem half unreal, archaic figures.
 This is bound to be so, because theirs is a lost experience and theirs
 were ambitions and principles that have lost their power to inspire.
 Wars are no longer fought without maps, scientific medicine, know¬
 ledge of hygiene, specially adapted clothing and food, organized
 intelligence, radio and aircraft, on peripheries of the known world;
 and few honest soldiers now see the battlefield as a source of honour
 and glory. These terrible stresses and these old-fashioned ideas
 played havoc, no doubt, with weak personalities; but in the best
 officers they seem to have stimulated qualities whose value is
 eternal. These men became sublimely brave, and capable at once of
 the leadership that makes men devoted and the chivalry that gives
 even war nobility.
    The Nepal War marks the beginning of the final stage in the
 history of the Bengal army. It was a stage marked on the one hand
 by the struggle to rationalize the army’s internal structure, and on
the other by its increasing involvement in difficult and distant
 operations. The Nepal War, which was the first ‘frontier’ war in the
 history of British India and thus a foretaste of the sort of service
 which the sepoys would increasingly have to undergo, served to
 demonstrate the sort of leader which that army now required. But
 it also served to demonstrate that such was not the sort of leader
 that the system was geared to produce. The most successful com¬
 manders in the war—Ochterlony, Nicolls, and William Gardner—
 were not products of the East India Company’s system of military
 promotion. Ochterlony was a junior general officer who would never
      14 Major William Hough, writing in The Englishman, 27 Oct. 1846.
358                           Epilogue

have had an independent command had it not been for Gillespie’s
unexpected death; Nicolls was a King’s officer; and Gardner was a
freelance. It was the least successful commanders who had owed
their advancement to the system.
   This inchoate army never resolved its problems. Each step in the
process of rationalization was more painful, until finally the attempt
to introduce the Enfield rifle with a new type of cartridge led to the
disastrous mutiny of 1857. Journeys to distant theatres of war, the
inevitable consequence of the extension of British dominion, be¬
came causes of unrest and rebellion. These ills could not be con¬
trolled and contained, because, as the need for it increased, so the
palliative of good leadership grew weaker. At regimental level,
officers tended to get fewer, less able and, because of changing
social conditions in India, increasingly out of touch with the men.
The holders of high command continued to be enfeebled by age
and mental exhaustion. The causes of the destruction of the Bengal
army in 1857 are manifold and complex; but its essential precondi¬
tion was undoubtedly the destruction of that army’s best asset—
the European officers whose claim to authority rested less on the
mechanical workings of a promotion system or on any sense of racial
superiority than on real ability and an unconscious but exemplary
achievement in the field of racial partnership. The names of these
men have been forgotten, and their graves are often untraceable;
but they did exist, and it is fitting that they be summoned from the
shadows.
                         APPENDIX i

TREATY of PEACE between the HONOURABLE EAST INDIA
COMPANY AND MAHA RAJAH BIRKRAM SAH, Rajah of Nipal,
settled between LIEUTENANT-COLONEL BRADSHAW on the
part of the HONOURABLE COMPANY, in virtue of the full powers
vested in him by HIS EXCELLENCY the RIGHT HONOURABLE
FRANCIS, EARL of MOIRA, KNIGHT of the MOST NOBLE
ORDER of the GARTER, one of HIS MAJESTY’S MOST HON¬
OURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL, appointed by the Court of Directors
of the said Honourable Company to direct and control all the affairs in
the East Indies, and by SREE GOOROO GUJRAJ MISSER and
CHUNDER SEEKUR OPEDEEA on the part of MAHA RAJAH
GIRMAUN JODE BIKRAM SAH BAHAUDER, SHUMSHEER
JUNG, in virtue of the powers to that effect vested in them by the said
Rajah of Nipal,—2nd December 1815.
    Whereas war has arisen between the Honourable East India Company
and the Rajah of Nipal, and whereas the parties are mutually disposed
to restore the relations of peace and amity which, previously to the
occurrence of the late differences, had long subsisted between the two
States, the following terms of peace have been agreed upon:—

                           ARTICLE 1st.
   There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between the Honour¬
able East India Company and the Rajah of Nipal.

                           ARTICLE 2nd.
   The Rajah of Nipal renounces all claim to the lands which were the
subject of discussion between the two States before the war; and acknow¬
ledges the right of the Honourable Company to the sovereignty of those
lands.
                           ARTICLE 3rd.
  The Rajah of Nipal hereby cedes to the Honourable the East India
Company in perpetuity all the undermentioned territories, viz.—
  First.—The whole of the low lands between the Rivers Kali and
     Rapti.
  Secondly.—The whole of the low lands (with the exception of Boot-
     wul Khass) lying between the Rapti and the Gunduck.
  Thirdly.—The whole of the low lands between the Gunduck and
     Coosah, in which the authority of the British Government has
     been introduced, or is in actual course of introduction.
360                            Appendices

   Fourthly.—All the low lands between the Rivers Mitchee and the
      Teestah.
   Fifthly.—All the territories within the hills eastward of the River
      Mitchee including the fort and lands of Nagree and the Pass of
      Nagarcote leading from Morung into the hills, together with the
      territory lying between that Pass and Nagree. The aforesaid
      territory shall be evacuated by the Gurkha troops within forty
      days from this date.
                            ARTICLE 4th.
   With a view to indemnify the Chiefs and Barahdars of the State of
Nipal, whose interests will suffer by the alienation of the lands ceded by
the foregoing Article, the British Government agrees to settle pensions
to the aggregate amount of two lakhs of rupees per annum on such
Chiefs as may be selected by the Rajah of Nipal, and in the proportions
which the Rajah may fix. As soon as the selection is made, Sunnuds shall
be granted under the seal and signature of the Governor-General for the
pensions respectively.
                            ARTICLE 5th.
    The Rajah of Nipal renounces for himself, his heirs, and successors,
all claim to or connexion with the countries lying to the west of the River
Kali and engages never to have any concern with those countries or the
the inhabitants thereof.
                            ARTICLE 6th.
   The Rajah of Nipal engages never to molest or disturb the Rajah of
Sikkim in the possession of his territories; but agrees, if any difference
shall arise between the State of Nipal and the Rajah of Sikkim, or the
subjects of either, that such differences shall be referred to the arbitra¬
tion of the British Government by which award the Rajah of Nipal
engages to abide.
                            ARTICLE 7th.
   The Rajah of Nipal hereby engages never to take or retain in his
service any British subject, nor the subject of any European or American
State, without the consent of the British Government.

                            ARTICLE 8th.
   In order to secure and improve the relations of amity and peace here¬
by established between the two States, it is agreed that accredited
Ministers from each shall reside at the Court of the other.

                            ARTICLE 9th.
   This treaty, consisting of nine Articles, shall be ratified by the Rajah
of Nipal within fifteen days from this date, and the ratification shall be
                             Appendices                            361

delivered to Lieutenant-Colonel Bradshaw, who engages to obtain and
deliver the ratification of the Governor-General within twenty days, or
sooner, if practicable.

   Done at Segowlee, on the 2nd day of December 1815.

                                   Paris Bradshaw, Lt.-Col., P.A.

   Received this treaty from Chunder Seekur Opedeea, Agent on the
part of the Rajah of Nipal, in the valley of Muckwaunpoor, at half-past
two o’clock p.m. on the 4th of March 1816, and delivered to him the
Counterpart Treaty on behalf of the British Government.

                                           DD. OCHTERLONY,
                                           Agent, Governor-General.
                          APPENDIX 2

In 1814 the East-India Company’s Bengal army was composed of:
                  Corps                       Total all ranks


          r Engineers                                31*
            Horse Artillery                         312
European < 3 battalions of Foot Artillery         1,761
            1 regiment of
          -   European Infantry                   i.ic^1

            Total European contingent                                3>207

          ' 1 battalion of Native Foot
              Artillery (Golandaz)                  952
            45 Companies of Gun Lascars           2,975
            8 regiments of Native Cavalry         4,512
            27 Regiments of Native
               Infantry (including the
               Marine Regiment)                  52,880*
            Pioneers                                728
            Miners                                  131
          s Ordnance Drivers                      2,860*

           Total native army                                    65,038
           Grand Total                           68,245

The figures are those given in Gov. Gen. to Vice-Pres., 9 Feb. 1815:
Secret Consultations, 21 March 1815, No. 1., para. 88, except those
marked*, which are taken from the General Abstract Return of H.M.
and the Hon. Company’s European and Native Troops Serving under
the Presidency of Fort William, 13 Jan. 1812: Nugent MSS, ff. 108-9.
These figures have been used where Hastings’s estimate takes account of
increases made for the purpose of the Nepal War. The above therefore
represents the peace establishment of the regular army in 1814. The
Pioneers and Miners were in fact a single corps, having been designated
since 1808 as the Corps of Pioneers or Sappers. Supplementary bodies,
counted as part of the Bengal military establishment but not liable for
general service, were the Governor-General’s Bodyguard and the
Residency escorts at Hyderabad, Poona, Berar and Gwalior.

          1 This appears to be an underestimate. Cf. below, p. 92.
                               Appendices                            363


   The irregular corps were as follows:
Ramgarh Local Battalion            989*
Hill Rangers                       354*
Skinner’s Horse                  1,000
Gardner’s Horse                  1,000 (approx.)
Delhi Najibs                     1,000 (approx.)
Calcutta Native Militia          1,824
6 Provincial Battalions          6,481
European Invalids                  31c
Native Invalids                  I>732

Total                             14,690

Figures are taken from Gov. Gen. to Vice-Pres., 9 Feb. 1815: loc. cit.,
para 88, except those marked* which are taken from Nugent’s Return,
Nugent MSS., ff. 108-9 (in the case of corps increased by Hastings for
the Nepal War) and that for Gardner’s Horse, which is unaccountably
omitted in Hastings’s list.

King's and Company's Troops:
(a) In 1786 the total (to nearest
    half-thousand) of the Com¬
    pany’s regular troops in
    Bengal and Madras was                          70,000
    The total of King’s troops                               ratio 13:1
    in same was                                     5.5°°
    (Source: Ross, Cornwallis
    Correspondence, vol. i, p. 329)

(b) In 1811-14 the total of
    regular troops in Madras
    was                           77»5°°
    (Source: Mins, of Ev.,
    1832, Sec. 5, p. 194).
    The total of King’s forces
    in same was                   12,000
    (Source: Nugent MSS.,
   f- 25)
   Therefore total Company       -
   troops in same was            65,000             65,000
   Total Company regular
   troops in Bengal                                 68,000
364                          Appendices

  Therefore, total Company
  regular troops in Bengal
  and Madras was                          133,000
  Total King’s troops                               ratio 8
  in same                                 17,000
  (Source: Nugent MSS.,
  f- 25).
                            APPENDIX 3

                 A Note on Official Sources

Hastings was away from Calcutta, on an official tour of the upper
provinces, during the first phase of the war; but, desiring to supervise
the campaigns and their concomitant diplomacy personally, he had
correspondence concerning the war conducted from his itinerant Head¬
quarters. This meant that much correspondence received by the Vice-
President in Council,1 at Fort William, for the Records, consisted of
duplicates of dispatches received and sent by the Secretary to Govern¬
ment in the Secret Department (John Adam) and the Adjutant-General
(George Fagan), both of whom accompanied Hastings in his dual
capacity of Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief.
    Sometimes duplicates of dispatches sent to Headquarters were direc¬
ted to Calcutta, for the information of the Vice-President, by their
authors; on other occasions, however, the latter made no duplicate, but
left the copying to the clerks at Headquarters. Letters therefore arrived
in Calcutta from two sources: from Headquarters, in which case they
would be in batches with a covering letter; and from the individual
authors, when they came in singly. In Calcutta, they were recorded on
the appropriate set of Consultations, in the order of receipt. Letters sent
to Headquarters were for the information either of the Governor-
General, in which case they were addressed to the Secretary in the
Secret Department, or of the Commander-in-Chief, when they were
addressed to the Adjutant-General. In the first weeks of the war, these
two officials sent their duplicates separately to Fort William, where the
Governor-General’s correspondence was recorded on the Secret Consul¬
tations■, and the Commander-in-Chief’s on the Military Consultations.
Once operations were actually under weigh, dispatches concerning them,
which as a matter of form were always addressed to the Adjutant-
General, for the information of the Commander-in-Chief, naturally
became of great concern to the Governor-General as well. Therefore, it
was the custom for the Adjutant-General, as soon as he had received a
dispatch from the field, to send a copy of it to the Secretary in the Secret

     1 The Vice-Presidency in Council was an office which existed only during
the periods of a Governor-General’s absence from the seat of government in
Calcutta. During the period of Hastings’s tour of the Upper Provinces it was
filled first by Nugent and then, after Nugent’s departure in December 1814,
by Edmonstone.
366                            Appendices

 Department for the information of the Governor-General. It was then
left to the Secretary to send a further copy to the Vice-President in
 Council at Fort William. The result of this system was that most of the
duplicates of dispatches from the field arriving in Calcutta came from
the Secretary in the Secret Department, and were accordingly entered
on the Secret Consultations.
    The practice of conducting correspondence from Headquarters
worked well for most aspects of the war, because Headquarters were
nearer the scene of operations than Calcutta. For other areas, however—
e.g. the north-east border—Headquarters were too distant, and dis¬
patches were accordingly addressed to the Acting Secretary to Govern¬
ment in the Secret Department, or to the Acting Adjutant-General, in
Calcutta, for the information of the Vice-President in Council; then a
duplicate of each dispatch, and of the reply to it, were sent to Head¬
quarters. In these cases, the Vice-President in Council issued instruc¬
tions according to his discretion, pending advice from Headquarters.
These original dispatches, and copies of their replies, were entered on
the Secret Consultations', and copies of dispatches addressed to other
secretaries were also entered there, so that a reasonably comprehensive
view of operations and diplomacy was to be found on one set of records.
    Once the Governor-General had returned to Calcutta, this separate
direction by the Vice-President ceased, and all dispatches were addressed
for the information either of the Commander-in-Chief or of the Gover¬
nor-General in Council. Important correspondence continued to find
its way into the Secret Consultations, because the Governor-General in
Council continued to be informed of the Commander-in-Chief’s dis¬
patches in the way described above.
   Duplicates of all Bengal records were sent regularly to London, and
copies of most of the correspondence relating to the Nepal War are to
be found on the Secret Consultations and the Military Consultations in
the records section of the India Office.
    During the period of Hastings’s tour, official letters giving a general
account of the war were sent both by the Vice-President in Council, and
by the Governor-General, to the Court of Directors in London. At first,
letters from the Vice-President in Council were classified either as
‘Political’ (open letters addressed to the general court and relating to
military events), or as ‘Secret’ (addressed to the Secret Committee of the
Court, and dealing with diplomacy). Later, this division was abandoned,
and Secret Letters, beginning with that of 21 June 1815, contained both
military and diplomatic intelligence. This practice was continued after
Hastings’s return to Fort William, and letters concerning the war,
whether from the Governor-General or the Governor-General in
Council, continued to be addressed to the Secret Committee.
                                Appendices                               367

    These letters from Bengal nearly always contained numbered en¬
closures, which were copies of dispatches recorded on the various series
of Consultations, selected with a view to illustrating the observations in
the main letter. Sometimes the letter was no more than a few lines,
accompanying a large number of enclosures selected and arranged to give
a narrative of events by themselves. This was generally the nature of
letters from the Vice-President in Council and from the Governor-
General in Council. Letters from the Governor-General, on the other
hand, tended to be much longer. Hastings’s Secret Letter of 2 August
 1815, for example, has 322 paragraphs, and contains no enclosures.2
    When they arrived in London, these letters were included either in
the series of records called Political Letters from Bengal, or in that called
Secret Letters from Bengal, according to their classification. Any en¬
closures, however, were scattered, and recorded in various places. The
enclosures to the Governor-General’s Secret Letters were sometimes
bound with the letters themselves; enclosures to other Secret Letters
were included in the series Enclosures to Secret Letters from Bengal', and
yet others went into the Home Miscellaneous series.
    All open dispatches sent to India required the separate approval of
the Board of Control (in the case of secret dispatches this was automatic
because they were drafted in consultation with the President of the
Board). When the Directors sent the first draft of an open dispatch
to the Board for its approval, it was accompanied by copies of the
correspondence on record which had given rise to the letter. These
copies comprised a Board’s Collection. Enclosures to Political Letters
concerning the Nepal War therefore often found their way into Board’s
Collections.
    When it is recalled that sets of all Consultations were automatically
sent to London, it will be appreciated that it is not impossible, or indeed
unusual, in the case of secret correspondence, for copies of the same
document to be found in four different places in the London records,
viz: with a letter from the Governor-General in Secret Letters from
Bengal', in Enclosures to Secret Despatches from Bengal', in Home Miscel¬
laneous', and in Secret Consultations. In addition, the inefficiency of the
clerical departments in Calcutta sometimes resulted in two or even three
enclosures to a letter being copies of the same document. Political en¬
closures can usually be found in the series Board’s Collections, as well as
on the Political Consultations.
   The volume of printed documents called Papers Respecting the Nepaul
War, published by order of the Court of Proprietors in 1824, contains
(with many mistranscriptions) letters sent to and from London between
   2 Dalhousie’s famous ‘monster’ Minute on Oudh of 1855 (75 paragraphs) is
tiny in comparison.
368                           Appendices

27 December 1814, and 6 August 1816. The enclosures to the Governor-
General’s letters from the upper provinces are given complete; but this
is not the case with letters from the Vice-President in Council and the
Governor-General in Council. Those that are printed follow the
haphazard sequence of volumes 643 to 656 of the Home Miscellaneous
series—but there are extensive omissions. Volume 649, containing
enclosures to the Political Dispatch of 20 February 1814, is not included.
Nor are volumes 651 to 654, which contain many of the enclosures to
the Secret Letter of 21 June 1815; and selections only from volumes 655
and 656 are given.
    This printed volume therefore needs to be supplemented from the
manuscript records. The unprinted parts of the Home Miscellaneous
volumes mentioned above fill some gaps; but many of the 400 enclosures
of the Secret Letter of 21 June 1815 (making, with sub-enclosures, some
 1,500 letters) still remain unaccounted for. More of them are to be found
in volumes 5 to 9 of Enclosures to Secret Despatches from Bengal-, and
where the enclosures themselves are untraceable, recourse has to be had
to the Secret Consultations. Fortunately, it is possible to discover which
letters constituted the missing enclosures from the list given in the
printed volume. All extra correspondence relating to the war which was
not transmitted to London in the form of enclosures is to be found on
the Secret Consultations and the Military Consultations.
    In one case, the text of a letter (as opposed to enclosures) has been
bowdlerized in the printed volume. Paragraphs 263-7 °f Hastings’s
Secret Letter of 2 August 1815, which relate to Marley’s misconduct and
removal, have been omitted. Documents relating to this affair have also
been removed from the series Enclosures to Secret Despatches from Bengal.
The full account is to be found only in the MS. version of Hastings’s
letter, in Secret Letters from Bengal, and on the Secret Consultations.
                        BIBLIOGRAPHY

                        I. MANUSCRIPT SOURCES

(a)   India Office Records: Commonwealth Office, Orbit House, Black-
      friars Road, London
      Secret Letters from Bengal.
      Military Letters from Bengal.
      Military Letters to Bengal.
      Enclosures to Secret Despatches from Bengal.
      Bengal Secret and Political Consultations.
      Bengal Political Consultations.
      Bengal Military Consultations.
      Home Miscellaneous Records.
      Personal Records.
      Maps and Plans.

(b)   India Office Library Manuscripts,     Commonwealth Office,    Orbit
      House, Blackfriars Road, London
      The Raffles Collection: MSS./EUR/C/34.
      Special Military Collections: L/Mil/5/391.
      The Papers of Lt.-Col. John Lewis Stuart: MSS./EUR/D/668.
      Letters to John Adam and Charles Ricketts: MSS./EUR/D/585.
      The Moorcroft Papers: MSS./EUR/F/38.
      The Stubbs Papers: MSS./MISC/348/MR.
      MS. History of Sikkim, compiled by Their Highnesses the Mahara¬
       ja Sir Thutob Namgyal and Maharani Yeshay Dolma of Sikkim
       in 1908: MSS./EUR/E/78.
      ‘Regimental Histories of the Indian Army’: a bibliography by
        M. A. Myers, 1957: MSS./EUR/C/142.

(c)   Library of the Royal United Services Institution, Whitehall, London
      The Correspondence of Sir George Nugent: MM/181, and folder
        marked ‘Maps and Plans’.

(d)   The University Library, Cambridge
      The Ludlow Papers: MSS. AD 7450/1 and AD 7450/2.
37°                           Bibliography

(e)   Public Records Office, Chancery Lane, London
      Private Out-Letters of the Commander-in-Chief: MSS./WO/3/610.

(f)   National Army Museum, Camberley, Surrey
      The Papers of Sir Jasper Nicolls (unclassified).

(g)   Regimental Museum of the King’s Shropshire Light Infantry, Cop-
        thorne Barracks, Shrewsbury
      Transcriptions by W. Rogerson of the private journals of Captain
      Henry Sherwood and Captain Charles Chepmell.

(h)   Library of the Royal Artillery Institution, Woolwich, London, S.E.
      ‘Memoirs on Artillery, Referring to the Present Establishment of
        that Arm in the Bengal Presidency’, by Major-General Sir John
        Horsford, K.C.B., 1801 and 1816: MS./15.

(i)   Library of the Royal Army Medical College, Millbank, London
      MS. notebook entitled ‘Remarks and Observations on the Health of
       Troops and Meteorological Observations’, among the papers of
       John Francis Smet, Surgeon to H.M. 8th Dragoons.

(j)   National Archives of India, Janpath, New Delhi
      Bengal Annual     Military   Statement,    1813/1814,   1814/1815:
        2861/68/R.

                     2. OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS

Papers Respecting the Nepaul War, Printed for the Court of Proprietors of
  the East India Company: London, 1824.
C. U. Aitchison, A Collection of Treaties, Engagements and Sanads
  Relating to India and Neighbouring Countries, volume XIV, revised
  edition: Calcutta, 1929.
Political Missions to Bootan: Bengal Secretariat Office, Calcutta, 1865.
Minutes of Evidence taken before the Committee of the Whole House and
  the Select Committee on the Affairs of the East India Company: ordered
  by the House of Commons to be printed, 1813.
IUrd and IVth Reports from the Select Committee of the House of
  Commons on the Affairs of the East India Company (1811-12).
Minutes of Evidence taken before the Select Committee of the House of
  Commons on the Affairs of the East India Company . . . 1832: Printed
  by order of the Court of Directors, 1833.
Report on East India Affairs from the Select Committee of the House of
  Commons, 1832.
The Marquis of Hastings’ Summary of the Operations in India, with their
                              Bibliography                            37*

  Results, from the 30 April 1814 to the 31 January 1823: General
  Appendix 11 to the 1832 Report.
Events at the Court of Ranjit Singh 1810-1817: Punjab Government
  Records Office Monograph no. 17, edited by G. T. Garret: Lahore,
  ^de¬
selections from the Punjab Government Records, Volume 2 {Records of
  the Ludhiana Agency, 1808-1815): Lahore, 1911.
Army Lists
Selections from the Records of the Government of Bengal, vol. xxvii:
  Calcutta, 1857 (articles by B. H. Hodgson, entitled ‘On the Aborigines
  of the Sub-Himalayas’; ‘On the Origin and Classification of the
  Military Tribes of Nepal’; ‘The Route from Kathmandu to Darjeel¬
  ing’; ‘Letter to the Political Secretary to Government . . . 1831’;
  ‘The Trade of Nepal’; ‘On the Law and Legal Practise of Nepal’.)
The Panjab States Gazetteer, vol. viii {The Simla Hill States): Punjab
  Government Press, Lahore, 1911.
The East India Register, for 1814 (Second Edition).
Historical Papers Relating to Kumaun, 180(7-1842, edited by B. P.
  Saksena: Government Record Office, Allahabad, 1956.
A List of Inscriptions on Christian Tombs or Monuments in the Punjab,
  North West Frontier Province, Kashmir, and Afghanistan, compiled
    by Miles Irving: Punjab Government Press, Lahore, 1910.
Biographical Notices of Military Officers and Others Mentioned in Inscrip¬
  tions on Tombs and Monuments in the Punjab, North West Frontier
  Province, Kashmir and Afghanistan, by G. W. De Rhe-Philippe:
  Punjab Government Press, Lahore, 1912.


            3. PERIODICAL AND NEWSPAPER ARTICLES

Cardew, F. G., ‘Major-General Sir David Ochterlony, Bart., G.C.B.,
  1758-1825’, Journal of the Society for Army Historical Research, vol.
  10: London, 1931.
Carnaticus (pseud.), ‘A General View of Our Indian Army’, Asiatic
 Journal and Monthly Register, vol. xi, no. 65: London, May 1821.
Chatterji, N., ‘Lord Hastings, Colonel Baillie, and the Oudh Loans’,
 Journal of the Uttar Pradesh Historical Society, vol. i, part 1: Lucknow.
Hamilton, W. G., ‘Ochterlony’s Campaign in the Western Hills’,
 Journal of the United Services Institute of India, vol. xli, no. 187:
 April 1912.
-, ‘Some further Notes on Ochterlony’s Campaign’, ibid., no. 189:
 Oct. 1912.
--, ‘The Campaign in Kumaun’, ibid., vol. xxxii, no. 153: Oct. 1903.
Hough, Major William, series of articles (published anonymously) on
372                          Bibliography

  the history of the Bengal army in The Englishman and Military Chro¬
  nicle: Calcutta, Sept.-Oct., 1846.
Hearsey, H. (Ed.), ‘The Journal of Gholaum Hyder Khan’, Asiatic
  Journal and Monthly Register, vol. xviii, part 1: London, 1835.
Imbault-Huart, Camille, ‘Histoire de la Conquete du Nepal par les
  Chinois, 1792; Traduit du Chinois . . I, Journal Asiatique, ye serie,
  vol. xii: Paris, 1878.
Lamb, Alistair, ‘Tibet in Anglo-Chinese Relations, 1767-1842, Part T,
  Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Parts 3 & 4: London, 1957.
-, ‘Tibet in Anglo-Chinese Relations, Part 2’, ibid., Parts 1 & 2:
  London, 1958.
Macdoon Sharpshooter (pseud.), ‘Some Account of the 15th . . .
  Bengal Native Infantry’, East India United Services Journal and
  Military Magazine, vol. iii: Calcutta, 1834.
Majumdar, D. N., ‘Some Aspects of the Cultural Life of the Khasa of
  the Cis-Himalayan Region’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of
  Bengal (Letters), vol. vi: Calcutta, Nov. 1944.
Moorcroft, W., ‘A Journey to Lake Manasarova in Undes, a Province
  of Little Tibet’, Asiatic Researches, vol. xii: Calcutta, 1816.
Nicolls, Jasper, Letter to the Editor, Asiatic Journal and Monthly
  Register, vol. xviii, part 1: London, 1835.
Noel, E., ‘The Marquis of Hastings and the Nipal War of 1814-1816’,
  United Services Magazine: London, Mar. 1913.
Parker, E. H., ‘Nepal and China’, Imperial Asiatic and Quarterly
  Review, 3rd Series, vol. vii: London, 1899.
Parry (pseud.), Letter to the Editor, East India United Services Journal,
  vol. viii: Calcutta, Apr. 1936.
Raper, Captain F. V., ‘Narrative of a Survey for the Purpose of Dis¬
  covering the Source of the River Ganges’, Asiatick Researches, vol. xi,
  Calcutta, 1810.
Sarkar, S. C., ‘Some Notes on the Intercourse of Bengal with the
  Northern Countries in the Second Half of the Eighteenth Century’,
  Proceedings of the Indian Historical Records Commission, vol. xiii:
  Calcutta, Dec. 1930.
Traill, G. W., ‘A Statistical Sketch of Kumaun’, Asiatic Researches,
  vol. xvi: Calcutta, 1828.
-, ‘A Statistical Report on the Bhotia Mehals of Kumaun’, ibid., vol.
  xvii: Calcutta, 1832.
Miscellaneous news items and reports in:
  Asiatic Journal and Monthly Register, vols. i & ii: London, 1816.
  Calcutta Monthly Journal, vols. xxv-xxviii: Calcutta, Dec. 1814-Apr.
  1816.
  Calcutta Review, vol. xii: Calcutta, 1849.
                              Bibliography                            373

  East India United Services Journal, vols. iii & viii: Calcutta, 1834 and
  1836.
  Gentleman'sMagazine: London, Mar. 1817.


                           4. OTHER WORKS

Anon., Military Sketches of the Goorkha War in India in the Years 1814,
  1815 and 1816: London, 1824.
Anon., Memoir of Sir R. R. Gillespie: London, 1816.
Anon., Sketches of India, Written by an Officer for Fireside Travellers at
  Home, second edition: London, 1824.
Aspinall, A. (Ed.), The Letters of King George IV, 1812-1830: Cam¬
 bridge, 1938.
Atkinson,  C. T., Regimental History of the South Wales Borderers,
 168Q-IQ3J: Cambridge, 1937.
Atkinson, Edwin T., The Himalayan Districts of the North West
 Provinces of India: Allahabad, 1884.
Auber, Peter, Analysis of the Constitution of the East India Company:
  London, 1826.
Badenach, Walter, An Inquiry into the State of the Indian Army:
  London, 1826.
Barat, Amiya, The Bengal Native Infantry, Its Organization and Disci¬
  pline iy(46-1832: Calcutta, 1962.
Basham, A. L., The Wonder that was India: London, 1954.
Bastin, J.  (Ed.), The Journal of Thomas Otho Travers, 1813-1820:
  Singapore, i960.
Boulger, Demetrius Charles, The Life of Sir Stamford Raffles: Lon¬
  don, 1897.
Bute, the Marchioness of (Ed.), The Private Journal of the Marquis of
  Hastings, London, 1858.
Camman, Schuyler, Trade through the Himalayas: Princeton, 1951.
Campbell, George, Modern India: A Sketch of the System of Civil
 Government: London, 1852.
Cannon, Richard, Historical Record of the 33rd or Shropshire Regiment
 of Foot: London, 1849.
-, Historical Record of the 8th or King's Royal Irish Regiment of
  Hussars: London, 1837.
Cardew,  F. G., A Sketch of the Services of the Bengal Native Army,
  revised edition: Calcutta, 1903.
Carey, W. H., The Good Old Days of Honorable John Company: Cal¬
  cutta, 1906.
Chaudhuri, K. C., Anglo-Nepalese Relations from the Earliest Times of
  the British Rule in India till the Gurkha War: Calcutta, i960.
374                          Bibliography

Clark, T. W., Introduction to Nepali: Cambridge, 1963.
Compton, Herbert, A Particular Account of the European Military
  Adventurers of Hindustan: London, 1892.
Coomaraswamy, Ananda K., The Arts and Crafts of India and Ceylon
  (reprint): New York, 1964.
Crawford, D. G., A History of the Indian Medical Service: London,
  I9I3-
Cunningham, J. D., History of the Sikhs, Indian reprint: Delhi, 1955.
Desgodins, C. H., Le Thibet, d’Apres la Correspondance des Missionaires,
  deuxieme edition: Paris, 1885.
Dictionary of National Biography.
The East India Military Calendar, London, 1823.
Embree, Ainslee, Charles Grant and British Rule in India: London,
  1962.
Fortescue, J. W., A History of the British Army, vol. XI: London, 1930.
Fraser, J. B., Journal of a Tour through Part of the Snowy Range of the
  Himala Mountains and to the Sources of the Rivers Jumna and Ganges:
  London, 1820.
-, Military Memoir of Lieutenant-Colonel James Skinner: London,
  1851.
Gleig, G. R., Memoirs of the Life of the Right Honorable Warren
  Hastings: London, 1841.
Gorer, Geoffrey, Himalayan Village, an Account of the Lepchas of
  Sikkim, 2nd edition: London, 1967.
Greenberg, Michael, British Trade and the Opening of China, 1800-
  1842: Cambridge, 1951.
Grey, C., and Garrett, G. T., European Adventurers of North India:
  Lahore, 1929.
Hadow Jenkins, L., General Frederick Young: London, 1923.
Hamilton, C. J., The Trade Relations between England and India:
  Calcutta, 1919.
Hamilton, Francis Buchanan, An Account of the Kingdom of Nepaul
  and of the Territories annexed to this Dominion by the House of Gurkha:
  Edinburgh, 1819.
Hamilton, Walter, Gazetteer of Hindustan and the Adjacent Countries,
  second edition: London, 1820.
Hart, Liddell, The Ghost of Napoleon: London, 1933.
Harvey Darton, F. J. (Ed.), The Life and Times of Mrs Sherwood:
  London, n.d.
Heber, R., Narrative of a Journey through the Upper Provinces of India:
  fourth edition: London, 1829.
Henry, Walter, Events of a Military Life, second edition: London,
  1843.
                             Bibliography                          375
Hodson, V. C. PA List of the Officers of the Bengal Army, 1758-1834:
  London,1927-46.
Hough William, The Practice of Courts Martial and other Military
  Courts: Calcutta, 1834.
-, Political and Military Events in British India from the Year 1756
 toi84g: London, 1853.
Hue, E., Souvenirs d’un Voyage dans la Tartarie, le Tibet, et la Chine,
  Pendant les Annees 1844,1845, et 1846: Paris, 1850.
Hutchison, J., and Vogel, j. Ph., History of the Panjab Hill States:
  Lahore, 1933.
Ilbert, Courtenay, The Government of India, second edition: Oxford,
  1907.
Jackson, Major Donovan, India's Army: London, 1940.
jNavali, Surya Vikram, Amar Singh Thapa 1748-1816: Darjeeling,
 Samvat 2000.
Kaye, J. W., The Life and Correspondence of Charles, Lord Metcalfe:
  London, 1854.
-, Selections from the Papers of Lord Metcalfe: London, 1855.
-, Lives of Indian Officers: London, 1867.
——, A History of the Sepoy War in India, seventh edition: London, 1875.
Kelly, Sophia, The Life of Mrs Sherwood: London, 1854.
Kincaid, Dennis, British Social Life in India: 1608-1937: London,

  W38-
Kirkpatrick, W., An Account of the Kingdom of Nepaul: London, 1811.
Landon, Percival, Nepal: London, 1928.
Lawrence, H. M., Essays Military and Political,      Written in India:
  London, 1859.
Lee-Warner, Sir William,      The Life of the Marquis of Dalhousie:
  London, 1904.
Levi, Sylvain, Le Nepal: Etude Historique d’un Royaume Hindou: Paris,

  i905-7-
Li, Tieh-Tseng, Tibet, Today and Yesterday: New York, i960.
Lorraine Petre, F., The Royal Berkshire Regiment: Reading, 1925.
Low, C. R., Life and Correspondence of Field Marshall Sir George
  Pollock: London, 1873.
Mackenzie, Alexander, The History of the Frasers of Lovat: Inverness,
  1894.
Malcolm, Sir John, Political History of India: London, 1826.
Markham, C. R. (Ed.), Narratives of the Mission of George Bogle to
 Tibet and of the Journey of Thomas Manning to Lhassa: London, 1876.
Maron, Stanley, Rose, Leo, et ah, A Survey of Nepal Society: Human
 Relations area Files, South Asia Project, University of California,
   W56-
376                           Bibliography


Marshall, P. J., Problems of Empire: Britain and India 1757-1813:
   London, 1968.
Martin, Sir J. Ranald, The Sanitary History of the British Army in
  India, Past and Present: London, 1868.
Martin, R. Montgomery (Ed.), The Despatches, Minutes, and Corre¬
 spondence of the Marquess Wellesley: London, 1836.
-, China: Political, Commercial, and Social: London, 1847.
Montague, Mrs. F. M., Memorials of the Family of Wood of Largo:
  London, 1863 (privately printed).
Morse, H. B., The Chronicles of the East India Company Trading to
  China 1635-1834: Oxford, 1926.
Murray, R. H., History of the 8th King's Royal Irish Hussars: Cambr id ge
  1923.
Northey, W. Brook, and Morris, C. J., The Gurkhas: Their Manners,
  Customs, and Country: London, 1928.
Nugent, Maria, Lady, A Journal from the Year 1811 to the Year 1815:
  London, 1839.
Oldfield, Henry Ambrose: Sketches from Nipal: London, 1880.
Parks, Mrs. Fanny, Wanderings of a Pilgrim in Search of the Picturesque:
  London,1850.
Parlby, Captain S., The British Indian Military Repository: Calcutta,
  1823.
Pearse, Colonel Hugh, The Hearseys: Five Generations of an Anglo-
  Indian Family: London, 1905.
Petech, Luciano, Medieval History of Nepal (Serie Orientale Roma,
  vol. x): Rome, 1958.
Postans, T., Hints to Cadets: London, 1842.
Prinsep, Henry, T., History of the Political and Military Transactions in
  India during the Administration of the Marquis of Hastings: London,
  1825.
Pryme, Jane Townley and Bayne, Alicia, Memorials of the Thackeray
  Family: London, 1879 (privately printed).
Roberts of Kandahar, Lord, Forty One Years in India: London, 1897.
Ross of Bladesburg, Major, The Marquis of Hastings, Oxford, 1900.
Ross, Charles (Ed.), The Correspondence of Charles, First Marquis
  Cornwallis: London, 1859.
Rouire, D., La Rivalite Anglo-Russe au XIXe Siecle en Asie: Paris,
  1908.
Royal Military Calendar, third edition: London, 1820.
Ram, Sita, From Sepoy to Subadar, translated by Lt.-Col. Norgate,
  third edition, edited byD. C. Phillot: Calcutta, 1911.
Shawe, W. B., History of the Second Regiment of Bengal Native Light
  Infantry: Julpigoree, 1872.
                              Bibliography                           377

Shipp, John, Memoirs of the Extraordinary Military Career of John
  Shipp, A New Illustrated Edition with an Introduction by H.
  Manners Chichester: London, 1894.
Sinha, N. K., and Dasgupta. A. K. (Eds.), Selections from the Ochter-
  lony Papers in the National Archives of India: Calcutta, 1964.
Sleeman, W.   H., Rambles and Recollections of an Indian Official:
  London, 1844.
■-, A Journey through the Kingdom of Oude in 1849-50: London,
   1858.
Spear, Percival, The Nabobs: Oxford, 1932.
 Stubbs, F. W., A History of the Bengal Artillery: London, 1877.
 Sutherland, Lucy, The East India Company in Eighteenth-Century
   Politics: Oxford, 1952.
Tucci, G., Preliminary Report on Two Scientific Expeditions in Nepal
  (Serie Orientale Roma, vol. x): Rome, 1956.
Turner, R. L., Comparative and Etymological Dictionary of the Nepali
  Language: London, 1931.
Turner, Samuel, An Account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo
  Lama in Tibet: London, 1800.
Twemlow, George, Considerations on Tactics and Strategy, second
  edition: London, 1855.
Wakeham, Eric, The Bravest Soldier: Sir Rollo Gillespie, 1786-1814:
  London, 1937.
[Wallace, Lieutenant], Fifteen Years in India, or Sketches of a Soldier's
  Life: London, 1823.
Watkins, Walter Kendall, The Scotch Ancestry of Major-General
  Sir David Ochterlony, Bart., a Native of Boston in New England:
  Boston, 1902 (privately printed).
Webb, E. H., A History of the Services of the 17th (the Leicestershire)
  Regiment, second edition: London, 1912.
Welsh, Colonel James, Military Reminiscences: London, 1830.
Wheeler, J. Talboys, A Short History of India and the Frontier States
  of Afghanistan, Nipal and Burma: London, 1880.
White, George Francis, Views in India, Chiefly Among the Himalaya
  Mountains: London, 1837.
Williams, G. R. C., Historical and Statistical Memoir of Dehra Doon:
  Roorkee, 1874.
Wilson, H. H. (Ed.), Travels in the Himalayan Provinces of Hindustan
  and the Panjab by William Moorcroft and George Trebeck from 1819 to
 1825: London, 1841.
-, The History of British India: London, 1845.
Wilson, Minden, A History of the Behar Indigo Factories: Calcutta,
  1908.
378                         Bibliography

Woody ATT, Nigel, Regimental History of the 3rd, Queen Alexandra's
  Own Gurkha Rifles: London, 1929.
Wright, Daniel (Ed.), History of Nepal, Indian reprint: Calcutta, 1958.
Wurtzburg, C. E., Raffles of the Eastern Isles: London, 1954.
Young, H. A., The East India Company's Arsenals and Manufactories:
  Oxford, 1937.
                                      INDEX

Abdul Qadir, 83, 87                         Attock, 61
Adam, John, 98, 291, 365                    Awl, 34. See also Malaria and Tarai
Adams, Lieutenant-Colonel, 258, 262,            fever
    325. 339
Addiscombe, 120                             Badekh, 108
Afghanistan, 30, 71, 89, 345                Baghal, 21 n.
Afghans, 19, 30, 32                         Baghat, 21 n., 346
Agra, 252                                   Baghirati river, 164, 189, 202, 203
Ahmed Ali, 87                               Baikantpur, 12, 36
Ajaigarh, 168                               Baillie, Colonel, 235
Ajmaigarh, 22                               Baines, Captain, 330
Alaknanda river, 346                        Baisi, see Twenty-Two Rajas
Allahabad, 227, 230, 286                    Bajji, 21 n.
Almora, 15, 290, 294, 295, 299-300,         Bal Bahadur Singh,         141,   150,   151,
    301. 303                                     158, 163, 181, 182, 186, 188, 189,
Amar Singh Thapa, Kaji, 17, 20, 22,              202, 349
    23, 25, 38-42, 5°, 126, 130, 190,       Baldi river, 164
    206, Ch. IX passim, 309, 318,           Baldock, Major, 154, 181, 186, 189
    320-1, 323, 342, 346                    Bali river, 328
Amar   Singh     Thapa,    General,   16,   Balrampur, 237
     17 n., 18, 43, 46, 47, 53, 126, 229    Balsan, 21 n., 25
Ambans, 65, 321                             Baluchistan, 71
American War of Independence, 48,           Balwi, 326
     355                                    Bandela, 266, 268
Amherst, Lord, 79, 82, 340, 347             Bansgaon, 245, 246, 247
Amir Khan, 313                              Bansi, 236
Amir tribe, 38                              Baragarhi, 211, 214-15, 217, 242
Amlekhganj, 328                             Barahati, 23
Amowa, 308                                  Baraset College, 120
Amrit Rao, 293                              Bara Thakuri, see Twelve Lordships
Amritsar, 70                                Barauli, 21 n.
Amsu Varman, King of Nepal, 5               Bareilly, 38
Anderson, Lieutenant, 231, 234, 236         Barharwa, 210, 211, 214
Anglo-Indians, 113                          Bariyan, 255, 256
Arki, 248, 252, 253, 254. 256, 257, 261     Barog, 266
Armenian merchants, 58                      Basahar, 21, 25, 60, 204, 283, 284
Armstrong, Lieutenant, 282                  Batavia, 138
Arnold, Colonel, 266-8, 274-5, 277,         Bath, Order of the, 207 n., 339
    280                                     Battine, Captain, 190, 195
Arnold, Matthew, 99                         Beja, 21 n.
Arrack, 92                                  Bell, artillery officer, 305
Artillery, see Ordnance                     Bell, deserter in Nepal, 26-7
Arun river, 12, 13                          Benares, 16, 18, 26, 83, 229, 230, 319
Aryans, 4 n.                                Bengal, 30-4, 42, 57, 7 L 346
Assam, 4                                    Bengal army, size, organization and
Assey, Charles, 138                              weaknesses     of,   Ch.   IV passim,
Asthal, 145, 154                                 350 ff., 362-4. See also Clothing
3So                                      Index
      agency,    Commissariat,    Contract     Bowyer, Captain, 280
      system,     Engineers,      European     Bradshaw, Paris, Major, 44-6, 50, 52,
      troops, Guides and intelligence,             79,    86,    132, 210,    215-18,   222,
      Local battalions, Military Board,            224-5, 231, 244, 309, 314-19, 344
      Military    officers,   Off-reckoning    Brahmadeo, 297
      fund, Ordnance, Pioneers, Pro¬           Brahmaputra river, 61
      vincial battalions, Seniority sys¬       Brahma Shah, 15-16, 18, 24, 43, 47,
      tem, Sepoys, Small arms                      283, 285-6,       290-1,    294-6,   301,
Berar, 31, 32, 313                                 306, 309,311, 316, 320
Berhampur, 226, 227, 228                       Brahmins, 6 n., 7, 8, 10, 14, 15, 272
Berlin Decrees, 80                             Browne, Lieutenant, 304
Betiya, 44, 45 n., 216, 218, 221, 222,         Buddhamargis, 4
      224, 226, 227, 242, 243, 246. See        Bucke, Captain, 154
      also Bir Krishna Singh                   Buckland,        Lieutenant-Colonel,     143,
Bhajji, 21 n.                                      157
Bhaktawar Singh, 332, 337-8                    Bundelkhand, 95, 100, 108, 167, 168
Bhakti Thapa, 272, 275-6, 281-3                Burma, 119, 313, 321
Bharatpur, siege of, 107-8, 272, 355           Burnet, Lieutenant-Colonel, 331
Bhatgaon, 6, 10, 11                            Butwal, 43-7, 51, 126, 229, 231, 234-5,
Bhim Sen Thapa, 16-18, 26, 28, 43,                 237-8, 316
      47, 52, S3, 214, 314, 318, 320,          Byers, John Sparks, Captain, 151, 153
      342,344, 346                             Byrnes, deserter in Nepal, 26-7
Bhotiyas, 59
Bhutan, 13, 32, 34, 35, 52, 56, 57, 58,        Calcutta, 27, 31, 34, 35, 38, 43, 45-7,
      66, 313, 321, 347                            56, 60, 70, 95, 242, 365-6
Bichakori, 328, 330                            Calcutta Native Militia, 96, 363
Bichakori pass, 217, 244, 327-9                Cambay, 291
Bidyagong, 36                                  Campbell, John, Captain,          145,   151,
Bihar, 31, 33, 58, 116, 308                         156
Bijni, 36                                      Campbell, Sir George, quoted on the
Bilaspur, 21-3, 252, 260, 264-8, 274               Permanent Settlement, 35
Binjara Pokhra, 224, 239, 242                  Canton, 78, 81-2, 84
Birat, 140, 142, 164, 202                      Cape of Good Hope, 313, 325
Bir Krishna Singh, Raja of Betiya,             Capuchins, 63, 65
      45 n.                                    Carmichael Smyth, Captain, 155, 206
Black Hill, 188, 190, 194, 195, 201-2,         Carnatic, 248
      204                                      Catholic emancipation, 49
Blackney, Captain, 215, 221                    Carpenter, Lieutenant-Colonel, 140-1,
Blagrave, 135                                       145, 147, 149, 154. 164-5, 189,
Blagrave, Mrs., 135                                 202-3
Blane, Ensign, 155                             Cartridge boxes, 259, 354-5
Board of Control, 91, 89, 349, 367             Cartwright, Lieutenant, 282, 287 n.
Bogle, George, 56-7, 62-3, 65-6, 68-9,         Casement, Captain, 324
     72, 77, 89                                Caste, 6
Boileau, Lieutenant, 211, 344                  Castlereagh, Lord, 79, 91
Bokhara, 88, 89                                Cawnpore, 35, 237
Bombay, 31, 81, 89                             Ceded and Conquered Provinces, 33,
Bombay army, 90, 94                                34, 37, 38
Bonaparte, Napoleon, 71,          125, 288;    Ceylon, 33, 313, 325
      quoted     on    mountain     warfare,   Chamba, 23, 268, 273
      289 n.                                   Champaran Light Infantry, 210
Boneta, 185                                    Champawat, 297
Bourcet, 125                                   Chamur, 164, 181, 189, 202
                                          Index                                        38l
Chand dynasty (of Kumaun), 14-15               Cunningham,       J.     D.,   quoted    on
Chandra Sekhar Upadhyaya, 53, 214,                  Ochterlony, 340—1
     309-10,    314, 316-18, 320, 332,
                                               Dacca, 61
    337-9, 342-3
                                               Dalai Lama, 36, 64, 65, 84, 342
Chaubisi, see Twenty-Four Rajas
                                               Dalhousie, Lord, 351, 367 n.
Chepmell, Charles, Captain, 199, 208
                                               Damodar Panre, 16, 43, 83, 133
Charter of East India Company, 75
                                               Dang, 235
Chaupal, 203
                                               Darby, Surgeon, 177
Chetris, 6, 8-11, 26
                                               Darjeeling, 127
Chilkana, 165
                                               Darkoti, 21 n.
China, 1, 19, 27, 43, 51, 52, 54, 55, 56,
                                               Deb Raja, 56
     61; and the British, 68, 74-8, 83,
                                               Deccan, 30, 32, 33, 71, 272 n., 313
     88-9, 313, 342-4; and Nepal, 67,
                                               Dehra, 19, 141, 144
     272, 320-1, 350; and Tibet, 64-8.
                                               Dehra Dun,       18,   40-1,   126-7,   134,
     See also Peking
                                                    139 ff., 181, 189, 202, 271, 296,
Chanalgarh, 190
                                                    298, 346-7; British decision to
Chumbi valley, 86
                                                    annex, 85
Chunar, 35
                                               Delhi, 21, 32, 49, 51, 107, 340
Churia hills, 327, 328
                                               Delhi Najibs, 96, 363
Clive, Robert, 26, 31, 90, 183
                                               Detailu, 21 n.
Clothing agency of the Bengal army,
                                               Dhami, 21 n.
     102-3
                                               Dhankuta, 13
Clothing for the war, 128
                                               Dhanpura, 245
Cloth trade, 72, 75, 76-8
                                               Dharma Raja, 56
Commercial treaty (Anglo-Nepalese),
                                               Dhikuli, 298-9
     of 1792, 82
                                               Dick, Lieutenant-Colonel, 227
Commissariat     of the     Bengal     army,
                                               Digarche, 343
   99-102, 105, 129, 3SO-I
                                               Dinapur, 35, 126, 210, 216, 222, 224,
Comyn, Major, 232-3
                                                    244, 326
Contract system of military supply, 99,
                                               Dionthal, 276-8, 281-2, 289
     102
                                               Dip Chand Temple, 303-4
Consultations, Military, Political and
                                               Dokal Singh, Sepoy, 303
     Secret, 365-8
                                               Doti, 290, 296, 311, 320 n., 325; Raja
Cooper, Lieutenant-Colonel, 267, 268,
                                                    of, 294
    273, 275, 277
                                               Duars, 34
Coote, Sir Eyre, 248
                                               Duncan, Lieutenant, 221
Coromandel Coast, 31
                                               Dundas, Henry, 91
Cornwallis, Lord, 35, 37, 82, 90, 109
Coss, unit of distance, 261                    East India Company, 26, 31, 34-8,
Costley, Lieutenant, 303                           4i-3, 47, 49, 53, 55, 7D armies
Cotton trade, 73, 77, 80, 81                       of, 90; see also Bengal army,
Coultman,      Wheeler,     Captain,    147,       Bombay       army,    Madras    army,
     149,154                                       Vellore mutiny; Economic situa¬
Court of Directors, 38, 50, 71, 99, 103,           tion of, 72 ff.
     106, 109, 113, 123, 286, 350 ff.          Edmonstone, N. B., 48, 98, 315, 318,
Court   of   Inquiry   to    Examine     the       350, 365 n.
    Failures     before     Kalanga,    163,   Ellis, Lieutenant, 148
    207-9                                      Elliot, Mr., Magistrate of Saran, 226
Cracroft, Mr., Attorney, 226                   Elphinstone, Mountstuart, 340
Cradock, Sir John, C. in C. Madras,            Enfield Rifle, 358
    122                                        Engineers, Corps of, 106-7, 362
Crichton, Surgeon, 278                         European troops in Bengal army, 90-2
Croker, Captain, 233                           Evangelicals, 112
382                                         Index

Fagan,       George,     Adjutant-General,       Gossains, 58, 63
     153. 175, 365                               Gotras, 6 n.
Fast, John, Captain, 140, 145                    Grant, Charles, 349
Field, Lieutenant, 305                           Grant, Sir William Keir, 313
First Gurkha Rifles, 275                         Greenstreet, Major, 219, 221
Fleming, Lieutenant, 277                         Gregory, Colonel, 225, 242, 243-4, 3°8
Fort Almora, 301, 303                            Guge, 7
Fort William, 47, 50                             Guibert, 125
Fou-kang-an, 67-8                                Guides and       intelligence       of    Bengal
Fox, Charles James, 48                               army, 352
France, 30-2, 71 n.                              Gujarat, 32, 60
Fraser, J. B.,2in.,6on., 196-7,198,204           Gun lascars, 139 n.
Fraser, William,       112,    153-4,   I64-5,   Gurkhali, 6, 10 n.
      181,    183-4,    188,     191,   201-2,   Gurkha regiments, 26 n., 204, 275,
      203-4, 284, 290, 346 n.                        277. 348-9
Frontier disputes, 35-52, 347                    Gurkhas, 26, 204 n.; origin and history
Fyzabad, 165                                         of, 6-11; religion of, 11 n. See
                                                     also Nepal
Gajraj Misr, 43, 309-10, 314-20, 332,            Gurung tribe, 11, 26
      342-5                                      Guru Singh, Sepoy, 164
Gambar river, 258, 262, 266-7                    Gwalior, 31-3, 51, 313, 344
Gamrola river, 266, 274, 276
Gananath, 300-1                                  Halhed, Mr., Magistrate of Purnea,
Gandak river, 10, 218, 315-16                       245
Gandhi, 30                                       Hamilton, Francis, 58, 231, 290, 324
Ganges river, 18, 32, 34, 35, 38, 40, 61,        Hamilton, Lieutenant, 277
   202, 215, 326                                 Hansi, 181
Gangtok, 13, 132, 246, 247                       HarakDevaJoshi, 14-15,19,40, 130-1,
Gardner, the Hon. Edward, 112, 290-                  294, 297
      1, 294, 306-7, 311, 316, 320, 325,         Hardyman, Colonel, 238
    342, 343-4                                   Hariharpur, 216, 224, 324, 327
Gardner’s Horse, 96-7, 210, 219, 237,            Hari Sinha, King of Tirhut, 5
    243                                          Harrington, Lieutenant, 156, 158
Gardner, William, Major, 96-7, 291 flF.,         Hasti Dal Shah, 24, 47, 290, 294-7,
    309, 311. 357                                    300-1
Gartok, 61, 68                                   Hastings, Marquis of, 33, 48, 50, 54,
Garhwal, 15, 18, 19, 21, 25, 27, 28, 37,             79; and the Bengal army, 97-8,
      40-1, 70, 84, 85, 131, 291, 346                 103, 106, 114, 175, 350, 352-3,
Georgegarh, 296                                      354;     and     Court    of    Directors,
Genti Khatri, 246, 339                               349-50;        and    Himalayan         com¬
Gharti clan, 8                                       merce, 54, 85 ff.; and H.M. 53rd
Ghazipur, 35, 229                                     Regiment, 152-3,   161-3,   *75.
Ghorasahan, 210, 222                                  207—9; and Marley, 216-17, 222-
Ghoshi Ram, 280                                       3, 226-8; and Martindell,               168,
Gillespie,      Robert        Rollo,    Major-        181-2, 192-3, 199-200, 203, 205-
      General, 126, 128, 134-53, I6o,                 6,   207;     and   Military        strategy,
     161-2, 208-9, 245, 249, 251                      125 ff., 288, 290, 298; and Ochter-
Giri Ganga river, 21, 180                             l°ny,   248,    249,    255,   270,     339;
Goela, 254, 256, 258                                  and     Peace       negotiations,       285,
Gogra river, 10 n.                                    308 ff.; and Wood, John, 235-6,
Gorakhpur, 34, 35, 42, 43, 47, 61, 63,                238;    and    Wood,      George,       217,
      126, 228, 229, 234, 235, 236, 237,              226, 240-1, 245. See also Imperial¬
      238, 242, 308                                   ism, Paramountcy
                                              Index                                    383

Hastings, Warren, 32, 45 n., 55-7, 61,             Indore, 31, 33
    69, 71-2, 76-7, 80, 86, 89, 109                Indus river, 59, 61, 345
Hay, Captain, 211, 214-15                          Infantry, Native, see Sepoys
Hay, Lieutenant, 305                               Ingleby, Major, 155, 201
Hearsey, John,          Cornet, 44, 210-n,         Innes, Major, 277, 281
    243                                            Irregulars, 95-6, 181, 184-5, 191-2,
Hearsey, Hyder, Captain, 28 n., 40-1,                   199, 203-4, 218, 353, 363. See
    70,     85,   88,    127,    130-1,   290-1,        also Gardner’s Horse, Pathans,
    293-8, 299, 300, 306, 346-7                         Skinner’s Horse
Heathcote, Captain, 229-30
Heber, Bishop, 123                                 Jainagar, 277
Henry, Walter, Surgeon, 326                        Jaipur, 313
Hethaura, 216, 224, 324, 327, 331-2                Jaithak, 170, 176, 181, 183, 185, 188,
Hewitt, Sir George, 99                                  190, 193, 199, 201-2, 205, 206,
Hill stations, 347                                      271, 285, 286, 346
Hindu Kush, 71                                     Jampta, 22, 172, 194, 197, 198
Hindur, 21-2, 39-40, 205, 252, 258,                Janakpur, 224, 172, 194, 197-8
     346. See also Ram Saran Sen                   Jats, 30
Hindur auxiliaries, 251, 266, 268, 273,            Jaundra, 140, 143
     278, 281, 282-3                               Jaunsar, 184, 189
Hindustan, 1, 40, 57, 60, 64                       Jauntgarh, 181, 189, 202
His Majesty’s Regiments:                           Java, 135, 249, 273
  Eighth Royal Irish Dragoons, 139,                Jaya Sthithi Malla, King of Nepal, 5
    143, 148-9, 260                                Jaya Yaksha Malla, King of Nepal, 6
  Eighty-Seventh, Royal Irish, Regi¬               Jelal river, 190
    ment, 325, 327, 329, 331, 333-4,               Jhapa, 245
    335                                            Jinjals, 219
  Fifty-Third       Regiment,        109,   139,   Jitgarh, 232, 234
     143, I47-5I, 155-8, 160-1, 163,               Jones, Captain, 56
     168, 170-2, 173, 175, 194, 196,               Jorjoru, 268-9, 270
     198, 207-9                                    Jubal, 21 n., 184, 191, 201, 203, 204
  Fourteenth Regiment, 242, 298                    Jumna river, 18, 22, 23, 28 n., 32, 33,
  Seventeenth       Regiment,        229,   233,        38, 108, 134, 142, 165, 248, 285
     236, 241-2                                    Jung Bahadur Rana, 346
  Sixty-Sixth       Regiment,        325,   327,
     336                                           Kabul, 61, 70, 95, 313
  Twenty-Fourth Regiment, 216, 244,                Kachurwa, 52
     308,    325,   326.        See also Royal     Kahalur, 21 n.
    troops                                         Kahanani, 256, 258, 264
Hodgson, B. H., 9 n., 11 n., 28 n., 55             Kaji (rank), 20
Holkar, 107, 248, 291                              Kalanga, 134, 140, 141 ff., 261, 271
Horsford, Sir John, 104, 351                       Kalanjar, 100, 108, 167
Hough, William, Major, 289 n.                      Kali Kumaun, 295, 300
Hue, 62 n., 89                                     Kalimath, 301, 303
Hutchinson, Lieutenant, 282                        Kali river, 14, 15, 28, 38, 85, 126, 290,
                                                        295. 296, 300, 310, 346
Ham, 13, 339                                       Kalsi, 134, 140, 142, 153, 164, 202
Imperialism, 49                                    Kanaka Nidhi Tewari, 231-3, 234
India Act of 1784, 94, 109, 355                    Kanatu, 21 n.
Indigo, 81                                         Kandahar, 60
Indigo planters, 35, 226, 245. See also            Kangra, 23-4, 41
    Moran, Mr., McEntee, Mr.                       Kankai river, 13
Indo-Aryan languages, 4 n., 9 n.                   Karara river, 331, 332
3%                                     Index
Karman Prakash, 22-4, 131, 346              Krishna Pandit, 45
Karnal, 252                                 Krishna Singh, of Sirmur, 131, 184,
Karnali river, 10                                190-1, 199
Karsalli, 145                               Kuch Bihar, 32, 36, 56
Kashipur, 294                               Kulu, 88
Kashmir, 6 n., 7, 20, 25, 59, 61, 69, 71,   Kumaharasin, 21 n.
     81                                     Kumaun, 14, 18-19, 28, 37, 39-40, 54,
Kashmirian merchants, 58, 61, 87               58, 59, 88, 205, 283, 314, 315,
Katalgarh, 297                                   325,     346;    British   decision    to
Katarmal, 295, 302, 305                          annex, 85-6, 130; war in, Ch. X,
Kathmandu, 6, 11, 15, 17, 18, 19, 26,            passim
     28-9, 39, 40-1, 43, 45-6, 50, 52,      Kumaun Battalion, 348
     54, 58, 60, 82, 84, 214, 224, 271;     Kumauni, 9 n.
     British Residency in, 79, 83, 310,     Kunawar, 21 n., 60 n.
    342-5 _                                 Kunhiar, 21 n.
Kausalya river, see Kosila river            Kursa Kanta, 254
Kayarda Dun, 40, 126, 165, 346
Kaye, Sir John, quoted on Company           Ladakh, 59, 60-1, 70, 81, 88-9
     officers, 121                          Lahore, 33
Kelly, Major, later Lieutenant-Colonel,     Lakanda nulla, 327
     145, 158, 159-60, 185, 196, 201,       Lake, Lord, 107, 293
   327, 337-8                               Lakhaend, 145, 154
Kennedy, Lieutenant, 150                    Lag Hill, 277
Khas or Khasiya tribe, 7—11, 310-11         Lai Mandi (=Fort Moira), 301, 305
Khas Kura, 10 n.                            Lai Singh, of Kumaun, 15, 131
Khatri clan, 11                             Latter, Barre, Captain, 86, 127, 132,
Kheri, 38                                       245-7, 326
Khilpati, 297                               Laurie, Major, 278, 282-3
Khiri, 140, 143                             Lautan, 218, 221, 317
Khyber pass, 289, 307                       Law Book of Alarm, 7
Kiari, 21 n.                                Lawrence, Sir Henry, 112, 123
King’s Shropshire Light Infantry, see       Lawtie, Peter, Lieutenant, 253, 256-7,
     His Majesty’s Regiments: Fifty-            258-9, 265, 268-70, 273, 276-7,
     Third                                      286
Kinloch, Captain, 45 n., 54, 56, 63         Leh, 61
Kionthal, 21 n., 40, 346                    Leicestershire       Regiment,    see      His
Kipling, Rudyard, 347                           Majesty’s Regiments: Seventeenth
Kirata tribe, 1, 4, 12, 14, 28, 132             Regiment
Kirkpatrick, William, 12 n., 83, 310        Lepcha tribe, 12-13, 246
Kirong pass, 67, 343                        Levey, William, Matross, 220
Kirti Rana, 204                             Levi, Sylvain, 9 n.
Kishen Kant Bose, 321                       Leys, Captain, 298, 301, 303
Kiund, 21 n.                                Lhasa, 52, 60-1, 65, 68, 84, 88, 313,
Knox, Captain, 83-4, 310                        320-1, 342-3
Komona, 108                                 Licchavi tribe, 4-5
Kosi river, 13, 224-5, 345                  Limbu tribe, 14, 28
Kosila river, 294, 300-2                    Local Battalions, 348 n., 352-3, 363.
Kot, 256                                        See also Champaran Light In¬
Kotgarh, 21 n., 81                              fantry, Ramgarh Local Battalion,
Kothar, 21 n.                                   Rangpur Local Battalion
Koti, 21 n.                                 Lotan, 229-31, 234, 236-8
Kotoch, 22-3. See also Sansar Chand         Lucknow, 44, 231, 235, 262, 319
Krishna Bahadur Rana, 223, 335              Ludhiana, 39, 248, 254, 313
                                           Index                                             385
Ludlow, John, Major,         ioi   n.,   139,   Martin, R., Magistrate of Gorakhpur,
    i4S. I47-5L 153-4. 157. 160,                    235
    163-4, 169-76, 183-90, 194-6,               Martindell,    Gabriel,      Major-General,
    198, 200-2                                      166 ff., 245, 264, 286, 354. See
Luxford, Lieutenant, 157                            also Hastings, Marquis of
Lyons, Lieutenant-Colonel, 262                  Mason, Major, 222
                                                Matchlocks, 185
                                                Matheson, Lieutenant, 220
Macao, 78, 82                                   Mauritius, 313. 325
Macartney, Lord, 68, 79                         Mawby, Sebright, Lieutenant-Colonel,
MacDonald, deserter in Kotoch, 261                  140 ff., 151 ff., 163, 189, 190, 199,
Macon, Captain, 104, 123                            202, 207-8
Madras, 31, 33                                  McEntee, Mr., 226
Madras army, 90, 114, 242, 313. See             McGregor, Lieutenant, 305
    also Vellore Mutiny                         McMahon, Colonel, 222-3, 226
Magar tribe, 8, 9, 11, 26                       Mechi river, 245, 339, 346
Mahabharata, 7                                  Meerut, 35, 38, 208
Maha Chand, Raja of Bilaspur, 22-3,             Menteith, Lieutenant, 202-3
    252, 260, 266, 274                          Mercantilism, 72, 73 n.
Mahajogi, 327                                   Metcalfe, Charles, 98, 163, 184, 249,
Mahendra Singh, Raja of Kurnaun, 15                  313, 339-40
Mailog, 21 n.                                   Mewati tribe, 38, 185
Makwanpur, 12, 26, 44-5, 126, 132,              Military Board, 104, 351, 354
     214, 216, 224, 226, 241, 244, 246,         Military    officers    of the       East    India
     324. 327. 330, 332-3, 337                       Company, grievances of, 91, 93-
Malaria, 34, 56, 308                                 4, 111-14; pay and allowances of,
Malaun, 23, 265-8, 270, 273-6, 278-                  102, 105, 109-10; numbers of, 91,
    Si, 285, 346                                     115. 174, 303; quality of, 114-16,
Malcolm, Sir John, 94, 340                           119-23, 356-8; recruitment of,
Malla dynasty, of Nepal, 5, 6, 8;                    109-10. See also Seniority promo¬
     of Purang and Guge, 7                           tion
Malwa, 31, 340                                  Miller, Lieutenant-Colonel, 334-5
Mana pass, 85                                   Minto, Lord, 33, 39-40, 45, 84, 249
Manas river, 36                                 Mirzapur, 168
Manchu dynasty, 64-5                            Moffussil, 34
Mangal, 21 n.                                   Mogul Emperors, 10, 20, 23, 30-1, 36,
Mangeit, see Munjeet                                 49, 50, 71, 293
Mangu, 262-4, 267                               Mohan pass, 140, 143
Manning, Thomas, 84                             Mohan       Singh, of Gardner’s Horse,
Manjusri, 1                                          295, 304
Manu, 7                                         Moira, Earl of, see Hastings, Marquis
Mara faction of Kurnaun, 14                          of
Moran, Mr., 218                                 Mojamand, 166
Marathas,     19,   30-3,   37, 49-5°, 7L       Mongolia, 64-5
     130,272,321-3, 353, 356                    Monson, 248
Maratha wars, 95, 248                           Moorcroft, William, 28 n., 68, 70-1,
Marine Battalion, 334                                82,    84-5,      87,   88-9,    131,    226,
Markanda river, 166, 169, 194, 197                 275 n., 290, 296
Marley, Bennet, Major-General, 126,             Moradabad, 38, 54, 70, 262, 291, 298
     128, 210, 216 ff., 235, 240, 286.          Morang, 12, 34, 42, 245, 246
     See also Hastings, Marquis of              Mountain        warfare,      principles        of,
Martin, C. R., Magistrate of Pumea,                  288-9
     245
                                                 Munjeet, 87
386                                       Index

Munro, Sir Hector, 340                         Ochterlony,       David,      Colonel,        after¬
Munt, Lieutenant, 174                               wards Major-General, 28 n., 39-
Murray, Lieutenant, 281                             42, 51, 84,       126,    128,    131,    142,
Muskets, see Small arms                             192,      199,   204-6,    241,    Ch.      IX
Mussoorie, 347                                     passim, 307, 316, 318-19, Ch. XII
Mutiny of 1857, 349, 353, 358                      passim, 354, 356^7
Muzafferpur, 225                               Ochterlony, R. P., 287 n.
Mynari, 231, 234, 236-7                        Off-reckoning fund, 102
Mysore, 31-3                                   O’Halloran, Joseph, Major, 114, 244
Mysore wars, 94-5                              O’Hara, Lieutenant, 151
                                               Oldham,      Mr., Magistrate of Mora-
                                                    dabad, 299
Nagana, 25
                                               Opium trade, 74, 81
Nagpur, 31                                     Ordnance of Bengal army, 99, 105-6,
Nagri, 13, 246-7, 326, 339                          287-9, 307. See also Gun lascars
Nahan, 21 n., 134, 163, 165-6, 169 ff.,
                                               Orissa, 31
      182, 187, 190, 192-4, 196, 200-1,
                                               Oudh, 14, 30, 32-4, 37-8, 42-3, 116,
    253. 269, 346                                  230, 234-6, 272; loans from, 318,
Niakot, 231-2, 237
                                                    345. 350
Naini Tal, 347
Nalagarh fort, 22-3, 252-3, 255, 273
                                               Pabar river, 21
Nalagarh (=Hindur), 21 n.
                                               Paget,   Sir    Edward,       quoted     on     the
Nalapani, see Kalanga
                                                   Bengal commissariat, 351-2
Nanur, 45 n.
                                               Palasi, 21 n., 22, 253
Nanya Deva, King of Tirhut, 5
                                               Palli, 231, 235
Narayani river, 10
                                               Palpa, 14, 18, 28 n., 43, 47, 53, 126,
Nasiri Battalion, 275, 277, 348
                                                    132, 231-2, 234, 237, 325
Nathpur, 244, 308
                                               Panchen Lama, 56, 63, 66-7
Nation, Major, 335
                                               Pandavas, 7
Native officers, no, 121-2
                                               Pandu,7
Nauni, 185-8, 190, 202
                                               Pandur, 21 n., 346
Need, Lieutenant-Colonel, 208
                                               Panipat, 30
Nepal, army of, 26-9, 53; economy of,
                                               Panjal Peak, 199
      45, 62-4; history of, 1-6, 12-25,
                                               Panna, 167-8
      66-8
                                               Panre clan, 16-18, 43, 285, 346
Nepali, 6, 9 n., 17 n.
                                               Paramountcy, as a principle of British
Newars, 4, 11-12, 59
                                                   policy, 49, 98, 314, 355-6
Nichlaul, 235
                                               Pamia, see Purnea
Nicol, Lieutenant-Colonel, 327, 333,
                                               Patan, 6, 10, 12
      336, 338
                                               Pathans, 30, 127, 185, 294; as irregular
Nicolls,     Jasper,   Lieutenant-Colonel,
                                                   troops, 293, 304, 307
      205, 208, 289, 295, 298 ff., 316,
                                               Patiala, 40, 251, 346
      325. 339. 347, 357                       Patna Provincial Battalion, 97
Nilkanth, 342
                                               Patta, 277
Niti pass, 85
                                               Patton, Major, 301
Nizamtara, 246, 247
                                               Parbatiya, 10 n.
Nori, 256-8, 260, 262, 266, 268-9
                                               Parker, Captain, 155
Nugent, Maria, Lady, 112, 138
                                               Parsa, 211, 215, 218-19, 221-2, 225,
Nugent, Sir George, 48, 50, 95, 98,
      106, hi, 115, 135, 350
                                                    335
                                               Parsa Ram Thapa, 52, 210, 211, 223
                                               Partabgarh, 229, 235, 237
O’Brien,      deserter   in   Kotoch,   132,   Peace settlement, of 1816, 346. See
      260-1, 275                                    also Segauli, Treaty of
                                        Index                                           387
Peacock Hill, 176, 178, 180, 188-9           Raganath Pandit, guru, 43
Peboun, 62 n.                                Rangpur Local Battalion, 127, 245
Peking, 52, 65, 68, 79, 80, 82, 343. See     Ranikhet, 294, 295
    also China                               Ranjit   Singh,     Maharaja,      24-5,    33,
Pemionchi, 13 n.                                 70-1, 88-9, 99, 130, 132, 260-1,
Permanent Settlement of Bengal, 35,              272, 284, 312-3, 349
     37                                      Ranjor Singh Thapa, 164, 170, 180,
Persia, 30, 71, 89                               182,    184,    188-9, 201-2, 205-6,
Peshawar, 61                                     271, 320,337
Peshwa of Poona, 30-1, 50, 293               Raper, Captain, 28 n., 347
Perron, 296                                  Rapti river(s), 58, 316, 318, 324, 327,
Petech, Luciano, 5                               333, 345
Phae-Phae, 339                               Ratanpur, 275, 277, 279-80
Phartiyal faction of Kumaun, 15, 131         Rautahat, 45 n.
Pickersgill, Joshua, Lieutenant, after¬      Rawdon, Lord, see Hastings, Marquis
     wards Captain, 222, 239, 328-9,            of
     333-4                                   Reformed Buddhists, 64
Pilibhit, 296                                Regulating Act, 1774, 109
Pindaris, 95, 167, 207, 313, 353             Revolutionary Wars, 48
Pioneers or Sappers, 269, 273, 330,          Rewa, 100, 167
     362                                     Rewari, 181
Pitt, William, the younger, 48, 94           Richards,    William,       Captain,      after¬
Poona, 30-2, 50                                  wards Major, 28 n., 171, 176—81,
Prince Regent, 48, 162, 207, 217, 286             199-200
Prithvi Malla,    King of Purang and         Roberts,     Lord,     cited    on     Bengal
     Guge, 8                                     officers, 353-4
Prithvi Pala, Raja of Palpa, 14, 18          Robertson, Captain, 237
Provincial battalions, 96, 348 n., 352,      Rohilkhand, 19, 32, 34, 37, 127, 293
     353, 363                                Ross, R., Lieutenant, 21 n., 88, 266-8
Purang, 7                                    Roughsedge,        Major,   210,   216,    221,
Punjab, 7, 19, 23, 30, 33, 41-2, 60, 61,         224, 242
    7o-i, 345                                Royal Berkshire       Regiment,      see His
Purnea, 34-5, 37, 127, 245                       Majesty’s Regiments: Sixty-Sixth
                                                 Regiment
Raffles, Stamford, 135 ff., 162, 209         Royal troops in India, 91-3, 363-4.
Raila Peak, 276, 277, 281                        See also His Majesty’s Regiments
Rais, 14 n.                                  Rudra Vir Shah, 24, 309-12, 320, 322
Rajpur, 142                                  Rupar, 126, 251, 252
Rajputana, 9 n., 31, 60, 70, 313, 340        Rupitagarhi, 243
Rajputs, 4 n., 8, 9, 19-20, 30, 33, 340      Russia, 59, 7i, 345
Rama Sahai Singh, Sepoy, 211                 Russian traders, 59, 66
Ram Das, 285                                 Rutherfurd, Thomas, 28 n., 290-1,
Ramgarh,      22-3, 254-8, 261-2,     264,       293, 295, 299-300, 307
     267-70, 272-3, 276                      Rutledge, Lieutenant, 280
Ramgarh Local Battalion, 96                  Ryuni, 294
Ramnagarh, 132, 224, 324
Rampur, capital of Basahar, 21 n., 25,       Sahanranpur, 19, 34, 38, 126, 139
     70                                      Sain mountains, 190
Rampur state, 37, 293                        Saklayana, 164
Ram Saran Sen, Raja of Hindur, 22-3,         Salari, Lascar, 220
    131, 251, 255, 258, 278                  Sallayana, 309, 320 n.
Rana Bahadur Shah, Raja of Nepal,            Saltpetre, 81 n.
     16-17, 83                               Samanpur, 215, 221, 242, 335
388                                        Index

Sankara Deva, King of Patan, 5                   Siling, 65
Sangri, 21 n.                                    Silk trade, 81
Sansar Chand, Raja of Kotoch, 23-4,              Simla, 347
      42, 131, 260-1, 275                        Simra Basa, 327, 331
Saran, 34-5, 44-5, 210, 216, 224-5,              Sind, 345
      229, 239, 242, 326                         Sindhia, 32, 313, 322, 344
Sarani, 21 n.                                    Sirdhana, 37
Scott, David, Magistrate of Rangpur,             Sirhind, 30, 33-4, 39, 5 L 296
      247                                        Sirmur, 21-2, 38, 40, 84, 164, 184,
Scott, Sir Walter, 204                                346
Sealy, Mr., Magistrate of Tirhut, 225,           Sirmur Battalion, 348
      228                                        Sissugatchi, 245
Second Gurkha Rifles, 348                        Sitapur, 316
Sedaura, 166                                     Sita Ram, 157
Segauli, 244, 308, 310, 316; Treaty of,          Sitoli, 301-3
      Ch.     XI     passim,    338,   344-5,    Siura, 231-2
      359-6i                                     Siuraj, 44, 46-7, 126, 228, 231, 234,
Seniority promotion, 110-12, 228, 340,               236-7
      353-4                                      Siwalik hills, 140
Sepoys, 90; pay of, 118-19; recruit¬             Skinner, James, 96, 183, 204
      ment     of,    116-18;    quality   of,   Skinner’s Horse, 97, 139, 204
       119-23, 287-8, 303, 356-8                 Sluyster, Mr., 138, 162
Seton, Archibald, 48                             Small arms, 103-5, 185
Shah dynasty of Gurkha and Nepal,                Smith, Adam, 75
       10                                        Smith, Chief Engineer, 195
Shah Alam, Emperor, 32                           Smith, Lieutenant, 211, 215, 219—20
Shawl-wool trade, 54, 56, 59, 69, 72,            Song river, 134, 141, 154, 163
      74, 80-1, 86                               South      Wales   Borderers,   see   His
Shee    Chan      Choon,   Chinese envoy,             Majesty’s     Regiments:   Twenty-
       321, 342, 343                                  Fourth Regiment
Sherwood, Henry, Captain, 152, 159-              Srinagar, 19, 134, 164, 189, 203
      60, 170, 187, 188, 202, 206, 208           Stalkert, Ensign, 179
Sherwood, Mrs., 153                              Stuart, Charles, Major-General, 112—
Shigatse, 61, 67. See also Tashilunpo
                                                     13
Shipp, John, Ensign, 27,           109, 222,     Staunton, Sir George, 79
    335-6, 337 n.                                Stephens, Ensign, 232
Shiva, 4, 12 n.                                  Stevenson, Robert, 179, 195
Shiva Dat Rai, 20, 22, 252, 260, 266,            Strettel, Lieutenant, 221
       274, 349                                  Stud of East India Company, 70, 85
Shivamargis, 4                                   Subas, 14 n., 224
Shore, Sir John, 83, 113                         Subathu, 25, 255, 346
Showers, Charles, Captain, 279, 281,             Sudras, 6 n.
    283                                          Sudra Sen Shah, 131
Sibley, Henry, Captain, 211, 215, 218,           Sumatra, 119
       219-20, 222                               Supracargoes, 78
Sikhar Khatri, 333-4, 337                        Surajpur, 234
Sikh auxiliaries, 251, 258, 274, 280             Surat, 31
Sikhs, 19, 23-4, 30, 33-4, 38-40, 51,            Surjagarh, 23, 275-6
       71, 82, 86, 89, 123, 185, 248, 251,       Sutlaj river, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25, 33,
       258, 272, 340, 356                             34, 41, 60, 61, 69, 70, 71, 248,
Sikkim, 12-13, 52, 62, 84, 86, 88, 132,               251, 264
    246, 339, 342, 346                           Symes, Ensign, 259
Sihayi Devi, 295                                 Szechwan, 67
                                       Index                                       389
Tadi river, 67                             Tulsipur, 132, 234-5
Taplejung, 13                              Tundhikhel, 28
Tapley, Lieutenant, 304                    Turks, 30
Tanhu,132                                  Turner, Sir Ralph, 9 n.
Tansen, 126                                Turner, Samuel, Captain, 64, 66, 69,
Tansing, 18, 229, 325                          72, 89
Tantrism, 12 n.                            Turner, William, Ensign, 179-81
Taragarh, 23, 268, 273                     Twelve Lordships, 21-4, 274, 346
Tarai, 34, 38, 42, 45, 58, 84, 130, 218,   Twenty-Four Rajas, 10, 12, 14, 132
     224-6, 230-1, 234, 243-4, 271,        Twenty-Two Rajas, 10, 14, 132
     310-14,     316-19,   325-7,   337,
     344-5                                 Utraj, 21 n.
Tarai fever, 308. See also Awl, Malaria
Tartary, 54, 61                            Vaisya, 6 n.
Tashilunpo (=Shigatse), 56, 62, 67         Varna, 4, 6 n., 8
Tea trade, 78, 81                          Vazir Singh, 234, 237
Teshoo Lama, see Panchen Lama              Vellore Mutiny, 122-3, 135
Thackeray, Thomas, Lieutenant, 117,        Vice-President in Council, 365-7
     177-80                                Vijaypur, 12-14, 245
Thackeray, William Makepeace, 177
                                           Warehouse Act, 1799, 80
Thakur (title), 10
                                           Watson, Captain, 188
Thakuri dynasty of Nepal, 5
                                           Webbe, Captain, 88
Thapa clan, 8, 11, 16-18, 20, 39, 306,
                                           Wellesley, Lord, 32-3, 37 n., 48, 49,
     310-12, 346
                                               83. 346
Thar, 6 n.
                                           Wellington, Duke of, 32, 48
Tharu tribe, 34, 234, 237
                                           Whinfield, Lieutenant, 304
Thioka, 21 n.
                                           Wight, Lieutenant, 302
Thomas, George, 296
                                           Williams, Lieutenant, 259
Thompson, Lieutenant-Colonel, 253,
                                           Wilson, artillery officer, 305
     255-6, 258, 263-4, 278-9, 281-2
                                           Wilson, Captain, 204-5
Tibet, 1, 4, 7, 12, 13, 19, 54, 55, 57,
                                           Wilson, William, Ensign, 179-81
     59, 60, 247, 272, 342-3; relations
                                           Wood, George, Major-General, 217,
     of with Nepal and China, 62 ff.
                                                226-7, 236, 239 ff., 316, 339, 354.
Tibu, 263-4, 266, 289
                                                See also Hastings, Marquis of
Tickell, Captain, 218, 333-4, 338
                                           Wood, John Sulivan, Major-General,
Timla pass, 296, 297
                                                126, 128, 132, 228, 229 ff., 264,
Timli, 144
                                                308,    317,   325,   339.   See   also
Timli pass, 140
                                                Hastings, Marquis of
Tingri, 342, 343
                                           Woollen trade, see Cloth trade
Tipnu,280
Tipu Sultan, 32, 271                       Yaks’ tails, 56
Tirhut, 5, 34-5, 37, 210, 216, 222, 224,   Yarkand, 60, 61
     242-3                                 Yellow sect of Buddhists, 64 n.
Tirrell, Lieutenant, 334                   Young,      Frederick,   Lieutenant,    184,
Tista river, 25, 34, 36                         188, 190-1, 199
Titalia, 127, 245, 247                     Young, Mr., Assistant Magistrate of
Tod, James, 340                                 Saran, 44-7
Torrens, Sir Henry, 161                    York, Duke of, 161
Tons river, 21, 134, 186                   Yuk Namchu, 13, 246
Trebeck, George, 89
Tucci, G., 9 n.                            Zemindars, 14, 15, 35, 36
'
               Date Due
vAil 2 1 —6
 s- p H, 1 •[ 1989                                        1988
                                         &pp
                                         pr rv 1 a
           1< i.‘ <nn*
                  ’770
                                   r '



             APR 0 4 TO
ocr 2 7 1303
U v * 1 7 iqqg
nrr               - - .
                                                w/




 &         CAT.   NO.   23   233          PRINTED   IN   U.S.A.
                      DS 485 .N4 P37                   010101 000
                      Pemble, John.               r
                      The invasion of Nepa : John Cc




                             0       63 0092936 5
                                 TRENT UNIVERSITY




  DSU85   .N4P37

Pemble, John
  The invasion of Nepal

DATE
                   ISSUED}TBn428




                                 163428
