

13.  If  in  animal,  physical,  or  mechanical  economy,  derangements  exist, 
it  does  not  suffice  that  things,  good  in  themselves,  are  applied  to  remedy  the 
evils  of  the  derangement ; the  beneficial  effect  of  mechanical  economy  does 
not  consist  in  its  extent  and  force,  but  in  the  adaptation  of  all  the  parts  to 
each  other,  and  the  whole  to  the  purpose  to  which  it  is  applied  : so  in  finan- 
cial and  social  economy,  the  well-being  of  a community  does  not  depend 
upon  whether  its  combination  of  means  are  rated  at  one  or  ten  thousand 
millions ; but  the  harmony  of  all  its  varied  degrees  of  rank,  its  ample  means 
of  subsistence,  its  increasing  comfort  and  happiness,  and,  above  all,  their 
permanence  and  security  depend  on  proportion,  and  the  application  of  pro- 
per and  particular  means,  to  the  wants  and  derangements  which  a pecu- 
liar combination  of  circumstances  may  have  engendered. 

120  c 

Introduction  to  the  Following  Statements  of  Exports  and  Imports.  • 

14.  The  body  politic,  like  the  animal  body,  may  experience  the  extreme 
of  pain  and  privation  from  the  extreme  of  opposite  causes  ; a spasmodic,  a 
corrosive  or  morbid  affection,  resulting  from  some  special  cause,  may  ema- 
ciate and  reduce  the  animal  body,  otherwise  vigorous  and  powerful,  to  the 
lowest  state  of  debility,  as  effectually  as  an  inadequate  supply  of  food.  The 
two  causes  in  combination,  will  also  produce  the  same  effect ; and  so  witli 
an  indulgence  in  ease  and  intemperance  without  commensurate  activity  ; in 
like  manner  the  body  politic  may  be  exposed  to  the  extreme  of  suffering  by 
the  interposition  of  nature,  in  a succession  of  unfavourable  harvests ; a 
universal  prevalence  of  virulent  disease,  or  some  convulsion  like  that  which 
inhumed  for  20  centuries,  the  cities  of  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii — all  these 
would  produce  great  social  derangement ; internal  dissension  or  external 
conflict  would  produce  the  same  effects  ; and  so  will  any  other  cause  that 
obstructs  the  freedom  of  circulation  and  consumption,  or  that  occasions  any 
inordinate  disproportion. 

15.  The  subjecting  to  payment  in  gold  at£3. 17s.  10£d.  per  oz.,  22  millions 
amount  of  annuities  created  by  the  aid  of  500  millions  of  mere  representa- 
tions of  amount  on  paper ; more  than  a third  of  which  was  not  exchangeable 
for  gold  under  £5.  11s.  per  oz. ; and  after  that,  to  tax  the  community  for 
the  means  to  re-purchase  at  the  rate  of  £94.  3s.  6d.  = 24.19  oz.  of  gold  as 
was  done  in  1824,  part  of  those  annuities  for  which  less  than  10  oz.  of  gold 
were  received  in  1815,  may  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  grossest  acts  of  in- 
justice ever  inflicted  upon  an  unsuspecting  people,  and  only  equalled  as  an 
evidence  of  perversion  in  legislation,  by  the  act  of  refusing  to  receive  corn 
from  those  countries  which  had  no  other  valuable  commodity  to  give  in  ex- 
change for  those  commodities  which  it  forced  to  seek  consumption  in 
those  countries ; unjust,  absurd,  and  reprehensible,  as  both  these  acts  of 
legislation  were,  it  does  not  follow  that  either  the  alteration  of  the  fixed 
value  of  gold  from  £3.  17s.  10£d.  to  £5,  or  any  other  higher  rate  per  oz., 
whereby  an  enlarged  amount  of  paper  might  again  be  put  in  circulation  ; or 
that  the  uncontrolled  or  even  modified  admission  of  Foreign  Corn  would 
remove  the  existing  derangements,  nor,  in  themselves  would  they  ; both 
have  operated  as  aggravations,  but  neither  the  one  or  the  other  have  been 
the  cause  of  the  existing  derangements,  and  therefore,  any  further  inter- 
ference in  legislating  upon  them,  should  be  left  to  follow,  and  not  precede 
those  measures  which  the  singularly  involved  nature  of  the  prevailing  em- 
barrassment more  imperatively  demands. 