

9.  Much  as  the  Foreign  Loan  transactions  have  aided  those  of  Commerce 
during  the  last  Sixteen  Years,  their  illusiveness  is  now  beginning  to  mani- 
fest itself,  the  total  sum  so  transferred  from  England  since  1816  approxi- 
mates in  Amount  to  £100,000,000,  and  has  therefore  aided  the  Commercial 
transactions  to  that  extent,  in  the  same  way  as  the  Bills  of  the  British 
Government  did  during  the  War.  But  the  position  in  which  the  combined 
transactions  have  placed  Great  Britain,  is  far  more  singular  and  perilous  than 
that  in  which  she  was  placed  at  the  close  of  the  War  in  1815,  unexampled 
as  was  the  paralysis  experienced  at  that  time.  Whenever  the  disposition 
or  means  to  transfer  capital  from  British  to  Foreign  Security  ceases,  and 
cease  it  must.  Great  Britain  will  find  herself,  not  merely  confined  to  the 
consequences  of  the  cessation,  but  the  amounts  transferred,  having  created 
an  interest  equal  to  6 to  £8,000,000  per  Annum,  the  amount,  be  it  more  or 
be  it  less,  will  operate  conversely ; instead  of  aiding  the  Commercial  trans- 
actions, so  much  will  be  Annually  withdrawn  from  the  Value  of  the  Products 
Imported,  leaving  the  Exporters,  not  only  minus  the  cessation  of  further 
investments,  but  whatever  may  be  withdrawn  to  discharge  the  interest  on 
the  Amount  already  invested.  The  following  display  shows  the  way  in  which 
all  the  extraneous  external  Money  transactions  are  involved  with  those  of  the 
external  Commerce  in  the  aggregate,  while  the  Notes  to  pages  127 — 136 
show  the  way  in  which  they  operate  with  each  Country  separately ; and  the 
whole  will  be  seen  to  involve  consequences  fearful  to  all  honest  men,  and 
all  the  friends  of  social  order,  to  contemplate. 

10.  That  the  Foreign  Commercial  transactions  of  Great  Britain  may  be 
seen  in  relation  to  the  scale  of  subsistence  and  pressure  of  Taxation,  the'  fol- 
lowing statement  of  the  value  of  the  exports  in  each  year,  since  1813,  con- 

tains also  the  average  price  of  wheat,  and  the  amount  of  the  income  derived 
from  Taxes,  and  of  the  Public  Expenditure  in  each  of  the  corresponding 
years.  The  maximum  of  the  money  amount  of  Taxation,  it  will  be  seen,  was 
£78,537,928  in  1815,- reduced  in  1831  to  £50,837,550,  a ratio  of  35  in 
every  £100  ; this,  on  a prima facie  view  of  the  subject,  may  be  regarded  as  an 
adequate  or  approximate  compensation  for  the  reduction  in  the  money 
value  of  the  products  of  manufacturing  industry  ; but  on  due  examination  it 
will  be  seen  to  bear  no  proportion,  whether  viewed  either  in  reference  to 
the  weight  of  the  amounts  in  gold,  or  the  facility  of  payment  which  the 
amount  of  government  and  other  representations  of  value  in  circulation  in 
1815  afforded  ; if  viewed  in  reference  to  its  weight  in  gold  : the  amount  in 
1815  was  as  14,680  oz.,  to  13,056  in  1832,  a difference  of  only  11  per  cent. ; 
while  the  reduction  on  the  aggregate  of  manufactured  products  has  been  in 
the  proportion  of  133  to  55  or  50  per  cent.,  but  this,  great  as  is  the  disparity, 
by  no  means  represents  the  extent  of  the  disproportionate  pressure  now 
prevailing. 