

16.  The  prevailing  embarrassment  does  not  arise  from  any  destitution  of 
means ; on  the  contrary,  all  the  means  of  power  and  efficiency — all  the 
means  of  comfort  and  of  human  enjoyment — exist  in  Great  Britain  at  the 
present  moment,  not  only  in  a far  higher  degree  than  in  any  other  part  of 
the  world,  but  as  far  as  all  experience,  all  the  force  of  reasoning,  and  all 
history,  afford  us  the  means  of  judging  correctly,  in  an  infinitely  higher  de- 
gree than  ever  before  existed  in  any  age  or  country.  The  prevailing  embar- 
rassments consist  in  inordinate  disproportions ; an  enlarged  circulation  of 
Paper  money  would  tend  to  enhance  the  money  price  of  most  commodi- 
ties, and  in  some  degree  lighten  the  pressure  of  Taxation,  but  it  would  af- 
ford no  guarantee  fora  proportionate  increase  in  the  remuneration  for  labour, 
more  especially  not,  under  the  influence  of  the  extraordinary  extent  of  me- 
chanical power  now  in  operation ; nor  would  it  in  the  slightest  degree  tend 
to  equalize  that  disproportion  which  is  the  main  cause  of  the  all-prevailing 
embarrassment ; on  the  whole,  such  a measure  would  rather  tend  to  aggra- 
vate than  equalize  the  prevailing  disproportions ; so  with  the  admission 
for  consumption  of  F’oreign  Corn- 

17.  The  price  of  Wheat,  during  the  last  three  or  four  years,  has 
averaged  about  £3.  4s.  per  quarter,  and  the  aggregate  annual  value  of 
the  produce  of  the  soil  about  £160,000,000.  The  uniform  admis- 
sion of  Foreign  Corn  for  consumption  at  any  fixed  rate  pf  duty  on  Im- 
port, whether  of  5s.,  10s.,  or  even  15s.  per  quarter,  would  tend  to  lower 
the  price  of  Wheat  in  Great  Britain  from  £3.  4s.  to  £2.  10s.  or  pro- 
bably £2.  6s.  per  quarter;  and,  in  the  vulgar  acceptation  of  the  term, 
it  would  make  Bread  cheap  ; and  thereby  bring  subsistence  more  upon  a 
level  with  the  present  money  price  of  manufactured  productions;  but  it 
would  afford  no  guarantee  against  the  remuneration  for  trading  and  manu- 
facturing profits  and  labour  being  reduced  in  a corresponding  degree  ; and, 
as  it  would  reduce  the  aggregate  money  value  of  the  soil,  from  £160,  to 
£120,000,000  per  annum,  and  thereby  diminish  the  power  of  internal 
consumption  of  Manufactured  and  Foreign  productions,  to  the  extent  of 
£40,000,000  annually,  instead  of  tending  to  equalize  the  prevailing  dispropor- 
tion, while  £28,000,000  of  Annuities  and  several  millions  of  other  money 

obligations  remain  fixed  ; such  a measure  as  that  of  a uniform  admission 
of  Foreign  Corn  for  consumption  at  any  rate  of  Import  duty,  would  still 
further  tend  to  increase  the  disproportion  : nevertheless,  means  may  be  de- 
vised for  the  admission  of  Corn  on  reciprocal  and  advantageous  terms ; but 
it  must  be  done  by  being  made  one  of  a combination  of  measures,  and  not 
by  any  abstract  or  specific  act;  and  before  any  legislative  measures  are  re- 
sorted to,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  to  relieve  the  existing  embarrassment, 
the  real  cause  of  the  embarrassment  should  first  be  determined,  and  agreed 
upon. 