

would not now enter into any vindication of the Admiralty; but if any direct motion of censure were hereafter produced against the board, he should be happy to meet and to refute it. Until proof of negligence or inability were adduced, he knew the House of Commons too well, to think that they would condemn. With regard to the early period at which this vote was brought forward, the hon. gentleman would find, on consulting the Journals, that it was always the first vote of supply of the session, and he (Mr. Dundas) should have been deficient in his duty if he had delayed it longer. As to the charge, that 140,000 seamen, were not at this time necessary, the hon. gentleman had answered himself; since he acknowledged that the navy must not be disbanded; and because we had at present the superiority on land, were we to lessen our pre-eminence at sea? In his view no policy could be worse, than that because a peace might perhaps take place, it would be fit to reduce our naval strength. If at any, future period 72 such an event should occur, parliament would have the power of limiting our naval power; but in the present posture of affairs Bonaparte could wish nothing better than to see all our ships laid up in ordinary and our seamen turned adrift upon the country. The hon. Gentleman had said, that our navy now had comparatively little employment. What had become of the enemy's fleets formerly so much talked of?—Where was the Toulon fleet?—At Toulon ready to put to sea on the first opportunity. Of how many sail did that consist? Of not less than 25 or 26 sail.—In the Scheldt there were how many?—Twenty-seven nearly ready for sea.—Was not this a formidable armament for our navy to meet?—At Brest, Cherbourg and in the Texel, there were also many ships, of which the hon. gentleman (Mr. Baring) seemed to have no recollection. He recommended that every individual who brought forward serious charges of this nature should be better informed.

said, that whatever prospects might open favourable to retrenchments in our necessarily great public expenditure, the House might be assured, would be readily embraced by government. In no preceding year had the difficulties attending the due distribution of our naval forces been greater than during the last year. If we had not had assistance of the Russian fleet, he did not believe that we could have made it effectual for all purposes. That we had no formidable enemy actually at sea, was among the number of the existing difficulties. The House and the country ought to know, that, notwithstanding the immense pressure which had been made on the enemy's naval resources for many preceding years yet he had not relaxed his maritime efforts; and that he had still fleets in most of his leading arsenals, ready for sea. He had, in fact, been accumulating his marine forces by rapid strides. The demand on the American station had been prodigious. The Baltic had also been a great pressure on our means, in consequence of its vicinity to military operations. We might, but for our naval exertions there, have seen, not a part, but the whole of the army of Demark put in the motion under the direction of France. He trusted, that the House would feel, that government would not necessarily keep up our naval forces; if they shewed such a disposition, it was in the 73 power of the House, at all times, to recal them to their duty. The numbers of seamen now actually serving, approached very closely to the vote now proposed, which was precisely the same as the last, and brought forward at the same period of the session. Whenever, under all the circumstances which engaged us with our allies, or concerned our operations in the peninsula, retrenchments would be justifiable, he trusted that ministers would vigilantly turn their attention to every practicable and wise means of reduction. But parliament would recollect, that it was our duty to proceed with prudence and foresight. If we suddenly disbanded, it would not be so easy a task, on an emergency, to recal our seamen to the naval force of the country. He was not now prejudging retrenchments, but merely voting for the usual provision.