---
source_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1813/nov/10/committee-of-supply"
final_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1813/nov/10/committee-of-supply"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "1ac15e500905c180c83df2ebd0abd860648ce6727cb01e97571bf08023bb3a37"
title: "COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY. (Hansard, 10 November 1813)"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY. (Hansard, 10 November 1813)

# COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY.

HC Deb 10 November 1813 vol 27 cc69-75 69

§ After a few observation from Mr. W. Keene, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and lord Castlereagh,

rose, to move for the number of seamen for the ensuing year. He observed, that the naval expences had exceeded in two branches—that of vic- 70 tualling, and that of wear and tear; which last was imputable to the extended nature of the service on which our navy had been engaged. He moved, that 140,000 seamen be employed for the service of the ensuing year, and 31,000 marines.

, considering the numerous, but, he believed, necessary expences, which the state of affairs imposed on the country, was surprized that no relief was to be afforded from the naval service; but that, on the contrary, there was an excess in that department. It was with regret that he found this motion made at so very early a period of the session, for the service of 1814. He would not prejudge on the necessity of the vote; but in the present unsettled state of affairs, he could see no necessity for urging it immediately. Looking at the map of Europe, and considering what our navy had at present to do, he could not conceive the necessity for so large an armament. In France, he observed that, according to the pressure of circumstances, some branches of public expenditure were so proportioned as to assist the necessary demands incurred by others, which were of a more exigent nature: whereas we continued to keep up full charges in all branches, as it appeared to him, unnecessarily. For years past, we had had nothing like a formidable enemy at sea; and at the period of the battle of Trafalgar we had 10,000 seamen less than now. We had a few years ago all the ports of the peninsula against us and we had the Baltic to guard, besides our own operations against enemies' colonies. There was now a considerable prospect of our clearing the ports of Holland. He would venture to say, that there was no man, with tolerable information, who followed up the conduct of our naval administration for the last year, but must be surprised at the little that had been done effectually on the North American coast. On that subject, he should not then enter particularly; but, judging from the use made of our great navy last year, he saw no reason for giving to the Admiralty Such great means. Was it meant to be contended, that this immense armament was required on the American stations, for assuredly no where else could it be necessary? From the information he and many other individuals had received, he was inclined to think, that the force already on the other side of the Atlantic, if properly applied, was more than equal to the 71 task it had to perform. The Americans had not more than 3 or 4,000 seamen to oppose to the 140,000 this night to be voted; but he was far from believing that the naval strength, under sir John Warren had been employed to the greatest advantage. Why, he asked, were forty, sail stationed off the Chesapeake, to the disgrace of this country, committing depredations, burning a few sheds, and taking a few stray tobacco ships; when three or four men of war, with due vigilance, could completely have effected the purpose? He would venture to assert, that one-third of the force now stationed off the republican coast, properly distributed, would be fully adequate to blockade the enemy's harbours. It was a known fact, that the preservation of our North American possessions depended upon maintaining a naval superiority on the Lakes; but in what condition were we by the last accounts? Our ships had been expelled from Lake Erie; and on Lake Ontario, with all his gallantry and all his ability, sir James Yeo was not able to face the American force brought against him. So that the state of things was this:—that the naval affairs, either here or abroad, were so ill administered, that where a large naval equipment was required, only a small force was detached; and where but few vessels were necessary, an enormous fleet was stationed.