

would say a single word on the subject of reduction in consequence of the accommodation of different branches of his expenditure by the enemy. He thought the hon. member had been better informed respecting the state of the French finances, than to have made this assertion. His opinions might be corrected, by adverting to the published statements of them. It was quite clear, in this view, that France had not lost sight of her marine, nor had neglected any means of supporting it. All that we now proposed was, to maintain our marine at the same rate as before, should it be necessary. At any time previous to the Appropriation Act, the House had it in its power to make such alterations as it saw fitting.

said, with respect to the point of time, that the House very seldom sat so early as they did this session. The motion might have been postponed till the matter was better understood. The 30 or 40 vessels in the Chesapeake to which he had alluded, had disgraced the country by their ineffectiveness, or rather by their injurious mode of warfare. All the arguments used on the opposite side would apply as well to the extension of one naval force to 150,000 seamen. Surely the fleet in the Scheldt could not be in a state of such perfect readiness for sea, and he doubted much whether that at Toulon was. The question with him was, whether, at present, greater exertions could not be made by land, through retrenchments at sea. Next year he thought that France could not be able to do much at 74 sea; all her resources would be wanted to meet her dangers by land. Our means should be directed to great ends, and not flittered away.

rose, and stated, that not long ago the French fleet in the mouth of the Scheldt amounted to 16 sail of the line, to all appearance ready for service. In the Texel there were not less than five, sometimes ten, in the same condition of preparation. Although some might believe that the enemy had withdrawn many of his seamen from his fleets, yet it would have been an improper confidence on the part of government, on a public rumour, so as to reduce our armaments as to permit them, so near to our own coasts, to move about, insufficiently watched and guarded. The hon. Member's opinion concerning the Toulon fleet was monstrous; since it was but recently that government was accused of neglect in that quarter; of having a naval force inferior to that of the enemy; particularly on the occasion and of L'Emeriau's once coming out to sea, and returning to harbour. Did not an enemy's force of 50 sail of the line require watching? If the Admiralty were the victims of those illusions of the hon. Member, they would indeed become liable to reproach. As to the time at which the motion was now made, it became necessary to make it in the last month of the last year's expenditure. It was also necessary that our brave seamen should be paid and fed: but then it might be said, "put it off till January." Why the necessity of this motion was among the other important reasons, why parliament was assembled so soon this session! But all that was now intended or proposed was, to vote one half of what was wanted. All the civil part of the navel expenditure, new buildings, repairs, and other items, on which a difference of opinion might fairly arise, were kept back for the period of the ordinary estimates, three or four months hence. Government might have adopted another mode, by proposing a rateable sum, for a few months' expenditure; but they had not done so, because they must then have forced upon the House, at the early period, the whole affairs of the naval department, to be printed and voted. It was thought much preferable to ask now, for no more than what appeared necessary for the payment of our seamen, and the expenses of our ships actually at sea, leaving all the rest for future consideration and discussion. 75 Whenever the hon. member should think proper to move any propositions on this subject, he should have, as far as his (Mr. C.'s) humble abilities went, every assistance in his power to afford him; being confident that an enquiry would redound to the credit of the Admiralty, and prove the hon. member to be misinformed. He could not tell why sir J. Warren had 30 pennants in the Chesapeake; but the hon. member might be a better admiral than sir J. Warren. That admiral was responsible for his conduct. He had done what he thought proper in his situation. With 120 pennants, he might have had 30 in the Chesapeake: he did not know that he had, and he thought he had not. He wished to put in his plea for those brave officers and men who had been blockading that coast during dreadful weather, that their characters might not be hinted away. He wished the officers had not been alluded to. The naval administration would be found perfectly ready to defend itself; and as to officers, he hoped the House and the country had full confidence in them; for what had they not to acknowledge, or to expect, from the tried skill, courage, and valour of British seamen?