u P. E, TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

that deviate dramatically from the perceptual anchor of the actual world with
which they are already so familiar (making it difficult to appreciate the arbi-
trariness of the status quo); the availability heuristic could lead people to be
too quick to embrace vivid, easily imaginable scenarios that link all the
component events into a compelling story (even though the compound prob-
ability of all the narrative’s components taken together is vanishingly small);
the representativeness heuristic could lead people to be too slow to concede
plausibility to counterfactuals that posit dramatic nonlinearities in cause-ef-
fect relations (making it difficult to appreciate that small causes can some
times produce big effects and vice versa).

Perhaps the most lethal threat to the validity of counterfactual thought
experiments comes, however, from theory-driven thinking. We have already
noted that counterfactual reasoning will inevitably be theory-driven to some
degree. Indeed, we treated “consistency with well-established theory” as a
defining feature of sound counterfactual reasoning. But the cognitive per-
spective leads us to be suspicious of people's capacity to apply standards of
evidence and proof in an evenhanded fashion (Nisbett and Ross 1980; Fiske
and Taylor 1991). People often succumb to the temptation of applying strong
{ests to dissonant arguments and weak tests to consonant ones—a temptation
that may be especially pronounced when the arguments invoke possible
worlds that no one can ever enter and that can never be decisively discon-
firmed. The perceived plausibility of a counterfactual hinges on how hard
‘one looks for shortcomings. Few counterfactual arguments will not have
points of vulnerability when we subject their antecedents and connecting
principles to close scrutiny. As a result, we are much more likely to recog-
nize the collapse of cotenability in our opponents arguments than in our
‘own—a recurring theme in several chapters.

‘The cognitive perspective also leads us to be suspicious of people’s capac-
ity to transcend (avoid contamination by) outcome knowledge. As theory-
driven thinkers, people automatically try to assimilate “what happened” to
some prior knowledge structure or schema that specifies cause-effect rela-
tionships for events of that type (Fischhoff 1975; Hawkins and Hastie 1990).
‘The result is a deep, and arguably unjustifiable, asymmetry between back-
ward and forward reasoning in time. On average, political experts see fewer
possible pasts than they do possible futures (Tetlock 1994). When they look
backward in time, they mobilize their finite mental resources to explain the
fone outcome of the many possible outcomes that actually occurred, selec-
tively recruiting the most plausible (theory-consistent) antecedents that will
allow them to tell a good causal story for that outcome (Commentary 3,
Dawes; Chapter 12, Weber). By contrast, when experts look forward into
the future, they are typically unsure of what will happen. In part for contin-
gency planning and in part to avoid the embarrassment of making blatantly
wrong forecasts, experts often survey in a reasonably open-minded way the

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS 38

panoply of possibilities and conditions for their occurrence. This cognitive
analysis helps us to explain an otherwise paradoxical pattern in expert judg-
‘ment: bold counterfactuals and timid forecasts. Experts often assert that they
know what would have happened in the past but modestly demur on what
will happen in the future.

Motivational Biases

Thus far, we have focused on only cognitive sources of bias. People are not,
of course, just information-processing devices; they are animated by wishes,
hopes, and fears that shape their perceptions of what might or could or
should have been (Commentary 2, Olson, Roese, and Deibert). These emo-
tional needs can take many, sometimes conflicting forms (Tetlock and Levi
182. Consider the following possibilities suggested by the psychological
literature:

(1) Needs for predictability and controllability: On the one hand, people
might allow their desire to believe that the world is fundamentally predict-
able to rule out butterfly-effect counterfactuals, which imply that, no matter
how hard we try, itis in principle impossible to anticipate the future because
so much hinges on small causes that are beyond our measurement grasp. On
the other hand, people might allow their desire to believe that the world is
controllable to rule out “inevitability” counterfactuals, which imply that, no
matter what people do, our fates are ultimately under the sway of powerful
geopolitical, macroeconomic, and technological forces beyond individual
mastery. Indeed, this psychological need to believe in a “controllable world”
‘may lie at the heart of Kissinger’s conversion from his belief as an academic
observer in deterministic arguments that minimized policy makers’ latitude
to influence events, to his world view as a policy maker which assigned
much more prominent role to individual human beings who could be per-
suaded—through the right combination of arguments and inducements—to
‘change their minds (Chapter 3, Breslauer; Kissinger 1993).

(2) Needs to avoid blame and to claim credit: On the one hand, people
might allow their desire to avoid blame for bad outcomes to override their
desires for predictability and control. In such cases, people will argue that
they should not be blamed for having failed to foresee the unforeseeable or
having failed to control the uncontrollable. On the other hand, people might
allow the desire to claim credit for good outcomes to enhance the plau-
sibility of counterfactuals that take the form “had it not been for my superior
predictive ability and courageous willingness to act on the basis of that in-
sight, this good outcome would never have occurred.”

(3) Needs for consolation and inspiration: People might use “downward”
counterfactuals to comfort and console themselves (“Things may not be

