P1: JZP
9780521879644int       CUNY1040/Marichal         0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007        11:39




                                                        Introduction                                              5

             a fiscal submetropolis that assured the capacity of the imperial state to defend
             itself in a time of successive international conflicts.
                 But how did the Spanish crown coerce or convince its colonies to pay
             for the empire? The analysis of Bourbon tax policy in Spanish America
             provides us with a striking example of the successful rebuilding of a fis-
             cal military state without a parliamentary government. A combination of
             coercion, fiscal and administrative efficiency, and colonial pacts allowed
             for an extraordinary tax revolution in the Spanish empire. The success
             in imposing a highly extractive tax regime in Bourbon Mexico contrasts
             markedly with the failure of the British government in establishing new
             taxes in the thirteen colonies in North America after 1765. In this case, the
             European historical debate on political regimes and finance in the eighteenth
             century is turned upside down: legislatures in colonial British America
             impeded tax reforms, while in colonial Mexico absolutist policy success-
             fully rebuilt a formidable fiscal machine that financed not only the defense
             of the viceroyalty but also of other colonies of the Spanish Caribbean as
             well as the metropolis itself in a time of a succession of international
             wars.
                 Taxes, however, were not the only factor in this story. In colonial Mexico
             ordinary revenues provided much of the money required by the Bourbon
             monarchy to revitalize its defenses and yet were not sufficient to cover all the
             extraordinary expenses provoked by each new war. At the behest of Madrid,
             the viceregal administration turned increasingly to raising loans and dona-
             tions. As metropolitan deficits skyrocketed, especially from the 1790s,
             taxes were increasingly complemented with a policy of indebtedness –
             including an extraordinary succession of loans and forced contributions –
             in both metropolis and colonies, which would eventually have catastrophic
             consequences for the monarchy and empire.
                 In short, by looking from the colony toward the metropolis, we argue
             that it is possible to gain a new perspective on the complex dynamics –
             military, fiscal, and financial – of the Spanish imperial state in the successive
             wars with Britain and France between 1780 and 1810. Such an approach
             feeds into the current debate on the antecedents of globalization in one
             of the many paths suggested by A. G. Hopkins in a recent seminal study
             aimed at stimulating more comparative history.17 It also speaks to the
             need for more transatlantic history, linking the already rich historiography
             of eighteenth-century Spanish America with that of Europe and North
             America.18

             17 Anthony G. Hopkins, ed., Globalization in World History (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 2002).
             18 A recent examplar is Horst Pietschmann, ed., Atlantic History: History of the Atlantic System, 1580–
                   1830 (Gottingen, Germany: Vandehoek & Ruprecht, 2002).
