P1: JZP
9780521879644int       CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        11:39




                                                           Introduction                                               7

                 To use a metaphor, the Spanish empire may have been slumbering but
             it reawakened in the late Bourbon era. David Brading has eloquently illus-
             trated this point:
             If in the reign of Philip II, the mines of Potosı́ rescued the monarchy from
             bankruptcy and paid for Spanish hegemony in Europe, during the reign of Charles
             III, in contrast, the silver mines of New Spain provided the funds for the recon-
             struction of the Spanish navy and the resurgence of the American empire.22

                But the road to imperial recovery was paved with enormous difficul-
             ties. The wars of Spanish Succession (1702–1713) reflected the military
             decadence of the Spanish state as many European powers fought in the
             peninsula for the spoils of an ancient power. After the accession of the
             Bourbon dynasty, nonetheless, there was a gradual transition to a more
             modern and powerful military and fiscal state. The Spanish imperial
             state regained strength progressively during the eighteenth century,
             although this did not imply that – in the long run – it was able to match its
             chief competitors, in particular Great Britain, which had begun its extraor-
             dinary march forward as the first industrial power and the leading naval
             power in the world.
                Despite the naval superiority of Britain in the Atlantic, the Spanish
             empire responded and restructured during the second half of the eigh-
             teenth century and therefore retained control of most trade and military
             dominion in its extensive colonies overseas. The process of imperial reno-
             vation was driven by the fact that Spanish America continued to fulfill an
             absolutely critical function for the world economy: the viceroyalties of Peru
             and New Spain provided the bulk of silver, which served as the basis of
             the metallic currencies of virtually all countries in the world. In particular,
             the steady increase of silver production in Mexico during the eighteenth
             century contributed to its increasingly important role in the dynamics of
             world money and trade at the same time that it provided a fundamental
             stimulus to the economy of the viceroyalty and created the conditions for a
             spectacular rise in tax revenues of the colonial administration. The Bourbon
             reforms in Spanish America were a notable example of the capacity to use
             the silver boom to forge an increasingly productive and efficient tax state,
             on an imperial scale.23
                From the perspective of the comparative history of the eighteenth cen-
             tury in the Atlantic world, the present book raises a simple question: did

             22 David Brading, “Balance crı́tico,” in Oscar Mazı́n, ed., México en el mundo hispánico, vol. 2 (Mexico:
                   El Colegio Mexiquense, 2000), p. 656.
             23 This hypothesis is developed at length in the major quantitative study by R. Garner and S. E.
                   Stefanou Economic Growth and Change in Bourbon Mexico (Gainesville: University of Florida Press,
                   1993).
