P1: JZP
9780521879644int     CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7         August 23, 2007   11:39




                                                       Introduction                             9

             multiethnic territories under Spanish rule. They also provide a huge amount
             of reliable, quantitative data for the detailed study of the income and expen-
             diture of most parts of the Spanish American empire. This represents a major
             step forward in our understanding of the eighteenth-century world.

                            Atlantic Wars, Mexican Silver, and Colonial Debts
                              in the Second Half of the Eighteenth Century
             In the first chapter of this book, the principal objective is to illustrate
             the military and especially the fiscal resurgence of the Spanish empire in
             the second half of the eighteenth century. We argue that from the end of the
             Seven Years’ War (1756–1763), the finances of imperial defense in Spanish
             America depended to a great degree on Mexican silver tax remittances. We
             propose a model for analysis of the fiscal logic of imperial expenditures and
             look particularly at how they contributed to sustaining the defense of both
             Mexico and the Spanish colonies in the greater Caribbean. Special emphasis
             is placed on the description of the complex network of tax transfers from
             one colony to another – known as situados – which financed the military and
             naval infrastructure of the empire. In this sense, our study demonstrates
             how Spain increasingly shifted many of the costs of imperial defense and
             of war to Mexico, precisely as the viceroyalty experienced a great silver
             boom that allowed royal functionaries to implement a rigorous campaign
             to increase extraction of taxes. In order to facilitate estimates of the relative
             importance of the data presented, we include in the appendix at the end
             of the book basic information on the colonial monetary system and several
             key indicators of the colonial economy.
                In the second chapter we analyze the fiscal income structure of the admin-
             istration of the viceroyalty of New Spain during the decades 1760–1800.
             We extend the concept of national tax state developed by historians of
             eighteenth-century Europe and propose that, in the case of Spain and Span-
             ish America, it can be useful and appropriate to think in terms of an imperial
             tax state. Despite the vast extension of the empire, the Bourbon reforms
             allowed for the development of a relatively homogeneous fiscal administra-
             tion, particularly in the colonies. The operation of the almost one hundred
             different regional treasuries in the western hemisphere is illuminated by a
             case study of those of New Spain, the wealthiest viceroyalty. The recent and
             rich historical literature on colonial taxes provides the foundation for this
             analysis of what Herbert Klein has described as one of the most complex
             and, in many ways, efficient tax machines of the eighteenth century.26
                The emphasis in this chapter is on the anatomy of the fiscal system in the
             viceroyalty of New Spain in the final decades of colonial rule. The review

             26 H. Klein, “La economı́a de la Nueva España,” 592.
