P1: JZP
9780521879644int      CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        11:39




                                                          Introduction                                              13

                 The colonial debts taken between 1780 and 1810 constituted something
             quite different from domestic public debts and must be considered a special
             category of finance since the loans raised in New Spain were not used
             to cover deficits generated inside the viceroyalty. What took place was
             different and more complex: the metropolis transferred a part of its deficits
             to the richest colony. The Madrid government did not promise to pay
             back the loans. On the contrary, Mexican tax branches were mortgaged
             indefinitely to pay the king’s debts. The same occurred in the case of loans
             raised in other viceroyalties in Spanish America, although on a smaller
             scale – all of which can be considered examples of almost pure financial
             colonialism.
                 At the same time, it is important to keep in mind that colonial elites, led
             by privileged corporations, collaborated in all the royal financial campaigns.
             In this regard, it should be noted that the debt policies applied in the
             Spanish American empire had no counterpart in the British colonies in
             North America. In the case of the thirteen colonies, for instance, it would
             have been unthinkable for the British Parliament to demand that the
             colonists provide loans to cover deficits of the metropolis. The degree of
             power exercised by the British authorities in North America was but a
             pale shadow of the fiscal control and financial influence of the Bourbon
             administration in Spanish America.

                   Comparative Issues in Colonial Finance in the Eighteenth Century
             Exploring fiscal and financial dynamics in the colonies can help in eval-
             uating whether empires involved fiscal costs or benefits for the respective
             metropolis, and vice versa.32 However, most recent historical studies on the
             major European powers of the eighteenth century – in particular Britain
             and France – have tended to focus quite strictly on success or failure in
             domestic tax reforms and their impact on the fiscal military state. According
             to a large number of historians, for example, the success of fiscal and admin-
             istrative reforms put in place in Britain during the long century from 1688 to
             1815 was key to the military and naval preeminence of the first industrial
             nation.33 Such an approach, however, tends to leave out a significant chunk

             32 A recent comparative survey focusing on the different metropolises is Patrick O’Brien and Leandro
                Prados de la Escosura, “The Costs and Benefits of European Imperialism,” Revista de Historia Económica,
                16, 1 (1998), 29–89.
             33 The hypotheses were first advanced by P. O’Brien, “The Political Economy of British Taxation” and
                J. Brewer, The Sinews of Power. For additional studies and bibliographical references, see Lawrence
                Stone, ed., An Imperial State at War: Britain from 1689 to 1815 (London: Routledge, 1994) and
                Leandro Prados, ed., Exceptionalism and Industrialisation: Britian and Its European Rivals, 1688–1815
                (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
