P1: JZP
9780521879644int        CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007        11:39




                   10                                   Bankruptcy of Empire

                   of the trends of major tax branches raises many questions as to the relation
                   between the fiscal and the general performance of the colonial economy. To
                   obtain a more complete view of overall trends, it is recommended that the
                   reader complement our analysis with the broad historical literature on the
                   Mexican economy in the eighteenth century. While major overviews have
                   been published by such historians as John Coatsworth, Eric Van Young, and
                   particularly Richard Garner, researchers have not yet reached a consensus
                   view on the nature of economic growth in this era.27 It is clear that Mexico
                   then experienced the greatest silver boom in colonial history, but also that
                   the colonial economy modernized slowly in a period that one historian has
                   baptized the “age of paradox.”28 What our first two chapters demonstrate
                   is the enormous weight of the official extraction of silver from the economy
                   and society and the large percentage of it shipped abroad.
                       The remaining chapters are devoted to analysis of two major questions:
                   (1) How many loans and donativos (forced contributions) were raised in
                   Mexico to assist in the finance of the wars of the Spanish crown in the second
                   half of the eighteenth century? These financial instruments gave rise to a
                   steadily rising volume of colonial debts that have been seldom analyzed in
                   depth. (2) How important were the Mexican silver remittances in the wars
                   between Spain, Britain, and France in the final decades of colonial rule?
                   Silver was a crucial means of payment for armies and navies, and therefore
                   all the European powers were acutely interested in these flows of coins and
                   precious metals, the greatest amounts coming from New Spain.
                       Chapter 3 focuses on the first issue, namely the methods by which the
                   Spanish imperial administrations were able to raise an astonishing volume
                   of donations, forced loans, and interest-bearing loans in Mexico to pay for
                   successive wars in the 1780s and 1790s. Fundamental in this strategy of
                   raising loan capital for the Crown Wars was the collaboration of colonial
                   privileged corporations: wealthy merchant guilds, the silver miners, royal
                   officers, landowners, and rentiers. The loans reflected the increasing sophis-
                   tication of colonial financial markets but at the same time proved to be
                   essentially a mechanism of extraction of funds for the royal coffers rather
                   than a method of establishing a new public credit system.
                       Surprisingly, neither Spanish nor Mexican historiography has paid much
                   attention to the problem of colonial debt despite its importance. In a clas-
                   sic study of the economy of colonial Mexico in the eighteenth century,
                   Richard Garner stated: “The history of the colonial public debt remains

                   27 John Coatsworth, Los orı́genes del atraso (Mexico: Alianza Mexicana, 1990); Eric Van Young, La crisis
                      del orden colonial: Estructura agraria y rebeliones populares de la Nueva España, 1750–1821 (Mexico,
                      Alianza Mexicana, 1992); and R. Garner and S. E. Stefanou, Economic Growth and Change in Bourbon
                      Mexico.
                   28 See E. Van Young, La crisis del orden colonial, first subtitle of Chapter 1.
