P1: JZP
9780521879644c01        CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007       13:51




                   22                                   Bankruptcy of Empire

                   flowing from Veracruz to Havana and thence to Cádiz.13 By focusing on
                   the richest Spanish American colony, we propose several explanations as to
                   how the Spanish empire operated in military and fiscal terms during an age
                   of Atlantic wars and revolutions. We begin with a summary of the impact
                   of the defeats suffered by the Spanish empire in 1762 at the hands of the
                   British, which led the Bourbon state to design and adopt a vast set of new
                   strategies of overseas defense. How these were financed is the second major
                   theme of this chapter, focusing on the fiscal logic of imperial expenditures
                   and, in particular, on the key role of the situados of colonial Mexico, which
                   came to operate financially as a kind of submetropolis of the Spanish empire
                   in the last third of the eighteenth century.


                        The Military and Financial Consequences of 1762 for the Spanish
                                                Imperial State
                   The occupation in 1762 of the port cities of Havana and Manila by British
                   military forces was an event that shook the Spanish monarchy to its foun-
                   dations. For over two and a half centuries, no foreign power had seriously
                   attempted to take control of Cuba, fundamental locus of Spanish power in
                   the Caribbean and the point from which all the great armadas had arrived
                   and departed. The bulk of transatlantic Spanish American trade depended
                   on Havana as entrepôt, the key port where the flotillas of both warships
                   and private merchant vessels concentrated for the voyages in and out from
                   the western hemisphere. When British troops seized this great Caribbean
                   port city, the news spread quickly through Spanish America, provoking
                   considerable commotion. Equally, galling had been the occupation in the
                   same year by British naval forces of the port city of Manila, the key outpost
                   of the Spanish empire in Southeast Asia. Great relief was felt after the exit
                   of the British troops, following the Treaty of Paris in 1763, but clearly
                   the Spanish crown (and its ally France) had suffered a major setback in the
                   international power struggle.
                      The effectiveness of the contemporary British military machine was
                   based on its notable amphibious capabilities. From early in the eighteenth
                   century the British Navy had outdistanced all competitors in number of
                   ships, firepower, and skill of officers and mariners.14 In addition, it had the
                   faculty of being able to transport large numbers of troops to attack rival

                   13 This was an expression frequently found in contemporary Spanish documents and reports.
                   14 See two recent overviews: Patrick K. O’Brien, “Fiscal Exceptionalism: Great Britain and Its European
                      Rivals from Civil War to Triumph at Trafalgar and Waterloo,” London School of Economics, Work-
                      ing Paper No. 65/01, 2001 and Daniel A. Baugh, “Naval Power: What Gave the British Navy
                      Superiority?” in Leandro Prados, ed., Exceptionalism and Industrialisation: Britain and Its European
                      Rivals, 1688–1815 (Cambridge, U.K., Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. 235–257.
