P1: JZP
9780521879644c01     CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        13:51




                                           Resurgence of the Spanish Empire                                        19

             administrations. To cover their considerable and regular deficits, the latter
             were obliged to rely on remittances of silver from other parts of the empire,
             and most particularly from New Spain. The transfers of tax silver from rich
             to poor colonies were known as situados, a term which usually referred to
             monies dispatched to cover the expenses of military or naval garrisons in
             different parts of the empire. The complex network of these tax transfers
             was one of the great fiscal secrets of the longevity of the Spanish empire
             in the Americas since the metropolis did not have to cover most overseas
             defense expenses as they were financed by the silver-rich colonies.
                The fact that colonial Mexico did count upon a plethora of fiscal income
             placed it in a special position within the global structure of Spanish imperial
             finance – as was also the case of the viceroyalty of Peru.10 From the mid-
             sixteenth century, the chief officers of the royal treasuries of New Spain and
             Peru had been instructed by the Crown to send surplus funds abroad, in
             part to the metropolis and in part to military and naval garrisons in the
             rest of the hemisphere that were of strategic importance to the Crown but
             had insufficient funds for all their defense expenses. Both viceroyalties thus
             fulfilled the role of fiscal submetropolis. As Herbert Klein has demonstrated in
             a magnificent study, Peru was the leader in exporting silver revenues during
             the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, while Mexico came to
             exercise a dominant role during the eighteenth century.11
                During the years 1720–1800 there was a notable increase in current
             values of the remittances by the royal treasuries of colonial Mexico to both
             Spain and military garrisons in the greater Caribbean. The funds were
             collected in numerous tax districts throughout the viceroyalty and sent to
             Mexico City, whence the bags of silver pesos were transported by mule to
             Veracruz, to be shipped abroad. Until 1740 these situados did not usually
             exceed two million pesos per annum, but subsequently they increased as a
             result of the outbreak of wars, which impelled a surge of financial demands
             for the defense of the Spanish empire. The preeminence of New Spain as fiscal
             bulwark of the empire was reinforced after the Seven Years’ War (1756–
             1763), as can be observed in Figure 1.1 and in the Appendix, Table I.I

            10 The extraordinary fiscal series collected by Klein and Tepaske for the viceroyalties of New Spain,
               Peru, and Buenos Aires can be consulted in Excell format at the database “Estadı́sticas Históricas
               de México” in the general Web site of El Colegio de Mexico, www.colmex.mx, where a link will be
               found in “Biblioteca” under “Bases de datos” from July, 2007.
            11 The classic study is Herbert Klein, “El gran viraje: ascenso de México y decadencia de Perú en
               el imperio colonial de la América colonial, 1609–1808” in Herbert Klein, Las finanzas americanas
               del imperio español (Mexico: Instituto de Investigaciones “Dr. José Marı́a Luis Mora,”/Universidad
               Autónoma Metropolitana, 1995), pp. 133–162. Also see Hebert S. Klein, “Origin and Volume of
               Remission of Royal Tax Revenues from the Viceroyalties of Peru and New Spain,” in Antonio Miguel
               Bernal, ed., Dinero, moneda y crédito en la monarquı́a hispánica (Madrid: Fundación ICO/Marcial Pons,
               2000), pp. 269–292.
