P1: JZP
9780521879644int        CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007        11:39




                   14                                   Bankruptcy of Empire

                   of history, considering that Britain had an extensive, if quite scattered,
                   empire. Similarly, French historiography has devoted insufficient attention
                   to the costs of colonial wars in the gradual weakening of the finances of the
                   absolute monarchy during the second half of the eighteenth century.
                       Our study suggests that it may prove useful to add a colonial dimension to
                   this debate, developing comparative studies of the colonial finance of Spain,
                   Britain, and France in the eighteenth century. One clear contrast was the
                   difference in tax reforms in the American colonies. British authorities faced
                   stiff opposition to new taxes in the thirteen colonies in North America and
                   to the expansion of the royal army forces there. As a result, the defense
                   of empire in North America proved to be a fiscal and political burden for
                   Britain in the 1760s and 1770s.34 In contrast, the Spanish monarchy –
                   a major imperial rival of Britain in the western hemisphere – did not have
                   to expend funds for overseas defenses, as these were paid for almost entirely
                   by colonial administrations in Spanish America. Modern historical research
                   demonstrates that the tax burden was, in fact, much lighter in the Anglo-
                   American colonies: colonial Mexicans paid perhaps ten times more per capita
                   than taxpayers in the thirteen colonies.35 Nonetheless, and paradoxically,
                   it was in the lightly taxed Anglo-American colonies that independence
                   would triumph first, whereas in Spanish America the royal administra-
                   tion applied increasing fiscal and financial pressures until the critical year
                   of 1810.
                       But what was the fiscal situation of colonies in other regions at the
                   end of the eighteenth century? The questions are numerous, and most are
                   still unanswered. How costly were the British colonies in the West Indies?
                   Did they pay their way? Similarly, one may ask: how was the colonial
                   administration financed in Canada in this period? Michael Bordo and Angela
                   Redish have provided some recent answers, but many other questions remain
                   open.36 And, finally, how fiscally profitable was British India as a colony in

                   34 Nonetheless, explaining the success of this tax rebellion presents a challenge to current historical
                      interpretations, which have drawn attention to the notable domestic success of the government in
                      Britain in constructing a strong fiscal/military state during the eighteenth century. Major studies
                      by J. Brewer, The Sinews of Power and P. O’Brien, “The Political Economy of British Taxation” do
                      not fully explain social response to taxation nor do they explore the contrast with the tax revolt in
                      the United States.
                   35 The first historian to propose comparative studies in this realm was John Coatsworth, “Obstacles
                      to Economic Growth in Nineteenth Century Mexico,” American Historical Review, 83, 1 (1978),
                      80–100. Coatsworth used as one of his sources Robert Paul Thomas, “A Quantitative Approach to
                      the Study of the Effects of British Imperial Policy upon Colonial Welfare,” The Journal of Economic
                      History, 25, 4 (1965), 615–638, which provides some estimates for comparative analysis. For further
                      details see our estimates in Chapter 2 of this book.
                   36 Michael D. Bordo and Angela Redish, “The Legacy of French and English Fiscal and Monetary
                      Institutions for Canada,” in Michael D. Bordo and Roberto Cortes Conde, eds., Transferring Wealth
