P1: JZP
9780521879644c01       CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007        13:51




                                                                    1
                         Resurgence of the Spanish Empire: Bourbon
                           Mexico as Submetropolis, 1763–1800



                   When the great explorer and scientist Alexander von Humboldt visited
                   colonial Mexico in 1803, he was witness to one of the final and most bril-
                   liant periods in the history of the viceroyalty. Eloquent proof could be found
                   in the capital of Mexico which, with its more than 100,000 inhabitants,
                   was the largest city in the western hemisphere. It was also one of the most
                   prosperous to be judged by its many magnificent palaces, by the display
                   of luxurious carriages along its broad avenues, by the great number of
                   mercantile establishments, and by the activity of its popular markets. The
                   heart of political, financial, and social life revolved around the royal palace,
                   cathedral, and stores in the main square known as the zocalo. In the palace
                   were the grand offices of the viceroy of New Spain and of many high-level
                   functionaries, and there they received the members of the privileged cor-
                   porations of colonial society: the ancient and venerable merchant guild, the
                   miner’s association, the great landowners, the church prelates, and military
                   officers. But in late afternoons and evenings, the palace was also seat to a
                   number of social events, including games of gambling.
                      Behind the royal palace, there was a large building with patio which also
                   had enormous economic and political importance: the royal mint. In his
                   classic work, Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain, Humboldt noted
                   that it was the greatest and richest mint in the world, and added:
                   It is impossible to visit this building . . . without recalling that from it have come
                   more than two billion silver pesos in the space of less than three hundred years
                   and without reflecting on the powerful influence these treasures have had on the
                   destiny of the peoples of Europe.1
                   The well-informed German scientist emphasized the fundamental con-
                   tribution of Mexican silver to the sustenance of the Spanish empire as a
                   whole, providing large annual tax subsidies in silver to the Spanish colonies

                   1 Humboldt actually used the expression “two thousand million pesos”: see Alexander von Humboldt,
                     Ensayo polı́tico sobre el reino de la Nueva España (Mexico: Ed. Porrúa, 1991), p. 457. The work was
                     originally published in Paris in 1809 and a more complete edition in 1811.


                                                                    16
