P1: JZP
9780521879644c01        CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        13:51




                   30                                    Bankruptcy of Empire

                       In any case, it is clear that the dynamics and logic of expenditure of
                   funds in Spanish America were based on a secular three-tiered system of
                   management of imperial finance. This system can be defined in terms of the
                   operation of basic principles that explain the disbursement of public monies
                   as well as the logic of expenditures of the multiple treasuries of the empire.
                   A first, basic and secular principle of imperial finance (applied since the
                   sixteenth century) was that the largest number of expenses should be covered
                   in situ with the tax income collected on a regional level and accumulated in a
                   local caja real (treasury).37 However, when a local treasury district produced a
                   fiscal surplus, part of this money would be transferred to another tax district
                   which had a deficit or, alternatively, to one of the principal treasuries of the
                   respective viceroyalty. These remittances, nonetheless, were not necessarily
                   limited to the viceroyalty itself; they frequently were also shipped abroad
                   to different points of the empire, as we will see.
                       In the case of New Spain, we can observe the dynamics of this tridimen-
                   sional fiscal system in the transferences regularly realized (in the late eigh-
                   teenth century) among the different twenty-four regional treasury offices of
                   the viceroyalty, in most cases to cover military expenditures. For example,
                   certain regional treasuries such as that of Veracruz and Yucatán (that reg-
                   ularly accumulated fiscal surpluses) were responsible for the payment of a
                   substantial part of military expenses of districts that had scarce tax income
                   such as Campeche, located in the Gulf of Mexico, which had an important
                   military and naval garrison. Similarly, the revenue-poor military forts and
                   garrisons (presidios) of northern Mexico depended heavily on the remittances
                   of funds collected by the more proximate regional treasuries of Guadalajara
                   and Bolaños that accumulated a regular surplus of funds from taxes on local
                   silver production as well as on trade.
                       A second level of expenditures were the transfer of surplus fiscal funds
                   from one colony to another which were known as situados, those from New
                   Spain being directed principally to the Greater Caribbean, including Cuba,
                   Santo Domingo, Puerto Rico, Florida, Louisiana, and Trinidad. These con-
                   stituted a broad network of tax transfers between the different colonies, the
                   quantitative importance of which suggests that historians should rethink
                   many fundamental aspects of the way that imperial finance operated in
                   Spanish America.38 In addition, it should be noted that the viceroyalty of

                   37 José Patricio Merino Navarro, Las cuentas de la administración central española, 1750–1820 (Madrid:
                      Instituto de Estudios Fiscales, 1987), pp. 11–28 offers a preliminary outline of the operating prin-
                      ciples of the Spanish Treasury administration.
                   38 In the latter half of the eighteenth century, New Spain covered approximately 75% of the costs
                      of administrative and military costs of the government of Cuba and a large portion of the other
                      Caribbean colonies mentioned. For information and estimates, see C. Marichal and M. Souto, “Silver
                      and Situados” and C. Marichal, La bancarrota del virreinato (1999), Chapter 1.
