P1: JZP
9780521879644c01      CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                      August 23, 2007         13:51




                                             Resurgence of the Spanish Empire                                            29

             took charge of the military salaries of rapidly growing armies and militias
             in the western hemisphere, of the finance and building of the numerous
             great and small fortresses, and of the construction of close to half of the
             warships of Spanish royal Navy. In addition, they provided victualling of
             the Spanish warships in American waters, which included provisioning
             of ships in the greater Caribbean, in the River Plate, as well as the few
             warships on the Pacific coast and the famous Manila galleon that yearly
             crossed the largest ocean in the world. In order to understand how these
             vast requirements were financed, it is essential to focus attention on the
             vast network of interimperial fiscal transfers. In the section that follows,
             particular attention will be focused on the contributions of the richest tax
             colony – the viceroyalty of New Spain – to the defense of the Spanish empire.


                                   The Fiscal Logic of Imperial Expenditures
             The fiscal and military system of the Spanish empire in the Americas was
             older, quite different, and more complex than that of its imperial rivals.
             This vast imperial organization had its fulcrum in Spain, yet it spanned
             a great part of the western hemisphere as well as the Philippines and was
             based to a large degree on a complex network of tax transfers between the
             different treasuries of the different viceroyalties and captaincy generals. But
             how centralized was the fiscal administration in the empire? This is a hotly
             debated issue among historians today with a confrontation between two
             points of view. On the one hand, there is a traditional view that emphasizes
             the success of the Bourbon monarchy in establishing a professional fiscal
             bureaucracy, a modern accounting system, and an increasingly centralized
             tax machinery.35 On the other, there is a growing school of historians who
             emphasize the active role of local elites in the control of transfers of silver
             taxes from one treasury to another and in management of supply contracts
             derived from much local expenditure in the military sphere.36

            35 L. Jáuregui, La Real Hacienda de Nueva España; C. Marichal, La bancarrota del virreinato (1999),
               Chapter 2; Linda Arnold, Burocracia y burócratas en México, 1742–1835 (Mexico: Grijalbo/Consejo
               Nacional para la Cultura y las Artes, 1991).
            36 Alexandra Irigoin has argued: “Thus, private merchants largely ran the system and made handsome
               profits out of it. . . . But funds were also employed in various other purposes, in addition to the
               expected naval and military defence.36 These ranged from funding shipbuilding or tobacco purchases
               in Cuba, to the support of religious missions or colonisation ventures in other islands, to stipends for
               clergy and civil officials”: Alexandra Irigoin, “Bargaining for Absolutism: A Spanish Path to Nation
               State and Empire Building,” unpublished manuscript, October 2005, p. 16. Similar arguments
               have been advanced forcefully by Pedro Pérez Herrero, “Los beneficiarios del reformismo borbónico:
               metrópoli versus élites novohispanas,” Historia Mexicana, xii, 2 [162] (1991), 207–264 and by Allan
               Kuethe and Juan Marchena F., eds., Soldados del Rey. El ejército borbónico en América colonial en vı́speras
               de la Independencia (Castellon: Universitat Jaume I, Colección América, 2005).
