P1: JZP
9780521879644c01      CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                     August 23, 2007          13:51




                                             Resurgence of the Spanish Empire                                          25

             the costs were covered unequally. Those tax districts which produced most
             revenue – especially those in New Spain and upper Peru – were forced
             to cover deficits in other regions of the empire, ostensibly for military
             defense.22

                     Bourbon Reforms and Grand Strategies of Imperial Defense
             One of the most astonishing facts of imperial rule in the Americas was
             that for over two centuries the Spanish monarchy had not been obliged to
             cover major land expenses for the defense of its many colonies. The noted
             historian John Parry argued in a series of classic works that prior to 1760s
             the Spanish royal administration kept remarkably small military forces in
             the western hemisphere.23 Subsequent research has demonstrated that the
             reinforcement of army forces began in the first half of the eighteenth century,
             but it is abundantly clear that the reforms adopted after 1763 were crucial
             in the establishment of a much larger military establishment throughout
             the colonies. Equally striking was the fact that most defense expenses were
             covered by local treasuries.
                 The army and navy buildup had begun in the metropolis in the 1760s
             but was promptly applied in Spanish America. The new military policies
             were based on a three-pronged strategy: (1) building colonial armies and
             militias, (2) rebuilding the Spanish naval forces, and (3) strengthening a
             great number of military fortresses in the Caribbean and, to a lesser degree,
             in South America. The emphasis clearly was on defense against attacks by
             the British Navy and/or possible invasions of key ports by British troops.
             Practically all these expenses were financed with colonial taxes: in the greater
             Caribbean, mostly with Mexican silver remittances while in South America,
             most were financed with fiscal funds from upper Peru.
                 The main objectives of the military reforms in Spanish America were
             designed by a secret committee of imperial defense, appointed by the
             monarch, Charles III, meeting in Madrid on a regular basis during late
             1763 and early 1764 until they came up with a general plan. One of the
             first measures adopted was to send General Alejandro O’Reilly to Cuba to

               is reviewed in Alfredo Casillero Calvo and Allan Kuethe, eds., Historia General de América Latina,
               vol. 3 (Paris: UNESCO, 2000).
            22 The royal treasuries at Lima and Potosi produced tax surplus that was remitted to cover external
               military expenditures, mainly in Chile and Buenos Aires. Treasuries in New Granada helped finance
               military and naval garrisons at Cartagena. See Herbert S. Klein and John TePaske, Las cajas reales de
               la real hacienda de la América española (siglos xvi a principios del xix) CD (Mexico: Asociación Mexicana
               de Historia Económica/El Colegio de México, 2004).
            23 Parry wrote: “It is curious that the Spanish Indies – reputedly so rich, so envied, so repeatedly
               attacked – possessed, until the Seven Years War, no standing army.” John Parry, The Spanish Seaborne
               Empire (New York: A Knopf, 1966), p. 325.
