P1: JZP
9780521879644c01        CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007         13:51




                   28                                    Bankruptcy of Empire

                   been slow to recognize the simultaneous and surprising renovation of the
                   Spanish Navy. However, the recent monumental study by Jan Grete has
                   forcefully demonstrated that, already quite early in the eighteenth century,
                   the Spanish naval forces became the third most important in the world, after
                   those of Great Britain and France. The maritime contest for world power
                   intensified from the 1740s onward as both France and Spain pushed forward
                   with new construction of warships and frigates. Although the Seven Years’
                   War led to major defeats at sea for both Bourbon monarchies, this did not
                   discourage them. The Bourbon allies were bent on establishing parity with
                   their more vigorous, naval rival, Great Britain. As a result, the French and
                   the Spanish governments plowed enormous amounts of money into warship
                   construction during the last four decades of the eighteenth century.31
                      In the case of metropolitan Spain the three naval ports of Cartagena,
                   Ferrol, and Cádiz were sites of construction of a large number of warships,
                   particularly in the second half of the century.32 But, the most important
                   naval shipbuilding arsenal was, in fact, that of Havana, where there were
                   built a grand total of 114 ships for the Spanish Navy during the eighteenth
                   century, including fifty-four warships as well as sixteen frigates and many
                   smaller armed vessels. The Havana-built warships carried a total of 3,642
                   cannon and the frigates 684 cannon, altogether a formidable force.33 The
                   enormously expensive naval construction program in Cuba, however, was
                   not financed from Spain but mainly from colonial Mexico. A review of
                   imperial finance demonstrates that it was New Spain that financed the bulk
                   of construction of the great warships built in Cuba during the century by
                   sending large annual silver subsidies to Havana as well as basic provisions.34
                      All these military projects – army, navy, and fortresses – were extremely
                   costly and required the financial support that only a strong tax state could
                   provide. The tax reforms (which financed the military buildup) are analyzed
                   in detail in the next chapter, but here we wish to reiterate that the greater
                   part of military and naval expenditures for the defense of empire was covered
                   by the colonies themselves. Metropolitan Spain did not have to finance more
                   than a fraction of the expenses in the Americas. The colonial administrations

                   31 For data on construction of warships, see numerous charts in J. Glete, Navies and Nations, vol. 2.
                   32 The essential study on building of warships in Spain is José Patricio Merino Navarro, La armada
                      española en el siglo XVIII (Madrid: Fundación Universitaria Española, 1981) but, unfortunately, this
                      work provides no information on the Havana naval arsenal.
                   33 The detailed notes by J. S. Thrasher provide the information on each of the ships built in Havana.
                      These notes are found in Alejandro von Humboldt, Ensayo polı́tico sobre la isla de Cuba (Havana: Archivo
                      Nacional de Cuba, 1960), pp. 114–117. J. S. Thrasher was translator into English of Humboldt’s
                      essay that was published in New York in 1856.
                   34 A recent study is Andrade Muñoz, “La búsqueda española de suministros, vı́veres y pertrechos navales
                      en Nueva España (siglo XVIII). Los intereses coloniales frente a los problemas imperiales,” Master’s
                      thesis, Instituto Mora, Mexico, 2002.
