P1: JZP
9780521879644c01     CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007         13:51




                                            Resurgence of the Spanish Empire                                        43

                The contribution that these remittances represented for the overall war
             effort of the Spanish crown can only be judged indirectly, but their impor-
             tance is manifest. This financial subsidy was worth over 750 million reales
             (one silver peso was equal to twenty reales de vellón, the monetary unit
             most used in the treasury accounts in Spain). This was an extraordinary
             sum for the period if we consider that it was equivalent to twice the annual
             peacetime defense expenditures of the metropolitan treasury at Madrid.73
                A difficult problem is to find out exactly how these monies were spent
             since only a part remained in Cuba while the rest was remitted for var-
             ious military operations throughout the greater Caribbean. It should be
             noted, however, that the majority of the funds went to finance three types
             of military expenditures: (1) the expeditionary army under the command of
             Bernardo Gálvez, the headquarters of which was at Havana, but operated in
             the Floridas and Louisiana; (2) the Armada, under the direction of Admiral
             José Solano, that carried out various naval operations against the British
             throughout the greater Caribbean; and (3) the military garrisons in Cuba,
             headed by Captain-General Juan Manuel Cacigal, which included thou-
             sands of Spanish, Cuban, and Mexican troops. While there are a number of
             historical studies that analyze aspects of the military campaigns undertaken
             by these forces, there are only a few studies of the precise disbursement of
             funds.74
                The financial documents generated by the war are abundant but dispersed
             and are sometimes contradictory. The official correspondence of the viceroys
             in the Mexican archives includes the confidential reports sent by Viceroy
             Martı́n de Mayorga to the Minister of Indies José de Gálvez including
             much information on the silver remittances sent to Havana on Spanish
             warships. Mayorga frequently complained that the Cuban functionaries
             rarely acknowledged receipt of the shipments and that he therefore had
             insufficient information on effective disbursements in the island; he even
             went so far as to suggest to Gálvez that he believed that important sums

               J. Lewis, “New Spain during American Revolution,” 146 are from AGN, Hacienda, vol. 395, exp.
               7. Despite being derived from different archival sources, these figures also agree with those in the
               treasury summaries of Veracruz, published by Klein and TePaske: the total amount registered as
               leaving Veracruz for Havana between 1779 and 1783 is 37.8 million pesos. See Veracruz data in J.
               TePaske and H. Klein, Ingresos y egresos de la Real Hacienda: these can be consulted in Excell format
               at the database “Estadı́sticas Históricas de México” in the Web site of El Colegio de Mexico, www.
               colmex.mx, where a link will be found in “Biblioteca” under “Bases de datos” from July, 2007.
            73 This estimate is based on the exchange rate of 20 reales vellón to each silver peso. For comparative
               financial data on metropolitan finance, see Pedro Tedde, Polı́tica financiera y polı́tica commercial en
               el reinado Carlos III, Actas del Congreso Internacional sobre Carlos III y la Ilustración (Madrid:
               Ministerio de Cultura, 1989), vol. 2, p. 143.
            74 An exception is Johanna von Grafenstein Gareis, Nueva España en el Circuncaribe, 1779–1808: rev-
               olución, competencia imperial y vı́nculos intercoloniales (Mexico: UNAM, 1997), which provides excellent
               data. Also very useful is J. A. Lewis, “New Spain during the American Revolution,” pp. 130–159.
