P1: JZP
9780521879644c01        CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                      August 23, 2007          13:51




                   36                                       Bankruptcy of Empire

                   most important in the period under consideration, we now turn our atten-
                   tion specifically to the analysis of the problems associated with the financial
                   transfers by the royal treasury at Veracruz for the sustenance of the civil and
                   military administrations in Cuba, Santo Domingo, Puerto Rico, Florida,
                   Louisiana, and several other Spanish colonies in the Antilles.51 A brief
                   review of the origins of the military objectives of this kind of intraimperial
                   remittances is followed by summary analysis of the volume of remittances
                   to the different colonial territories. We underline the importance of the
                   financial transfers in times of international war, in particular the huge con-
                   tribution of the royal treasuries of Mexico and Veracruz to cover the costs of
                   the military operations conducted by the Spanish crown in the years 1779–
                   1783 against Great Britain throughout the greater Caribbean – including
                   Florida and Louisiana – precisely as the war of independence of the thirteen
                   colonies reached its apogee.


                                  Imperial Expenses Covered by the Mexican Situados
                   Military expenditures were the principal items financed by the situados,
                   although they were not the only ones. The payment of salaries of troops
                   and officers (infantry and artillery) stationed in the different garrisons and
                   the costs of fortifications in the principal ports and of the various naval
                   squadrons absorbed a large volume of funds, which tended to rise through
                   most of the eighteenth century.
                       The strategic importance of these fiscal transfers in sustaining the naval
                   “life-lines” of the empire in the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico can
                   be judged by their contribution to the costly reinforcement of the great
                   fortifications of Havana, Cartagena, San Juan, and Veracruz,52 as well as in
                   the maintenance of the ships of the royal Armada (when on mission in the
                   region) and the expenses of the Havana shipyards. While the construction
                   of ships at the Cuban capital was financed mainly with the royal remittances

                      Duke University Press, 1983), pp. 425–445; Juan Marchena Fernández, “La financiación militar en
                      Indias: introducción a su estudio,” Anuario de Estudios Americanos, 36 (1979), 93–110; and Juan
                      Marchena Fernández, “Financiación militar y situados,” in Temas de historia militar, Ponencias del 2o.
                      Congreso de Historia Militar, vol. 1 (Madrid: Servicio de Publicaciones del EME, 1988) (Colección
                      Adalid), pp. 263–307.
                   51 To determine the levels of remittances on account of the royal treasury from New Spain to Spain
                      and to the American situados, we consider that the series from the “real caja” of Veracruz are the
                      fundamental and most complete source of data. We follow here J. J. TePaske in his essays “New
                      World Silver” and “The Financial Disintegration.”
                   52 A description of the fortifications constructed during the colonial period can be found in J. A.
                      Calderón Quijano, Las fortificaciones españolas. Also by the same author: Historia de las fortificaciones de
                      Nueva España (Seville: Escuela de Estudios Hispanoamericanos, 1953).
