P1: JZP
9780521879644c01      CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007   13:51




                                             Resurgence of the Spanish Empire                                 47

             of Mexican silver. This suggests that it is necessary to revise the hypotheses
             of researchers such as historian Pedro Tedde who has argued that the Spanish
             financial success in the 1780s (in striking contrast to the financial failure
             of its ally France) was due to the ability of the government of Charles III in
             covering steeply rising wartime expenditures by intelligent handling of the
             debt policy of the Spanish monarchy.82 Our analysis, however, indicates that
             such an argument – focusing almost exclusively on the metropolis – tends
             to leave the contributions of colonial Mexico largely out of the picture and
             therefore makes it virtually impossible to understand the complex course
             of imperial finance. The fact is that the bulk of the war expenses in the
             Caribbean and North America were not covered with funds from Spain,
             but by Mexican silver.
                 Both during the war and after the conclusion of hostilities, the remit-
             tances of silver – raised by taxes and loans in Spanish America – proved
             to be essential pillars of the fiscal and debt policies of the administration
             of Charles III as well as of his son Charles IV, who became monarch in
             1789. In the last years of the eighteenth century, however, as war became
             an almost permanent state of affair, large military deficits became a charac-
             teristic feature of royal finance. The Bourbon monarchy therefore required
             more and more money to pay army and navy as well as to cover service on
             the ballooning public debt. As a result, the fiscal and financial demands
             of the metropolis upon the Spanish American colonies and, in particular,
             upon Mexico increased dramatically. In the chapters that follow, we focus,
             first, on the analysis of the colonial tax system that provided the greatest
             volume of revenues for the empire and, secondly, on the increasing number
             and complexity of colonial loans for the metropolitan government.

            82 P. Tedde, Polı́tica financiera y polı́tica comercial, pp. 139–217.
