P1: JZP
9780521879644c02        CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007    12:27




                   52                                   Bankruptcy of Empire

                   Arnold, among others, illustrate the increasingly professional character of
                   the colonial fiscal administration – branch by branch – transforming it into
                   a complex and highly structured state apparatus.
                      But to collect more taxes without generating major protests, it was not
                   enough to have a more professional and more rigorous bureaucracy. As we
                   have already mentioned, in the viceroyalties of Peru and New Granada, royal
                   officials initially provoked extreme reactions by tens of thousands of irate,
                   mostly poor taxpayers, although eventually the new taxes were put in place.
                   In New Spain, on the other hand, royal functionaries were more careful in
                   dealing with the privileged corporations that characterized the colonial
                   ancien regime. They negotiated specific terms of fiscal innovations with the
                   great miners and merchants as well as the church – and after 1770 managed
                   to avoid major conflicts with the artisan guilds and the Indian peasant
                   communities (known as repúblicas de indios). Historian Alejandra Irigoin has
                   argued in this regard: “In a political system in which the underlying nature
                   of the relationship between the crown and its subjects was understood to
                   be one of consensus, negotiation was a necessary and continuous process.”16
                   Nonetheless, negotiation was also accompanied by coercion and rigor as
                   applied by the Bourbon colonial administrations to all taxpayers, whether
                   Indian peasants or wealthy silver miners.
                      From a geopolitical perspective, it is clear that the colonial fiscal regime
                   had a differential impact in the various regions of Spanish America, as we
                   have already suggested in our analysis of tax transfers: for example, the
                   silver-rich colonies tended to subsidize other colonies that benefited from
                   the considerable transfers of funds. But overall, the fiscal statistics suggest
                   a general rise of government income as a result of the introduction of new
                   taxes and fiscal monopolies in all the viceroyalties, New Spain, Peru, New
                   Granada, and the Rı́o de la Plata, as well as in the captaincy generals of
                   Chile, Venezuela, Guatemala, and Cuba, particularly during the reign of
                   Charles III.

                           Tax Reforms and the Construction of an Imperial Tax State
                   The historical reconstruction of royal income in the different regions of colo-
                   nial Spanish America has advanced leaps and bounds in the last two decades.
                   The statistical sources collected by Herbert Klein and John TePaske and
                   other historians provide basic guidelines. The detailed series of tax receipts
                   in almost one hundred royal treasuries in Spanish America demonstrate a
                   rising trend from mid-eighteenth century onward. In the early 1780s, there
                   was a temporary drop in tax income in much of the empire as a result of

                   16 Alejandra Irigoin, “Bargaining for Absolutism: A Spanish Path to Nation State and Empire Build-
                      ing,” forthcoming in the Hispanic American Historical Review.
