P1: JZP
9780521879644c02      CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        12:27




                                                     Imperial Tax State                                            49

             catalysts of revolution and of the war of independence (1776–1783) by the
             new United States, according to most standard historical interpretations.
                 The protests and political conflicts provoked by imperial taxes in the
             thirteen colonies were not unique. In Spanish America, tax reforms intro-
             duced from the 1760s also spurred a series of popular revolts, some of which
             eventually became major social and political rebellions. In Mexico, a series
             of localized protests were repressed quickly and bloodily: over 80 men were
             executed by royal officials in the late 1760s and many hundreds deported or
             imprisoned and forced to do hard labor for life.5 In Peru and New Granada,
             resistance to fiscal reforms translated into massive mobilizations and the for-
             mation of informal armies that threatened colonial rule in both viceroyalties
             during the years 1780–1782. In Peru the repression of these movements led
             to imprisonment and execution of thousands of peasant Indians, who had
             risen in arms to follow their leaders Tupac Amaru and Tupac Catari. In New
             Granada, in contrast, church officials were able to negotiate a settlement
             with the rebels, known as comuneros, avoiding the fall of Bogotá by means
             of a series of political and fiscal concessions.
                 Tax revolts in Spanish America, however, did not lead to independence as
             in the emerging United States, and the viceroyalties remained under control
             of the Spanish monarchy for almost another half century. In this sense, the
             Spanish empire in the western hemisphere proved surprisingly durable.
             Clearly, the persistence of the colonial regime implied high fiscal, political,
             and economic costs for the inhabitants of Mexico, Peru, New Granada,
             Chile, Buenos Aires, Venezuela, and the other territories under the sway of
             the Catholic monarchy. The most striking contrast that can be established
             is that between the fiscal costs covered by the Spanish colonies and the
             thirteen colonies in British America: already by 1770, colonial Mexico alone
             provided the vicerregal administration with three times more tax funds
             than did all thirteen colonies to their British administrations. Historians
             have reconstructed the tax trends in Spanish America in the eighteenth
             century but have not yet adequately explained how the Crown was able to
             extract increasing amounts from their subjects. Fiscal coercion was certainly
             a necessary factor but not a sufficient one. At the same time, there is no doubt
             that social elites and corporations, such as the church and merchant guilds,
             benefited from the stability and prosperity of the colonial administration
             from which they derived secular economic privileges and control over official
             appointments. Indeed, whether one looks to the monarchy or to colonial
             elites, it would appear that the introduction of new taxes, a more rigorous
             state administration, and the expansion of colonial armies during the second

             5 For details on tax revolts and repression in Mexico in the 1760s, see Felipe Castro Gutiérrez, Nueva
               ley y nuevo rey: reformas borbónicas y rebelión popular en Nueva España (Zamora, Mich.: El Colegio de
               Michoacán, 1996).
