P1: JZP
9780521879644c02        CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        12:27




                   60                                    Bankruptcy of Empire

                   to be more consistent, particularly after the mid-eighteenth century when
                   the farming out of taxes was eliminated. Nonetheless, there were marked
                   differences in the productivity of diverse taxes according to each region of
                   Mexico. Hence, the only adequate method to understand the functioning
                   of the colonial fiscal system is to review the productivity of different tax
                   branches overall and then to do so on a regional basis.
                      One important propertied sector that had to pay direct taxes was that
                   composed by the owners of silver mines. The tax rates on silver production
                   had fallen from 20 percent in the sixteenth century to 10 percent in the
                   eighteenth century, but still represented a most significant portion of royal
                   revenues in Mexico. While the direct tax on mine production (known as the
                   mining diezmo) was the single most important item among the varied list of
                   exactions that fell upon silver, a close runner-up was income derived from
                   seignoriage, as shown by the data on minting revenues (amonedación de oro y
                   plata). (See Table 2.1.) Additional income was derived from the sale of the
                   products of the state-owned mercury monopoly, an essential ingredient for
                   colonial silver refining processes, but the bulk of the income thus generated
                   could not be disposed of by the local treasuries: it was shipped off to Spain to
                   buy more mercury. The net annual revenues obtained from mining taxes –
                   directly and indirectly – approached four million pesos in the 1790s, approx-
                   imately a fourth of total net income of the viceregal government.36 (See
                   Figure 2.1.)
                      The mining guild fought for some reductions and exemptions, but these
                   were established only in some regions. Most significant was the struggle
                   by the corporation of silver miners (known as the Tribunal de Minerı́a) to
                   obtain preferential prices on mercury, which was a state monopoly. Regular
                   shipments of mercury from the Almaden mines of Spain were indispens-
                   able for an efficient process of silver refining. Throughout the eighteenth
                   century, silver miners fought to obtain more and cheaper supplies and in
                   this they were largely successful: as economic historian Rafael Dobado has
                   demonstrated, the extraordinary boom in silver mining in Bourbon Mexico
                   was closely correlated with the rise in imports of mercury supplies.37
                      Richard Garner has demonstrated that the increase of silver production –
                   as measured by the data of the Mexico City mint – approached 1.3 percent
                   a year during the eighteenth century, a figure superior to all other economic

                   36 These calculations are higher than the relevant percentages offered by Klein (1995), but it should
                      be noted that Klein did not use consolidated accounts nor did he discount costs of fiscal adminis-
                      tration nor does he take into account seignorage of the mint. Our source is Memoria instructive del
                      estado comparativo de los productos de la Real Hacienda (México, 1813), Biblioteca Nacional (Mexico),
                      ms. 1282.
                   37 Rafael Dobado González, “El trabajo en las minas de Almadén, 1750–1855,” Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
                      sidad Complutense de Madrid, 1989, 2 vols.
