P1: JZP
9780521879644c02        CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        12:27




                   56                                     Bankruptcy of Empire

                   and tax instruments aimed at increasing revenues. Gálvez also proceeded
                   to eliminate most tax farming in the viceroyalty, particularly that exercised
                   by the powerful Mexico City Merchant Guild, which had become accus-
                   tomed to administrating extremely profitable contracts for the collection of
                   sales taxes (alcabalas) throughout the viceroyalty. The result of greater state
                   control was to generate a great increase in the revenues generated by these
                   indirect taxes, which were collected in every rural and urban market in the
                   viceroyalty.
                      At the same time, Gálvez and a generation of high-level functionaries
                   of the Spanish monarchy pressed for the establishment of a larger, more
                   hierarchical, and professional fiscal administration.25 This was not a unique
                   trend. As John Brewer has demonstrated in the case of eighteenth-century
                   Britain, the activity of thousands of well-trained clerks was key in improving
                   state administration.26 In the case of Spanish America this is also verified by
                   the high quality of the Bourbon accounting records of taxes and expenditures
                   from 1760 onward.27 The improvement was visible in the records of the
                   majority of the regional colonial treasuries and the principal branches of
                   the royal tax administration, including the state monopolies and the royal
                   mints. But it should be noted that since the colonial regime was absolutist
                   and there were no local legislatures, there was little publicity given to the tax
                   records. In fact, the summaries of the revenues of the colony were normally
                   known only by the viceroy and his closest advisers, as well as by the Spanish
                   Cabinet. The original documents were kept in the government archives
                   in each colony, and copies of most of the documentation were remitted
                   annually in warships to Cádiz and Seville.28
                      Another innovation of the Bourbon was the reinforcement and modern-
                   ization of fiscal monopolies.29 The production and sale of key commodities
                   tobacco, powder, and mercury was now thoroughly controlled by the royal
                   administration. This was accomplished by the transformation of the old
                   monopolies into large and relatively efficient state companies, as we shall

                   25 L. A. Jáuregui, La Real Hacienda de Nueva España and L. Arnold, Burocracia y burócratas en México,
                      1742–1835 provide the essential analysis and description of the Bourbon fiscal bureaucracy.
                   26 J. Brewer, The Sinews of Power, particularly Chapter 3.
                   27 Scores of historians who have worked in the archives of Bourbon Mexico and Spain attest to the high
                      quality and detail of the colonial fiscal accounts. For detailed observations, see the introduction to
                      J. TePaske and H. S. Klein, Royal Treasuries of the Spanish Empire.
                   28 The enormous volume of documents has proved invaluable for scores of contemporary historians.
                      The richest sources are to be found in the Archivo General de Indias in Seville and in the Archivo
                      General de la Nación in Mexico, but there are also major repositories in all the capitals of the Spanish
                      American nations.
                   29 A thorough analysis of the administrative innovations in the fiscal regime of New Spain can be found
                      in L. A. Jáuregui, La Real Hacienda de Nueva España.
