P1: JZP
9780521879644c02     CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                     August 23, 2007         12:27




                                                      Imperial Tax State                                              55

             to the state close to 15 percent of their extremely limited income, a high
             level for an ancien regime society.24
                What were the reasons for extraordinary efficiency of the tax machinery
             in New Spain in terms of extraction capacity? To answer this question it is
             necessary to turn attention first to the overall fiscal strategy and secondly to
             the precise nature of tax reforms. This can help us understand how Bourbon
             reformers extracted money from all sectors of colonial society, both rich and
             poor.

                   Bourbon Fiscal Strategies in the Americas: Reforms and Varying
                                        Degrees of Resistance
             Despite the changes that were introduced in the second half of the eigh-
             teenth century, the colonial tax structure in Spanish America was not
             a modern fiscal system, for it retained many typical features of secular
             ancien regime tax structures. It was modeled in part on the old fiscal regime
             of Castile but also had pronounced differences as is demonstrated by the
             fact that there existed a number of direct taxes that were not applied in
             the metropolis, in particular Indian tribute and taxes on silver mining.
             Generally speaking, the tax system in the Americas was oriented toward
             revenue-raising, since the colonial administrations were not as inclined as
             the government in the metropolis to offer much flexibility with regard to
             the interests of tax-paying groups. It is true, of course, that there were some
             significant exemptions for privileged groups (landowners, churchmen, mil-
             itary officers), which might suggest that the fiscal system was regressive.
             Nonetheless, a number of taxes, such as those on silver mining, were not
             regressive – a fact which suggests that the interpretation of the entire range
             of taxes should be analyzed with attention to nuance. Fiscal administration
             was also a matter of political negotiations between the state and diverse
             social corporations, as can be also observed in the case of the Indian com-
             munities that also received certain fiscal exemptions.
                From the mid-eighteenth century, Bourbon reforms made for a more
             centralized and efficient tax machine throughout Spanish America. The
             basic model was that established by royal envoy, José de Gálvez, during his
             mission in New Spain (1765–1771). His vigorous reform campaign con-
             sisted in the introduction of a complex set of administrative, accounting,

               place, it is extremely difficult to calculate average tax payments because it is necessary to differentiate
               between peasants of Indian towns (repúblicas de indios) who paid tribute but were exempt from the
               alcabalas and other workers who did not benefit from exemptions. Moreover, any calculation should
               eliminate silver taxes which did not directly affect workers.
            24 According to Brewer, in Great Britain, the most advanced economy (and the most heavily taxed)
               of the eighteenth century, “the share of per capita income appropriated as taxes reached 23% in
               1783 . . . almost twice the comparable French figures. . . .” J. Brewer, The Sinews of Power, p. 91.
