P1: JZP
9780521879644c02        CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        12:27




                   58                                    Bankruptcy of Empire

                   the resistance to tax reforms, long before the arrival of Areche to Peru.
                   The magnificent book by Scarlet O’Phelan Godoy on the successive
                   eighteenth-century rebellions in the viceroyalty of Peru clearly demon-
                   strates the long-standing opposition of great swaths of colonial Andean
                   society to fiscal innovations that negatively affected local trade and also
                   weighed heavily on peasant towns.32
                       Almost at the same time as the Peruvian rebellions were being bloodily
                   dissolved, in the viceroyalty New Granada, a revolution broke out that
                   also was spurred by rejection of the Bourbon tax reforms. Colonial elites
                   allied with popular sectors and organized a rebel army in central regions
                   of the viceroyalty that marched by stages to the capital to protest the
                   increase in sales taxes, the imposition of new duties on alcoholic beverages
                   (aguardiente), and the imposition of the tobacco monopoly. The Visitor-
                   General Juan Francisco Gutierrez de Piñeres was forced to flee from Bogotá
                   to the coastal port of Cartagena. Eventually, the rebels (known as comuneros)
                   put down their arms in exchange for a wide range of concessions, including
                   temporary reductions in certain taxes.33
                       In colonial Mexico, as we have noted, initial social protests in the late
                   1760s were rapidly crushed and, subsequently, there is little documentary
                   evidence of tax rebellions before 1810. Why this was so is a major question
                   which historians have not yet resolved since the intensity and breadth of
                   the Bourbon fiscal offensive in colonial Mexico was unmatched. There was
                   undoubtedly much disguised local resistance to hikes in taxes as is con-
                   firmed by archival research on the numerous protests to be found in the
                   alcabala (sales tax) documentation, every time rates were raised or the base
                   extended.34 But it is also true that there is scarce testimony of full-blown
                   tax riots in the late colonial period in the viceroyalty. Indeed, the lack of
                   systematic opposition to the tax reforms surely contributed to the extraor-
                   dinary large volume of receipts from virtually all taxes and state monop-
                   olies. The result was that New Spain became the tax jewel of the Spanish
                   empire during its final decades, and more specifically between 1780 and
                   1810.

                   32 The resentment was directed at the mita, the traditional form of forced labor recruitment imposed
                      by the Spanish regime in the Andes, against hikes in the rates of alcabalas, aguardiente (alcoholic
                      beverages), and tobacco as well as opposition to reforms of the repartimiento system of trade. Details
                      on the many rebellions of the eighteenth century can be found in Scarlet O’Phelan Godoy, Un siglo
                      de rebeliones anticoloniales. Perú y Bolivia, 1700–1783 (Cuzco, Peru: Centro Bartolomé de las Casas,
                      1988). An excellent analytical discussion can be found in Juan Garavaglia and Juan Marchena,
                      América Latina: De los orı́genes a la independencia, vol. 2 (Barcelona: Crı́tica, 2005), pp. 132–143.
                   33 The standard study is John L. Phelan, The People and the King: the Comunero Revolution in Colombia,
                      1781 (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1978). For more recent contributions, see essays in
                      J. Fisher, A. J. Kuether, and A. Mcfarlane, eds., Reform and Insurrection.
                   34 I thank Richard Salvucci for drawing my attention to this point.
