P1: JZP
9780521879644c02a      CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007        12:47




                                                      Imperial Tax State                                           73

             assess it directly – a near impossibility at that time. An additional aspect
             that underlines the fiscal sharpness of the royal officials was their emphasis
             on taxing tobacco and alcohol: this was indicative of an awareness of the
             positive returns to be obtained from taxing goods for which demand was
             relatively inelastic, but not compulsory.60 In any case, the high growth rates
             of tax revenues throughout the viceroyalty were most visible in the period
             1760–1785, being followed later by a slower expansion in the two following
             decades.


                The Fiscal Burden of Colonialism for the Inhabitants of New Spain
             Beyond measuring revenue trends over time, it is also important to raise
             the issue of impact and incidence of taxes, although this is a subject that
             awaits much future research. In recent years, a few studies have begun to
             probe into some aspects of the social consequences of tax policies in colonial
             Mexico, analyzing tax shifting and incidence and also the economic effects of
             the Bourbon monarchy’s efficient but heavy tax machinery.61 Such analysis
             can prove of interest for an evaluation of the costs of colonialism for specific
             social groups, but also sheds light on future debates on what may be termed
             the fiscal constitution of the colonial regime in Spanish America.62
                In the case of Indian tribute, for example, the burden for Indian peasant
             families in Mexico was significant since it represented two and a half pesos on
             a small income (which would be, at best, some twenty to twenty-five pesos a
             year for a nuclear family).63 It was also hard on those Indian peasant families
             which produced little in the way of agricultural or ranching commodities
             that could be exchanged for money, and particularly hard on those who
             had no land or were in dire poverty, of which there were many. On the
             other hand, it is also true that Indian peasant communities were largely
             exempt from other taxes such as the alcabalas on the maize and beans that

            60 I am grateful to Richard Salvucci for this and several other observations on the implicit logic of the
               Spanish fiscal system at this time.
            61 See C. Marichal, La bancarrota del virreinato, Chapter 2 and C. Marichal and D. Marino, eds., De colonia
               a nación, Chapters 1–3.
            62 On the concept of a fiscal constitution in eighteenth century Britain, see R. Bonney, “Revenues”
               (Chapter 13), in R. Bonney, ed., Economic Systems, pp. 431–438 and P. O’Brien, Fiscal Exceptionalism:
               Great Britain and Its European Rivals from Civil War to Triumph at Trafalgar and Waterloo, pp. 13–14
               and 19–20.
            63 The estimate of 25 pesos would be wage earnings of an Indian who had regular work on a ranching or
               agricultural “hacienda.” For estimates of rural wages and income, see R. Garner and S. E. Stefanou,
               Economic Growth and Change in Bourbon Mexico, pp. 81–84. However, many Indian peasants simply
               lived off a small piece of their own land, and their income was largely nonmonetary, consisting
               basically of subsistence food products, mostly maize and beans.
