P1: JZP
9780521879644c02a    CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        12:47




                78                                   Bankruptcy of Empire

                Spain with regard to the legitimacy and functionality of the colonial tax
                system.
                   Such an implicit political/fiscal agreement would, perhaps, help to
                explain how it was possible that the numerous reforms of the fiscal sys-
                tem, including the multiplication of taxes at the end of the eighteenth
                century, did not produce generalized rebellions in New Spain. But it does
                not fully explain the extraordinary degree of compliance with the Spanish
                crown that demanded ever greater contributions in the last decades of that
                century with relatively scant local recompense.80 For it should be recalled
                that almost half of all taxes paid in New Spain were not spent within the
                viceroyalty but rather were exported abroad (as a kind of tax surplus) to
                support empire and metropolis.

                           Fiscal Benefits of Empire for the Metropolitan Treasury
                Although our analysis has so far concentrated on the fiscal burden that
                the inhabitants of New Spain were obliged to cover during the last half
                century of the colonial era, it is also important to underline, what we
                may term, the fiscal benefits derived by the metropolitan government from
                the colonial tax system. The overseas remittances of precious metals and
                coin on account of the royal treasuries of colonial Mexico and the rest of
                Spanish America represented a “unilateral” contribution of New Spain to
                the empire.81 During each successive decade, a huge volume of royal silver
                left the viceroyalty with a remarkably low degree of recompense.82 Of all
                the income received from the Indies by the General Treasury at Madrid, the
                viceroyalty of New Spain alone contributed with more than 60 percent in
                the period 1780–1810 as we have seen in the first chapter of this book. (See
                Figure 1.3) These transfers clearly represented costs for the colony but even
                more clearly benefits for the metropolis.
                    Following a secular tradition, the Spanish crown expected local taxes to
                cover local expenses (administrative and military), but also pressured the
                high-income treasuries of New Spain and Peru to remit significant amounts
                of silver coin to other colonies and to the metropolis itself. The sums remit-
                ted were extremely large. (See the Appendix, Tables 1.1 and 1.2) According
                to various authors, in the last fifteen years of the eighteenth century, approx-
                imately 20 percent of total income registered by the General Treasury of

               80 Although it may be anachronistic to say that the crown provided few “public goods,” it is well known
                  that the colonial administration invested very little in education, health, or other social services,
                  which were assumed basically by local institutions and the church.
               81 See J. Coatsworth, “Obstacles to Economic Growth in Nineteenth Century Mexico,” American His-
                  torical Review, 83, 1 (1978), 80–100.
               82 John Coatsworth, Orı́genes del atraso, pp. 108–109, presented the first estimates of this drainage and
                  of possible effects on the colonial economy.
