P1: JZP
9780521879644c02a      CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        12:47




                                                      Imperial Tax State                                            75

             tax income stagnated, such as the sales taxes known as alcabalas and pulques.
             It is also possible – as historians John TePaske and John Coatsworth have
             suggested – that inflation might have reduced the impact of the Bourbon
             state’s fiscal offensive and diminished their effects.67 If price increases were
             greater than tax contributions and were accompanied by stagnation in wage
             levels (as argued by Van Young), then it is possible that the tax system might
             not have been considered as the principal cause worsening the economic
             situation for the lower strata.68 There may have been greater discontent at
             price increases and the relative fall in wages, although there is a scarcity of
             historical monographs on popular response to these trends. Instead of a fiscal
             rebellion, it would appear that discontent led colonial Mexican taxpayers
             to carry on what one author has described as disguised resistance to tax
             payments.69

                                           Fiscal Pacts in Colonial Society
             In all discussion of tax systems, a major issue concerns the contemporary
             social perception of the relative fairness of the fiscal charges. Today tax sys-
             tems are described as regressive or progressive: in the former case, exactions
             fall unequally on sectors with less income, while with the latter, taxation
             rates increase proportionally with income. New Spain’s tax system was,
             in many regards, regressive since the preponderance of indirect taxes –
             especially on pulque and the sales tax – fell heavily on items of popular
             consumption; furthermore, certain direct taxes like the tribute were only
             paid by the poorest social groups. However, these terms and concepts were
             not used in the ancien regime; the underlying idea was that of fiscal justice.
                 Fiscal justice was associated with tax exemptions or immunities granted
             to specific social groups. When New Spain is compared to a number of
             European societies, it becomes clear that tax exemptions were more common
             in European Catholic monarchies than in Spanish America. In the Spain of
             Charles IV, for example, the greatest fortunes rarely paid taxes; while in
             New Spain, significant proportion of the richest men – among them the
             owners of silver mines – were obliged to make important payments to the
             government. In fact, most individuals in colonial Mexico had to contribute

            67 See John TePaske, “Economic Cycles in New Spain in the Eighteenth Century: The View from the
               Public Sector,” in Richard Garner and William Taylor, eds., Iberian Colonies, New World Societies: Essays
               in Memory of Charles Gibson (Pennsylvania: State College, 1985), pp. 119–142 but compare with R.
               Garner and S. E. Stefanou, Economic Growth and Change in Bourbon Mexico, pp. 34–35.
            68 E. Van Young, La crisis del orden colonial, Chapter 2, offers the most complete and penetrating discus-
               sion, to date, on income levels and wage trends in Bourbon Mexico.
            69 See the suggestive essay discussing disguised opposition to taxes at a time of growing fiscal pressure
               by Ana Lidia Garcı́a Peña, “El impacto popular de las reformas fiscales en la ciudad de México,
               1780–1820,” in C. Marichal and D. Marino, eds., De colonia a nación, pp. 85–133.
