P1: JZP
9780521879644c02a      CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007        12:47




                                                    Imperial Tax State                                          77

             for some type of legal concession. For example, tribute were only collected
             from Indian communities, in return for which they had been granted a series
             of legal and territorial concessions from the sixteenth century.76 So too, the
             mining tax (diezmo minero) applied only to silver producers as a concession
             for the right to exploit the viceroyalty’s rich mines, which in principle
             belonged to the Spanish crown, according to regalist tradition. Similarly,
             from 1783 certain taxes collected by the Mexico City Mining Tribunal also
             reflected a corporative character.77 Other examples of this interchange of
             taxes for privileges are found in the case of the merchants: the collection
             of the averı́a tax by the Mexico City Merchant Guild, for example, was a
             contribution with a specific purpose; it was used to support the mercantile
             Tribunal del Consulado, an organization that ratified the exclusive jurisdiction
             of the great merchants of the capital over all commercial disputes as well as
             their oligopolistic control over a great number of commercial transactions
             in the viceroyalty.78 Finally, it can also be argued that the taxes paid by the
             Church were conceived as instruments that guaranteed the traditional legal
             autonomy of ecclesiastical institutions.
                 All this suggests that the functioning of the New Spain’s tax system
             was not equivalent to that of parliamentary regimes, such as those of the
             Anglo-American colonies.79 The Spanish American colonies – which paid
             a far greater level of taxes than their northern neighbors – were obliged to
             adhere to the rules of an absolutist government that severely limited polit-
             ical autonomy and excluded all possibility of legislatures in the different
             viceroyalties. Taxes in colonial Spanish America were key elements in the
             functioning of a complex hierarchy of traditional corporations and social
             groups that operated within an equally complex judicial structure with sec-
             ular roots. And it is precisely for this reason that we use the term “colonial
             fiscal constitution,” suggesting that despite the harshness of the regime,
             over the long run there appears to have existed a certain consensus in New


            76 Key concessions were guarantees to communal land and the protection of General Tribunal of the
               Indians. See W. Borah, El Juzgado General de Indios.
            77 See Walter Howe, The Mining Guild of New Spain and Its Tribunal General, 1770–1821 (Cambridge,
               Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1949).
            78 See detailed discussion on the attributes of the Mexico City Guild in Guillermina del Valle, “El
               Consulado de Comerciantes de la Ciudad de México y las finanzas novohispanas, 1592–1827,” Ph.D.
               thesis, El Colegio de México, 1997, and on the Veracruz Merchant Guild in Matilde Souto Mantecón
               “El Consulado de Comercio de Veracruz, 1796–1821,” Ph.D. thesis, El Colegio de México, 1996.
            79 In a classic study, George Beer emphasized that the English colonies in North America “were
               expected to provide the funds for their own local, public affairs and to a great extent with this
               object in view large powers of self-government were granted to them. . . . Under these conditions
               each colony, whether in the Antilles or on the continent had developed a vigorous political life of
               its own, in which the popular branch of the local legislature, through its control of the purse, had
               become the most important factor”: G. Beer, British Colonial Policy, pp. 146–147.
