P1: JZP
9780521879644c03        CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        11:57




                   88                                   Bankruptcy of Empire

                   treasury officials resolved to take a new tack. Pedro Tedde has demonstrated
                   that during the war with Great Britain (1779–1783) the increase of army
                   and navy expenses led to a short-term explosion of deficits in the metropoli-
                   tan treasury. These were covered – as we have already indicated – by the
                   introduction of a new debt instrument of the Spanish government known as
                   vales reales (royal bonds or promissory notes); their service being assured by a
                   new financial institution, the Bank of San Carlos, founded in 1782.23 After
                   the war, financial authorities were able to reduce deficits with increased
                   taxes and, at the same time, to gradually retire some of the public debt.
                       In the Spanish American colonies, particularly in the greater Caribbean,
                   military and naval expenditures, traditionally, were not met by loans, but by
                   increasing the remittance of tax surpluses from Mexico to Havana. Nonethe-
                   less, from the early 1780s, wartime financial requirements also increased so
                   dramatically that royal officials finally turned to the issue of loans. A case
                   study of the donations and loans promoted by the colonial administration
                   in Mexico can prove an excellent way to explore the complexity of colonial
                   fiscal and financial policies in the late eighteenth century and, perhaps,
                   facilitate comparative studies with other colonial regimes.
                       Colonial debts began to be contracted on a large scale during the adminis-
                   tration of a new viceroy, Martı́n de Mayorga (1779–1783), who was initially
                   reluctant to use extraordinary finance to cover either increasing defense or
                   administrative costs. Such a position accurately reflected the contemporary
                   attitudes of royal officials in the Americas, who preferred to rely on taxes.
                   Mayorga was a high-ranking military officer of considerable experience
                   when he was named the viceroy of New Spain in 1779, the same year when
                   war was declared against Great Britian. He was charged by Charles III with
                   strengthening the army of New Spain and ensuring the financing of the
                   garrisons and colonial administrations in the greater Spanish Caribbean. At
                   the same he was instructed to continue – when possible – with the deliveries
                   of silver and gold to Cádiz.24 In order to secure these major objectives, the
                   Crown insisted that he apply a forced loan in the viceroyalty.25


                   23 P. Tedde, El Banco de San Carlos.
                   24 In late 1779, Gálvez ordered Mayorga to send funds to the Spanish settlements in Cuba, Puerto
                      Rico, Trinidad, and Louisiana to neutralize the vessels of the British Navy and to prepare for the
                      reconquest of Florida, ceded to England in 1763. In less than two years, Mayorga ordered the transfer
                      of 15 million pesos from Veracruz to Cuba, together with provisions and munitions worth almost
                      1.5 million pesos. At the same time, he ordered the embarkation of one of the best Mexican infantry
                      corps, the Crown Regiment (Regimiento de la Corona), destined for Havana to which he added a
                      corps of 1,600 marines to be incorporated into the crew of the Spanish squadron; see J. A. Lewis,
                      “New Spain during the American Revolution” and C. Marichal and M. Souto, “Silver and Situados,”
                      606–610.
                   25 The royal instruction for the American donation was published in August 1780, but Mayorga did
                      not want to apply it immediately.
