P1: JZP
9780521879644c03        CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                      August 23, 2007          11:57




                   84                                       Bankruptcy of Empire

                   to describe the financial activity of the period simply in terms of modern
                   markets. In the absolutist regime the Crown had recourse to a peculiar com-
                   bination of old and new financial instruments: royal functionaries turned to
                   the powerful privileged corporations for loans, but they also had recourse
                   to more coercive methods of obtaining funds from popular sectors.
                      In this chapter we review the principal financial operations adopted by
                   the colonial administration of New Spain between 1780 and 1800 to assist
                   in imperial defense and to help cover deficits of the metropolitan treasury
                   in its successive wars with Britain or France. We emphasize the inherent
                   contradictions in financial policy which combined the very different prin-
                   ciples of coercion and collaboration.10 This speaks to some of the archaic
                   characteristics of colonial financial relations but also to the slow emergence
                   of what may be considered more modern financial markets in Bourbon
                   Mexico.

                        Royal Donations and Loans in the Colonies: Between the Archaic
                                              and the Modern
                   Colonial debts are a subject that has been largely neglected in the colonial
                   history of Mexico as well as in most of the rest of Spanish America. Our sur-
                   vey of the financial instruments used by the Crown to obtain extraordinary
                   resources from New Spain to cover war expenses focuses on their diversity.
                   The review of the financial tools adopted by the colonial government also
                   reveals their contradictory nature: some were clearly archaic, while others
                   had modern characteristics. This is not strange, because the late eighteenth
                   century was a time of financial innovations in the north Atlantic world, the
                   impact of which was also felt in the Spanish-speaking realms.11 As Larry
                   Neal has demonstrated in a seminal book, this was the age of the rise of

                     (México: Instituto de Investigaciones “Dr. José Marı́a Luis Mora,”/UNAM, 1993); Pilar Martı́nez
                     López-Cano, ed., Iglesia, estado y economı́a, siglos xvi al xix (México: UNAM, 1995); and Gisela von
                     Wobeser El crédito eclesiástico en la Nueva España: siglo XVIII (Mexico: UNAM, 1994).
                   10 Actually, this combination of contradictory principles is typical of the majority of governments
                      identified as absolutist regimes, while consensus is normally linked to parliamentary regimes. See
                      discussion of these issues in R. Bonney, ed., Economic Systems and State Finance (Oxford: Oxford
                      University Press/The European Science Foundation, 1995), pp. 423–431 and Hilton. L. Root,
                      Construction de l’Etat moderne en Europe: La France et l’Angleterre (Paris: PUF, 1994), Chapters 8
                      and 9.
                   11 The origins of modern financial instruments are the object of a historiographical debate. See James
                      C. Riley, International Government Finance and the Amsterdam Capital Market, 1740–1815 (Cambridge,
                      U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1980) and Larry Neal, The Rise of Financial Capitalism: Interna-
                      tional Capital Markets in the Age of Reason (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
                      Also see the penetrating analysis in Marie Therese Boyer-Xambeau, et al., “A la recherche d’un âge
                      d’or des marchés financiers: intégration et efficence au xviiie siècle,” Cahiers d’Économie Politique, 21,
                      (1992), 33–65.
