P1: JZP
9780521879644c03     CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                     August 23, 2007        11:57




                            Imperial Wars and Loans from New Spain, 1780–1800                                       95

             were added bureaucratic slowness and, not infrequently, the difficulty of
             extracting money from peasant communities living in conditions of extreme
             poverty. As a result, the deliveries of monies dragged out and were only
             completed after three years. (See Appendix III.1.)
                The first information of rural receipts collected for the royal donation is
             to be found in a report dated May 1781 from the Hacienda of San Nicolas
             Coatepeque, in the jurisdiction of Texcoco, close to the capital. There, each
             senior worker paid two pesos, including the steward, the maize grower, the
             foreman, schoolmaster, blacksmith, the financier (el aviador), and muleteer;
             the sum of one peso was taken from the monthly wage of the more modest
             workers such as shepherds, bricklayers, and laborers (almost all of whom
             were designated Indians in the official lists). The amounts paid were not
             insignificant, as they represented on average the equivalent of between one
             and two weeks’ salary of each individual contributor.
                The collection in the Indian peasant towns required the collaboration of
             the local authorities, including the clergy and the Indian governors.44 In
             the late eighteenth century, there were more than 4,000 Indian towns and
             villages (repúblicas de indios) in the viceroyalty, most of which were obliged to
             participate in the donation. For example, in August 1781 the commissioner
             sent to collect in the peasant town of Tlocotepec in Veracruz reported that he
             had been accompanied by the parish priest to a meeting with the governor
             and mayors of the Indian community to explain the conditions “by which
             the Indians should contribute to His Majesty with a peso each for the royal
             donation.”45
                This universality of the donation is corroborated in a study by Natalia
             Silva Prada which demonstrates that the donation was collected by the local
             governors, clergy magistrates, and mayors, relying on the lists of family
             heads which were normally used to collect the annual tribute tax:

             The first step in the principal Indian towns was to meet on holidays in the “tecpan”
             or community houses where the royal request was communicated to the represen-
             tatives of the nearby villages. The royal officials also visited work locations such
             as the wool manufactories (obrajes) in which numerous indentured Indian peasants
             labored. In the Indian towns, the local governors would name two official mayors
             (alcaldes) to collect the corresponding amounts in their neighborhood . . . , listing
             the names of each individual donor in a book. The verification of the tax collection,
             that is, the control stayed in the hands of the magistrates and clergy.46


            44 See the excellent detailed study by Dorothy Tanck, Pueblos de indios y educación en el México Colonial,
               1770–1810 (México: El Colegio de México, 1998), Chapter 4.
            45 AGN, Donativos y Préstamos, vol. 21, f. 74.
            46 N. Silva Prada, “Contribución de la población indı́gena,” p. 15.
