P1: JZP
9780521879644c03        CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007         11:57




                   94                                      Bankruptcy of Empire

                                                                                                        Metropolitan treasury
                                                                     Monarch

                                         Royal Treasury                                 Royal Mexican
                                          Mexico City                Viceroy              Treasuries




                                                       Army                       Church        Town mayors and governors
                   Governement offices                officers                   hierarchy         of peasant towns


                        Employees
                                                     Soldiers                     Priests                         Urban
                                                                                                                  population
                                                                                 Peasant
                                                                                 communities
                                                                                                                    Residents
                                                                                                                    and guild
                                                                                  Mines and                         members
                                                                                  haciendas
                                          Flow of orders
                                          Flow of money

                            Figure 3.1. Typical universal donation in New Spain (late colonial period).
                                                  Source: Drawn by Carlos Marichal.


                   the clergy’s greatest assistance to the donation was helping in the campaign
                   to collect funds in several thousand peasant villages and in hundreds of
                   estates – the length and breadth of the viceroyalty. An analysis of the
                   extensive lists of donors shows that the bulk of the funds came from the
                   popular classes: peasants, miners, artisans, and even slaves!42 During two
                   long years, agents of the civil bureaucracy and the clergy called on the
                   villages and urban neighborhoods, demanding a peso payment from each
                   Indian and two pesos from each Spaniard, which presumably referred to
                   both persons of European origin and mestizos.43 (See Figure 3.1.)
                      As the collection of the universal donation proceeded into many rural
                   regions, it became clear that time worked against the demands of the viceroy
                   for speed in gathering coin from a vast and highly differentiated popula-
                   tion. The estimated four months’ period for collection was quite insuffi-
                   cient, given the vast and mountainous terrain of the viceroyalty, to which

                   42 In the case of laborers and slaves from the haciendas, it was the responsibility of the landowners to
                      deliver the donation. The respective correspondence with detailed lists of contributions are found in
                      AGN, Donativos y Préstamos, vols. 1–33, passim. For comments see Carlos Marichal, “La historiografı́a
                      económica reciente sobre el México borbónico: los estudios del comercio y las finanzas virreinales,
                      1760–1820,” Boletı́n del Instituto de Historia Argentina y Americana Dr. E. Ravignani (Buenos Aires),
                      tercera serie, 2 (1990), 161–180.
                   43 In practice it is difficult to determine the royal treasury’s definition of “Spanish” exactly, for, in
                      practice, it not only refers to propertied classes but includes relatively poor whites (Spanish and
                      mixed (criollo)) and mixed (mestizos) with specialized jobs particularly in ranches (haciendas) and
                      mines.
