P1: JZP
9780521879644c03        CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        11:57




                   96                                     Bankruptcy of Empire

                      In the more remote villages of the viceroyalty, the collection was hindered
                   not only by distance but also by the extreme poverty of many peasant vil-
                   lages. In September 1784, three years after the campaign had first begun, the
                   lieutenant of the senior mayor (alcalde mayor) of Xiliapam (in the northern
                   territory of Sonora) issued a report on his visit to the Pames Indians and his
                   negotiations with the local governor. The native population of this region
                   was in such penury that most Indian peasants were not able to pay a peso
                   apiece, and the royal functionary had to content himself with extracting
                   only four reales per neighbor. The official added that while a good number
                   of the inhabitants delivered their donation, others were unable to do so,
                   “not because they are lazy . . . but they reply that they find themselves too
                   insolvent. . . . ”47
                      Success in obtaining funds from each village depended on the type of
                   community or social group from whom the contribution was requested.
                   In some regions, the officials used a caste classification that reflected the
                   hierarchies and different socioethnic characteristics of colonial society. In
                   Zimatlán, for example, the donation was levied on family heads based on
                   various categories: those described as Spanish descendants (españoles) paid
                   two pesos per head of family while mulattos and other mixed racial groups
                   (mestizos and castizos), as well as Indian peasants, paid one peso. The Zimatlán
                   donation lists reveal that Spaniards and mestizos (a total of 207) were concen-
                   trated in four towns, mulattos were workers in four rural estates (haciendas)
                   and sugar mills (trapiches), while the 3,840 Indians were distributed among
                   a broad spectrum of forty-six villages.
                      The methods used to convince the local population of the donation’s
                   importance were varied. Although it may be supposed that a sentiment of
                   loyalty to the King may have prevailed, it is evident that the officials’ zeal
                   counted for a great deal in extracting funds, in many cases prompted by
                   the ambition to be promoted up the bureaucratic-political ladder. When
                   there was difficulty or resistance to collection, royal officials often appro-
                   priated the accumulated funds in the respective, community treasury (caja
                   de comunidad). In others, the local mayors threatened Indian peasants with
                   severe punishment. Silva Prada notes that in the jurisdiction of Maravitı́o,
                   two Indian towns accused the mayor of transgressing the spirit of the royal
                   instruction by demanding donations from “maids, widows, and old people,
                   menacing the rest with threats and diverse apparatus for execution.”48
                      In summary, the universal donation of 1781 was a compulsory fiscal
                   requirement that all the king’s subjects in colonial Mexico were obliged
                   to pay. Donations, however, were not the only extraordinary financial

                   47 AGN, Donativos y Préstamos, vol. 21, exp. 20, f. 300.
                   48 N. Silva Prada, “Contribución de la población indı́gena,” p. 10, who cites AGN, Donativos y Préstamos,
                      vol. 24, fs. 252–255.
