P1: JZP
9780521879644c03      CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                     August 23, 2007          11:57




                            Imperial Wars and Loans from New Spain, 1780–1800                                         107

             they lacked cash because they had so much of their capital committed to the
             purchase of goods in Europe or to transactions with Peru and other colonies
             in America. The wealthy entrepreneur Isidro Icaza, for example, deplored
             that he could not make a contribution owing to large commitments that he
             had in “regular commercial activities that continue with Peru via Acapulco
             that require remittances in advance. . . . ”85
                Another argument used by the great property owners was to call atten-
             tion to the large amounts they had invested in cattle, wheat, and sugar
             properties, details of which can be found in the correspondence between
             the royal officials and such rich landowners as Juan de Oteyza, the Marquis
             de Inguanzo, or the Count of Medina y Torres.86 For his part, Gabriel de
             Yermo, merchant and landowner, later to become an important political
             figure, wrote to the viceroy that the considerable expenses incurred on his
             estates in Cuernavaca and on a new sugar mill, which he had just bought,
             made it impossible for him to make significant contributions to the gov-
             ernment. He also pointed out that the greater part of his liquid capital was
             tied up in business related to sugar exports and to the import of European
             cloth that he had ordered from his agents in Cádiz and Santander.87
                The correspondence with the wealthiest individuals reflects the hetero-
             geneity of their fortunes. This appears to confirm the arguments of historian
             Perez Herrero with regard to the diversification of investments by the great
             merchant houses of New Spain, particularly from the 1780s, having placed
             much capital in mines, estates, and urban real estate, as well as in trade.88
             For the leading merchants it was necessary to adopt strategies to protect for-
             tunes during periods of abrupt changes in the economy of the viceroyalty,


               Havana, and other parts of the Spanish empire, reducing the hoarding of silver and obliging them
               to put it into circulation. This reinforces the arguments of Pedro Pérez Herrero, Plata y libranzas: la
               circulación mercantil en el México borbónico (Mexico: El Colegio de México, 1988), Chapters 9 and 10.
               There he argues on the greater circulation of bills of exchange (in place of silver) to finance commerce
               within the viceroyalty.
            85 Icaza wrote the viceroy that his firm’s prosperity would depend on maintaining the “continuous
               movement” of his capital and that he did not dispose silver pesos for royal loans. Similarly, his col-
               league, the merchant Juan Dosamentes, insisted that the great bulk of his goods had been consigned
               “internally . . . in this capital and in the port of Veracruz.” AGN, Donativos y Préstamos, vol. 1, exp. 3,
               f. 7 and exp. 29, f. 75.
            86 Medina y Torres pleaded poverty, telling the viceroy that from 1786 his many estates (haciendas)
               were doing badly and that in the previous year he had to spend 80,000 pesos in corn to feed his
               laborers (sirvientes) – permanent laborers in the core of the hacienda – as a result of which he had to
               find new mortgages for his lands. AGN, Donativos y Préstamos, vol. 1, exp. 12.
            87 The viceroy was disappointed with Yermo’s reply and told him he would have to tell the king about
               his unwillingness to contribute. AGN, Donativos y Préstamos, vol. 1, exp. 38, f. 101.
            88 P. Pérez Herrero, Plata y libranzas, Chapter 9, argues that mining investment was one of the mech-
               anisms adopted by Guild merchants to maintain their monopoly of silver circulation in spite of the
               Crown’s attempts to limit their control over this key facet of the colonial economy.
