P1: JZP
9780521879644c03        CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        11:57




                   108                                   Bankruptcy of Empire

                   caused by international wars, sharp trade fluctuations, and the Bourbon
                   regime’s administrative and fiscal reforms.
                      But the reluctance of a considerable number of the wealthy to contribute
                   to the first loan requested by Viceroy Revillagigedo was also due to the
                   fact that this transaction carried no interest payments. The refusals indicate
                   that a good number of the capitalists of New Spain were not disposed to
                   risk their funds without a reasonable return. In fact, in the majority of the
                   subsequent loan operations, the colonial administration was forced to offer
                   interest payments and more secure fiscal guarantees, together with a series
                   of special concessions, including the granting of titles of nobility to some
                   of the greatest creditors.89
                      The new methods of raising loans suggest a growing complexity in
                   the way that financial markets functioned in the viceroyalty. Illustrative
                   of the financial innovations were the attempts by Viceroy Revillagigedo
                   in 1793 to convince the powerful Mining Tribunal and Merchant Guild of
                   Mexico City to act as intermediaries for a new million-peso loan. The viceroy
                   asked these privileged corporations to act as financial intermediaries (much
                   like merchant banks) and charged them with seeking individual investors
                   interested in placing their capital in government loans. Nevertheless, their
                   functions were more complex, since they were also commissioned to cover
                   future debt service, using specific fiscal resources for the payment of future
                   interest. This reflected one way in which the public and the private inter-
                   twined in the colonial ancien regime.90 The negotiations with the merchants
                   of the Mexico City were laborious. As Guillermina del Valle has pointed
                   out:
                   On March 8, 1793 one day after the French Assembly formally declared war
                   on Spain . . . the Consulado notified Revillagigedo that they had only been able
                   to raise 527,000 pesos with great difficulty. Various individuals and corporations
                   had advanced 309,200 pesos, plus the 218,000 pesos already delivered by the Royal
                   Tribunal (Audiencia). . . . 91
                       Later, the authorities in Madrid informed Revillagigedo that they
                   required additional amounts and urged him not only to mortgage the
                   branches of the royal treasury but also to appropriate the “capital of pious

                   89 The granting of titles of nobility to merchants such as Antonio Bassoco or Pedro Antonio de Alles is
                      described in D. Ladd, The Mexican Nobility. Other rewards included appointments as militia officials.
                   90 The basic model for placing capital had been successfully tried since 1782–1783. Now each Tribunal
                      was offered a tax resource to guarantee the service of new debts: five per thousand of the averı́a tax
                      to be collected by the Consulado and 1% of minting taxes by the Tribunal de Minerı́a. The most
                      detailed research about this type of colonial financial intermediary is G. Valle Pavón, “Consulado
                      de Comerciantes,” Chapters 3 and 4. For some comparisons with Peru, see A. W. Quiroz, Deudas
                      olvidadas, pp. 142–149.
                   91 G. Valle Pavón, “Consulado de Comerciantes,” p. 229.
