P1: JZP
9780521879644c04       CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007       11:35




                   120                                  Bankruptcy of Empire

                   on a secular alliance between the Crown and church.2 What is more, the
                   bonds between them were so strong in fiscal and financial areas – and in
                   many other domains – that it is entirely proper to speak of a Royal Church,
                   as William Callahan has suggestively argued.3 This alliance – we contend –
                   was crucial for the survival of the Spanish empire in the Americas at the end
                   of the eighteenth century since the collaboration of the church was essential
                   both to raise funds for the many wars in which the crown engaged as well
                   as to assure popular support for these costly endeavors.
                       It is well known, of course, that the relationship between the two bodies
                   (civil and ecclesiastic) was asymmetric, since in terms of worldly powers the
                   monarchy was prevalent and could implement statist policies – such as the
                   expulsion of the Jesuits in 1767. As many authors have stressed, the regal-
                   ism of the Bourbons entailed a clear division between the government and
                   the church in their respective rule over temporary and spiritual domains.
                   Even so, it is worthwhile emphasizing that the church was still extremely
                   influential in ideological terms among all social classes. This explains, in
                   turn, why royal officials were repeatedly obliged to seek the active collab-
                   oration of hierarchy and clergy of the Catholic Church in New Spain in
                   the monarchy’s grand financial campaigns to raise money for the successive
                   wars against the principal European rivals of Spain.
                       The Catholic Church agreed to the royal demands for war finance, but by
                   the end of the eighteenth century the pressure by the monarchy to extract
                   resources from religious corporations surpassed all historical precedent. In
                   New Spain the fiscal campaigns involved increasing transfers to the royal
                   treasuries of monies collected by various ecclesiastical branches – tithes,
                   papal bulls, vacantes, and medias anatas.4 In addition, revenues from spe-
                   cial branches such as the Temporalidades – which managed the old Jesuit
                   properties – were remitted to Spain. And, increasingly, the government in
                   both metropolis and colonies called for ecclesiastical subsidies and a series
                   of loans and donations from religious institutions.5 Financial contributions


                   2 David Brading, Una iglesia asediada: el obispado de Michoacán, 1749–1810 (Mexico: Fondo de Cultura
                     Económica, 1994), p. 19: “In fact, in some areas of the empire the Church was the State and its
                     ministers acted as judges and representatives of the monarchy.”
                   3 William Callahan, Church, Politics and Society in Spain, 1750–1874 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
                     University Press, 1984), especially pp. 2–5.
                   4 These were percentages to be paid to the royal treasury of salaries of newly appointed ecclesiastical
                     functionaries.
                   5 Perhaps the most important study on this issue is D. Brading, Una iglesia asediada, pp. 195–282.
                     According to the author (p. 210): “In the last decades of the Spanish government, the cathedral
                     chapters of New Spain overtly confronted the crown, when ministers and officers tried to invade
                     their jurisdiction and levy on their incomes. Attempting to take control of tithes collection from
                     jueces hacedores; charging an ecclesiastic subsidy on every religious income, and disentailing church
                     properties were some striking examples of the bureaucratic assault.”
