P1: JZP
9780521879644c04        CUNY1040/Marichal              0 521 87964 7                      August 23, 2007          11:35




                   122                                      Bankruptcy of Empire

                   religious concerns and not to political or administrative duties.7 On the
                   other hand, among the wealthy and professional classes, financial participa-
                   tion was undoubtedly linked to considerations regarding the maintenance
                   of the status quo in both an individual and a collective way. This complexity
                   obliges us to reconsider the true nature of the state in the old regime and
                   how the different sectors of colonial society perceived it.
                       This chapter explores the complex network of fiscal and financial ties that
                   linked an increasingly subordinated colonial church to the royal treasury.
                   We will explore, first, the historical mechanisms for transferring a portion
                   of tithes and other ecclesiastical contributions to the royal coffers. Secondly,
                   we will present an overview of loans supported by Mexican religious per-
                   sonnel and institutions to help finance the wars of the monarchy. Finally, we
                   conclude by reviewing how and why the royal authorities implemented the
                   most important and extortionate measure to appropriate church revenues
                   and property in the years 1804–1808: these included the disentailment
                   of capital, land, and buildings under religious control in order to provide
                   money for the royal debt office, known as the Consolidación de vales reales in
                   Spain. It should be stressed that funds collected in New Spain by the Crown
                   on this account reflected the fact that the Mexican church was then the rich-
                   est in the American hemisphere, although it was rapidly impoverished by
                   these measures.8

                           Ecclesiastical Revenues and the Royal Treasury in New Spain
                   A recent and important literature has analyzed the role of ecclesiastical
                   finance in Mexico during the eighteenth century, underscoring the impor-
                   tance of the church in the colonial economy and, particularly, in the func-
                   tioning of its complex, credit system.9 These studies demonstrate the

                   7 A study that stresses this problematic aspect of the relationship between church and government
                     is Oscar Mazı́n, Entre dos majestades. El obispo y la iglesia de Michoacán ante las reformas borbónicas,
                     1758–1772 (Zamora, Mich.: El Colegio de Michoacán, 1987).
                   8 It is hard to make an accurate appraisal of the wealth of the church in the Americas, but there are
                     revealing data in documents presented by D. Brading, Una iglesia asediada, Appendix 1: according
                     to this source, the income of the church in New Spain was roughly equivalent to 40% of the total
                     revenues of the Spanish American church as a whole.
                   9 The most significant overview on ecclesiastical credit for the private sector in New Spain toward
                     the end of the colonial regime is G. von Wobeser, El crédito eclesiástico en Nueva España and the
                     most comprehensive regional quantitative analysis is Francisco Cervantes, “El crédito eclesiástico en
                     Puebla, 1800–1856,” Ph.D. thesis, El Colegio de México, 1993. Other relevant works are Arnold
                     Bauer, “The Church in the Economy of Spanish America. Censos and Depósitos in the 18th and
                     19th Centuries,” Hispanic American Historical Review, 63, 4 (1983), 707–733; Linda Greenow, Credit
                     and Socioeconomic Change in Colonial Mexico: Loans and Mortgages in Guadalajara, 1720–1820 (Boulder,
                     Colo.: Westview, 1983); Asunción Lavrin, “El capital eclesiástico y las elites sociales en Nueva España
                     a fines del siglo XVIII,” in Enrique Florescano, ed., Orı́genes y desarrollo de la burguesı́a en América Latina,
