P1: JZP
9780521879644c04       CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        11:35




                                                               4
                            The Royal Church and the Finances
                                   of the Viceroyalty



                   The wheels on which runs the weighty Monarchy [ . . . ] are the sectors of
                   agriculture, mining and trade. [ . . . ] The entire metallic currency of the
                   kingdom is distributed among them and incorporated into the Pious Foun-
                   dations. This is the blood that runs through the veins of the political body
                   of the kingdom and keeps it alive. Thus, if for any reason the blood were to
                   be drained from that body, its ruin would be inescapable.
                                                     Municipal Council of Mexico City (1805)1


             By 1800 the government of the viceroyalty in New Spain had already
             amassed a voluminous debt that had been contracted essentially to pay
             for war expenses of monarchy and empire. This debt was in good mea-
             sure the result of loans collected among Mexican elites, merchants,
             miners, landowners, and rentiers, but the royal administration had also
             garnered much financial support from the church, which constituted a
             multifaceted array of institutions with an unparalleled ideological and
             economic influence on colonial society. Indeed, a close analysis of rev-
             enues collected by the viceregal administration from 1780 to 1800 reveals
             that the Catholic Church was perhaps the most important individual
             supplier of funds to the colonial treasury and hence to the monarchy
             for its war efforts. These included transfers to the state of substantial
             portions of tithes, donations, and direct loans from cathedral chapters,
             monasteries, convents, bishoprics, and pious foundations throughout the
             viceroyalty.
                The financial collaboration between ecclesiastical institutions and the
             royal administration reflected the fact that in Spanish America – as well as
             in Spain – the state was not merely a civil power but a dual entity, based


             1 A copy of the document titled Representación against the Consolidación de Vales Reales sent by the
               Municipal Council of Mexico City to Viceroy Iturrigaray is found in Masae Sugawara, La deuda
               pública de España y la economı́a novohispana (Mexico: Instituto Nacional de Antropologı́a e Historia,
               1976), pp. 27–35 (Colección Cientı́fica, 28).


                                                              119
