P1: JZP
9780521879644c04        CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                     August 23, 2007          11:35




                   124                                     Bankruptcy of Empire

                   in the last quarter of the eighteenth century as a result of Bourbon reforms
                   and the increasing expenses resulting from interimperial wars.
                      The fiscal system of the Spanish American church was based on a complex
                   set of revenues which included collection of tithes, sale of papal bulls, a
                   percentage of earnings of chaplaincies and religious foundations, as well
                   as parish income charged by priests for masses and other liturgical services
                   such as baptisms, marriages, and last rites.12 For the royal treasuries in
                   Mexico, the appropriation of a percentage of tithes collected by the church
                   was customary, in particular through the fiscal department known as novenos
                   reales. This fiscal branch was based on the transfer from the ecclesiastical
                   coffers to government treasuries of a ninth (11 percent) of tithes collected by
                   the clergy in the viceroyalty.13 Originally – in the sixteenth century – the
                   object of novenos was to finance the construction of cathedrals in America,
                   but later they began to be channeled directly to the royal administration.
                   (See Figure 4.1.) As recent research suggests, control and accounting of tithe
                   collection was considerably improved in the eighteenth century by more
                   professional ecclesiastical administrators. As a result, royal functionaries
                   everywhere began to take special notice of the increasing weight of the
                   tithe contributions.14
                      Broad sectors of colonial society had to pay tithes, which were levied
                   on the agricultural/livestock production of every hacienda and ranch, but
                   also, on occasions, on the agricultural commodities produced by Indian
                   populations.15 An evaluation of the impact of these ecclesiastical taxes on

                   12 For abundant information, see D. Brading, La iglesia asediada, passim.
                   13 This figure of 11% was equivalent to what the church called two novenos, based on a royal general
                      decree issued in 1541 and still in force in the eighteenth century. Borah describes that “according
                      to this regulation, half the total tithe collection should be divided into two equal parts, one for the
                      bishop and the other for the cathedral chapter. The other half should be divided into nine equal parts,
                      two of which were set aside for the king and should be collected and spent to his satisfaction. . . . ”
                      Woodrow Borah, “La recolección de diezmos en el obispado de Oaxaca,” in A. Bauer, ed., La iglesia
                      en la economı́a, p. 6. For similar studies on other regions of the Bourbonic Mexico, see M. I. Sánchez
                      Maldonado, Diezmos y crédito eclesiástico, p. 34 and Michael P. Costeloe, “La administración, recolección
                      y distribución de los diezmos en el arzobispado de México, 1800–1860,” in A. Bauer, La iglesia en
                      la economı́a, p. 121.
                   14 Bourbon government’s capacity to secure greater and steadier shares of tithes was dependent on the
                      increasing control that the clergy itself managed to implement in tithe collection, while leasing to
                      individual persons was eradicated as a secular practice. According to Costeloe: “The church expanded
                      the system of direct collection, whereas leased areas were increasingly reduced until the annulment
                      of the last one in 1782.” M. P. Costeloe, “La administración, recolección y distribución,” p. 102.
                   15 According to Borah: “in general terms, Indians were still paying tithes only on ‘cosas de Castilla,’
                      although the list had expanded from wheat, silk, and animals, in the sixteenth century, to include
                      every plant and animal from the Old World. Both Indians and Spaniards were forced to pay a 10
                      percent tithe on salt [ . . . ] they paid 5 percent on sugar [ . . . ] 4 percent on honey.” Small and
                      big cattle were levied differently for Indians and Spaniards. Woodrow Borah, “La recolección de
                      diezmos,” p. 88.
