P1: JZP
9780521879644c04     CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        11:35




                                 Royal Church and the Finances of the Viceroyalty                                 129

             in the common branches of the treasury. This would help to settle debts of
             the royal treasury to the church by means of a simple accounting measure,
             and simultaneously facilitate the use of the annual revenues of those same
             branches to cover a part of ordinary expenditures. The Minister of Finance
             Miguel Soler answered that he was in agreement but emphasized that all
             surplus obtained from sale of indulgences should be directly dispatched
             to the peninsula. This, however, proved impossible, since – according to
             treasury officials of New Spain – those ecclesiastical branches were essen-
             tial to balance the accounts of the royal treasuries in Mexico. The official
             correspondence reflected the numerous tensions between metropolitan and
             colonial representatives – and revealed important underlying disagreements
             with regard to the operation of the empire’s fiscal machinery.27
                In 1802 the Council of the Indies decided to implement a new policy
             aimed at reorganizing the sale of papal indulgences in New Spain and Peru
             and requiring the remittance of a third part of revenues to the Royal Con-
             solidation Fund (Caja de Consolidación) in Madrid. The Council instructed
             the local delegates of the Caja to record full listings of the money reserves
             accumulated in the administration of indulgences in each intendancy in
             New Spain and ordered them to take the third part of the cash out of the
             regional treasuries and send it on to the peninsula. The functionaries were
             ordered to keep a close watch on:
             the monies yielded (to be kept) in a three-keyed coffer, without laying a hand on
             them for any reason until they are transferred to the treasury officers at authorized
             ports and then embarked on ships heading to any of the authorized ports in Spain,
             where they shall be put at the order and will of the Council, and thus, of the
             Comisión de Vales Reales. . . . 28
                The officers of the viceregal treasury also worked hard to extract resources
             from other special fiscal branches which included, for example, the salaries
             of vacant positions in the religious hierarchy that were customarily trans-
             ferred to the state treasuries and sent to Spain. These branches were known
             as vacantes mayores y menores, medias anatas, and mesadas, each of which
             had its own administration and treasury where surpluses were amassed.29
             Traditionally, the government had authorized that such sums be channeled

            27 See the interesting letter from Viceroy Iturrigaray, dated February 26, 1803 in which he comments on
               the disputes between Soler and royal treasury officers, concerning the use of funds from ecclesiastical
               sectors; see AGN, Correspondencia de Virreyes, 1a series, vol. 214, file 330, pp. 201–203.
            28 This quotation is from AGN, Bulas y Santa Cruzada, vol. 25, p. 420. The Council developed a
               detailed outline, itemizing the amount of each bull that would be used for that purpose.
            29 Some of the various minor religious incomes collected in New Spain in 1810 were the branches
               of Santos Lugares de Jerusalén, the royal chapel (capilla real), the pension of His Majesty’s chaplain,
               and the pension of the bishop of Louisiana, among others. AGN, Caja Matriz, “Libro Común de la
               Tesorerı́a de Ejército y Real Hacienda de 1810.” For a more complete list, including those branches
               collected in previous decades see H. Klein, “La economı́a de la Nueva España,” pp. 601–609.
