P1: JZP
9780521879644c04     CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007        11:35




                                Royal Church and the Finances of the Viceroyalty                              141

                 The most important functions assumed by the Consolidation Fund
             involved the management of the internal and external public debt. To cover
             domestic debt service (in particular the interest payments on vales reales),
             the decrees of April 6 and 8, 1799, established that the treasury of the fund
             would receive revenues from at least ten important taxes.71 On the other
             hand, to amortize the vales (actually a form of public bond), an additional set
             of funds was designated, the most important being the monies to be derived
             from sale of properties of a broad range of ecclesiastical foundations known
             as Obras Pı́as y Capellanı́as. Other resources were added to the treasury of the
             Consolidation Fund, including the sales of a set of estates belonging to the
             Crown but not deemed indispensable for the royal family; the product of
             the auctions of the old Jesuit properties that had been expropriated by the
             state many years before (Temporalidades) in Spain and America; and the sale
             of some properties of the aristocratic Military Orders (Ordenes Militares).
                 With this regular and extraordinary income, the Consolidation Fund
             acquired a singular financial importance. As Richard Herr points out:
             Although the final results (of the Consolidation) could not be predicted at the
             beginning, the long term impact was to create a second state treasury charged with
             the national debt, with its own income and funds that came to be known as the
             Consolidation Fund (Fondo or Caja de Consolidación).72
                Apart from covering the debt service, the treasury department of the
             Consolidation Fund was responsible for covering the expenses of several gov-
             ernment military departments. For example, from 1798 onward, it became
             responsible for the greater part of supplies to the navy and some army
             provisions.
                As director of the Consolidation Fund, Manuel Sixto Espinosa soon
             became the second most powerful man in the financial machinery of imperial
             Spain, although he acted in close coordination with the Minister of Finance,
             Miguel Cayetano Soler. Given rising financial demands and declining fiscal
             receipts in the metropolis, Manuel Espinosa began to acquire a pronounced
             interest in New Spain’s financial resources, particularly as they came in the
             form of silver pesos. The extension of the Consolidation Fund to Spanish
             America was ratified in late 1804, six years later than in the metropolis.

               Remittance Office) after 1802, see “Reglamento e instrucción del Real Giro de Tesorerı́a Mayor,
               Madrid (1802),” in AHBE, Archivo del Banco de San Carlos, leg. 708.
            71 See the list of revenues assigned to the Caja de Amortización in Pedro Tedde “Crisis del Estado y
               deuda pública a comienzos del siglo XIX,” Hacienda Pública Española (1987), pp. 188. See text of
               the decree in M. Sugawara, La deuda pública, 1976, p. 305.
            72 The quote is from the essay by Richard Herr, “Hacia el derrumbe del antiguo régimen: crisis fiscal
               y desamortización bajo Carlos IV,” Moneda y Crédito, 118 (1971), 50. This pioneering research was
               later expanded into the major study by the same author in his work titled Rural Change and Royal
               Finances in Spain at the End of the Old Regime (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989).
