P1: JZP
9780521879644c04     CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007       11:35




                                Royal Church and the Finances of the Viceroyalty                               143

             century historian Lucas Alamán recognized the serious injury that the recall
             of credits caused to the private economy of the viceroyalty:
             The affluence of the clergy (in New Spain) did not consist so much in their prop-
             erties – which were many, especially in the most important cities, such as Mexico,
             Puebla, and so on –, but of interest-bearing loans applied to particulars. Further-
             more, the business resulting from the imposition and redemption of those funds
             made each juzgado de obras pı́as y capellanı́as (pious works) a sort of bank. . . . 76
                Alaman’s account, however, should be qualified, since – in each region
             of the viceroyalty – the respective juzgado de obras pı́as y capellanı́as was not
             actually a bank but rather a sophisticated institution created by the Catholic
             Church to supervise the financial legacies made by thousands of individ-
             uals and families to religious foundations. The juzgados in each diocese of
             Mexico received and managed funds donated for the maintenance of chari-
             table organizations, religious colleges, and hospitals or for the performance
             of certain services, most frequently to pay chaplains to offer prayers and
             masses for the dead on a regular schedule, often during decades. Generally
             speaking, the officers in charge of these legacies lent most of the available
             monies to property owners at a 4 or 5 percent annual interest rate. The total
             sum of capital managed in this way is not known with precision, although
             according to well-informed contemporaries in late, colonial Mexico, it may
             have amounted to perhaps as much as forty to fifty million pesos.77 These
             funds were pillars of the old-regime credit system in the Spanish Ameri-
             can colonies and they constituted precisely the monies with which crown
             expected to amortize or “consolidate” the growing stock of public debt held
             in the shape of securities known as vales reales.78
                The new decrees, thus, did affect not only the church but virtually all
             property owners, landowners, merchants, and miners, who had borrowed
             money from religious foundations. The royal decrees also represented a
             serious blow for numerous foundations, schools, hospitals, and persons
             that received the benefits of funds bequeathed to pious works or chaplain-
             cies.79 According to the exhaustive study by historian Gisela von Wobeser,
             the Consolidation affected the capital assets of four classes of religious

            76 Lucas Alamán, Historia de México, 5 vols. (Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica/Instituto Cultural
               Helénico, 1985) [facsı́mile of the first edition of 1849–1852], p. 66.
            77 Abad y Queipo, who was for many years in charge of the Juzgado de Obras Pı́as at the bishopric of
               Michoacán, provided similar estimates as did almost all the written protests by diverse corporations
               of New Spain: among the contemporary estimates of capital available for loans, see M. Sugawara, La
               deuda pública, pp. 29, 36, and 48.
            78 For an insightful review of this problem, see the introductory essay in A. Bauer, La iglesia en la
               economı́a.
            79 M. Chowning, “The Consolidación de Vales Reales,” p. 472, claims that the Consolidación had a more
               direct impact on the wealthy elite of the Michoacán region.
