P1: JZP
9780521879644c04       CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        11:35




                   138                                  Bankruptcy of Empire

                   the other hand, in the metropolis, both fiscal and financial crises had already
                   become severe as was evinced by the financial reform adopted in 1798 under
                   the name of the Consolidación de Vales Reales (Consolidation Fund for Public
                   Debt). This measure actually implied the disentailment of ecclesiastical
                   properties on a huge scale in order to cover the rapidly mounting deficits
                   of the Spanish monarchy. Despite the promise of revenues to be obtained
                   with this initiative, the Spanish crown was about to embark upon a dan-
                   gerous course which threatened to undermine its secular alliance with the
                   Catholic Church. The new financial strategy, however, was not extended to
                   Spanish America until the year 1804, when the government of Charles IV
                   resolved to do so, confiding that, once again, the colonies would save the
                   metropolis.

                                  The Consolidation Fund as Second Royal Treasury
                   The urgency felt by the Spanish authorities to adopt a series of major
                   financial reforms was the result of the growing deficits of the metropoli-
                   tan government. From the onset of the war with the French Convention
                   (1793–1795) the senior administrators of the Spanish Treasury had begun to
                   perceive the increasing incapacity of the Madrid Treasury to cover the enor-
                   mous expenditures created by military conflict. We have already noted that
                   the solutions adopted by the Madrid Cabinet to finance the war included
                   introducing several new taxes, the issue of large quantities of domestic pub-
                   lic debt (vales reales), and the negotiation of foreign loans in Holland. But,
                   for the first time in the century, the debt burden became a major problem
                   for the Bourbon administration.
                       From the 1780s, the Bank of San Carlos had been the agency responsible
                   for paying interest on domestic debt paper as well as on the external bonds
                   issued in Amsterdam. From the mid-1790s, however, the bank directors
                   recognized the difficulty of the bank in fulfilling this function as a result of
                   the growing scarcity of its own resources as well as of those of the Ministry of
                   Finance itself. They therefore sought new ways of overcoming the growing
                   difficulties involved in sustaining royal credit. In 1794 the managers of the
                   bank issued a number of reports in which they claimed that speculation
                   in public debt paper was impossible to control, criticizing the speculators
                   who mercilessly worked the Spanish financial markets.66 The fall in the
                   value of debt securities made it more and more difficult to obtain loans
                   for the monarchy, a fact that obliged it to consider various options for
                   reform.

                   66 See, for example, the long, interesting document in AHBE, Archivo del Banco de San Carlos, leg. 708,
                      doc. 5, entitled “Real Orden para que el Banco informe en razón de los medios para evitar la pérdida
                      de los Vales Reales.”
