P1: JZP
9780521879644c05       CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007       11:0




                   156                                  Bankruptcy of Empire

                   On the other, it tied the tax and financial machinery of the Spanish crown
                   to the French Treasury in ways that would have grave consequences.6
                      The treaty reinforced the Spanish crown’s chronic habit of mortgaging
                   its most valuable colonial fiscal assets to pay for its enormous financial
                   and military commitments generated by direct or indirect participation
                   in international wars. The payment of the subsidy to France was formally
                   assigned to the treasuries of New Spain, beginning in 1805 with the issuance
                   of bills of exchange delivered to the powerful, French merchant banker
                   Gabriel Julian Ouvrard who operated in his dual capacity as war contractor
                   and navy supplier as well as agent of the Napoleonic treasury. These drafts,
                   signed by Manuel Espinosa, director of the Consolidation Fund (Caja de
                   Consolidación), were payable only at the royal treasuries of Mexico.
                      But why was it necessary to resort again to the colonial treasuries? The
                   explanation is found in the growing difficulties facing the authorities in
                   charge of the Consolidation Fund in the metropolis, which as we have
                   argued had already become a kind of secondary treasury of the Crown. This
                   financial agency had two main sources of income in Spain: the revenues
                   derived from the disentailment of religious properties and receipts from a
                   broad but rather motley array of taxes. Nonetheless, the administrators of
                   the Fund soon found that these receipts were no longer sufficient to cover the
                   totality of the obligations they were obliged to pay, which had multiplied
                   extraordinarily as they now included not only covering most of the internal
                   and external debt service but also covering a substantial part of the costs of
                   the navy, as well as substantial supplies for Spanish land forces.7 As a result,
                   they found it more expedient to assure payments to France by diverting a
                   part of the official silver shipped from Mexico.
                      Both the Spanish and the French governments hoped that the Mexican
                   funds would be sent as soon as possible from Veracruz in Spanish warships
                   to Europe. However, the outbreak of the naval war with England in Decem-
                   ber 1804 made this extremely difficult, and after the catastrophic defeat of
                   the French–Spanish fleet at the battle of Trafalgar (October 1805), com-
                   munications and commerce between Spain and its American colonies were
                   interrupted due to the control of the British Navy over the Atlantic and
                   adjacent seas. Yet despite the war, not all trade was suspended. A vigorous
                   neutral commerce soon developed, as many traders and shippers from non-
                   belligerent countries plied manufactures to be sold in New Spain and the

                   6 The policy of requiring forced subsidies from allies was common practice of Napoleon’s financial
                     strategy, as shown in the study of John H. Sherwig, Guineas and Gunpowder. British Foreign Aid in the
                     Wars with France, 1793–1815 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1969).
                   7 According to one historian, “the Caja de Consolidación in Madrid probably was bankrupt by 1805”:
                     Jose Patricio Merino, “1805: La crisis financiera internacional y deuda española,” in M. Artola and
                     L. M. Bilabo, eds., Estudios de Hacienda: de Ensenada a Mon (Madrid: Instituto de Estudios Fiscales,
                     1984), p. 396.
