P1: JZP
9780521879644c05        CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        11:0




                   164                                   Bankruptcy of Empire

                   Espinosa, the director of the Consolidation Fund, providing the Parisian
                   merchant banker with numerous drafts to be settled in silver at the royal
                   treasuries in Mexico.32 As the historian José P. Merino has argued:

                   Soler, the minister of finance and Espinosa, director of the Fund, appeared to have
                   discovered with Ouvrard the key to the network of credit they were desperately
                   trying to broaden. The idea would be to integrate America directly into the Spanish
                   and European financial circuits.33

                      Simultaneously, and as part of this pact, a private contract was signed
                   between the Consolidation Fund and Ouvrard to jointly participate in trade
                   with Spanish America. The banker was given a large number of permits
                   authorizing the import of merchandise into Veracruz and the export of silver
                   and produce from that port in ships flying neutral flags. These extraordinary
                   trade concessions would, in principle, allow Ouvrard to control a consider-
                   able part of the port’s trade. As we shall see, the trading concessions were
                   later transferred to other merchant bankers but, in any case, they prompted
                   a surge in Veracruz’s “neutral commerce” between 1805 and 1808.34
                      On his return to the French capital, Ouvrard used some of the drafts
                   from the Consolidation Fund to pay off many of his creditors, who included
                   a good number of the most important French merchant bankers. However,
                   the success of these transactions depended on the likelihood of the bills of
                   exchange being cashed in silver at Mexico and shipped to Europe – a diffi-
                   cult if not impossible task for French and Spanish ships, given the dominant
                   control of the Atlantic by the British Navy. There was no alternative but to
                   negotiate a parallel and complementary agreement with neutral merchants
                   authorized to pass through the British maritime blockade. With this idea,
                   Ouvrard set out for Amsterdam at the end of 1805, to call on the house of
                   Hope & Company, one of the leading Dutch financial firms which, coin-
                   cidentally, had excellent relations with the politically influential British
                   merchant bank of Baring Brothers.


                                 The Agreements with the Firms of Hope and Baring
                                            to Transfer Mexican Silver
                   According to contemporary accounts, when Ouvrard made his visit to Ams-
                   terdam to the house of Hope in May 1805, the partners of the prestigious

                   32 M. G. Buist, At Spes Non Fracta, pp. 306–308.
                   33 J. P. Merino, “1805: La crisis financiera internacional,” pp. 390–391.
                   34 The classic study on Veracruz’s neutral trade is that of S. Bruchey, R. Oliver, Merchant of Baltimore.
                      Additional information is to be found in J. A. Jackson, “The Mexican Silver Schemes,” Chap-
                      ters 4–8.
