P1: JZP
9780521879644c05     CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007       11:0




                                    Napoleon and Mexican Silver, 1805–1808                                    165

             banking firm were initially mistrustful.35 Ouvrard explained with enthu-
             siasm the set of astounding transatlantic financial and trading transactions
             to be realized in Mexico. Although there were clearly great risks involved
             in such complex business operations at a time of international war, the
             Dutch merchant bankers carefully considered the possible losses lest they
             let slip this singular business opportunity.36 The head of the firm Pierre
             Labouchère soon agreed to negotiate with the French banker and signed
             various contracts.
                To begin with, the house of Hope promised to explore the possibility
             of opening a new and large loan for the Spanish crown on the Amsterdam
             stock market; in exchange for taking charge of the issue of the Spanish
             bonds, Hope & Company would receive bills payable by the Consolidation
             Fund to be drawn against Mexican royal treasuries, as guarantee of debt
             service payments. In the second place, the Dutch firm proposed to hire a
             group of young and adventurous traders, led by the merchant banker David
             Parish, to take charge of the trade with Mexico. They were to organize
             various fleets of neutral vessels that would be provided with royal licenses
             to transport European merchandise (mainly textiles) to Veracruz for sale
             to local merchants. As commercial agents of the Hopes, they were also
             authorized to cash the drafts issued by the Consolidation Fund on the royal
             treasuries of Mexico and to transport the silver pesos on U.S. (neutral)
             merchant ships to Europe. The Hope bankers demanded stiff commissions,
             but Ouvrard had little choice but to accept. Probably no other continental,
             financial firm would have been able to launch this complicated and delicate
             mission with much chance of success.37
                That the directors of Hope were willing to enter into such a singular
             business venture reflected not only their audaciousness but above all their
             confidence in their capacity to manage complex financial and trade trans-
             actions. But it was also a fruit of long experience with the finances of the
             Spanish crown.38 Already in 1782, the Hopes had been charged by the
             Spanish government with the placement of an external loan on the Ams-
             terdam bourse in order to help finance war against England. A decade later,
             in 1792, the house of Hope again issued a new Spanish loan worth six
             million florins on Dutch financial markets, negotiating a contract with a
             Madrid banker, Juan Ignacio Gardoqui, who was brother of the minister of

            35 The negotiations with the financial house of Hope of Amsterdam are described in considerable detail
               by M. G. Buist, At Spes Non Fracta, Chapter 9.
            36 In his Mémoires (1826), vol. I, p. 113, Ouvrard underlined the surprise of the Hope partners at this
               extraordinary proposal.
            37 Details about the commissions are included in M. G. Buist, At Spes Non Fracta, Chapters 9 and 10.
            38 A Dutch loan had been negotiated between Hope and the well-known Spanish banker Cabarrús in
               1782, when the latter was exploring the creation of the Banco de San Carlos. M. G. Buist, At Spes
               Non Fracta, Chapter 9 and P. Tedde, Banco de San Carlos, Chapter 2.
