P1: JZP
9780521879644c05       CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007        11:0




                   166                                  Bankruptcy of Empire

                   finance of the Spanish government. Subsequently, between 1799 and 1801,
                   the Hopes had collaborated with the Croese bank of Amsterdam to issue
                   another three foreign loans for Charles IV’s administration.39 (For details
                   of the Dutch loans arranged for Spain, see Appendix III.3.)
                      The Hopes’ relations with the Spanish Treasury, therefore, were close.
                   They had a marked interest in ensuring a regular flow of funds from Spain
                   to cover payments on the many loans that had been issued and sold in the
                   Amsterdam financial market. But, above all, their objective was to directly
                   control a part of the lucrative business of American silver remittances. All
                   Spanish foreign loan contracts signed between 1791 and 1801 invariably
                   stipulated that funds from the royal treasuries of Mexico would serve as
                   guarantor of payment. The same procedure was adopted in the negotiations
                   that took place between Ouvrard and Hope in preparation of the new
                   Spanish loan of 1805. The transactions were guaranteed with ten bills of
                   exchange issued by the Consolidation Fund (for a total of 8,484,375 pesos),
                   payable by the royal treasuries in Mexico.40
                      According to the ever-modest Ouvrard, the pact negotiated with the
                   Hope banking firm promised to become “one of the greatest commercial and
                   political operations ever conceived.”41 Nevertheless, there were substantial
                   obstacles to this complicated transatlantic transaction. The most serious
                   was the probable opposition of the British government to the transfer of
                   Mexican treasure to Europe, particularly if destined to end up in the coffers
                   of their principal enemy, Bonaparte. For other banking firms, this would
                   have been a difficulty almost beyond repair, but not for Hope & Company.
                   They had long maintained close relations with one of the most important
                   banking houses of London, Baring Brothers, and this critical alliance would
                   eventually facilitate key negotiations with the British Cabinet.42
                      Baring Brothers, like Hope, had special reasons for being interested in
                   the Mexican silver shipments. To begin with, the scion of the firm Alexander
                   Baring was a director of the Bank of England, which was actively engaged in
                   assisting the government with the acquisition of silver coin, essential to the
                   payment of military subsidies to Britain’s wartime allies on the European
                   continent. In the second place, Sir Francis Baring, the head of the banking
                   firm, was director of the East India Company (the largest private company
                   in England), which required a constant supply of silver to sustain purchases


                   39 For details see M. G. Buist, At Spes Non Fracta, pp. 281–285.
                   40 M. G. Buist, At Spes Non Fracta, p. 284.
                   41 G. J. Ouvrard, Mémoires, p. 135.
                   42 The trading relations between both banking houses were strengthened by matrimonial alliances:
                      Pierre Labouchère, director of Hope, was married to the daughter of Sir Francis Baring. For details
                      about personal and financial relations between both firms, see M. G. Buist, At Spes Non Fracta,
                      pp. 40–61.
