P1: JZP
9780521879644c05     CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        11:0




                                    Napoleon and Mexican Silver, 1805–1808                                     177

             Fund) as well as to carry on a brisk import/export trade with licenses autho-
             rizing North American ships to enter and leave the chief Mexican port.
             David Parish, an Anglo-German trader, was responsible for the supervision
             and leadership of the whole enterprise. After an apprenticeship in his father’s
             Hamburg merchant house (correspondent to both Hopes of Amsterdam and
             Barings of London), the young speculator had opened a house in Antwerp
             and committed himself to a risky but lucrative commercial business in the
             midst of the Napoleonic wars.82
                 Parish’s acceptance of Hope’s offer to run the Mexican silver operation
             using neutral shipping was the most audacious of his adventures. In Decem-
             ber 1805, he traveled to the United States, having chosen Philadelphia as
             headquarters for the consortium’s operations. The other two agents selected
             by Hope were also young traders; Vincent Nolte was sent to New Orleans,
             a port near to Veracruz which offered excellent possibilities for the dis-
             patch of commercial shipments.83 The third agent Gabriel Villanueva was
             charged with establishing an office in Veracruz and implementing what
             was, perhaps, the most delicate part of the business as he had to negotiate
             the settlement of the bills of exchange with the viceroy and, at the same
             time, make arrangements with Veracruz merchants for the sale of the cargos
             sent by Parish and Nolte from the United States. (See Figure 5.2.)
                 The work of this adventurous trading trio required considerable coor-
             dination. The first part of their business consisted in organizing the dis-
             patch of numerous cargos (authorized by the licenses already mentioned)
             from the United States to Veracruz, where the imported goods would be
             sold to local merchants. In exchange, they hoped to receive payment in
             silver coins and some commodities, sugar, dyes, cocoa, vanilla, cotton,
             etcetera, to be exported in the same neutral vessels. The profit from these
             commercial transactions went beyond that expected on the settlement of
             the royal drafts, which in themselves promised extremely lucrative comm-
             issions.84


            82 Parish made huge profits from speculating on various imported raw materials whose price fluctuated
               wildly on account of the war. Some of his business was associated with Talleyrand, Napoleon’s minister
               of Foreign Affairs, who supplied secret information about his government’s political-military strategy
               in exchange for a share in Parish’s commercial speculations. On Parish’s dealings with Talleyrand
               and the house of Hope, see V. Nolte, Fifty Years in Both Hemispheres, pp. 80–82 and P. G. Walters,
               “The American Career of David Parish,” The Journal of Economic History, 4, 2 (1944). The classic,
               but little known, study of the house of Parish in Hamburg is that of Richard Ehrenberg, Das Haus
               Parish in Hamburg ( Jena: G. Fischer, 1925.)
            83 For an autobiographical account with abundant information about this fantastic mercantile adven-
               ture, see the work of V. Nolte, Fifty Years in Both Hemispheres.
            84 With each shipment sent from Veracruz in the hired neutral vessels, Villanueva would include
               quantities of silver that fluctuated between 50,000 and 100,000 pesos, the result of cashing in bills
               of exchange of the Consolidation account.
