P1: JZP
9780521879644c05        CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007       11:0




                   182                                  Bankruptcy of Empire

                   commerce did not only facilitate imports. Acting on behalf of Parish, Oliver,
                   and Nolte, Echeverrı́a and Septien also purchased large amounts of local
                   merchandise and exported it to the United States and Europe – cochineal
                   from Oaxaca, indigo from Guatemala, cotton, sugar, sarsaparilla, and vanilla
                   from Veracruz.
                      To summarize, the participation of Echeverrı́a and Septien was abso-
                   lutely essential for the success of the numerous Hope/Baring shipments to
                   Mexico – perhaps even more than that of the foreign traders and agents. This
                   can be shown, for example, from the correspondence between Echeverrı́a
                   and various senior government viceregal officials, including the Viceroy
                   Iturrigaray, the military governor of Veracruz, Pedro Alonso, the acting
                   mayor, Pedro Telmo Landero, the top official royal treasury in Mexico City,
                   Javier de Borbón, and others. The letters refer to various issues, including
                   payment of the bills of exchange of the Consolidation Fund, permissions to
                   disembark neutral ships arriving on Villanueva’s consignment, and tax pay-
                   ments on imports.99 Quite clearly, the success of the neutral trade operations
                   run by Hope/Baring in Mexico depended to a large degree on the viceroy’s
                   consent and his orders to key officials to facilitate the transactions. As a
                   result the merchants engaged did not face significant obstacles neither for
                   the import of a huge volume of textiles nor for the export of vast quantities
                   of silver and a lesser amount of primary products from the viceroyalty.
                      Indeed, it should be noted that in spite of the protests of a considerable
                   number of Mexico City and Veracruz merchants who felt marginalized by
                   neutral trade, the viceroy insisted that absolute priority should be given to
                   these transactions. On September 4, 1806, Iturrigaray wrote to Landero,
                   one of the top royal officials at Veracruz, stressing the urgency of moving the
                   cargos “that are arriving in the said neutral ships” from the port of Veracruz
                   to the upland town of Xalapa for their sale. According to the viceroy, this
                   step would avoid the spread of disease and fever – especially the black
                   vomit/yellow fever (vómito negro) – that had caused so many deaths in the
                   port of Veracruz in earlier years. He also added that the military commander
                   of Xalapa ought to provide all possible help to the merchants transporting
                   goods from the neutral vessels, indicating that he should “scrupulously take
                   care and look after those that provide the mule trains for the neutrals with
                   preference over those living in that city. . . .”100
                      The profits gained by the merchant houses and foreign agents responsible
                   for these transactions were extraordinary. This is a subject discussed in detail
                   by various monographs on the trading houses of Oliver and Hope. According
                   to historian Robert Bruchey, Oliver’s profits approached $775,000 between
                   1806 and 1808. In his memoirs, Vincent Nolte, one of the chief participants

                    99 AGN, Marina, vols. 206, 218, 223–226, 229, 233–234, passim.
                   100 The full text of Iturrigaray’s instructions to Landero is in AGN, Marina, vol. 226, fs. 97–102.
