P1: JZP
9780521879644c06        CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                     August 23, 2007          10:56




                   186                                     Bankruptcy of Empire

                   the transactions of the Baring/Hope consortium (analyzed in the previous
                   chapter), designed for payment of the Crown’s international debts during
                   the years 1805–1808, the activities of their commercial rivals, Gordon &
                   Murphy, had the complementary but distinct aim of ensuring the continued
                   operation of the imperial fiscal system of the Spanish state in the most adverse
                   circumstances.
                      The mercantile agreements analyzed in the pages that follow are of inter-
                   est because they show how the Spanish government avoided the interruption
                   of the royal treasury’s transatlantic lines of communication and commerce.
                   Such a breach would have drastically reduced the flow of silver from the
                   colonial treasuries and undermined the finances of an increasingly menaced
                   monarchy. But before examining the complex business of the Gordon &
                   Murphy conglomerate, we shall focus on the interdependence that tradi-
                   tionally existed between colony and metropolis with respect to the principal
                   state monopolies of the Spanish crown.


                            The Import Dependence of the Colonial Fiscal Monopolies
                   The tobacco monopoly was one of the most lucrative of fiscal branches of
                   the Spanish empire but relied on a set of important and varied transatlantic
                   trade transactions that had to be carried out on a regular basis. The size and
                   variety of these exchanges demonstrates that the Spanish tobacco monopoly
                   was one of the most complex economic organizations in the Western world
                   at the time.5 From the 1760s until 1810, its operations included an inter-
                   connected set of fiscal administrations in metropolis and colonies, including
                   a group of factories in Spain, Cuba, New Spain, New Granada, and Peru, as
                   well as thousands of sales points in these and many other territories.6 The
                   Spanish tobacco monopoly also operated commercially in Buenos Aires,
                   Chile, Guatemala, Puerto Rico, Santo Domingo, Venezuela, Louisiana, as
                   well as in the Philippines. Historian Susan Deans-Smith affirms that at the
                   end of the century, the tobacco factories in New Spain alone employed more
                   than 13,000 workers, apart from several thousand commercial and admin-
                   istrative employees in the viceroyalty. To these should be added the 2,000
                   workers in the Havana factory, the 5,000 in the Seville tobacco factory,
                   and fewer numbers in other parts of the empire. In fact, it is unlikely that
                   there was any manufacturing enterprise in Europe, at this time, which had
                   an equivalent number of employees. The only commercial enterprise that

                   5 S. Deans-Smith, Bureaucrats, Planters and Workers, p. 159. On the early history of the monopoly, see
                     José Manuel Rodrı́guez Gordillo, La creación del estanco del tabaco en España (Seville: Fundación Altadis,
                     2002).
                   6 For a broad, comparative analysis, see L. Nater, “El tabaco y las finanzas del imperio español: Nueva
                     España y la metrópoli, 1760–1810,” Ph.D. thesis, El Colegio de México, 1998.
