P1: JZP
9780521879644c06        CUNY1040/Marichal                 0 521 87964 7                          August 23, 2007             10:56




                   188                                             Bankruptcy of Empire

                               Silver
                                             Mining
                                             districts
                                                                                  Silver coin
                                                                                                                                         Almaden
                               Mercury                    Mercury                                                                       Mercury Mine
                                                                                                            Tobacco
                                                                                Silver                                                 Mercury
                            Mexico                                 Port of                  Havana                          Cádiz
                             City                                 Veracruz                   Cuba
                                                    Silver
                                         Silver                                                     Paper         Mercury

                                                                         Mercury, paper
                             Royal Tobacco
                                                                                                                  Paper
                               Factory,                                                                                             Valencia
            paper             Mexico City                                                                                            Spain
                                                         silver

                             Other Tobacco
                               Factories




                                                                                Flow of fiscal commodities of state monopolies
                                                                                silver

                    Figure 6.1. Flows of Fiscal Merchandise and Silver between the Royal Treasuries of Spain,
                                                 Cuba, and Mexico, (circa 1790).
                                                  Source: Drawn by Carlos Marichal.



                   supplied the bulk of cigars, cigarettes, and snuff consumed throughout the
                   peninsula. In effect, by remitting tobacco leaf, the Cuban tobacco monopoly
                   provided a valuable subsidy in kind to one of the most important revenue
                   sources of the metropolitan treasury at the end of the eighteenth century:
                   tobacco produced close to 30 percent of total ordinary revenues of the royal
                   tax administration in Spain.12 The complexities of the transatlantic transfers
                   are illustrated in Figure 6.1.
                      The importance of the tobacco monopoly for imperial revenues was
                   exceeded only by silver mining, which, in turn, depended to a consid-
                   erable degree on mercury (quicksilver) imports from Spain. The use of large
                   quantities of mercury for silver amalgamation and refining in the colonial
                   mining centers was not new, having begun in the mid-sixteenth century
                   in Mexico. Although it was possible to process the silver minerals without
                   mercury, the alternative procedures were time-consuming and inefficient,


                   12 C. Marichal, “Beneficios y costes fiscales” offers an estimate of the minimum figure, but it is necessary
                      to undertake more detailed research on the monopoly’s cost structure in Spain. On deliveries of tobacco
                      leaf from Cuba to Spain, see the classic work of R. de la Sagra, Historia económico-polı́tica y estadı́stica,
                      pp. 240–265.
