P1: JZP
9780521879644c06     CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007        10:56




                   Royal Treasury and the Gordon & Murphy Consortium, 1806–1808 187

             exceeded the size of the Spanish tobacco monopoly in the late eighteenth
             century was the British East India Company.7
                The performance of this Spanish imperial company depended strategically
             on a series of trading and financial operations carried out between the royal
             treasuries of Spain, Mexico, and Cuba.8 These included the shipment of
             large quantities of paper from Valencia, Malagá, and Cádiz to Veracruz since
             this commodity was an essential input for the manufacture of cigarettes at
             the tobacco monopoly’s great factory in Mexico City and smaller manu-
             facturing establishments in other cities. The annual consignments of tens
             of thousands of reams of paper sent from Spain were fundamental for the
             monopoly’s smooth operation.9 If supplies were not received, manufacture
             and packing would be disrupted, sales would fall, and there would be a
             reduction in the monopoly’s large, annual financial surplus sent from New
             Spain to the tobacco administrations in both Cuba and Spain.10 To guar-
             antee the provision of paper for the great tobacco factories in Mexico, the
             Spanish government signed contracts with international trading firms that
             were to send dozens of ships from Europe to Veracruz in the years 1806–
             1810.
                The productivity of the tobacco administration in Mexico influenced
             other units of the monopoly across the empire. The Cuban tobacco admin-
             istration, for example, depended on regular fiscal transfers (known as the
             tobacco situados) from New Spain that financed a large proportion of costs
             associated with the annual tobacco harvest in the island. In the second half
             of the eighteenth century, New Spain yearly sent between 500,000 and
             750,000 silver pesos to the officers of the tobacco monopoly in Havana
             so that they could acquire the tobacco leaf from local producers.11 In turn,
             Cuban tobacco output was vital for the monopoly’s metropolitan operations.
             Havana was already famous as the source of the best cigars and snuff in the
             world and it also provided much raw tobacco for manufacture in Spain. A
             great volume of tobacco leaf (tobacco en rama) was shipped annually from
             Havana to Cádiz: this was the essential raw material for the Spanish state
             tobacco factories, especially for the famous establishment at Seville that

             7 “The Mexican monopoly played a pivotal role in the financing of an empire-wide tobacco monopoly.”
               S. Deans-Smith, Bureaucrats, Planters and Workers, p. 61.
             8 The tobacco monopoly also carried on trade between Louisiana and New Spain and between the
               different branches of the tobacco monopoly in South America. For references, see L. Nater, “El
               tabaco y las finanzas del imperio español,” Chapter 5.
             9 Most of the paper came from factories in Barcelona, Aragón, and Valencia, generally being sent to
               Málaga and Cádiz for transshipment to the Americas. For useful references on the paper trade, see
               S. Deans-Smith, Bureaucrats, Planters and Workers, pp. 101–105.
            10 By regulation the net income from the tobacco monopoly in New Spain was sent to the metropolis
               and, in smaller proportion, to Cuba.
            11 On the tobacco situados for Cuba, see C. Marichal and M. Souto, “Silver and Situados.”
