P1: JZP
9780521879644c06       CUNY1040/Marichal         0 521 87964 7                 August 23, 2007      10:56




                                                                  6
                             Between Spain and America: The Royal
                              Treasury and the Gordon & Murphy
                                   Consortium, 1806–1808

                      We have seen with great pain and indignation the Royal licences granted
                      through the Consolidation Fund (Caxa de Consolidación de Vales Reales) to
                      various foreign trading houses from Europe and the United States . . . to send
                      to this port as many vessels as they wish and to return with gold, silver and
                      the products of this country . . . directly to Spain or to neutral ports.
                                       Merchant Guild of Veracruz (Consulado de Veracruz) (1809)1

                   For the administration of Charles IV, the transfers of American silver to
                   Europe were fundamental not only to pay for wartime obligations such as the
                   Subsidy Treaty signed with Napoleon but also to sustain the overall finances
                   of the monarchy. To ensure a regular flow of bullion from the colonies, it
                   was essential that the fiscal system in the Americas continue to produce and
                   remit tax surpluses, despite the obstacles and interruptions caused by naval
                   wars. This depended on both the ability of royal officials to collect resources
                   in the colonies and the smooth functioning of the most important state
                   monopolies, which required regular dispatches of vital materials from Spain
                   to the colonies as well as return shipments of key commodities and silver
                   from the Americas. In sum, an indispensable condition for the continuity
                   of the empire lay in the sustained functioning of what was a complex,
                   transatlantic fiscal machine.
                      There were two strategic monopoly branches in this vast fiscal system that
                   maintained major commercial and financial activities across the Atlantic.
                   The first was the great and extensive tobacco monopoly which operated
                   throughout the Spanish empire and was composed of a great number of
                   interrelated units. The tobacco monopoly was not only a money machine
                   for the extensive network of imperial treasuries but, in practice, also a
                   powerful transatlantic enterprise. During the last third of the eighteenth
                   century, it became one of the most important sources of revenues for the

                   1 “Representación presentada por el Consulado de Veracruz a la Suprema Junta Central de España”
                     (document dated March 1, 1809), AGN, Consulado, 252, exp. 5, f. 4.




                                                                 184
