P1: JZP
9780521879644c06       CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007       10:56




                   190                                 Bankruptcy of Empire

                   warships traveling from Seville and Cádiz to the Spanish American ports
                   of Veracruz and Cartagena. Nevertheless, during the First Naval War with
                   Britain (1796–1801) and, above all, during the Second Naval War (1804–
                   1808) the supply of mercury for the American mines as well as the paper
                   required by New Spain’s tobacco monopoly required new carriers. Nei-
                   ther royal warships nor Spanish merchant vessels could cross the Atlantic
                   without running the risk of being captured by the dominant British Navy.
                      To overcome these serious obstacles, the Madrid authorities decided to
                   use neutral commerce to their advantage and to negotiate private trade
                   agreements with merchant houses that could guarantee delivery of key
                   supplies from Europe to the colonial administrations.19 In the case of the
                   tobacco and quicksilver monopolies, the Anglo-Spanish merchant firm of
                   Gordon & Murphy received the most important contracts and hence was in
                   a position to exercise a prominent role in the royal commerce and finance of
                   New Spain. This private enterprise thus assumed the traditional functions
                   of supplier of crown commodities, receiving, in return, the right to extract
                   large volumes of silver, both on public and private account.
                      Gordon & Murphy’s successful management of these operations was due,
                   in good measure, to the fact that it already operated as an international
                   trading conglomerate with a broad-ranging network of mercantile partners
                   and correspondents in Malaga, Cádiz, Lisbon, London, Hamburg, Jamaica,
                   New Orleans, Havana, and Veracruz. Also of critical importance were their
                   excellent political contacts in Spain, New Spain, and England.20 This is
                   confirmed, on the one hand, by the fact that in the midst of wars, the Spanish
                   crown assigned this merchant house responsibility for the transfer of official
                   correspondence between the metropolis and the colonies and, in the second
                   place, by their ability to obtain English government licenses allowing free
                   passage to Spanish America and avoiding dangerous confrontations with
                   the British Navy.
                      The fiscal and financial significance of these special mercantile contracts
                   for the sustenance of the Spanish empire has been underestimated by the
                   majority of historians that have analyzed neutral commerce between 1797–
                   1799 and 1805–1808. It is traditionally argued that the main factor leading
                   to authorization of neutral trade in Veracruz and other American ports was
                   the desire of Spanish authorities to sustain private transatlantic trade in
                   years when the French and Spanish navies were at a clear disadvantage to


                   19 The policy was not a complete novelty. In fact, from the early 1790s the Crown had looked for
                      alternative mercury sources to those from Amaden by buying large amounts from mines in Saxony.
                      According to D. Brading, Mineros y comerciantes, p. 320, already by 1793, sales of German mercury
                      tripled those of Castilian mercury in New Spain.
                   20 The most detailed analysis is that of G. Jiménez Codinach, “An Atlantic Silver Entrepot,” Chap-
                      ter 6.
