P1: JZP
9780521879644c06       CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007       10:56




                   204                                  Bankruptcy of Empire

                      The total value of the cargos carried by ships chartered by the Gordon &
                   Murphy consortium between 1806 and 1808 is difficult to estimate because
                   of the complicated accounts, although the value was considerable for the
                   period and involved several million pesos.71 The information is not complete
                   because the merchandise brought by the neutral ships used simulated bills:
                   the lading lists were deliberately falsified to deceive the British Navy. Even
                   so, some ships contracted for Gordon & Murphy were confiscated by British
                   frigates and their cargos were auctioned in Jamaica. It is surprising that a
                   greater percentage of ships were not captured.


                                     The Agreements with the British Government
                                        and Jamaica-to-Veracruz Mail Packets
                   We have previously summarized several reasons why the British govern-
                   ment did not seriously impede neutral trade with Veracruz and approved
                   the business transactions of consortia such as Hope/Baring and Gordon &
                   Murphy, ensuring access to Mexico, the world’s largest producer of silver.
                   We have already suggested that there were powerful trading interests in
                   Great Britain that insisted on the importance of a regular supply of precious
                   metals from Spanish America to finance trade with India and China and
                   that, equally important, the British government needed the Mexican sil-
                   ver to provide subsidies to its European allies fighting against Napoleon.72
                   However, there were other benefits for the English economy, derived from
                   the activities of the neutral merchant fleets of both consortia since a consid-
                   erable part of the consignments sent to Veracruz were made up of English
                   textiles. Historians have established that, in fact, the markets of Mexico
                   and the rest of Spanish America became particularly important to English
                   industry precisely as it began suffering as a result of Napoleon’s continen-
                   tal blockade imposed in 1806.73 More specifically, the historian François
                   Crouzet, doyen of studies on the international aspects of the economy in
                   the Napoleonic age, has argued that British textile exports to Spanish and
                   Portuguese America avoided the closure of a great number of factories and
                   helped maintain the dynamism of the industrial revolution in Britain, dur-
                   ing the crisis years of 1806–1808. In his classic work on the Continental
                   Blockade, Crouzet explained in detail the different kinds of neutral licenses

                   71 Our extensive revision of the Naval (Marina) records in the National Archive (Archivo General de
                      la Nación) shows that the records of the Gordon & Murphy shipments are more dispersed and less
                      complete that those of their rival, Hope/Baring, which makes it difficult to reconstruct the joint
                      accounts of both fleets.
                   72 The best source on this subject is J. H. Sherwig, Guineas and Gunpowder.
                   73 See F. Crouzet, L’Economie Britannique, vol. 1, Chapters 4 and 5. Statistical estimates of Veracruz
                      trade for this period are found in J. Cuenca, “Comercio y hacienda.”
