P1: JZP
9780521879644c06     CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                     August 23, 2007         10:56




                    Royal Treasury and the Gordon & Murphy Consortium, 1806–1808 211

             royal treasury or to its several creditors, for there is difficulty in ascertaining
             the final destination of this large volume of Mexican funds, given the dis-
             persed nature of the documentation in this time of war, contraband, and
             complex transatlantic transactions.88
                 The neutral trade conducted with Mexico was also of great importance
             to the British economy, as we have already argued. Some general estimates
             of the volume of this commerce can be obtained from contemporary reports,
             in particular those of the Veracruz Merchant Guild. A large number of local
             merchants were furious with the privileges obtained by foreign merchant
             houses and their local allies. The guild merchants calculated that neutral
             trade between 1805 and 1808 had allowed for the introduction of eigh-
             teen million pesos of foreign goods through Veracruz and the extraction of
             almost twenty-eight million silver pesos and four million pesos in Mexican
             commodities.89 These large figures suggest that the Veracruz trade was
             among the most important and profitable of the entire transatlantic trade
             conducted during these years of Napoleonic wars.
                 The expeditions of neutral ships of the Hope/Baring and Gordon &
             Murphy merchant groups continued to arrive at the port of Veracruz dur-
             ing the first half of 1808, but were suspended in July owing to the invasion
             of the Iberian peninsula by the French army. In early 1808 the Napoleonic
             invasion of Spain produced a series of radical and profound changes in
             international alliances. The British government now threw its support to
             the Spanish patriot forces, struggling against the invading armies and the
             result was suspension of neutral trade since the British Navy henceforward
             allowed all Spanish vessels and warships clear passage across the Atlantic.
             Given the new circumstances, the Hope/Baring partnership no longer had
             an important role in the Veracruz trade after May 1808. But, surprisingly
             enough, the international merchant conglomerate headed by Gordon &
             Murphy continued to be active in Mexican–European trade for several more

            88 At the same time as the treasure was being transferred to the British ships anchored near the port of
               Veracruz, a considerable quantity of precious metals was being loaded onto a French warship at the
               port of Acapulco. This surprising event can be explained taking into account (1) France was the ally
               of Spain at this time, and so agreements of mutual support existed; (2) in the Pacific, the British fleet
               did not have the same presence as in the Atlantic, making it easier for the French ships to operate
               with a certain freedom along the west coast of America. The French frigate had arrived from the
               Philippines, accompanying the Spanish galleon Magallanes on the Manila to Acapulco route. For its
               return to Manila, the viceroy authorized 2,670,387 pesos be sent in the French warship, of which a
               little more than a fifth were destined to sustain the military fort (situado) of the Philippines. It can be
               assumed that the French Navy would have instructions to transport the remainder of the silver from
               the Philippines to France to assist the Napoleonic navy and army. AGN, Correspondencia de Virreyes,
               vol. 233, exp. 1421, f. 363.
            89 “Representación presentada por el Consulado de Veracruz a la Suprema Junta Central de España,”
               AGN, Consulado, 252, exp. 5, fs. 6–7.
