P1: JZP
9780521879644c07       CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007         10:52




                   214                                   Bankruptcy of Empire

                   Napoleon seized upon the weakness of both son and father and shortly
                   negotiated their departure and the subsequent imprisonment of Charles IV
                   and Fernando VII in respective palaces in southern France. The establish-
                   ment of a French administration in the Spanish capital, however, was not
                   met without popular resistance. The famous rebellion of the Madrid popu-
                   lace against the invaders in early May 1808 (immortalized in one of Goya’s
                   most famous paintings) was bloodily repressed. It was not long, however,
                   before a number of regional, patriotic juntas began to be formed in different
                   regions of Spain, and soon the struggle against the French invaders gained
                   strength. In Spanish America, most colonial elites expressed their sympa-
                   thies with the patriotic juntas that had sprung up in different regions of
                   the mother country. But, inevitably, considerable confusion reigned with
                   respect to the future of monarchy and empire.
                      In the pages that follow, attention is focused on the loans and donations
                   collected in colonial Mexico to assist the patriot forces in Spain in their
                   struggle against Napoleon. The financial contributions were considerable.
                   Between late 1808 and early 1811, over twenty-five million pesos in tax
                   monies, loans, and donations were sent from New Spain to Cádiz, principal
                   seat of patriot resistance in southern Spain. The Spanish American financial
                   contributions to the treasury of the Junta Central in Seville and Cádiz in
                   1809 and the Cádiz Parliament in the years 1810–1812 underscore the
                   significance of fiscal and financial contributions of Mexico and the other
                   colonies to the struggle against Napoleon during this period and demon-
                   strate that without the silver sent, the patriot resistance in southern Spain
                   would have probably lacked the financial resources to resist the prolonged
                   French siege of Cádiz.2 The paradox was, therefore, that the colonies should
                   have helped to defend the metropolis in its darkest hour.

                     The Importance of Spanish American Contributions to the Struggle
                          against Napoleon and to the Cádiz Parliament, 1810–1812
                   The Napoleonic invasion created a deep fiscal and financial crisis in Spain.
                   After the French occupation, the Spanish population had to support double
                   taxation: that of the invading army as well as war taxes (in money and
                   kind) imposed by patriotic armies in various regions. The French admin-
                   istration attempted to keep control over the old fiscal system in the occu-
                   pied territories, but with mixed results. On May 19, 1808, the Minister of

                   2 A detailed evaluation of income data for the Cádiz Parliament is found in C. Marichal, “Beneficios
                     y costes fiscales.” However, Josep Fontana argues that the patriot resistance in the rest of Spain did
                     not receive much support from the government at Cádiz but rather had to rely on local resources.
                     See Josep Fontana, “La financiación de la guerra de la independencia,” Hacienda Pública Española, 69,
                     1981, 209–217 and Josep Fontana and Ramón Garrabou, Guerra y Hacienda: la Hacienda del gobierno
                     central en los años de la guerra de independencia 1808–1814 (Alicante, Spain: Instituto Juan Gil Albert,
                     1986).
