P1: JZP
9780521879644c07      CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        10:52




                   220                                 Bankruptcy of Empire

                   consisted of tax monies and loans: 80 percent of the total came from New
                   Spain, while the rest was made up of lesser contributions from Peru and
                   other colonies. The clear preponderance of Mexico in silver remittances
                   reinforces the argument previously advanced with regard to its role as a
                   colonial submetropolis, even in this critical era, crisscrossed by Atlantic wars
                   and revolutions.
                      In the pages that follow, we look at three aspects of the last great cam-
                   paign undertaken in colonial Mexico to provide the metropolis with finan-
                   cial assistance. First, we explore how – despite the political crisis in New
                   Spain between July and September 1808 – the viceregal government was
                   able to launch a successful effort to collect donations from all social sec-
                   tors of the viceroyalty in order to contribute financially to the struggle
                   against Napoleon. Second, we analyze specifically why the richest groups of
                   New Spain provided so great a number of loans and supplements for the
                   patriot government at Cádiz in the years 1809–1811. Lastly, we evaluate
                   how important the shipments of Mexican fiscal remittances and loans silver
                   were in relation to the viceroyalty’s regular income. These transfers – which
                   amounted to around twenty-five million pesos – were of two types, consist-
                   ing of approximately ten million pesos in donations and loans, and fifteen
                   million pesos in tax funds. For such a huge sum to be sent in less than three
                   years bespoke the persistence and power of the colonial administration,
                   despite the extreme weakness of the metropolis.

                    The Coup against the Viceroy of Mexico in 1808 and the First Loans
                                         for the Spanish Patriots
                   The months of July to September 1808 marked a first moment of crisis
                   for the colonial regime in New Spain, although not its downfall. From the
                   beginning of July, different versions of events transpiring in the metropo-
                   lis began to circulate in Mexico. Bitter disputes broke out regarding the
                   supreme authority to which the viceroyalty was now subject, particularly
                   as news of the imprisonment of Charles IV and Fernando VII and the
                   installment of a French administration in Madrid awoke enormous con-
                   cern. Soon after, reports on the establishment of patriotic juntas in different
                   regions of Spain generated an unprecedented political effervescence in the
                   cities of the viceroyalty, although there were as yet few channels for pub-
                   lic expression in colonial society. In the summer of 1808, therefore, great
                   confusion reigned with regard to the legitimacy of the different Spanish
                   juntas since all declared themselves “sovereign.” Subsequently, however,

                     pesos (equivalent to 587,560,544 reales), while the income for Seville’s general treasury and Cádiz’
                     treasury, registered as arriving from Americas, was 591.4 million reales. This close correspondence
                     is indicative of the reliability of the data.
