P1: JZP
9780521879644c07    CUNY1040/Marichal         0 521 87964 7                 August 23, 2007      10:52




                   Mexican Silver for the Cortes of Cádiz and the War against Napoleon 223

             to the defense of the Catholic religion, stating that if the French were not
             expelled from the Peninsular, there could be untold consequences for New
             Spain itself:
             The humble Indian, who honors with a candle the Saint that defends his home,
             as well as the wealthy Mexican who enjoys using his wealth for sumptuous events
             dedicated to the Virgin of Guadalupe, . . . will find themselves forced to submit to
             the martial spirit and philosophy . . . (of the French invaders). . . . 32
                The official proclamation requesting financial contributions from the
             Mexican population for the defense of the metropolis was only ratified after
             the Viceroy Iturrigaray had been deposed in early September 1808, and the
             struggle for political power in the capital settled with the victory of the
             wealthy guild merchants. In spite of the growing popular discontent caused
             by the political coup in the capital, the new Viceroy, General Pedro Garibay,
             began to collect a great quantity of funds, sending them to the metropolis.
             The explicit objective was to provide financial resources for the struggle of
             the patriots against the French armies and, at the same time, to shore up
             the shaky edifice of the Spanish imperial state.

                             Mexican Silver for Defense of the Metropolis:
                                    The Donation of 1808–1809
             On October 4, 1808, Viceroy Garibay published an official petition
             addressed to the inhabitants of New Spain, asking them to provide resources
             to sustain the Spanish in their war against the French. His edict suggested
             that the money would be sent in the name of the king to Junta at Seville and
             ordered the formation of “associations of bodies, communities or guilds” to
             collect the funds. Initially, there was certain confusion about the specific
             nature of the first contribution, but it was soon confirmed to be a univer-
             sal donation. From November 1808 onward, the Gazeta de Mexico regularly
             published lists of the donors and the amounts they had contributed. The
             majority of the initial contributors were from the capital city and surround-
             ing zones. (See Table 7.1.)
                By November, almost half a million pesos had been collected from dif-
             ferent social groups and regions, and over the next two years, additional
             amounts were added in successive campaigns, resulting in a total donation
             of more than two million pesos.33 The detailed lists sent to Mexico by

               Its Current War with France], (México: September 13, 1808), 4-page pamphlet, Fondo Reservado,
               Colección Lafragua, BN (Mexico).
            32 Ibid., p. 2.
            33 The Gazeta de México published the lists daily between late 1808 and early 1811.
