P1: JZP
9780521879644c07     CUNY1040/Marichal         0 521 87964 7                  August 23, 2007       10:52




                   Mexican Silver for the Cortes of Cádiz and the War against Napoleon 217

                 The total income of the governing council and the Army of Andalusia
             in 1809 was registered at 388,505,075 reales and, of this sum, 75 percent
             was made up of silver remittances from the colonies in the Americas.
                 The Supreme Junta was soon forced to abandon Seville, as the political,
             military, and financial situation in southern Spain became increasingly pre-
             carious as a result of the advance of the French troops in late 1809 and early
             1810. The Napoleonic forces inflicted successive defeats upon the Spanish
             troops and, inevitably, forced retreats: the principal divisions of the armies
             of Andalusia and Extremadura retired south, fighting a rearguard action. In
             late 1809, they finally abandoned Seville and marched to the port of Cádiz.
             This city, with its magnificent bay opening on the Atlantic and excellent
             military defenses, provided the necessary resources for the patriot govern-
             ment as well as army and navy to survive during the years 1810 and 1811
             at a time when the Napoleonic occupation reached its zenith in much of
             the rest of Europe.
                 Indispensable to the continued resistance against the French armies was
             the alliance that had been signed with Great Britain in early 1809. Crucially
             important was the protection offered by the British fleet that anchored in
             the bay and port of Cádiz. The great concentration of cannon on numerous
             ships of the line and frigates stationed in the inner and outer bay impeded
             all attempts by the French forces to cross the extremely narrow peninsula
             that stretched from the mainland to the port city. Also of fundamental
             importance was the fact that the British warships facilitated the regular
             movement of Spanish merchant fleets and warships across the Atlantic,
             maintaining the vital connections with the colonies in the Americas. As
             a result, Cádiz remained a bustling trade entrepôt during the war years:
             British merchants and shippers carried on a great activity there, sending
             out cargos of manufactured goods – mainly on Spanish vessels – to the
             colonies and receiving in exchange large quantities of silver and tropical
             produce.
                 The alliance with Great Britain, therefore, made not only the military
             but also the commercial and fiscal circumstances in the port of Cádiz more
             auspicious than might have been expected, given the concentration of thou-
             sands of military and political refugees who arrived there in the first months
             of 1810. After fleeing from Seville to Cádiz, the members of the Supreme
             Junta agreed to dissolve as governing council since the military defeats
             had undermined their legitimacy. Sovereignty was transferred to a Regency
             Council, but this body was politically weak and did not control significant
             fiscal resources.12 As a result, from January 1810, authority to collect taxes

            12 The Regency Council was constituted by the Bishop of Orense Pedro de Quevedo the senior officials
               Francisco de Saavedra, Francisco Xavier de Castaños, and Antonio Escaño, and the cleric Miguel
               Lardizabal y Uribe (representative for America).
