P1: JZP
9780521879644c07        CUNY1040/Marichal              0 521 87964 7                      August 23, 2007          10:52




                   218                                      Bankruptcy of Empire

                   was transferred to the Cádiz Council ( Junta de Cádiz) – composed of lead-
                   ing merchants – which effectively administered most public monies for
                   the patriot forces until the end of the year.13 The Regency and the Cádiz
                   Council proceeded to issue a call for elections to a general representative
                   government for Spain and America, which became known as the Cortes de
                   Cádiz (Cádiz Parliament).
                      A considerable volume of funds were soon accumulated in the coffers of
                   the Cádiz Council as a result of collection of duties on the brisk transatlantic
                   trade but, above all, as a result of the arrival of large fiscal remittances and
                   loans in silver coin sent by the Spanish American colonies. The Cádiz mer-
                   chants (who were in charge of the fiscal receipts of the patriot government)
                   assumed their responsibilities with enthusiasm as illustrated in the procla-
                   mation to Spanish American (Proclama a la América española), published at
                   the beginning of 1810 by the Cádiz Parliament. In it the authors affirmed:
                   “Here is the nerve of the war; here our union with the British nation has
                   been forged.”14
                      The Cádiz Council sent official notices to Spanish America, indicating
                   that the Regency had called on all residents of Spain and its possessions to
                   participate in a National Congress (the Cádiz Parliament to begin sessions
                   in 1810) and underlined that this political enterprise would be facilitated by
                   the fact that Cádiz had connections with virtually, “all places in America.”
                   The text also added that the patriots required as much financial assistance
                   as Spanish Americans could provide.15
                      But exactly what was the level of financial resources or disposable income
                   available to the patriot government in Cádiz during 1810? The Count of
                   Toreno, deputy-elect in the parliament and a man well informed on public
                   finance, made a summary of income:

                   The entries of the Cádiz Council ( Junta de Cádiz) during that time ( January-
                   October 1810) reached 351 million reales. Of these about 84 million came from
                   duties collected in the district; in donations and extraordinary charges of the city,


                   13 The contract between the Regency and the Junta Superior de Cádiz was established on March 31,
                      1810. See the interesting document, Real aprobación y decreto de S.M. sobre el Reglamento que la Junta
                      Superior de Cádiz propuso, haciéndose cargo provisionalmente en su distrito de todas las rentas de la Corona y
                      su Dirección (Cádiz, reprinted in Mexico, 1810), 8-page pamphlet, copy in the Collection Lafragua,
                      no. 182, Biblioteca Nacional (BN) (Mexico).
                   14 Junta Superior de Cádiz a la América Española (Cádiz: February 28, 1810), doc. 393, Collection Lafragua,
                      BN (Mexico), p. 6.
                   15 Ibid., pp. 6–7: In the same document it was stated: “Cádiz calls on you (os), peoples of America and
                      is confident its voices will be heard. . . . In which city, in which port, in what remote and hidden
                      place does not Cádiz have a correspondent, a parent or a friend? Oh, Americans! You have to defend
                      the same rights, the same king to liberate, the same injustices to correct. . . . ”
