P1: JZP
9780521879644c07     CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        10:52




                   Mexican Silver for the Cortes of Cádiz and the War against Napoleon 233

             extraordinary contributions suggest the marked scarcity of hard currency
             which had begun to affect even the wealthiest sectors of Mexican society.
                This last loan exhausted the patience of the propertied classes of New
             Spain and reduced possibilities of further contributions for the metropolis.
             The failure of the loan was confirmed by the testimony of Bishop Abad y
             Queipo, one of the most lucid and informed minds on colonial financial
             matters. Responding to the requests of the merchant guilds to lend money,
             the skeptical bishop remarked that he did not believe the twenty-million-
             peso patriotic loan could be paid back:
             it would seem impossible to me that it can be realized completely or in part. Not
             completely because there is not enough hard cash in the kingdom to cover it without
             taking all the silver from the churches and all the silverware that is the property
             of individuals, both of these dangerous methods in the critical circumstances in
             which we find ourselves.60
                 For Abad y Queipo, the Mexican economy simply could not provide
             more money to the state: the catastrophic agrarian crisis (1809) had caused
             a steep drop in agricultural production; trade was increasingly stagnant and
             money was becoming scarce in all regions. Except for “some ten or dozen
             mercantile houses in the cities of Mexico and Veracruz,” traditional credit
             networks had been devastated:
             We see all commerce constrained, bills delayed, and nobody able to make the
             stipulated term payments on credits. . . . All this is the effect of the impolitic and
             ruinous contributions and other extraordinary extractions that have left the viceroy-
             alty without savings and without the necessary cash for business and trade.61
                The viceroyalty of New Spain, however, faced not only an economic
             recession but also an imminent political crisis. The outbreak of popular
             insurrection in Guanajuato in September 1810, led by the revolutionary
             priest Miguel Hidalgo, marked the start of ten years of violent and extensive
             conflict throughout Mexico, later known as the wars of independence. After
             the outbreak of domestic warfare, further attempts to seek financial support
             for the metropolis were bound to be much more difficult, as historian
             Luis Jáuregui has argued. The patriot subscription of March 1811 was the
             last used to exclusively support peninsular troops and hence forward, the
             colonial administration focused its efforts, financial and military, on defense
             of royalist positions within the viceroyalty itself.62

            60 Cited in J. M. L. Mora, Crédito Público, p. 143.
            61 Ibid., p. 143.
            62 L. A. Jáuregui, “La anatomı́a del fisco colonial,” p. 266. Nevertheless, it should be observed that L.
               Alamán, Historia de México, vol. 2, pp. 235–236, affirmed that the last loan for the peninsula was in
               August 1811.
