P1: JZP
9780521879644c07       CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        10:52




                   228                                  Bankruptcy of Empire

                      It may be presumed that this enthusiasm reflected the fact that after
                   the coup against Iturrigaray, the capital city’s merchant elite had assumed
                   the real power behind the viceregal throne. If we consider how impor-
                   tant it was for the great Mexican merchants to maintain control of trade
                   with the metropolis and, in particular, with Cádiz, the great entrepôt of
                   colonial trade, then their willingness to collaborate with large sums of
                   money in the official financial war campaigns can be readily explained. In
                   fact, maintenance of this vital transatlantic connection was indispensable
                   to the survival of much of their business activity and of the privileges
                   of the merchant guilds, which as many old regime corporations assured
                   control of key business opportunities. If the Spanish government should
                   disappear as a result of the Napoleonic onslaught and if Mexican ports
                   should be opened to free traffic from other countries – in particular from
                   England and the United States – this would radically alter the status quo.
                   It would probably lead to the end of the secular trading oligopolies that
                   the rich Mexico City guild merchants had exercised for more than two
                   centuries.45
                      There is, therefore, little mystery on the size of the financial contributions
                   of the Mexican colonial plutocracy to the metropolis in the critical years
                   of 1808–1810. Initially, however, loans made up only a small part of the
                   remittances sent from Veracruz to Cádiz to help finance the war against
                   France. Between August 1808 and August 1809 the astounding amount
                   of over fourteen million pesos was shipped to Cádiz, but most of this sum
                   consisted of accumulated tax reserves, plus a donation collected during that
                   year and four million pesos from the offices of the Consolidated Fund in
                   the viceroyalty.46 Subsequently, however, as tax reserves became depleted,
                   the largest contributions did come in the way of loans from the wealthy
                   Mexican merchant oligarchy and silver miners. (See Table 7.3.)
                      In July 1809, the new Viceroy, Archbishop Lizana, received orders from
                   the Spanish minister of finance “to send 3 million pesos to pay drafts owed
                   to the British government.”47 These bills were receipts that the Regency
                   in Seville had delivered to British diplomats in Spain in exchange for the
                   money and arms supplied from London to the first Spanish juntas for their

                   45 For detailed analysis of the mercantile and fiscal privileges of the powerful merchant guild, see the
                      doctoral thesis of G. Valle Pavón, “Consulado de Comerciantes.”
                   46 The resumption of silver shipments to Spain in the English warships Diamante and Melpómene
                      that left Veracruz in December 1808 were effected principally with funds from the Mexico City
                      mint, although a part of the monies also came from the tobacco monopoly. See L. A. Jáuregui, “La
                      anatomı́a del fisco colonial,” pp. 250–251. Later, at the beginning of 1809, the warship San Justo
                      set sail for Cádiz, loaded with funds of the Consolidation Fund: see A. Lavrin, “Execution of the
                      Laws.”
                   47 L. A. Jáuregui, “La anatomı́a del fisco colonial,” p. 252, who cites the Gazeta de México, July 12,
                      1809.
