P1: JZP
9780521879644c08       CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007         10:48




                   238                                   Bankruptcy of Empire

                   including Uruguay and Paraguay in the years 1810–1811. Similarly, in
                   Chile, republican movements triumphed briefly between 1811 and 1814
                   although they were later repressed by royalist forces (sent by the viceroy
                   of Peru), until in 1818 these forces were finally evicted and independence
                   consolidated. Conservative forces and royalist military officers also stymied
                   the initial success of insurgents in Caracas, leading to prolonged civil war
                   in Venezuela and then in the neighboring viceroyalty of New Granada,
                   where war between the royalist armies and insurgent forces, led by Simón
                   Bolivar, ran for over a decade. In the silver-rich viceroyalty of Peru, on the
                   other hand, the power equilibrium continued to be favorable to the colonial
                   administration which was able to impose its will and impede insurgency for
                   more than a decade.4 From Quito to Lima and Potosı́, royalists continued
                   to govern until the early 1820s and, as a result, the traditional heart of
                   Spanish administration in South America remained loyal to monarchy and
                   empire.
                      In late colonial Mexico the royalist regime also held onto power until
                   1821, but it was confronted by extensive popular rebellions. The year
                   1810 signaled the outbreak of insurrection in Mexico, led by the sol-
                   dier priests Miguel Hidalgo and José Marı́a Morelos, although colonial
                   authorities and troops held sway in practically all cities for a decade. The
                   revolts that broke out in central Mexico in September of 1810 were the
                   prologue of an extended civil war (and, in many ways, also a class war),
                   a conflict that confronted the viceregal administration and its allies (mil-
                   itary officials, church hierarchy, and economic elites) with different rebel
                   groups that enjoyed broad popular support.5 The former kept control of the
                   large colonial army and therefore the royalist administration remained in
                   power, although forced to defend against extensive guerrilla warfare in the
                   countryside.
                      During the years of domestic warfare, the great majority of the lead-
                   ing merchants, silver miners, and landowners of colonial Mexico remained
                   closely identified with the traditional regime, with its hierarchic social and
                   corporate order and its religious, political, social, and economic practices.
                   Their interests lay in supporting the monarchy and the status quo, which
                   explains why they were willing to finance the counterrevolutionary struggle.

                   4 On the counterrevolution in Mexico and Peru, see Brian Hamnett, Revolución y contrarrevolución en
                     México y el Perú: liberalismo, realeza y separatismo, 1800–1824 (México: Fondo de Cultura Económica,
                     1978).
                   5 Brian Hamnett, “Absolutismo ilustrado y crisis multidimensional en el perı́odo colonial tardı́o,
                     1760–1808,” in Josefina Vázquez, ed., Interpretaciones del siglo XVIII mexicano (Mexico: Nueva Imagen,
                     1992), p. 78, points out that it would be tempting to postulate a polarization between Europeans
                     and Americans (within the elite of New Spain) but that such an opposition never existed. The
                     wealthy joined hands against the insurgents during the entire war. He argues that the polarization
                     was propaganda invented by nationalists after independence.
