P1: JZP
9780521879644c07       CUNY1040/Marichal         0 521 87964 7           August 23, 2007   10:52




                   236                                Bankruptcy of Empire

                   Regency, and the Cádiz Parliament, as well as the armies of Andalusia and
                   Extremadura. Without this transatlantic financial assistance, their destiny
                   would have been highly in doubt.
                       At the same time, the Mexican silver shipments were of great significance
                   for Great Britain, Spain’s principal European ally against Napoleon. To
                   begin with, the silver was required to assist Wellington’s army in Portugal.
                   Historians of British military strategy argue that, after naval defense, the
                   Peninsular War was the most important priority in the struggle against
                   Napoleon in Europe. The soldiers under Wellington were considered to be
                   the ultimate bulwark of British influence on the continent. Nowhere else
                   were so many troops of the regular British army and nowhere else were
                   military expenditures so considerable. The latter were covered by sums
                   authorized by the Parliament but a substantial portion came, indirectly,
                   in the shape of Mexican silver: the British government taxed the colonial
                   trades with Spanish America, and the Bank of England accumulated much
                   silver on this account. These monetary resources were also indispensable to
                   cover the numerous and large subsidies provided in cash to the allies of Great
                   Britain in various parts of continental Europe engaged in war with France.66
                       These strategic interests also help explain the active role of the British
                   Royal Navy in protecting both Spanish transatlantic shipping and the port
                   of Cádiz during the Napoleonic onslaught. But there were also solid, com-
                   mercial reasons for the participation of the navy in the Mexican silver
                   shipments. During the war, British merchants took over much of Span-
                   ish American trade in Cádiz. English trading firms replaced most of their
                   competitors in the supply of goods to be sent out to the Spanish American
                   colonies and in exchange received most of the silver sent from the other side
                   of the Atlantic to pay for these goods. As historians Francois Crouzet and
                   Javier Cuenca have demonstrated in detailed studies, the British economy
                   benefited markedly from the flexibility of its merchants in taking control of
                   different international markets during the war years. The obstacles created
                   by the continental blockade (set up by Napoleon) were overcome in good
                   measure by contraband and new trading strategies, including the increasing
                   control of the Spanish American commerce that went primarily through
                   Cádiz. This allowed them to obtain a high percentage of silver and gold
                   shipments which were indispensable to British military strategies but also
                   for sustenance of the great trades with India and China. In this sense, pro-
                   viding naval protection for the port of Cádiz and the Spanish American
                   fleets during the Napoleonic war proved to be one of the essential secrets
                   of short- and long-term British economic and military success.

                   66 J. H. Sherwig, Guineas and Gunpowder, passim.
