P1: JZP
9780521879644c08        CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                      August 23, 2007          10:48




                   240                                      Bankruptcy of Empire

                   to avoid double counting and other accounting problems.6 While our esti-
                   mates of the government’s colonial debt with the private sector are more
                   modest, this does not imply that they did not have important economic
                   consequences.
                      The argument made here is that one of the greatest disadvantages of
                   the colonial debt was that the money lent (or donated) was not invested in
                   Mexico itself but simply shipped abroad to pay for the military expenses
                   and debts of the Spanish crown. The amounts lent were never returned by
                   the principal debtor,the metropolitan treasury, which in fact required that
                   both interest and principal be repaid to local investors by the treasuries of
                   the viceroyalty. As a result, these colonial debts reduced capital assets in the
                   economy and, at the same, increased the future tax burden of the inhabitants
                   of New Spain. Their economic effects were altogether different from the
                   adoption of a public debt policy in which government borrowing results
                   in stimulus to the domestic economy by means of public expenditures. In
                   contrast, the colonial debts were little more than a way of extracting private
                   savings from New Spain’s economy for transfer to the metropolis.7
                      A key issue then is to evaluate how important this debt was in terms of
                   the principal sources of capital that colonial corporations, institutions, and
                   individuals had available for investing in the economy.8 To proceed with
                   this discussion, it is useful to analyze the total amounts collected for the
                   Crown by the various privileged corporations of colonial Mexico.
                      Among the most important contributions to the Crown were those real-
                   ized by the wealthy members of the merchant guilds of Mexico City and
                   Veracruz. Over the years the Mexico City Merchant Guild was responsible
                   for the administration of seven interest-bearing loans between 1782 and

                   6 H. Klein, Las finanzas americanas, p. 112, affirmed that “loans and private subsidies reached 5.8
                     million pesos per year in the 1780s and 21.6 million pesos per year in the first decade of the new
                     (19th) century.” However, loans from the private sector to the Crown were actually much lower than
                     these figures suggest as demonstrated by thorough analysis of the documents in the Archivo General
                     de la Nación in branches such as “Préstamos y donativos” and “Consolidación.” Nonetheless, further
                     research is needed on the accumulated debts in specific branches of colonial treasuries, which should
                     be treated separately from private loans. The considerable problems of double accounting from 1787
                     until the end of the colonial epoch are cited in P. Pérez Herrero, Los beneficiarios del reformismo borbónico,
                     pp. 207–264, among other authors.
                   7 Abad y Queipo in J. M. L. Mora, Crédito Público, p. 129 wrote in 1810: “As the extraction of metallic
                     currency from New Spain is without return and has exceeded annual minting, the lack of money in
                     circulation is now felt and each day will be felt even more. . . . ”
                   8 H. Klein, Las finanzas americanas, p. 150, argues “this tax on individual savings was in fact a tax on
                     the local capital market.” J. Coatsworth, “Obstacles to Economic Growth,” 80–100, and E. Cárdenas,
                     “Algunas cuestiones sobre la depresión mexicana,” in E. Cárdenas, comp., Historia económica de México,
                     pp. 27–56, refer to the problem of the impact of transfers (including the money for the loans) on New
                     Spain’s investment rate; nevertheless, in a later revision, J. Coatsworth, Orı́genes del atraso, pp. 108–
                     109, argues that he considers an increase in the availability of this capital would not have produced
                     a substantial increase in investment.
