P1: JZP
9780521879644c08   CUNY1040/Marichal     0 521 87964 7          August 23, 2007   10:48




                    Rebellion of 1810, Colonial Debts, and Bankruptcy of New Spain        239

             Their loyalty to the Crown had been systematically demonstrated for
             decades and they continued to provide a series of smaller loans to the roy-
             alist forces that battled the insurgents within Mexico for another ten years.
             Yet both fiscal and financial resources of the colonial regime were already
             seriously depleted by 1810, and the wars only accentuated the growing
             insolvency.
                Ten years of war caused the definitive bankruptcy of the viceroyalty of
             New Spain and help explain why the royalist administration collapsed so
             abruptly in 1821. But, as we have already seen in detail, the financial crisis
             had its roots in the prolonged drainage of tax funds and incessant demands
             for loans by the Spanish crown to pay for numerous international wars
             between 1780 and 1810. In previous chapters, we have provided estimates of
             the huge volume of tax remittances as well as loans raised in colonial Mexico.
             In this chapter, we provide estimates of total government debt outstanding
             in 1810 and years immediately following, distinguishing between creditor
             groups. These colonial debts increasingly became a source of grievances
             during the war years insofar as the royalist administration faced increasing
             difficulties in covering debt service. A provisional balance is presented of
             the different categories of debt as well as rough estimates of the capital
             depletion experienced by the privileged corporations, which participated
             in the royal loans up to 1810.

                                       The Colonial Debt in 1810
             While not underestimating the effects of aggressive tax policy of the Bour-
             bon’s administration, this book has devoted special attention to the colonial
             debt. Our study suggests that it is important to attempt to evaluate the
             impact of the government’s debt policy on the society and the economy of
             Mexico, although there is a clear need for more research on its impact during
             the wars of independence and in the immediate postwar. The present study
             concludes with a more limited objective which consists in offering some
             quantitative estimates of the colonial debt by sector around 1810: here we
             summarize information on the loans, supplements, and donations studied
             in previous chapters.
                On the basis of the abundant archival materials reviewed, it is possible
             to affirm that between 1780 and 1810 the royal administration in Mexico
             collected at least thirty million pesos from individuals and corporations
             in the shape of loans and five million pesos as donations, all of which
             were shipped abroad. These figures for total indebtedness are substantially
             lower than those of other historians, particularly Herbert Klein, who has
             suggested that the colonial public debt grew by leaps and bounds, partic-
             ularly, after 1800. Klein’s calculations of debt, however, are based on the
             annual treasury summaries (cartas cuentas), which should be disaggregated
