P1: JZP
9780521879644c08     CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007         10:48




                      Rebellion of 1810, Colonial Debts, and Bankruptcy of New Spain                               245

             were extremely meager.15 The result was a virtual expropriation by the
             metropolitan treasury of many of the principal sources of capital and credit
             in the colonial economy.
                 What was the effect of the transfer of these funds on New Spain’s finances
             and economy overall? This question is not easy to resolve, not least because
             reliable estimates of the stock of total investment and annual investment
             rates are not yet available. However, it would seem perverse to argue that
             the transfer of loan funds to the metropolis did not have an effect on the
             investment path of the economy of colonial Mexico.16 Given the reduced
             size of financial markets in this period, thirty million pesos drained from
             elites and corporations cannot be considered a small sum.17 Our hypothesis
             is that metropolitan financial demands debilitated the colonial economy –
             through the constant borrowing in the form of royal loans – and so depressed
             private investment.18
                 Until the end of the colonial period, there had existed an extensive
             credit system and a relatively complex (if not very deep) capital market in
             Mexico. This is attested by recent work on the financial operations of the
             merchant guilds of Mexico and Veracruz and the Mining Tribunal as well
             as by studies on the numerous loans and credit extended by religious and
             pious organizations to merchants, rentiers, landowners, and silver miners,
             all of which provide testimony on the vigor of credit and financial markets
             in New Spain.19 When the royal administration contracted the Mexico City

            15 In Spain the monies obtained from the Consolidation were never returned to the church. See the
               comments on unpaid debt service in J. Fontana, La quiebra de la monarquı́a absoluta, pp. 415–418.
            16 J. Coatsworth, Orı́genes del atraso, p. 109, considers that the reduced annual investment rate would have
               amounted to a million pesos per month, which according to his calculations represented about 5% of
               total annual investment. He discounts the cumulative effect of this figure over a thirty-year period,
               stating that the inflation would have minimized its economic contribution. Also see two articles by
               David Brading “Facts and Figments in Bourbon Mexico,” Bulletin of Latin American Research, 4, 1
               (1985), 61–64 and “Comments on ‘The Economic Cycle” that advance similar arguments.
            17 R. Garner and S. E. Stefanou, Economic Growth and Change, pp. 12–14, and Richard Salvucci, “Eco-
               nomic Growth and Change in Bourbon Mexico: A Review Essay,” in The Americas, 51, 2 (1994),
               219–231, estimate the gross product of New Spain at 200 million pesos. But, what was the size of
               the capital market? As yet there are no reliable estimates: contemporaries suggested that the total
               capital stock of religious foundations at the end of the eighteenth century was around 40 million
               pesos, although the majority was in the form of outstanding loans; to this should be added the funds
               administered by nonecclesiastical corporations (such as the merchant guilds) and investors.
            18 Economists use the expression “crowding out” which is considered prejudicial when government
               expenditure refinances existing debt rather than making physical investments. Such was the case in
               New Spain, with funds transferred to cover metropolitan debts and not invested in the viceroyalty.
            19 See, among others: P. Pérez Herrero, Plata y libranzas; G. Valle Pavón, “Consulado de Comerciantes”;
               M. Souto “Consulado de comercio”; G. Von Wobeser, El crédito eclesiástico en Nueva España; E. Flores
               Clair Las deudas del Tribunal; D. Ladd, Mexican Nobility; and L. Greenow, Credit and Socioeconomic
               Change.
