P1: JZP
9780521879644c08     CUNY1040/Marichal          0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007        10:48




                     Rebellion of 1810, Colonial Debts, and Bankruptcy of New Spain                            251

             insurgency and the economic effects of the interruption of much transport
             and commerce. Successive viceroys requested support to finance the fight
             the war against the insurgents and received considerable support from the
             wealthiest groups in colonial society. But progressively, the financial con-
             tributions decreased as many members of the colonial elite argued that the
             volume of loans and donations advanced in preceding years had drained
             their personal resources, and therefore did not allow them to provide more
             money for the royal administration.
                The result was a financial crisis that was explicitly confirmed by the
             reports of a commission of financial experts in 1813 who evaluated the level
             of government debt and proposed remedies to attempt to maintain service
             payments in the midst of war. In the pages following, we comment these
             reports in some detail insofar as it is important to be aware of the opinion
             of those contemporaries who had the best information on the evolution of
             royal finances.
                In 1813, Viceroy Calleja gave instructions for the organization of a spe-
             cial financial commission ( Junta Permanente de Arbitrios) to analyze the fiscal
             and debt situation of the government.36 Calleja wished to obtain greater
             financial stability for his government and to open up the possibility of
             new loans for military operations. But the trends of fiscal receipts were
             not encouraging. According to the decree of April 17, 1813: “The Public
             accounts are in agony . . . with a monthly deficit of 260,000 pesos, consum-
             ing all public funds and exhausting all ordinary and some extraordinary
             financial instruments. . . . ”37 To attempt a debt conversion would not be
             an easy task, since investors resented the suspension of debt service on an
             already long sequence of loans and donations collected before 1810 and,
             even more, the forced loans decreed since the outbreak of the insurgency.
             This was confirmed in a key report on the situation of the finances of the
             viceroyalty at the end of 1813. The collective authors were wealthy indi-
             viduals and high-level functionaries with a profound knowledge of the
             economic status of the royal administration: the group included one of the
             wealthiest miners of Mexico José Marı́a Fagoaga, the director of the Mining
             College, Fausto de Elhuyar, the rich Veracruz merchant Tomás Murphy, the
             great landed proprietor José Martı́nez del Campo, and the knowledgeable

            36 On the several debt commissions formed between 1810 and 1812, see L. Jáuregui, La real hacienda
               de la Nueva España, Chapter 6. The Junta Permanente de Arbitrios, constituted in 1813, was made
               up of the Intendant of Mexico, Ramón Gutiérrez del Mazo, an ecclesiastical representative, Andrés
               Fernández Madrid, a representative of mine owners, José Marı́a Fagoaga, two representatives from
               commerce, Antonio Bassoco and Tomás Murphy, the head of the royal treasury of Guadalajara,
               Antonio Medina, and the accountant of the Central Army (Ejército del Centro), Francisco Javier de
               Aramberri. L. Jáuregui, La real hacienda de la Nueva España, pp. 266–270, analyzes the activity of
               this commission in detail.
            37 Cited by L. Jáuregui, La real hacienda de la Nueva España, p. 266.
