P1: JZP
9780521879644c08     CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        10:48




                     Rebellion of 1810, Colonial Debts, and Bankruptcy of New Spain                               249

                In summary, the Crown’s fiscal policy weighed unequally on New Spain’s
             population, with traumatic effects on the peasant communities.30 But it
             was precisely the most productive rural sectors – which had accumulated
             savings – that suffered the most and to such an extent that by 1810, the
             more prosperous Indian peasant towns no longer had much left in the way
             of communal monetary reserves.
                Preliminary estimates allow us to conclude that the total amount con-
             tributed by Indian towns in colonial Mexico between 1780 and 1810 in
             the shape of loans and donations for the Crown reached almost 2.7 million
             pesos. Virtually no interest was ever paid on this large sum, and the principal
             was never returned to the owners. The approximately 4,500 Indian peasant
             villages depended on these resources for a variety of economic, political,
             religious, and educational needs, as described in previous chapters. The
             decapitalization of the extensive network of what may be described as the
             savings and loan system of the Mexican peasantry represented an extremely
             severe blow to a predominantly agrarian society.31


                              Colonial Debt in the Early Years of Insurgency:
                                   The Bankruptcy of the Viceroyalty
             As a result of the outbreak of insurgency and war, the royal administration
             began progressively to suspend service on debts, which now constituted a
             major burden. The bulk of fiscal income was devoted to paying the loyalist
             military forces that struggled to contain numerous rebellions throughout
             the viceroyalty. The result was a growing tax crisis. In a thoughtful study
             on the gradual disintegration of New Spain’s fiscal system, historian John
             TePaske has suggested that the war of independence was, in itself, the cause
             of a dramatic decline in the efficiency of tax policy and administration,
             reducing revenues as well as transfers between treasuries. Political and mil-
             itary conflicts spurred a centrifugal process that advanced with great rapid-
             ity, disarticulating the complex, fiscal and financial system of the Bourbon

            30 The success of the donation was extraordinary as indicated by reports from the far-off province of
               New Mexico, more than 2,000 kilometres to the North of Mexico City. In this sparsely populated
               territory, the royal officials forced the traders and small cattlemen, as well as the Indian communities
               to contribute money and in-kind, resulting in 117 pesos in metal, together with 218 blankets
               (sarapes), 149 fanegas of corn, 52 tanned hides, 18 strings of chiles, and 32 garlic plants. In the case
               of Indian women from the village of San Felipe, it was reported that they were obliged to contribute
               apiece one peso of silver and one buffalo hide! See Marc Simmons, Spanish Government in New Mexico
               (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1968), p. 93.
            31 M. Terán, “Muera el mal gobierno,” p. 177, argues that Bourbon policies led to the reduction of
               autonomous control of the Indian towns, including the loss of control over the communal treasury
               and the total loss of surplus monies. The consequence, she argues, was decapitalization of the towns.
