P1: JZP
9780521879644c08        CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007        10:48




                   246                                    Bankruptcy of Empire

                   Merchant Guild and Mining Tribunal as intermediaries for successive credit
                   operations, it contributed to a process of change in these markets as a result
                   of the introduction of new credit instruments and new practices for their
                   purchase and sale.20 The privileged corporations of New Spain, as well as
                   many wealthy individuals, invested their funds because the interest rates
                   were relatively attractive, although there were some exceptions as in the
                   case of non-interest-bearing loans, issued on various occasions in wartime
                   situations.
                      But since the viceroyalty’s financial markets were neither broad nor deep,
                   many of the government demands had a profoundly negative influence.
                   This is documented in the extended protests against the Consolidation
                   Fund by merchants, miners, landowners, and farmers, as we have seen in
                   Chapter 4. The appropriation by the Crown of the loan capital of hun-
                   dreds of religious institutions was a clear example of the disadvantages that
                   the emergency financial policies of the Crown had for both entrepreneurs
                   and the church. In sum, the principal defect of the colonial debt was that
                   the collected monies were not spent in New Spain but were sent abroad.
                   Royal debt policy extracted private capital stock which could have been
                   invested productively, and – we may add – in Bourbon Mexico the number
                   of actual and potential investment opportunities was not negligible before
                   1810.21
                      Finally, it is important to evaluate the impact of government debt on sav-
                   ings in the community funds (cajas de comunidad) of rural villages. The social
                   groups which suffered most from the fiscal and financial demands of the
                   Crown were precisely those least prepared to resist the impact, namely, the
                   Indian peasant communities. Specific case studies confirm the exploitation.
                   Studies by historian Dorothy Tanck and other colleagues illustrate how the
                   functionaries of the royal treasuries progressively took control of the com-
                   munal funds of peasant villages and towns throughout the viceroyalty. (See
                   Table 8.4.)
                      The greater part of the monies extracted was used to cover financial
                   demands of the monarchy in Spain.22 In the case of Yucatan, over a period
                   of thirty years, a total of 400,000 pesos was taken from Indian village

                   20 G. Valle Pavón, “Consulado de Comerciantes,” provides the most detailed analysis.
                   21 Investment in mines, estates and sugar mills, roads (especially between Mexico and Veracruz), as
                      well as the great program of public works and urban building at the end of the eighteenth century
                      are outstanding examples. Both R. Garner and S. E. Stefanou, Economic Growth and Change, and C.
                      Marichal, “La historiografı́a económica reciente” give full bibliographical references to useful studies
                      on the evolution of different sectors in the Mexican economy during the eighteenth century.
                   22 D. Tanck, “Escuelas y cajas de comunidad,” analyses this process in the Yucatan and M Terán,”Muera
                      el mal gobierno” for Michoacán, examining the diverse ways by which, from 1780, the royal offi-
                      cials (“Intendentes” and Subdelegados) progressively took over the administration of the communal
                      treasuries of the Indian towns.
