P1: JZP
9780521879644con       CUNY1040/Marichal           0 521 87964 7           August 23, 2007   10:13




                   256                                  Bankruptcy of Empire

                   a web of administrative, military, fiscal, and financial relations that were
                   inherent to survival. These bonds were reinforced by the demands of each
                   successive Atlantic war, although military conflict certainly placed increas-
                   ingly severe strains upon the colonies and, in particular, on the viceroyalty of
                   New Spain because of the enormous volume of fiscal and financial resources
                   transferred abroad.

                         The Fiscal and Financial Burden of Colonialism in New Spain
                   The demands of war finance gradually outstripped the tax base of the
                   viceroyalty despite the extraordinary silver boom of the late colonial era. But
                   prior to the wars of independence, there were few possibilities of modifying
                   imperial tax or financial policies. The viceroy and other officials responsible
                   for the colonial administration obeyed the orders of metropolitan govern-
                   ment to their ultimate consequences. And since there were no elective
                   legislatures in the viceroyalty, colonial taxpayers were simply obliged to
                   contribute. Nonetheless, it is important to evaluate the overall economic
                   and fiscal consequences of such policies. Our interpretation tends to under-
                   score the negative effects of royal fiscal and financial practice on New Spain’s
                   economy and society.
                      During the last decades of the eighteenth century and the first of the nine-
                   teenth, increasing amounts of the colony’s revenues and capital resources
                   (collected from all of the inhabitants of the viceroyalty) were being exported
                   to Spain. These transfers illustrate the remorseless fiscal logic of the Span-
                   ish imperial state. The policy stood in contrast to other European states
                   that had never been able to obtain significant fiscal remittances from their
                   colonies in the Americas but rather had been obliged to finance the greater
                   part of the costs of their empires, with funds sent from the metropolis.
                      However successful the Bourbon tax reforms may be considered from an
                   imperial perspective, they certainly proved to be a significant burden for
                   New Spain. Indeed, some historians have argued that the aggressive tax and
                   loan policies of the late Bourbon regime and those of the wars of indepen-
                   dence not only drove the colonial administration into bankruptcy but also
                   affected the future economic evolution of Mexico. Hebert Klein argues:
                   The massive exploitation by the crown of the accounts of the colonial treasuries after
                   1780 – both for the increase for the colonial situados and the considerable increase
                   of capital transfers to Spain through forced and voluntary loans – indicates that
                   fiscal policies . . . were one of the most important factors in the economic decline of
                   Mexico during the wars of independence.2

                   2 H. Klein, Las finanzas americanas, p. 174.
