P1: JZP
9780521879644con      CUNY1040/Marichal             0 521 87964 7                     August 23, 2007          10:13




                                                            Conclusions                                                259

             has proposed estimates of the net exports of fiscal resources at somewhere
             between 5.0 and 7.5 percent of the annual gross annual product of the
             viceroyalty.10 This is a big figure and the drainage of this wealth from New
             Spain would merit more research, especially if we consider that in ancien
             regime economies annual investment rates were extremely low. In any case,
             the funds sent abroad can be seen as a net export of capital without any com-
             pensation or return payment. On balance, a majority of historians believe
             this capital drain had a negative overall effect on New Spain’s private eco-
             nomic activity. The following scenario may be a useful point for comparison:
             what would happen if an independent country had to contribute the equiv-
             alent value of 40 percent of its exports abroad without trading or financial
             recompense, as was the case for New Spain between 1790 and 1810? It
             does not seem possible that this would not have a depressing effect on the
             economy.11 The economic historian Enrique Cárdenas has recently summed
             up the situation in a survey which argues that the Crown’s appropriation of
             these resources severely prejudiced New Spain’s economic performance in
             the first decades of the nineteenth century.12
                 The systematic and often coercive nature of the fiscal campaigns through-
             out Mexico during the final decades of the colonial regime has been a con-
             stant theme through this book. Yet the relative scarcity of tax revolts in
             Bourbon Mexico (with some localized exceptions) also raises many questions
             regarding the social impact of imperial tax policy and practice. The contrast
             with the great tax rebellions in the 1780s in the viceroyalties Peru and New
             Granada is striking. This is all the more surprising since the rigorous fiscal
             and financial policies applied in New Spain were the most extensive and
             efficacious in Spanish America in the second half of the eighteenth century.
             To all appearances, until the outbreak of rebellion in 1810, popular per-
             ceptions of tax pressures in New Spain did not radically conflict with the
             political and social consensus underlying this particular colonial society. In
             previous chapters, we have argued that such circumstance suggests that the
             majority of New Spain’s population continued to accept the legitimacy of


             10 J. Coatsworth, Los orı́genes del atraso (México: Alianza Mexicana, 1990), pp. 85–87 and 108–109
                and J. Coatsworth, “La independencia latinoamericana: hipotesis sobre los costes y beneficios,” in
                Leandro Prados de la Escosura and S. Amaral, eds., La independencia americana: sus consecuencias económicas
                (Madrid: Alianza Universidad, 1993), pp. 20–21.
             11 In this regard, it seems that the arguments of R. Garner, and S. E. Stefanou, Economic Growth and
                Change, Chapter 7, are conclusive.
             12 With regard to exports of collected taxes and the possible effect on contemporary investment rates,
                E. Cárdenas, “Algunas cuestiones sobre la depresión mexicana del siglo XIX,” in Enrique Cárdenas,
                comp., Historia económica de México, vol. 2 (Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1990), p. 41,
                affirms: “These figures show fully the real size of the colonial tax burden imposed on New Spain. If
                a part of this net savings had been used in productive projects, such as transport facilities, Mexico’s
                economic growth model would probably have been very distinct from the one that it experienced.”
