P1: JZP
9780521879644con       CUNY1040/Marichal              0 521 87964 7                      August 23, 2007         10:13




                   258                                      Bankruptcy of Empire

                   colonial Mexican population: food and textiles.6 With regard to savings, it
                   may be presumed that wealthier groups would have increased their silver
                   holdings or invested them in trade or enterprise.
                      Some authors, particularly John Coatsworth and David Brading, have
                   claimed that an increase in silver available would have implied an expan-
                   sion of the viceroyalty’s monetary base and generated higher inflation than
                   occurred; in such a case, the benefits of the fiscal saving might not have been
                   significant.7 These views, however, are not corroborated by the research of
                   Richard Garner, who has provided the most detailed economic analysis of
                   the period. Garner argues that in spite of the systematic increase in produc-
                   tion and minting of silver coins (1.4 percent per year during the eighteenth
                   century) there was only a slow rise in prices, especially of maize, the most
                   important food product of the population of New Spain. The increase was
                   not exceptional, averaging 0.5 percent per annum during the eighteenth
                   century, with sharp peaks only at the time of serious agrarian crises.8 In
                   other words, it would appear that in the long run, relative price stabil-
                   ity was maintained despite the enormous increase of silver produced and
                   minted in the viceroyalty. At the very end of the colonial era, there was a
                   significant shift upward in prices but also a decline in living conditions.
                   In the most detailed study of consumption in this period, the historian
                   Enriqueta Quiroz has demonstrated that in the decade 1800–1810 there
                   is clear evidence of a sharp increase in food commodities in Mexico City
                   and, simultaneously, a marked drop in consumption, particularly among
                   the poor and working classes.9
                      Evidently, the economic and social analysis of the impact of the exter-
                   nal transfer of an enormous accumulation of tax resources from colonial
                   Mexico over various decades remains an open question. John Coatsworth

                   6 An increase in production would depend on avoiding supply bottlenecks of agricultural and textiles
                     production, but most research on Mexico’s economy for this period do not find evidence of such
                     bottlenecks and demonstrate that there was a sustained increase in agricultural output and cattle
                     products which surpassed population growth: R. Garner and S. E. Stefanou, Economic Growth and
                     Change; J. C. Garavaglia and J. C. Grosso, “De Veracruz a Durango”; Las alcabalas novohispanas, 1776–
                     1821, Mexico, AGN, 1987; and Puebla desde una perspectiva microhistórica; E. Van Young, Hacienda and
                     Market in Eighteenth Century Mexico and Jorge Silva, “Producción agropecuaria y mercados regionales:
                     el caso de Michoacán en el siglo XVIII,” Ph.D. thesis, El Colegio de México, 1997.
                   7 David Brading, “Comments on ‘the Economic Cycle in Bourbon Central Mexico,” Hispanic American
                     Historical Review, 69, 3 (1989), 531–538 and J. Coatsworth, Orı́genes del atraso, pp. 108–109.
                   8 “Corn price levels only moved up slowly over the very long term. This suggests that inflation, as
                     measured by corn was not much of a threat. . . . Indeed, it can be argued that over the long term corn
                     prices were so low and supplies so ample that without making production more efficient a (large)
                     producer had trouble earning a big enough profit to justify or encourage investing further in grain
                     or food production.” R. Garner, and S. E. Stefanou, Economic Growth and Change, pp. 28–29.
                   9 Enriqueta Quiroz, Entre el lujo y la subsistencia: mercado, abastecimiento y prcios de la carne en la ciudad de
                     México, 1750–1812 (México: El Colegio de México, Instituto Mora, 2005), p. 242.
