P1: JZP
9780521879644con      CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                   August 23, 2007         10:13




                                                          Conclusions                                              261

                Here we are confronted with a great paradox, which we have attempted
             to explain but must be reemphasized: while coercion was a frequently used
             instrument to obtain extraordinary resources from the viceroyalty, many
             wealthy individuals and privileged corporations in New Spain openly col-
             laborated with enormous sums extended to the monarchy for its war efforts.
             Why they contributed remains an open question. We have suggested that
             there was clearly a quid pro quo, since loans to the Crown ensured the con-
             tinuity of extraordinary privilege for the wealthy in a society with great
             swaths of impoverished social groups.16 But is this an entirely adequate
             answer?
                Our chapters analyzing the loans offered to the Crown by the great
             merchants, miners, and landowners suggest the enormous concentration
             of wealth in late colonial Mexico: there is no doubt that the rich, privi-
             leged corporations of the viceroyalty were intent on maintaining the status
             quo unchanged. Equally significant were the financial contributions of the
             Catholic Church, the great ally of the state for over three centuries of colo-
             nial rule. However, the application of so many extreme financial measures
             affecting religious foundations and especially the Consolidation Fund in
             1805–1808 gradually undermined the alliance between the church and the
             Crown. It proved no surprise that many of the most severe critics of the late
             colonial regime were clerics nor that the rebellions that broke out against
             Spanish rule in 1810 were led by revolutionary parish priests like Miguel
             Hidalgo and José Marı́a Morelos. In any case, the information presented
             in this study on tax and debt policy provides a good deal of hard evidence
             which can be of use to future studies that propose to explore the enormous
             tensions and difficulties that the Mexican economy would subsequently
             confront in the transition from colony to independent nation.
                But, again, let us broaden our perspectives by suggesting that the analysis
             of the finances of Bourbon Mexico is of interest for broader comparative
             purposes. For example, it is relevant to future comparative work on the
             finances of the other Spanish American colonies, with which New Spain
             had diverse and complex links. But it is also of considerable interest for the
             comprehension of the financial trajectory of the Spanish monarchy itself.
             In the final analysis, the deficits of the metropolitan government were the
             root and cause of the aggressive tax and financial campaigns applied in
             late colonial Mexico. The estimates we have presented in previous chapters
             clearly indicate the crucial importance of the colonial remittances in the
             midst of the gravest wars of the late Bourbon regime, although even such
             large transfers of Mexican silver were insufficient to save the Crown.

             16 On this subject, also see Pedro Pérez Herrero, “Los beneficiarios del reformismo borbónico: metrópoli
                versus élites novohispanas,” Historia Mexicana, xii, 2 [162] (1991), 207–264.
