P1: JZP
9780521879644con      CUNY1040/Marichal            0 521 87964 7                    August 23, 2007   10:13




                            Conclusions: The Financial Collapse
                               of Viceroyalty and Monarchy



             The fiscal and financial crisis of New Spain’s colonial administration after
             1810 was not a singular event. It was part of a much broader debacle.
             The finances of other Spanish American viceroyalties were also crumbling,
             slowly but surely. As a result of the wars of independence (1810–1825), the
             Spanish empire progressively disintegrated into a multitude of fragments,
             eventually to reconstitute in an extraordinary mosaic of new and distinct
             nations. At the same time, the heart of the old monarchy, Spain itself,
             suffered military defeat and confronted the deepest bankruptcy.1 There was
             thus a striking symbiosis in the prolonged collapse of colonial regime and
             metropolis. This would appear to be a frequent lesson of the downfall of
             imperial states through much of history, ancient and modern.
                This study has called attention to the interlocking relationship between
             imperial wars and the incessant fiscal and financial exactions of the
             metropolitan state from its richest Spanish American colony during the
             half century spanning the decades 1760–1810. Even though these con-
             tributions to the Crown were sustained and large, they only could delay
             the final debacle. In the end, all financial expedients were vain. The silver
             obtained from New Spain through taxes, donativos, numerous loans, and the
             Consolidation Fund was absorbed by military expenditures and by the ser-
             vice on domestic and foreign debts taken by the Spanish government to pay
             for the international wars in which the Crown engaged almost incessantly.
             By 1810, the governments of both viceroyalty and monarchy were bankrupt.
                This would seem to be a straightforward empirical conclusion. But are
             there any larger lessons to learn from our study of the fiscal and debt dynam-
             ics of the viceroyalty and of the Spanish empire in its final decades? More
             specifically, how does it contribute to a deeper understanding of the logic of
             imperial finance? Most important, our analysis illustrates the inextricable
             nature of many of the links between the different component parts of the
             imperial state. The Spanish empire was the most integrated of all European
             imperial states of the era. Metropolis and colonies were bound together by

             1 The classic study is J. Fontana, La quiebra de la monarquı́a absoluta.



                                                                255
