P1: JZP
9780521879644con      CUNY1040/Marichal     0 521 87964 7             August 23, 2007   10:13




                   264                           Bankruptcy of Empire

                   The Napoleonic invasion implied the virtual defeat of the Spanish monar-
                   chy and the appropriation by the French of fiscal resources in most of the
                   Iberian Peninsula. The patriot armies struggled bravely to resist but, in
                   practice, had few domestic fiscal resources once forced into refuge in Cádiz.
                   Nonetheless, the relation with the colonies across the Atlantic saved the
                   Liberal government at Cádiz. Despite the cracks in the empire, the remit-
                   tances of American treasure to the metropolis were not interrupted between
                   1808 and 1811 – a fact that reflected the continued vigor of the colonial
                   treasuries. These shipments of American monies (the bulk from New Spain)
                   were initially used in part to support the patriotic councils (juntas patrióticas)
                   that sprang up in different Spanish regions from June 1808. Subsequently,
                   in 1809, the silver was used to finance the three-man Regency as well as
                   the Central Junta at Seville. And finally, when the Army of Andalusia was
                   forced to beat a retreat and fall back to the southern port city of Cádiz, the
                   colonial silver remittances served to finance both the defense of this last
                   outpost of Spanish resistance and the ordinary expenses of the extraordi-
                   nary experiment in Liberal government, known as the Cortes of Cádiz (Cádiz
                   Parliament) of 1810–1812.
                      Spanish American silver remittances, nonetheless, would not continue
                   indefinitely. The outbreak of rebellions in three of the viceroyalties (Buenos
                   Aires, New Granada, and New Spain) from 1810 onward marked the begin-
                   ning of the end for the integrated fiscal system of the Spanish imperial state.
                   Combined with the financial crisis of the absolutist monarchy, this circum-
                   stance helps to explain the failure of the absolute monarch Ferdinand VII
                   in his persistent attempts to recover the Americas after his return to power
                   in Madrid in 1814. The Spanish state no longer had the military, naval,
                   or fiscal strength to maintain a vast and far-flung empire. On several occa-
                   sions, the absolutist regime sent the remains of its once important fleet and
                   significant portions of its army to South America between 1815 and 1824
                   but failed in the bid to recover empire.
                      The bankruptcy of the metropolitan treasury of the monarchy implied
                   that the costs of waging war against the insurgent movements in Spanish
                   America during the years 1810–1824 had to be covered fundamentally by
                   the respective colonial administrations. The royalist authorities in Mexico
                   spent the bulk of their fiscal resources to finance the struggle against the
                   rebel movements between 1810 and 1820 as did the royalists in upper and
                   lower Peru during the war years of 1818–1824. But in the colonies – as
                   in the metropolis – the cumulative burdens of more than thirty years of
                   financing the wars of the Spanish crown had severely weakened the royal
                   administration as well as the fiscal and financial structures on which it
                   depended. The wars of independence would eventually destroy both.
                      The main objective of this book has been to emphasize the importance
                   of the fiscal and financial antecedents of the final bankruptcy and breakdown
