

CHAPTER II.

THE EGYPTIAN EXPEDITION OF 1801.

Objects of the expedition — strength of the Indian contingent — embarka-
tion' — arrival at Kos«eir — march across the desert — idvance to
Cairo — fall of Alexandria — declaration of pence — return to India — ap-
pendices : — composition of tho Indian contingent — disembarkation
return — instructions for officers commanding detachments crossing
the deaert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 — 20

CHAPTER III.

THE EXPEDITION TO MALTA IN 1878.

Reasons for the expedition — organisation of the forcer — return to India —

appendices : — composition of the force — embarkation return . . 21 — 24

CHAPTER IV.

THE INDIAN CONTINGENT IN EGYPT, 1882. « ;

Composition of the force — arrangements for water supply at Suez — reoly
corps — provision of transports — embarkation — occupation of Suez — con-
centration at Ismailia — arrangements for disembarkation — Operations
up to 9th September — the battle of Tel-el-kebir — occupation of Zagazig
and Cairo — Appendices : — composition of the Indian contingent —
embarkation returns — casualties .. .. .. .. 25 — 53

ii CONTENTS.

CHAPTER V.

Page.

SUDAN CAMPAIGN, 1885.
Transport — embarkatJoti-*-Medical Department — night alarms — letter
from Osman Digna — -plan of campaign — features of the country —
Tactics of the enenrj 5 — Reconnaissance to Hashin — Attack on Hashin
— Preparations for advance on Tamai — Breakdown of transport — Dis-
position of troops at Tofrik — Attack by Arabs — Stampede of trans-
port — Gallantry of Subadar Gurdit Singh — Staunchness of the Indian
troops — Repulse of the enemy — Action of the cavalry — Return to
Suakin — Advance on Tamai — Formation of column — Railway con-
struction — Camel Corps — Suakin garrison — Extract from Despatches ? 54 — 64

CHAPTER VI.

ABYSSINIA.
General topography — climate — political divisions — ethnography — events
leading up to the expedition — Preparations for expedition — appoint-
ment of Sir R. Napier — co-operation of the Royal Navy —
interpreters — foreign attaches — arms — embarkation — operations

during October and November 1867 — the r.dvance— action of Arogie
and capture of Magdala — operations subsequent to the fall of
Magdala — Menelik — appendices: — staff of the Abyssinian Expedi-
tion — composition of the force — casualties . . . . . . 65 — 84

CHAPTER VII.

80MALILAND—THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE.

Geographical positiony-physical geography — spheres of influence — the

people— history . . . . . . . . . . . . 85 — 95

CHAPTER VIII.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND.
The Isa Expedition of 1890 — operations against the Mulla in 1901-1902 —
fight at Erigo — campaign against the Mulla in 1902-1904 — opera-
tions under Brigadier-General Manning — plan of campaign — dis-
embarkation at Obbi.i — occupation of Mudug — advance to Galadi —
the Gumburru disaster — subsequent operations — General Egerton's
campaign — preparations for the advance — reconnaissance to
Jidballi — action of Jidballi — Mulla's flight to the north — movements
of the Abyssinians — operations north of the Sorl — capture of Illig —
final escape of the Mulla — demobilization of the force — appendices:
command apd staff— casualties — notes on transport .. .. 96 — 151