

CHAPTER XV.

THE ARABIAN PENINSULA AND THE ISLANDS OF PERIM

AND SOCOTRA.

Geographical situation — first expedition to Ras-al-Khaimah, 1809 —
arrival at Masqat — Ras-al-Khaimah — landing of the main body —
capture of Ras-al-Khaimah — bravery of the enemy — Turning of pirate
vessels — Lingeh- -attack on Laft — repulse of the troops — re-embarka-
tion — attack on Shanas — desperate resistance — second expedition
to Ras-al-Khaimah, 1819— composition of the force — embarkation-
reconnaissance of Ras-al-Khaimah — arrival of the troops — dis-
embarkation — attaok by piquets — cannonade of town — counter-
attack by enemy — opening of the batteries — occupation of fort —
Mockade of Ramfl — skirmishes — rendition of fort — losses —
treaties — end of expedition — the Bani-bu-'Ali expedition, 1820 —
murder of pilot — start of expedition — co-operation of the Imam —
inarch from Snr — arrival at Bani-bu-Hasan — summons to sur-
render attaok on town — bad tactics — repulse of the British foroo

CONTENTS.

—casualties— retreat to Masqat— the Qishm garrison— second ex- aoe.
pedition — disembarkation at Sur— attack on General's camp —
march on the capital — desperate conflict — return of the expedi-
tion— Perim—Sokotra . . . . ■ • • • • • 245— 2o0

CHAPTER XVI.

ADEN.

History — attack on the Darling — causes leading up to the expedition —
expedition to Aden — first party lands — reinforcements — plan of
attack — a reconnaissance — shelling of Sirah — landing of troops —
casualties — attempts to recapture Aden — garrison increased — third
attempt — attack on Shaikh Mehdi — increase of garrison — attack by
Saiyid Ismail — trouble with the Abdali — "aptureof Shaikh Othman —
operations in the Aden Hinterland — inter-tribal quarrels — Turkish
intervention — British expedition — action near Ad Daraijah — frontier
delimitation — expedition to Dhali — Arabs attack a convoy — punitive
column — return to Dhali — attack on survey party — attack on
Awabil camp — punitive expedition to Nakhlen — attack on Sulaiq —
punitive column — return of British troops to Aden . . . . 260 — 270''

PART III.

CEYLON AND THE ISLANDS OF THE INDIAN OCEAN.

CHAPTER XVII.

CEYLON.

Geographical position — description of the island — climate — mortality
amongst the troops in 1804 and 1818— inhabitants— mode of
warfare — history .. .. .. .. .. .. 273 — 277

Trincomali, 1782 — assault of Fort Orten burg— departure of the Admiral
— state of Trincomali surrendered to Admiral Suffrein — conquest of
Dutch possessions in Ceylon, 1795-96— resume of events, 1796-1817
—rebellion of 1817— subsequent history .. .. .. .. 277 — 280.

CHAPTER XVIII.

MAURITIUS AND BOURBON OR REUNION.

Mauritius— climate— population— Rodrigues— Bourbon or Reunion —
climate— produce— population— affairs in the Indian Ocean— Ex-
pedition to St. Paul— submission of the French— expedition to
Bourbon, 1810, surrender of the island— capture of the He de la
Passe — British disasters— expedition to Mauritius — action with
the French— capitulation of the island . . . . . . 287 — 299"