

CHAPTER IX.

BRITISH EAST AFRICA.
Boundaries — political divisions — Zanzibar — j hysical features — Jakes-
rivers — the Seyyidieh Province — Vanga — Mombasa — (he mountain-

CONTENTS. liJ

Page.

ous region of Mombasa District — Mombasa town — Malindi District —

•early history Portuguese domination — Masqat control — division

of Masqat and Zanzibar — British influence — the Germans in East

Africa spheres of influence — The British East Africa Association —

British East Africa Company— Anglo-German Agreement — explora-
tion British proteotorate — Mabarak's rebellion — operations of the

Mombasa Field Force — distribution — operations against the rebels —
movements of Major Tulloch's column — surrender of Mubarak . . 152—163

CHAPTER X.

J UB ALAND.
Geographical position — physical geography — the people—history — ex-
pedition against the Ogaden Somalis in 1898 — force in Jubaland —
attack on Yonti— Major Quentin's operations— fight near Helished
— raid on the enemy's camp — end of the expedition — the Ogaden
punitive expedition of 1901 — preparations at Kismayu — encounter
with the enemy — retirement to Afmadu — return to Kismayu —
operations in the Gosha district — Appendix : command and staff .. - 164 — 181

CHAPTER XI.

V AN DA ; THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE.
'Geographical limits — physical features — the lacustrine region — rivers
— mountains — produce — communications — climate — population — his-
tory — early European exploration — the kings of Uganda —
Captain Lugard's expedition — Captain Macdonald, Commissioner —
military operations in Unyoro — trouble in Uganda — flight of King
Mwanga — distribution of troops — Macdonald' s expedition — Mutiny
of Sudanese . . . . . . . . . . . . 182—191

CHAPTER XII.

EXPEDITION TO UGANDA.
Troops from India — the Teita country — reinforcements for Uganda —
the Magangi Expedition — operations in Uganda — defeat of the Sud-
anese mutineers — Mwanga and the rebels — dispersal of rebels —
reaasembly of the Sudanese — defeat of the mutineers — action at
Alagoyu — operations in Unyoro — the mutineers at Mruli — attack
on the mutineers — operations of Lieutenant Price's column — desul-
tory operations — action near Kitabu — operations in Unyoro —
attack on the enemy at Kiweri — Captain Fowler' s operations — oper-
ations in the Budonga Forest — end of the expedition — conditions of
service in Uganda — Appendix : — supply and transport . . . . 192 210

CHAPTER XIII.

SOUTH AFRICA ; 1899-1901.
Despatch of the Indian contingent — non-combatanta — remounts — stores
— reinforcements — Lumsden's H'jrse — appendices : strength of the
8outh African Contingent— staff .. .. .. .. 2H—217

IV CONTENTS

PART II.
PERSIA AND ARABIA.

CHAPTER XIV.

PERSIA.

Page.

Geography — climate — provinces— Persian Gulf — communications — trans-
port — animals — modern history — ethnography — religion--the army
— expedition to the Persian Gulf, 1838 — the Persian War of
1856-57 — orders for despatoh of expedition — numbers of force — sea
transport— rendezvous — disembarkation — plan of operations — ad-
vance on Bush ire — action of Rash ir — casualties — o-cupation of Bu-
shire — reconnaissance of Tihsiya — destruction of depot at Chahkuta
— arrival of Sir James Outram — formation of second division — at-
tack on Burazjan — cavalry skirmish — occupation of enemy's camp —
night attack on Khushab — action at Khushab — casualties — incle-
ment weather- return to Bushire — ' ehaviour of the Persian troops —
the Shah's account of the engagement — expedition to Muhammareh
— garrison of Bushire — organization of levies — delay of the expedi-
tion — plan of attack — orders — rendezvous — preliminary arrange-
ments — bombardment — infantry attac k — persian defence — naval
casualties — attack on the camp — expedition to Ahwaz — the Karun
river — arrival at Ahwaz — sratagem — flight of Persians — return
to Muhammareh — General Outram' s letter to Court of Directors —
Treaty of Paris — the Shah and his troops — Bushire garrison — provi-
sions of Treaty of Paris — arrangements at Bushire . . . , 221 — 244