Page.

1
227
233
241
273
288
291
331
353
366
413
478
483
504
Pocket.

PART I.
AFRICA AND THE MEDITERRANEAN

M

EGYPT

Seals of Milos
Miles «x jo o «» 100 mo Miles

■' "-*

Hi* J»«

AFRICA AND THE MEDITERRANEAN.

CHAPTER I.

EGYPT AND THE SUDAN. THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE.

Egypt* is bounded on the north by the Mediterranean, on the
west by the Great Desert, and on the east by a line drawn
from Rafa to Akaba, the gulf of Akaba, and the Red Sea. The
22nd parallel of north latitude is the southern boundary of Egypt
proper, but to the south of this the provinces of the Sudan extend
almost to the equator.

The great area of desert, mountain, and plateau of which

Egypt is mainly composed is intersected
ysica ea ures. throughout its entire length from south
to north by the valley of the Nile. Dealing with this valley first,
the southern portion of it, from Wadi Haifa to Assuan, is
known as Nubia, and is an inhospitable and rugged country
through which the Nile flows in a rocky and narrow channel.
North of this, between Assuan and Cairo, the Nile valley is known
as Upper Egypt. Here it varies from 5 to 30 miles in width, and is
enclosed to the east and west by the cliffs of the desert plateau.
The soil of the valley is a deep alluvial deposit, and is highly
cultivated. Near Cairo the river bifurcates into the Rosetta and
Damietta branches, each about 140 miles in length. The district
between these two arms is called the Delta, and is a rich alluvial
plain, studded with towns and villages, and intersected by innumerable
canals and watercourses. During flood season this plain is inundated,
and communication is only possible by the railways and paths
which run along the banks of the canals.

Turning to the deserts, to the west of the Nile lies the Lybian
desert, a monotonous waste of sand and limestone, devoid of vegeta-
tion, and possessing water at only a few widely distant points ; while
to the east another desert, mountainous, and much cut up by dry
watercourses, lies between the Nile and the Red Sea.

* See map facing page 60.
vol. vi

2 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Egypt may be said to have two distinct climates. On the
Clim Mediterranean coast, and for 50 miles

inland, the temperature throughout the
year is usually mild, the air is damp, and in the winter months
a certain amount of rain falls. South of this zone the climate
is characterised by great dryness, with a wide range between the
maximum and minimum temperatures. Upper Egypt is hotter
than Lower Egypt, and at Assuan the summer heat is intense. After
sundown, however, the temperature falls considerably, and the
nights are usually cool and pleasant. At Cairo the annual rainfall
averages only about *1 of an inch, while south of Assuan the country is
practically rainless. The climate is, on the whole, a very healthy one,
but fever and dysentery are liable to be brought on by chills, especially
at sundown. The principal diseases of the country are ophthalmia
and small-pox, and in the hot weather there are occasional outbreaks
of cholera.