

About this time four companies of the 61st Begiment from
the Cape, two companies of the 80th, the Bengal Horse Artillery,
and some artillery and pioneers from India, arrived at Kosseir,
but this addition to his force was accompanied by the unfortu-
nate intelligence that several of his transports had foundered
in the Red Sea.

As many river boats as were required were quickly obtained,
and on the 27th August General Baird' s force was concentrated
at Rhouda. Colonel Montresor had meanwhile been sent forward
to Rosetta to arrange with the inhabitants for provisions for the
remainder of the journey to that place. 1

'Colonel R.T.Wilson, in his" History of The inhabitants furnished the different

the British Expedition to Egypt, " writes : — supplies very readily, for which, to their

Nothing of note occurred during General astonishment, they were immediately

Baird's passage from Kena to Rosetta. paid.

14 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

On the 30th August General Baird reached Rosetta. He

desired to advance on Alexandria

Fall of Alexandria. . -, . , , 1 , , i • • . -i •

immediately ; but to his intense dis-
appointment received an order from General Hutchinson to the
effect that the French had already sent out a flag of truce, and
were on the point of capitulating, and that the Indian Contin-
gent was therefore to halt.

Two days later the garrison of Alexandria — the last remnant
of the French army in Egypt — surrendered to General Hutchinson,
thus bringing the war in that country to an end. General Baird's
troops had been so far unfortunate as not to see a shot fired
throughout the campaign.

The British Government now decided that Egypt should
be garrisoned until the end of the war by 6,000 of General
Hutchinson's army and the whole of the Indian Contingent, the
combined force to be under the command of Lord Cavan. To
this course General Baird at first vigorously objected, stating that
it was quite wrong that Indian troops (both British and Native)
should be brigaded together with troops from England, whose
regulations and pay were so entirely different. Subsequently,
however, he withdrew his objections, and consented to serve under
Lord Cavan' s command.

Rumours of a treaty of peace between England and France

now became frequent, and General Baird

Declaration of peace. x .

began to make preparations tor his return
to India. His transports were already waiting for him at Suez,
and the knowledge that their hire was costing the East India
Company £40,000 a month made the General all the more anxious
to embark as early as possible. Definite news, however, was
long in coming, and it was not until the 30th April that despatches
arrived from England announcing the Treaty of Amiens, and
giving orders for General Baird's force to proceed to Suez en route
to India.

General Baird had already caused accurate reconnaisances
of the road from Cairo to Suez to be made, so there was no need
of further delay. With the exception of the 10th, 61st, and 88th
Regiments (which were to proceed to England) the whole force