

General Baird accompanied the first detachment to its camp,
twelve miles from Kosseir. Here it was discovered that a large
number of mussacks had leaked badly, and as the local supply
of water was insufficient for the force, orders for the march of the
second detachment from Kosseir the following day had to be
cancelled, their camels and mussacks being used to carry water
to Colonel Beresford' s troops that night. The difficulties of water-
supply, owing to the majority of the mussacks being faulty, now
increased daily, while, to make matters worse, what water there
was turned out to be of so brackish a nature that the troops
were attacked by a violent form of dysentery. At one time,

indeed, it seems that General Baird

March across the desert. , . . , ... , .

seriously contemplated abandoning ins
attempt to cross the desert and bringing back to the base the troops
who had already started. By dint of careful staff work, however,
these difficulties were eventually overcome. New wells were
dug wherever possible, and posts with supply depots were organized
along the line wherever water existed. The troops were moved
across the desert in small detachments, and detailed orders for the
conduct of the march were issued to the officers commanding
each party. A copy of these orders is given in Appendix C.
By the 6th July a large part of the Indian Contingent had reached
Kena, but there were still a number of transports that had not
yet arrived at Kosseir.

Three days later, not having heard again from Hutchinson,
General Baird wrote to the Duke of York, in England, for instruc-

1 It was discovered that water was to be following up Arab horseman, who periodi'
-obtained by digging, and by watching and cally collected round wells.

THE EGYPTIAN EXPEDITION OF 1801. 13

tions as to the part his force was to play ; but before an answer
could be obtained, news arrived to the effect that the French
had entered into a treaty with General Hutchinson for the
surrender of Cairo.

Thinking that his services would no longer be required,
Baird now ordered preparations to be made for a return to
Kosseir, whence he hoped to be able to start on the original
expedition to Mauritius. The following day, however, he received
the long-expected despatch from General Hutchinson. In it he
was informed that owing to rumours of large reinforcements being
on their way from Europe to join the French at Alexandria, the
early capture of that port was of vital necessity. The British
army from Cairo had already marched north, and expected to
reach Rosetta on the 29th July. Baird was to procure boats as
quickly as possible, and to follow on to that place with all his force
at the earliest opportunity.

Baird accordingly prepared for an immediate advance with

those of his troops which had already

Advance to Cairo. ■ -, ml -.-pi n

arrived. Ine JNile having now risen
to such an extent that a march along its banks was out of the
question, he decided to send the bulk of his stores and guns, and
all his weakly men, by water, and to proceed with the remainder
by the inland route. He also decided to leave two battalions
to guard his communications between Kena and the sea.