

In 1801 the British Government decided to drive the French

British Expedition, 1801. fr ° m ^P*' and with . tUs ° b J eCt in vleW

Sir Ralph Abercrombie was despatched
with a force of 12,000 men to Aburkir Bay. Abercrombie, opposed by
only 1,500 men, made a successful landing at Abukir on the 8th
March, but from that date the righting was heavy, and between the
8th and 13th March the British lost 1,700 men killed and wounded.

VOL. VI 2 A

4 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Menou now j oined the French at Axandria with large reinforce-
ments from Cairo, and attacked the British on the 19th ; but after a
severe action, in which the English lost 1,500 men, including Sir E.
Abercrombie, the French were defeated and driven into Alexandria.
The arrival of a Turkish army to reinforce the British now enabled
Sir John Hutchinson, who had assumed command of the expedi-
tion, to take the offensive. Leaving 6,000 men under General Coote
to watch Menou, he marched on Cairo with 5,000 British and
4,000 Turkish troops, and on 26th May was reinforced by a second
Turkish Army under the command of the Grand Wazir. Mean-
while it was decided to send an Indian contingent to co-operate
from the Red Sea, and this force landed at Kosseir on the 8th June,
whence they proceeded to Kena on the Nile. Cairo capitulated on the
27th June, the French garrison being allowed to march out with
all the honours of war, and to embark for France at Rosetta.
Alexandria was surrendered on the same terms as Cairo on the
2nd September, and General Menou embarked for France with all
his troops on the 14th. In 1803 the English evacuated Egypt, and
a reign of anarchy now ensued in the country, while Turk,
„. , ,. . . ... Mameluke, and Albanian struggled for

Rise of Mehemet Ah. ' i _,.

supremacy and ravaged the land. Final-
ly the populace, oppressed beyond measure, rose against the
Turkish Governor, and elected Mehemet Ali, chief of the Albanians,
and founder of the present Khedival line, as Pasha, an appoint-
ment which was recognised by the Porte in 1806. Meanwhile the
face of European politics had changed, and England was engaged in
operations against Turkey. With a view to striking a blow at the

Porte the British Government now des-
cend expedition to Egypt, patched another expe dition to Egypt in

March, 1807, under the command of
General Frazer. This expedition was, however, unsuccessful; after
a severe defeat at El Hamad, terms were made with the Turks, and
the British force embarked for Malta.

Egypt now passed through various phases of fortune with
which this history has no concern, and the next period to be noted
is the year 1876. In this year the extravagance of the Khedive,
Ismail Pasha, had brought the country to the verge of bankruptcy
and the unfortunate inhabitants were the victims of an extortionate

EGYPT AND THE SUDAN. THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 5

taxation and a corrupt system of justice. Pressure was accord-
ingly brought to bear on the Khedive by the two Powers most
interested in the country, England and France, and a dual control
was established. In 1879 Ismail was deposed by the Sultan at the
request of the above Powers, and Tewfik appointed Khedive in his
stead. In 1881 as a protest against the way in which all the