

The native population of Egypt is composed mainly of Fellahin,
The people Copts, and Bedouin. Of these the

Fellahin, or peasantry, who form the
bulk of the population, are Muhammadahs, and are usually
men of fine physique. The Copts (Christians) are the direct descen-
dants of the ancient Egyptians, and are chiefly resident in the large
towns. They number about 600,000, and most of them are engaged
in the trades of goldsmiths and clothworkers, while a large per-
centage of the clerks in Government offices are drawn from this com-
munity. The Bedouin, or Arabs of the desert, are of two different
classes. First, the Arabic-speaking tribes, who have probably
immigrated from Syria and Arabia, and who occupy the deserts as
far south as latitude 26° N. ; secondly, the tribes who dwell in the
desert between Koseir, Suakin, and the Nile, namely the Haden-
dowa, Bisharin, and Ababda, who speak a language of their
own, and are probably descendants of aboriginal races. Further
south, in the Sudan, are wild tribes, including the Baggara, who
formed the backbone of the Khalifa's army. All these tribes are
nomadic. Some of them are strict Muhammadans, and those from
the south were famous for their fanatical support of the Mahdi,
but the majority are little affected by their nominal religious
beliefs. The typical Bedouin is of slender build, with thin neck
and limbs, and a dark-brown complexion.

EGYPT AND THE SUDAN. THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 3

The common language of the country north of Khartum is
Arabic.

It is unnecessary within the scope of this work -to trace

the history of Egypt further back than

Outline of history. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^.^ ^ cmn _

try formed a portion of the Ottoman Empire, but the Mameluke
Beys, from whom it had been wrested by the Turks some three cen-
turies previously, were beginning to get the reins of government once
more into their own hands. It was in these circumstances that

Napoleon, who had always realised the
apo eon s invasion. strategical value of the country, landed

in Egypt on the 1st July, 1798, with the avowed intention
of chastising the Mameluke Beys and restoring the country
to the Turks. Hardly, however, had he entered Cairo in triumph,
when his fleet was destroyed by Nelson at Aboukir Bay, and his
communications with France severed. The Porte meanwhile
entered into an alliance with England and Russia, and declared war
against the French. Two Turkish armies were at the same time
collected ; one to march through Syria on Cairo, the other to embark
at Rhodes for Damietta. Napoleon, with his usual promptitude,
at once seized the initiative, and marched with a force of 13,000 men
to capture Acre and defeat the Turks in Syria. His siege of Acre was,
however, unsuccessful, and he accordingly withdrew to Egypt.
Thence, having defeated the Turkish army which had landed at
Aboukir Bay, he embarked for France on the 22nd August, 1789,
leaving a large force behind him in possession of the country, under
the command of General Kleber. During the following year Kleber
succeeded in defeating two Turkish forces sent against him, but on
June 1800 he was assassinated by a fanatic, and the command of the
French army of occupation now devolved on a man of weak and
vacillating character named Menou.