

Arriving at Bombay on the 31st March, General Baird found
that several transports were nearly ready for sea. On the 3rd
April, by dint of much hard work, the first six were able to sail,
Colonel Beresford being in command. It was the General's inten-
tion to have accompanied this detachment, but owing to the
sudden illness of Colonel Wellesley his departure was delayed
till the 6th. Colonel Wellesley's indisposition proved so severe
that he was finally obliged to give up all idea of accompanying
the expedition, and returned to his command in Mysore ; nor is
it without interest to note that the very vessel on which he was
to have sailed foundered with all hands in the Red Sea.

It is unfortunate that available records make no mention
of the arrangements for the embarkation and disembarkation
of the troops for this expedition, nor of the number of transports
that were employed. 1 It is, however, to be noted that the total
Strength of the Indian Con- strength of the Indian contingent was
tingent. 166 ffi cers> 54 native office's, 279 non-

commissioned officers, 4,363 rank and file, and 477 gun lascars.
These numbers include the 1st and 7th Bombay Regiments, now
added to the force, in addition to the units mentioned on page 8.

To save time, the transports were sent off in detachments
as soon as ready for sea. Mocha and Jeddah were to be ports
of call, and the fleet was apparently to concentrate in the neigh-
bourhood of Kosseir. Suez was to be the port of final disembarka-
tion for the march inland.

The arrangements for the disembarka- great interest, and are given in detail in

tion of Sir R. Abercrombie's force in the Wilson's "History of the British Expedi-

face of the enemy at Aboukir (which do not tion to Egypt," 1803.
come within the scope of this work) are of

10 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

All supplies for the expedition, including rations for the Cape
troops, were to be sent in store ships from Bombay.

General Baird reached Mocha on the 25th April, and found
that Beresford's six transports, together with a detachment of
Bombay sepoys under Colonel Murray, who had arrived at that
place some time before, had already sailed for Jeddah. Anxious
lest these officers should attempt to capture Kosseir with insufficient
force, he now sent orders to them to await his arrival before taking
any offensive action. Meanwhile he began to make arrangements
for the supply of transport camels for his force, inducing a pro-
minent native to accompany him to Jeddah with a view to
obtaining the co-operation of the Sharif of Mecca in that respect.

Owing to the lateness of the season the monsoon now made

it impossible to reach Suez by sea ; and the General's difficulties

will be realised when it is stated that he had at present not one

camel in his force for the now necessary march across the desert

_ , . from Kosseir, nor, owing to the infra-

Difficulties. ' ' & .

ence of the French, was it expected
that any could be obtained at that place. The only transport
animals in the force were some bullocks brought from Bombay,
and owing to the distance from Kosseir to the Nile, 1 and the
known scarcity of water and forage in the desert, these would be
quite incapable of carrying more than their own requirements
for the journey. To make matters worse', the navigation of the
Red Sea was at that time fraught with difficulties, the few charts
in existence being confessedly inaccurate. As evidence to the truth
of this fact it is to be noted that seventeen ships of the transport
fleet foundered on the voyagt .