

higher appointments in the army were

Military revolt, 1881. ■ - m i j n- • ■ 4- 1

given to Turks and Circassians instead
of to native Egyptian officers, a military revolt broke out in Cairo,
headend by Colonel Ahmed Bey Arabi. By the middle of May, 1882,
Arabi had obtained the executive power in Egypt, the Khedive
retaining little more than his title. Some time previously the British
and French Governments had given the Khedive an assurance
of their support, and on the 20th May the allied fleets entered
Alexandria. On thellth June serious riots broke out between the
Christians and Muhammadans in that town. As a result a religious
excitement, which had long been smouldering among the Muham-
madans, was awakened throughout the country, and in three weeks
some two-thirds of the Christian population had fled to Europe.
On the 24th June the English and French Controllers, who till then
had held decisive authority as representatives of the protecting
powers, received notice that they would no longer be allowed to sit
in council with the Egyptian Ministry, and Arabi announced his
intention of resisting by arms any attempt to restore order by
landing troops. At the same time it was announced that the Sultan
had conferred on Arabi the first class of the order of the Medjidie.

Great alarm now began to be felt as to the safety of the Suez
3rd Egyptian Expedition, Canal ; and the safeguarding of the in-
l882- dispensable fresh-water canal necessitat-

ed preparations for an advance on Cairo. The French Govern-
ment at this time decided to take no part in the coming operations,
and England was left to act alone. Arrangements for the expedi-
tion were quickly completed at home ; a division was asked for from
India ; and on the 17th July British troops landed at Alexandria.
On the 20th August the British base was changed to Ismail ia. On
the 13th September Arabi's army was crushed at Tel-el-Kebir ;
and Cairo surrendered to Sir Garnet Wolseley on the following
day.

6 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

We must now turn to notice affairs in the Sudan. General'
Gordon had been appointed Governor-General of the Equatorial'
Provinces in 1874. In 1875 Darfur and Harrar were annexed, and
Gordon was made Governor -General of the Sudan, where he labour-
ed to destroy the slave trade and to establish just government.
In 1879 he returned to Cairo, and was succeeded by Rauf Pasha
Misrule and oppression now began afresh ; the slave-traders were
prepared to revolt, and a leader was to hand in Muhammad Ahmad.
Events in the Sudan, 1879- In 1881 an expedition sent by Rauf Pasha
1884 ' to capture this man was destroyed^ and

Ahmad proclaimed himself Mahdi. Thus, when the Egyptian army
was broken up at Tel-el-Kebir, the Sudan was already in flames.
The rebellion spread rapidly, and in March, 1883, Major-General
Hicks, who had been appointed Chief of the Staff of the Sudan Army
by the Khedive, found himself at Khartum with a force of only 2,000
troops of little value. He advanced against the Mahdi's forces, but
his command was practically destroyed at El Obeid in November.
It was now determined to evacuate the Sudan, and in January, 1884,
General Gordon left for Egypt to assist in the execution of this
measure. Meanwhile Osman Digna had invested Sinkat and Tokar,
and General Baker, who, with a mixed force of 2,500 men and 10
British officers, had proceeded to the relief of those places, was
routed at El Teb. Suakin was now in danger, and on the 6th
February, 1884, British bluejackets and marines were landed for
the defence of the town. A policy of non-intervention in Sudanese
affairs being no longer possible, it was now decided to send a British
force of 4,400 men and 8 guns, under Major-General Sir G. Graham,
to effect the relief of Tokar. On the 28th February Graham's force
was disembarked at Trinkitat, and, advancing towards Tokar the
next day, came under fire at El Teb. The enemy were defeated
with great loss; Tokar was relieved; and the force returned
to Trinkitat, whence they embarked for Suakin. An advance was
then made upon Tamai, which was occupied after some severe
fighting. The force wa3 then re-assembled at Suakin and broken
up.