

It now became necessary to relieve Gordon at Khartum, but
Death of Gordon. the expedition despatched for that pur-

pose arrived too late.

EGYPT AND THE SUDAN. THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 7

In February, 1885, Lord Wolseley urged the necessity of im-
, , „ mediate action against Osman Digna, and

Expedition of 1885. .,,... 6 , r • f t

with this object a large iorce, including a
brigade from India, was concentrated at Suakin by the end of
March. For political reasons, however, the withdrawal of the troops
from the Sudan was ordered on 11th May ; and nothing was
achieved.

During the Dongola campaign of 1896 an Indian brigade
reached Suakin for garrison duty, thus relieving the Egyptian troops
for service on the Nile, and returned to India in November of the
same year.

The power of the Khalifa and Mahdism was finally broken in
1898, and in 1900 Osman Digna was captured.

CHAPTER II.

THE EGYPTIAN EXPEDITION OF 1801.

In January, 1801, it was decided to send an expedition from
India for the capture of Batavia and Mauritius from the French.
For this purpose a force consisting of His Majesty's 10th and
89th Regiments, with detachments from the 86th and 88th, a
corps of Bengal sepoys who had volunteered for the service, and
two companies of European and Native Artillery, were assembled
at Trincomali under the orders of Colonel Wellesley, afterwards
Duke of Wellington.

Shortly before the expedition sailed, Lord "Wellesley, the
Governor- General, decided to supersede his brother in the chief
command, owing to the superior claims of General Sir David Baird.
The latter officer now made all preparations to proceed from
Calcutta to take up his new appointment ; but, on the eve of his
departure, orders arrived from England to the effect that, instead
of attacking Batavia, the expedition should, in agreement with
previous suggestions made by the Governor-General, be sent to the
Red Sea, to co-operate with the army of Sir Ralph Abercrombie
in the expulsion of the French from Egypt.*

The detailed plan of the Home Government was to send a
. , , battalion, some cavalry, and a few guns

Objects of the expedition. , , ^ . ■, • r ti^i

from the Cape, to be reinforced by the
Indian Contingent; and the actual objects of the expedition were
(1) to drive the French from Kosseir, Suez, and any other ports
in the Red Sea of which they might be in possession ; (2) in
co-operation with Sir Ralph Abercrombie 's army, to force
the French from Upper Egypt; and (3) to conciliate the Egyptian
population to our interests. Owing to the expected arrival of
the Cape force in the Red Sea by the end of February, every effort
was to be made to despatch the Indian contingent as quickly as
possible.

See map facing page 66.

THE EGYPTIAN EXPEDITION OF 1801. 9

These orders, in addition to being sent to the Governor-Gen-
eral, had also been repeated to the Governors of Fort St. George
and Bombay, with the result that on General Baird's arrival at
Trincomali he found that Colonel Wellesley (unaware as yet of
his supersession) had, with his usual promptitude, already sailed
to Bombay with the expedition, there to make further preparations
for the voyage to the Ked Sea. General Baird accordingly follow-
ed on to Bombay, writing at the same time an express letter to
Colonel Wellesley, in which he was careful to inform him that he
(Wellesley) had " been appointed second in command."