

On arrival at Jeddah, Baird received news of the British suc-
cesses in Egypt, and of tVe death of Abercrombie. He also learnt
that the only places now occupied by the French were Cairo and
Alexandria. Beresford and Murray, not having received their
orders, had meanwhile proceeded to Kosssir.

On the following day the Sharif of Mecca arrived, and much
to Baird's relief promised his assistance in procuring camels and
horses. He also offered to raise an Arab force to co-operate with
the British, but this offer Baird hesitated to accept.

1 The nearest point on the Nile was Kena, or Gena, distant 120 miles from Kosseir.

THE EGYPTIAN EXPEDITION OF 1801. H

On the 26th May, just as the General was sailing for Kosseir,
Sir H. Popham arrived from the Cape with the information that
a part of the 61st Regiment, some Light Dragoons, and a detach-
ment of artillery were hourly expected, but that when he left

Mocha no news was to hand about the
Arrival at Kosseir. remamder f troops and store ships from

Bombay. Sir D. Baird now sailed for Kosseir, which was reached
on the 8th June.

Kosseir was a cluster of mud hovels, and the coast was barren
and inhospitable. The water was bad, and altogether the place
was singularly uninviting.

General Baird found that Murray, who had been at Kosseir
about three weeks, had succeeded in collecting sufficient transport
for his own detachment. 1 He consequently decided that these
troops should move forward to the Nile at the first opportunity
and resolved himself to follow so soon as the remainder of the
army should arrive.

On the 15th June General Baird received a letter from General
Hutchinson, commanding the British army in the neighbourhood
of Cairo, dated 13th May. In this letter General Hutchinson
stated his intention of pushing on towards Cairo with a view
to containing the French force at that place, and preventing them
from interfering with the disembarkation of the Indian contin-
gent at Suez, 2 or with their subsequent junction with the army
of the Grand Wazir. He also informed General Baird that he had
requested the Wazir to lend him all possible assistance in the way
of guides and transport. He gave a dismal account of the route
from Suez to the Nile, but hoped that the Indian troops would
find it less trying than those lately arrived from Europe. He
held out no hopes of bein.g able to help in the matter of
supplies, and in fact suggested that a loan from General Baird
would be welcomed, as, owing to the European ports being closed,
his own force was in dire straits for money.

1 It is interesting to note the very largo were only " sufficient for his own detach-
amount of transport considered necessary ment. "

in these days. Murray is said to have had 2 General Hutchinsoi was of course

5,000 camels at this time, and yet these unaware at this time that Baird's force

would have to disembark at Kosseir.

12 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Baird in reply informed General Hutchinson of his inability
to reach Suez by sea, and of his consequent landing at Kosseir.
He also informed him that he intended to send Colonel Murray
across the desert to Kena, to reconnoitre the route and to get
into communication with the British army. Murray started
a few days later, and finding that water was procurable in small
quantities at a few places along the route, 1 sent back the welcome
intelligence to the base. The General thereupon decided to push for-
ward at once, in small detachments, and the first body of troops,
under the command of Colonel Beresford, started on the 19th June.