

A statement showing the number of transports used, their
tonnage, and the numbers of men and animals that were embarked
on them, is given in Appendix B.

In addition to fitting out the Indian Division, the Government
of India also despatched to Egypt 1,763 tents for the use of the
troops from England and a muleteer transport column consist-
ing of 3 British officers, 5 British Non-Commissioned Officers, and
600 native personnel. The transport column, however, arrived in
Egypt too late to be of use, and never joined the army.

It was at first arranged that all transports should be discharg-
ed at Suez ; but before these orders reached the Director of Indian
Marine some of the ships had already been taken up for a month.
Eventually it was decided by Sir Garnet Wolseley that all trans-
ports were to remain undischarged.

Occupation of Suez.

Owing to the daily increasing agitation in Egypt, on the 10th
July all Europeans were ordered to quit Suez, and the Suez end

THE INDIAN CONTINGENT IN EGYPT, 1832, 31

of the Eastern Telegraph Company's cable was disconnected from
the shore and taken on board a lighter, whence it was on the 21st
transferred to the Indian Marine ship Amberwitch, specially sent
from Aden for the purpose. At this time the Dragon and the Reidy,
of the East Indian Squadron, were at Suez, and Admiral Hewett was
on his way there from Ceylon with the Euryalus and the Ruby.

Meanwhile Alexandria had been bombarded and the forts wreck-
ed on the 11th July. On the 13th Sir Beauchamp Seymour had
landed his seamen and marines, and on the 17th the first troops
from Cyprus were landed in Alexandria. It being desirable that
a corresponding move should be made from the Indian side, Kear-
Admiral Hewett landed his Naval Brigade on the 3rd August ; and
this step had the effect of making the Egyptian garrison, together
with the greater part of the Arab population of the town, with-
draw without doing any damage. Admiral Hewett's prompt
landing thus saved the town from being burnt, but he has unfor-
tunately too late to secure any rolling stock.

The Naval Brigade now took up an advanced position, com-
prising the waterworks, the Victoria hospital, and two hillocks on
each side of the railway, in line with the above buildings. In
order to obtain a reserve of fresh water the gates of the dry dock
were closed and caulked, and hoses from the fresh- water canal
were turned on into it. By this means 10,000 tons of water were
stored, and the garrison rendered temporarily independent of the
canal .

On the 8th August the Seaforths and the Madras Sappers
arrived from Aden, and General Tanner, landing on the following
day, took over command of the town from Admiral Hewett. The
main body of the enemy was at this time at Neflche, with cavalry
piquets near Chalouf, 10 miles north of Suez ; but no collisions took
place for the next few days.

Meanwhile the army corps from England had been concen-
trating at Alexandria, and it had been decided to seize the Suez
Canal and transfer the main body of the army to Ismailia, which
was to be the base of operations against Cairo.