

Concentration at Ismailia.

On the 27th August Divisional Headquarters reached Ismailia,
and on the same day the first train from Suez reached that place.
When Ismailia had been captured on the 20th, a few trucks had
been secured, but no engine had fallen into our hands, nor were
there any facilities for landing one there from the canal. An
engine was accordingly sent from Alexandria to Suez, and the rail-
way line having in the meantime been repaired, a train was made
up at the latter place on the morning of the 27th and proceeded to
Ismailia under escort of some bluejackets and sappers.

On this day a general order was published notifying that the
cavalry of the army (with the exception of the 19th Hussars) was
to be organized in a cavalry division under the command ot
Major-General Drury-Lowe. The First Brigade was to be composed
of the Household Cavalry, the 4th and 7th Dragoon Guards ; and
the Second Brigade was to include all the Indian cavalry, namely,
the 2nd and 6th Bengal Cavalry and the 13th Bengal Lancers.

On the 28th August a mountain battery and some troops
of Native cavalry disembarked at Ismailia. On this day the
enemy had attacked General Graham's force at Kassassin with
superior numbers, and the action had only been brought to a
successful conclusion by a charge of the Household Cavalry and
7th Dragoon Guards late in the evening. 1 At 10 p.m. orders were
received by General Wilkinson, commanding the Indian cavalry
brigade, to proceed to the front as soon as possible with all
available troops, and he accordingly marched at midnight with
three troops of the 13th Lancers, two of the 6th Cavalry and one of

1 ThiB force, a part of the British Contin- vide page 36 and " Military History of the
gent, had boon pushed forward along the Campaign of 1882," page 63.
fresh-water canal on arrival at Ismailia,

Vol. vr. 4

34 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

the 2nd Cavalry. It was decided that, though now detached
from General Macpherson, the Indian cavalry should continue
to be rationed by the Indian commissariat, and previous to march-
ing they were supplied with three days' rations. The advantage
of sending transport animals in the same ships as the troops was
again exemplified by the rapidity with which General Wilkinson
was able to advance to the front on the receipt of orders.

By the 29th August fourteen transports of the Indian contin-
gent had arrived at Ismailia, and began to disembark their troops
and stores. The remainder of the cavalry were at once issued
with three days' supplies and sent up to the front. As there was
Arrangements for disembarka- only one small pier and a jetty available
tlon " for the disembarkation, and as these

were already overcrowded by the English contingent), the Madras
Sappers were ordered to construct a subsidiary landing pier 15
feet wide, and this they erected by means of large baulks and
planking in four hours. This pier was afterwards found insuffi-
cient for the requirements of the Commissariat, and was length-
ened 100 feet into deep water by means of carts brought from
Suez, which supported beams on which planking was laid. A
roadway of matting was also made over the heavy sand up to
the canal banks. The inconvenience experienced by the Indian
troops in having to swim their horses ashore and carry stores from
lighters, in water up to their waists, was thus avoided. In this
connection it is of interest to note a remark in the Official History
of the expedition to the effect that the absence during the earlier
period of the disembarkation of any organized gang of labourers
was severely felt, the fatigue duties thrown on the soldiers,
and the necessity for continuously teaching fresh bodies of men,
representing an inconvenience which should be remembered on
future occasions. " The necessity for these fatigues, " adds the
Official History, "abstracted from the front a number of men
whom it might have been very inconvenient to detain at the
base."