

On the 20th August, simultaneously with the seizure of Ismailia
from the north, 400 of the Seaforths advanced along the fresh-
water caual on Chalouf, 200 more being embarked on H.M.S.

32 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Mosquito and Seagull to attack the place from the east via the
maritime canal. The importance of this move lay in the fact that
Chalouf (where a considerable force of the enemy had lately arrived)
gave possession of the Suez Canal between Suez and the Bitter
Lakes, and in tie fact that there were, at that point, lock gates con-
necting the fresh-water and the maritime canals, which, if opened,
would deprive Suez of its water-supply. The brunt of the fighting
in this action devolved on the party which proceeded by the
maritime canal. As soon as this party had landed, one company
proceeded direct to the lock and closed the gates, which had already
been opened. The remainder of the force, covered by fire of the
ships' 7-pounders and gatlings, advanced against the enemy, who,
to the number of about 600, had taken up a position on the west
side of the fresh- water canal. Lieutenant Lang, Seaforth High-
landers, swam across this canal under a heavy fire, and succeeded in
bringing back a boat to the eastern side ; and, with the help of this
and two other boats now brought from the men-of-war, the little
party crossed to the enemy's side of the water and drove them
north with great loss. The enemy showed no lack of courage, but
their shooting was so bad that only two sailors were wounded;
while their own casualties amounted to 168 killed and 75 prisoners.
A large number » rifles and a quantity of ammunition was also
captured in this spirited affair.

The following day, the first detachment of the troops from India
having reached Suez, the Highanders were sent up the maritime
canal to occupy Serapeum. Thus communication via the canal,
between Ismail ia and the Indian contingent at Suez, was secured.
Transport from India now began to reach Suez daily. The
first five ships to arrive were unloaded alongside the jetty,
advantage being taken in the case of those with large hatchways to
walk the horses up inclined planks from the main deck, and thence
by a gangway on to the quay. The horses were put under cover of
the railway sheds until evening, the infantry being marched direct
to the camp which had been marked out for them. On the 23rd,
however, orders were received that the Indian contingent was to
concentrate at Ismailia. No more troops therefore were disembark*
ed at Suez, but all, except detachments for the lines of commu-
nication and two troops of cavalry who had landed on the 21st.

THE INDIAN CONTINGENT IN EGYPT, 1882. 33

and whose horses were now in good condition, were re-embarked
and taken up to Ismailia via the canal. The cavalry above
mentioned were ordered to march to that place on the 25th, and
reached their destination on the 27th without incident and without
a single casualty among their horses. The advantage of sending
troops and transport on the same ships was exemplified by this
march, as the cavalry were able to proceed without in any way
upsetting existing arrangements.