

8. Every halting day the camel-drivers are to receive forty comaffes for
each camel. The deputy quartermaster general will advance the money if
you require it ; 450 comaffes are equal to one dollar. You will endeavour to
conciliate the drivers as much as possible, lest they desert. One headman
will have the charge and direction of them, and you will give your orders
through him.

9. You will write to me from the New Wells, Moilah, and Legaitte,
mentioning any inconveniences or impediments you may have met with, and
whether you halt, in order that the succeeding detachments may be guided
by it. You will find fresh meat at Moilah and Legaitte, whi ih you will issue

"to your men. also spirits, as your wine must be issued only on marching days.
You have with you one gallon of wine for each European soldier which is to
be issued on marching days at the rate of one pint per man.

10. You will endeavour to dissuade your men from drinking a great quan-
tity of water, which has been found very hurtful and weakening ; and when
you are at those stations where water can be had, your men should be marched
to the wells to fill their canteens morning and evening, and no more should be
allowed. At those places where they cannot cook their victuals they must
be persuaded to eat what is cooked the day before, as they will not otherwise
be able to perform the succeeding march through faintnesa and weakness.

Route from Kosseir to Kena.

Kosseir to the New Wells . . 11 miles ; water to be had

Half-way to Moilah . . . . 17 miles ; no water.

Moilah (El Moella) .. .. 17 miles ; water and provisions.

Advanced wells . . . . 9 miles ; water.

3 a

20

FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Half-way so Legaitte
Legaitte (El Geita)
Baromba (Bir Ambar)

Kena

19 miles ; no water.

19 miles ; water and provisions.

18 miles ; water.

10 miles ; the Nile.

120 miles.

(Sd.) J. MONTRESOR,

Lieutenant-Colonel,

ll " ATTGJ91

CHAPTER III.

THE EXPEDITION TO MALTA IN 1878-

As a result of the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-78 the Russian Gov-
ernment entered into the Treaty of San Stefano with Turkey, by
which almost complete independence of Turkey was secured for the
populations of the Christian provinces and a new Bulgarian State was
to be created, with a seaport on the ^Egean Sea. The English Gov-
ernment refused to recognise this treaty, Lord Beaconsfield openly
declaring that it would put the whole south-east of Europe directly
under Russian influence. Russia offered to submit the treaty to the
perusal of a Congress, but argued that the stipulations which merely
concerned Turkey and herself were for Turkey and herself to settle
between them. This was an untenable position, as it was impossible
for the Great Powers to allow Russia to force on Turkey any terms
she might think proper. Turkey meanwhile asserted that she had
been coerced into signing the treaty. At this juncture, at the end of
March 1878, the British Government determined to call out the
reserves, to occupy Cyprus, and to summon a contingent of Indian
troops to Malta.