1

1 * *

1 i

1 -

9

1 *

E S

05 p«

ll

A ri PQ

a

s

<B

4*

8

I

.a
H

8 - - _

a - a xt J3 «

s 2 S 1 s I

!

2 ►»

1*

_ f
I

3 S

APPENDIX C.

Instructions for Officers Commanding Detachments proceeding from Kosseir to

Kena.

1. You will proceed with the detachment under your command on the
evening of the to the New Wells, distance about 11 miles.

2. The wells are a little of! the road, therefore be careful not to pass
them, nor allow your camels and baggage to miss them. An officer's party is
stationed at the wells. On your arrival there, which will be about 11 o'clock
at night, you should not allow your men to straggle about, or keep each other
awake, as a good night's rest will enable them to make the march of the next
night with more alacrity. In the morning half a pint of wine should be given
to each man, and their rice, which they must cook for that day and the
following.

3. The men's canteens should be filled with congu, or the water in which
rice has been boiled ; and just previous to their marching, another half pint
of wine should be issued to them, to mix with their congu. The men should
be kept in their tents, and as quiet as possible during the heat of the day.

4. The mussacks, or water-bags, will be filled up at the wells if any should
have leaked out.

5. As you will find plenty of water at the wells of course you will not use
any of the water carried from here. But be extremely careful of your mus-
sacks, that they do not get damaged, particularly in lifting them on and
off the camels, which ought to be done with a tent pole.

6. On the evening of the you will proceed half-way to Moilah, which is
about 33 or 34 miles from the wells ; therefore if you start from the wells at
five o'clock in the evening, and march till twelve at night, you will have
marched seventeen and a half miles (at the rate of two and a half an hour), or
half-way to Moilah. You will halt there, and in the morning issue half a pint
of wine per man, and the rice which was cooked the previous day. No water
is to be had at this halting place ; you will therefore issue to your troops and
followers from your casks and mussacks a proportion of water. Two gallons
of water for each man is sent with you, with an allowance for leakage. You
should therefore in the morning issue a gallon per man, and fill the canteens
in the evening before your march. If you find you will have water to spare
you will issue it at your discretion. On the evening of the you will proceed

APPENDICES. 19

to Moilah, where you will find an officer's party. Water and provisions
are to be had there. You will indent on the commissary for two days' pro-
visions, to be carried with you, to serve on the way to Legaitte.

7. If you find your men much fatigued, you may halt one day and night
at Moilah, and on the following evening you will proc<vd to the advanced wells
about nine miles beyond Moilah. There you will fill up your mussacks, and
cook rice for the following day. Your next march is half-way to Legaitte,
which is about 35 miles from the advanced wells. You will take the
same precautions and measures on this march as directed in that from the
wells to Moilah; for as there is no water till you arrive at Legaitte, you must
carry your provisions cooked for one day, and be very careful of your water.
Your next march is to Legaitte, where you will find water and provisions.
You may halt there a day and night if you find it necessary. Your two
next marches carry you to Kena, distant 28 mil's.