

Careful arrangements -were made for water-supply for the

Arrangements for water- contingent on arrival at Suez, that

supp y a uez. town depending entirely, at ordinary

times, on the fresh- water canal. Though all the transports were

It was also decided to procure some camel use of the contingent. On the Director of

transport locally. After Suez had been Transport reaching Suez, however, it was

occupied, the British Admiral telegraphed found that only 13 camels were available,

that 6. U00 camels could be obtained on hire and these were animals which had been.

locally, and Ihe Government of India there- captured from the enemy.
fore requested l.im to obtain 750 for the

28 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

fitted with condensers, the expense of retaining them for water
supply only would have been great, and they would besides have
been a long way from the camp. It was therefore decided that
the Admiralty should erect a condenser at Suez capable of
producing 4,800 gallons in 24 hours, and should further send a steam
tank vessel with a capacity of 40,000 gallons to that place, while
the Indian Government arranged to despatch 511 casks and 130
iron tanks in the transports, with a total capacity of 78,000 gallons,
for the further storage of water.

With regard to the provision of labour for disembarkation,

Cooly corps. ^ was suggested by the Admiral at

Suez that a coolie corps of 400 men.
with English-speaking headmen, should be enlisted in India ; but as
it was believed that an efficient corps could not be raised in time,
the Government of India decided that camp-followers should be
given working pay instead.

Turning to the arrangements for taking up transports, it

was decided to despatch the York and Lancaster Regiment, the

n . . . . . reinforcements for the Seaforth High-

Proviaion of transport. °

landers, and the Madras Sappers, as
a preliminary measure, prior to the embarkation of the whole
force, 1 ;,nd orders were sent to Captain Brent, R.N. the Direc-
tor of Indian Marine, on the 9th July, to take up shipping for
these units. Twt) ships were accordingly taken up on the 10th
July ; work was started on them on the 11th ; and on the 15th
they were ready for the troops. No further orders were issued
at the time ; but on receipt of the Home Government's telegram
on the 25th (vide page 26), Captain Brent was instructed to take
up sufficient tonnage for the troops therein ordered ; and between
that date and the 12th August he was given instructions to charter
the balance of ships required by the additional troops for which
the Home Government had asked. The total tonnage required
was 95,529 tons, and the actual amount taken up was 47 ship
to tall ing tons 1 1 2, 357 .

The Prince's Dock was given up for the use of the expedition,
.and all sheds were cleared out and placed at the disposal of the
military and naval authorities. By the 27th July 19 ships had

1 Vide footnote, page 26. -

THE INDIAN CONTINGENT IN EGYPT, 1882. 29'