

been taken up, and were set to work to take in their ballast and
complete fittings, some providing their own coal and some being
supplied from Government stores. From previous experience
it was found that the work of ballasting and coaling should pre-
cede that of fitting. As only fourteen transports could be accom-
modated at one time in Prince's Dock, arrangements were made
with the Superintending Engineer, Bombay, the Municipal Engi-
neer, Bombay, the Bombay Port Trust, the Peninsular and
Oriental Company, the Great Indian Peninsular Railway, and
the Bombay, Baroda, and Central India Railway, to fit up 12 ships,
the remainder being fitted up by the dock authorities. Forty-
two transports had been finished by the 13th August, and the
remaining five were all ready by the 5th September. The short-
est time taken to fit up a ship was two days, the longest six and
a half days. Day work from 7 a.m. till 7 p.m. was all that was
asked of the workmen , it being found that night work in the dark
was useless. In order to make the transports as cool as possible
in the Red Sea the sides of iron ships were matted inside,
and all ships were painted white. With regard to the fittings, 400 horse
stalls and 110 double mule stalls were supplied by the Bombay
Dockyard, and 1,500 horse stalls, 2,500 double and 590 single
mule stalls by the Public Works Department and the Bombay,
Baroda, and Central India workshops, Bombay, while 500 mule
stalls were sent by train from Calcutta. Captain Brent subse-
quently stated it as his opinion that Bombay could be expected
in the future to fit out and start transports at the rate of one a day,
i.e., 20 in 20 days and so on.

The embarkation spread over the period 21st July — 12th
Embarkation of troops. September, and with the exception of the

20th Bengal and 29th Bombay Infantry
who embarked at Karachi, and the 4th and 31st Madras Regiments
who sailed from Madras, the whole force was embarked at Bombay.
The procedure adopted was that as soon as ships were fitted up
they were brought alongside ' E ' and ' G ' sheds, Prince's Dock, to
take in their stores, whence they were taken alongside the jetty to
receive the troops. The allotment of troops to transports was
carried out by Captain Brent in communication with General
Macpherson. All units to be embarked at Bombay were concentrated

30 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

at Deolali, whence they were railed down to the Prince's Dock
j etty, and embarked direct from the trains. All units took half
their baggage animals, and all their water mules on board their
own transports, the remaining half of the baggage mules being
sent off as far as possible in vessels sailing the same day as the units
to which they belonged. This plan of embarking mules and men in
the same ships was in the first instance objected to on the ground
that some ships were better able to carry mules than others, and
that the comfort of troops would be greater if all animals were
placed in separate vessels ; but this objection was overruled by the
Commander-in-Chief, who stated that he was convinced by history
that the governing principle in preparing such expeditions was so to
embark the force that every portion of it should be able to disem-
bark completely equipped from the ship or ships conveying it.
This, he stated, was absolutely necessary if the landing was likely
to be opposed, and was the best means of preventing confusion and
delay even if there were no opposition. It further had the advant-
age that the fact of any ships being detained would not affect the
efficiency of the remainder of the force, and any ship could be
diverted to a different port or landing place with the confidence
that the troops on board could be landed in complete order.