

Orders for the preparation and despatch of the Indian Contingent
were issued in April , 1878. The force, which was designated the Malta
Expeditionary Force, was placed under the command of Major-Gen-
eral J. Ross, C.B., British Service, and consisted of two batteries
of artillery, two regiments of Native Cavalry, four companies of Sap-
pers and Miners, and six battalions of native infantry, details of
which are given in the Appendix. In order to complete regiments to
the full established strength, volunteers of similar class composition
were called for, but only men of good character and in every way fit
for field service were allowed to volunteer. Regiments giving volun-
teers were allowed to recruit up to their full establishment. All fur-
lough men were recalled, and their travelling expenses paid by the
State. Regulation Field Service kit had to be taken, and in addition
«Goverment granted a free issue to each man of two canvas frocks, two

22 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

pairs flannel drawers, two jerseys, two pairs warm socks, and one
pair English boots. Followers received a free issue of clothing on
the following scale : — one blanket, one pair pyjamas, one great-coat,
one lascar coat, one pair boots, one tin canteen, one havresack, two
pairs socks, and two jerseys. Regiments of Native Infantry drew
extra batta, and ration money in lieu of rations at the rate of
Rs. 3-8-0 per mensem, while public followers received an addition of
50 per cent, on pay and batta, in addition to free rations. Forage
for all horses, mules, and ponies accompanying the force was
supplied by the State, with such assistance as the regiments were
able to render after landing. With regard to equipment, infantry
regiments took 50 picks, 50 shovels, and 100 billhooks, packed in
three pairs of camel khajawahs. Complete camp equipage was.
taken, and quartermaster's stores estimated for three months'
supply accompanied regiments. Infantry took 200 and cavalry 100
rounds of ammunition per man. No land transport was sent, but
2,000 sets of pack saddles for mules were ordered to be made up.
The whole of the force was embarked at Bombay, with the excep-
tion of the 25th Madras Infantry, who sailed from Cannanore.
Embarkation was carried out under orders from the Assistant
Quarter Master General, Bombay Army, but no details are available
as to the length of time that was taken over fitting up and des-
patching the transports, or of any of the arrangements that were
made for the embarkation of the troops. The transport fleet con-
sisted of 12 steamers towing 15 sailing ships, and Appendix B gives
the numbers of men and animals accommodated on each ship.

The troops reached Malta in May, and remained there about a
month, when, owing to a peaceful agreement having been amved
at between England and Russia, they returned to India.

APPENDIX A.

Composition of the Malta Expeditionary Force.

Staff.

Major-General J. Ross, C.B., British Service . . Commanding.

Brigadier-General J. Watson, C.B., Bombay Commanding Cavalry