

ness of embarkation. the Indi{m Contingeil t should Consist of

only one British battalion (the Seaforths), three Native Infantry
battalions, three regiments of Native Cavalry, and two companies of
Sappers, together with two battalions of Native Infantry as a reserve
at Aden. This necessitated a change of the Commander-in-Chief's
plans ; and between the 25th July and the 12th August still further
changes were necessitated owing to the Home Government telegraph-
ing, first for another British Infantry battalion, and subsequently
for some artillery. The fact that the whole force was not detailed
at the same time, but that orders to the various units to hold them-
selves in readiness to embark were thus spread over the period 6th
July — 12th August, should be remembered when investigations are
made as to the time taken over the embarkation of the contingent.
The final organization and composition of the force, which
was designated the " Indian Division, Egypt Expeditionary Force,"
is given in Appendix A. The port of disembarkation was to be
Suez, and the Government of India were informed that orders as
to its future employment would be communicated to General
Macpherson by Sir Garnet Wolseley, General Commanding in Chief,
on arrival at that place.

•Tins move was carried Out in accordance ness to proceed to Suez at a minute's

with a telegram from Home directing that notice, to safeguard the southern end of the

the Seaforth Highlanders should be reliev- Suez Canal. Tho Highlanders eventually

ed at Aden immediately, and held in readi- embarked for Suez on the 2nd August.

THE INDIAN CONTINGENT IN EGYPT, 1882. 21

With regard to the establishments of units, British Infantry

were to embark as strong as possible,

Organization of the force. ^.^ ^^ unitg were to be brought

up to war strength by transfers of men and animals from other
batteries. Native cavalry and infantry were to embark as near
then field service strength of 550 and 832 as possible. Most of
the units happened to be below strength at the time, but volunteers
from other units were not allowed. The numbers of the 29th
Bombay Native Infantry, however, were augmented by attaching
one company of the 27th Bombay (Baluch) Native Infantry to that
regiment. The force was equipped on a modified Kabul scale, full
transport (mules) being allowed for all units. 1 Hospital accommoda-
tion was arranged on the basis of fifteen per cent, for troops and three
per cent, for followers, or a total of 420 beds, of which 125 were
to form 1| field hospitals, and 295 to serve as general hospitals.
With regard to ambulance transport, doolies and dandies were
taken in the proportion of five per cent, for troops and one per
cent, for followers. These were divided into three bearer columns,
each consisting of 23 doolies and 74 dandies. In addition to two
water pakhals being taken for each company, four Macdermott
filters were supplied to each company of British infantry.

It was arranged that the force should be rationed from India,
Aden supplementing to some extent the supply of fresh meat.
One month's rations were shipped for the vojjage, and a further
three months' for consumption on shore. Firewood being scarce
and expensive in Egypt, each transport was to take a forty days'
supply for the troops and followers on board, and as much more as
room could be found for. A three months' supply of lime juice
was also to be taken, calculated at the rate of one ounce per man
per day.