

" As soon as it was dark on the evening of the 12th September,
I struck my camp at Kassassin, and the troops moved into position
a little to the west, where they bivouacked. No fires were allow-
ed, and smoking was prohibited.

" At 1-30 a.m. I gave the order for the advance of the 1st and
2nd Divisions simultaneously. The night was very dark, and it was
difficult to maintain the desired formations, but by means of
connecting files, and by the exertions of the staff, this difficulty
was overcome.

" The Indian contingent and the Naval Brigade did not move
until 2-30 p.m. To have moved them earlier would have given
the alarm to the enemy, owing to the number of villages south of
the canal.

"In moving over the desert at night there are no land marks
to guide one's movements; we had, consequently, to direct our
course by the stars. This was well and correctly effected, and
the leading brigades of each division reached the enemy's works
within a couple of minutes of each other.

"The enemy were completely surprised, aud it was not until
one or two of their advanced sentries fired their rifles that they
realised our close proximity to their works.

"These were, however, quickly lined by their infantry, who
opened a deafening musketry fire, and their guns came into action
immediately. Our troops advanced steadily without firing a
shot, and when close to the works charged with a ringing cheer.

" On the left the Highland Brigade had reached the works
a few minutes before the 2nd Brigade had done so, and in a dash-
ing manner stormed them at the point of the bayonet.

42 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

" On the extreme left the Indian contingent and the Naval
Brigade, under the command of Major-General Macpherson, V.C.,
advanced steadily and in silence until an advanced battery of
the enemy was reached, when it was stormed by the Seaforth
Highlanders, supported by the native infantry battalions. The
squadron of 6th Bengal Cavalry, attached temporarily to General
Macpherson, did good service in pursuing the enemy through the
village of Tel-el-Kebir.

"The cavalry division, on the extreme right of the line, swept
round the northern extremity of the enemy's works, charging
the enemy's troops as they tried to escape. Most of the enemy,
however, threw away their arms, and, begging for mercy, were
unmolested by our men. To have made them prisoners would
have taken up too much time, the cavalry being wanted for the
more important work of pushing on to Cairo."

Turning now to the operations of the Indian contingent
in detail, orders were issued on the 12th September at 3 p.m.
for all tents to be struck after dusk, and all baggage packed but
not loaded. One day's cooked and two days' uncooked rations,
100 rounds per rifle and 150 rounds per gun, were to be taken by
the troops. Water bottl es were to be filled with weak tea ; and
all baggage left in charge of small guards from each battalion.
At 6 p.m. orders were issued for the troops to be formed up
on the canal bank at 2 a.m. in the following order : —