

General Wilkinson reached Kassassin on the 30th August. From
that day until the 7th September reconnaissances of the enemy's
position were frequently made, and the enemy in their turn made
a few attacks on our piquets, but nothing of especial interest
occurred.

THE INDIAN CONTINGENT IN EGYPT, 1882. 3*7

By the 7th September the various reconnaissances which
had been carried out had brought in a fair amount of information
as to the nature of the enemy's position at Tel-el-Kebir. On
the same day the railway was for the first time reported to be
in working order, and was able to carry enough stores to provide
for the whole army and to allow of some surplus. Accordingly
arrangements were now made for the advance to the front of the
whole of Sir A. Alison's brigade (which had arrived from Alex-
andria on the 1st September), of the Indian contingent, and of
the remainder of the artillery, which had hitherto been kept back
at Ismailia. On the 8th the final orders for the march to Kas-
sassin, and the concentration at that place of the whole army, were
issued. The march was so arranged that the last troops would
reach Kassassin on the 12th September.

About this time Arabi Pasha had been informed by Bedouins
that the British force at Kassassin was only a small one, and that
they (the Bedouias) had cut off communication between Kas-
sassin and Ismailia. He therefore decided to make a combined
attack on the former place from Tel-el-Kebir and Es Salihiyeh
on the 9th September. Needless to say the Bedouins' inform-
ation was entirely incorrect, for the British at Kassassin now
numbered 8,000 men, not including the Guards, a cavalry regi-
ment, and some Royal Horse Artillery, who were at Tel-el-Mas-
khuta.

The Indian cavalry brigade were furnishing the outposts
at Kassassin on the morning of the 9th September. At 4 a.m. a
piquet of the 13th Bengal Lancers was attacked by a large number
of the enemy. Colonel Pennington immediately took command
and charged down on the attackers, driving them back with loss.
About the same time Colonel Macnaghten, 13th Bengal Lancers,
had started out with a patrol, as usual, to reconnoitre towards
Tel-el-Kebir. He soon observed the enemy advancing in consider-
able force ; and on receipt of this information in camp a cavalry
regiment was at once sent to the front and the infantry brigade
ordered to turn out. By 7 a.m. the infantry were in the positions
which had already been allotted for them in the event of an attack
on the camp ; and at the same time both cavalry brigades moved
out towards the enemy. It being now seen that the enemy were

36 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

advancing in two bodies, from the north and west, the cavalry
were manoeuvred so as to keep these two bodies separated and
to afford each other mutual support, the Indian Brigade threaten-
ing the left of the Tel-el-Kebir column, and the 1st Brigade
moving against the right of the column from Es Salihiyeh. At
the same time orders were sent to the Duke of Connaughtat Tel -el -
Maskhuta directing him to advance from that place against the
left flank of the Es Salihiyeh force.