

About 7-15 a.m. our artillery opened on a train bringing up
Egyptian troops. Half an hour later General Willis (in command)
ordered a general advance of the British force. The enemy
made no stand against our advance, and by 10-30 a.m. the infantry
had followed them up to within 5,000 yards of the Tel-el-Kebir
position, while the Es Salihiyeh force had retreated with equal
haste before the 1st Cavalry Brigade.

It is possible that had an attack now been made on Tel-el-
Kebir it would have succeeded. It would not, however, have been
the decisive success for which Sir Garnet Wolseiey wished, and which
was indeed the essence of his strategy, for only a fraction of the
army could have pursued, and the cavalry could not at once have
pushed on to Cairo to save that city from the destruction with
which Arabi had threatened it in the event of his defeat. General
Willis therefore decided not to push his advantage any further
that day. Sir Garnet Wolseiey, who arrived on the field shortly
after (having hurried by train from Ismai Ha that morning) approv-
ed of General Willis's decision, and by 2 p.m. all the troops had
returned to camp.

Throughout this action the Indian cavalry attracted atten-
tion by their steadiness, and Lance Duffadar Aussan Singh and
Trumpeter Narain Singh, 13th Lancers, were specially brought
to notice for gallant conduct.

The Battle of Tel-el-Kebir.

The period 9th_12th September was taken up by the march
to the front, and by the successive arrival in camp of those por-
tions of the army which had not yet been concentrated at Kas-
B.iwin. On the afternoon of the 12th September all troops detailed

THE INDIAN CONTINGENT IN EGYPT. 1«82. 39

for the front had arrived, and the distribution of the Indian con-
tingentjwas as follows : —

' H ' 1st and 7-lst Northern Royal Ar-
tillery.

2nd Bengal Cavalry

6th Bengal Cavalry (less 3 troops) .. Kassassin.

13th Bengal Lancers

Seaforth Highlanders

Madras Sappers and Miners

1st Battalion Manchester Regiment . . Ismailia.

7th Native Infantry (Lines of Com- .. Suel, Serapeum, Ismailia, Ne-
munication). fiche, Maskhuta, and Kassassin.

20th Native Infantry (do.) . . . . Chalouf, Genefeh, Fayid, Ismai-

lia, Nefiche, and Kassassin.

29th Native Infantry (do.).. .. Suez, Ismailia, Nefiche, and

Kassassin.

Sir Garnet Wolseley had been always a great believer in night
attacks, when possible, as the best means of passing with little
loss over that destructive zone of fire which has to be traversed
in front of works held by well-drilled soldiers armed with breech-
loaders. The ground in this instance, unmarked by any disturb-
ing feature, lent itself to the operatioii, provided the troops could
be properly guided over the pathless desert. Further, it had
been noticed that the outposts and piquets of the enemy were
only sent out beyond their entrenchments at daybreak. Another
advantage gained by a night attack would be that all exhaustion
to the troops from the sun's rays and want of water would be
obviated. For all these reasons therefore, Sir Garnet Wolseley
decided to advance up to the enemy's position at Tel-el-Kebir by
night, and to attack the entrenchments at the first gleam of dawn.