

In order to make the attack as great a surprise as possible
it was decided to advance directly the last troops had arrived
from the base, i.e., on the night of the 12th-13th September.
For a similar reason no sign of the intended movement was to
be given till after dusk. No hint of the intended attack w;is
published in the camp, but on the morning of the 12th General
Wolseley met his brigadiers before dawn, and explained to them
on the ground the nature of the intended movement.

40 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

In order to guard against all chance of failure it was arranged
that the two infantry divisions should be placed at a consider-
able interval from each other, and should be entirely indepen-
dent. By this means it was hoped that in the event of one division
failing to deliver its attack at the right moment, the other, wholly
unaffected by this fact, would be able to give its independent
blow, and would give the division that had failed time to re-
cover itself and act as a support to the successful wing of the
army.

Between the two divisions was to march the whole of the
artillery. Throughout the campaign our guns had produced an
immense effect on the enemy, and it was expected that arriving
opposite the position at dawn, forty-two guns would be able to
cover the rally of either division which needed support, or pave
the way for a successful advance in the event of the infantry be-
ing unable to take the position with a rush.

The cavalry were to be on the right wing, ready to take up
the pursuit, and the Indian contingent on the south of the canal,
where, being on the line of retreat of the enemy, they could march
direct upon Zagazig after the action, and so secure that important
junction before the enemy could recover from their disaster.

They were, however, to move off an hour later than the main
force, because, since their route passed through several villages,
it was feared that by startling the inmates of these too soon, warn-
ing of the attack might be given. The Naval Brigade were to
advance along the railway with the 40-pr. gun, in support of the
Indian contingent.

The lines of Tel-el-Kebir, which had been under construc-
tion for six weeks, started from a point on the fresh- water canal
about two miles east of Tel-el-Kebir bridge, and extended north-
wards for about four miles. The line consisted of six batteries
connected by breastworks of varying profile, generally 7 feet broad
and 4 feet thick, with a ditch 6 feet wide and 5 feet deep.
The railway line was protected by a gun on each side of it, bui
was not blocked. The only advanced work was a 9 -gun battery
about a mile north of the canal and 1,000 yards in front of the
position. The right of the line rested on the canal, on either
bank of which was a work for three guns.

THE INDIAN CONTINGENT IN EGYPT, 1882. 41

South of, and parallel to the canal, and at a distance of about
300 yards from it, was a deep irrigation channel. The intervening
ground was, with the exception of a narrow strip of broken ground
immediately south of the canal bank, covered with jowari crops, and
south of this channel similar crops extended for a mile to the edge
of the desert. In the middle of this cultivation, about half a mile
in front of a prolongation of the enemy's position, was a large village.
Before describing the operations of the Indian contingent
during the battle it will be well to quote the following general
summary of the action from General Wolseley's despatch: —