

A general hospital for natives was pitched on the beach,
and from it the more 1 serious cases were regularly sent to
the Hydaspes, which had been fitted up as a hospital ship at
Suez.

THE INDIAN CONTINGENT IN EQSP'f, 1882. 35

On the 30th August the Seaforth Highlanders arrived at
iBmailia from Serapeum, and marched to Nefiche, where they were
joined by the 7th Native Infantry. Nefiche was ordered to be
the advanced base of the Indian division, and its troops were to
be concentrated there ; but General Macpherson detained the 20th
and 29th Native Infantry at Ismailia to furnish fatigue parties,
as no labour was obtainable locally. On this day the mountain
battery proceeded to Kassassin, where it was to be attached to the
cavalry brigade.

Nine more transports arrived on the 30th, and the work of
unloading was vigorously carried on, a number of kahars now
being lent by the Ambulance to the Commissariat to assist in
landing stores. Strenuous efforts were now made to push 30
days' supplies forward to Kassassin, which had been named as the
advanced depot for the Indian division. Only three trucks per
day could at first be placed at General Macpherson' s disposal
for the supply of his troops at the front, but as it was found that
fodder could be procured locally in the neighbourhood of Kas-
sassin, only rations for the men were at first despatched. Mean-
while the troops on the lines of communication were supplied
from Suez, and rations for the detachment at Nefiche were sent
up the fresh-water canal in boats towed by mules.

In order to expedite the formation of the advanced depot
seven men-of-war's boats, towed by a steam launch, were placed
upon the fresh- water canal on the 2nd September ; and on the
following day, two more engines having arrived from Suez, a re-
gular service of three trains per diem was started from Ismailia
to Kassassin. The sapper telegraph train (10 miles of wire and
three offices) arrived about this time, and detachments of the
Madras Sappers were set to work to learn its manipulation ; but
much difficulty was afterwards found in the construction of lines
by the Madras men, as they were neither strong enough nor tall
enough for the work.

By the 10th September 21 days' supplies for 5,000 combat-
ants and 6,000 followers of the Indian division had been collected
at Kassassin. By this time the majority of the Indian contingent
had reached Ismailia, and the Manchester Regiment had been
detailed as the garrison of that place.

36 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Operations up to the 9th September.

Having now completed an account of the disembarkation of
the Indian troops, we will turn to the operations of those units
which had been sent up to the front previous to the general
advance.

From Ismailia to Kassassin by the railway is 21| miles, viz.,
to Nefiche 2h, to El Magfar 7|, to Tel-el-Maskhuta 11, to Mahsameh
18| and to Kassassin 21 J. South of the railway, and generally
parallel to. it, ran the fresh- water canal, whose waterway was
about 20 yards broad. At Mahsameh on the canal was an irrigat-
ing sluice, and at Kassassin a lock. Since the army on its march
to the Delta would have to depend entirely on the canal for its
water-supply, and as this could easily be drained between Kas-
sassin and Ismailia by shutting the above-mentioned lock or open-
ing the sluices at Mahsameh, the first object of the British was
to seize those two points as soon as possible. With this view
General Wolseley advanced on the 24th from Nefiche with 2
battalions, 3 squadrons, 2 guns, and the mounted infantry, drove
the enemy from El Magfar, and captured a dam which had been
constructed at that place across the canal. He was there attacked
by abou 1 "' 8,000 of the enemy with 20 guns, who had been encamped
at Tel el Mahuta, but being reinforced by 5 battalions, 8 squadrons,
and 4 guns, he succeeded in maintaining his position, and on the
following day drove the enemy back on Tel-el-Kebir with great
loss. Kassassin was occupied the same evening. On the 28th
August, General Graham, who held Kassassin with 2| battalions,
2 guns, and a few dragoons and mounted infantry, was attacked
by about 9,000 of the enemy, but he succeeded in holding his own,
and General Drury Lowe's cavalry from Mahsameh, charging at the
end of the day, drove the enemy back in confusion. No Indian
troops took part in any of these actions, General Wilkinson's
detachment, which had been the first to start for the front, having
only left Ismailia on the night of the 28th.