

Seaforth Highlanders.

7-1 st Northern Royal Artillery.

Sappers and Miners.

20th Native Infantry.

29th Native Infantry.

7th Native Infantry.

In pitch darkness at 1-30 a.m. the troops were roused, and
at 2-30 a.m. the column moved forward in silence in column of
fours. This formation was necessary owing to the restricted
nature of the ground already alluded to. The cavalry followed
in rear. The force had marched about three miles when the warn-
ing shots which preceded the attack of the Highland Brigade
were heard. About a quarter of an hour later the enemy observ-
ed the column, and began to shell it. The Highlanders were

THE INDIAN CONTINGENT IN EGYPT, 1882. 43

then pushed forward over the open ground against the guna, which
were protected by some pits and covered by some trenches with
about 400 men in them. The 20th Infantry at the same time
passed round the battery, taking it in flank. The 7th Infantry
supported the Highlanders, while the 29th followed in rear of the
20th. The mountain battery came into action on the canal bank,
firing at the flashes of the guns.

The Seaforths advanced by rushes, firing volleys at intervals,
and supported by the gatlings on the north bank. By 6 a.m.
the enemy had been driven from their entrenchments on the south
bank, and four guns had been captured.

The 20th Native Infantry had meanwhile advanced against
a native village which was held in force by the enemy, and had
carried it by a bayonet charge.

The whole line now advanced, driving the enemy before it,
and capturing his guns. The cavalry were pushed forward to cut
off the fugitives who were soon po # uring into the village of Tel-el-
Kebir from the northern side.

Soon after 7 a.m. General Macpherson reported to Sir Garnet
Wolseley on the bridge the complete success of his brigade.

The total losses incurred by the Indian contingent in the
action were one man killed and eight wounded.

Occupation of Zagazig and Cairo.

Sir Garnet Wolseley now ordered the cavalry to continue the
pursuit, and to advance upon Cairo with all speed. The Indian
contingent he ordered to march on Zagazig railway junction, and
so break the connection between the various portions of the Egyp-
tian army dispersed throughout the Delta.

I General Wilkinson, with the 2nd (Indian) Cavalry Brigade and
mounted infantry, at once moved by the north side of the canal to
Aabasa lock, and, marching on Belbeis, seized that place about
noon on the 13th, after encountering little opposition en route.
General Drury Lowe, with the 1st Brigade and Horse Artillery,
reached Belbeis some few hours after.

A.t 4-30 a.m. on the 14th the advance on Cairo was resumed.
General Drury Lowe was in command, and his column consisted of
3 squadrons, 2nd B?ngal Cavalry, 4th Dragoon Guards, 2 squadrons,
13th Bengal Lancers, and 100 Mounted Infantry. As the troops

44 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

approached the capital the inhabitants showed every expression of
pleasure ; but as nothing was known of the state of affairs in the
town, the General decided to halt his men some miles outside, and
sent forward only a detachment. By this means the Egyptians
were made aware of the arrival of a force in their vicinity without
finding out how small was their actual strength.