

The enemy's tactics consisted in long range firing from cover
_ L . , , followed by desperate hand-to-hand assaults

Tactics of the enemy. „ i

from the bush. Their movements were
stealthy and sudden and carried out with extraordinary rapidity
by small groups of spearmen.

The line of railway was to follow the caravan route to Berber,
„ .. and lay in a north-westerly direction from

lvMlv.v.y. J ■ J

Suakin. To crush Osman Digna's power,

before the railway could be proceeded with, it was necessary

to advance to Tamai, thence return to Suakin and again advance

along the proposed line of the railway. First of all, however, the

p „ •„.,„,„>* tt u- enemy's force at Hashin had to be broken

Kico:iP.aissance to Hashin. J

up. Accordingly on the 19th March the
cavalry brigade and Indian infantry advanced.

Hashin lies west of Suakin, the route for the first seven miles
traversing a level, sandy district. At this point a group of black,
rocky hills is met with and thence, westwards, thicker undergrowth
extends to the base of the Waratab range. A mile and a half
further on is a conspicuous isolated ridge, half a mile in length,
running from east to west. The slopes are steep and rugged and
destitute of vegetation, but the bush at its base is about seven feet

•^ high. To the north of this lies Hashin Hill, and separated from
it by a wide ravine is a lower eminence, in rear of which is situated
the squalid village of Hashin ; beyond this again, is a wide khor,
choked with scrub.

" m At about 9-30 a.m. on 19th March a small force of the enemy was
seen, which retreated, apparently, upon the main body at Hashin.
Later on the whole force retreated westwards leaving a portion in
occupation of Hashin (Dihilbat) Hill whence it fired occasionally
upon the cavalry. The force returned to camp soon after mid-day.
On the following day a force of about 8,000 men, including the

JFA Indian contingent, advanced towards

* w Attack on JT<nhm. TT , . ,

Hasnin under the command oi Sir (j.

SUDAN CAMPAIGN, 1885. 57

Graham. The formation was three sides of a square with the
cavalry covering the front and flanks. The infantry reached the
hills east of Hashin at S-35 a.m. and redoubts were thrown up on
them. The enemy, meanwhile, had fallen b«ck on Dihilbat

Hill.

Orders for attack were issued, the 2nd Brigade to lead, sup-
ported by the Indian c ontingent and followed by the artillery. The
Guards Brigade moved in support of the whole and the cavalry
protected the flanks ; the Berkshire Kegiment advanced up the
slopes in attack formation, supported by four companies of the
Royal Marines, the other half battalion of the Marines moving on
the right rear of the Berkshires. A heavy fire was opened by
the enemy, who were, however, driven from the summit. The
Indian and Guards Brigades with the artillery had meanwhile ad-
vanced and occupied the gorge between Dihilbat and the smaller hill.
Considerable difficulty was encountered in moving through
the bush, and the enemy made many unavailing attempts to
attack.