

Christianity was introduced at the beginning of the third
century ; Islam, however, supervened and Abyssinia sank into
torpid oblivion for about a thousand years. Subsequently the

Outline of history. Portuguese opened up communications

with Europe, and in 1520 a.d. a fleet

arrived at Massowah. In 1526 the Portuguese missions sailed for

India with an Abyssinian Ambassador ; the latter subsequently

visited Portugal.

On the invasion of Abyssinia by a Muhammadan army, a
Portuguese force was sent from India to aid the Christians of
Abyssinia. On March 25th, 1542, this force defeated the invaders,
but was itself beaten in a subsequent engagement.

In 1804 Lord Valentia sent his secretary, Mr. Salt, into
Abyssinia. He again visited it in 1810 but apparently failed
to reach Amhara.

In 1841 an embassy was sent from India with little result.
In 1846, Ras 'Ali sent a mission and presents to the Queen. In
1848 Mr. Plowden was appointed Consular Agent ; he reached
Debra Tabor in 1849 and effected a treaty of commerce with
Ras 'Ali, ratified by His Majesty three years later.

ABYSSINIA. 67

Lij Kassa, known as the Emperor Theodore, was born in 1818,
and fought his way to the throne in 1855, assuming the title of
Theodore III.

Mr. Plowden was murdered in 1860 and Theodore avenged his
death. Captain Cameron succeeded PJowden as Consul in Abyssinia,
and on his arrival in 1862 he received a letter from Theodore to
forward to Her Majesty the Queen. Shortly afterwards the Emperor
made Cameron and other Europeans prisoners and cruelly tortured
them. A Mr. Rassamwas subsequently sent to negotiate, but he,
too, was made a prisoner. Theodore's atrocities growing worse and
worse, diplomatic proceedings were entered upon. These failed in
their object and preparations were made for despatching an
expedition.

Bombay was selected[as the base of possible operations. Under
Preparations for 1867 Sir Robert Napier's orders Colonel Phayre
expedition. began investigations, and Massowah was

decided upon as the point of disembarkation. Sir R. Napier
considered that the expeditionary force should consist of 12,000
men, and that a large amount of transport would-be required. He
advocated the employment of mules, camels, carts, and 3,000
coolies. He also recommended the allocation of funds to enable
supplies to be procured. He represented that the Government
responsible for the arrangements should have a free hand, and
deprecated misplaced economy. He considered that, with the
exception of carriage, the force could be equipped in from three
to four months ; he suggested that Aden, Egypt, and Abyssinia
itself should be indented on for transport, and that it should be
collected as near the point of disembarkation as possible ; that
an advanced party should be despatched as soon as practicable,
and that the troops sent from Bombay should be relieved bv
others from Bengal and Madras.

On July 25th 1867, the Secretary of State for India telegraphed
orders to begin the collection of transport, and asked what would
be required from England. The officers to command were now
selected. All the troops and officers were drawn from the Indian
establishment. The assistance of the various departments —
Foreign, War Office, and Admiralty — was freely given ; transports