

The right half battalion of the Berkshires, after getting to its

arms, made a most gallant resistance. One hundred and twelve

rt „ , „ , Arabs who entered the zareba at the first

Gallantry of Subadar

Guidit Singh. rush were killed. Two soldiers ot the Berk-

shires were saved from certain death by the
magnificent daring of Subadar Gurdit Singh of the 15th Sikhs, who,
placing himself between the pursuers and their prey, killed three
Arabs in succession by rapid sword-cuts.

The 15th Sikhs and 28th Bombay Infantry stood firm, main-
taining an intact line and receiving and re-

Staunchne^s of the Indian ■>■,• • ., i -,i i „„

troops pellmg successive attacks with a heavy

fire, as also did the two companies of the
17th Bengal Infantry who were in line with the Bombay Infantry.
Hundreds of dead Arabs were afterwards counted in front of tbe
Sikh position. The Bombay regiment was less directly attacked,
but fought steadily and added its quota to the slain.

The remaining half battalion of the Berkshires was dining when
b rube of the enemy. the alarm was given. It formed rallying

square and repelled two attacks without

loss, and killed 200 of the enemy. Twenty minutes after the

action commenced the " Cease fire " was sounded, yet in that short

period 1,500 Arabs were killed, to take no account of the wounded.

Major Graves of the 20th Hussars, who had left the zareba at

1-30 p.m. for Suakin, met the relieving

Action of the Cavalry. 8quadron of the 9th Bengal Cavalry but

hearing firing at the zareba, returned with the two squadrons. About

0De mile from the zareba they came upon a number of camel drivers,

some native infantry, a few British soldiers and a number of camels,

uiuks, etc., all in full retreat on Suakin, closely pursued by the enemy

SUDAN CAMPAIGN, 1885. 61

in much, greater force, who were cutting down and killing them in
large numbers. The squadron promptly charged, and when the
enemy was checked, dismounted every available man, and, firing
volleys, stopped the pursuit. Eemounting and pressing on they
delivered more volleys within 300 yards of the enemy. The Arabs
then' retired on the zareba, leaving many dead and wounded on the
ground. It was now observed that the enemy were trying to turn
the left flank of the cavalry with a view to falling again upon the
transport, so one troop was sent to intercept them. The cavalry,
joined by a troop of the 5th Lancers, drove the Arabs, with dis-
mounted fire, past the eastern side of the zarebas ; they dispersed
and did not again assemble in any numbers. A strong cavalry
cordon was formed round the transport and baggage, and Major
Graves took a despatch to Suakin, announcing the result of the
action. By 4 p.m. all was quiet. As soon as possible the zareba
was completed and the night passed quietly.

The British casualties in this action were 150 killed, 174
wounded, and 148 missing, the latter number including 124 native
followers.

The following day Sir G. Graham arrived at the zareba with
r , , . three battalions of the Guards and a convov