

at Tofrik. follows. The British square was marched

, - SUDAN CAMPAIGN, 1885. 59

to the eastf^the Indian Brigade, leaving their camels at the
place indicated for the zareba, formed in three sides of a square,
a large covering party protecting the north, west, and south, fa<j$s ;
the Sikhs on the west, 17th Bengal Infantry on the south, and the
28th Bombay Infantry on north. The eastern face was assumed
to be protected by the British square. Subsequently, the bush
in front of the Bombay regiment being very dense, two companies
of the 17th*Bengal Infantry were brought up on their right. Small
piquets from the flank companies of the various regiments were
thrown out about 150 yards in front of the Indian Brigade. The work
of constructing the zarebas now commenced, the Indian Brigade
working-parties being taken from alternate ranks of alternate
sections, thus preserving the front rank intact. At 2 p.m. the
defensive work was nearly complete. The Indians were standing
easy with bayonets fixed. One half battalion of the Berkshires were
outside their zareba cutting brushwood near the 15th Sikhs. The
marines were inside their own zareba. The other half battalion
of the Berkshires were having their dinners on the left flank of
the 17th Bengal Infantry. The camels had been unloaded and were
riling out preparatory to the return march. Shortly after 2-30 r.M,
news was received that the enemy were collecting in front and
i Attack by Arabs. advancing rapidly. Notice was given W

call in the working-parties, when the cavalry
was seen galloping in, closely followed by the enemy in their usual
small groups. The working -party of the Berkshires moved back
and stood to their arms. The native infantry piquets ran in
on the flanks of their companies and the lines opened fire. The
right flank of the 17th Bengal Infantry was somewhat disordered
by the 5th Lancers riding through it, and Sir J. McNeill, observ-
ing that the regiment was unsteady, although the officers were
doing their best, ordered some of the Berkshire Regiment from the
other face of the zareba to move over, but it was too late, Ura
six companies of the 17th Bongal Infantry broke after firing one
volley, the two companies on the right, whose ranks had been
broken by the cavalry, retired in confusion into the Berkshire
zareba and were rallied on the south front supported by some of the
Berkshire Regiment. Others retired towards Suakin. The left of
the line fell back in more regular formation to the Marines' zareba.

60 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Stampodo of transport 0n ^ Tetn&t ° f the llth Bon g al Infantr y

the Arabs stampeded the animals collected
to the left rear of that regiment and swarmed into the Berkshire
zareba, stabbing and cutting everywhere. The Gardner guns could
not be got into action. Large bodies of the enemy rushed round
in every direction charging on the fence with the utmost courage,
and intervening between the zarebns and the transport animals they
destroyed an enormous number of the latter. • -