

were arranged for ; a telegraph was constructed, suitable for service

Voi. vi 5 A

68 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA. ,

in the field; signalling equipment was prepared ; a search light was.
provided ; preparations were made for laying down a railway, but
this was subsequently sent from Bombay. Condensers were
supplied ; the Enfield factories manufactured breech-loading fire-
arms for the European portion of the contingent, and mountain
guns for mule carriage were prepared at the Eoyal Gun Factories,,
and all other contingencies foreseen as far as possible.

The question of currency necessitated a great deal of corre-
spondence ; eventually dollars, purchased in Austria, were sent
out by the Bank of England. Special rates of pay were fixed for
the individuals taking part in the expedition.

Military operations.

On the 16th September, 1867, the advanced party left Bombay
to reconnoitre a landing place on the shores of the Red Sea, arid
on the 7th October an advanced brigade sailed from Bombay
taking rations for two months in addition to one month's supply for
boardship. A further supply for four months was despatched
shortly after their departure.

On the 11th November a General Order was published directing
the despatch of the force to Abyssinia under the command of
Lieutenant-General Sir Robert Napier, g.c.s.i., k.c.b., (for detail
of force vide Appendix A).

It had been foreseen that the Navy would be called upon to play

Co-operation of the Royal an important part in the expedition, and

Navy. the following ships were present in Annesley

Bay . — ft. M. S. Octavia, Satellite, Spiteful, Star, Dryad, Nymphe,.

Daphne and Vigilant, all under the command of Commodore L. G-

Heath, c.B.

A rocket brigade of two batteries was organised from officers
and men of the Royal Navy and attached to the army.

The Reverend Dr. Krapf , Mr. Dufton, and Mr. Haussmann were
encased as interpreters on salaries of from

Interpreters. ° n >-

£500 to £600 a year.
Foreign officers from Italy, Prussia, France, Austria, Holland,
Foreign Attaches. and ^pain were permitted to accompany
the force.

ABYSSINIA. 69

Five thousand breech-loading rifles with 2,500,000 rounds of

ball ammunition were despatched in Sep-

Ams ' tember from England to Bombay. The

Indian troops were armed with the discarded Enfield rifles on the

leturn march from Magdala.

Although the greater portion of the force embarked at Bombay,
a brigade was shipped at Calcutta and

Embarkation. T _ . . , „ ■. ., , lr ■,

Karachi and smaller > units at Vingorla
and Calicut. Two hundred and five sailing vessels and seventy-five
steamers in all were employed in connection with the expedition.
In addition eight ships were engaged in the Mediterranean.
Captain Tryon was appointed principal agent for transports.
The embarkation was carried out most successfully ; no acci-
dent occurred to troops or followers, and only two horses and one
bullock were injured. During the voyage fever and dysentery
broke out on one of the transports, and 45 out of 270 coolies died.
The total tonnage employed was 300,000 at a monthly hire of
£450,000. The total number of persons of every class sent to
Abyssinia for purposes of the expedition was sixty-two thousand,
.and of animals fifty-five thousand.