

In addition to the actual Indian brigade the following corps, etc.,

were supplied by the Indian Government

War Office Transport, etc. rr . J . . , .

for dutv with the British force at buaKin.
4.500 camels (for baggage only, equipped with suleetahs and a proper
proportion of headmen and drivers).

500 riding camels (complete with saddles and proportion of attendants).
150 ponies for mounted infantry (complete, with saddles, bridles and

mat€rials for repairs).
Corps of camel-drivers, 2,050, for camels purchased at Suakin.
Corpfl of muleteers, 300 strong.
Corps of bhisties, 300 strong.

Corps of dhoolie-bearers, 500 strong with 100 Lushai dandies.
Corps of labourers, 900 strong, of whom 400 were to be especially adapted
for lailway work.

♦See map facing page < 4

} . 8i7J)4X CAMPAIGN, 1885. 56

" The requisitions for these various corps were received by the
Government of India between the 11th and 21st February, and
by the 5th April the whole force had been embarked and despatched
from India complete in every respect.

The transport of the Indian contingent was almost entirely
in regimental charge, and consisted of 1,973 mules, 150 bullock
carts, and a corps of over 500 dhoolie- bearers, who were chiefly
employed as labourers.

The personnel of the medical branch consisted of one Principal
Medical Officer, one Brigade Surgeon, two Surgeons-Major, and
nine Surgeons. Hospital provision was made on an estimate of
twelve per cent, sick for troops and three per cent, for followers.
All f>ick unlikely to be fit for duty in the field were to be sent back
to India fortnightly.

Two field hospitals of 100 beds each were formed, ana a base
hospital of 288 beds under a Brigade Surgeon was also provided.
The transport Qzir:witci was selected as a hospital-ship for the
Indian contingent, and contains! 125 b ds. Ambulance transport
for five par cent, of troops an! oas par cent, of followers was also
supplied.

After di : e nbarkation ;.t Su ;k n c instants nail nis^it attacks
on the part of the enemy were very harassing to the troops.

Shortly after Sir G. Graham's arrival a defiant letter was re-
ceived from Osman Digna, an! a reply was sent warning him of
the consequences of any hostility. He was at this time stated to
be at Tamai with some 7,000 men, about 1,000 at Haspin, and
a small force at Tokar.

The plan of campaign was divided into

Plan of campaign. . ■, "~

two phases : —
First. — The destruction of Osman Digna and the clearance

of the country for the construction of the railway.
Second.— The construction of the railway and location of
troops for its protection.
From the sea coast of Suakin a sandy plain rises gently, in
-, . a westerly direction, for a distance of ten or

Features of the country. ..

twelve miles, to where, at an elevation of
about two hundred feet above sea level, it meets the foot of th*
volcanic, range of mountains which bounds it on the west. The

&6 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

country in the vicinity of Suakin is fairly open. Towards Tamai
it is covered with a thick scrub of prickly mimosa, varying in height
from six to eight feet. The country is intersected by numerous
Mors or water-courses.