

It should be recorded that on sailing from India the places
of some fifty sick of the 15th Sikhs were filled by volunteers from
the 45th Sikhs.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

History of the Sudan Campaign by Colonel IT. E. Colvile, C.I3., firena-
dier Guards. Compiled in the Intelligence Division of the War

Office.

CHAPTER VI.

ABYSSINIA.

When the British expedition to Abyssinia * was contemplated

little was known of the topography or

General topography. ...

resources of the country ; various investiga-
tions were, therefore, made, from which it appeared that Abyssinia
proper consisted of a high mountainous table-land, the eastern
boundary roughly following the 40th degree of east longitude.
Between this mountainous region and the sea there is a tract of
arid, low-lying, waterless country, inhabited by savage tribes.
At Massowah this tract is only a few miles broad, but at Tajurrah
it widens out to between two hundred and three hundred miles.
These two regions differ totally as regards climate, inhabitants, and
physical character, the high lands being salubrious, well watered,
and with good communications, while the low country is waterless,
with few facilities for communications, and uncultivated.

There were three points of communication between the sea
and the uplands — Massowah, Amphilla Bay, and Tajurrah.
The road from Massowah climbs the eastern boundary of the high-
lands, while that from Tajurrah traverses two or three hundred
miles, and that from Amphilla Bay fifty to one hundred miles of
the low-lying country, before ascending to the highlands.

The highlands are very healthy, but at certain seasons of the
year, March till November, malaria is

Climate. , .. .

prevalent in the valleys. The rainy season
is from May to September ; little rain falls during the remainder
of the year. The average rainfall is about thirty-five inches,
July and August being the wettest months. Rain seldom faU c
between 6 a.m. and noon. The temperature is mild; tents or cove
of some kind is, however, essential. Massowah itself is very hot,
the shade temperature in July exceeding 120°.

* Vide map 1 4 in pooket.
Vol. VI

^6 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA

The main political divisions of the highlands were Tigre in
the north, Amhara in the centre, and Shoa

Political Divisions. .,, ,, ., • -i ,i v

in the south. Amhara comprised the dis-
tricts of Wag, Lasta, and Begemder. On the western slopes of
the highlands lie Wogera and Koara, where the highest mountains
are found. On the shores of Lake Tsana are the districts of Dembea,
Chelga, and Mecha, and south of these is the province of Gojam.
Abyssinia is inhabited by a mixed race ; the majority of the
people are of Shemite origin and speak a
language closely allied to Arabic and
Hebrew. The ancient tongue was the Ethiopic, and while this
was preserved there was comparative civilisation in the highlands ;
the modern dialects are derived therefrom but have become con-
taminated by the proximity of Arabic-speaking tribes. Of the
early history of Abyssinia little is known. The invasion by the
Ptolemies and the penetration of Grecian art and literature is
proved by the inscriptions found at Adulis and Axum.