

Two squadrons of the 9th Bengal Cavalry, while in pursuit of
the Arabs, were charged from the bush. One squadron dismounted
and opened fire, but was driven back upon the Guards' square with
a loss of nine men. On the right the 5th Lancers and two squadrons
of the 9th Bengal Cavalry charged with great effect and com-
pletely checked a body of the enemy who were attempting to turn
the British right flank.

> At 12-45 p.m. the Indian Brigade was recalled, and retired,
covered by the 2nd Brigade. At 2-30 p.m. the whole force (zarcba)
assembled at Dihilbat Hill, retired under the fire of the Horse
Artillery. The force, with the exception of the East Surrey Regi-
ment, left to guard the zarcba and redoubts, returned to Suakin
at 6 p.m. The losses amounted to one officer and eight non-
commissioned officers and men killed, and three officers and thirty-
six non-commissioned officers and men wounded. The enemy's
strength was estimated at 3,000. The trying night attacks on our
troops were now discontinued.

The next step was to crush Osman Digna at Tamai. Before

Preparations for Advance doing so, however, it was necessary, fit

on Tamai. reasons of supply, to establish an interme-

58 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA*

diate post in the desert, and for this purpose the Ipllcrwing force
flDdl&r the command of Sir J. McNeill, was despatched : —

"■ "j. British.

] squadron, 5th Lancers.
Berkshire Regiment.
Battalion Royal Marines.
1 Field Company, Royal Engineers.
Detachment Naval Brigade with 4 Gardner guns.
Ammunition Column.

Indian Contingent.
15th Sikhs.

17th Bengal Native Infantry.

28th Bombay Native Infantry.

1 Company, Madras Sappers and Miners.

The force was formed up in two squares at 7 a.m. and moved
off in a south-westerly direction, the British square in advance.

The orders given to Sir J. McNeill were to make three zarebas
eight miles from Suakin, one capable of holding 2,000 camels and
the flanking ones for one battalion each. The Indian Brigade was
"to march back with the empty transport, making an intermediate
Wareba half-way to Suakin and leaving one battalion there to return
to Suakin.

The Indian Brigade was echeloned to the right rear of the
British square ; inside the Indian square was the transport. The
advance was difficult owing to the dense scrub. The baggage
animals had, in many cases, been overladen, and frequent halts
were necessary. In consequence the average rate of progress was
little more than one and a half miles an hour.

The cavalry soon reported small bodies of the enemy retreat-
ing towards Tamai. At a distance of five miles from Suakin the

camel convoy was rapidly falling into con-

^BnviUdown of transport, . ^ ■->-,• •\'\ n

*'* fusion and it was considered impossible

to carry out the original programme. A modification, to form
the zarebas six miles from Suakin, was reported to Sir G. Graham
by telegraph and approved by him.

At about 10-30 a.m. the force reached the halting ground

Diction of t,oo r9 known as Tofrik, and was disposed as