

The Second Brigade then crossed the khor under the fire of
the Artillery, a high point in the centre being occupied by the
Berkshires, while the 15th Sikhs crossed the detached hills to the
left and front. The guns then came into action on the far side of
the khor, and the Arabs gradually withdrew into mountains to the
south-west.

No signs of water were found and, it being considered useless

to follow up the enemy, Sir G. Graham ordered a retirement.

After burning Osman Digna's village and destroying large quantities

of ammunition, the force returned to the Tesela zareba at noon, and

D . . c. reached Suakin the following dav. Sir

Return to bua in. o j • *-"

G. Graham now proceeded to carry out

the second part of his instructions. McNeill's zareba, being of no

D .. t . further use, was closed and the stores with-

Kailway construction.

drawn. Orders were, however, received on
the 15th April to suspend the construction of the railway and to
hold Suakin for the present. By the 16th April the railway had
reached a point within one mile of Handub. On this date orders
Camel Cor were issued for the immediate formation

of a camel corps, each of the Indian con-
tingent regiments furnishing its quota for a combined company.
On the 30th April the railway was completed as far as Otao.
On 6th May the Camel Corps, two companies mounted infantry, and

64 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

the 9th Bengal Cavalry marched soon after midnight from Sualrin
to attack a Shaikh who was threatening the line of communications.
A force from Otao, comprising a company of mounted infantry,
the 15th Sikhs, and 200 friendly natives co-operated. The district
was cleared of the enemy by 7 a.m., and his camp captured.

Tn accordance with orders from England the withdrawal of the
,„. t , , , . , . expeditionary force from Suakin began on

Withdrawal fiom Suakin. ,

the 17th May.
On the 27th May Lord Wolseley forwarded his recommendations
„ , . for the protection of Egypt. The garrison

Suakin garrison. \ OJ r °

of Suakin was to consist of 1 squadron
Indian cavalry, 1 garrison battery, 1 company Madras Sappers
and Miners, 1 British and 3 Indian battalions, with 150 British
mounted infantry and 100 men from the Indian battalions as
a camel corps.

Lord Wolseley, in his final despatch of 15th June, alluded to

the Indian contingent as follows: — "The

Extract from Despatches. ^.^ contingent> under Brigadier-General

Hudson, C.B., showed high soldier-like qualities, and was of the
utmost value in the operations round Suakin."

Sir Gerald Graham in his despatch of 30th May said :— " • •
The 15th Sikhs on several occasions displayed their splendid march-
ing powers the force was composed of the British

troops of Her Majesty, and of the native soldiers of her Array in
India . . . but though the troops were drawn from so many
different sources, all were animated and bound together by a firm
determination to preserve untarnished the reputation of the British
Army."