

Return to Suakin. J

of twelve hundred camels.

On the 24th March another convoy proceeded to the zareba,
escorted by the 15th Sikhs 28th Bombay Infantry, and the 9th
Bengal Cavalry. Three miles from the zareba the force was met
by an escort of the Coldstream Guards and Royal Marines who had
come to take over the convoy. On its way back it was attacked by
the enemy in considerable force and in closing up the square more
than one hundred camels were left outside and either killed or lost.

On the following day a water convoy reached the zareba without
mishap. The zarebas near Hashin were now dismantled. On the
26th March a large convoy escorted by —

2 guns, G-B Royal Horse Artillery ;

1 squadron each f.ora the 5th Lancers and 20th Hussars ;

Grenadier Guards ;

East Surrey Regiment ;

Shropshire Light Infantry ; \

62 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA . j"

9 th Bengal Cavalry ; si ; "

I5th Sikhs; >""'

28th Bombay Native Infantry ;

under the" command of Sir G. Graham, proceeded to the zareba (now
known as McNeill's) at 6 a.m. After two hours' march the enemy
were seen in small numbers and a few shots were exchanged between
them and the cavalry, and by 9-15 they were swarming in the thick
bush. After half an hour's desultory firing a rush was made at the
right-front corner of the square but repulsed. Only one casualty
resulted, and having handed over the convoy to the Coldstream
Guards the escort returned to Suakin.

On the 31st March it was reported that Osman Digna's force
had been withdrawn from Tamai. The mounted infantry and a
troop of the 9th Bengal Cavalry were sent there and reported that
the village was still held. Sir G. Graham, therefore, issued orders
for an advance on the morrow.

At 4-30 a.m. on the 2nd April the following force, about 7,000
Advance on Tamai. strong, marched from Suakin —

Guards Brigade.

2nd

1 Company Koyal Engineers.

4 Mountain and 4 Gardner guns.

G-B Royal Horse Artillery.

Cavalry Brigade. : ^,j

Indian Contingent.

The force was formed in one large oblong the convoy being
placed inside. McNeill's zareba was reached at 8-30 a.m. and
a halt made for breakfast. The 28th Bombay Infantry and
two Gardner guns, manned by the Royal Marine Artillery, were
left as garrison. The force was joined by the Grenadier Guards,
Berkshire Regiment, 24th Company Royal Engineers, mounted
infantry, and a troop of the 9th Bengal Cavalry. At 4-30 p.m. they
reached Tesela Hill, where the troops bivouacked for the night.

At 8 next morning the troops marched off in the following

order : —

The Second Brigade (Berkshire Regiment, Royal Marines and
15th Sikhs) under General Hudson, in

Formation of column. ^^ ^ ^^ ^ ^ ^ ^

SUDAN CAMPAIGN, 1885. 63

Horse Artillery on the right flank. Sir J. McNeill with the East
Surrey, Shropsh ires and two Gardner guns remained at Tesela to
protect the transport. The cavalry and mounted infantry recon*
noitred to the front. The right and right-front was covered by
the 5th Lancers and a squadron 9th Bengal Cavalry, and
the left and left-rear by the 20th Hussars and the remainder
of the 9th Bengal Cavalry. The objective was Osman Digna's
head-quarters at New Tamai between Tesela Hill and the khor
Ghoub, and the occupation of the wells in the khor. The ground
between Tesela and the khor was broken by three low ridges, bet-
ween which lay the village ; this was occupied without serious
opposition by 9 a.m., and twenty minutes later the square had
reached the edge of the khor, firing being kept up all the time
between the mounted infantry and the enemy's scouts.