

Transport Animals.

Lowland Train— Strength on 1st May .. .. 26,883

Casualties to 1st May . . . . 6,920

Highland Train— Strength on 1st May.. .. 7,690

Casualties to 1st May .. 1,175

CHAPTER VII.

SOMALILAND— THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE.

Somaliland* occupies that part of the African continent known*

as the " Horn of Africa " between the equa-
eogiap nca osi ion. ^ ^^ ^ e ^^ degree of north latitude.

It is bounded on the north by the Red Sea, on the east by the
Indian Ocean, and on the west and south-west by Abyssinia and
Jubaland, the latter a portion of the British East Africa Pro-
tectorate. The country forms a triangle, measuring 600 miles
along the coast from the French port of Jibuti to Cape Gardafui ;
1,100 miles from Cape Gardafui to Kismayu ; and thence through
Harrar to Jibuti about 900 miles. The whole of this area, covering
some 320,000 square miles, is partitioned into spheres of influence
among Great Britain, France, Italy, and Abyssinia.

The Golis, a chain of mountains running roughly parallel to and
at a short distance from the northern coast
iy.Mca ,eograp j . f orm the backbone of the country. Correct-
ly speaking this name applies to the hills behind Berbera, but it
is a convenient term for the whole range. The northern slopes
of these mountains, which vary in height from 5,000 to 6,800
feet, descend in a series of bluffs, similar to the Ghats of India
to the maritime plain, a long strip of arid country between the base
of the slopes and the shores of the Gulf of Aden, varying in width
from 60 miles to some 200 yards at Cape Gardafui. i

To the south of the Golis lies a large plateau, which, beginning
with an altitude of nearly 5,000 feet, stretches right across the
country with a very gradual fall to sea level on the south-east coast.
This inclined plateau extends, therefore, over the greater part of
Somaliland. It is covered with belts of dense thorn jungle inter-
spersed with open spaces, where the grazing is good. In the higher
portion of the plateau, called Ogo, there are a number of torrent beds
which either lose themselves in the bush, or drain into the Nogal
valley. These only contain water after the occasional showers of

* Vide map 15 in* pocket.

66 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

rain which generally fall in April and May, and again in August and
September. Water can, however, usually be found by digging at
certain places in the sandy beds. Otherwise, the only permanent
supply is obtained from wells dug by the Somalis, or their Galla
predecessors, in the scattered outcrops of hard gypsum rock.
These watering places become scarcer towards the interior, where
there is a wide belt of waterless bush country, called in the north
the ' ' Sorl ' ' or Northern Haud, and in the south the Haud (or
Ay a). South of this again some wells are found in the low-lying
lands towards the coast.

The bush country forms a barrier between the tribes of the
British Protectorate and those further south in Italian and Abys-
sinian territory. In the west, near Harrar, it is not a formidable
obstacle, but eastwards it widens to over 100 miles. In the dry
season it is uninhabited, but after rain it furnishes a common graz-
ing ground to the tribes on all sides, who frequently contend for
the possession of its rich pastures. This bush country is divided
by the Nogal into two portions, the Northern Haud, or Sorl, and
the Southern Haud. 1