

Mr. Duf ton, who had been attached to the Intelligence Depart-
ment, was attacked by Shohos in the Kumayli Pass, and died from
the wounds he received. He had rendered valuable services to the
expedition as the result of experience gained in travel in Abyssinia.
A small punitive force was despatched in pursuit of the Shohos
but with little result.

On the 1st June the Commander-in-Chief with the last column

of the force reached Kumayli, and on the day following, Zula, where

the embarkation had been busily progressing. By this date all

stations except Zula and Kumayli had been evacuated. On the

10th June Sir Robert Napier, having handed over to the Egyptian

Governor, Abdul Kadir Pasha, the care of some railway plant

and buildings which could not be removed until after the monsoon,

started for Marseilles. On the 11th June the 25th Bombay Native

Infantry was the only regiment left at Zula, as a guard for the stores.

While these events were happening the present Emperor,

Menclik Menelik, who was one of Theodore's pages,

effected his escape. He entered Ankober at the

head of a few followers and seized the reins of government. In 1881

King John obtained his submission and he reverted to the position of

Ras of Shoa. On John's death in 1889 he became King of Ethiopia.

During the Italian campaign against Menelik in 1896 the

Abyssinian army practised much the same tactics as in the 1868

war, the overlapping of the adversary's flanks and an assault

80 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

carried out by sheer weight of numbers : their arms were, however,
of more modern pattern, and their success was largely due to faulty
tactics on the part of the Italians.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Record of the Expedition to Abyssinia. By Major T. J. Hollani
and Captain H. M. Hozier (official).

APPENDIX A.

Staff of the Abyssinian Expedition.

Commander-in-Chief— Lieutenant -General Sir Robert Napier, G.C.S.T.,

K.C.B. »

Military Secretary.— Lieutenant- Colonel M. Dillon, Rifle Brigade.
Deputy Adjutant-General.— Colonel the Hon'ble F. Thesiger, 95th Foot.
Deputy Quarter Master General— Lieutenant-Colonel R. Phayre,

Staff Corps.

Political Officer.— Brigadier-General W. L. Merewether, C.B., Staff

Corps.

Commanding Divisions.

Major-General Sir C. W. D. Staveley, K.C.B.

G. Malcolm, C.B.

Commanding Royal Artillery.
Brigadier-General J. G. Petrie, R.A.

Commanding Royal Engineer.
Lieutenant-Colonel H . St. Clair Wilkins, R.E.

Principal Medical Officer.
Inspector- General of Hospitals S. Currie, M.D., C.B.

Commanding Brigades.
Colonel J. E. Collings, 33rd Foot.
„ W. Wilby, 4th Foot.
„ D. M. Stewart, Bengal Staff Corps.
,, J. W. Schneider, 2nd Bombay Native Infantry.

Deputy Commissary General.
Lieutenant-Colonel A. W. Lucas, Staff Corps.

Intelligence Department.
Major J. A. Grant, C.B., Bengal Staff Corps.

„ Roome, Staff Corps.
Colonel J. Brazier, C.B., Retired List, Bengal Army.
Mir Akbar 'Ali.

Director of Transpo t.
Major R. P. Warden, Staff Corps.