

On the arrival at the summit of the Second Brigade, some
20,000 of Theodore's troops, who were there, laid down their arms.
The Armstrongs and mortars were then brought up by elephant.
Theodore himself joined his guns on Islamgie, intending to move
into the citadel with them and defend himself to the last. At this
time the detachment of Bombay cavalry had reached the Islamgie
saddle, and Sir C. Staveley, seeing the Abyssinians advancing to-
wards their guns, sent a company of the 33rd Regiment to the saddle
to keep them under fire. Theodore, meeting these two detachments,
mounted his horse, ordered two of his guns to be dragged into
Magdala, and firing off his rifle called out a challenge for a champion
to meet him. As he kept at a distance it was impossible to cut
off his retreat from the fortress ; at the same time he was unable to
escape down the Islamgie saddle. After some exchange of Bhots the
Abyssinians withdrew into the amba and the gate was closed.
Some 200 Gallas, who had been massacred by Theodore, were
discovered by the detachments, much to their disgust. The British
Commander now reconnoitred Magdala and prepared for an attack
on the fortress. Beyond the Islamgie saddle the rock of Magdala
rose in a steep scarp to a height of 300 feet. A double line of
defence, in each of which was a small gate, crowned the scarp ;
this was approached by a steep and rugged path. That the defences
had not been abandoned was evident, though the strength of the
garrison could not be determined, and Theodore himself was occa-
sionally seen. Twelve guns and four rocket tubes now opened fire on

76 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Magdala gate at a range of 1,300 yards, meeting, however, with no
reply from the fortress. Sir Charles Staveley then made dispositions
for the attack, the First Brigade leading, supported by the Second.
The 33rd Regiment was to advance across Islamgie, two companies
in skirmishing order, two in support. The remaining six companies
headed by a detachment of Royal Engineers and " K " Company
of the Madras Sappers and Miners, carrying powder bags, ladders,
etc., were to form the storming party. Two companies of Bombay
Sappers and Miners were to bring up the rear. On nearing the
foot of the steep ascent the skirmishers, reinforced by the supports,
were to cover the advance of the storming party. The 45th
Regiment was to follow the 33rd in line, and the bulk of the
First Brigade, moving in column, wa3 to form the reserve. Two
companies of the 10th Native Infantry were to remain at Selassie
to guard the surrendered arms and clear the Abyssinians off the
mountains. The Armstrong guns and eight mortars were to advance
as far as practicable along the main road south of Selassie and
cover the infantry advance, while the two mountain and Naval
Rocket Batteries at the foot of Selassie were to keep up a fire on
the fortress. The latter opened at 3 p.m., but the heavy guns
could not approach nearer than 2,400 yards, and the mortal,
finding the range ineffective, soon ceased firing. During the can-
nonade the enemy remained under cover. At 4 p.m. the order to
storm was given. The 33rd Regiment, covered by the fire of the
skirmishers, soon reached the outer gate, in spite of the fire of the
defenders. Here the advance was arrested, for the gate was closed
and powder bags were not at hand. It was broken down by
crow-bars, and a stone wall 12 feet high was found to form a
formidable obstacle.