

The garrison maintained a constant fire through the loop-
holes, without, however, inflicting much loss. Meanwhile some
of the 33rd mounted the wall by means of ladders, and, taking
the defenders of the gate in flank, drove them with heavy loss
up a narrow path, and rushing through a small gate-way, seventy
yards further up, gained the summit of the fortress and planted
the English standard. The followers of Theodore threw down
their arms and begged for quarter, which was, of course,
granted. The fortress, though so easily captured, was of great

ABYSSINIA. 77

strength, and a properly arranged defence would have entail-
ed heavy loss upon the assailants. When he saw that further
efforts were useless, Theodore gave the order " Sauve qui pent, "
and drawing his pistol committed suicide. Early on the morning of
the 13th the main body of the cavalry advanced from the Bashilo
and threw out piquets to watch the approaches from the fortress
to th e British camp, the Kaffir-bir gate being watched by the Gallas.
Next day the cavalry withdrew to its former position. Thirty
pieces of ordnance, superior in calibre to that of the British, |?were
captured. The total force employed in the assault numbered
about 3,500. The British loss was not serious.

After the capture, the garrisoning of Magdala was entrusted to
Operations subsequent to the 33rd and a wing of the 45th Regiment
the fail of Magdala. under Brigadier General Wilby. Order was

with some difficulty established, and guards were posted at the gates.
The crown and royal seat of Theodore were taken possession of, and
his body was buried, without military honours, in the Church
of Magdala, a Committee of Investigation as to the cause of his
death being held. The Gallas were a source of much trouble, and it
was frequently necessary to fire upon them to prevent the molestation
of water-parties. The larger number of Theodore's subjects were
allowed to leave for their own districts, and every care was taken
to protect them. The disposal of Magdala caused Sir Robert
Napier much trouble, several claimants coming 'forward. Wagshum
Gobaze declined the responsibility. After dismantling the fortress*
and arranging for a safe conduct for those Abyssinians who desired
to pass through Gallas territory to their homes, it was handed over to
Queen Ma3teeat. The elephants and heavier ordnance having been
sent off in advance on the 15th, orders were issued for the evacua-
tion of Magdala by 4 p.m. on the 17th. At that hour the work
of dismantling the fortress and the destruction of the captured
ordnance began. On the 18th the last of the British forces crossed
the Bashilo on its homeward route and encamped that evening
on the Talanta, while Masteeat lost no time in establishing
herself and her followers in Magdala. On the 19th preparations
were made for the withdrawal of the whole force to Zula, arrange-
ments being made for the safeguarding of the baggage from' the
numerous marauders who hung upon the flanks and rear, and upon