

Magdala was concealed by these heights from the British posi-
tion. This rugged country was bounded by the table-lands of Talanta
and Ambala Sieda. Magdala was separated from the former by the
Menjara ravine, and from the latter by the Kulkulla, both tributaries
of the Bashilo. The mountain mass of Magdala forms a crescent of
which Magdala is the eastern and Fahla the western peaks. Midway
between the two is the peak of Selassie. Magdala and Selassie
are connected by the saddle of Islamgie, and Selassie and Fahla
by that of Fahla. Magdala is 9,150 feet, Selassie 9,100 feet above
sea level and 3,000 feet above the M:njara and Kulkulla ravines.

The sides of Magdala are scarped and steep, but at two points
they fall to the terraces of Islamgie and Sangallat. From these alone
can an entrance be made to the amba by the Kohit-ber and Kaffir -
ber gates. From the foot of the Fahla saddle the Arogie valley
runs down to the Bashilo, up which Theodore had constructed
the road by which he dragged his guns into position at Fahla.
Between the upper portion of the stream, which forms this valley,
and one of its tributaries, lies the Arogie plateau.

On April 7th Sir R. Napier reconnoitred the Bashilo, ten

Action of Arogie and miles beyond which lay Magdala. On the

capture of Magdala. jQth the troops moved down to the Bashilo.

The Fahla spur was the immediate objective. On the 9th orders

had been issued to the First Brigade, First Division, to

ABYSSINIA. 73

occupy the Gombagie spur ; on the following day the Second
Brigade was to advance to the bed of the Bashilo at 10 a.m.
Three cavalry regiments were detailed to hold the Bashilo.
The Commander-in-Chief, on arriving at the Affijo plateau, at
once ordered a regiment to occupy the point where the King's
road debouched from the Arogie ravine, and directed the
remainder of the First Brigade to move up in support.
Almost simultaneously with the completion of this movement
a round shell passed over the head of the staff and the
action of Arogie began. Theodore, imagining that the mountain
battery was merely transport, sent 6,000 Abyssinians to capture
it. The Naval Brigade opened on the mass with rockets and
partially checked the movement, but a portion advanced against
the British column on the plateau while another pressed on
to the head of the pass to attack the artillery and baggage.
The 4th (King's Own) Eegiment in skirmishing order, supported
by a wing of the Baluchis, a detachment of Royal Engineers, and
the Bombay Sappers, advanced to the Arogie plain and opened
fire. The Abyssinians slowly fell back and were finally driven off
the plain. A party, however, inflicted some loss on Sir Charles
Staveley's right flank from a cactus grove on Fahla hill. Another
party attempted to turn Sir C. Staveley's right, but was repulsed.
In the meantime a sharp action had been fought at the point
where the King's road issued from the Arogie valley.

" A " Battery, with an escort, had now ascended from the defile.
On seeing this, Theodore rushed down the mountain and was met
by the fire of the battery. The enemy still continued to advance,
however, and the detachment of Pioneers went forward to meet
them, a close contest between bayonet and spear ensuing ; the
Abyssinians were driven off with great slaughter, but not until
they had inflicted many spear wounds. Further on the left consi-
derable numbers of the enemy pressed towards the head of the
defile where the baggage had arrived. The latter was parked under
cover, and the escort, consisting of two companies of the King's
Own Regiment, checked the enemy's attempt to penetrate the
defile. Closed in by other troops the Abyssinians suffered severely,
the Sniders, especially, doing great execution. The action which had
commenced at 4 p.m. was over by 7 p.m. ; heavy rain fell during the