

74 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

greater part of the time. Theodore's forces retired in good order,
and, where favourable ground offered, made stubborn counter-
attacks.

The British troops bivouacked on the ground covering the issue
of the Arogie valley. Their loss only amounted to twenty
wounded ; that of the Abyssinians was estimated at seven hundred
killed and twelve hundred wounded. At midnight Theodore sent
the following message to Mr. Kassam : — " I thought that the people
now coming are women ; I find that they are men. I have been
conquered by the advanced guard alone. All my gunners are
dead ; reconcile me with your people." At daybreak he sent to
sue for peace.

By dawn on the 1 1th April the First and Second British Brigades
had taken up their positions on the Affijo plateau and Arogie
plain. The Baluchi's were pushing forward in skirmishing order,
when the flag of truce was seen approaching. Unconditional sur-
render of himself, his force, and the British prisoners were Sir Robert
Napier's terms. MeaDwhile Theodore, finding that matters were
not so bad as at first appeared, plucked up courage and returned
an insulting letter to the Commander-in-Chief ; he soon thought
better of it however, and shortly after sunset the British captives
reached Sir Robert Napier's camp. On the 12th April an apology
for the tone of his previous letter was sent by Theodore. On the 13th
April Theodore resolved to make an attempt to escape from Mag-
dala. His troops, however, declined to accompany him, thousands
surrendered to the British, and he himself re-entered the fortress.
Double the period of the armistice having expired, Theodore b
surrender not having been effected, and news having been received
that the enemy were recovering from their defeat, the Commander-
in-Chief determined to attack.

Before the troop3 had formed up, news of Thfpdore's departure
from Magdala reached Sir R. Napier ; he at once sent word to
the Gallas offering 50,000 dollars for his capture. Some cavalry
were sent forward to watch the western side of the fortress
until the main body should come up. The Sind Horse held the
Bashilo and detachments watched the Minjara ravine. At
7 a.m. fifty troopers proceeded to the Fahla saddle to communi-
cate with those of Theodore's troops who wished to surrender.

ABYSSINIA.

Sir R. Napier then ordered Sir Charles Staveley to advance
and occupy Fahla and Selassie. On the advance commencing ab
8-30 a.m. the Armstrong guns and the mortars took up a covering
position ; one mountain battery, advancing a short distance with
the column, took up a position on a spur on the left of the road
to cover the head of the escort ; the second battery followed in
rear of the leading battalion. A company of Baluchis ascended the
first accessible spur on the right into Fahla, supported by two
companies of the same regiment on another spur. At midday the
head of the column reached the Fahla saddle, whence two companies,
supported by the remainder of the Second Brigade and a battery,
were pushed on to the summit of Selassie. The path was so difficult
that only three guns could be man-handled to the top.