

ABYSSINIA. 7T

Halts were made at Masgah on the 12 th and at Mashik on the
13th and 14th. Distance from Antalo 16J miles. By this time
the telegraph line had been laid from Zula to Adigrat, a distance
of 101 miles. On 17th March the First Brigade marched to Bulago
and on the 18th to Makan. The distance from Atsala is fifteen
miles and the march difficult. On the 18th Sir R. Napier with
some Pioneers advanced to Ashangi, fourteen miles from Makan.
On the 20th March the Commander-in-Chief with the main body of
the Pioneers moved on to Mussagita, a march of eight miles.
On the 22nd Lat, a march of seven miles, was reached-
Here new distributions of the troops were made and orders
issued to proceed without baggage. On 23rd a march of ten miles
was made to Marawah ; this was very severe as each man car-
ried a weight of 55lb. After a day's halt to rest the troops, the
Commander-in-Chief with the First Brigade moved to Wandach,
eight miles, followed at one day's interval by the Second and Third
Brigades. Next day a march of seven miles brought the advanced
brigade to Muja. The following morning after a 6£ miles march
the Takazze was reached. On the 28th March a halt of two days
was made at the Santara, 4| miles beyond the Takazze. This is
on the edge of the Wadela table-land at an elevation of 10,000 feet.
Here the thermometer varied between 20° and 110° in the tents.
Between the Takazze and the Bashilo, besides the Wadela plateaus,
lie the plateaux of Talanta and Daont, north of the Bashilo ; in the
fork formed by that river and the Kulkulla is grouped the knot of
mountains of which Magdala is the key. The route to this fortress
was much intersected by ravines. In the most important runs the
river Jedda. From information received it was decided to follow a
south-westerly direction ; accordingly on the 31st March the First
Brigade moved to Gahso and on the 1st April to Abdikum, followed
by the Second Brigade which halted on the 1st April at Gahso.

On this date the total force in Abyssinia numbered nearly

11,000 fighting men and 15,000 followers, distributed as under: —

Head-quarters and the First Brigade, First Division; at

Abdikum. Head-quarters of the First Division and

the Second Brigade at Gahso.

Details of the First and Second Brigades, First Division,

between Wandach and Antalo.

72 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Second Division at Antalo, Adigrat, and Senafe.
0nthe2nd April the Commander-in-Chief with the First Bri-
gade moved to Sindi, and Sir Charles Staveley with the remainder of
the First Division to Abdikum. On the 4th April Sir E. Napier
moved up to the Talanta plateau. On the same day the advanced
guard seized the entrance to the plateau, followed by the First
Brigade, the Second Brigade occupying Bethor. From the Talanta
plateau the Abyssinian camp at Islamgie became visible. On the 6th
April the Second closed up to the First Brigade, and here several
days delay occurred on account of the want of supplies. On April
9th the main body advanced five miles to the brink of the Bashilo
valley and encamped within sight of Theodore's army. On the
further side of the Bashilo lay a rugged mass of broken ground, in
the centre of which the heights of Selassie and Fahla rose to almost
an equal height with the Talanta plateau.