

Owing to rough weather the reconnoitring party did not
Operations during Octo- reach Aden until the 26th September ; it
bcr and November 1867. arr i ve d a t Massowah on October 1st, but

finding the harbour unsuitable, landed at Malkatto in Annesley Bay
on October 4th. Zula was finally selected as the place for landing.

On the 21st October the fleet conveying the advanced brigade
arrived, and on 4th November a party started to reconnoitre the
route toSenafe via Kumayli, which was explored and waB found
suitable. The distance was 62| miles.

The 10th Regiment and Mountain Train reached Senafe on
December 6th, and the 3rd Light Cavalry on 7th. The Sind
Brigade arrived at Annesley Bay on 4th December. Hitherto
the scarcity of water at the landing place had been much felt, and
mules and camels had died of thirst and from want of attention.
The arrival of steamers with water, and of the Sind Brigade,
remedied this state of affairs. Great trouble had also been ex-
perienced in obtaining native labour and with the Persian
and Egyptian transport muleteers.

70 FLONT1EB AND CYEBSEAS EXPEDITIONS FIJ.'M INDIA.

During the last week in December a reconnaissance was made
of the road from Senafe to Adigrat, a distance of only thirty-seven
miles. This was divided into three marches.

Sir Robert Napier arrived at Annesley Bay on the 2nd
January, 1868. His first care was to stock the depot at Senafe.

By January 28th Sir R. Napier considered an advance to Antalo
_,. , justified. Instructions were sent to Aden

The advance.

to push on the troopships, and a brigade was
warned to be in readiness to march from Senafe. Sir Robert him-
self left Zula for the front. The railway did not make the progress
expected, and by the 31st January only three miles had been,
completed.

On the 6th February, the Commander-in-Chief reached Adigrat,
where a permanent entrenched post was established. Prince Kassai
arrived at this place with a deputation and the troops were paraded
in his presence. The general conduct of the Abyssinians was satis-
factory, and the health of the troops good. Parties were pushed
forward to repair the road, and the Commander-in-Chief himself
followed on the 18th February. In two marches Adabaga was
reached, and from here officers' servants and the cavalry syces
and grass-cutters were sent back to Annesley Bay.

On the 25th February the Commander-in-Chief advanced to
the Dyab, a stream between Adabaga and Hauzen, to meet Prince
Kassai. As the result of several interviews the Prince promised
to afford security to convoys, but Sir R. Napier neglected no pre-
cautions to render himself independent.

On the 26th February the British column commenced its ad-
vance to Antalo. After a difficult march a halt was made at Don-
golo. Next day a march of eight miles brought the force to the
b anks of the Agula, where camp was pitched. This short march had
proved very trying. On February 28th a still more difficult march
of fifteen miles was made to the valley of Dolo. Here the force
halted on the 29th. On the 1st March an advance was made to
Eikullet, nine miles. On 2nd, after a march of twelve miles, Buyah
was reached. A halt of ten days was made at Antalo, and here a
main depot was formed. Preparation was now made for an advance
towards the south. On the 12 th March the force marched via
Mashik and the Alagi pass to the Atsala valley.