

78 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA .

whom the rear-guard was obliged on several occasions to open
fire.

On Talanta plain the released captives were handed over to the
foreign officers of their own nationality. The plunder was sold b} r
auction, and the proceeds issued to the troops as prize-money. The
campaign was declared to be over, and the Commander-in-Chief issu-
ed a complimentary order to the troops engaged. On the 22nd April
Sir Robert Napier with the last of the force marched to the brink
of the Jedda ravine and on the 23rd reached Bethor. On the 24th
he moved to Abdikum and received in audience a large number of
notable Abyssinians who had been liberated on the fall of Magdala.
The force continued its retirement, and on the 10th May reached
Mashik. Here the Queen fell seriously ill and remained in camp,
but her two brothers departed. On the 12th at Antalo the
Commander-in-Chief received congratulatory telegrams from Her
Majesty, the Duke of Cambridge, and the Secretary of State for
India. On the 21st May Sir Eobert Napier arrived at Adigrat,
and the Second Division was broken up, all troops hereafter
remaining in the country being considered as belonging to the First
Division, the Staff of the Second Division at once embarking for
India. On the 24th May the Commander-in-Chief reached Senafe,
and held a review of the troops next day in honour of Her Majesty's
birthday. Prince Kassai was present, and on the following day a
present of arms was made to him on the understanding that they
were to be used solely in the defence of his own country. Four
Chiefs of Tigre here swore allegiance to him. Sir R. Napier told
Prince Kassai that, if he so desired, he might send some Tigre men
to Aden for instruction in the use of the weapons which had been
presented to him, being unable to accede to his request that British
instructors might be left behind for the purpose. Prince Kassai
had shown himself very friendly to the expedition. Through the
failure of the land transport corps, Sir R. Napier had been obliged
largely to look to local resources ; it was necessary to complete
the campaign before the rains broke, and any delay would have been
serious. Owing to the ravages of locusts the supplies available
in Abyssinia had fallen to a very low ebb, and it was essential to enlist
the Prince's active sympathy. He, shortly after the meeting with
SirR. Napier, sent in 10,000 dollars worth of grain; the half -pro-

ABYSSINIA. 79

mised armament had, therefore, proved a successful bait. Look-
ing at the transaction from another point of view, a strong ruler was
the surest guarantee of the peace of Abyssinia. The present of arms
consisted of 12 howitzers and mortars, 725 muskets with 350,000
rounds of ammunition, besides other minor items and a large
amount of commissariat stock.

Corps and batteries were now gradually moved down in three
stages to Kumayli, where they were entrained and railed to the
pier-head at Zula. Particular attention was paid to the com-
fort of the troops during these movements. All surplus baggage,
etc., was taken under escort to Zula and stored under a guard. On
the 29th May the last of the troops evacuated Senafe, Prince
Kassai accompanying the Commander-in-Chief to the head of the
pass, whence he returned to Senafe.