Prior to the Mahdi's rebellion, Egypt had, since 1870, held the
northern coast of Africa from Suez to Cape Gardafui with garrisons
at Berbera and other places. On the evacuation of that port by the
Egyptians in 1884, four tribes placed themselves under the protec-
tion of the British Government, viz., the Habr Awal, Habr Gerhajis,
Habr Toljaala, and Warsangli. (The treaty with the Warsangli
was concluded in 1886.)

At this time the Italian possessions in Africa were confined to
a small coaling-port at Asab on the Red Sea, but in 1885 Massowah
was handed over to them, and shortly afterwards they established
the colony of Erithrea on the shores of the Red Sea. They then
announced a Protectorate over a considerable portion of Soma-
liland and eventually over Abyssinia. Their claims to the latter
country were abandoned after the disastrous battle of Adowa in
1896, but they still retain their Somaliland possessions. In 1891
it was found necessary to define the boundary of their Protecto-
rate with that of the Imperial East Africa Company on the
Juba river, and in 1894 the northern limits of their territory
were settled with reference to those of British Somaliland.
The southern portion of their Protectorate, east of the Juba river,
is administered by the Benadir Trading Company. Here there
are a few Italian officials and some native levies, but elsewhere their
occupation of the country is purely nominal.

Harrar, after its evacuation by the Egyptians, was, in 1887,
seized by Menelik, then King of Shoa ; and from this base the
Abyssinians have extended their conquests into the valley of the
Webi Shebeli, thus laying claim to the western portion of central
Somaliland. The facility with which the Abyssinians acquired
their new possessions was due in no small measure to rifles imported
through Jibuti, the chief port in French Somaliland, and the centre
of the arms trade in this part of Africa. The French obtained their
first footing here by the purchase of Obok from a local chief in
1885. In 1888 the eastern boundaries of their possessions, which

SOMALI LAND— THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 93

had in the meantime grown considerably, were delimitated with
respect to British territory.

To return now to the British Protectorate, which, as we have
seen, was established in 1884 by agreement with the tribes. For the
first fifteen years little trouble was experienced in dealing with
the Somalis. The military operations, which were from time to time
necessary, were on a very small scale, with the exception of those
undertaken by the Zeila Field Force in 1890 against the
Mamasan section of the White Isa, who had raided Bulhar and
attacked a caravan near Hensa. Owing to the skilful tactics of the
enemy the punishment meted out to the tribe on this occasion was
not severe, but the results of the expedition were on the whole satis-
factory. The offending clans made their submission on the with-
drawal of the punitive force, and the attitude of the whole
tribe has since that date been friendly towards the British
authorities.