

Opinions differ as to the Somali's fighting qualities but at any
rate he appears to possess little sense of discipline or confidence in

1 These mounds are about ten feet high find chamber, which has now inmost cases
fifteen feet in diameter through the bnse. fallen in, leaving a hollow on the top.
They all originally contained an inner t Called Herioa.

80MAL1LAND—THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 91

his leaders. Colonel Swayne gives a favourable opinion of the

Somalis as soldiers in his report on his ope-

Fighting qualities. T&tions (gee p&ge ^ TU gomaH ; a fuU q{

resource, and makes an excellent scout in his own country. He is
brave, quick to learn, and soon becomes a good shot. He has
few vices, although impatient of restraint, and somewhat un-
amenable to discipline. On the other hand he is vain, lazy, and
unable to make a prolonged effort. The Dolbahantas, who are
further removed from civilising influences, are undoubtedly the
hardiest tribe with which we have come into contact. They form-
ed the bulk of the Mulla's f >llowing, and many of the men who
served us best in the native scouting corps and levies belonged to
this tribe, and had a blood-f .ud with the Mulla. The Isaare also
said to be bold fighters, addicted to night-attacks, a mode of tactics
not often resorted to by other Somalis.

The Somali is not a ghazi, and although the Mulla's influence
was so great as to imbue his followers with a very fair semblance
of the fanatical spirit, they did not on any occasion stake their all
on one rush, but invariably attacked in several lines of extended
groups, with the riflemen distributed along the front. When the
centre of their line is checked, the wings wheel inwards like the
horns of a Zulutmpi, but their formation is much less dense than
that adopted by other African savages, and is, doubtless, very
suitable for bush-fighting.

They are armed with spears of two kinds, a small and light one
for throwing, and one of stouter make for thrusting. They also
carry small round leather shields, about one foot in diameter ;
and some are armed with short straight double-edged swords,
called bilawas. The Mijjarten also use a club, and the Midgan carry
a bow and poisoned arrows, and a knife. Rifles were scarce in
the country before the Mulla's appearance.

The dress of a Somali consists of a tobe, several yards of cotton
sheeting, which is wound round his waist and thrown over his shoul-
ders. The tobes of the Mulla's men were of red ochre colour resembl -
mg the soil of the Haud. The coast Somalis generally wear white.

Our connection with Somaliland dates from the year 1827,

when the Habr Awal elders signed a treaty

History. f p eace an( j commerce with the British

92 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Government, and agreed to pay compensation for the plunder of a
merchant vessel wrecked on their coast. In 1855 the Somali coast
was put under blockade until reparation had been exacted for the
murder of a British officer near; Berbera.

