

Boundary.
f British Protectorate. The first four along
the coast in the order given, from west to
east. The two last in the interior ; the
Gadabursi in the extreme west ; the Dol-
bahantas in the Nogal and adjoining ter-
ritory.
Italian territory ; point of the Horn and

eastern coast down to Obbia.
Italian territory, coast below Mijjarten.
Italian territory ; interior ; north of the
Hawiya.
Ogaden. Interior ; north-west of the Marehan.

The Ogaden are nominally under Abyssinian influence.
A large section of the Habr Gerhaji live inland north of the Habr
Awal. The three Habr tribes claim descent from a common
ancestor, from whom they are collectively known as the Ishak
tribe.

There is, in addition, a lower class or caste, the Midgans, dis-
tributed among all the tribes. They are outcasts, who live by
hunting, and are very expert trackers and guides. Workers in iron
and leather are also said to belong to a lower class, as in India.

It may be mentioned that protection clauses have been insert-
ed in our treaties only with the Habr Awal, Habr ToIjaala„
Habr Gerhaji, and Warsangli.

Habr Awal.

Habr Toljaala.
Habr Gerhaji.
Warsangli.
Gadabursi.

1
1

Dolbahanta.

Mijjarten.

Hawiya.
Marehan.

90 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The Somalis trace their descent from certain Arab chiefs, who,

according to tradition, introduced the Muhammadan religion into

the country about 450 years ago, and intermarried with the Galla

tribes of the coast. The descendants and followers of these settlers

have gradually extended their conquests down to the Juba river,

and the present inhabitants are, therefore, a mixed race, in which

the Galla strain appears to predominate. They still speak what

seems to be a Galla language, which is not Semitic except for a few

borrowed Arabic words, and has no connection with the Bantu

languages of East Africa. Very little is known of the Galla tribes

inhabiting parts of Abyssinia and Juba land, but from the brief

descriptions of travellers they appear to resemble the Somalis in

many respects. That they once held the whole of Somaliland is

proved by the fact that the numerous barrows or grave-mounds

scattered over the country are to this day called Galla mounds. 1

Many of the wells, and the few remains of stone buildings, are also

supposed to be the work of this people. The Somali of to-day is a

nomad pure and simple, content with a portable house, made of a

frame-work of poles supporting a few mats. These mats 2 also do

duty for camel-saddles, and the whole apparatus can be packed

up and loaded for a move in a few minutes. The women do most

of the hard work involved by the wandering habits of the Somali.

The men appear to think they do enough in looking after the camels,

and spend their spare time, when they are not quarrelling, in talking

and singing in chorus with a mournful drone.

The Somali approaches the African type in colour and texture
of hair, which is usually short and crisp, but his features are regu-
lar and show no trace of the thick lips and flat nose of the negro. In
build he is tall and spare, with no great muscular development, but
he is very wiry and capable of great endurance. Next to excitability
and inordinate vanity, his chief characteristic is avarice, which
accounts for his strong inclination to loot camels, the principal
wealth of the country, on every possible opportunity.