

On the 27th the force marched into the interior, and on the
29th halted at Husain, about forty-five miles south-south-east of
Bula Ado.

The site chosen for the zareba at Husain, although the best
that could be found, was unfavourable, being on the banks of a
nala in broken ground. At 2-35 a.m. on the 30th, just after
the moon had set, the camp was rushed by a party of 25 of the

* The troops were subsequently reinforced garrison of fifty-one of all ranks was left at
by 1 British officer, 40 Bombay Sappers, Zeila, the strength of the force in the
and 9 »owars from Aden. As, however, a field was not actually augmented.

i " MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 97

enemy who used their long spears as poles and leapt over the zareba.
They were driven out with a loss of eight killed, but not before they
had killed four of the 17th Bombay Infantry, and wounded sixteen
including Captain Hughes.

After this affair the force recrossed the maritime plain by a more
westerly route than that by which it had advanced, burning several
encampments and capturing some of the enemy's stock en route
to Zeila, where it embarked on the 3rd February. The offending
clans afterwards submitted, agreeing to allow caravans a safe passage
through their country in future and to abstain- from further
outrages.

Operations against the Mulla Muhammad Abdullah in 1901 and
1902 under Lieutenant-Colonel E. J. E. Swayne.

The Mulla 's repeated raids into British territory induced the
Government, at the end of 1900, to sanction the raising of a local
force for the defence of the Protectorate. By February, 1901 the
levy was completed to the strength shown in the margin, under
Men, the command of (Local) Lieutenant-
Camel Cor ps . loo Colonel E. J. E. Swayne. The mounted

troops were under Major W. Gr. L.

infamy i?two corps 4 °° Beynon, I.S.C., and Captains G. E. Phillips

(of 560 each) l.ooo an d M. McNeill, Argyll and Sutherland

Highlanders, each commanded a corps of infantry. The strength

of the levy was 1,500 rifles 2 with twenty-one British officers.

With the co-operation of an Abyssinian force, the Mulla, whose
head-quarters were at Milmil and Bohotle, was driven into the
Dolbahanta country. The enemy's strength was at this time es-
timated at about 5,000 men, the greater part of whom were
mounted ; they probably had some 500 to 600 rifles.

In April, 1901, Colonel Swayne moved to Burao, which was then
made the advanced base. Rain having fallen, the advance into the

It appears that the small party which p.m., had no time for the construction of

attacked the zareba formed the advanced strong defences. Experience shows that it is

guard of a larger force, which remained usually better to widen the thorn fence

behind in the bush and did not support round camp when time permits rather

the attack. The British oommander was than increase its height,

oriticised for not making a higher zareha 2 This includes fifty drill instructors, etc.,

with a banquotte to enable the men to fire from the Punjab,
over it. The force, arriving in camp at 5