

No attempt had been made to teach the men, in the limited time avail-
able, anything except generally to obey orders, to shoot and to learn the for-
mations and movement necessary for general cohesion. They could march
well, and being all more or less used to inter-tribal fighting, they quickly
adapted themselves to our tactics. They understood the care and loading of
transport animals, could live on meat alone, and could go easily for two days,
subsisting only on the water they themselves carried.

I had no difficulty in at once finding as many riders as were necessary to
utilise such ponies as we were able to buy or capture.

Some difficulty occurred at the start owing to there being no non-com-
missioned officers or training staff available, the men we eventually used for
this purpose being mostly coast policemen, some of whom had less than a
year's service.

The men learned fast, however, and directly non-commissioned officers
began to come forward amongst them there was no further trouble.

It was not advisable nor was it necessary to dragoon the levies, whose
mobility was, to a great extent, the outcome of their being an irregular
corps.

Provided the men are treated with the same consideration as is used
in the native army in India, they will readily respond by doing their best.
It was unfortunate that many of the officers could only communicate with
their men through interpreters, who, in some cases, were prone to make the
most of their positions.

The levies were placed under the Burma Military Police Regulations and
Somaliland Order in Council of 1899. There was very little crime and
the punishments, which it was found necessary to inflict in a few serious
cases of plundering, having been very severe, a stop was at once put to any-
thing of the kind.

In December 1901 the Mulla once again entered the Protecto-
rate, raiding the tribes and threatening Burao, which was garrisoned
by 650 men. Steps were now taken to re-organize the levy which

had in the meantime been reduced. Six officers of the King's
Vol. vi 7A &

100 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

African Eifles 1 were sent out from England and 300 troops were
ordered to be held in readiness in British Central Africa.

The operations which took place at the beginning of 1902 were
unimportant, being intended to prevent the Mulla from tamper-
ing with the Protectorate tribes. It was not until the 26th May
that Colonel Swayne was able to advance from Burao towards
Wadamago and Bohotle, with a force consisting of 1,200 infantry
and 70 mounted troops. The Mulla, who was near Baran with
12,000 mounted men and 3,000 foot, then retired to Erigo, one
day's journey north of Mudug, leaving a body of mounted men
at Damot to observe the movements of the British force. On the
15th June Colonel Swayne moved on Damot, driving the Mulla's
men into the Haud.

It was deemed inadvisable at this time to advance to Mudug,
and, indeed, there was not sufficient water at Damot to enable
the force to cross the Haud. Accordingly, it was decided to move
eastwards into the Nogal to clear that district of the enemy and
drive them away northwards, or back to Mudug, where they would
increase the Mulla's water difficulties. July and August were spent
in these operations. Meanwhile the Mulla's force was daily increasing
and caravans of rifles, which were smuggled into the country through
Mijjarten ports, were reported to be reaching him in Mudug. Colonel
Swayne, therefore, asked for a reinforcement of 300 of the 2nd
Battalion, King's African Eifles. These troops were despatched, as
well as sixty Sikhs from British Central Africa.