

88 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

by a natural breakwater of rock, which enables small boats to land
through the surf.

In such a country, where movement is possible in every direc-
tion, and is only dependent on the water supply, the number of
routes is, of course, almost unlimited.

The whole country is divided into spheres of influence
Q , t . a under the British, Italian, French, and

Spheres or influence. # ,

Abyssinian Governments. British Somali-
land stretches along the coast from Loyi Ada, near Jibuti, for
some 450 miles towards the point of the Horn, with a maximum
breadth of 200 miles. Its area is about 68,000 square miles,
and the population is estimated at about 250,000. It includes
a large portion of the Ogo, or higher plateau, the best part of
Somaliland, which, as regards climate, may be called a white
man's country. The Italians possess the point of the Horn and the
south-east coast down to the mouth of the Juba river. The limits
of Abyssinian territory are less clearly denned, but they include the
central portion of the country from the Webi Shebeli to the eastern
edge of the Ogaden country. The French have a slice of hinterland
behind their port of Jibuti, and have made a railway towards Har-
rar, which is to be continued to Adis Adeba, the capital of Abyssinia.
The approximate boundaries of the several spheres of influence are
shown on the accompanying pocket map.

Berbera, the principal town and seaport in British Somali-
land, was occupied by Great Britain in 1884. The town is divided
into the eastern native quarter, enclosed by a circular embankment as
a protection from floods, and laid out in wide streets with some stone
buildings, including mosques, a custom-house, and a pier ; and the
official town, the Shaab, containing the Residency and officials'
quarters, a jail, a treasury, and court-house. On the beach twenty
feet below is a large stone water-tank. Near by is a detached fort,,
connected with the pier by a trolley-line. The population varies
from 25,000 in the trading season to 6,000 in hot weather. Water
is brought eight miles by a pipe from Dubar, and furnishes a supply
of some 6,000 gallons per diem, while the tanks have a cubic capacity
of some 19,000 feet.

The climate is not unhealthy, but the heat is intense during the
prevalence of the south-west monsoon. The harbour, formed by

80MAL1LAND—THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE.

89

a spit of land l£ miles in length, is the only one on the Somali
coast where vessels can anchor in all weathers. The trade is prin-
cipally with Aden, and in a lesser degree with the Persian Gulf
and the Red Sea.

The People.

The Somalis comprise various tribes, occupying certain well-
defined tracts and quite independent of each other, being more often
than not at feud among themselves. The following is a list of
the more important tribes, each of which is sub-divided into
clans and sections under the control of recognised headmen or
akils : —

Tribe. Locality.

Isa. Country on either side of the Anglo-French