

In the operations under Colonel Swayne in 1901 the Mulla
was twice defeated in the Nogal district and driven across
the Haud to Mudug, the British force being then withdrawn to
Burao by order of Government.

In 1902 Colonel Swayne again advanced against the Mulla,
who had re-entered the Protectorate, and drove him back to

SOMALILAND-THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 95

Mudug. Later, in attempting to follow him up across the Haud,
Colonel Swayne encountered his main body at Erigo. The
enemy were driven off, but the Somali levies were so demoralised
bv the severe fighting that a retreat to Bohotle became
necessary.

The control of the operations was then entrusted to Briga-
dier-General Manning, who advanced from Obbia in February
1903, with a force mainly composed of Indian and East African
troops. Mudug was successfully occupied, and the Mulla was,
with the assistance of the Abyssinians, driven across the Haud
into the Nogal. The disaster which befell Colonel Plunkett's de-
tached column at Gumburru had, however, increased the Mulla'a
pres.ige, and further operations became necessary. Major-
General Egerton, who commanded the re-organized expedition,
succeeded in totally defeating the enemy's main body at Jidballi
in January 1904. The Mulla, however, with his personal follow-
ing, escaped to the Warsangli country on the north side of the
Sorl, and when a column was sent out against him from Las
Dureh he retired into Italian territory.

The Somali Field Force was broken up in June 1904, a garri-
son of Indian troops being maintained in the country until
1905. The defence of the Protectorate was then entrusted to
local forces supported by a special corps of 600 men recruited
in the Punjab. The Mulla has now been assigned a tract of
country in Italian territory, but still appears to maintain hia
influence over the Dolbahantas in the south-east of our Pro-
tectorate. In 1905 the administration of the Protectorate was
transferred from the Foreign to the Colonial Office.

Naval Detachment .

. 10 of all ranks.

Aden Troop

• 64

Arab levy

• 20

17th Bo. Infantry .

. 224

Bombay Sappers

. *30

CHAPTER VIII.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND.

The Isa Expedition of 1890.

This expedition was directed against the Maraasan section of the
White Isa, to punish them for raiding the Habr Awal at Bulhar
and for an attack on a caravan at Hensa, in which two French
priests were killed.

The Zeila Field Force, under command of Captain J. R. C.

Domvile, composed of the troops
detailed in the margin, embarked
at Aden on the 9th and 11th Jan-
uary and landed at Zeila on the
13th. The fofce then marched
Total 348 along the coast about thirty miles

— eastwards to Bula Ado, where it

halted from the 17th to the 27th January. On the 19th the
cavalry raided some Isa karias near Gerissa, distant a long march
into the interior. One hundred camels and a large flock of sheep
were captured, while some of the enemy were killed and others
taken prisoners. The camels and prisoners were brought into
camp, but the guard with the sheep was ambuscaded when
returning at night, and a native officer and ten sowars, out of
a party of thirty-six of all ranks, were killed.