

The other expeditions undertaken on behalf of the protected
tribes were directed by the local authorities, who usually employ-
ed Somali troop3 assisted by contingents from the friendly tribes.
In 1893, however, a small force of seventy-five regular troops from
Aden, assisted by forty Somali levies, was sent to punish the
Aidagalla section of the Habr.

At this time Somaliland was one of the most prosperous of our
African colonies, and the only one, it is said, which was entirely
self-supporting. The only danger to be apprehended to the security
of the Protectorate was towards the western border. Here the
growing power of Abyssinia had absorbed some of tho tribes, and
the others looked to us for protection. In 1897, however, the
spheres of influence of the two Governments were defined by
treaty, and some 17,000 square miles of territory, which had
previously been considered British, were handed over to King
Menelik.

The Protectorate was administered from India until the
1st October 1898, when the control was taken over by the
Foreign Office. About this time the Mulla, Haji Muhammad
Abdullah, of the Habr Sulaiman clan of Ogaden Somalis, began
to give trouble. Having gained a reputation for sanctity by
several pilgrimages to Mecca, he had established his influence

94 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

over certain of the more remote tribes. Among these the Ali
Gheri Dolbahantas, with whom he was connected by marriage,
and the Ogadens were his chief supporters. At first he appears
to have used his influence for good by settling disputes between
the tribes, but it soon became apparent that he intended to
organize a religious movement against the British Government.
Early in 1899 he raided the Protectorate as far as Burao, pro-
claiming himself to be the Madhi and announcing his intention
of ruling the interior, leaving the coast only to the Europeans.
It will be noted that he has succeeded in some measure in making
this threat good, owing to the country being too poor to re-
pay complete occupation.

It was currently reported at this time that the Mulla was
demented, and this may be the reason why he became known as
the <; Mad Mulla."

In August; 1899, the Mulla again advanced to Burao and
threatened Berbera, which was thereupon reinforced by a detach-
ment of 200 native infantry from Aden. On this the Consul-
General, Colonel J. Hayes Sadler, proposed that an expedition
bhould be sent into the interior, but, owing to the state of affairs
in South Africa, operations against the Mulla were deferred.
Not having obtained the support he expected from our tribes,
the Mulla retired to the Ogaden country. In June 1900 the
Abyssinians sent a force against him and defeated a body of
Somali spearmen, who attacked them while in zareba. In July he
again raided our Protectorate, and at the end of the year sanction
was given to the Consul-General to raise a force for the pro-
tection of the country.

The several expeditions undertaken against the Mulla will
be described in the next chapter. Including the two phases of
the 1903-1904 operations, which were practically separate
campaigns, there have been in all four expeditions.