

Vo U VI 7

98 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Nogal district commenced on the 21st May. Samali, or Somala, some
twenty-five miles south-east of Eil Dab, was reached on the 30th
May, and here a strong zareba was made for the bulk of the transport,
Captain McNeill being left in command with 370 rifles and about
100 spearmen and tribal horse. The main body then pushed on
towards the Mulla's position, but the latter, evading Colonel Swayne,
delivered three determined assaults on the zareba at Samali on
the 2nd and 3rd June. The enemy were beaten off with the
loss of 600 killed and wounded, and, being intercepted at
Odergoeh by the main column, their retreat became a rout,
and the Mulla fled to Mudug. In a short time, however,
he returned to the Nogal, and Colonel Swayne, who was at Bohotle,
moved out with 700 rifles along the southern edge of the valley.
The Mulla again retreated, but his rear-guard was overtaken and
defeated at Ferdiddin on the 17th June. Captain D. A. Friedrichs,
R. E., and nine men of the levy were killed in this action, and Lieu-
tenant F. A. Dickenson and sixteen men were wounded. The Mulla,
with his chief adviser Haji Sudi, 1 once more fled across the Haud
while Colonel Swayne returned to Burao, orders having been
received to confine operations to our own territory.

The enemy's total losses during the campaign were estimated
at 1,200 killed and wounded, while 800 prisoners were captured.
Colonel Swayne, in his final report on his operations in 1901,
made the following observations : —

The levies had covered some 1,170 miles in three months, including delays
at Burao, and had frequently marched thirty miles a day. On days of action
as at Odergoeh, on two occasions in the Ararsameh country, at Kurmis, on
Beveral occasions in the Ali Gheri country, and at Ferdiddin, forty miles had
been covered. Besides this, detached sections and companies had traversed
an aggregate distance of 1,700 miles. This does not include the work of
parties of scouts and spies, who frequently worked two days ahead of the force.

The infantry carried, besides rifle, bayonet, equipment, and 100 rounds of
ammunition, two days' rations of dried meat and dates, and a sheep-skin con-
taining about a gallon of water. Blankets and superfluous clothes were left
behind at Burao. Every British officer was mounted.

Although the men in some cases were excited in action, they soon settled
down to work, and on no occasion did the loss caused by the enemy's rifle fire

1 This man was formerly an interpreter in the British Navy.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 99

affect them so as to cause them to hesitate in their advance. At Ferdiddin,
the Somalis, on their own initiative, extricated the maxims from the dead
camels and worked them, paying proper attention to sights and trial shots.
They took up new positions whenever the advance of the infantry rendered
this desirable. In the same action the mounted corps, which had suffered
severely in men and animals, was ordered temporarily to fall back on
the infantry, but advanced with them directly a forward move was
made.