

The Nogal is a wide open valley, bordered by broken hills.
It collects a great part of the drainage of the higher plateau round
Burao through its principal tributary, the Tug Der, and runs in an
east-south-easterly direction towards Illig on the Italian coast, eight
miles south of the mouth of the Wadi Nogal. The open and level
part of the valley, where the bush is either very sparse or entirely
lacking, has an average width of about twenty miles. There is no
running stream, but a good water-supply from wells and springs*
and the grazing is fair. Unlike the Haud it is in every respect
an easy country for military operations.

The only other important valleys are those of the Tug Darror
and the Webi Shebeli. Of these our troops visited only the upper
portion of the latter, the Tug Gebi, which is similar in character
to, but narrower than, the Nogal. The Webi Shebeli is a large river,
rising in the Abyssinian highlands and flowing south-east and south
towards the Indian Ocean through dense forests. Within a short
distance of the coast it turns southwards and loses itself in

1 The latter i<* frequently mentioned in this narrative as «■ The Hand-

S0MAL1LAND—THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 87

marshes not far from the mouth of the Juba. The Tug Fafan
descends from the Harrar highlands, and drains the Ogaden
country to the east of the upper Webi Shebeli, finally losing itself
in the marshes south-east of Faf. This river, and its tributary the
.Terer, forms stagnant pools in the dry season, but after rain causes
extensive floods, especially about Faf.

In the north-west corner of the Protectorate are a few villages
surrounded by cultivation. With this exception the whole country
is a wilderness, the only permanent settlements being on the sea-
coast. From Berbera, the largest of these trading villages, which
possesses a good harbour, a track runs south-south-east, by Shaikh-
Burao, Kirrit, and Garrero to Bohotle, a distance of nearly 200
miles. This has been our main line of communication in the Protec-
torate since 1902. The distances along it from water to water
nowhere exceed about 45 miles, and are usually much less. It gains
the plateau 40 miles from Berbera by a deep cleft in the scarp,
formed by a ravine coming down from Upper Shaikh. The slopes
of the hills are here well-wooded, and the ravine in which Lower
Shaikh lies contains a stream. The climate i; all that could be
desired, and the scenery is picturesque, in marked contrast to the
appearance of the country further inland.

At Bohotle there is a strong masonry fort on the edge of the
basin containing the wells. The distance from this place across
the Haud to Mudug is about 114 miles, with a few wells, yielding
a scanty supply of water, at Damot, 42 miles from Bohotle. The
first wells in the Mudug district on this route are at Badwein, from
which place Galkayu is about 33 miles south and Bera some 25
miles south-west.

These are the three principal Well-basins in the Mudug district,
which is shaped something like a horse-shoe, and is rather more
open than the surrounding tracts, containing excellent grazing.
Galkayu is connected with Obbia on the Italian coast by a trade
route some 50 miles in length, with wells at fairly frequent inter-
vals. The slope of the country southwards is nowhere perceptible,
until the route from Shaikh emerges on to the open grassy downs,
which border the sea-coast within a short day's march of Obbia.
The latter consists of a few mat huts collected roxind two stone houses
belonging to the Chief of thr place. The so-called port is formed