

Great numbers of sheep were taken on each occasion and were a
useful addition to the meat supply of the force, but of the camels
captured only a very small proportion were fit for transport pur-
poses.

The Abyssinians had meanwhile reached the valley of the
Webi Shebeli, and on the 4th April halted after a twenty mile-
march on the left bank of the river in fairly thick bush near Burhilli.
At about 11 A.M., after the arrival of the main body in camp,
but before a zareba had been made, they were attacked on three
sides by about 1,100 Somali tribesmen. The attack came as a
surprise, and severe hand-to-hand fighting ensued, lasting some
forty-five minutes, when the enemy were driven off. Many were
killed while trying to cross the river. Colonel Kochfort, who was
present, reports that little control was exercised over the fighting
by the Abyssinian commanders, but that individually the men,
who preferred their swords to their rifles, rushed into the fight
in the keenest possible manner. At the conclusion of the action
those who had killed their man or men presented themselves one by
one before the commander of the force, dancing a war-dance and
proclaiming in loud tones their devotion to their Emperor and
country. The custom of firing a shot in the air, which signifies an
enemy slain, was also observed. The Abyssinians pursued all day.
Their losses amounted to 21 killed and 10 wounded, those of the
enemy to nearly 300 killed and only 2 or 3 wounded. 1

The Somaliland Field Force was now disposed as follows : —

General Manning held Galadi with about 650 rifles, 2 pending

the arrival of reinforcements. The remainder of the Obbia Column

> The small proportion of wounded to Gait.di between the 1st and 13th April,
killed is significant. Dn d remaining theie, brought thin tola]

* The escorts of convoys arriving at to about 750,

112 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

was extended along the lines of communication, now some 230
miles in length, and was mostly split up into small parties, except at
Galkayu, where there was half a battalion of the 2nd Sikhs, ready
to move up in support if required. At Bohotle, in addition to the
garrison of the post, there was a movable column of about 500 men,
which was to take part in the forthcoming enveloping operations
against the Mulla, who was at Wardair. The Abyssinians at
Burhilli were well placed to prevent the enemy from breaking
either to the south or west, and his only safe line of retreat lay to
the north-west, where it was doubtful the tribes would support
him.

In order to cross the eighty odd miles of waterless bush country
which lay between Galadi and Wardair, General Manning intended
to establish water-posts for the first two marches out of the former
place, and then to advance to the foremost post, carrying five or
six days' water in tins for the 800 or 900 troops that would be
available when the half battalion at Galkayu and other details
arrived at the front. It was first necessary to collect a reserve of a
fortnight's rations at Galadi, and for this purpose convoys were
arranged for both from Galkayu and Bohotle, which the reinforcing
troops were to bring up with them. Major Gough was ordered
to cooperate in the advance on Wardair by moving out from
Bohotle with the movable column in a south-westerly direction
towards Daratoleh.