

1 10 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

At about 3 p.m. the camp would be roused by a jarring sound
on the bugles, known in this country as the " camel call, "which had
the merit of being easily recognised by the Somali camel-men.
Within half an hour of the return of the transport to camp the
column would be once more in motion in a loose single-rank square,
which was the formation for the march. In the open, with good
camels, it was possible to maintain some cohesion, but in close
country, which was the rule, the camels were compelled to advance
along one or two jungle paths, and all trace of a square was lost soon
after starting, so much so that the rear-guard [gradually fell back
to a distance of from \\ to 3 miles behind the head of the column.
The advanced troops usually halted at sunset and made a zareba
for the night. It often happened that the rear-guard arrived in camp
long after dusk. This was the case on the occasion of the last march
but one towards Galadi, when it was observed that the enemy
had lighted a number of signal-fires on the flank of the march to
give warning of our approach to the karias, which the Mulla
had left behind on his retreat to Wardair. On the level plain it was
difficult to estimate the distance of these beacons from the line of
march, or even to distinguish them from the cooking-fires of the
advanced guard, which had halted a mile or two in front.

Galadi proved to resemble Dudub and the other well-basins
of this district. 1 It is a large shallow depression of bare white rock,
dotted with trees, the largest of which are near the wells. Here the
Somalis collect their flocks when they drive them to water. Con-
sequently the ground swarms with ticks and vermin.

The mounted troops, working ahead of the infantry, had moved
without transport. The men had consequently to subsist for nearly
two days on half a biscuit each, and some mutton, while the horses
had nothing but camel-mats to eat. The country being at this
time completely dried up there was not a blade of grass near
Galadi.

1 The cleansing of, the wells is the first ting timber and filth of all kinds. The w»t«

task to be performed on arriving at one is impregnated with Fnlls ord the gpffais

of these localities. The following may be fumes often rendered men working

taken as a fair example of the material in the wells imensitile. Several Rijo'

that has to be removed from them. Broken Humane Society medals weie earned on

hunt, or water-vessels made of plaited fibre ; these occasions, but at least one deBtn

a Somali corpse or two ; a collection of rot- occurred before rel ef could arrive,

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. Ill

Small columns sent out from Galadi effected large captures of
stock from the karias, which the Mulla's hasty retreat had left scat-
tered over the country. One of these columns under Colonel
Plunkett proceeded some forty miles in the direction of Wardair and
returned to Galadi on the 6th April. Captures were also made at
Dudub and by small parties sent out from other posts mentioned
below, the actual number of the camels, reported as captured,
being :— Galadi 1,228, Dudub 60, Bera 100, Damot 2,000.