

General Manning, following the mounted troops, reached Galadi
on the 31st March with the guns and about 450 infantry. When
it became probable that the enemy would not be encountered, the
greater part of the 2nd Sikhs, 328 men, had been sent back to Gal*

lThc greater pirt of (he Bikunir Camel t'ovim wan finally tent to Bohotle to re-
place troops token from that side.

' i MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 109

kayu from the first bivouac out from Bera, owing to the uncertainty
of the water supply, and also to relieve the strain on the transport.
Sixty 1 men had been left in zareba at the Dudub wells, and an escort
of 60 rifles had been sent back to Bera on the morning of the 31st
with the empty camels of the column. The distance from Galkayu
to Galadi is about eighty miles, or 4£ days' march as made by
General Manning's column, and subsequently shortened to four
marches by convoys, etc., coming up to the front.

The usual method of conducting these marches was to start
at day-break, or sometimes an hour or two earlier, and continue
on the move with short halts every hour, until about 11 a.m., when
the camels were unloaded and sent out to graze under a guard, the
baggage being deposited in the centre of a rough square, formed
by the several detachments of troops as they came in. The worst
hours for marching were from 10 a.m. to noon, as in places where
the bush was so thick as to prevent the air from circulating, the heat
was stifling. Each man carried at least 40lb. of kit on his back, 8
and in these circumstances the daily allowance of one gallon of
water, reduced by evaporation to three-fourths of that amount, was
often insufficient to quench his thirst and provide for his cooking. 3

A fairly open spot was, if possible, chosen for the mid-day halt,
and a company was fortunate if it found a clump of trees near its
assigned position, otherwise the men lined up in the open and made
such shade for themselves as was possible with pagris, blankets,
etc., supported on brushwood. The heat in Somaliland is due
to the direct rays of the sun, and not so much to refraction and hot
winds, as is the case in India ; consequently the least shade gives
some relief, and the men became expert in the construction of these
temporary shelters. A good plan, sometimes adopted, was to alter
the position of the troops in column at the mid-day halt. It was
then unnecessary to make any changes in the dark before starting
the following morning.

1 Including a few mounted infantry, to half a gallon per man, but it cannot

whose horses had broken down. be said that the force as a whole ever

8 Rifle, 100 rounds of ammunition, chagu actually suffered from want of water. It

or canvas water-bag, water bottle, one day'B was rather the know ledge of the consequence

ordinary riitions, one day's emergency ra- which would ensue from running short of

tions, axe, cape or blanket, havresaek, etc. water that acted aa Buch a drag on the

» Occasionally the allowances were reduced operations. •