

On the 2nd October the 2nd King's African Eifles joined
Colonel Swayne at Baran, where he had arrived at the end of Sep-
tember, sixty miles east of Bohotle, and the advance on Mudug com-
menced the following day. The column which, with the exception
of the 2nd King's African Eifles, consisted entirely of Somali troops
and levies, numbered about 150 infantry and 500 mounted troops.
It also included two 7-pr. guns and four maxims. On the 5th
October it encamped in dense bush at Awan Erigo. Next morn-
ing, news being received that the enemy were advancing in
force, the column moved out of camp in search of a more open
space.

1 Six additional officers were subsequently sent out,

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 10l

When it had marched about two miles without reaching the open,

the mounted scouts galloped in and reported
Fight at Erigo. that the enemy were cloge at hand< Accord .

ingly the column, which was moving in loose square, was halted, and
the formation was dressed as far as the thick bush and the large
number of transport camels would permit. After waiting for some
time the force again advanced slowly and was almost immediately
attacked from all sides. The rear and right face, where two com.
panies of the King's African Rifles were stationed, stood firm, but
the Somali levies on the left and front f aces fell back on the centre in
sudden panic, with the exception of one half company which charged
to its front. The enemy advanced very rapidly, firing as they came
up to the muzzles of the guns. Captain Angus, R. A., was here killed
at his post. Major Phillips was killed while rallying his men, and
Captain Howard and Lieutenant Everett were wounded about the
same time. In spite, however, of the confusion into which the
column had been thrown by the first onset, the officers succeeded
in rallying their companies, which now re-formed and drove the
enemy back. In the meantime the camels had stampeded through
a gap in the left rear corner of the formation and had scattered their
loads broadcast in the bush. When the enemy had been driven off
most of the camels and their loads were recovered, but a maxim
gun, which had been dropped by its bearer during the action, was
carried off. Our casualties in this engagement amounted to two
officers, fifty-six levies, and forty-three transport followers killed,
and two officers and eighty-four levies and followers wounded.
Sixty-two dead bodies of the enemy were counted close to the
scene of the action. It was in this action that Lieutenant-
Colonel A. S. Cobbe won the Victoria Cross.

After the fight, Colonel Swayne retired to more open country,
and on the 11th October fell back towards Bohotle, as the levies
were too much shaken to allow him to continue his advance.

Campaign against the Mulla Muhammed Abdullah, 1902-04.

First Phase. Operations under Brigadier-General W. H. Manning.

The check at Erigo left our advanced force concentrated at
Bohotle, with the Mudug oasis still in the possession of the Mulla,