

4. An Italian Officer to accompany the Obbia force as Political Officer,

and his advice to be taken with regard to the future control of the
Mudug district.

5. The occupation of Mudug to be reported to the Secretary of State with

a view to the issue of further instructions.

6. An Abyssinian force was to occupy the eastern frontier of their own

territory and act as a stop to the Mulla, if he retired in that
direction.

7. The base at Obbia was to be closed by the end of April, and the Obbia

column to return via Bohotle.

8. Attention to be paid to the improvement of roads and water supply

in our own Protectorate.

The plan of basing a column on Obbia or some other point on
the south-east coast had already been proposed in Colonel
Swayne's time, and had the advantage of taking the enemy's posi-
tion in rear by a shorter and easier line of approach than that
from our own side of the country. The direction of the advance,
morever, tended to drive him either north or north-east into
British territory, or westwards to the Webi Shebeli, where the
Abyssinians would be able to deal with him. It is obvious
that no other plan would have offered so many chances of success,
but the following difficulties were inherent to the scheme : —

1. The uncertainty of obtaining camels in sufficient numbers in an

unknown part of the country.

2. The difficulty of landing on the south-east coast, which caused consi-

derable delay, especially in the disembarkation of traiisport.

104

FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

3. The necessity of removing the base froraObbia before May, when the
south-west monsoon begins to blow. This removal of the base
obliged the column, as stated in the general instructions, first to
concentrate at Mudug and eventually to march to Bohotle with
all its impedimenta. It can easily be seen that this operation, as
compared with a simple advance from a permanent base, required
exceptionally good transport. This, however, as events proved,
was not forthcoming, and how far the dearth of camels contributed
to the indecisive outcome of the operations can best be judged
from the following narrative.

The detail of the Somaliland Field
Force, as it was eventually con-
stituted, is given in the margin.
Particulars of Command and Staff
will be found in Appendix A.
General Manning assumed direct
command of the column at Obbia,
where the troops from Berbera
arrived on the 27th December,
and formed an entrenched camp.
Troops from South Africa and
India arrived in January. The
total of the Obbia Column
amounted to eighty- six British
Officers and 2,256* of other ranks,

"a .
a ■»

a .b

o Ti

Obbia Colwmn.

Lahore Mountain Battery, two Guns-*
3rd Sappers and Minere, No. 17

Company.
2nd Sikhs, Punjab Frontier Force
Bikanir Camel Corps (200 men).

Native Field Hospital. • ^

1 Section British Field Hospital. J

British Mounted Infantry, 1 Com- j S

pany (141 men). I | g

Boer Mounted Infantry, 1 Com- j a J

pany (100 men). j 2 "

Punjab Mounted Infantry , 1 i