

Company (160 men).
1st King's African Rifles (Yaos

(350 men).
3rd King's African Rifles (Sou

danese) (98 men).
6th King's African Rifles (Sikhs) I

(102 men). J

3

fa *

including native officers.

The strength of the Berbera Column was 78 British Officers

and 2,297* other ranks. The func-
tions of this force were to keep
open the lines of communication
to Bohotle, and to provide a move-
able column for the defence of the
Protectorate and for co-operation
with General Manning in case the
Mulla should be driven north-

Berbera Column.

let Bombay Grenadiers, \ Battalion.

7th Bombay Pioneers

Sikh Contingent, British Central Africa

(106 men).
2nd King's African Rifles and Details

(Yaoe) (700 men).
6th King's African Rifles (Somalis) (400
men).
Telegraph Battalion, R. E. (56 men).

* These figures are approximate only.
The strength of the force varied from day
today according to disembarkations and

re-embarkations. The grand total W8B
under 5,000 of all fighting ranks.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 105

wards. Colonel J. C. Swann commanded the lines of communi-
cation and Major J. Gough the movable column.

Brevet-Colonel A. N. Kochfort and Captain E. P. Cobbold
accompanied the Abyssinian force of 5,000 men, which King
Menelik agreed to send to the Webi Shebeli under Fitaurari Gabri. 1
The months of January and February were occupied in collecting

the main column at Obbia and preparing for

Disembarkation at Obbia. the advance to Mudug. Great difficulties

were experienced in landing, the heavy seas making it impossible
sometimes for days together to do any work. The Senior Naval
Officer attributed the difficulties of disembarkation to the exposed
anchorage, indifferent landing places, and lack of appliances.
Horses and mules swam ashore, and very few were lost. Camels
were either towed ashore, or landed in Madras surf- boats, accord-
ing to the state of the sea. The plentiful supply of military
labour and the combined efforts of seamen and soldiers alone
enabled the disembarkation to be carried out successfully.

During this period of preparation, the staff duties were not
lightened by the fact that the force consisted of so many different
nationalities — British, Boers, Indians, East Africans, Soudanese,
and Somalis. Requisitions for stores, etc., had to be made by wire
from Aden.

On the 14th January a column of 500 rifles under Lieutenant-
Colonel Cobbe, V.C., left Obbia and marched into the interior, re-
turning on the 28th. Under cover of this reconnaissance a line of
advanced posts was pushed forward towards Mudug as under : —

Gabarwein 1st stage 10 miles, intermediate distance.

Lodobal 2nd ... 13

ElDibbar 3rd ... 18£

Dibit 4th ... 154

Major R. G. Brooke, D.s.o., who was in charge of the advanced
lines of communications, made several venturesome rides with a
few Bikanir camel sowars to within a short distance of Galkayu, the
centre of the Mudug district and the first objective of the column.
As a result of his reports it was decided to advance from Dibit by the
circuitous but fairly well-watered route by Wargallo. One month's