

An Abyssinian military title meaning " commander of the advanced guard. '

106 Frontier and overseas expeditions from india.

supplies for the whole force were pushed up the line towards Dibit,
but owing to the lack of transport a great part of it accumulated
at the nearer posts.

The hopes which had been entertained of drawing a number of
camels from the country round Obbia were not realised, chiefly
owing to the obstructive attitude of Yusuf 'AH, Sultan of that place,
who was, with the assent of the Italian authorities, deported to Aden
on the 29th January. As this chief afterwards rendered us good
service, it is improbable that he was actually disaffected. It is
more reasonable to suppose that avarice, the Somali's besetting
sin, prompted him to manipulate the local camel market to his own
advantage. A number of rifles and ammunition, both of French
make, were found in his house ; also several treasure chests, which,
had he been content with his lawful commission on the purchase
of camels, could scarcely have contained so many rupees.

After his removal, a reconnaissance was made to El Hur on
the coast south of Obbia, where some ponies and camels were ob-
tained. A few purchases were also made at Obbia, but the bulk
of the transport had to be brought round by sea from Berbera.
Some 3,000 camels were required to move the whole force to Mudug,
but of these only a portion had been collected and disembarked
towards the end of February. The dry season was, however, already
more than half over, and any further delay would probably have
made it impossible to bring the Mulla to action.

Accordingly, General Manning marched from Obbia on the 22nd

with a flying column, 800 strong, leaving

ccupa io u . ^ e remainder of the troops to follow

twelve days later with a month's supplies for the whole force,
which it was intended to concentrate in Mudug by the 15th
March. He reached Dibit on the 25th February with the mounted
troops, and waited there one day for the infantry, which had halted
at Aolu, ninn miles short of Dibit, to graze the camels.

The Mulla' s Harun 1 with the bulk of his forces, was at this time
reported to be at Galadi and Dudub. He probably had under him
altogether some 12,000 men, a large proportion of whom were
mounted and able to make rapid marches. There was, therefore,

1 His own kariat and personal following.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 107

a possibility of General Manning's advance being opposed beyond
Wargallo.

On the 27th February the column, reinforced to a strength
of about 1,000 men from the garrisons of the posts, left Dibit and
marched by Inideenli and Rakhan to Wargallo, where it arrived on
the 3rd March. The wells at these places had already been occupied
by Major Brooke, working in advance with a few mounted troops,
and on the 3rd a small party, consisting of 3 officers, 30 Punjab
mounted infantry, and 50 Bikanir camel-sowars acting under his
orders, left Wargallo for Galkayu, where they arrived early the
following morning, and at once made a zareba. A few of the enemy's
scouts were seen during the day, and the party had to stand to their
arms once or twice in the night. On the 4th March they were
reinforced by the remainder of the mounted troops and on the 5th
by the infantry of the column.