

It was feared that the rains, which would enable the Mulla,
hitherto restricted to the wells, to move freely about the country,
might begin at any time. General Manning, therefore, determined

All mnks. to utilise the time which must
elapse before the reinforcements
could arrive, by sending a column
out, strength as in the margin,
under Lieutenant- Colonel Cnbbe,
v.c.,d.s.o., on the 10th April with
orders to reconnoitre the road
from Galadi to Wardair, and to
occupy the latter place if practicable.

In the special instructions issued to him, Colonel Cobbc was
informed that the main column would leave Galadi on the 17th

lutK.A.R.'s

122

2nd K. A. R's

264

5th K. A. R's

51

Camel Battery

21

British M. I.

23

Bo>r M. I.

23

Somali M. I.

11

Total combatants of w

hom 22

were c

)fficrrfl

. . 515

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 113

April, and he was to secure the water supply at Wardair, if possible,
but to refrain from attacking the enemy's main body. It was
considered probable that he would reach Wardair before the enemy
could concentrate in force to oppose him. This forecast proved
to be wrong.

Ten days' rations and six days' water in tins were taken with
the column, and one day's supply of water had been sent out a march
in advance under escort of the fifty Sikhs of the 5th King's African
Rifles who were to accompany the reconnaissance. This party
was led too far to the south by the guide, and in following them
the column had to make a detour before regaining the proper
direction on the 12th. In order to economise water the mounted
portion of the column left Galadi a day later than the infantry,
which they overtook on the 13th. A few of the enemy's mounted
scouts were encountered on the 12th and 13th, and on the 14th
the column, continuing the advance, became involved in very
dense bush. The troops were in danger of losing not only the
track to Wardair, about which there was some uncertainty, but
also each other, for so limited was the field of vision that the left
flank company passed within fifty yards of Colonel Cobbe without
being seen, and got in front of the advanced guard. Of the mounted
infantry which had been sent on to reconnoitre, not a trace could
be discovered. Accordingly, the column, having been turned about,
was made to march back on its own tracks, and as the former
rear-guard, now the advanced guard, was clearing the thick
bush, it was suddenly fired into. The enemy, however, proved to be
only a scouting party of mounted men who had been hanging on to
the rear of the column and had themselves been taken by surprise
by the retrograde movement ; and a few rounds from the 7-pounders
soon dispersed them. The mounted infantry, attracted by the
sound of the firing, now arrived, and the column, continuing its
march into more open country, halted for the night at a spot about
forty-two miles west of Galadi, on the north side of the more south-
erly of the two Gumburru hills. These hills are situated about
half way between Galadi and Wardair and, although of no great
elevation, form conspicuous land-marks in the surrounding plain.
They lie north-west and southeast of each other at a distance
of not more than four or five miles apart, athwart what is called the