

102 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

against whom a third campaign was now to be undertaken. Colonel
Swayne having been invalided and recalled to England to advise
the Foreign Office, the direction of operations was entrust-
ed to Brigadier-General W. H. Manning, Inspector- General of
the King's African Rifles. His first step was to call for regular
troops to replace the Somali levies, who could no longer be relied
upon for close fighting. Accordingly, re-inf orcements from British
Central and East Africa, amounting to some 800 men, were ordered
to embark for Somaliland ; and on the 21st November a wing of the
1st Bombay Grenadiers left Aden for Berbera, followed at a short
interval by 150 Punjab Mounted Infantry from India.

As soon as a flying column could be got ready, Bohotle, which
was surrounded by hostile piquets, was relieved and garrisoned
by a company of Bombay Grenadiers and the British Central
African contingent of Sikhs. A flying column was then stationed
at Garrero to act on the Berbera-Bohotle lines of communication.

The control of the operations was handed over by the
Foreign Office to the War Office on the 10th December, on which
date the force in the country amounted to 2,674 of all ranks. A
few days later, when the consent of the Italian Government to
operate in their territory had been obtained, it was decided at a
Cabinet Council to proceed with the Somaliland Expedition. In
addition to the reinforcements already despatched from India
it was arranged to send the following troops to Somaliland.
For disembarkation at Obbia direct :— One regiment from the
Punjab, one section of a native mountain battery, one company
of Sappers and Miners, the Bikanir Camel Corps, one native field
hospital, and one section of a British field hospital. For
disembarkation at Berbera : — One Pioneer regiment. Six months
rations were to accompany the troops. At the same time Lord
Milner was informed that it had been decided to accept General
Ben Viljoen's offer to raise a Boer contingent for service against
the Mulla. These were to be sent to Obbia as soon as they could
be raised and equipped, together with a company of British
mounted infantry from South Africa.

The plan of campaign approved by the War Office contemplat-
ed combined operations from Obbia and

Plan of Campaign. Berbera . the former place> from wh i cn the

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 103

main advance was to be made, having been reported as suitable
for landing troops. The following general instructions were then
issued for the guidance of the General Officer Commanding :—

1. The primary object to be the expulsion of the Mulla from Mudug.

2. The Italian Government made it a condition of their assent to the

landing of a force at Obbia that operations should aim at pre-
venting the Mulla from retiring south-west.

3. If the Mulla should retire or be driven from Mudug, he should be pur-

sued, but not for a greater distance southwards or westwards than
four or five days' march. (This restriction was subsequently
removed, and after the occupation of Mudug General Manning was
practically given a free hand.)