

Meanwhile Colonel Swann had been instructed to occupy
Damot, an op eration which was successfully carried out on the 4th
March. Another force under Lieutenant-Colonel Plunkett, recon-
noitring to the south of Bohotle, encountered a p arty of the enemy's
spearmen at Lasakante, killing fifteen of them and making sixteen
prisoners.

To return to the operations of the main force on the ^south side
of the Haud. The reserve column, strength 841 rifles, left Obbia
with the supplies on the 6th March, and, marching generally by
night, arrived early on the 10th at Dibit, where they met the return-
ing camels of the flying column. A convoy was then sent on to Gal-
kayu with seventeen days' supplies for the force at thatplace, while
the remainder of the camels were sent back to bring up supplies from
Lodabal, the main body of the column halting five days at Dibit.
By the 24th March the whole force was concentrated in Mudug,
with the exception of about 700 men at Obbia and the various
posts on the lines of communication. These included the section
of the Mountain Battery and 172 mounted troops at Dibit. In the
meantime the occupation of the Mudug district had been com-
pleted by the despatch to Bera and Badwein of small columns,
which had taken possession of the wells at those places without
firing a shot. The enemy's position at Dudub and Galadi was
screened by a belt of thick jungle, which lies immediately to the

108 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

west of Bera, and efforts were made to burn this with a view to the
next advance, but the thorn-trees of this country being juicy even
at the driest time of the year, it was found that the bush would
not kindle.

Owing to the enemy's inactivity the operations had so far been
attended with no difficulties except those due to scarcity of water,
but the movement to Mudug had been a severe tax on the
transport and each step in advance was now to lead into more difficult
country. Communication had been established between the Berbera
and Obbia forces by aparty of forty-seven Somali Mounted Infantry>
who crossed the Haud from Bohotle and arrived at Galkayu on the
18th March. These were followed on the 25th March by a column

under Lieutenant-Colonel Plunkett, con-

Advanee to Galadi. ... „ . -. '. , ...

sisting oi 308 men of the 2nd King s African
Rifles, 25 Somali mounted infantry, and two guns, Camel Battery. 1
The necessity of holding the line down to Obbia in strength had
induced General Manning to send for this reinforcement.

All was now ready for an advance to Galadi, and on the 26th
the General marched to Bera with the available troops. Here the
column was made up to a total strength of 867 infantry and two
guns by additions from the garrison of the post and by the arrival
of Colonel Plunkett' s party from Galkayu, where they had rested
for one day. The advance was resumed on the 28th March, on which
date Major Kenna, V.C., who had been sent on with a covering party
of i 240 Mounted Infantry, occupied Dudub and captured a few
prisoners. It was ascertained from these that the Mulla himself
had left Galadi, but that the wells there were still held by a few of
his men. Accordingly Major Kenna made a night- march on the
29th and, reaching Galadi at 8 A.M. on the 30th, surprised a party
of the enemy's spearmen as they were drawing water. These were
chased for some miles through the bush, several being killed and
a few made prisoners.