

From these and similar events, and also from the reports of the
ilolos, it was ascertained that the Mulla with the whole of his follow-
ing was engaged at this time in passing between Damot and Bohotle
on his way to the Nogal, whither he had been persuaded to go by
the Dolbahantas, when driven from the neighbourhood of Wardair
by the Abyssinian advance. Damot was for some days completely
cut off from Bohotle, and the communications to the north of the
latter place towards Garrero were threatened by a body of the
enemy's horsemen, the wires being cut in several places. A recon-
noitring party composed of Somali Mounted Infantry was sent out
from Bohotle towards Damot, but they -returned without having
effected anything, as a number of our Dolbahantas took the
opportunity to desert. This was attributed to the fact that the
Mulla had given out that, on reaching the Nogal, he would

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 125

exterminate the families of any men who fought against him.
There were very few other mounted troops available, as the
majority of the Punjab Mounted Infantry had been invalided to
India with scurvy, and the Burghers had just left for South Africa
on the completion of their six months' engagement. Of the
British Mounted Infantry (60th Rifles) part were with General
Manning and part at Bohotle.

The garrison of the latter place at this juncture amounted to
just over 1,000 rifles, 1 exclusive of Somali troops and sick. It was
not considered advisable to send out a column of less than 800 rifles
to Damot, and the officer commanding the lines of communication
decided that the balance was not sufficient to ensure the safety of
the fort at Bohotle. This guarded the wells and supplies on which
General Manning's force, now about to leave Mudug, depended.
The Mulla, therefore, passed his karias through in safety between
the 9th and 16th June, protecting them with some 5,000 horsemen
whom he used most skilfully to mask Bohotle and threaten Damot.
He also spread rumours that he intended to attack Bohotle, which
helped to conceal his real object of reaching the Nogal in safety.
In carrying out his plan he interposed between the two main British
forces, so that all communication with General Manning was cut
off for more than a fortnight, and the situation appeared sufficient-
ly serious for the Imperial Government to call upon Aden and India
to hold reinforcements in readiness. At the same time he offered
the Bohotle garrison the best opportunity which occurred during
this campaign of dealing an effective blow.

General Manning's force left Badwein on the 18th June, reach-
ing Damot on the 21st, after four days of comparatively easy
marching. Owing to the few showers of rain which had fallen the
grazing was good and the nights were cool. The extreme length
of the column, however, delayed the rear-guards more than usual.
During the march one man of the 2nd Sikhs died of heat apoplexy,
another of the same regiment lost his way in the bush and failed
to find the column, while a third was wounded on piquet duty.
The neighbourhood of Damot was found clear of the enemy. They