* 27th Punjabis.

* 52nd Sikhs.

No. 28 Mountain Battery (two guns).

Lines of communication.
*101st Grendiers.
*107th Pioneers

6th King's African Rifles (Scmalis).
No. 17 Corny., 3rd Sapps. and Miners.
No. 19 Compy., 3rd Sapps. and Miners.
Telegraph Section R.E.

Detail.
Total fighting strength —

British Officers . . 250

British, other ranks . . . . 1,082

Indian, all ranks . . . , 3,650

Africans .. .. .. 1,407

Total ..6,389t

A detail of commands and staff is
given in Appendix A.

before Jidballi, but on the whole
levies was rather unsatisfactory.

1st Brigade, and Lieutenant-
Colonel C. G. M. Fasken, with
the local rank of Brigadier-
General, was appointed to com-
mand the 2nd Brigade. The
mounted troops were at first
divided between the two brigades,
but in October, 1903, they were
formed into a separate command
under Major (Local Lieutenant
Colonel) P. A. Kenria, v.c. The
27th Punjabis were, on arrival
in the country, attached to the
1st Brigade, four companies being
sent to Kirrit to form part of a
movable column based on that
place. This column was subse-
quently broken up, and when
the force took the field it was
organized as here shewn, except
that some of the troops from the
lines of communication partici-
pated in the active operations.
,In addition to the force here de-
tailed, two corps of Somali Irregu-
lars, of 500 men each, were raised
in October and November, the
Gadabursi Horse under Major
Beresford, and the Tribal Horse
under Major Bridges. The latter
did some good reconnoitring
the service rendered by these

* The Indian Army was renumbered in
1903 and regiments are hero given their
new titles. The 2nd Sikhs became the
52nd Sikhs, the 1st Bombay Grenadiers the
101st Grenadiers, and 7th Bombay Pioneers
tho 107th Pioneers, etc.

"f" This total was eventually increased
to over 7,000 combatants, chiefly by drafts
from the Indian regiments. In December
1903, including the Tribal Horse, the maxi-
mum strength of the force amounted to
8,380 oombatante,

128 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Two courses were now open to General Egerton : — (1) To
advance against the Mulla as soon as a force of sufficient strength
could be provided with transport. (2) To wait until the enemy's
retreat southwards could be blocked, and then to operate against
him with two strong columns in the Nogal, with a fair prospect
of dealing a decisive blow.

It was considered that the first plan would be indecisive in its
results, and it was decided to adopt the second alternative, which,
with certain reservations, was finally approved of by the Secretary
of State. General Egerton was given a free hand as regards his
movements in the Protectorate and in adjoining Italian territory
as far as might be necessary. As, however, Government were averse
to the reoccupation of Mudug by the British, the Abyssinians were
asked to send a force to Wardair and Galadi, and assistance was
given them to enable them to do this.

As no immediate advance was contemplated, and as the Mulla
Preparations for the ad- himself remained inactive, a further move-
vance. ment of troops towards the base 1 was