

1 A Strength Return, dated Bohotle, 13th June 1003, gives the force at that place
1,160 combatants of all ranks, not including sick.

126 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

had perhaps been taken by surprise by the sudden appearance
of General Manning's force from the other side of the Haud, and
had, therefore, made no attempt to oppose it in the thick bush.
After a day's halt, and reinforcing the Damot garrison with 250
rifles, the march was resumed on the 23rd, and next day, at a dis-
tance of twelve miles from Damot, the column came across the
tracks of the Mulla's karias, many of them quite fresh. One large
Dolbahanta karia with its camels and sheep was captured in the
very act of crossing, and the Somali Mounted Infantry reported
that there were several others out on the left flank waiting for the
column to pass before crossing over on their way to join the Mulla
in the Nogal. The column, however, pushed on without delay,
and arrived at Bohotle on the 26th June. As there had not been
sufficient transport to bring in the Damot garrison with the main
body, a column of 700 rifles and two guns was sent back to effect
the withdrawal of the post. On the completion of this operation
on 3rd July, a garrison of 400 rifles was left at Bohotle, and the
remainder of the force was moved down to Garrero, Burao, and
Shaikh.

With these movements the first phase of the operations ended.
In the meantime reinforcements had arrived in the country, and the
organization of a new expedition had been entrusted to Major
General Sir Charles Egerton, K.C.B., d.s.o.

The strategy of the campaign had been justified by the fact
that the Mulla had been driven into a part of the country where
it was possible to strike at him again, but the camels had been
marched to a standstill and an immediate prosecution of the pursuit
was out of the question.

Second phase. Operations under Major -General Sir C C

Egerton, K.C.B., D.S.O.

Major-General SirC. C. Egerton landed at Berbera on the 4th
July 1903, and on the 16th assumed command of the Somali-
land Field Force, which had been strengthened by reinforcements
from India and Aden. He at once proceeded to reorganize the
force. The distribution of troops finally decided upon is shewn in
the margin. Brigadier -General Manning remained in command

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND.

137

of the African troops, forming the

Mounted Troops.

l3t Corps.
1st Company, British Mounted Infantry

(60th Rifles).
2nd Company, British Mounted Infantry

(60th Rifles).
3rd Company, British Mounted Infantry

(60th Rifles).
4th Company, Somali Mounted Infantry

(attached 1st Brigade).
5th Company Somali Mounted Infantry

(attached 1st Brigade).

2nd Corps.
6th Company, Poona Mounted Infantry.
7th Company, Ambala Mounted Infantry.

Bikanir Camel Corps.

1st Brigade.
1st King's African Rifles.
2nd „ „ „

3rd „ ,, „

4th ,, ,, ,,

5th ,, „ „

Indian contingent, B.C. A. Camel Battery.

2nd Brigade.
1st Battalion Hampshire Regt. Wing).

