

Several heavy showers fell in May, completely altering the as-
pect of the country, which in its normal condition is most desolate
during three-quarters of the year. The improved grazing greatly
assisted the marching of convoys, but it also enabled the Mulla
to move in any direction, and he might now be expected at any
point on the long line of posts held by our troops, stretching at one
time from Obbia to Berbera.

Early in June arrangements were made to evacuate the posts
on the south side of the Haud, and by the 17th of that month the
force was concentrated at Badwein. A number of troopB had
already been sent to Bohotle, and the column that was now to
cross numbered 1,473 combatants, inclusive of the escort of
a convoy that had been delayed at Badwein by news received from
Damot.

The post of Damot, or more correctly Dermo, guarded the
only wells between Badwein and Bohotle, being seventy-two
and forty-two miles from these places, respectively. The
safety of General Manning's communications depended, there-
fore, on the retention of this place. South of the wells are two
small dome-shaped hills, commanding a good view on all sides
over the Haud, which, at that time of the year, is a wide ^xpanse
of verdure, dotted with red-brown ant-heaps.

1 This place appears to be situated on Halii they turned east towards Bur, on hear-

the Buseli. Gerlogubi road about midway ing that the Mulla was at the latter place,

between thoso places. It is not the Hahi Jeyd is, therefore, south or Bouth-west

s ltuated to the west of Gerlogubi. From of the position occupied by the Mulla.

124 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

There had been some sniping round the post on the 8th and 9th
Mulia's move to the June, but not much importance had been
Ncgai. attached to this, as a convoy had been sent

on to Bohotle with forty rifles as escort, leaving only ninety men to
garrison Damot. The convoy got through without any incident,
but on the 11th a small party of Bikanir and Somali sowars,
carrying despatches to Bohotle, were cut up before they had
proceeded twelve miles on the way. A water post of sixteen men
in the same direction owed their escape from a similar fate to the
intelligence of the Yao sergeant in command, who, seeing that the
enemy were too numerous to be resisted, buried all the spare ammu-
nition and, slipping out unobserved into the bush, made his way
back to Damot with his men.

On the 13th the piquets on the hills above mentioned sighted
a body of the enemy's horsemen in the distance, threading their way
through the bush towards the post. The alarm being at once given,
the raid failed to be a surprise. After a certain amount of wild
firing and shouting as they rode round the zareba, the enemy retired
without having left the cover of the bush. Captain Hoskins, who
commanded the post, kept his men under cover, and did not allow
them to return the fire, as that would only have disclosed the
weakness of the garrison. The defences, which had to be hastily
improved during the next few days, consisted at the time of a
low shelter trench and the ordinary zareba, or thorn fence.