

Vol. VI 8

114' FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

middle Wardair road, which. Colonel Cobbe had been endeavouring*
to follow. Of the other so-called roads and tracks to Wardair, one *
passes to the south and the other at some distance to the north of
the hills. On hearing of Colonel Cobbe's difficulties, General
Manning decided to recall him and advance by the northern road,
which would have brought him within some twenty miles or less of
Major Gough's line of advance. This decision, however, was taken
too late to prevent the disaster to Colonel Plunkett's party, which
occurred about one and a half miles south-east of the northern hill
and some four miles from the zareba.

On the night of the 14th only about two days' water was left

in the tins, and one object of the reconnaissance, the location of

the enemy, 1 who were evidently in the neighbourhood in some force,

had been fulfilled. Accordingly it was decided to return to Galadi.

leaving a post at Gumburru. With this intention work on the

zareba was commenced at da flight on the 15th. It happened,

however, to rain that morning, and enough water was collected

to enable the column to remain out a day or two longer and

reconnoitre the enemy, while awaiting orders from General

Manning. Throughout the 15th and 16th the piquets and patrols

were in close contact with the hostile scouts, and on the latter date

a patrol of twenty-eight mounted infantry under Captain Shakerley

was suddenly attacked by the enemy's horsemen, when crossing an

open space about two miles from camp. The mounted infantry

immediately dismounted and returned the fire, eventually retiring

a short distance to a more favourable position, where they formed a

small circle. Here they were almost surrounded by some 200 of the

enemy, who attacked them most persistently, one man and one horse

being killed within twelve yards of the circle. Rifleman Miller, 60tli

Rifles, who volunteered for this dangerous duty, rode back to camp

for reinforcements, but before these could arrive, and just before

the ammunition of the patrol gave out, the enemy drew off, being

alarmed by the near approach of Captain Luard's company of Yaos,

who were returning from a reconnaissance and had marched to the

sound of the firing. In this skirmish Lieutenant Chichester, 6th

King's African Rifles, was killed, while one Burgher and two Somahs

1 The tenor of the instructions for the column commander wns to avoid attacking
the enemy if encountered in strength.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 11 S

Were wounded. The same day a convoy arrived at the zareba,
bringing water and rations from Galadi, with an escort of fifty of
the 2nd Sikhs under Captain Vesey. 1

Next morning, the 17th April, two parties of Yaos were
. , sent out to reconnoitre, and about 8 A.m.

The Gumburru disaster. - , ,

Captain Ohvey, who commanded tne com-
pany in the Wardair direction, sent in to say that, having met a
large force of the enemy, he was retiring towards the zareba. Ac-
cordingly Colonel Plunkett was ordered to support him and
bring him in, taking for this purpose another company of Yaos and
forty-eight men of the 2nd Sikhs under Captain Vesey, who asked
leave to join the party. At about 9 A.M., as they were about to
start, another message arrived from Captain Olivey to the effect
that he was now within one and a half miles of the zareba, and that
no enemy was in sight. This report was shown to Colonel Plunkett,
who must have met Captain Olivey very soon after leaving camp
and have taken the latter on with him to engage the enemy.
No news was received from him, but about 11-45 A.M. it was
reported that firing had been heard. It was scarcely audible,
but a look-out party sent to a tree, 1,000 yards from camp, dis-
tinctly heard a burst of maxim fire. Some mounted Somalis were
sent out to report, and at 12-45 p.m. one of them returned with
Colonel Plunkett's guide, whom he had picked up wounded
in the bush. This man reported that the column had been cut up.
Soon after this a few fugitives confirmed the disastrous news. In
all thirty-seven Yaos 2 and one Somali, the sole survivors of the fight,
and most of them wounded, straggled into camp during the after-
noon, and from their reports it was possible to gather what had
happened. The battle-field was visited in January 1904 by a
British Officer 3 attached to the Abyssinian forces, and statements
as to the distances, etc., will be based on his account.