

122 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

insufficient transport was the principal cause of the failure to bring
the operations to a successful conclusion.

Somali camels, although able to endure great privations, soon
lose condition when worked continuously without a rest. As an
instance of the wastage in transport it may be mentioned that one
convoy, moving across the Haud, lost 100 out of 700 camels in a
six days' march. Many of the camels were only able to lift 1|
maunds, whereas four maunds is th.3 normal load for the Somali
animal. There was just sufficient transport left to move the force
to Bohotle, but the margin to spare was small, and the resources of
the country, in this respect, appear to have been temporarily ex-
hausted, so that camels had to be ordered from Aden and eventually
from India. (See Appendix C.)

A considerable portion of the Obbia force, chiefly mounted
troops, was now transferred to Bohotle, leaving under General
Manning's direct command some 750 rifles, in addition to
the garrisons of Dudub and Galadi. These had been rationed
for another month by a convoy which left Galkayu on the 19th
May.

During this month the Mulla remained in the vicinity of War-
dair, moving, however, on one occasion south to Bur, but keeping
a strong detachment at Gumburru. His scouts were active round
Galadi, and on the 17th a party of ilalos, or Somali scouts, were
attacked outside the post. Some ten days later a grazing guard
near Bohotle was fired on by a party of horsemen. This enterprise
on the part of the Mulla's scouts no doubt indicated that theAbyB-
sinians were pressing him from the south-west, and that he was feel-
ing his way for a move out of their reach. His karias were also
moved about from time to time in search of fresh pasturage, and this
gave rise to various rumours as to his intentions. So meagre was
the information that on the 4th June General Manning reported
from Galkayu as follows : —

The whole situtation is one of absolute mystery. We have no particle
of really trustworthy information, which should lead us to believe that the
Mulla has shifted his quarters. In fact, had he done so, in consequence of
the approach of the Abyssinians, we should almost certainly have been in
communication with the latter ere thia.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 123

Our allies, whose movements had been slow from want of trans-
port, were, a3 subsequent reports show, at this time advancing by
Hahi, 1 on Gerlogubi. Oa the 31st May they surprised the Bagheri
tribesmen, a section of Ogadens attached to the Mulla, at a place
called Jeyd, capturing 1,000 camels and killing a great number of
spearmen. Beyond this point they do not appear to have advanced,
owing to difficulties of water and supply.

In the meantime our troops were still holding the Galadi and
Mudug districts. This period of inaction was the least interesting
part of the six months' campaigning in Southern Somaliland,
which for the majority consisted of inactivity alternating with
long dreary marches in a singularly unattractive country.