

The casualties in the Daratoleh fight were: — two British
officers and thirteen other ranks killed ; four British officers and
twenty-five other ranks wounded. Captain C. M. Bruce, Royal
Field Artillery, and C. Godfrey, d.s.o., i.a., (B.CA. Indian Contin-
gent) were killed, and Majors A.G. Sharp, Somali Mounted In-
fantry, and H. B. Rowlands, King's African Rifles, Captains E.M.
Hughes, LA., (Bikanir Camel Corps) and R. E. Townsend were
wounded. Major Rowlands subsequently died of hiB wounds at
Bohotle.

The enemy's numbers in the Daratoleh fight were estimated
at about 300 riflemen and 500 spearmen. Of these perhaps 150
were killed or badly wounded, and 11 rifles were captured. The
flying column brought back all its wounded -and most of the
dead ; no rifles were lost.

Major Gough had now to decide whether to make another
attempt to advance, after resting his men, or to return to Bohotle-
On the one hand there were some indications of the Galadi column
having suffered a reverse, and, on the other, his orders were to co-
operate in an advance on Wardair. He decided to await further
news, and wrote to Colonel Swann at Bohotle that he would start
to return on the 25th, unless news of the Galadi column was received
before that date. At the same time he asked for a water convoy
to be sent to meet him. On the following day a messenger
arrived from Bohotle with news of the Gumburru disaster and
the intended withdrawal to Galadi. Accordingly the force

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN S0MAL1LAND. lSl

marched at 12-30 p.m. the same day, and reached Bohotle on the
28th April.

It is now necessary to return to the operations of the Obbia
column under General Manning's direct command. It was impossible
to renew the advance towards Wardair, as the whole of the avail-
able transport was required to bring up to Galkayu the garrisons
and supplies at the posts between that place and Obbia. It was
accordingly decided to withdraw the bulk of the troops at Galadi
and Mudug, holding the former place and also Dudub with detach-
ments which would both cover the movements of convoys in rear
and deny the use of these wells to the Mulla, while the Abyssinians
operated against him from the west.

On the 23rd April General Manning marched from Galadi,
leaving a garrison of 380 King's African Rifles under Colonel
Cobbe. For Dudub a garrison of eighty Sikhs and six Somalis was
detailed on the 24th, and the remainder of the force was withdrawn
to the Mudug district and distributed between Bera, Galkayu
and, eventually, Badwein, headquarters being established at
Galkayu.

The base had been removed from Obbia on the 17th April,
but there was still a considerable quantity of supplies at the various
posts on the lines of communication. General Manning estimated
that when these had been brought to Galkayu he would have,
after sending the Lahore Mountain Battery (one section) and a large
portion of the mounted infantry to Bohotle, sufficient to ration his
force up to the end of June.

The work of rolling up the lines of communication was now ener-
getically proceeded with, and the last convoy from the south reached
Galkayu on the 20th May. This task might have been completed
nearly a month earlier, had there been enough camels to spare after
providing for the column which was then operating from Galadi.
In that case a renewed advance on Wardair would have been
possible, while the enemy was weakened by his heavy losses at Gum-
burru. As it was, the defeat of a single detachment had been sufficient
to put a stop to the advance, and the force was compelled to assume
a passive attitude. It needs no further explanation to prove that