

1 The Boer Mounted Infantry, who were partly Boers and partly Colonist*.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 119

Some anxiety was felt as to the fate of Major Gough's column,
which had in the meantime moved out of Bohotle in supposed
co-operation with the advance from Galadi, for, although a
messenger had been sent to recall him, the circuitous route by
which the man would have to travel made it uncertain whether
the order would reach him in time. Major Gough's objective was
Daratoleh, which is scarcely more than forty miles from Gumburru
in a straight line, but the Bikanir camel sowar who carried the
message had to proceed via Mudug, Damot, and Bohotle, a circuit
of some 300 miles. This circumstance illustrates the difficulty of
carrying out combined operations in this country and the advantage
accruing to the Mulla from his occupation of interior lines.

The following account of Major Gough's march to Daratoleh is
taken from the diary of Captain G. M. Rolland, v.c, who was In-
telligence Officer to the Column, which consisted of 350 infantry
and about 200 mounted troops.

The column left Bohotle on the afternoon of the 13th April. On the
16th Major Gough, hearing from prisoners that the enemy intended to occupy
Danot, pushed on with bis mounted troops to seize that place, and ordered
the infantry under Major Rowlands to follow on with all speed. On arriving at
Danot, however, it was found that there was insufficient water there for the
whole of the infantry, and word was accordingly sent back to Major
Rowlands that he was to send 200 men back to Bohotle, and to advance with
the remainder. On the arrival of the infantry at Danot, Major Gough
decided to push on to Daratoleh, which was reported to be held by 500 of the
enemy. The whole of the 2nd April was spent in preparation for the march
of 27 miles to Daratoleh, and, as Major Gough had decided that his whole
force was to be mounted, the Yaos were taught how to ride behind the
Bikanirs on the double saddle.

On the 22nd the force, strength as per margin, left camp at 4-30 a.m.,
Action at Daratoleh. the Somali Mounted Infantry acting as advanced

guard. Some of the enemy's patrols were en-
Bikanir Camel Corps 60 countered about 8 o'clock, and at 10-20 A.M.,
Somali Camel Corps . . 50 Captain Howard of the Somali Mounted Infantry
King's African Rifles" ^ 50 galloped back with the information that the enemy
B. C. A. Indian Cont. were advancing in force. The column was at once

•" halted and formed square round the camels.

Toial of all ranks with Five minutes later the enemy appeared through

one maxim .. ..213 the thick buflh and attacked the square with

120 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

great courage, advancing to within 50 yrrds before they opened fire. It
Was noticed that many of them were wearing sun hats, fezes, and bandoliers,
which could only mean that a disaster had occurred to some other column.
The attack was kept up with vigour till 2-30 p.m., by which time out of
the 300 rounds of ammunition per man with which Major Gough has started
only 100 rounds per man were left. In the circumstances it was now
decided to retire slowly towards Danot. The enemy followed up the
retirement, but, the square formation being maintained, they could
make no impression, and at 5-30 p.m., they drew off. It was during th's
retirement that Captain Walker, Major Gough, and Captain Rowlands won
the Victoria Cross. No further fighting occurred that day, and Danot was
reached safely about an hour after midnight.