

When tbe full extent of the disaster was realised in the zareba
it was too late to undertake any measures to retrieve it. A party
of mounted men were sent out to pick up stragglers, but
they were drivan in by a strong force of the Mulla's horse, whose
dust could be seen from the zareba.

The defences had in the meantime been improved in prepara-
tion for an expected attack. The night, however, passed quietly
except for the movements of the enemy's scouts in the bush round
the zareba, and at 1 p.m. on ths 18th Major Kenna's mounted
infantry arrived from Galadi.

The first message from Colonel Cobbe, despatched from Gum-
burru at 1 p.m., had reached Galadi on the evening of the 17th.
Fortunately there were sufficient troops to form a relieving column
owing to the arrival that morning from Galkayu of half a battalion
of the 2nd Sikhs and a company of Soudanese (3rd King's African
Rifles) with a large convoy of supplies, part of which, with its escort
of 50 of the 7th Bombay Pioneers, had joined the column at Dudub,
after crossing the Hand direct from Damot. The convoy had
with great difficulty found its way by a hitherto unexplored route
to Dudub, where it arrived with its water completely exhausted.

General Manning now altered his plans, which had been to rein-
force Colonel Cobbe with a small column, 2 and marched himself

1 Deserters from the enemy estimated Colonel Cobbe to return to Galadi, on
their losses at about 1,000. receiving new* of the fighting on the

tie had decided to do this, and to order 16th.

118 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

at 1 a.m. on the 18th April with all the available troops, viz., 300
rifles of the 2nd Sikhs, 60 Soudanese, and 100 mounted infantry,
to relieve Gumburru ; about 200 men being left to garrison Galadi.
In order to move as light as possible, kits were left v behind,
and only water and rations for three or four days, together
with ammunition and hospital stores, were taken with the
column.

The mounted infantry started ahead of the other troops, and
making a forced march of over forty miles in twelve hours, arrived at
Gumburru, as has been stated, at 1 p.m. on the same day. The
infantry halted at about sixteen miles from Galadi and made a
zareba in which the rations and most of the water-tins were
deposited, with the Soudanese and fifty of the 2nd Sikhs as guard.
The remainder of the column, about 250 men, marched early the
following morning and halted at 9 a.m., about fourteen miles from
Gumburru. Here another zareba was made, and news awaited from
Colonel Cobbe, who^hadbeen instructed to retire from Gumburru, if
possible. If unable to withdraw, 150 of the relief column were to
endeavour to obtain touch with him and help him to cut his way out.
At about 10-30 a small party of Burghers * rode in from Gumburru,
and reported that Colonel Cobbe had left his zareba, and was on his
way to join the relief column with the whole of his transport, the
enemy having made no attempt to hinder his withdrawal. His
arrival at 1 p.m. brought up the force under General Manning's
immediate command to 700 men, i.e., remainder of Colonel Cobbe's
column 350 men, 2nd Sikhs 250 men, mounted infantry 100. Full
details of the disaster had only reached the General on the
march out from Galadi. On leaving that place his information
was to the effect that Colonel Plunkett had been repulsed with loss.
Consequently he made his arrangements simply with a view to the
withdrawal of the column from Gumburru and not with the intention
of an advance beyond that point. Therefore, although Colonel
Cobbe had still two or three days' water, it was not considered
possible with the supplies in hand for the whole force to march to
the scene of Colonel Plunkett's fight. Accordingly the combined
column retired to Galadi, where it arrived on the 20th April.