

It appears that Colonel Plunkett in his eagerness to engage
the enemy was drawn on to a distance of four miles from the zareba
in a westerly direction, where there is a comparatively open space
some 500 yards in extent, partly surrounded by thick bush,

1 He had arrived at Galadi about the up in the bush.

12th April with a (■envoy from Galkayu. 3 Major J. W. Jennings, D.S.O,

3 Two others were subsequently picked R.AM.C.

Vot. VI 8 a

11C FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA. I

which from this point stretches almost continuously to Wardair.
Near this spot he was attacked by the whole of the Mulla's forces,
numbering perhaps some 8,000 men. The column, 224 of all ranks,
had apparently formed three sides of a square in single rank on the
march out with the Sikhs in the front face. Afterwards a half com-
pany was thrown across the rear face. On the repulse of the first
attack on the front, the column appears to have pushed on to the
middle of the open space mentioned above, for some of the wounded
survivors owed their escape to having been left on the ground, in
rear of the scene of the main action. The first assault, which
was made by horsemen, was followed by further attacks from
all sides by riflemen on foot, supported by masses of spear-
men. All were successfully repelled until the ammunition gave out.
Captain Olivey's company and the Sikhs had taken with them 100
rounds per rifle in their pouches, the remainder, 150 rounds per
rifle. There was no reserve ammunition. Moreover, the Sikhs
used solid bullets not suited to stop a charging savage. Most of
the officers were by this time killed or wounded, and Colonel Plunkett
now gave the order to the remnant of his men to charge through
the enemy and make for camp. He himself was immediately after-
wards shot through the head. Only a few succeeded in reaching
the zareba. i

The enemy evidently fought with great ferocity and courage,
charging up to within ten yards of the rifles and even penetrating
the square in the earlier stages of the fight. The final attacks, which
overwhelmed the square, or what was left of it, when Colonel
Plunkett gave the order to break through, were made by a mob of
spearmen, who included a number of Adonis. The latter are a
tribe of negro type, dwelling on the Webi Shebeli, some of whom the
Mulla pressed into his service. It seems probable that the action
began about 10-45, reached its climax at 11-45, and was all over
soon after 12 o'clock. But as no European or Indian survived
the fight, any account of it must necessarily be imperfect, seeing
that Yaos are said to be unable to count above ten. Their state-
ments, however, that the enemy surrounded them like a
boma 1 and that the dead lay piled in heaps, may be taken as being

* A thick thorn fence, or zareba.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 117

substantially accurate ; and there can be no doubt that the losses 1
inflicted by Colonel Plunkett's brave men deterred the enemy
from following up their success. Thus the remainder of Colonel
Cobbe's column was able to return to Galadi unmolested.
The immediate result of the action was to deprive the force
of nearly 200 valuable lives, to disarrange the General's plans,
and to show that the enemy possessed a fighting spirit which had
previously been entirely underrated, and which, added to the
extreme difficulty of the country, made them a very formidable foe.
Lieutenant-Colonel Plunkett, Captains Johnston- Stuart, Olivey,
Morris, andMcKinnon, Lieutenants Gaynor and Bell (2nd K.A.R.).,
Captain Vesey (2nd Sikhs), Lieutenant Sime, I. M.S., and 176 other
ranks, including 2 native officers of the 2nd Sikhs, were killed. The
wounded were returned as 28 ; 11 men, therefore, escaped unscathed.