

News of this reconnaissance reached General Egerton at
Kirrit on the 21st December. On the same day he received a letter
from Colonel Rochfort from which he gathered that, owing to
difficulties of water and transport, it was hopeless to expect the
Abyssinians to arrive at Galadi within a reasonable time, if at all.
It was, therefore, useless to defer the advance any longer on their
account. The Mulla was known to have moved from Adadero, and
the presence of a force at Jidballi pointed to a resolve on his part to
move northwards. Consequently General Egerton decided to recall
the Galadi garrison which had practically fulfilled its object ; to
bring up the remainder of the 2nd Brigade and the mounted troops
to Eil Dab, with a view to attacking the hostile force at Jidballi,
and to move up the 1st Brigade fromBohotle to the right flank.
Accordingly headquarters were transferred to Eil Dab on the
23rd December, and the following movements were ordered: —

A convoy with escort of 400 rifles to leave Bohotle on the

•29th December, ostensibly to ration and reinforce Galadi, but with

secret orders to bring back the garrison of that place by the 10th

January, to form a support to the operating columns. Advanced

base to be moved from Kirrit to Eil Dab.

Vol VI y A

132 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The 52nd Sikhs and the two guns of the 28th Mountain Battery
to reach Eil Dab by the 4th January, thus completing the con-
centration of the 2nd Brigade.

The 1st Brigade to march from Bohotle to Yaguri and to
reach the latter place by the 7th January.

A convoy with rations for the 1st Brigade to leave Eil Dab on
the 4th for Higloli with an escort of the Gadabursi Horse and
200 rifles, 27th Punjabis. This detachment after meeting the 1st
Brigade at Higloli was to form a post at Yaguri.

In the meantime a close watch was kept on Jidballi by the
Tribal Horse, and the enemy's force at that place was reported to be
daily increasing in numbers, so much so that it was now decided
to concentrate both brigades for the attack.

Mounted hoofs. Accordingly, on the 8th

2 Companies, British Mounted Infantry. January the 2nd Brigade and

? S»^S^M^£i1£SS?- mounted tro °P s > accompanied by
Bikanir Camel Corps- General j Egerton,' marched to

S213"E«* '' Badwein, and next day to a point

twenty miles east of that place,
r. „ > T no tit * • -d *f where it had been arranged to con-

2 Guns, No. 28 Mountain Battery. o

infantry, 2nd Brigade. centrate the whole force, with five

w!n g g ; ^ P ?unTabt B (irdetachment days' rations and two days' water

in camp). in tins. Here a large bivouac,

N 2 o nd 19 S Com P any, Sappers and Miners. protected by a barbed wire fence,

2 Maxim gun detachment, 107th was formed, and early the follow-

Pmneers. ^ Brigade. * n S mornm g tne troops detailed

King's African Rifles (about 500 men), in the margin fell in for the march

Detachment, Sappers and Miners. to Jidballi, distant about twelve

Total strength 2,200 regulars (including .. .„ , . . ,, ■