

134 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

At the beginning of the action these troops were-
charged and driven back in disorder, and their stampeded horses
were to be seen careering wildly about the plain. Lieutenant
Welland, R.A.M.C., was here shot while attending a wounded
hospital assistant, and Lieutenant Smith, who attempted
to rescue him, found him already dead and was unable to bring;
away kis body. The enemy followed up this success, but in spite
of the slight advantage which the ground gave them were unable
to make any impression on the right face of the square. To the left
there were a few patches of scrub, somewhat thicker than else-
where, where the enemy collected in some numbers, only, however,
to suffer heavier losses from the fire of the maxims and of the left
face, which was thrown forward in echelon. By 10 a.m. the enemy
were in full flight, pursued by the shells of the mountain battery,
which burst well into a crowd of fugitives beyond the balli. The
*' cease fire " was now sounded as the mounted troops charged across
the front of the square, following close on the enemy, and in a
few minutes the whole mass rolled out of sight in the dust and
haze.

The infantry then advanced to a point about half a mile beyond
Jidballi, and orders were at once sent back to the transport to ad-
vance During the afternoon the mounted troops returned in de-
tachments, having followed up the enemy for a distance of about
twelve miles. The latter, although kept well on the move, had still
some fight left in them at the end of the pursuit, for when the
ammunition of the mounted infantry began to run short, they
formed line and turned on their pursuers. Our casualties in the
action amounted to three officers (Captain the Hon'ble T. Lister,
Lieutenants C.H. Bowden-Smith and J. R. Welland) and sixteen
other ranks killed. Nine officers (Majors F. B. Young and G. T. M.
Bridges, Captains G. C. Shakerley and E. H. Llewellyn, Lieutenants
H. H. R. White, H. E. Reinhold and A. E. Andrews, Lieutenant-
Colonel G. T. Forestier-Walker and Captain G. R. Breading,
and twenty -seven other ranks wounded. Total — nineteen killed and
thirty-six wounded. Captain Lister, who was orderly officer to
Colonel Kenna, returned to camp with a message about noon and
left shortly afterwards to rejoin the mounted troops. Later
he was reported missing, 'and search parties were at once sent out,.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 135

but his body was not recovered until next day. He had been killed
a few miles from camp.

The enemy were estimated to; number 6,000. Six hundred and
sixty-six bodies were counted on and near the position, 350 of these
being found close to the square. To these must be added those ac-
counted for in the pursuit, so that probably 1,000 were killed. A large
number of prisoners and 366 rifles (chiefly Gras, of French make)
were captured. Jidballi proved to be merely a dry rain-pool with
a few trees and grass huts close by. It is situated at the bottom of
a depression 1 in the open Nogal valley about eight miles distant from
Bur Anod, a detached hill w hich rises at the western extremity
of the Shile Madu range. The wells were few in number and the
water indifferent, the supply at Adur, four miles south-east, being
much better.