

The Hampshires and fifty marines were left on the shore to
prevent the enemy reoccupying their defences, which were demolish-

1 The cliffs, at the base of which the village lies, are about 250 feet high. They were
crowned by a stone and mud wall, ten feet high and twelve feet thick at the base. This
was intended to protect the atone towers from the fire of the ships. The stone towers
wero situated ashort distance inland from this wall, and were surrounded by walli and
connected with the cliffs by covered ways. There were several caves in the faco of.
the clifK

142 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA .

ed on the two following days by working parties from the ships,
It became necessary to re-embark the garrison on the 25th owing
to the daily increasing surf, caused by the oncoming monsoon. The
Isa Mahmud tribe were invited to reoccupy the village, which had
belonged to them before its seizure by the Mulla.

The operations of the Las Dureh column in March had driven
_,. , ,., , r „ the Mulla to Bilbilo on the Tus Darror.

Final escape of the Mulla. ,,... . °

Mrjjarten pressure now forced him to move
again. As sufficient rain had not yet fallen to enable him to
recross the Sorl in safety, he went to Baran, secure, as he sup-
posed, in the knowledge that the whole of Colonel Fasken's force
had gone to Las Khorai. The advance, however, of Colonel
Kenna's column to Baran about the 24th April forced him to fly
south towards Halin. Hearing that this place was held by our
troops, he turned south-south-east, and, making a detour, reached
a point in the Nogal, some twenty miles west of Illig, about the
7 th May.

Colonel Kenna, meanwhile, was making the final effort of the
campaign to round up the fugitive Mulla, or rather his harun, for
the most hopeful view of the situation scarcely included the pros-
pect of laying hands on Muhammad Abdullah himself, unless the
tribes should give him up. The movements of Colonel Kenna's
column were rapid. The infantry marched some forty-five miles in
two days from the neighbourhood of Baran to Biliyu. Here they
were joined on the 27th by the mounted troops which had been to
Baran, and now made another march of fifty miles into the Sorl to
Kheman, where some stragglers from the harun told them of the
Mulla's flight to the Lower Nogal.

On returning to Biliyu, after covering 100 miles in thirty-six hours
on one gallon of water per man and none for horses, orders were
received recalling the column. With the return of Colonel Kenna
to Las Khorai, and the escape of the Mulla from the corner into
which he had been driven, the campaign came to an end, for it was
not the intention of Government to extend the operations to any
distance beyond the Protectorate boundary. Moreover, the trans-
port still remaining fit for work was not sufficient to maintain the
troops in their present positions. The 1st Brigade in the Nogal
'had for some time been on reduced rations, supplemented by

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 143