

1 With the exception of the 62nd SikhB and No. 28 Mountain Battery who were
ordered to stand fast at Shaikh. The latter (two guns) were now mounted on camels.
Vol. VI 9

130 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Abyssinians on arrival at Galadi with a month's grain, and this was
now being rapidly pushed up the line. The diversion of so large a
portion of the transport for this purpose, and for the movement to
Galadi was the chief reason for not advancing into the Nogal in
October or early in November, as first intended. November passed
without news of the approach of the Abyssinians having reached
head-quarters. Arrangements were now made for a naval demon-
stration at Obbia, and Yusuf 'Ali, who had been reinstated as Sultan
of that place, was encouraged by a gift of rifles and by assistance
in the way of supplies to occupy Mudug. This he appears to have
done on the 12th December.

On the 4th December the Tribal Horse reconnoitred to Jidballi,

Reconnaissance to Jid- forty -five miles east of Eil Dab, and there en-

balh - countered some of the enemy's horsemen.

Some days later a second skirmish took place near Badwein 1

where the Tribal Horse were posted. The latter lost three men

killed and one wounded, but succeeded in taking a prisoner, who

reported that there was a hostile body encamped at Jidballi on

200 Tribal Horse. their wa ^ to surprise Badwein. Accord-

100 British Mounted In- ingly on the 17th December a column,

fantI 7- strength as in the margin, under Colonel

100 Indian Mounted In- T ^ , ., TV1 -,-, ■■ ... -, ,

f antry Kenna, left Jbu Dab with orders to recon-
60 Bikanirs. noitre the enemy's position. Before start-
loo Hampshires. m ^ information was received by wire from
°i J ■ ""^ m Bohotle that the Mulla was reported to have

1 Maxim. L

left Kallis and Adadero and moved up lito
Haisamo, which is a hilly district on the northern edge of the Nogal
valley behind Bur Anod and the Shile Madu range. This report
may have led Colonel Kenna to expect a considerable amount of
opposition. At any rate when he approached the hostile encamp-
ment before daybreak on the 19th with his mounted troops it
became evident from the large number of fires that the enemy
were in force. Accordingly he halted and waited for daylight,
when he sent the Tribal Horse round to the rear of the position,
supporting them on his left with two sections of the Poona

1 About thirteen miles east by north of Eil Dab, and not to be confused with
fUdwein in the Mudii"? district. Badwein is a common name in Somalilagd, meaning a
Urae lake or sea.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 13]

"Mounted Infantry. He then ordered a company of British
Mounted Infantry to advance and fire into the encampment,
which brought the enemy swarming out to the number of some
2,000. The mounted infantry fell back on the Bikanirs, but the
enemy refused to be drawn into the open. After several unsuccess-
ful attempts to induce them to leave their position, Colonel Kenna_,
having sent orders to the Tribal Horse to rejoin the main body,
retired on his infantry support, and returned to Badwein, followed
by some of the enemy's mounted men. Our casualties in this
very successful reconnaissance, owing to the wildness of the enemy's
fire, amounted only to two men of the British Mounted Infantry
wounded and one missing;, and two killed and two wounded of the
Tribal Horse. In withdrawing from the right flank of the position
a sepoy of the Poona Mounted Infantry lost his horse and, becoming
separated from the rest of his section, was followed closely by the
enemy. Lieutenant Carter rode back alone and brought the man
in. For this act of gallantry he was awarded the V. C.