

The position was apparently held by the Mulla as a strong
advanced post to protect the grazing in the Nogal, and to cover
his retreat to the north, which he had already resolved on if un-
successful in the fight. During th% action he himself is said to have
remained at Hudin with a large force, while the Harun was at
Gaplo. The fact that heavier losses were not inflicted on the enemy
was due to their being well extended and on the move, and to their
making the most of all available cover. Moreover it appears that
only a portion of their line, which was about two miles long, actually
attacked the square, otherwise a more effectual blow might have
been dealt at the Mulla's power. The punishment, however, received
in the pursuit practically disposed of this force, which was mainly
composed of Dolbahantas, the pick of the Mulla's fighting men.

General Egerton now resolved to adhere to his original plan
of temporarily occupying the southern edge of the Nogal, thus
cutting off the Mulla from his line of retreat towards Mudug and
from such of his karias as were still in the Southern Haud. Accord-
ingly the mounted troops, supported by the 1st Brigade, were direct-
ed on Geirowei and Adadero, and the 2nd Brigade on Dariali, as soon
as supplies were brought up from Badwein. These arragements
resulted in touch being temporarily lost with the enemy, but it was
considered better to make certain of preventing his escape south -

This hollow contains some scattered clumps of bushes, so that a force moving
towards it without scouts might be surprised j otherwise the position bad nothiDg to
commend it from the enemy's point of vietr.

,136 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

wards than to endeavour to reap the immediate fruits of the victory
by an advance to Halin or Hansoga, whither the Mulla was variously
stated to have fled 1 .

On the 11th January a convoy of empty camels with the cap-
tured rifles left for Badwein to bring up supplies. On the 12th and
13th the mounted troops and 1st Brigade marched for Dumodleh,
and on the 14th reconnoitred Hudin, but no traces of the enemy
except dead bodies were met with. The supplies from Badwein
having arrived, the 2nd Brigade with Force headquarters left Jid-
balli on the 15th, and marching by Derigobbo and Duhung reached
Dariali on the 17th. A convoy of rations was sent to overtake
the 1st Brigade at Kurtimo. The latter with the mounted troops
reached Gerrowei on the 20th, capturing on the way some 2,500
camels and a quantity of sheep.

A post was established at Dariali and communications with
Eil Dab were opened via jY&guri, the garrison of Badwein being with-
drawn. Burao was reinforced to the extent of some 450 rifles by
the shifting of garrisons on the hnes of communication, and by the
breaking up of the movable column, which had been formed from
the Bohotle and Galadi troops.

Orders were now issued for the two brigades to gain touch on
the 24th January 1904 with a view to combined operations in
the neighbourhood of Gaolo and Halin. On the 21st the 2nd Brigade
and Headquarters, with No. 5 Company, British Mounted Infantry,
and a company of Somali Mounted Infantry from the movable
column, left Dariali, and, marching across the Nogal via Arde Jiffifta,
Teached Gaolo on the 25th. On the same day the 1st Brigade and
mounted troops occupied Halin. All the enemy's tracks passed
by the columns led northwards, and it was evident that the Mulla
had ordered up his karias from the south to join him in Haisimo
or the Sorl. From Gaolo and Halin numerous signal fires were seen
on the edge of the Sorl, and, as at Galadi in March of the preceding
year, this portended a retirement. Traces of the enemy's occupation
„„,„., , were discovered at both these places, and a