

Considerable captures of stock, amounting to over 3,000 camels,
besides sheep, were made by raiding parties of the 1st Brigade
during February in the Nogal.

News was received that the Abyssinians had reached Wardair

Movements of the Abys- on the 14th January, and, after reconnoitr-

sinians. ing G umDurrU) h a d withdrawn to Gerlogubi

on the 1st February owing to shortness of supplies. On the 28th
March they were compelled for the same reason to return to Harrar.
The part taken by our allies in the operations had not, therefore,,
been important, except in so far that their presence about War-
dair deterred the Mulla from flying in that direction.

Orders were now issued for the concentration of the troops

Operations north of the Sori. detailed in the margin at Las

lf „ ~T, Dureh, and on the 10th March

Mounted troops. '

Rifles, the column under Brigadier-Gene-
ral Fasken left that place reaching
El Afweina, a distance of eighty-
five miles, on the 15th. Major
Brooke's column, which left Eil
Dab on the 9th arrived
about the same time. After ft
day's halt the advance waa
resumed by the main colunyi on
the 17th in a northerly direction towards Jid 'Ali, by Gud Anod

3 companies British

Mounted In-

fantry

• .

250

Bikanir Camel Corps

150

Mounted Levy

10

Infantry.

Hampshire^

250

27th Punjabi*

• • . .

350

52nd SSikhs

250

107th Pioneers

150

Sappers and Miners

50

Halo*

l'>0

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 139

and Megebu. At Megebu the mounted troops encountered a
hostile raiding party and killed 50 of them, capturing 23 rifles,
27 camels, and some 1,200 sheep.

The enemy had apparently been unaware of our advance up to<
the 14th and had then moved further east ; consequently Jid 'Ali
and neighbourhood was found unoccupied when the column arrived
there on the 21st. The next objective was the district marked
Rat in the maps. The country now being traversed formed a por-
tion of the Ogo, or high plateau of Somaliland, which was here
quite open and fairly well supplied with water in the various tugs
or water courses. The climate, moreover, is bracing, owing to the
elevation, so that conditions were favourable for marching except
that the grazing was poor, and for this reason the Indian camels,
which had worked continuously since their first arrival in the
country, were now rapidly losing condition. The route was flanked
on the north by the mass of hills into which the plateau is broken on
its outer edge. To the south lay the waterless Sorl, on the further
side of which the Nogal was held by the 1st Brigade, while the Mulla
was prevented from escaping to the south-west by Major Brooke's
column, based on El Afweina. The result of the operations, there-
fore, could only be to drive the enemy into the country oE the Mij-
jartens, a tribe nominally subject to the Italians. On the 25th Feb-
ruary General Egerton had telegraphed for permission to operate
in their Protectorate, but no answer had yet been received. Briga-
dier-General Fasken had been instructed not to cross the boundary,
and to withdraw his troops through the passes to Las Khorai early
in April, before his supply of rations gave out. The column which
left Jid 'Ali en the 23rd March reached Bihen two days later, where
a post of 150 rifles was established. Starting again on the 27th
it marched by the Tug Gebi to Ausaneh, arriving there on the 30th..
This was the limit of advance.