

The infantry were now joined by the mounted troops which
had preceded them by about a day's march, and had reconnoitred
some twenty -five miles further south-east. Notwithstanding good
marching the force was unable to come up with the Mulla,.
who it appears crossed the Italian boundary on the 27th March
with the mounted infantry close on his heels. The latter had
been able to keep in advance of the infantry and transport by-

"140 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

reason of the rations carried by the Bikanirs on their camels for
the whole of the mounted force for one or two days. Had the de-
tachment of camel sowars been larger it is probable that consid-
erable captures would have been made ; and it appears that
the only method of coping with a Somali enemy is to employ
a mounted force equipped in this manner, which in country like
the Ogo is able to operate independently for several days. The
Haud and Southern Somaliland generally, it may be mentioned,
are less favourable for mounted troops, owing to the thick bush
and long distances to be traversed without water.

The column was now withdrawn to Baran near Bihen,
whence the mounted troops withdrew to Jid 'Ali, while the
infantry with the bulk of the transport were pushed over the
difficult Aiyu pass to Las Khorai. The rise to the watershed
from Baran on this route was perhaps not more than 1,000 feet
in some 20 miles, the fall to the sea-coast being at least 6,000
feet in the same distance. The maritime plain is here only
some 8 or 10 miles in width, the mountains descending to it in
two drops or lines of bluffs, the intermediate plateau of Al
being well wooded and green. Las Khorai is a hot sweltering
place on a sandy beach consisting of one or two stone houses
surrounded by the usual mat-huts.

In the meantime the Italian Government had consented, subject
to certain conditions, to the proposal to extend the operations into
their territory. Intimation of this did not, however, reach General
Egerton in time for him to countermand the march of the force
under General Fasken to Las Khorai, where the latter arrived on the
10th April. Orders were now issued for the troops at Las Khorai to
stand fast, and for the 1st Brigade to hold the Nogal, if possible, to
the end of April, while arrangements were made for the Rat district
to be reoccupied by a column, under the command of Colonel
, „ ... c „ n Kenna, consisting of the infantry of

•Mounted troops. . 500 . ' _,

infantry ..mo Major Brooke's column and the mounted

Somalia ..150 i n f aatr y troops.*

The Mijjarten Sultan, who had been either unwilling or unable

Capture of niig. to P rev ent the Mulla from obtaining an

asylum in his country, was now reported

to be anxious to attack him. As it was considered probable

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 14!

that the Mulla would make for TUig, which was held by
some of his men, arrangments were made to seize that place.
Accordingly a detachment of 130 Hampshires was sent by sea
from Berbera to co-operate with a naval force for this purpose.
The operation was successfully carried out. The enemy, to the num-
ber of about 100 riflemen with a backing of spearmen, held a strong
position on the cliffs above Illig, protected by sangars and two
stone towers. 1 As a direct attack would have entailed considerable
loss, it was decided to land a force of 752 of all ranks at daybreak
on the 21st April at the mouth of the Gallule river, 3| miles north of
Illig. Owing to the surf it took two hours to disembark all the men.
As soon as the landing was completed the force marched along the
sea-coast towards Illig in preparatory formation for attack. Within
a short distance of the place the right flank was pushed further out
and forwards to overlap the defences. The enemy awaited the attack
in their works, shouting defiance and blowing horns. They then
opened fire with rifles and an old gun, firing canister, but the sea-
men and marines, supported by the Hampshires on the left, were
not to be denied, and advancing by short rushes to within one
hundred yards of the position, they charged and carried it with
the loss of three killed and eleven wounded. Entrance to the prin-
cipal work was effected by Petty Officer J. Murphy, who battered
down the wooden door under fire from the loop-holes. Captain
the Honourable H. Hood, Midshipman A.G. Onslow, R.N., and Cor-
poral Flowers, R.M.L.I., also rendered signal service in clearing
a cave, from which sniping had been going on. The maxims, which
had been brought up by hand, were turned on the flying enemy.
The defences and the village itself, from whence sniping had
taken place, were then demolished, the work being completed
by about mid-day. Fifty-six corpses of the enemy were counted,,
and a number of wounded received medical aid.