

Mulla ■ flight to the north. t ^ , , ,,

few prisoners were taken. (Jn the 'jytn, tne
mounted troops having been detached to Hansoga, the 1st Brigade

1 Deserters stated that he had gone to Halin, but, as was often the case, their
information was misleading, and he probably went to Hansoga in the Haisimo distriot.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SO MALI LAND. 137

ascended the Bosaso pass, sending a party to communicate with
the 2nd Brigade, which had reconnoitred as far as the Anane pass.
Both these passes lead to the Sorl, which is a bush-grown waterless
plateau about 1,000 feet above the level of the Nogal. Between
the escarpment, which forms the edge of the plateau, and the Shile
Madu Hills, which run roughly parallel to it on the south, lies the
broken and hilly district of Haisamo. Hither, as has been already
mentioned, the Mulla had probably betaken himself after his defeat
■at Jidballi, but he was too wary to risk a second fight, and during
the course of the encircling movements in the Nogal he had moved
the remainder of his men and the greater part of his flocks across
the Sorl towards Jid 'Ali in the Warsangli country.

Orders were now issued for the 1st Brigade, rationed up to the
15th April and reinforced by 350 rifles 1 from the lines of communica-
tion, to hold the Nogal ; while the 2nd Brigade, preceded by the
mounted troops, was to leave Hansoga on the 1st February and re-
turn to the Ain valley, reconnoitring Haisamo and the country to
the north of Bur knodi en route. In pursuance of these instructions
General Fasken's column, less 170 rifles left as a temporary garrison
at Hudin, reached Eil Dab on the 12th February, two days after
the mounted troops which had returned via Bohol and Ferogul.
Before the advance into the Nogal Captain B. G. Munn had pro-
ceeded to the Ogaden country in order to induce the tribesmen to
attack the Mulla' s raiding parties. Finding his efforts unavailing
he rejoined General Egerton's staff at Eil Dab on 8th February.

A movable column as detailed in the margin, under Major
tw r™, ■ T j- R- G. Brooke, D.S.O., was now formed at

iwo Companies Indian t ' ' _

Mountain infantry, detach- Eil Dab, while the remainder of the troops

2^°pS£SS: moved down the lineto Shaikh and

■d-tachment, Sappers and Berbera, to refit and prepare for the next

Miners, Ilalos 100 rifles. j

advance.
General Egerton had in the meantime transferred his head-
quarters to Berbera, and as a brief rest was necessary for the 2nd
Brigade, which had been marching with only occasional halts since
early in January, the time was utilised in stocking Las Dureh with
supplies for the column which was to be based on this place for
operations in the north-east of the Protectorate. Las Dureh is some

These were 1st Brigade troops (K. A. Rs.) which had returned from Galadi.

138 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

seventy miles south-east of Berbera and rather more than half that
distance from Shaikh. It lies in a gap in the hills, so that the ascent
from the maritime plain to the plateau is more gradual here than
elsewhere. An observation post was established on the coast some
230 miles east of Berbera at Las Khorai, which was to be the ulti-
mate objective of the column. The remainder of the Tribal Horse
which with the Gadabursis had been considerably reduced in num-
bers after the Jidballi fight, were now disbanded with the exception
of a mounted company of 100 men. In their place a levy of 270
Somali riflemen was raised to operate in the Musa Abukr country
under Lieutenant-Colonel C. E. Melliss, v.c., who had proceeded
thither in January for that purpose. On the 26th February this
officer reconnoitred to within a day's march of Jidballi and reported
that the Mulla and Harun were in the neighbourhood of that place.