

some 600 mounted troops) and 1,000 miles, 200 I.fleS being left in

irregulars. camp to guard the transport.

The advance began at 5 a.m. in echelon from the centre,
the 52nd Sikhs leading. A short distance
Action of Jidballi. behind them on the right flank marched
the 1st, Brigade, while the left wing (or echelon) was formed by
the Hampshires and 100 men of the 27th Punjabis. The mountain
battery (two guns), the staff, the field hospital, and ammunition
camels were in the centre, with a rear guard of 100 rifles, 27th Punja-
bis. In this formation the force was ready either to attack or to-

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN S0MAL1LAND. 133

form square for defence. The main, body of mounted troops
marched at a distance of half a mile on the left flank, while the
front was covered by a company of Somali Mounted Infantry,
and the Gadabursi Horse.

Daylight revealed the whole array moving steadily forward
over country which was nearly as open and flat as a parade ground.
It was not expected that the enemy would await the attack of so
large a force. Direction was maintained by a Koyal Engineer officer,
who had been out with Colonel Kenna's reconnaissance of the 19th
December, and at about 8 a.m. he was able to check his bearing by
the tops of two trees, which were just visible over a long swell in
the ground, and marked the site of the balli. Messengers now
ibegan to come in from the mounted scouts in front with reports
that the enemy were in position awaiting our advance. The square
was shortly afterwards closed up and halted for the issue of
.thirty extra rounds per rifle, while the mounted troops swept forward
■in several lines to envelope the right of the enemy's position. At 9-25
a.m. a sharp rattle of musketry broke out from that quarter. The
square meanwhile had advanced to a second position within 1,000
yards of the balli, beyond which a group of led horses was to be seen.
i These had at first been taken for the Somali Mounted Infantry,
■but a few shots coming from their direction showed that they were
hostile. The enemy's skirmishers could now be distinguished lying
down in the short grass within 700 yards of the square. As these
advanced through some low scrub to the attack the order to open
fire was given, and the crackle of musketry soon swelled into a
deafening roar. The enemy's fire was inaccurate, most of their
bullets passing overhead. Owing, however, to the depth of the
square, several casualties occurred, chiefly in the rear face, during
the ten minutes or so while the action was at its height. The enemy
made a determined and brave attempt to close, but their extended
lines soon melted away under the hail of bullets which was directed
on them from the front and left corner of the sqfuare. Only a few
came within 400 yards of the rifles. On the wings they appeared
to be in greater force and were better supported. The ground,
which dipped towards the balli, rose slightly on the right, so that the
Gadabursi Horse and Somali Mounted Infantry on this flank were
out of sight of the square.