

ordered in August, with the object of facilitating their supply and
of setting free a larger portion of the transport to stock the
advanced depot. Strong working parties of the Indian regiments
were employed to assist the Pioneers in making a cart road up the
Shaikh pass, while fit the same time the communications between
Berbera and Wagon's Rust (foot of Shaikh pass) were improved
in readiness for the "buck" waggons, which had been ordered from
South Africa. Several months were thus spent in preparing for the
advance and in purchasing remounts and camels to replace those
worn out and lost in the previous operations. Besides the Somali
Camel Transport Corps which was being raised as rapidly as
possible, the transport consisted of 5 Indian and 1 Arab Camel Corps,
the " buck " waggons from the Cape, 3 ekka trains, and some 300
mules (see Appendix B). When available, the whole of this trans-
port was distributed as follows on the lines of communication: —
Berbera to Wagon's Rust — " buck " waggons ; Shaikh pass-
mules ; Upper Shaikh to Burao — ekkas and camel carts ; Burao on-
wards — camels. Camels also frequently worked down the line to

1 General Manning had sent the 2nd Sikhs to Shaikh and the Britifih Mounted

Infantry to Bihcndula, in June.

MILITARY OPERATIONS IN SOMALILAND. 129

Berbera, and the Indian Transport Corps may be said to have borne
the brunt of the hard work, both in the preliminary task of forward •
ing supplies to the front, and in their superior utility as transport
to marching columns.

Kirrit was made the advanced base, as a route branches from
that place towards the Nogal by Wadamago and Eil Dab in the
Ain valley. Supplies collected at Kirrit could be forwarded in either
direction to Eil Dab for a campaign in the Nogal, or to Bohotle,
if the Mulla went south. (Efforts were made to improve
the water supply along the main routes, and water-boring opera-
tions were commenced under Major Joly de Lotbiniere, R.E., but
unfortunately the thickness of the porous strata which overlie the
hard rock throughout the greater part of Somaliland proved too
great for the plant which had been provided.

By the end of October all was ready for an advance, and a
movement of troops was then begun, the 1st Brigade moving to
Bohotle and the 2nd Brigade to Wadamago and eventually to Eil
Dab. The Mulla was at this time at Adadero in the Southern Nogal.
As the general idea of the operations was to drive him towards the
north, it was first intended to move the 1st Brigade to Damot,
in order to make it appear that a re-occupation of Mudug was the
object of the advance. The 2nd Brigade was then to march to
Dariali, which was to be the advanced base for further operations,
while the mounted troops were to push on and seize Gerrowei and
Kallis. As, however, it was thought possible that the Mulla might
evade the columns and escape southwards, it was eventually decided
to defer the advance and wait for the Abyssinians, who had not
yet commenced the long march from Harrar that was necessary
to bring them into line. In order to hasten their advance, the 1st
Brigade left Bohotle on the 11th November, crossed the Haud
to Galadi, and returned on the 27th, having left a garrison of 400
rifles at the latter place, with six weeks' rations, to hold the wells
until the arrival of the Abyssinians and ensure them their water at
the end of the eighty miles march from Wardair. A raiding party
which was met on the way back from Galadi was dispersed and their
camels captured. General Egerton had undertaken to supply the