

Indian camels, four silladar corps, and one baluch
corps . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,847

Cape " buck " wagons . . . . . . 80

Ekkas .. .. .. .. .. .. 482

Mules .. .. .. .. .... *1,973

In addition there were about 1,000 Arab camels landed at the end of
the first phase in May and June and some 6,000 Somali camels purchased
after General Egerton's arrival. Those remaining from General Manning's
operations were nearly all worn out and need not be taken into con-
sideration.

During the second phase of the operations 1,324 Indian camels died or
were destroyed up to the end of March 1904, and the proportion of casualties
in the Somali transport corps was still heavier. No camels returned to India,
the balance remaining on demobilization being disposed of locally after provid-
ing for the needs of the Protectorate garrison.

As already stated, the Indian camel proved superior to the local animal
for transport purposes, and practically saved the situation in the second phase
of the last campaign. Kequiring more grain and water than the Somali camel,
it is bettter able to stand hard continuous work. It was latterly found neces-
sary to give the Somali camels grain, but even then they wore out more quickly
than the Indians. Their carrying power is only three maunds compared with
five maunds borne by the latter. Indian are also better than Somali camels
for marching with columns, as they straggle less and keep a more compact
formation ; but this is of course partly due to the Indian attendants being
better trained than the Somali camel-men, and to superior gear. The heriot,
or mats used as saddles, proved unsatisfactory, as they took longer than
the ordinary saddle to adjust and were continually working loose on the
march.

Camels are the only transport suitable for Somaliland. Owing to the
bad roads neither the " buck " wagons nor the ekkas were a success.
Mules were only useful in such places as the Shaikh pass in the Golis
range.

In addition to the regular transport, hired camels were used between
Berbera, Kirrit, and Bohotle.

• Taken from Disembarkation Returns and includes mules for '< buck " wagone.

APPENDICES. '! 151

Under General Manning the transport was worked on the convoy'system,
but in the second phase a combination of the staging and convoy system was
adopted on the line of communications. Contrary to the experience gained,
in many other countries, it was considered that the latter system, i.e.,
through convoys from the base to the front, was preferable in Somaiiland.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Official History of the Operations in Somaiiland — General Staff — War
Office.

CHAPTER IX.

BRITISH EAST AFRICA.

The British East Africa Protectorate* is bounded on the east

by the Indian Ocean, on the west by the
Uganda Protectorate, on the south and

south-west by German territory ; the northern boundary has not

yet been accurately determined. It comprises some 300,000

square miles of territory.

Political Divisions. The Protectorate may be divided into —