

East Africa was settled by immigrants from Persia during the
eighth century of the Christian era, and
Early history. subsequently many flourishing towns were

established by Arab and Persian settlers.

In 1497 Vasco de Gama touched at Mombasa and Malindi;
three years later the former town was

Portuguese domination. n , . __

taken by the Portuguese ; in 1507 Lamu
was captured by Tristan da Cunha ; Zanzibar and Malindi were
occupied at a later date, and by 1528 Portuguese sovereignty was
established over the whole of the East African coast south of
the Equator.

Portuguese domination was, however, short-lived. During
the seventeenth century the Imam of Masqat held a commanding
position in western Asia, and began to encroach on the east coast
of Africa. In 1660 the Arabs took the fort of Mombasa from the
Portuguese ; and by 1698 Zanzibar was taken and the Euro-
peans were expelled from the coast.

The control of Masqat was, however, nominal, and the coast

Masqat control towns maintained a practical independence

until the beginning of the nineteenth

century, when the Imam Saiyid Said began to consolidate his

power in East Africa ; and Mombasa and the whole coast came

under the rule of Masqat in 1837.

Three years later the Imam transferred the seat o f government
from Masqat to Zanzibar, and established his authority over the
whole coast. In 1844, under the aegis of the Sultan, the German
missionary Krapf established near Mombasa a mission-station
which still flourishes.

156 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

On the death of Saiyid Said in 1856, he left his dominions
Division of Masqat and between two of his sons ; the elder was
Zanzibar. ^0 succeed to Masqat, and the younger

to the soverignty of Zanzibar and the African territory, an arrange-
ment which led to a family dispute that was settled by the inter-
vention of the Indian Government.

The Government of India had long been interested in the
prosperity of East Africa, owing to the great influx of British
Indian subjects who developed and in course of time practically
monopolised the trade. On this account the dispute between the
rulers of Masqat and Zanzibar was referred for arbitration to the
Governor-General of India, by whose award the sovereignty of the
two was finally separated.

To equalise the award, an annual payment of some £9,000
was to be made by Zanzibar to Masqat, as compensation for the
loss sustained by the latter in the separation. The payment
of thi3 compensation was subsequently undertaken by the Indian
Government, and in 1862, by a declaration made by Great Britain
and France, Zanzibar was recognised as an independent state.

In 1870 Bargash-bin-Said, who proved to be a ruler of capa-
city and enlightenment, succeeded to the sovereignty of Zanzibar.

British influence. He was <l uick to perceive the advan-
tages of encouraging British enterprise,
and his dominions were administered throughout his reign with
the advice of the British Consul-General, with the result that, while
his power and trade were extended far into the interior, British
influence became paramount, and was characterised by the pre-
sence of thousands of British subjects on the coast, and of British
steamers for trading purposes, and warships to protect the trade-
Between 1880 and 1885, German subjects began to acquire a
The Germars i , E.-mt f <><>ting among the tribes of the interior,
Africa. behind the southern part of the Zanzibar