

(1) The mainland territories of the Sultanate of Zanzibar.

(2) The Sultanate of Witu.

(3) British East Africa Proper, comprising the old chartered
territory of the British East Africa Company, and the
region between the Tana and the Juba not included
in either Zanzibar or Witu, which extends from along
the coast from Kipini to Kwaihu.

The dominions of the Sultan of Zanzibar consist of a strip

of coast ten miles wide from high-water

mark, extending from the mouth of the

river Umba on the south to Kipini on the Ozi on the north ; and

some islands off the coast, as well as the town of Kismayu and

a radius of ten miles round it.

The interior of British East Africa is a vast plateau, with
elevated tablelands rising gradually from

Physical features. the CQast . ^ ordinary leyel Q f the

country varying from 3,000 to 6,000 feet above the sea.

In the meridional rift, a chasm running east and west for some

700 miles through Africa, lie the fresh water

lakes of Naivasha and Baringo, the salt

lakes Elmenteita and Nakuro, and the flooded saline basins of

Lakes Rudolf, Stephanie and Suguto.

The chief rivers, which flow from the watershed of the rift,
_. are the Juba, which rises in Abyssinia

Rivers. ' J

and running south-east, forms the eastern
frontier ; the Tana, rising on Mount Kenia, and the Sabaki, formed

* See maps 16 and 16 in pooket.

BRITISH EAST AFRICA. 153

by the united waters of the Tsavo and Athi. All these flow in an
easterly direction to the Indian Ocean.

The Tana and Juba are respectively navigable for some 200

and 400 miles.

We are concerned here only with the Seyyidieh Province and
Jubaland, in which alone the military

The Seyyidieh Province. . .

operations of expeditionary forces sent
from India have taken place.

The former, of which the capital is Mombasa, is divided into
the Vanga, Mombasa, and Melindi districts. The coast is character-
ised by numerous creeks lined with extensive mangrove swamps.
Inland there are plantations of sugar-cane and cocoanut, and fields
of millet, Indian corn, and plantains. This cultivated area extends
some twenty miles from the coast, when it gives place to a more
pastoral region, which merges into the scrub of the waterless Nyika.

The Umba valley is fertile, producing abundance of rice,
and has populous Wadigo villages on both sides of the river.

The population of the Vanga district was in 1900 some 25,000,
including 500 Arabs, 4,000 Swahilis, and
the rest Wadigo, Wasegua, Waduruma
and other savages, the whole comprised under the generic term
Wanyika. The most numerous are the Wadigo, extending over the
whole coast region from Mombasa to Tanga. Most of the Wadigo
are in the Vanga district; they are peaceable people, who formerly
suffered much from slave-raiding by Shaikh Mubarak. They
have no settled government, but one or two chiefs exercise authority
beyond the limits of their own villages.

Vanga town was burnt and sacked by Mubarak of Gazi, when he
rebelled in August 1895, when it had a population of some 300. In
1897 it had 600 inhabitant •-, and a few Indian shops. The population
of Gazi decreased after the rebellion, but is gradually recovering.