

camel meat, and the necessity of using the whole of their transport
for bringing up supplies had rendered these troops immobile, and
unable to move into the Lower Nogal, when the Mulla arrived

there.

Accordingly the troops were withdrawn towards the base, the
1st Brigade by Eil Dab, and the mounted portion of Colonel Kenna's
column by El Afweina and Las Dureh, while the infantry followed
General Fasken's troops, which had already embarked at Las
Khorai for Berbera.

By June the bulk of the force was concentrated at the latter
place, and orders having been received for
Demobilization of the force, demobilization, the various corps were des-
patched in transports to their destinations, with the exception of
the 101st Grenadiers, the 107th Pioneers, and the two companies
of the Indian Mounted Infantry, which were to garrison the country
until the arrival of the reliefs from India in the autumn.

Since the first landing of a force at Obbia in January 1902,

the object kept in view had been to drive

the Mulla northwards, and to this end he

had been slowly but doggedly pursued throughout the length and

breadth of the country.

His power had been broken at Jidballi, and his following had
then ceased to exist as a fighting force, or as a solid objective for
General Egerton's columns, while nearly 10,000 of his camels 1
and 462 rifles had been captured. The Mulla himself had escaped
capture owing to the failure of the Mijjarten Sultan, on whose
co-operation it had unfortunately been necessary to rely. Neverthe-
less, our engagements with the protected tribes had been kept, for
these had been relieved from the fear of his devastating raids, in
which neither age nor sex were spared. The Mulla owed his escape
principally to the rapidity of his movements. Only mounted troops
were able to compete with him in this respect. In the opinion of
those qualified to judge, the transport for mounted troops should
consist of Arab or other trotting camels, lightly equipped, each
camel-man leading another loaded camel. The camel-men should
be armed and there should be an escort of camel sowars, such as

1 Exclusive of those captured by Yusuf 'AH at Obbia in 1904, and by General Man-
n ng during the first phase of the operations.

144 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Bikanirs, carrying five or six days' rations for themselves. The
mobility of mounted troops would by this means be at least doubled,
enabling them to cover distances at the rate of forty miles a day in
pursuit of a broken enemy. Infantry will always be necessary as a
support to the mounted troops, and to provide escorts to convoys.
The vulnerability of the large convoys of water, etc., that are neces-
sary constitutes one of the chief difficulties to be encountered in
campaigning in this country. As it is impossible to be continually
halting to close up, the only safeguard against surprise is to receive
timely warning of an attack from mounted scouts thrown out to a
distance of several miles.