

The Mombasa district, including the island, the coast line
„ . between Freretown and Kurwitu, the

Mombasa.

Rabai and Chogni hills, pShimba, and the
Duruma country, has a population of some 50,000.

The island of Mombas i, has an area of nine square miles and a
population of some 25,000. It is fertile except on the shores of the
Indian Ocean, and is mainly covered with cocoanut plantation.

154 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The coast from Preretown to Kurwitu forms a narrow strip
between the sea and the hills of Eabai, Ribe, Chogni and Jibana,
and has in it the deep creek of the Mtwapa. The country is
undulating and wooded, with numerous villages and plantations.
In the rebellion of 1896 it suffered much from the adhesion to the
rebel cause of its chief Shaikh Hamis-bin-Kombo. The popula-
tion of this coastline, including the villages of Mtwapa, Jauri,
Kijipoa and Kurwitu, each under its own headman, is about 2,000,
who profess the Musalman faith and speak the Swahili language.

Some eight miles behind the coast strip rises a range of hills
The mountain religion of running north and south, having eight

Momiasadistri t. distinct summits, the highest, Jibani,

1,087 feet above sea-level.

The tribes of these districts include a considerable propor-
tion of Christians, for there are mission-stations at Rabai, Ribe,
and other places. North of the Rabai is the Senawe range, rising
to 1,132 feet in Chogni peak.

The Shimba range, south of Mombasa, rises to 1,200 feet and
is fertile and thickly peopled by Wadigo.

Mombasa town is built on the eastern side of the island,
which is three miles in length and one-
and-a-half miles broad. Like other
eastern towns, it is a labyrinth of narrow streets and lanes. Supplies
are chiefly drawn from the mainland. The old Portuguese fort
forms a military store and jail.

Malindi lies to the north of Momasa and south of the river

Tana. The fertile coast zone, which has

a considerable population, extends far into

the Nyika. Large quantities of Indian corn, millet, copra, and

rubber are produced, and cattle, horses, and camels do well in this

district near Malindi and Mambrui.

The population numbers some 10,000, distributed principally
in the coast towns of Malindi, Takaungu and Mambrui, and in
Tangar.iko, fifte en miles inland. Provisions and water are abund-
ant at Malindi, which is fertile and prosperous, having an annual
rainfall of fifty-four inches. Kilifi, the port of Takaungu, has a
good anchorage in the mouth of the creek which extends fifteen
miles into the interior. Tanganiko was destroyed by the rebels

BRITISH EAST AFRICA. 15 5-

in 1895, but has since been rebuilt. The coast from Takaungu
to five miles north of Mambrui is lined with villages and farms,
round which a considerable amount of grain is raised for export.

Beyond Mambrui the country is uninhabited, except for some
nomad Gallas and Wasania who live by hunting.

Inland is the fertile undulating tract of Giriama, extending
from the Rabai hills on the south to the river Sabaki on the north.
This country is generally pastoral and agricultural, with scattered
forests. It is arid in the dry season, and the water-supply is scanty
and in some streams is brackish.