

Sir A. Hardinge proceeded to Gazi with an armed force under
Admiral Rawson. and found the place deserted, the chief and the re-
bch. having fled together to Mweleh, a fortified stronghold fifteen
miles inland. The British force attacked and took Mweleh, when the
rebel leaders fled in different directions into the jungle. It was
decided to wait for an Indian contingent of troops, promised
by the Government, before following up these scattered bands ;
but four months elapsed before their arrival, and during this period
the rebels reassembled, and were joined by the Swahili chief of
Mtwapa, north of Mombasa, and were actively assisted by the
tribes behind the coast.

Malindi was attacked by the rebels, and the Government then
decided to send troops from India to supplement the 300 men of

160 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

the newly-arrived Indian contingent. The rebellion was suppressed
by the occupation of all the food-centres, and the constant pursuit;
of the insurgents.

Operations of the Mombasa Field Force.

The 24th Bombay Infantry x under command of Lieut. -Colonel
A. A. Pearson, left Karachi on the 5th March 1896, and anchor was
dropped in Mombasa Creek on the 15th March. The ship was cleared
of all troops and baggage by 5 p.m. next day.

On the 19th the party detailed in the margin embarked on dhows
Distribution at Rabai. which were towed by a steam pinnace

Captain C J. Melliss. . t> u • i, -r>i_*- ^

Subadar Shah Mast. to Uabai. At Rabai two men were
ioo rank and file. drowned in disembarking. The detach-

ment marched thirty-three miles inland to Mbungu post, thirty-
five miles north-west of Mombasa.

..«-,,., On the 20th the detail noted in the

At Shimba.

i British office. margin, under Lieutenant Tarver, pro-

Subadar Din Muhammad, ceeded to Shimba in dhows, and next

ti „. ' day Lieutenants Holbrooke and Field-

At Wanga. . . .

2 British Officers. ln g embarked in H.M.S. Wigeon for

jemadar Baz Khan. Wanga, and Jemadar Nur Din proceeded

in the same vessel to form a post at Gazi.

At Gazi. On the 22nd Captain Tighe, d.s.o..

25 m rank r Sd flu?' with Lieutenants Woolridge and Mitchell

proceeded in H.M.S. Barossa with sixty
rank and file to Wasin, whence they were to travel in boats
to Pongwe to attack and burn a stockade which was being built
there.

On completion of this work, Captain

At Mkono. Tighe was to take on sixty -fiv; men from

S.fr a ankrnd he nie. DS '°" Lieutenant Holbrooke and march to his

post at Mkono.
On the 24th March Lieutenant Parker marched from Rabai
to Quabongo, which he burnt, and made Bongo's son a prisoner.
Large quantities of supplies and gunpowder were destroyed, but no
opposition was met with.

1 One company of the regiment was absent on the Baluch-Afghan Boundary
Commission ond waa replaced by a Hazara Company of the 26th Bombay Infantry.

BRITISH EAST AFRICA. 161

On the 26th Lieutenant Mitchell with forty-eight rifles proceed -
u--At Meiindi. edintheS. S. J uba to relieve the detach -