

Exploration. - 1 r

was not undertaken until close upon the
middle of the nineteenth century. The German missionaries Krapf
and Rebmann discovered Kilimanjaro and Mount Kenia and
explored Teita and Ukambani in 1848-49.

In 1861 and succeeding years Baron Von der Decken explored
a considerable portion of the interior, but was killed at Bardera
on the Juba river in 1865. Frequent journeys into the heart
of Africa were undertaken, until the greater portion of the
country had been opened out by 1890, among the principal
•explorers being Fischer, Thompson, Count Teleki, Peters, Jackson
and Lugard.

On the 4th November 1890 a protectorate was declared by
the British Government over those portions

British Protectorate. . . . . ,

oi the Company s territory which formed
part of the Zanzibar Sultanate, and on the 19th November over
"Witu and the coast between the Tana and Juba rivers.

In September 1894 a protectorate was established over
Uganda, and subsequently extended as far as the western limits
of Kikuyu. The remainder of the British sphere between the
Zanzibar and Uganda boundaries and the Tana river and the
German frontier was placed under the British Government on
the 1st July 1895 when the whole of the territories east of the
Uganda Protectorate was incorporated in the " East Africa
Protectorate."

For some time subsequent to the transfer to the British Govern-
ment of the territory forming the Seyyidieh

Mubarak's rebellion. t, . . , t

1'rovince, the country was in a state ot
disturbance. The cause of trouble was a dispute over the succession
to the chieftainship of Takaungu between Rashid-bin-Saliro, the

B JUT1 SB EAST AFBWA. 159

son, and Mubarak -bin-Rashid, the nephew of Shaikh Salim-bin-
Hamis, who died in February 1895.

Mubarak being turbulent and fanatical, the other claimant
was supported by the British. Mubarak thereupon retired upon
Gonjoro, fifteen miles inland, and, with 1,500 of Salim's armed
slaves who were quartered there, threatened to attack Takaungu.
He was encouraged in these proceedings by the chief of
Gazi.

The Conpany's administrator applied for assistance to the
Eritish Government, and a ship of war was ordered to Kilifi, the
port of Takaungu, while Mubarak was summoned to Zanzibar
to meet Sir A. Hardinge, the Consul- General. He, however, de-
clined to obey, and an expedition was sent to Gonjoro, which was
evacuated without resistance. Afterwards Mubarak opened fire
on the British comp from the adjacent hills, and thus all hope of
a peaceful settlement was at an end.

From Gonjoro Mubarak retreated to Sokoke, and with his
brother Aziz, who had meanwhile burned Tanganiko and looted
the Indian traders there, he took refuge with Mubarak of Gazi.
The latter promised Sir A. Hardinge that he would arrest and dis-
arm the rebels, but he did not prevent them from making a second
uttack on Takaungu, which was repulsed by Captain Raikes.

Mubarak again took refuge at Gazi, but the chief of that place
now promised to co-operate with the Consul -General in seizing the
rebel chief.