

Coast, and in February 1885 the German Government granted
a charter to a company, the result of which was the recognition
of a German Protectorate over Usagara in August 1885.

In 1886 an agreement was signed by Great Britain and Ger-
many and later accepted by France, defining the boundaries of
the dominions of the Sultan of Zanzibar, who acquiosced in the

BRITISH EAST AFRICA. 157

arrangement. By this convention, his sovereignty was restricted'
to a belt of ten miles running parallel with the coast from the
Portuguese frontier on the south to the German protectorate of
Witu on the north, some islands being also included.

The British and German spheres of influence were denned
by a line running from the mouth of the

Spheres of influence. __ , . T , T . , ,-,

Umba river to Lake Jipe, and thence
after skirting the northern base of Kilimanjaro, to the point at
which the first degree of south latitude intersects the eastern shore
of Victoria Nyanza. Kilimanjaro was included in the German
sphere ; to the north, the British sphere was bounded by the
Tana river.

A " British East Africa Association " was at once formed to

The British East Africa develop the British region, and concessions

Association. of certain T ^ ts were granted by the

Sultan to both the German and British Companies.

The Sultan Bargash died in 1888, and was succeeded by Saiyid
Khalifa. In September 1888 the Association was incorporated
British East Africa Com- under Royal Charter as the " Imperial
pany. British East Africa Company," with

power to exercise the right of government beyond the limits of
the Sultan's territory, within the sphere of British influence, by
treaty with the tribes of the interior. The Company's staff at once
began the work of taking over the administration of the Sultan's
territory, and developing the country in the interior.

Meanwhile the proceedings of the German company had caused
insurrection in their territory, and their agents fled to Zanzibar.
Their Government intervened, and the coast was not recovered
without much fighting, the German blockade being aided by a
British squadron.

By an Anglo-German agreement signed on the 1st July 1890,
Anglo-German agreement. Germany resigned her protectorate over

Witu, and over the region north of Kipini,
and recognised the protectorate of Great Britain over the islands
of Zanzibar, Pemba, and Mafia. The British sphere of influence
was defined by the Congo State and the watershed of the Nile on
the west, by the Italian sphere of interest on the north, ;„nd by the-

"158 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

German sphere on the south. In August 1890 France recognised
British and German so vert ignty in these regions in return for the
recognition of her protectorate over Madagascar.

Next year the boundary between the British and Italian
spheres was denned, and thus by 1 891 the Imperial British East
Africa Company had acquired the whole of the coast line between
the Umba and Juba rivers.

Although the coast of Africa had long been open to European
„ , enterprise, the exploration of the interior