

After the submission of the Ogadens" in 1898 Mr. A. Jenner,
<§ttb-commissioner of the province, made several tours through the
ilOuntry, and found the inhabitants friendly. The Ogaden Sultan,
Ahmad Marghan, and other chiefs were constant visitors to Kismayu,
and practically the only symptoms of disorder in the province
were due to the quarrels between the Hirtis and Ogadens as to>
gTazing rights.

In the autumn of 1900 Mr. Jenner arranged to make another
journey into the interior with the object of opening up a district
to the north-west of Kismayu in the direction of the so-called Lorian
swamp. All was quiet in the province, and there was no outward
sign of any ill-will towards the Sub-Commissioner, who indeed had
always been very friendly with the Somalis and had much too high
■n opinion of their character. Had it not been for this misplaced
confidence in their good faith, he would scarcely have ventured
into the midst of these treacherous savages with an escort of only

JUBALAND. 1G9

forty Somali police. It appears that he had once found it necessary
to detain for a few months at Kismayu an Ogaden chief, named
Hasan Yera, who was suspected of complicity in the murder of
some friendly natives. After his discharge this man conceived
a violent hatred towards Mr. Jenner, and on it becoming known
that the latter intended to make a tour, he secretly arranged with
other disaffected chiefs to murder him. The actual execution
of the plan was left to Omar Marghan, a brother of the Ogaden
Sultan, who at the head of about 300 men attacked the Sub-Com-
missioner's camp before daybreak on the 16th November. Mr. Jennet
and all but nine of his escort were killed before they could offer
any resistance.

At about the same time a party of Boran traders returning
from Kismayu to their own country were attacked and cut up b)
the Ogadens about twenty- five miles north of Afmadu. News of an
intended rising of the tribe had already reached Mombara, and
Colonel T. Ternan, c.m.g., d.s.o., Acting Commissioner and Consul-
General at that place, at once proceeded to Kismayu, where he
arrived on the 25th November. On receiving his report on the
situation in Jubaland the Imperial Government decided to send
an expedition to that province to punish the Ogaden tribe for the
outrage. Orders were issued for the despatch of troops from Bombay
and Mombasa to Jubaland, the command of the Ogaden Punitive
Expedition being given to Colonel Ternan. Operations began in
January, 1901, and practically ceased at the end of April, when
the Ogaden Sultan agreed that a fine of 5,000 cattle should be paid
by the tribe. At the same time he promised to endeavour to obtain
the surrender of the instigators of Mr. Jenner 's murder. The force
was broken up on the 12th June, when the Indian troops sailed for
Bombay.

Military Operations.

Expedition aga'nst the Oganrfa Somali s in 1898.
In 1898 it became necessary to coerce the Ogadens and punish

them for raiding into the Kisma-
yu district. The force detailed in
the margin was assembled in Ju-
baland under Major W. Quentin,
tut only a portion of those troops were available at the