

166 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

coast are some low sand-hills, but elsewhere the country is flat and
evidently a continuation of the great plain of Southern and Central
Somaliland, which is described in chapter VII. Notwithstanding
the existence of a large river, the conditions of warfare are here
very similar to those prevailing in the latter country.

The climate is said to be healthy, and, except for a few cases
of sunstroke and scurvy, the health of the troops in 1898 and 1901
was good. The dry season lasts from December to April, when the
rains begin and continue to about October.

The Wagosha, or inhabitants of the riverain tract called
_, . Gosha, are runaway slaves of the Somalis,

and came originally from various tribes in
East Africa. Some 12,000 of them are settled on the right bank
of the river in British territory and have cleared a great deal
of the forest for cultivation. As they possess a few rifles, they are
able to protect themselves in some measure from their former masters.

With the exception of these people and a few Arabs and Swahilis
in and around Kismayu, the inhabitants of the province are chiefly
Gallas and Somalis. The former live in Boran in the interior, and
very little is known about them. The latter are divided into
Marehans, Ogadens, and Hertis. The Marehans appear to be
located on the right bank of the Juba river, above Berbera, and like
the Gallas they live too far inland for us to have had many dealings
with them. The Ogadens occupy the interior south of the Gallas
and Marehans down to Lake Wama. They came originally from
the east side of the Juba river, driving the former inhabitants
to the north and west, and are a fierce, warlike tribe, differing in no
marked degree from their kinsmen in the interior of Somaliland,
except that they are even more intractable. There are no horses
in Jubaland, and the tactics of the Ogadens in this country are
similar to those of the Isa tribe of Eastern Somaliland who also
fight on foot. Both these tribes almost always endeavour to
surprise an adversary or to lay ambushes for him. The partiality
of the Ogadens for close quarter fighting may be attributed to
the fact that they have not more than two or three hundred rifles.

They are said to number about 6,000 fighting men. As, however,
the Abdullah section held aloof during the campaigns of 1898 and
1901, only about 4,500 could possibly have taken up arms against us.

J VB ALAND. 16?

The Hertis dwelling on the coast are Mijjartens, who came
■originally by sea from the neighbourhood of Cape Gardafui. Al-
though at first inclined to be troublesome, they have, on the whole,
been loyal since 1895, but they did not prove very useful in
obtaining information or assisting the operations in Jubaland.

Scattered among the Ogaden, and subject to them, are about
.2,000 Gallas and Wabonis ; the former a remnant of the original
population of the country, 1 and the latter slaves or the children
• of slaves captured by the Somalis.