

Captain Tighe's force marched at midnight for Mkwachi, the
captured headman leading the column. At 4 a.m., three of the
prisoners escaped. The village was reached at 5-30 a.m., and a rush
made for it, when numbers of men armed with guns and bows
ran out of the houses into the jungle, and were pursued and fired
on by the advanced guard. A number of armed men threw
down their arms at Captain Tighe's command, and it was discovered
that the village was friendly, belonging to the Wadigo and not to
the Wadruma. Three men were wounded and two women killed
by the fire of the advanced gu ard, the women being mistaken
for men in the dense jungle.

Patrols were sent out in the direction of Lueni and Mweleh,.
but the men were so exhausted by their exertions that the march
towards Mweleh, and blocking of the Momandi road had to be
abandoned.

At 3 a.m. on the 5th a column of 100 men marched to attack
Mubarak's village. It was found deserted and was burnt, and
large quantities of grain were ^destroyed. Captain Tighe returned

* BRITISH EAST AFRICA. 163

to Mkono this day, and the patrols from other posts saw nothing
of the enemy.

Next day a patrol revisited Mubarak's stronghold, and burnt
Movements of Major five outlying villages and a quantity of
Tuiioch's column. Indian corn. Major Tulloch marched, at

3 a.m. from Mweleh with a flying column towards Visiani, and
on the 7th April arrived at Momandi, near which one of the
enemy's picquets was met with, and a prisoner taken. The
whole of Mubarak's rr.agazine was found in dense jungle, and a
stockade was constructed. Following on Mubarak's tracks,
Major Tulloch heard on the 8th that he had gone almost due west
in the direction of the Samburu range. The column advanced
ten miles, and then returned to the stockade to await the
arrival of rations.

On the 12th April information was received from Major Vos
Wissman that Mubarak and his followers

surrender of Mubarak.

had crossed into German territory, some-
where north-west of Tanga ; and about a week later the rebel chief
and his following surrendered and were disarmed in German
territory.

Desultory operations of a similar nature against rebels con -
tinued until May, and in June 24th Bombay Infantry returned
to India.

Vol. VI n A

CHAPTER X.

JVBALAND.

J obaland,* the north-easterly province of the British East Africa

Protectorate, lies between the province of
Tanaland and the Juba river, which forms the
eastern boundary of the Protectorate, dividing it from Italian Soma-
liland. The province has about ninety miles of coast line from
the mouth of the Juba to Port Tula, and extends inland up the right
bank of the river for a distance of about 440 miles to the 6th parallel
of northern latitude, but effective control is only exercised to about
120 miles inland. This portion is divided by the equator into
Lower Juba, or Kismayu district, and Upper Juba, or the Ogaden
and Gosha district. In the far interior lies Boran, an almost unex-
plored region. The strip of forest country about eighty miles long,
~ . . , between the Juba river and the chain of