

4th Bombay Rifles .
271 h Baluchi*
East African Rifles..
Uganda Rifles

. Wing.

2 t'onipanie.-i.

3

4

Total . ,

.1,0(50 men.

170 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

•outset of the operations, the remainder being sent to Kismayu
*i8 reinforcements became necessary.

On the 7th March, 1898, a wing of the 4th Bombay Rifles reached
Mombasa to replace the 27th Baluchis,

Force in Jubaland. ,

most oi whom had already been sent
up country to assist in quelling the mutiny of the Sudanese
troops in Uganda. At this time the troops in Jubaland consisted
•of three companies of East African Rifles (Sudanese and
-Swahilis), and on the 4th April a company of the 4th Bombay
Rifles, under Lieutenant Ford, was sent by orders of the
Consul-General to Kismayu, in consequence of the hostile
attitude of the Ogadens. This company established itself at
Turki Hill on the 7th April and proceeded to reconnoitre the
Toad towards Yonti, in which direction a party of the East Af-
rican Rifles had been ambuscaded a few days previously. On the

evening of the 12th it was reported that the
police post at Yonti was in danger of attack,
and at 4 a.m. the following morning Lieutenant Ford marched to its
relief with twenty- six rifles and a maxim gun. On arrival at Yonti,
he found that the enemy had already attacked and taken the post,
killing eleven of the police, and retiring on the approach of the
troops.ty It was impossible to follow them up with his small force,
«,nd on the 14th, on the urgent request of Mr. Jenner, the Sub-Com-
missioner, he withdrew his men to Turki Hill.

In the meantime Major Quentin had received orders to send
,,.„,., t . to Kismavu a second company, which he

Major Quontin ;; operations. - . . •

decided to accompany himself. This rein-
forcement landed on the 15th April and marched to Turki Hill
immediately afterwards ; the two following days being spent in bring-
ing up the ammunition (600 rounds per rifle) and the supplies,
which were to ration the two companies for two months.

The Ogadens were reported to be collecting in large numbers
near Lake Wama, and on the 18th April Major Quentin advanced
with 150 men, making two short marches to Yonti. Hearing
lhat the lake was dry, he now sent back for camels, pakhals, etc.,
and halted until the 22nd. Taking with him an escort of eighty
rifles, he then pushed on to the lake, which, contrary to the report,
proved to be half full of water, due to rain having fallen during

J UB ALAND. 171

"the month. The remainder of the column was now brought up,
and a reconnaissance of the lake was carried out ; but the enemy
profiting by the delay at Yonti, had driven off their herds in the
direction of Afmadu, and the column was compelled by shortness
of rations to return to Turki Hill on the 27th.

In the meantime the remaining two companies of the 4th Bom-
bay Rifles had arrived from Mombasa, and were followed on the
7th May by 128 men of the 27th Baluchis under Captain Tanner.

On the 17th May Major Quentin transferred the head-quarters
•of the force to Yonti, the garrison of Turki Hill being eventually
reduced to seventy-five men.