

Afmadu, the head- quarters of the Ogaden tribe. Further operations
were to depend on circumstances.

The Foreign Office agreed to these proposals, and on the 12th
December Colonel Tertian was appointed to the command of the
punitive expedition. Arrangements were made with the Indian
Government for the dispatch of a wing of a native regiment, and a
section of a mountain battery from Bombay, and fifty camel sowars
from Aden, while a reinforcement of 200 men of the East African
Rifles was at once sent from Mombasa to Kismayu, thus bringing the
force of Protectorate troops in Jubaland to a strength of 500 rifles.

Omar Marghan, brother of the Ogaden Sultan, was reported
to have led the attack on Mr. Jenner's camp, and there was good
reason to suppose that the Sultan himself had been aware of what
was going on. Accordingly he was ordered to come in to Kismayu r
and on his failing to comply with the summons it was decided to
treat him as an enemy.

Preparations for the expedition were now hurried on, and,

in view of the impending arrival of the Indian troops, the pier at

. „. Kismayu, which had formerly been unap-

Preparations at Kismayu. J 1

proachable at low water, was lengthened 100

feet and made available at nearly all tides. A trolley line 1,200

yards long was laid down from the pier to the town, where two

sheds were prepared for the storage of rations, etc. The water.

supply was improved and extra wells were dug for the large number

of transport animals which were expected. Condensed water for

drinking purposes for Europeans and Indian troops on their arrival

was supplied by H.M. S. Magicienne, which remained at Kismayu

during the operations. The defences of the town were at the same

time strengthened and a hospital was established at Kismayu.

The troops from India and Aden having arrived at Kismayu

Naval Detachment for defence of in three transports on the 12th,

a, n 1 ^ ism 7^- fl , 15th, and 22nd January, the

Aden Cornel Co p (52 ufles). \ .

One section. No. 9 Mount in Battery. punitive force was constituted as

rat^fSS^SSSifla, »hown in the margin, the total

l Company of Somali Police. strength being forty-three British

^Zlto^J^^^' officers and 1,404 other ranks,

100 Somali Scout, and Guides. ' exclusive of SCOUtS, but incluu-

ing~242 Somali Police and armed po r ters.

JUBALAND. 175*

A detail of the staff is given in Appendix A.
The steam launch Geraldine was used for forwarding supplies-
from Gobwen to Yonti, which was made

Disposition of the troops. , ,

the advanced base.
The transport consisted of 590 camels, about 900 porters-
(exclusive of armed porters), and a number of carts, donkeys,
and oxen. 1 Three months' supplies were landed with the troops, but
as all the camels had not yet arrived from Aden, the column only
took with it rations for twenty-five days, in addition to other stores,,
when it left the coast on the 24th January. One company of the 16th
Bombay Infantry and one company of armed porters were left
at Kismayu to assist the naval detachment in holding that place ;
half a companv of the 16th was left at Gobwen and a company of,
the same regiment occupied Yonti. The remainder of the force,
about 1,000 rifles, advanced from the latter place on the 28th Janu-~
ary and reached Kumbi on the 1st February. The lake was found to
be quite dry, and the column, making a short cut, marched up the
lake-bed. From Kumbi a light column moved forward on the*
4th February and occupied Afmadu on the night of the 5th
without opposition. Orders were then sent back for the remainder
of the troops and the baggage to come up, and the whole of the ad-
vanced force was concentrated at Afmadu on the 10th February.
The Ogaden Sultan with his personal following gave himself up on
the 7th February, on condition that his life should be spared. He was-
sent off to the coast on the same date under an escort, which took
with it all the empty camels, to bring up a fresh supply of
rations.