

On the evening of the 3rd August Captain Fry of the 4th

Bombav Rifles, having obtained informa-

Rftiil on the cnrmv'sMm . . ,. "' , . . . ,-, > a

tion that a large number of the enemy »
cattle was near the west end of the lake, started with about 300 1
men from Helished, forded the lake, and arrived at day-break
at an Ogaden encampment. The enemy were taken completely
by surprise and many were killed, while some 450 head of cattle
were brought back to camp. Ten days later Major Quentin made
a second large capture of stock in the same locality, and on the
following day a deputation came in from the Somalis saying
that they wished to make peace. Eventually, the Sultan and the

JUBALAND. ■■ * 173

■ * . $ *

principal chtefs of the Ogadens having come into camp, peace waff
declared, and a fine of 500 head of cattle was inflicted on the tribe.
It was also stipulated that two chiefs were to be held as hostttges
until all the captured rifles had been returned. By the 3rd October
twenty-two Martini-Henry rifles and six Sniders had been giveMj
in, and on the 9th November the Sub- Commissioner reported thatr
the Ogadens had complied with the terms imposed. The expedi-
_, , . ., ,.,. tionary force was accordinglv broken up

End of the expedition. J o . r

on that date ; the 4th Bombay Rifles left
Kismayu for Mombasa on the 18th, and sailed to Bombay in
December. The detachment of the 27th Baluchis and the Uganda
Rifles also returned to Mombasa, being replaced by 150 men of the
new Indian contingent for the Protectorate, who arrived at Kis*
mayu under Captain Watson on the 7th November. ^

Before the breaking up of the force Lake Wama was thoroughly
reconnoitred. During an examination of the Bulbula Creek Captain
Tanner was seized by a crocodile, when filling his water-bottle at
the river. He was dragged into the water, but succeeded in freeing
himself and in regaining the shore with the help of some of his men.

The Ogaden Punitive Expedition of 1901.

This expedition was undertaken to punish the Ogaden Somalis
for the murder of Mr. Jenner on the 16th November, 1900, when-
touring in Jubaland, of which province he was Sub-Commissioner.

Colonel T. Ternan, c.m.g., d.s.o., Acting Commissioner and

Consul- General in East Africa, arrived at Kismayu on the 25th

November. On the following day he reported to the Foreign Office

that the whole of the Ogaden tribe with the exception of one section

, were in revolt, and at the same time recommended that the following

'■measures should be taken : —

The troops in Jubaland to be brought up to a strength of about
1,000 men by reinforcements from Mombasa and India. Kismayu
to be held by one company assisted by a naval detachment and local
levies. Gobwcn (Turki Hill) and Yonti to be held by one company
each. A force of 600 men to proceed to Kumbi at the north-
western end of Lake Wama, and after establishing a supply depot
there with one company as garrison, the remainder to advance to

174 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.