

Phvsical geography.

numerous lakes about ten miles to the west
of it, into which the river overflows when in flood, is called Grosha.
The river is in flood in April. It then falls, rising again in July.
After remaining in flood for some time the river once more subsides
and Temains very low in December, January, and February. At
this season the lakes appear to dry up almost completely, and
water then becomes very scarce in the country away from the river.
Moreover, owing to the tse-tse fly, cattle cannot be taken to drink
except at certain places along the river. It is, therefore, possible
during the dry season to deny the water supply to the tribes within
the protected area.

The mouth of the river is closed by a bar with a depth of only one
fathom at high water, and the crossing is difficult owing to rollers.
Inside the bar the river itself is a fine navigable waterway, 250
yards wide at Yonti. In the summer of 1891 Commander .Dundas,
R. N., took a steamer with a 2% foot draught up to the Bardera
rapids. On the 30th March, 1901, however, it was found impossible

* See maps 15 and 16 in pocket.

jubaLand. "' 165

to take a steam launch further than seventeen miles above Yonti
owing to the shallows, but the river rose immediately afterwards
and was in full flood by the 21st April.

Kismayu, the principal town of the province, is situated on the
coast twelve miles south-west of the mouth of the Juba river. It
consists of a collection of native huts surrounding the stone Kesi-
dency where the Sub-Commissioner resides. Kismayu Bay form*
the only anchorage available for ocean steamers along the entire
Eastern Somali coast during the south-west monsoon (April to
October). The bay is shallow, and ships have to anchor about a
mile out and discharge their cargo into large dhows and these in
turn into small boats.

Ths water at Kismayu being brackish, the supply for Europeans
is brought from Turki Hill, a stone fort on a sandhill on the right
bank of the river a little above the Arab village of Gobwen. Ten
miles north of this place is Yonti, where there are a stockade post
and two Somali villages. From Yonti there are two routes, one
north between Lake Wama and the river to the Gosha country,
and the other north-west along the southern shore of the lake and
past its western end to Afmadu.

The latter, a collection of water-holes about sixty-seven miles
north-west of Yonti, is the head- quarters of the Sultan of the Ogaden
tribe. In 1898 there was a post on a fairly open site at Helished
near Lake Wama, about 12| miles from Yonti on the route to
• Afmadu. Seven miles beyond Helished is Kurkames, which is said
*to be the only permanent watering place on this route in *"he dry
season. Twenty-three miles further on is another watering place,
Kumbi, at the north-western end of the lake. This lake, also
called Lake Hardinge, is about thirty miles long with a maximum
width of nearly five miles. Like most of the other so-called lakes
it is dry at the end of February. It is connected with the Juba
river by the Rulbula creek, but it is uncertain whether it
obtains most of its water through this channel or from the water
course at its north-western extremity. It is very shallow even in the
flood time and is surrounded by a fringe of grass and dense jungle, be-
yond which the country is open for some distance. Such open spaces
appear to be the exception in this province. Towards the interior
there are belts of thick bush, extending for many miles. Along the