

Lieutenant Mitchell. m<mt of the Mombasa contingent at
49 Rifles. Malindi.

Kubu and several other minor chiefs came in to Mkono with a
large following of bowmen on the 31st March. Mubarak was report-
ed to be living in the jungle near Mweleh, near which place the rebel
leaders Ayub, Aziz, and Sebi had established themselves at Gandini.
On April 2nd the headquarters of the regiment moved to Shimba,

and were joined by Major Tulloch's and
Operations against the Lieutenant Parker's detachments, which

rebels.

had preceded them. The column was to
form the main attack on Mweleh, where Mubarak had concentrated
in the Kamari forest. On this date the distribution of the troops

was —

(i) On the Uganda road, cutting the enemy's line of retreat north, at
(a) Samburu, (6) Maji-ya-chumbwi, (c) Mbungu, (d) Rabai,
(e) Shimba, (/) Chengoni.

(ii) Main attacking column at Shimba moving on Mweleh.

(iii) Cutting the line into German territory at Wanga, Mkono,
and a column advancing from Mkono to the west of Mweleh,
so as to cut off retreat fromMomandi and Kisigan. In addi-
tion Gazi, Malindi, Karwitu, Roha and Bamber were held.

On the 3rd April the main column marched in two parties,
the first a light column for fighting, the second with the baggage,
starting from Shimba at 9 and 10-30 a.m., respectively. After
marching four hours, the camp was formed on the left of the stream
flowing towards Mweleh.

Captain Tighe with eighty rifles marched from Mkono to Mdwai,
leaving his post in charge of a native officer who had full instructions
with regard to patrolling. Similar orders were given to the Wanga
post. All roads leading to German territory were to be blocked
and a patrol sent towards Pongwe. Three days' rations were carried
so as to enable the column to follow up any track of the enemy.
Mdwai was reached in six hours. In the village was found a house
belonging to Aziz, four of Mubarak's Enfield guns, three kegs of
powder of German manufacture, some boxes of percussion caps

Vol. VI 11

162 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FMOM INDIA.

and a sword. The headman was absent, but presented himself
in the evening with six others, all in a state of intoxication.
They were taken prisoners. Mdwai was selected as the objective,.
as it was on the road to Mkwachi on the Lueni-Momandi road,,
which Captain Tighe had orders to block.

On the same day at 7 a.m., Captain Melliss marched from
Mbungu for Maji-ya-Chumbwi along the old Masai track, and
struck the Uganda road at 10-30 a.m. Two non-commissioned
officers and twenty-five rifles were left here to watch the Masai
track leading to Mweleh and south. Water was plentiful in the-
water -holes near the junction of the two roads.

The advance was then continued to Maji-ya-Chumbwi, a.
distance of two-and-a-half hours westwards on the Uganda road.

On the 4th April the main column marched, the attacking
column moving at 2 a.m., for Minny Jaka's stronghold. No-
opposition was met with, and after burning the villages the column
moved on to Mweleh, which was also deserted, and encamped on
one of the western spurs. In the afternoon a patrol on Mweleh hill
captured an armed rebel, who said he would lead the column to
Mubarak's hiding place, which was within an hour's march of camp.