

It had been decided to build a stockade at Yonti, and as no
timber was available on the British side of the river, permission
was obtained from the Italian Resident to cut palm trees on the
left bank and bring them across in canoes. On the evening of the
:21st May Lieutenant W. F. Stevenson, attached 4th Bombay
Rifles, was returning from the Italian side, after finishing work for the
day, in a canoe with a native officer and eleven men of his regiment,
when the canoe capsized just after they had pushed off from the bank.
Most of the men managed to scramble ashore, but Lieutenant
Stevenson and a non-commissioned officer were drowned.

On the 30th May a large party of Ogadens was sighted close
to Yonti post and pursued for some distance, their losses being
reported as about twenty-five killed. It was then found that the
-enemy had killed a camel-driver and twenty-eight camels, which
were grazing in the bush under a police guard. These had allowed
the camels to stray too far and, on being attacked, had run away.

A post of about 150 rifles under Captain Tanner was now estab-
lished at Helished on Lake Wama, and at 6 a.m. on the 22nd June
a native officer and forty- one rifles were sent out from this place
to reconnoitre the roads towards Malkhana and Kurkumes. The
party had reached a point, about two miles from camp, where the
road passes through a hollow with thick bush on both sides, when
they were suddenly attacked by about 400 Somalis. The main body
p- , . „ , , , was marching in single file with an advanced

Inght near Hchshed. ° . e

guard fifty yards in front and a rear-guard
100 yards in rear. The bush was very thick to within ten yards of
the road, and the first attack was made from the right. When the

172 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

\ « -; «" '*>, .'■' .^

*nen turned to meet it they were assailed in rear by another part
of the enemy. The attack was so sudden that the commander
(Jemadar Radha Singh, 4th Bombay Rifles) and several sepoyp,.
who were for the most' part Sikhs, were killed before they could'
^jse their arms. The remainder retreated, firing towards the lake,,
%nd when clear of the jungle succeeded in checking the enemy.

The sound of the firing being heard at Helished camp, Captain
Tanner proceeded to the spot with sixty-two men of his regiment.
Twenty-seven bodies were recovered, and one man was reported
missing. A reconnaissance was then made along the road as far as
Malkhana but no trace could be found of the enemy, who effected
their retreat through the bush, carrying off twenty-seven rifles and
1,640 rounds of ammunition.

. . r The post at Helished was now reinforced by a section, the force
under Major Quentin's command being at this time disposed as
follows : — At Kismayu about 100 Sudanese and Swahilis ; at
Turki Hill 91 rifles; at Yonti 151 rifles; at Helished 168 rifles-
Various reports were received that the enemy intended to attack
one or other of the posts, and on the 14th July they raided some
Government cattle close to Kismayu. Accordingly, as the force
in the country was not sufficient for active operations, a reinforce-
ment of 350 rifles of the Indian contingent of the Uganda Rifles
was sent from Mombasa to Kismayu, where it arrived on the 23rd
July, bringing up the force under Major Quentin's orders to about
1,000 rifles, including two companies of Sudanese in the Gosha
district. One hundred and fifty men were left to garrison Kismayu
and the remainder were moved up to Yonti and Lake Wama.