

What is known of the province dates from the year 1887 when

the Imperial British East Africa Company

arranged for the lease of a considerable

tract of coast territory on the mainland from the Sultan of Zanzibar.

In 1890 a treaty was made with Germany delimiting the
British sphere of influence in East Africa generally, and in the
following year, by an agreement with Italy, the Juba river was
fixed upon as the eastern boundary of the territories administered
by the Company. In 1895 these territories were taken over by the
Imperial Government and divided into two administrative areas,
the Uganda Protectorate and the East Africa Protectorate, both
•of which are under the control of the Colonial Office.

From the beginning of the Company's rule the Somali
tribes of Jubaland were a source of constant anxiety to the ad-
ministration, but by the time they came under the direct control
of Government the Hirtis had became amenable to British in-
fluence. The Ogadens, however, continued to give trouble, and
in the early part of 1897 the Sub-Commissioner of the province had
to remonstrate with them on account of an unprovoked raid on
the Boran Gallas. In the autumn some Ogaden spies, arrested
in Gosha, killed two of our native police and escaped. The Sultan
Ahmad Marghan was threatened with severe measures, unless
the culprits were given up or blood money paid. He appeared
willing to comply with these demands, but was prevented from doing
so by the young bloods of the tribe, who were only waiting for an
opportunity to show their hostility to the British authorities.
Such an opportunity occured in April 1898, when a Galla ^lave

1 A tribe called the Bajuns inhabiting certain inlands on the coast ere said to be the

real aborigines of Jubaland.

168 FRONT I Eli AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FRqM INDIA.

n

fleoVfrom hit' Somali ma"ster and placed himself under British pro-
tedstiorf. He was followed up and killed, the murderer escaping;
to Afmadu. As security for the surrender of the latter some cattle
belonging to him and his section of the tribe were seized. The
Ogadens then retaliated by raiding into the Kismayu district
and it became necessary to take steps to coerce them.

The 27 th Baluchis and a wing of the 4th Bombay Infantry were
at this time serving in East Africa, and a portion of these troops,.
not required in Uganda for the suppression of the Sudanese mutiny,
were available for service in Jubaland. Detachments from the two
regiments, amounting in all to some 460 men, were accordingly sent
from Mombasa to Kismayu in April to strengthen the garrison of the
province, which consisted of three companies of East African Rifles.

The whole force, subsequently reinforced by four companies.
of Uganda Rifles, was placed under the command of Major W.
Quentin. During the operations, which lasted five months, no en-
gagement of importance took place, although owing to the surprise
of a small party of sepoys by the enemy, the British losses were on
one occasion rather heavy. Considerable captures of stock were
effected, and at the end of August the Ogadens submitted. They
were then made to pay a fine of 500 head of cattle and to restore
all captured arms.