

On the 2nd April the column forded the Webi Yero, a branch
near the place where this arm of the Juba rejoins the main stream
after leaving it near Ukur some three marches further up. Then
marching up the narrow island formed by the two branches of
the river, the force reached Bua on the 4th April, having burnt en
route villages, the inhabitants of which had taken up arms against
the Government.

A detachment of 29 East African Rifles was left at Bua, and
the force marched the following day to Ukur. The enemy attempted
to oppose the march, but were easily driven back, losing a chief
and three or four Wagosha killed. There were no casualties on the
British side. At Ukur the western branch of the Juba had to be

Vol. VI. U a

180 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

crossed in boats at the river had risen considerably in the last few
days. Leaving a detachment to guard the ferry, the force advanced
to Mfudu on the 7th April and halted there two day % while a strong
post was being built on the banks of the river. This post
was garrisoned by 120 East African Rifles, and the remainder of
the force commenced its return march on the 10th, and arrived at
Songoro Mafula on the 14th. Here the steam launch Geraldine was
met on its way up stream with further supplies for Mfudu, the
river being now in full flood. Colonel Ternan availed himself of
this opportunity to return by river, and the barge containing
the supplies having been left moored to the bank under a guard,
he arrived at Yonti in the launch on the 14th April.

The column reached Yonti three days later, orders having been
in the meantime issued for a concentration at Kurkumes with a view
to an advance to Afmadu. This movement was, however, postponed
and eventually cancelled, as Colonel Ternan had to proceed to
Kismayu to meet Sir C. Eliot, whose arrival was expected on the
21st April.

After conferring with Colonel Ternan on the situation, the Com-
missioner interviewed the Ogaden Sultan, who promised on behalf
of the tribe to pay a fine of 5,000 cattle and to do his best
to obtain the surrender of Mr. Jenner's murderers. Sir C. Eliot
then telegraphed to Government to the effect that in his opinion
active operations might cease, and that the fine in cattle, which the
Sultan had promised to collect, might be enforced by holding
certain posts and by maintaining the blockade of the Ogaden
country, and that therefore the greater part of the Indian con-
tingent might now be dispensed with.

As a result of this telegram and of further correspondence with
Sir C. Eliot, it was decided to send back the Indian contingent to
Bombay and to retain only 350 Sudanese as a permanent garrison.
Of these 100 were to be formed into a camel corps, and the remaining
250 were considered sufficient to hold the post, at Kismayu,
Yonti, and, for the time being, Mfudu. The Aden Camel Corps
were to be kept in the country until the new corps had been
equipped and trained-

Accordingly orders were issued on the 8th May for the recon-
stitution of the East African Rifles serving in Jubaland into three.