

Off the main lines of communication the usual transport
is man and pack animals ; the latter can be used owing to the absence
of the tse-tse fly throughout the larger part of the Protectorate.

As already indicated, the climate of Uganda varies in different
localities. It is remarkably temperate
on the whole, considering the equatorial
position of the country, the temperature being modified by the vast
expanses of water in the lacustrine region, which cool the air,
and affect the prevalent winds. • The thermometer rarely rises
above ninety degrees in the shade during the day, and does not
often fall below sixty degrees at night. The rainfall averages
some sixty inches, the heaviest downfall occurring from March
to May and August to November. These months are character-

UGANDA— THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 185

ised by heavy thunderstorms, occurring usually in the after-
noons or at night ; at other times of the year there are occasional
showers. By the heavy storms the rivers become raging torrents,
overflowing their banks, while the numerous swamps throughout
the country are frequently rendered impassable.

At the beginning of 1900 the population of Uganda was
Po ulation estimated at 4,000,000. The indigenous

people are negroes. In the province of
Uganda the inhabitants are Bahima, a people of common origin
with the Abyssinians, Gallas and Somalis. The negroes are black ;
the Bahima peoples of light brown colour. The Bantus, a mixture
of these two, inhabit the country between the three great lakes —
Victoria, Albert, and Albert Edward.

The earlier history of Uganda is unknown, depending on
legendary and mythical native traditions.
At the beginning of the nineteenth
century the King Kamanya gained celebrity by his victories over
the fierce tribes north of Lake Choga. His son Suna, then sixteen
years of age, succeeded h ; m in 1836. Cruel, despotic, and warlike,
he spread the fear of the Baganda over the neighbouring nations,
overran Ankole and Unyoro, and after desperate fighting subdued
the coast tribes of Usoga, thousands of whom were slaughtered
after being disarmed.

In 1860 Mutesa succeeded his father Suna, and was king
of Uganda when the country was first approached by Europeans.
In the first half of the nineteenth century Arab traders established
trading depots in the southern portion of the kingdom, and Mutesa
was converted to Islam sonn after his accession.

In 1858 Speke, who with Burton 1 had been exploring Lake
European early expiora- Tanganyika, reached the southern shore
tl0 n of Victoria Nyanza, to which he gave its-

name. Two years later Speke and Grant explored the great lake
and the sources of the Nile, and reached Uganda, where they were
hospitably received by Mutesa.-

They then marched down the left bank of the Nile to Unyoro,
and made their way to Gondokoro, where they met Baker, 2 who-

1 Afterwards Sir Richard Burton.
* Afterwards Sir Samuel Baker.

186 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

had come from Egypt, and had discovered Albert Nyanza, known
locally as Dueru, Lueru, or Luta Nzige.