

In 1874, when General Gordon was Governor of the Sudan,
communication was again established with Egypt, and Colonel
Long proceeded from Gondokoro to Foweira, and thence to Mengo,
Mutesa's capital, from whence he returned by the same route.
Stanley visited the country at a later date, and a Christian mission
was established in 1878.

In 1877 Emin was received by the king of Unyoro ; and in
1879 anothei party of missionaries reached Uganda, having tra-
velled from Suakin and along the Nile.

Mutesa was succeeded in 1884 by his son Mwanga, who was
weak and cruel, encouraged the Arab

The kings of Uganda. n n , , , , ... , . ~. . , •

traders, and showed hostility to Christians.
In 1885 Bishop Hannington was killed by orders from Mwanga and
for the next two years there was a persecution of native Christians,
culminating in a general massacre in May 1886.

In 1888 Mwanga was driven from the throne, his elder brother
Kiwewa elected king, and religious liberty was proclaimed.
In October of that year, however, the Muhammadans obtained the
ascendancy, the Christians were driven south, and the missionaries
were expelled ; the king was deposed, and his brother Kalema
elected in his place.

Meanwhile Mwanga was allied with the exiled Christians, who,
under a Protestant chief named Apolo, now the katikiro or prime
minister, succeeded in restoring him in October 1889, and drove
out the Muhammadans. The Christians and Mwanga were, however,
expelled again for a short time, but were restored on the approach of
an expedition sent by the British East Africa Company under Messrs.
F. J. Jackson and Gedge, who arrived in April 1890, but returned
without having come to any definite arrangement with the king.
In December 1890 an expedition under Captain Lugard 1 reach-
Captain Lngard's e X pe- ed the country. Having settled matters
dition - between the rival factions of Roman

Catholics and Protestants, Lugard marched against the Muham-
madans, who were supported by Kabarega, king of Unyoro, and,

l CapUin Lugard, Norfolk Regiment, now Sir F. D. Lugard, K.C.M.O.,

etc

f' 7 UGANDA— THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 187

.1

having defeated them on the frontier, started to explore the
country to the south and west, leaving Captain Williams at Mengo
in charge of affairs in Uganda.

Lugard marched westward across the Semliki, and reached
Kavalli's. Here he met Selim Beg, who had command of the
Temnant of Sudanese troops left by Emin when Stanley brought
him away in 1888. These numbered some 800 men, with 8,000
women, children, and followers, and now took service under the
Company, with the title of the Uganda Eifles. After recrossing
the Semliki, Lugard built a line of forts between Toru and Unyoro,
which he garrisoned with Sudanese, and then returned to
Uganda.

Here in January 1892 civil war broke out between the Pro-
testants and Roman Catholics ; the former, supported by the
Company's troops, prevailing, while the king and his party fled
to the islands. Mwanga, however, eventually returned to Mengo,
and placed himself in Captain Lugard's hands. The country was
then divided into three provinces, apportioned between the three
religious parties. Lugard returned to England, and in March
1893 a mission under Sir Gerald Portal, High Commissioner in East
Africa, was sent to enquire into Uganda affairs. On Portal's
departure, Captain Macdonald, R.E., 1 who remained as Acting
Captain Macdonaid, Com- Commissioner, had a difficult situation to
missioned deal with _ T h e Muhammadans adopted a