

A strong defensive post was established at Afmadu, and on the
12 th February a flying column under Colonel Ternan, consisting of
one company 16th Bombay Infantry, three companies East'
African Rifles, the Aden Camel Corps, and one gun No. 9 Mountain
Battery (a total strength of rather under 400 men) left Afmadu,.,
and marched in a north-westerly direction towards the Jiro district,

'Four hundred and ten camels were brought from Aden, the remaining 180 were
Somali camels collected at Kismayu. Forty-eight of the latter died before the columa
returned to the base onthe]2th March. In that time only fourte n of the Arab camels
from Aden had died. These figures show that the Arab is better than the Somali camel for
transport purposes in this country. Apart from the water question the porters were found
to be the most convenient form of transport, and for the Gosh a district they were cer-
tainly the best. The bullock-carts broke down and hod to be abandoned. i -

176 / -FRONTIER and OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

where the chiefs, personally concerned in the murder of ]\ilr. Jenner,
were said to be. Ten days' rations were taken with the column
and 150 transport camels, including sixty for the carriage of water.
The country to be traversed was quite unknown, and the water
supply along the track could not be depended upon. Owing to
the thick bush the column was in place? stretched out to a length of
$wo miles. A water pool was found at Gulia, an open place some
thirty- five miles from Afmadu, and one at Ghulima twelve miles
further on, where the column arrived on the 15th.

After Ghulima. according to native reports, there is no water
until the Boran country is reached, a distance of perhaps 200 miles,
so that the column here found itself on the edge of a waterless
stretch of country similar to that known as the Haud in Somali-
land.

On the 16th the way lay through very thick bush, and from the
number of fresh tracks all around, it was evident that the enemy
was in some force in the neighbourhood. Having marched ten miles
without reaching open country, Colonel Ternan decided to encamp
and reconnoitre for the enemy. Samase, where the halt was made, is
about fifty- seven miles north-west of Afmadu. The Camel Corps,
forty strong, with a Sudanese rifleman mounted on each camel
behind the rider, had been sent on early in the morning to recon-
noitre under Major Legh, 16th Bombay Infantry, who had tem-
porarily relieved Captain Gordon, suffering from sun fever. The
remainder of the force, with the exception of the rear-guard which
had not yet come in, was formed up in three sides of a square with
the company of the 16th Bombay Infantry in the front face and a
company of East African Rifles on each flank. Each face of the
square was about 120 to 150 yards in length, and the bush was so
thick that it was impossible to see across the camp from one side
to the other. The men were still under arms and were engaged in
cutting down the bush to form a zareha, when they were suddenly