

disloyal attitude, assembled a large force in the capital, and began
intriguing with the Sudanese, and Selim Beg despatched a mutinous
message to Macdonald. For a time matters were settled ; some
Muhammadan chiefs were arrested, their followers were attacked
and defeated by the Protestants, the Sudanese were disarmed,
and Selim was deported.

Meanwhile the Sudanese who had been left in the forts to guard
the country against the depredations of Kabarega, king of Unyoro,
broke out and looted in all directions, and incurred the hostility
•offlthe surrounding inhabitants. The Sudanese were, however,
withdrawn by Captain Owen and Mr. Grant and concentrated at
Port Alice, Lubwa's, and a few other places. Recruits were enlist -

1 Now Brigadier-General Sir J R. Maodonald, etc.

188 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

ed from them and the establishment was raised to 600, with a
reserve of 300 on half pay.

Meanwhile Colonel Colville arrived in Uganda as Acting Corn-
Military operations in Unyoro. missioner, and advanced with
Europeans .... 8 the force detailed in the margin

S B U ag a and S a e Rine m en /. i." S.JS ***™* Kabarega, who had

Spearmen 13,000 been a source of great trouble

Maximguns 3 to Uganda. The capital of

Unyoro was occupied without opposition, the king escaping to the
forests of Pudonga. Colville returned to Uganda, and was invalided
to England, whither Macdonald had also proceeded ; Captain
Thurston was left in command in Unyoro, and inflicted several
defeats on Kabarega's followers ; and on June 19th, 1894, the
Uganda Protectorate was proclaimed by the Imperial Govern-
ment.

Mr. Berkeley, first Commissioner of Uganda, arrived in
June 1895. Meanwhile the king of Unyoro was defeated, and
half his territory was incorporated in the kingdom of Uganda ;
the remainder and Usoga being added to the Protectorate in
1896.

Mwanga's cruelty and religious persecutions had made him

odious to the maiorit/ of the people,

Trouble in Uganda. , , x , J <•„-,.•, ,

and alter a few years of Bntis'i protec-
tion he represented only a small portion of the c mmunity,
who formed a reactionary party opposed to civilisation and
Christianity.

The peace of Uganda was also menaced by Unyoro, for king
Kabarega was greatly incensed at the establishment of the British
Protectorate. In the eastern portion of the Protectorate the war-
like Nandi tribe, occupying the Man plateau were inclined to be
hostile, resenting the passage of caravans through their country.
In May 1897 it became necessary to despatch an expedition to punish
the Kamasia tribe, who inhabit the country on the eastern border*
of Nandi. During the progress of these operations arrangements
were made for an escort for an expedition under Major Macdonald
to survey and explore the northern portion of British East Africa
The troops selected were three companies of Sudanese which had
just taken part in the Kamasia expedition.

UGANDA— THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 189

Meanwhile a plot against the British administrati on was dis-
covered. A few leading chiefs were arrest -
Flight of king Mwanga. ^ and Mwanga fle a t o Buddu, where he