

J UB ALAND. 181

companies of infantry and a camel corps, and the remainder of the
troops were moved to the coast for embarkation. By the end of
the month all arrangements for the breaking up of the force had
been completed, and the Indian tioops left Kismayu for Bombay in
the S.S. Nevasa on the 12th June.

APPENDIX A.
Command and Staff.

Operations in 1898.

Major W. Quentin, 4th Bombay Infantry, Commanding the Force.
Lieutenant C. A. W. Ford, 4th Bombay Infantry, Staff Officer.
Captain P. P. Kilkelly, I.M.S., Senior Medical Officer.

Ogaden Punitive Expendition 1901.

Lieutenant-Colonel T. Ternan, c.m.g., d.s.o.

Captain H. W. Rattigan, K.O.S.B.'s Staff Officer.

Captain H. R. Cook, R.A., Intelligence Officer.

Captain C. W. Justice, A.S.C., Director of Transport.

Captain E. G. Vaughan, I. A., S. and T. Corps, Chief Commissariat Officer*

Lieutenant-Colonel C. B. Maitland, I. M.S., Principal Medical Officer.

Dr. Mann, East Africa Protectorate Staff, Acting Political Officer.

CHAPTER XI.

UGANDA — THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE.

The Uganda Protectorate* is bounded on the east by British

East Africa, on the south by German

eograp ica lmi a. territory, on the west by the Congo Free
State. On the north it is coterminous with the Sudan. The
Protectorate comprises several large provinces : — Uganda proper,
Buddu, Toru,Umyoro, Bulamwezi, Singo, Bwera, Chagwe, Usoga,
Kavirondo, and Nandi.

For administrative purposes it is divided into the Eastern
Province (now transferred to the East Africa Protectorate) the
Central Province, Rudolf Province, Nile Province, Western Pro-
vince, Uganda Province. Of these the kingdom of Uganda, or
Uganda Province, is most important and most advanced, while the
Rudolf Province, the northern portion of the Central Province,
and the eastern districts of the Nile Province are but little known.

This great territory comprises the equatorial region lying

between the lakes, inhabited by a settled

population, thus differing from the rest

of East Africa, the inhabitants of which are principally wild and

in some cases nomadic.

The greater part of the country lying to the east, north, and
south-west consists of high tablelands, which are dry and bare
except along the rivers. These elevated tablelands, which are
sparsely inhabited, possess a temperate climate, for the most part
healthy for Europeans. The central portion of the Protectorate,
the lacustrine regions, and the banks of the Nile are fertile, well
wooded, tropical in characteristics and densely populated, but
are damp and unsuitable for permanent occupation by Europeans.

The chief physical features qf the Protectorate are the four
great lakes, Victoria Nyanza, Albert

The lacustrine region- Nyanzat Albert Edwar d, and Rudolf,

all of which lie partially within the British sphere. The Victoria

* See map 1 tf id pooket,

UGANDA— TEE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 183

Nyanza is some 250 miles in extreme length, and has an area
of nearly 30,000 square miles. The other lakes are also of great
extent, Kudolf, 190 by 20 miles ; Albert Nyanza, which is over
2,000 feet above sea level, 90 by 20 miles ; Albert Edward, 3,000
feet above the sea, 30 by 40 miles. These are all fresh-water lakes ;
there are also a number of salt lakes to the south of Lake Rudolf,
situated in the meridional rift, which runs for several hundred miles
along the 36th meridian E., having mountain ranges or the scarped
-edges of plateaux on either side.