

Information was now brought in that the enemy had some cattle
at a place called Tabtu, about 45 miles west of Afmadu, and
arrangements were made for a flying column to visit this place
and return before the drying up of the water-holes round Lake
Wama made it necessary for the whole force to return to the coast..
On the 1st March, however, Colonel Ternan received a despatch
from Sir C. Eliot, Chief Commissioner, E. A. Protectorate, which
caused him to change his plans.

Prior to advancing from Afmadu into the Jiro district, Colonel
Ternan had indented for another two months' supplies for the Indian
troops, in case of the operations being prolonged beyond the period
at first arranged for, and the despatch, which he now received,
informed him that the Foreign Office were unable to understand
the reason of his demand for the extra rations, as it was desirable
to bring the operations to a conclusion as soon as possible ; that
he was not to continue the pursuit if there was no immediate
prospect of capturing the men who were responsible for Mr. Jenner's
murder : and that reparation might be enforced by the detention
of the Sultan and Chiefs. He was further required to render a
report of the actual situation in Jubaland and of the movements
he proposed to make.

Colonel Ternan, reading these instructions in the light of an
„ x ± * . order to close the expedition with the least

Return to KiRmayu. r • t '

possible delay, gave up the idea of going
to Tabtu and marched his force down to the coast, arriving at Kis-
mayu on the 12th March. He now received further instructions,
which were to the effect that the immediate breaking up of the
expedition was not intended, that Mfudu might be occupied u>

JVBALAND. 179

accordance with his suggestion, and that further military opera-
tions were left to his discretion.

Later, in reply to Colonel Ternan's explanation of his return
to the coast, the Foreign Office repeated their instructions as to the
occupation of Mfudu and the detention of the Sultan, and informed
him that the Indian troops could be retained until further orders.

Accordingly Colonel Ternan decided to march with a column
Operations in the Gosha into the north of the Gosha district, which
dlstnct - for some months past had been in a dis-

turbed state, and where some rebel Wagosha chiefs had combined
with the Ogadens to make war on the loyal population. It was
further intended, after establishing a strong post at Mfudu, to
return to Yonti and make a second advance into the Afmadu
country with a view to bringing the enemy to terms by driving
him back into the waterless desert.

On the 25th March head-quarters moved to Yonti, and on
the 28th a column of 450 rifles under Colonel Ternan marched
from that place towards Mfudu up the right bank of the Juba river.
Owing to the prevalence of the tse-tse fly in this part of the country,
the transport consisted almost entirely of porters, carrying a month's
supplies for the column. Arrangements were made at the same
time for a river convoy of country boats (dug-outs), which left
Yonti with supplies for Mfudu on the 30th March, but did not reach
the latter place until the 16th April. This was owing to the river
not having yet risen sufficiently to allow of the boats being towed
by the launch to a greater distance than 17 miles above Yonti.