

attacked from the right rear. The officer

Encounter with the enemy. • t r.i i ,-, r ,

in command of the rear guard was the first
to observe the enemy, creeping through the bush on his right
front, when he was still at a distance of two or three hundred
yards from the camp. He immediately sent on a man with
the information, but the enemy moved through the bush so quickly

JUBALAND. ; 177

that they arrived simultaneously with the messenger, and a small
party of them broke in at the gap in the right rear corner of the camp
before the rearguard could be doubled up to close it. Here they came
upon the hospital tents, which were being pitched, and in the hand-
to-hand fighting which ensued a considerable number of casualties
occurred among the medical staff and patients. Lieutenant-Colonel
Maitland, I.M.S., had unfortunately taken off his accoutrements on
arrival in camp, and when he was running to get his revolver,
he was attacked and killed by two of the enemy, who according to
their usual custom fought in pairs. Dr. Mann, who was also unarmed,
closed with one of the enemy and received a wound in the head before
his adversaries were disposed of ; while Captain Gordon, who was
close by the hospital and had his revolver by him, dropped one of the
pair that attacked him, the other making off. The enemy then got
among some cattle, which had been captured a day or two pre-
viously, and stampeded them by cutting them with their knives
and spears. This added to the confusion caused by the sudden
attack, and for a few minutes there was a certain amount of wild
firing inside the camp, as a portion of the transport attendants,
one man in ten, were armed with rifles. The troops, however,
remained steady, and the gap having been closed up, the enemy
were driven off after ten minutes' sharp fighting. Of those who
broke into the square not one succeeded in getting out again.
Seventeen dead bodies of the Ogadens were counted, and their total
losses were estimated by Colonel Ternan at about 150 killed
and wounded. The casualties on the British side amounted
to seventeen killed, including Colonel Maitland, and twenty- two
wounded.

Major Legh returned with the Camel Corps in the afternoon. He
had seen nothing of the enemy, and the bush was so thick that he
had found it necessary to dismount the men and proceed on foot.

Owing to shortness of supplies and water it was now decided

Retirement to Afmadu. t0 retUm t0 Afmadu > and ™ the l 7 th the

column marched back to Ghulima, followed
up by the enemy, who hung on the flanks but did not attempt
to come to close quarters.

Next day the retreat was resumed, and the enemy continued
to follow up the column at a respectful distance until within a day's

Vol. VI. 13 J

178 ' FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

march of Afmadu, which was reached on the 20th February..
In concluding his report of the action at Samase, Colonel Ternan
stated that he intended to remain at Afmadu for the present, but
did not recommend its permanent occupation, and that, as regards
eventual arrangements, he was of opinion that a force of 600 men
would be necessary to hold the country, with a post of 300 men
(200 of whom should be camel corps) at Mfudu, a place on the
Juba river about 150 miles from its mouth and 40 miles distant
from Afmadu.