

From the high ground on either side of the meridional rift

rivers flow east into the Indian Ocean, and

Rivers. west into the Victoria Nyanza and the

Nile.

The Nile issues from the northern extremity of Victoria

Nyanza, falling some twenty feet over a ledge of rock. Thence after

a series of rapids the river flows north-west for about seventy miles,

when it enters Lake Choga. Beyond this lake it is joined at Mruli

by the Kafu, which drains a large portion of the Uganda and

Western Provinces. The Nile then turns north-east for fifty

miles to Foweira, then due west until it enters the Albert

Nyanza. Flowing north from this lake, it forms the western

boundary of the Protectorate until it reaches the Egyptian

Sudan.

In the south-west of the Protectorate are several rivers of
importance, the Semliki, flowing into the southern end of lake
Albert ; the Katonga, falling into the north-western corner of
the Victoria Nyanza ; and the Kafu. On the east side of the Pro-
tectorate are the Nzoia, draining the country north-east of Victoria
Nyanza, and 1 he Turkwel, which loses itself in the sand near the
south-western shores of Lake Rudolf. In the north and north-east
are the Assua, Kos and Tu — tributaries of the Nile.

From the elevated plateaux detached mountain masses rise to
a height of 17,000 feet in the summit of

Mountains. _ . . ,

Kuwenzon to the south-west. Mount
Elgon, 60 miles north-east of the Victoria Nyanza, rises to 14,000
feet. These two mountains cover a large area, their lower slopes
providing a hilly country with a temperate climate.

184 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The soil is fertile throughout the southern and western districts
Produce. °^ * ne Protectorate, but the people have

little knowledge of agriculture. Coffee,
cotton, and rubber grow in abundance, the latter in districts below
5,000 feet in altitude. The southern half of Uganda, below tlft
2nd degree of north latitude, is a country of forests, resembling the
forests of temperate regions. The forests of the west and centre
are tropical in type. The elephant provides large quantities of
ivory. Camels are found west of Lake Rudolf, and there are herds
of cattle, goats, and sheep in all inhabited parts of the Protectorate.
Horses are not indigenous, but those brought up from the coast
are said to stand the climate well. Iron, coal and gold in small
quantities, and salt are among the minerals.

A railway now runs from Mombasa through Uganda, and roads
r „_ . .. have been made in various parts of the

Communications. _ *

Protectorate; but in forest regions there
are generally only winding footpaths.

The waterways provide most important communications.
The great lakes are navigable for steamers ; the Nile from
Victoria Nyanza to Fajao, a few miles east of Albert Nyanza, is
navigable only in a few places for a small steam launch, owing
to rapids and falls. From Fajao it can be navigated by small
steamers as far as Dufile, where navigation is barred by rapids to
Fort Berkeley; from here to Khartum the river is passable for
steamers.