

collected a large following. The same month Major Ternan with
300 Sudanese and some Waganda defeated Mwanga, who fled
to German territory.

In September 1897, the Uganda Rifles were distributed in

Unyoro, Tom, Buddu, Kampala, Lubwa's

Distribution of troops. in Usoga> Kayirondo, and Mau district.

Major Ternan had proceeded to England, and the command
devolved on Major Thurston, d.s.o., Oxfordshire Light Infantry,
who was at Kampala. In British East Africa, under Major Hatch

Indian Contingent (Punjabi Muham- whose head-quarters were at

ma 256 Mombasa, were the troops noted

256 in the margin. At Mombasa

16 _ .

191 were some 300 Indian sepoys
t til \vh) un( ^ er Captain Barratt, d.s.o.
and Lieutenant Scott, d.s.o.

The expedition under Major Macdonald, who was ac-
companied by eight European officers^

Macdonald's expedition , , ,i ±. j.i_ x t i

was sent to the country north ot Lake
Rudolf, to watch British interests in view of the activity of the
French under Captain Marchand, and of the Abyssinians. Mac-
donald was to explore the territories lying on the northern and
eastern frontier of the East Africa and Uganda Protectorates,
examine the districts in the Juba region, and at the same time
cultivate friendly relations with the tribes inhabiting that portion
of th" British sphere. The expedition was accompanied by 30
Sikhs, the Sudanese already mentioned, and 450 Swahili porters.

The expedition, which was organized in three columns under
Captain Austin, Captain Kirkpatrick, and Lieutenant Macdonald,
was concentrated at Ngare Nyuki on the 17th September, and pre-
parations were made for a further advance.

Sudanese

Swahilia

Arabs

Somalia and Goshaa

1 Captain E. M. Woodward, Leicestershire Regiment, Captain H. H. Austin. R.E-,
Lieutenant Macdonald, 14th Sikhs ; Lieutenant the Honourable A. Hanbury Tracy,
P.. H. G., Captain R. Kirkpatriok, Leicester Regiment; LieutenantJR. Bright, Rifle
Brigade ; Surgeon Captains Mc Loughton and Ferguson.

190 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

During the advance, the Sudanese mutinied at various
Mutiny of Sudanese. stations and retired towards Uganda,

looting stations, and the country en route ;
whilst their numbers were swelled by other Sudanese resid-
ing in the districts traversed. Major Macdonald pursued the
mutineers with the Sikhs and armed Swahili porters, and in the
middle of October we find him at Lubwa's, where the mutineers,
and the garrison of that post had made prisoners of and confined
their officers, Major Thurston and Messrs. Wilson and Scott.
On the 19th October the mutineers to the number of 320 attacked
Major Macdonald's force, but were defeated, and driven into the
fort at Lubwa's, which was strongly placed on a promontory jutting
out into Napoleon Gulf, from the north-western extremity of which
is the issue of the Nile. Here they murdered their English prisoners
and were invested.

Fighting took place throughout October and November, the
fort being invested all the time. In November the troops in Bri-
tish East Africa were set in motion, and a force under Captain
Harrison advanced towards Uganda, and application was made to
India for reinforcements, whilst the Indian troops at Mombasa were
also hurried to the scene of operations. In December the situation
in Uganda had become exceedingly grave, as not only had Mwanga,
the exiled king of Uganda, escaped from German territory, and been
joined by many of his old adherents in order to create a diversion in
favour of the invested mutineers ; but there were serious indications
that the Sudanese garrisons of Buddu and in the various forts
in Unyoro, numbering some 800 men in all, provided with maxims
and Hotchkiss guns, were disposed to throw in their lot with their
besieged brethren at Lubwa's, and overthrow the British admin-
istration of Uganda. To cope successfully with the dangerous
complications that threatened the Protectorate, Macdonald, leaving
a watching force at Lubwa's, proceeded to Buddu, where he defeated
Mwanga's forces, disarmed the wavering Sudanese in that province,
and then turned his attention to the mutineers who had early in
January escaped from Lubwa's and were endeavouring to join
the Sudanese in Unyoro. At the beginning of February a force
was despatched to Unyoro under Lieutenant Scott, who forestalled
the arrival of the mutineers and restored confidence in that prov-