

In the meantime the Sudanese mutineers, who still remained
_, .. * « ,. a few miles east of Mruli, had assumed an

The mutineers at Mruli. . , , , , -„■, T

aggressive attitude, and on the 27n J une
fired on a convoy of canoes proceeding from Kisalize to Mruli.
As they were now reported to occupy a strong position, where tbey
were a standing menace to the peace of the Protectorate, Major
Martyr decided to attack them about the beginning of August.
Captain Fowler was in command of the stockade of Mruli on the
30th July, with a garrison of details of the 27th Bombay Infantry,
Uganda Rifles, and native levies. His force was employed in keep -
ing watch over the mutineers' position, which was visible from
a look-out post some 300 yards in front of the stockade. He also
patrolled the surrounding country. His orders were not to disturb
or attack the enemy, so that they might not be put on the alert.

Major Price, commanding the troops in Unyoro, was directed to
proceed to Mruli with two companies of the 27th Bombay Infantry
and half a company British East African Rifles. At Mruli he was
joined by Major Martyr with 150 Sudanese troops and a 4-p . gun.

On the night of the 3rd August two columns, as detailed in the

margin, marched against the

Attack on the mutineers. . . ■ ,1 • • 1 i

No. i Column. mutineers in their neighbouring

ET r c- h. u. Price. position at Jeruba.

2<tn Bombay Infantry, 4 British A
officers, 237 native ranks. No. 1 Column, Starting at 6 P.M.

nauves nda RifleS * * British officer ' 24 from Mruli, arrived at a hill over-
No. i Column. looking the enemy's position at

U^SnB^sh officers, 159 3 A.M. On the 4th. Onthis

Nubians. hill a piquet of sixty men were

East African Rifles, 1 British officer, „, ■ j „ i •,, j

53 natives. surprised, seven killed or

27th Bombay infantry, i British wounded,and ten rifles captur-
One 7- P r? n g un, Captain Carieton. ed - Leaving the hill guarded by

3 maxim guns, Lieutenant P. H. Dyke, a Sma ll piquet, the Column deB"
2/th Bombay Infantry. i i i , i

cended and took up a position
close to that of the enemy, waiting for dawn, to make a combined
attack with the other column. No. 2 column, starting from Mruli
at 12-15 a.m., arrived within half a mile of the position at 5 a.m.,

200 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

but owing to the dense jungle did not gain touch with No. 1 column
until 6 a.m., when a general advance was made in the direction of
the enemy's stockade. The 7-pounder gun was brought into action
at about 400 yards.

The enemy attempted a flank attack on the British left, but
were driven off by t a party of the 27th under Lieutenant W. 0.
Grant. The troops charged the stockade, the enemy bolting as they
entered it. The women and children had left during the night, and
Bilal Amin had gone north with six men the previous day. The
enemy lost forty killed, and the attacking party one porter killed
and two men of the Uganda Rifles wounded.

Next day a column of eighty men of the 27th and fourteen
Operations of Lieutenant Uganda Rifles under Lieutenant C. Price,
Price's column. marched towards Mahorsi hills, and surpri-