

Between the 26th November and 7th December Captain Fowler
pursued a portion of the enemy's force moving north-west towards
the Bogoma forest, Lieut. -Colonel Coles following another body
south-east. The mutineers scattered in small bodies all over the
country, and some thirty surrendered with their arms. The whole
of the marching was through difficult country amid swamps and
continuous rain. Between the 7th and 21st December Captain
Fowler's column searched the country between the Kitumbuai
and Maanja rivers, but with small result. On the 21st he joined

EXPEDITION TO UGANDA. 205

Lieut. -Colonel Coles' force at Kinakulia and thence proceeded
with sixty-two rifles to reinforce Major Price in operations against
the mutineers in the Budonga forest.

Major Price, with a native officer and thirty-five rifles of
Operations in the Budonga the 27th Bombay Infantry, left Masindi
forest. on t k e 3 r( j December 1898 to operate

against Iyrita in the Budonga forest. In conjunction with
Captain Ponsonby and thirty-five Uganda Rifles he attacked
the enemy at dawn on the 6th and killed twenty-four, having
one Wanyoro killed and eight Wanyoro and two Uganda Rifles

wounded.

On the 7th December, when en route to Bisu, he surprised thirty
rebels, killing seven and taking four prisoners. The column re-
turned to Masindi on the 1st January 1899.

During January the various detachments of the 27th Bombay

Infantry returned to head-quarters at

End of the expedition. Kampa j a> being relieve d by the newly

raised Indian contingent of the Uganda Rifles, and arrangements
were made for their return to India.

On the 14th January an advanced detachment left for the
coast, another detachment marched on the 21st and another on
the 25th. The headquarters left on the 1st March.

On the 11th May the regiment embarked onboard the Olive
for Karachi, where they arrived on the 20th.

In closing his diary of the campaign, Colonel Broome, wrote : —
Conditions of service in "The distance from Mombasa to Kampala
Uganda- is 796 miles through a foodless country, with

the exception of a few goats picked up occasionally, and plantains
obtainable only in the countries of Usogo and Uganda. The first
100 miles the railway was used 1 , the second 100 miles lay through
a waterless country, and being on the coast limit the heat was
intense ; the various stations along this road numbered seven only,
and were in charge of Protectorate officials. I found that their
authority in nearly all cases did not extend beyond the fort walls,
consequently this, together with the general apathy and disinter-
estedness in the move of the regiment, quite precluded our getting
both food, animals, and in many cases transport.

1 The railway has since been constructed to the lake.

206 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The first detachment left Mombasa on the 23rd December
1897, and the last detachment arrived at Kampala on the 26th
July 1898, taking a period of seven months. Owing to the want of
transport, the regiment had frequently to live on the meagre
resources of the country, pushing on to Uganda with their ammu-
nition and tents, as urgent appeals for reinforcements had been
received all down the road, and the Uganda Protectorate was
reported in a critical position.