

On the 9th October Lieutenant Hannyngton left Kisalizi for
Kitabu, with a view to rejoining the detachment at Masindi.
On arrival at Kitabu he heard that the Wakedi had crossed the
Nile and gone to Shambas. He at once despatched Subadar Alahdad
Khan with thirty men to Kamanina with orders to hold the

202 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

stockade, destroy the boats, and cut off the retreat of the
Wakedi.

Next morning Lieutenant Hannyngton left Kitabu for Kama-
nina, and had gone about two miles when he received a note from
the Subadar reporting his arrival at Kamanina, where he had burnt
the stockade but had seen no enemy. While Lieutenant Hannygnton
halted to read this report, the advanced guard got about 150 yards
in advance of the column. Five minutes after resuming the march,
. x . v . x , a rifle was discharged which was the signal

Aotion near Kitabu. ° °

for about seventy Nubians and a large num-
ber of rebels to charge down to within sixty yards of the column,
firing heavily. Hannyngton opened fire, and himself went to recall
the advanced guard, which he found surrounded by the enemy.
Having no weapon, he returned to the main body, which he found
split into two parties by the jungle ; four men were dead, and he
joined three who were firing, and opened fire himself. Two
of these men were shot down almost at once, and Lieutenant
Hannyngton plunged into the jungle to look after the rear-guard.
Unable to find them, he returned to find one man firing, who
was almost at once shot, while he himself was shot through the right
arm and had his left hand shattered by another bullet. Being
helpless, he went into the jungle, and finding a Waganda man, took
him to Upodia, where he arrived at about 3 p.m. He lay down
under a tree about 500 yards from the stockade, being too weak to
proceed further, and sent for help to Lieutenant Grant at Kisalizi,
to which place he was carried on a stretcher.

The rear -guard fought their way to Kitabu, where they arrived
that night, and eventually seventeen men and two followers, includ-
ing eight wounded, arrived at Kisalizi. They reported that over
100 of the enemy were killed and wounded, of whom 20 to 30
were mutineers.

Subadar Alahdad Khan patrolled in the direction of the Nile
on the 10th, and was attacked by the rebels and a few mutineers,
of whom forty or fifty were seen to fall during the action. Having
no rations and hearing firing in the direction of Kisalizi, he returned
to Kitabu, avoiding the stockade by a detour, as he heard it was
held by Nubians, and reached Kisalizi on the morning of the
11th.

expedition to uoandA. 203

The casualties were Jemadar Muhammad Shah 1 and thirteen
men killed, Lieutenant Hannyngton and eight men wounded. The
rebels took 14 rifles, 1,500 rounds of ammunition, and all the
baggage, the porters having thrown away their loads.

Reinforcements were ordered to Kisalizi, where on the 12th
October Lieutenant Hannyngton reported that the mutineers were
apparently building a stockade about a mile and a half from his
camp. He attacked the enemy, who were in great strength, on the
evening of the. 12th, and had two men wounded.