

The Muhammadan rebels were driven north across the Kafu
river, and were afterwards attacked and
dispersed on the 2nd April by Corporal
Brodie, K. E., with a force of fifty-six Swahilis, who had been
sent out from Fort Hoima. After this the rebels, finding they
were liable to attack from both north and south, abandoned
for a time their idea of joining the Sudanese, and retired west
into southern Unyoro. Here they endeavoured to effect a
junction with the chief Iyrita, but on the 10th April Captain
Fowler, with forty Sudanese and fifty Swahilis, attacked and
dispersed them in Bugoma, inflicting a loss of fifty-five killed and
wounded.

Two days later Iyrita was attacked at dawn by Captain Bilal
Effendi, who had been sent out by Captain Harrison with a small
column of forty East African troops and fourteen Sudanese.

Meanwhile Major Price, leaving a small garrison at Bukumi,
moved against Mwanga, who was assembling his forces in Kawanga
and north Ankole. Moving in three columns, 1 by a series of night
operations he dispersed Mwanga's following on several occasions,
and subsequently returned to Kijanguti, where he began to form
a post on the 27th April.

The Sudanese mutineers gradually reassembled after their
Reassembly of the Sud- defeat by Captain Harrison, and advancing
ane8e - towards Mruli, built a small fort nearly op-

posite that place on the east bank of the Nile. As their presence so
close to Mruli was a source of encouragement to Mwanga's faction,
Captain Southey, with 150 men of the 27th Bombay Infantry, who
arrived at Kampala on the 30th March, was sent on the 6th April
to Mruli, and was followed a few days later by Major Martyr with
a reinforcement of 70 men.

On arriving at Mruli on the 24th April Major Martyr decided to
attack the fort held by the mutineers, and on the 26th crossed to the
east b ink of thr Nile with detachments of the 27th Bombay Infantry,

EXPEDITION TO UGANDA. } 197

Indian Contingent, East African Kifles, and a few Swahilis and a

maxim gun. After a sharp engagement

Defeat of the mutineers. ^ Sudanege were de f ea ted and their fort

was captured. The enemy fled to the hills, but were not pursued
owing to the approaching darkness, and Major Martyr, after des-
troying the fort, withdrew his force to a new work which had been
constructed on the east bank of the Nile opposite Mruli. In this
engagement twenty-five mutineers were killed: the British loss
amounted to ten killed and twenty-seven wounded, including, of the
27th Bombay Infantry, Subadar Sher Din and five men killed, and
Subadar -Major Yar Muhammad and nine wounded.

On the same day Lieutenant Malcolm, who had been sent to
garrison Foweira, attacked another party

Action at Alagoyu. & ' r y

of mutineers who had moved north towards
the Shuli country. Hearing of their march he left Foweira with
a force of fifty East African Rifles, thirty Swahilis, and a maxim gun,
and on the third day overtook them at Alagoyu, where he defeated
them with heavy loss, having four killed and five wounded himself.
He then returned to Foweira. After these two engagemets and the
losses they had suffered during the operations before reinforcements
from India had arrived, the Sudanese no longer constituted a serious
danger to the Protectorate, out of which they had been driven.
Major Macdonald, therefore, on the 3rd May handed over the
command of the forces to Major Martyr at Kampala, and resumed
the special duties connected with his expedition. The remnant of
the Sudanese mutineers retired a few miles east of Mruli, and
constructed a stockade, but no attempt was made by them against
the British position at Mruli, beyond an attack on a patrol on the
30th May, which was easily repulsed.