

In June Major Price took effective steps to clear Unyoro of hos-

Operations in Unyoro. tUe g atherin S S Under Mwanga and Iyrita

and to reoccupy Fajao, a post which had for-
merly been held near the Murchison Falls on the Nile. The opera-
tion commenced on the 17th June, on which date Captain Southey

27th Bombay Tnfantry .. 44 marched from Masindi in COm-
Uganda Rifles .20 mand of the columm detailed in

Waganda .. ..75 ,, . .,, ....

the margin with instructions to
clear the enemy from east Unyoro and then proceed to Chikerota

li)8 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

and halt for further orders. Lieutenant Hannyngton, 27th
Bombay Infantry, with twenty men of his regiment and twenty
Uganda Kifles was directed to reinforce Captain Southey at
Kinamuzi from Mruli, and the officer commanding at Foweira
was instructed to despatch a column to co-operate.

'-' The occupation of Chikerota on the 25th June prevented any
further raids in Busindi, and on the arrival of reinforcements at
Hoima and Masindi, operations for clearing western Unyoro were
begun. Captains Carleton and Tickell of the Uganda Kifles, with a
force of 32 men of the 27th Bombay Infantry and 70 Wanyoro, left
Masindi on the 26th June for Kasigala, where they were joined by
65 of the 27th Bombay Infantry and 26 Swahilis under Captain
F. J. Fowler, d.s.o., and 150 Waganda under the chief Kasa.
These troops, formed in three columns, traversed a large area, re-
connoitring in all directions, and reached Fajao unopposed on July
3rd. It was ascertained that some of the enemy had crossed to
the north side of the Nile, but the majority had not crossed. A
garrison of sixty men of the 27th was posted at Fajao under Lieu-
tenant Hannyngton, and the remainder of the force was formed into
two columns under Captains Carleton and Tickell ; the former pro-
ceeded in the direction said to have been taken by Mwanga, while
the latter marched towards Kiswata. Captain Carleton was unable
to find Mwanga, and after passing through the country east of
Chikerota, returned by the Masindi road to that place.

On the 8th July, when at Btiggi, Captain Tickell ascertained
that a considerabe force of rebels under Iyrita were in the forest
about eight miles distant, in a south-easterly direction. The enemy
were surprised at dawn and dispersed, losing twenty killed ; the
British casualties were one killed and four wounded.

On the 12th July, near Bamateggi, Tickell ascertained that
Iyrita was in the forest near Parbidi. On the approach of the British
force the enemy dispersed, but kept up a continuous fire from the
jungle for nearly two hours. Pursuit was impossible, but the rebel
camp was destroyed, and all their property, including some cattle,
was captured, while ten dead bodies and a number of blood-tracks
were found. The British loss was three wounded. On the following
day a small party of rebels were encountered, and seven killed.

EXPEDITION TO UGANDA. 199

At this time Captain Carleton's column was met advancing from the
opposite direction, and the enemy dispersed through the forest
and apparently left that part of the country.