

UGANDA— THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE- 191'

ince, by sending the majority of the Sudanese down to the capital,
where they handed in their arms. The mutineers themselves shortly
after were attacked by Macdonald at Kijembo on the Nile, and dis-
persed ; and later they were routed and their stronghold captured
by Captain Harrison at Kabagambi on the 28th February.

After this last successful action the remnants of the mutineers
crossed the Nile and fled into Wakedi country, whilst Captain
Harrison's force, continuing its march into Unyoro, joined hands
with Scott, and proceeded to occupy the various posts in the
country with our forces, pending the arrival of the reinforcements
called for from India.

CHAPTER XII.

EXPEDITION TO UGANDA.

On the 20th November 1897 the requisition for troops reached
Troops from India. the Government of India ; on the 3rd
December the 27th Bombay Light Infan-
try 1 embarked at Bombay on board the transport Nowshera, and
reached Mombasa on the 12th December. The battalion, num-
bering 14 British officers and 743 native ranks, under com-
mand of Lieut. -Colonel W. A. Broome, disembarked by the 15th
with all their baggage and stores, and on that date Colonel
Broome proceeded to Ndi to select a camping ground for his
battalion near railhead.

The troops were intended to take the place of the British
East Africa Protectorate troops despatched to Uganda, and to be
at hand in case reinforcements were required. On December
30th the movement to railhead began, and by the 8th January
the corps was concentrated at Ndi, with the exception of one
company left at Mombasa. The battalion was encamped at the
foot of high hills 2| miles south of the railway line, where a
water-supply was ensured by damming a stream.

On the 9th serious news was received of the situation in Uganda,
Indian troops sent where Lieutenant Macdonald and a mis-
Uganda. sionary, Mr. Pilkington, had been killed ;

while it was reported that the Sudanese at Buddu would probably
join the mutineers. Colonel Broome was asked to supply an officer
to take the place of Captain Barratt, reported sick, at Machakos,
and to go with his Indians to the front, and to send a company
to that place to relieve the Indians.

Captain F. J. Fowler, D.s.n. accordingly proceeded on the
12th January 1898 to relieve Captain Barratt, and on the 14th a
company under Major Price, with a maxim gun and a month s
supplies, started for Machakos.

1 Now 127tli Prince of Wales' Own Baluch Lght Infantry

EXPEDITION TO UGANDA. 193

In his diary on the 17th January, Colonel Broome wrote " The
country (Teita) around is one mass of dense
y " scrub jungle entirely uninhabited except on
the mountains where the Wa-Teita live : there is but one road, the
Mackinnon road, which runs fairly parallel with the railway.
The inhabitants are friendly, but are timid and afraid of white
men or troops ; they are a very primitive race, living in caves on
the mountain sides, armed with bows and arrows. The resources
of the country are next to nothing, small quantities oimahendi, 1
goats, Indian corn, and fowls, but they are not willing to sell.
The available transport locally are the Wa-Teita coolies, and
physically they are very inferior, and can carry loads of only
50 lb. The railway line is now laid within six miles of Tsavo."
Human transport was afterwards supplemented by donkeys.