

sed a party of mutineers, killing one and wounding two. On the
6th August this column moved about ten miles east up the Nile, and
in the morning were attacked by some 200 Lango armed with bows
and arrows, who were driven off with a loss of two killed. The
same day a portion of the same column pursued a party of sixty
Nubians for about four hours, driving them out of three villages
and dispersing them with a loss of one killed and thirteen wounded.

After their dispersal near Mruli the mutinous Sudanese gave
no further trouble. Major Price and Captain Fowler returned to
Kampala on the 27th August with a detachment of their regiment.
On that date the distribution of the 27th Bombay Infantry was
as follows : —

British East Africa 1 2 British officers, 186 men.

c Kampala . . 10 British officers, 457 men.

V Masindi-Unyoro . . 2 British officers, 66 men,
Uganda Protectorate 4 [ Maxim gun

*-Masafta-Buddu . . 1 British officer, 14 men.

On the 22nd August Lieutenant Hannyngton with twenty

Desultory operation. rifles > 27th S » mba y Infantry, formed part

of a column under Captain Ponsonby,
Uganda Rifles, which attacked Iyrita and his followers at Kinega,
killing twelve.

1 For operations in Jubaland, see chapter VIII.

EXPEDITION TO UGANDA. 201

Early in September Hoima was attacked and the fort burnt
by Chikakule and his gang, who expelled the garrison of sixty
Waganda. A native officer and twenty-five men of the 27th
Bombay Infantry recaptured the fort and dispersed the
rebels.

On the 6th of September Lieutenant C. U. Price, commanding
the detachment of the 27th Bombay Infantry in Buddu, arrived at
Masaka, and found that Captain M. J. Tighe,D.s.o., had moved on
to Kabula. Captain Tighe, who left orders for Lieutenant Price to
follow him, pursued and dispersed the rebels in Buddu and Ankole,
and by the middle of the month he drove the rebel chief Gabriel
into Toru with a loss of fifty-nine killed and eleven prisoners. Lieu-
tenant J. A. Hannyngton, commanding at Masindi, reached Hoima
on the 7th September, and found all the villages in the vicinity
destroyed. Jemadar Din Muhammad, whom he sent to Hoima in
command of 25 rifles on the 1st September, was attacked by
Chikakule with 450 men with firearms and 300 spearmen on the 7th,
but the Waganda were driven off and followed up for about a mile.
Major Price arrived at Masindi on the 16th September and as-
sumed command of the troops in Unyoro. At his request a com-
pany and a half of the 27th under Lieutenant W. 0. Grant were
sent to garrison Kisalizi.

On the 27th September Captain Hicks, Uganda Rifles, with
a section of the 27th Bombay Infantry and some Uganda Rifles
and levies attacked Chikakule's camp about sixteen miles south-
east of Hoima, and killed seven of the enemy.

On the 28th Major Price wrote from Masindi that seventy
Movements of the mu- mutineers were encamped opposite Kisalizi
tineers. on the east bank of the Nile, while the re-

mainder with Bilal Effendi and Mwanga were some eight miles off
to the east. Kabarega, with 400 guns and 700 cattle, had left
the mutineers, and was two days' journey to the north-east.
The Wakedi were harassing and fighting with the mutineers.