

On the 14th October Captain Southey, with sixty-nine of the
27th, marched for Unyoro, and was

Operations in Unyoro. ^^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^^ p> ^

Fowler, d.s.o., with the force detailed in the margin. On the 13th

3 British officers and 130 men, 27th October Lieutenant Hannyng-

Bombay Infantry. ton wrote that the mutineers

3 British officers and i company i j j a t „ tt-- i; • •

Uganda Rifles. had moved off from Kisahzi in

l British officer and % company East a westerly direction, deyastat-

African Rifles. ,-, , ,, ,

ing the country as they went.
His reconnoitring patrols brought in Lawelli, a Waganda chief, who
gave himself up. He had hitherto been with Mwanga. It was esti-
mated that 260 Sudanese mutineers, including Bilal-Amin, Rehan,
Jardine, Jannan, and Alikani, and 542 Waganda rebels had
crossed the Nile. Mwanga was still on the east bank near
Mahoris.

Captain Fowler arrived at Kisalizi on the 23rd October, and
left next morning for Bututi, where the mutineers and rebel
were reported to be, but he heard that they were building a
stockade at the junction of the Lugogo and Kafu rivers, and
directed his march accordingly.

1 Jemadar Muhammad Shah exhorted Nubians and Waganda charged this he-

his men to stand fast and die whero they roic little band, who charged the enemy

stood, setting the example on his side and then retreated on the Kitabu stockade

of the position and lighting to the last, which they held until the enemy retired

and his men did the same. Naik Yusuf when they continued their retreat fourteen

Khan, in charge of the rear-guard to save miles to Kisalizi, with ten out of seventeen

the ammunition from falling into the wounded. Havildar Nihala also greatly

hands of the enemy, opened the boxes distinguished himself during these opera-

and distributed the cartridges to his tions, with Subadar Alahdad Khans*

men, under a heavy tire. Five times the party.

204 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Half an hour after daybreak on the 27th, Captain Fowler at-
Attaok on the enemy at tacked the enemy's camp at Kiweri and
Kiweri. dispersed and pursued them in a northerly

direction towards the Kafu river. He killed sixty and had one man
killed and four wounded. Following in a westerly direction, he
reached the Maanja river on the 31st October, and found that the
enemy had crossed in canoes, which they had destroyed. The river
was impassable, and a bridge that he attempted to build was carried
away by a flood in the night. He accordingly marched to Busibiha,
the nearest ford, by which he crossed the river on the 6th November,
and reached Kisala on the 10th November. Here he received news
that the enemy had attacked Bukumi, a French mission station,
but had been beaten off and retired towards Kijanjuti.

After reaching Kijanjuti and joining forces with Captain
Captain Fowler's opera- Meldon, Uganda Rifles, whom he found
tlon9 ' watching the enemy with some sixty Sud-

anese, Captain Fowler decided to attack on the 23rd November ;
but receiving news of the advance of a column under Lieut. -
Colonel Coles, he determined to await it so that a more effective
blow might be struck. On the night of the 23rd a party of the enemy
opened fire on the camp and sentries, but they were driven off by the
piquets in a few minutes. Owing to swollen rivers and miscarriage
of letters, Lieut. -Colonel Coles' column did not join with Captain
Fowler's as expected ; but, coming into contact with the enemy's
piquets on the morning of the 25th November, attacked them,
and Captain Fowler was unable to reach the position until noon.
He then deployed, and a running fight ensued, the enemy being
driven to the west to the Kaniogora river. The jungle was thick and
little could be seen.