

Operations in Uganda. ° . .

Protectorate, leaving two companies in
East Africa. He accordingly left Ndi on the 13th April, but
transport difficulties daily increased, and the movement of the
headquarters of the regiment up-country was very slow ; on
reaching the Ravine Station further delay occurred, and Colonel
Broome did not reach Kampala until the* end of July 1898.

In the meantime severe fighting had been going on in Uganda,
but the first detachment of the 27th Bombay Infantry, under

EXPEDITION TO UGANDA.

195

Major Price, did not reach Kampala until the 6th of March.
Major Macdonald had arrived at Kampala on the 27th February,
to dispose of the approaching reinforcements, and Major
Price was ordered to proceed at once to Bukumi in north-west
Singo, where Mwanga was reported to be assembling his forces.
In the meantime, Captain Sitwell, with the force detailed in the

margin, had advanced from Kawanga in

60 Sudanese. Buddu towards Bukumi ; while Captain

gun. Harrison, who had defeated the mutineers

in a hard-fought action at Kabagambi at the end of February and

occupied Unyoro, had been ordered to send a force from Hoima

in a south-westerly direction to co-operate with Major Price.

On the 13th March Captain Sitwell reached Bukumi, where

he was joined by Major Price's column

Mwanga and the rebels. next d&y _ ^ enemyj numbering aome 800

with fire arms, withdrew north-west from Bukumi, and divided into
two parties of 400 each, one party moving to Kijanguti, while the
other proceeded towards Bugomawith the spoil they had previously
captured. Major Price divided his force into three columns,
and advanced against the latter party, whom he dispersed, cap-
turing a good deal of baggage and cattle, and rescuing several
hundred women and children. About the same time Iyrita, a rebel
Unyoro chief, with some 500 men, moved south, apparently with
the intention of joining Mwanga 's party ; but on the 17th March
he was defeated by Captain Barratt, d.s.o., who had been sent
from Unyoro to co-operate with Major Price.

Meanwhile the rebels who had gone to Kijanguti moved in an
easterly direction roud Major Price's right flank, and attacked a
party of loyal Waganda, who were driven back to Matiana, leaving
the whole of the northern part of Singo open to the enemy. To re-
store confidence, Lieutenant Hanbury Tracy was sent with 40 armed
Swahilis to Matiana on the 23rd March, with orders to keep open
communications with Major Price, while Lieutenant Bright with 45
Swahilis and 400 Waganda proceeded to the north of Bulamwezi,
where he was reinforced by 50 more Swahilis under Captain Ashburn-
ham, who, with Major Martyr, D.s.o., arrived in Kampala on

the 24th March with a force of 67 Somal is, 50 Swahilis, and 25
Indians.

Vol. vi 13 A

196 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

* As it was important to prevent the rebels who had raided
into Singo from joining the Sudanese mutineers assembled
east of Mruli, Major Price was ordered to move a force into north-
west Singo with the object of cutting off the retreat of the Mu-
hammadans, and Mruli was strongly reinforced.