

On the night of the 26th January intimation was received that
Reinforcements for reinforcements were urgently required in
Uganda. Uganda, and the company of the 27th at

Machakos was ordered to advance at once to the Ravine Station,
supported by other troops from Ndi. Two companies under Captain
South ey started on the 1st February, and on the 5th orders were
received for the despatch of five companies to the front.

Great difficulties with transport were experienced. On the night
of the 27th March 300 porters reached Ndi from Mombasa. Of these
26 ran away during the night. 267 loads were sent off to Tsavo by
the remainder, but of these 156 threw down their loads within* 5
miles of camp, and bolted into the bush. The loads were recovered
but only some 70 porters returned. Meanwhile the permanent
force in Uganda was organised into two battalions of Swahilis
and Sudanese, and on the 31st March three companies of Swahilis
arrived at Ndi. It was also decided to organize in India a contingent
of 400 men for service in Uganda. More troops were sent from
India. On the 25th February the 4th Bombay Rifles left Bombay
in the troopship Dalhousie, and reached Mombasa on the 7th March.

At midday on the 20th March Colonel Broome received a letter
Tlin Mo from Mr. Weaver, District Officer, Ndi,

Ihe Magangi expedition. ... . ,, . ^

written irom Magangi near Boura, re-
questing the help of troops, as the Magangi people had rejected all

Vrti vi 1 -A cereal.

194 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

overtures of peace on behalf of the British East Africa Protecto-
rate. The tribe numbered some 1,000 men, armed with bows and
poisoned arrows. Colonel Broome left Ndi at daybreak on the
21st, with three British and two native officers, seventy-eight rank
and file, seventy rounds of ammunition per rifle, and ten days'
rations, and marched fourteen miles to Milaleni.

At 10-30 next morning the column reached the District Officer's
camp in Magangi's valley, 9 miles by a bad road, and 5,000 feet
above the sea level. Mr. Weaver reported that the chief of Magangi
had himself attempted to murder him two days previously, and
had been shot in the act, and he requested Colonel Broome to take
steps to make the people acknowledge the authority of the Gov-
ernment of the Protectorate.

That "afternoon Colonel Broome reconnoitred the enemy's
valley, and as the District Officer pointed out four villages where
the chief offenders lived, in all some 200 huts fairly close together,
he decided to attack them first.

At 4-30 on the 22nd March 1898 the column left camp and
arrived at dawn on a mountain just opposite and 150 feet above
the villages. Lieutenant Hulseberg was sent with thirty-five men
to rush the villages, the remainder of the column being disposed
to cut off the retreat of the inhabitants. It was found, however,
that there were very few men in the villages, as they had nearly all
lefjj during the night. The column then proceeded in two parties
up either side of the valley. Little opposition was met with ; some
forty or fifty of the enemy were killed, and sixty head of cattle cap-
tured. One native officer of the 27th was slightly wounded. The
column reached camp at 2 p.m., and returned to Ndi by the 25th.
On the 4th April Colonel Broome received orders to proceed
_ TT , to Uganda and assume command in that