

Vol. VI, ;4

210 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

turmeric and fresh onions were good for Indian troops. Potatoes rotted
on the way, and gram was all more or less eaten by weevils on arrival.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Precis of information concerning the Uganda Protectorate. — War Office.

Diary of the 27th Bombay Infantry.

With Macdonald in Uganda.— Maj r H. 11. Austin, C.M.G., D.S.O., R.E-

CHAPTER XIII.

SOUTH AFRICA, 1899-1901,

For a full description of South Africa, and the events which
led up to hostilities in 1899 and succeeding years, the reader is
referred to the official history of the war produced by the General
Staff at the War Office. Nor is it considered desirable to enter
here into any account of the campaign. But the history of the
despatch of the Indian contingent, which had such a great influence
on the progress of events in Natal is of importance as showing
the celerity with which a completely equipped force can be des-
patched overseas from India at the shortest notice.

The Boer ultimatum was presented on October 9th, 1899,

Despatch of the Indian the war commencing two days later. But

Contingent. ^ ^ a( j j or some time been perceived

that war was probable, if not inevitable, and it had been decided
at a Cabinet Council, held on September 8th, to despatch a force
of all arms from India for the protection of Natal from threatened
invasion. The Indian Government had already, early in August,
been requested to hold in readiness a cavalry and an infantry
brigade for service in South Africa. On the 7th September
the troops were warned to hold themselves in readiness. On
the 8th the embarkation order was received, and arrangements
for the charter of transport were quickly made, although ship-
ping had not been taken up prior to that date. The distance by
sea from Bombay to Durban was about fifteen days as compared
with twenty days from Southampton.

The troops were actually ready at their stations from the 11th
to 14th September, three or four days after the receipt of notice.
The Marine Department of the Government of India had been no-
tified that it might be necessary to take up shipping. As an ex-
ample of the celerity with which transports were prepared,
although the monsoon was not over, and there were few ships in

Vol. VI. 14 A

212 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA-

port, orders were received by the Director at the Bombay dock-
yard at 1 p.m. on the 9th September ; the Secundra, one of the
vessels chartered, was inspected the same day, and having been
fitted, coaled, and surveyed, she left on the 17th with a field
battery and a veterinary field hospital. In Calcutta the
Dockyard received the order on the 9th September, and the
Purnea, which was then discharging cargo, was moved to the
troop jetty, coaled on the 11th, fitted between the 11th and
15th, finally surveyed on the 17th, and embarked the 2nd
King's Royal Rifles on the 18th. Altogether twenty-two vessels
were taken up, eighteen in Bombay, thirteen of them being
horse-ships, and four in Calcutta, two being horse-ships. The ships
were sent off in sixteen days. The actual numbers of the first
contingent were 259 officers, 1,564 cavalry, 653 artillery, 3,427
infantry. Additional troops were despatched from India aa
follows :— From the 11th October 1899 to the end of July 1900:
132 officers, 713 cavalry. 376 artillery, 670 infantry and mounted
infantry, total 1,891. From the 1st May to 31st December 1901,
108 officers, 1,206 cavalry, 2,543 infantry and mounted infantry,
total 3,857.