

There were some Government transport carts and mules, hired bullock
carts and camels ; but quite insufficient for the large number of troops in the
country. Rinderpest killed all the bullocks, and camels brought up from the
coast could not stand the colder climate of Kikuyu and the Ravine;

APPENDIX. 209

while the mules were poisoned by the tse-tse fly. Donkeys appeared to be
the least affected, but these cost Rs. 50 or more and were not procurable in
large numbers.

The road from railhead at Ndi to Kikuyu passes through varied country,
sometimes enclosed with forest, at others passing over wide plateaux and
plains. At one portion of the journey after leaving Kibwezi it traverses
lava beds, and towards the end the river has to be crossed twice, and in May
there were nineteen miles of swamp.

The distance of the daily march depended on the water-supply. At tin.es
this was a brackish puddle ; at other seasons it had to be dug for in the
sandy bed of a nala. Sometimes it was not procurable at all.

At Kikuyu Lieutenant Vaughan found 800 loads left by the 27th Bombav
Infantry for want of transport, and he heard from Colonel Broome that he had
not been getting supplies at all regularly, only the fifty men at the Ravine
were receiving commissariat rations, the others on in front were living on the
produce of the country — chiefly black flour and plantains and consequently
going sick owing to inferior food. Lieutenant Vaughan had great difficulty
in getting contractors to take loads beyond Kikuyu, but was enabled to
forward 1,397 loads from that post in seven weeks. His difficulties were
increased from the absence of an interpreter, and the fact that he had no
cash assignment, while the natives appreciated only beads, cloth, and brass
wire as currency.

A medical officer was in charge of the transport arrangements of the Pc -
tectorate, with his head-quarters at Mombasa. He had as Assistants junic r
officers of the Army Service Corps. Former missionaries, traders, etc., held
appointments as District Officers ; and none of these could understand the
peculiar requirements of the natives of India, who they considered should
be able to thrive on roots, vegetables and coarse black flour known as
matama, like the local savages. There was no system of obtaining porters,
such as bringing pressure to bear on the heads of villages, and as the local
officials were indifferent and apathetic, Lieutenant Vaughan was obliged to
depend on his own exertions for the supply of the Indian troops. For this
reason it was most essential that each unit of such troops should have its
own transport establishment, so as to be independent of the local
officials.

In remarking on the packing of stores, the Chief Commissariat Officer

wrote that the waterproof bags were not serviceable, and that green rotproof

canvas is the best for Africa, where tents were all made of this material,

which stands the climate and is proof against white ants. Rice was found

o keep well and should be sent in sealed tins, covered with gunny, and