

The Persian war of 1856-57.

The cause of all the differences which have occurred between
„ ... ,.,. England and Persia — two powers whose in-

(Jaufle of the expedition. ° m r

terests are so identical — may be summed up

in one word — Herat. The evacuation of this place by the Persians

was the main object with which the war of 1856 was undertaken.

Two modes of operation were open to the British Government.

Alternative plans of opera- One was to march an army via Afghanistan

tlon - and expel the Persians ; but, in addition

to the difficulties and expense which would have been entailed, the

proceeding would probably have provoked another Afghanwar.

The other alternative was to send an expedition by sea to the
head of the Persian Gulf and seize Bushire ; thence operations
might be directed against the interior ; and a march from Bushire
to Tehran would not be more difficult than one from the Indian
frontier to Herat.

The main rendezvous for a force intended to invade Persia

Bombay, the ha«e. from India would be Bombay. The distance

to the Straits of Hormuz is thirteen hundred

and thence to Bushire six hundred miles, and, except during the
Vol. VI n,

226 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

south-west monsoon, the sea is usually calm. At a steaming rate of
two hundred and fifty miles a day the voyage might be accom-
plished in little over one week.

Final instructions for the despatch of the expedition reached

Orders for despatch of Bombay on the 9th November. The force

expedition. g t under weigh on the 12th and 13th, using

Bombay, Karachi, and two smaller ports, Vingorla and Porebunder.

Most of the troops were on board sailing transports towed by

steamers. The force was composed as under : —

H. M.'s 64th Eegiment.

2nd Bombay Europeans.

* 4th Native Infantry.

t 20th Native Infantry.

% 2 Squadrons, 3rd Native Cavalry.

§ 1 Squadron, Poona Horse.

3rd Light Field Battery.

5th Light Field Battery.

|| 2 companies, Bombay Sappers and Miners.

The entire number of fighting men was five thousand six
hundred and seventy, of whom two thou -

Strengths of force.

sand two hundred and seventy were
Europeans. The followers numbered three thousand seven hun-
dred and fifty, and there were eleven hundred and fifty horses,
and four hundred and thirty bullocks.

Eight Indian Navy steamers, seven steam and thirty sailing

gea transports, under Rear-Admiral Sir H.

Leeke, Commander-in-Chief of the Indian

Na\y, conveyed the expedition, which was commanded by Major-

General Stalker of the Bombay Army.

On the 21st headquarters reached the straits of Hormuz,

and waited four days to reassemble the transports before start-

o . inc for Bushire. It was resolved- to

KentlezvouA. ° ,

rendezvous twenty miles south of the
town, and to reconnoitre the coast. The fleet eventually

Prment des^nationa— % ,')3rd Q. O. Light Cavalry

* 104th Welleflley'e Rifles. § 34th Prince Albert Victor's Own

T 120th Rajputana Infantry. Poona Horse.

U 3rd Sapper*) anl Miners.