

principal are the Shatt-al-'Arab, Karun,

Aras, Kizil Uzun or Safid Rud, and Hari

Rud.

222

FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Climate.

Along the shores of the Persian Gulf great heat prevails except
in winter. On the plateau the climate
improves and in Fars, Isfahan, Kirman,
and Yazd is pleasant. In the higher parts of the north-west it is
intensely cold in winter and there are heavy falls of snow. The
district between the Elburz mountains and the Caspian is very
unhealthy.

The rainfall varies from about three inches at Isfahan to fifty -
five at Rasht, but, generally speaking, is
very moderate.

Malaria is very prevalent on the Gulf and Caspian. The other
prevailing diseases are, generally speaking
common to India and Persia.
Provinces. The provinces of Persia are —

Tabriz.
Senna.

Rainfall.

Azarbaij an Chief town

Kurdistan

Kirmanshah

Gilan

Mazandaran

Iraq Ajami

Kirmanshah.

Rasht.

Barfarush.

Tehran, Isfahan.

Meshed.

Astarabad.

Nasratabad.

Khorasan

Astarabad

Sistan

Laristan.

Arabistan.

Fars „ .. .. .. Shiraz.

Yazd.

Kirman „ . . . . . . Kirman.

Persian Baluchistan.

The length of the Gulf is about four hundred and sixty and the
average breadth one hundred and twenty
miles, but it narrows at its entrance to
about thirty. The water is deeper on the Persian than on the Arabi-
an side. Supplies are scarce and fresh water is difficult to obtain.
The principal ports are Bandar Abbas, north of the entrance,
and Bushire.

There are but few roads suitable for wheeled traffic ; such as
Communications. exist are usually caravan or mule tracks.

Persian Gulf.

PERSIA. 223

The principal crops are wheat, barley
Crops- rice, opium, and cotton. Grapes, dates,

apples, pears, pomegranates, melons, nuts, peaches, orange,
and limes are plentiful and cheap in the populous areas.

The ordinary means of locomotion are supplied by horses,

mules, camels, and donkeys. There are some

Tran S port animals. half . million of the first, small and hardy

and comparatively inexpensive to buy. The saddle horses average
about fourteen and the pack horses thirteen hands in height. The
mules vary between thirteen and fifteen hands, can carry two hun-
dred pounds weight, and are hardy. Camels are chiefly used in the
eastern parts of Persia and can carry five maunds. The donkeys
are small but enduring and can generally carry a load of two
maunds.

Besides the transport animals above enumerated, there is
practically an unlimited supply of sheep and goats.

The modern history of Persia may be considered to date from
, r , TT . the rise of the Sufi dynasty in 1499 A.D. It

Modern History. J J t .

was founded by Ismail who captured Taonz
and in 1499 A.D. was proclaimed Shah. The greatest ruler of this
dynasty was, however, Shah Abbas I, who lived in the beginning of
the seventeenth century. From his successors, Turkey gained pos-
session of Georgia, Azarbaijan. and Kurdistan, and the Imams of
Masqat became supreme in the Persian Gulf. The Afghans regained
Herat and Kandahar and, in 1721, Kirman, and for the eight years
following the capture of Isfahan, Persia passed under Afghan rule.
Nadir Quli drove out the Afghans in 1736, but was assassinated
eleven years later. Then followed a period of anarchy. From
1760 to 1779 Karim Khan, a Zend Kurd, ruled Persia. On his
death Agba Muhammad founded the Kajar dynasty. He was mur-
dered and succeeded by his nephew, Fath ' AH Shah, in 1797. In 1800
he formed an alliance with Great Britain against the French.
Defeated by Russia, the treaty of 1813 deprived Persia of certain
provinces. In 1814 Britain agreed to assist Persia against invasion
under certain conditions. Another fatal war with Russia terminated
in 1828, and in 1834 Fath 'Ali died. His grandson, Muhammad
Mirza, succeeded him and besieged Herat in 1837, withdrawing on
the landing of an Indian force at Bushire. A Persian-Afghan