

The advance of the regiment, as rapid as circumstances would
permit, and the arrival in Kampala of the first detachment some
six weeks after leaving Ndi, followed at intervals of three weeks
by successive detachments, saved the situation. I look upon
this march as one of the most difficult performed by troops in
recent times, bearing in mind its length, that the transport consist-
ed solely of porters of various countries and dialects, and that
the caravans were run independently by officers of the regiment,
to whom the country and its ways were entirely strange.

Half way the Mau range of mountains had to be crossed at an
altitude of 8,200 feet, where, in contrast to the first part of the
march, the cold was intense, killing several of the porters. From
here the road lay through dense primeval forests, or through miles of
elephant grass along a single path. Two rivers of considerable depth,
which had mud and slush for a mile on each side, had to be crossed.
The Nile was crossed in canoes. The elements themselves
were dead against us, for it rained every day from the day
we left Machakos to arrival at Kampala, and in Usogo and
Uganda heavy thunderstorms occurred daily. The detachments
on arrival in Uganda received no rations till I brought them up
myself in July. Major Price's detachment, which was the first to
arrive in Uganda, were five months without rations, and this officer
existed himself for three weeks solely on Indian corn. The regi-
ment succeeded, notwithstanding difficulties in getting to Uganda,
completely smashing up the mutineers of the Uganda Rifles and
in restoring quiet and order in the whole Protectorate." 1

1 It must, be noted, that the severest vious operations, which are of great ini-

fighting was over before the arrival portance but do not come within the

of the 27th, the mutineers having been scope of this work, will be found in Major

signally defeated at Kabagambi and H. H. Austin's book, with Macdonald t»

driven out of the country at the end of Uganda.
February. A full account of the pre-

EXPEDITION TO UGANDA. 207

The casualties of the 27th Bombay Infantry during the cam-
paign were: —

Killed. — Two native officers, one lance naik and 18 privates.
Wounded. — One British officer, one native officer, one naik, one bugler
and 17 privates.

Died from disease — One native officer and 13 privates.

The total killed and wounded during the operations from be-
ginning to end amounted to 835, the greater number having occurred
prior to the arrival of the expeditionary force from India.

APPENDIX.

SUPPLY AND TRANSPORT.

The difficulties of transport in Africa at that time will be gathered from
the foregoing narrative, which may be supplemented from a report by
Lieutenant E. G. Vaughan, Chief Commissariat Officer in British East
Africa, dated Kilkuyu, 10th July 1898, in which he gives some valuable
information regarding supply. •

Lieutenant Vaughan arrived in Mombasa in April 1898, and on May 4th
despatched supplies for the troops in Jubaland. Next day he left to try and
catch up Colonel Broome. He found that supplies f ov the Indian troops which
were despatched from Bombay were sometimes even weeks on the railway
part of the journey alone, and it took him nine days to travel by rail the 150
miles from Mombasa to Ndi. At Ndi he was delayed five days for donkey
transport, and eventually left that place on the 18th May. The system of
transport from the rail-head was by contract at Bs. 35 per load of 50ffi to
Kikuyo, a fifteen days' march. The contractors were few, and somtimes
there was a delay of days and weeks before they took up loads. This they did
in their on time. Swahili "boys " drove the donkeys to Kikuyo, but could
not be persuaded to go any further. The donkeys had only a pad, and the
loads were sewn up in a " gunny " roll, and placed one on each side of the pad.
No waterproof covering was provided f orthe loads, which invariably got wet
in crossing rivers. From Kikuyo onwards poiters were employed to take on
the loads, but these were only obtained with great difficulty, and exhibited a
strong preference for bags over boxes or packages. They were usually of the
Wakikuyu tribes. The rates per load from Kikuyu to the Ravine (10 to 22
marches) varied from Rs. 25 to Rs. 35. The same rates from the Ravine
to Mumias, about the same distance, and slightly higher from Mumias to
Kampala. Thus each load cost about Rs. 100 from the railhead alone, or
Re. 150 from time of purchase to that of consumption by the troops.