

224 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

treaty was effected in 1842. Muhammad Mirza died in 1848
and was succeeded by his son, Nasr-ud-Din, who occupied Herat
in 1852. When the Crimean War broke out, Great Britain declined
Persia's proferred services; strained relations ensued, and the
Persians again occupied Herat. An expedition was sent to Bushire
under Sir James Outram, and that place and Muhammareh were
captured, the Persians losing heavily. After the treaty of Persia in
1857 the British force was withdrawn.

The population of Persia is now about nine millions. The
Tanks are Persian- speaking lowlanders, and

Ethnography. J . ., r 6

are mostly !shi ahs. Jews are found inmost
of the large towns. There are about fifty thousand Armenians,
more than eight hundred thousand Turks and Turkomans, the same
number of Kurds and Leks, three hundred thousand Arabs, about
two hundred thousand Lurs, Baluchis, and Gypsies.

The Turks are found chiefly in the north and north-west.
The Kurds inhabit Azarbaijan and the highlands of western
Persia. The Leks are generally distributed over Persia, the
Arabs dwell on the borders of the Persian Gulf, the Lurs
in the mountainous western district the Baluchis in Baluchis-
tan and Sistan ; the Gypsies are found in Southern Persia

The prevailing religion is the Shi'ah form

of Muhammadanism, though there are

nearly one million Sunnis, and some Christians, Jews and

Zoroastrians. Babiism, founded in 1844, claims six hundred

thousand adherents.

The army numbers less than one hundred thousand badly
equipped, badly armed men. The soldier's
y profession is unpopular, and owing to that

and absence of funds, the army has been reduced to a state of com-
parative insignificance.

Military Operations.

Expedition to the Persian Gulf, 1838.

In November 1837 a Persian army commenced tne siege of
Herat, 1 and on the 1st May 1838 Lord Auckland wrote to the Bri-

1 An account of this siege and of the events to which it gave ri:ie will be found in

Volume III.

PERSIA. 225

tish Minister at Tehran suggesting that it would aid negotiations
were some cruisers and a regiment of Native Infantry despatched
to the Persian Gulf to hold themselves in readiness for any service
upon which it might be expedient to employ them.

Accordingly the " Semiramis " sailed on the 4th June with
eleven officers and three hundred and eighty soldiers. The ship
first touched at Masqat and thence proceeded to Bushire and
Kharag, where the troops and some marines were landed on the
19th July. No opposition was met with; in fact the Governor
placed the island and all it contained at the disposal of the expedi-
tion. Some additional troops and stores were afterwards brought
to Kharag and it is certain that this demonstration largely contri-
buted to bring the Shah to his senses. On the raising of the siege
of Herat in September the ships were withdrawn. A garrison was,
however, kept at Kharag until January 1842 when it was
removed ; a step which met with some criticism.