

Anohonge »t »mmare . wat ^ ^^ Jn ^ jj affar an( j Shatt-al-'Arab,

north of Muhammareh. The shore is, however, difficult for cavalry

SKETCH

OF NEIGHBOURHOOD OF

AHWAZ

/ Landing place __

I— I ,_-

78

U

Zo»f sandstone hills

Barren Plain

Sole 4 inches — 1 mile

I B Topo Dy No « 952
Rid. C. J. A . October 1907

No. 4,179-L. 1907.

■* PERSIA. 241

and impossible for artillery. The facilities for landing here are
great and, by careful reconnaissance, points along the bank can
be found, where creeks do not exist and troops can at once
march inland. The vast camping-ground is the high open plain,
one and a half miles behind the town and the Haffar supplies
drinking water.

To follow up the enemy and destroy his magazines at Ahwaz,
an expedition was organized to ascend

Expedition to Ahwaz. ... _,.

the river in three steamers. The troops
told off for the service were 160 men from the flank companies of
the 64th Regiment, and a like number of the 78th Highlanders.
Each steamer took one hundred men. The force started on
the morning of the 28th March, and anchored at sunset near the
ruined fort of Kutal-al-' Abd. The Karun is here one hundred yards
™ v wide and two to three fathoms deep, with a

The Karun river. r '

strong current. The banks are fringed
with dwarf poplar and willow jungle. Below this point to
Muhammareh the river varies in width from ninety to one
hundred and eighty yards with, usually, high banks covered
with tamarisk and dwarf poplar.

Getting under weigh at davlight on the 30th March, the ruined
mosque of Imam Sab'eh, the enemy's second halting ground,
was reached early in the afternoon. The river now begins to bend
sharply and progress was slow. The expedition anchored for the
night off the Arab village of Ismaini, when a report was received
that 7 regiments, 2,000 horse and 4 guns of the enemy had
passed up the previous day. One gun, with a broken carriage,
was towed up. Next morning an early start was made and at 9 A.M.
the first straggler was captured. In the evening at Kut-al-Amaireh
Arabs brought supplies and information that the enemy had reached
Ahwaz on the 30th but had not yet crossed the river. At 3 a.m.
on the 1st April the pursuit was resumed, and soon after day-light

«„; , . ., Ahwaz was sighted and the Persian army

Arrival at Ahwaz. . .

seen drawn up behind a ridge on the right
bank. Four masses of infantry were partially screened by sand-
hills ; three guns were near a small mosque in the centre, and a fourth
below and to the left of it. Their line fronted down the river,

making a slight angle with it, and the left rested on the bank.
vol. vi 6 J6

242 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The flotilla steamed to within three thousand yards, capturing a
boat with a gun. Some Arabs from Ahwaz now came on board
and gave information that the garrison of the village only numbered
about five hundred. It was determined to land on the left bank
and reconnoitre Ahwaz, a gun-boat firing on the village to cover
the movement, and also the retirement if necessary. The enemy
had no means of crossing the river.