

Between the 1st and 15th January, Shif, north-north-east of
Bushire, was visited and the creek behind Shaikh Sa'd explored.
Shif is a good landing-place at high water but there is no fresh
water there.

On January 20th the enemy were reported to have descended
the pass to Nanizak and Borazjun, in numbers esti.nated at about
ten thousand with some twelve guns, with the intention of advanc-
ing on Bushire. The liberated garrison had taken the road to
Shiraz, where they were reorganized and equipped. They formed
part of the above named foice.

On the 20th January Sir James Outram, with his staff, arrived

Arrival of sir James and assumed chief command. On the 30th

Outram. an( j 31st tne 78th Highlanders and the

26th Native Infantry arrived.

Supplies of all descriptions were plentiful and good in camp,

Demeanour of inhabit- and the surrounding inhabitants were evi-

anta ' dently pleased at the British occupation,

the treatment they received from the British troops contrasting

favourably with the exactions of the former Persian garrison.

230 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Sir James Outram was armed with full diplomatic powers,
Formation of second Di- and reinforcements to form a 2nd Divi-
vision. s ion were placed at his disposal. These

additional troops were : —

14th King's Light Dragoons,
1,000 Sind Horse (Jacob's Horse),
78th Highlanders,
23rd Native Light Infantry, 1
26th Native Infantry, 2
and a Light Battalion of the ten Light Companies of different native
regiments not employed with the Field Force.

The first Division (Major-General Stalker) consisted of : —
Her Majesty's 64th Regiment.
2nd Bombay European Regiment.
4th Regiment Native Infantry.
20th „

2nd Baluch Battalion. 3

Headquarters and two squadrons, 3rd Regiment.
Bombay Light Cavalry.
2 troops, Poona Irregular Horse.
A troop of Horse Artillery.

2 Companies, European Field and Reserve Artillery.
Headquarters and two companies Bombay Sappers and
Miners.
The Second Division was under Brigadier-General Havelock,
C.B., with Brigadier Hamilton, 78th Highlanders, and Brigadier
Hale, Bombay Army, Commanding the two brigades.

Troops.

1st Brigade.
78th Highlanders.
26th Native Infantry.

2nd Brigade.
23rd Native" Light Infantry.
The Light Battalions.

Preset designations —
123r Outxam's Rifles. > 126th Baluchistan Infantry.

■ 129th D. C. O. Baluohi§.

PERSIA. 231

Cavalry Brigade. Colonel Steuart, 14th Light Dragoons.
14th King's Light Dragoons.
3rd Regiment, Sind Horse.
Artillery Brigade — Brigadier Hill.
One troop, Horse Artillery.
Two Field Batteries.

Brigadier- General Jacob, c.b., Sind Horse, commanded the
cavalry of both divisions.

The General now decided to attack the Persians at Borazjun
and destroy their magazines, under the

Attack on Borazjun. . J °

impression that the force at that place
was destined to recapture Bushire. As the reports furnished by
the Intelligence Department stated that large reinforcements
were joining and their advanced parties of horse had begun to
check the supply of provisions to Bushire it was imperative to
strike a blow at once.