

On the arrival of the main body the enemy withdrew into the
fort. Both Brigades deployed and opened fire, the 4th Bombay
Rifles occupying Rishehr (Rashir) and extending to the coast ; the
2nd Brigade storming the left breach, with the Baluchis on the
extreme left. Under cover of the fire of the artillery and men-of-war
the fort was assaulted and its defenders driven out. Had the fort
been in repair, and properly defended, its capture would have been
difficult, except by escalade. The Tangistanis fought resolutely to
the last.

Brigadier -General Stopford was killed at the head of the Bri-
gade and two other officers were killed and

Casualties. °

one wounded. The cavalry cut up the
fugitives escaping along the beach, and here Colonel Malet was
killed by a man to whom he had given quarter.

Leaving the Baluch regiment to hold the fort, the force
bivouacked outside, facing Bushire, the right resting on Imam-
zadeh, which was held by three companies of the 64th.

At 8 a.m. on the 10th the column resumed its march towards
Bushire. The fleet, contrary to the arranged programme, began
to bombard the town before the column started.

No enemy was seen until the troops arrived within one mile
. n , . of the town, and the Persians abandoned

Occupation of Bushire. . .

the outer defences without awaiting their
near approach. The beach batteries were occupied by our forces
prior to breaching the town walls.

The men-of-war now ceased firing, and the column advanced
to within 500 yards of the walls, the horse artillery and cavalry
taking up a position near the creek to intercept the flight of the
enemy, who. in the absence of any gunboats there, were crossing.

Without further operations the town capitulated, the garrison,
consisting of 2 000 regulars marching out and delivering up their
arms, which bore the Tower- mark and had been presented by the
English to the Persian Government in former days with an eye
to Russian aggression.

The f rce now returned to the previous bivouac the wells,
and on the 11th headquarters were established at the Kalat tower

PERSIA. 2^9

where the Daria Begi and Commander-in Chief were kept prisoners

pending their despatch to Bombay.

On the 20th a reconnaissance was pushed to Tulsiah, eighteen

m . . . miles from Bushire, with the object of show-
Reconnaissance to lulsiah. ,

ing our troops and guns and to warn the
villagers to bring in supplies and information. On December 25th
the enemy were reported to have reached Kalimeh, above the
Haft Mulleh pass. The Persians had collected about 4,000
men at Shiraz and also supplies of flour and ammunition at
Borazjun and Chah Kutah, forty-five and twenty miles from
Bushire.

On the 1st January 1857 a party, consisting of the 3rd Cavalry
Destruction of depot at and the Poona Horse with three Horse Artil-
lery guns, marched at 3 a.m. to destroy the
depot at Chah Kutah which was reached at 10-30 a.m. 3,00ulb of
powder were blown up and the grain partially destroyed, and the
party turned to camp at 11 p.m. having marched forty -four
miles.