

Persian defence. . . .

maintained with great spirit for some time,

when storming parties from four of the war vessels drove off the

„ , , . enemy.and took possession of the works and

Naval casualties. mi i

guns. The naval casualties were five killed
and eighteen wounded. The Sind horse pushed to the front without
encountering the enemy.

Our troops now advanced against the enemy's camp in a line
... . ,. of columns with the field battery on the right,

Attack on the camp. J ° ">

then the 78th Highlanders, £ 26th Native

Infantry, His Majesty's 64th Regiment, the Light Battalion, the

23rd Bombay Light Infantry ; the whole covered by skirmishers.

Up to the moment of our advance the Persian troops were

Persian position. drawn up in order of battle outside the

Shahzadeh's camp, the right of their line

far out-flanking our left, whose only protection was the 23rd Native

Infantry which was slightly thrown back. When within gun range

of the camp the Persians literally vanished.

240 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS TROM INDIA.

Report had it that, though at first confident, the size and effect of
the 68-pounder shot proved too much for their nerves ; and very early
in the day they had lost their most able chief, Sartip Agha Jehan
Khan. In the north battery Prince Khanlar Mirza was in command.

Every tent was left standing. The ground was strewn,«with
arms, accoutrements, ammunition, etc. Large quantities of grain
and flour and eighteen brass guns and mortars were secured.
The want of cavalry prevented an effective pursuit.

The troops bivouacked where they stood in line of battle ; during

the night there was a false alarm when two

piquets fired into each other, and five

men were wounded. The Horse Artillery and 14th Dragoons came up

_, „ during the night. On the 27th the troops

Flight of Persians. , ° & .,,*-, -C

marched back and occupied Muhammaren.
The loss of the enemy was estimated at three hundred ; many
^^, of the wounded were butchered by Arabs

during their flight. The British casualties
were ten men killed and one officer and thirty men wounded.
On inspection the batteries were found to '^be much damaged.
The works were strong and well constructed.
Persian defences. with parapets ten feet thick at the top

and nearly double that at the base. The
north battery had embrasures for eighteen guns, and stood on
the right bank of the Karun, at its junction with the Shatt-al-'Arab.
The southern battery, on the opposite bank, mounted eleven guns.
A small fort between the northern battery and the town, and con-
nected with the former by an entrenchment, also mounted eight or
nine guns. This entrenchment, crowded with infantry, had kept up
heavy musketry fire during the action. Several smaller batteries,
of from two to four guns, were on either bank, and, just outside
the west face of the town, on the right bank, was a strong, well-
made work for ten guns. The total of the Persian force engaged
was computed at thirteen thousand.

Ships of 600 tons can lie in the Haffar channel and smaller
vessels can lie close in shore, and at low