

Great delay was caused by the difficult nalas for the first three

Accident to Sir Jamea miles. At 11-30 p.m., the column passed

Outram. Khush Ab and halted. Hearing that the

rear-guard was attacked the General and statr galloped back, and,

the former's horse falling, he was for some hours incapacitated-

SKETCH

OF ACTION OF

KHUSHAB

Scale 4 inches

KHUSHAB
O

3rd. Troop HH.4.

f 5 '

«£

fc

&

Baluchis

,^»

llkhanis Horse

26th N I

*t 3rd. Troop ^

C^ flNl charge of Csralry
,78th Highlanders

I. B. Topo. Dy. No. *.9fil.
Bxd. C J. A. October 1»0T.

No. 4,178-L. 1907.

PE&BIA.

J33

The column closed up and moved towards the water, three miles

beyond Khush Ab ; here, the guide los-

[ Night attack at Khush Ab. .^ ^ way> the column nalte d, SUWOUnded

by the enemy who kept up a constant fusillade. The night was in-
tensely dark. The enemy's horse showed great boldness, dashing
close up to the line and firing ; the troops, however, behaved with
steadiness, and took up their positions in the dark as if upon
parade. A square formation was adopted, with the field guns at
intervals and skirmishers connecting and covering all, baggage and
followers in the centre. Thus formed, the troops lay down, waiting
for daylight in perfect silence.

At 4-30 a.m. on the 8th the enemy's artillery opened on the
force with effect ; our guns replied, and in half an hour the enemy
ceased firing and moved to another position. Our losses were one
man killed and two officers and six men wounded ; several followers
and transport animals were killed.

At daybreak the enemy were discovered to the left rear, drawn

Action at Khush Ab. U P in line ' the Centre 0U lisin g E T0 ^^ With

guns on both flanks and in the centre ;
the cavalry were on the left flank one mile from the infantry. Their
right flank rested on the walled village of Khush Ab and a date grove ;
their left on a hamlet with round towers at intervals ; deep nalas
lined with skirmishers protected the right front and flank. They
numbered about 6,000 infantry and 2,000 horse. Shuja'-ul-Mulk
commanded in chief, with the Ilkhani of the Qashqai commanding
the cavalry, his tribal levies, in person.

Our guns moved to the front and opened fire ; the cavalry

swept round the base of the hill, in column of troops, and charged

the Persian cavalry and the left of their line, before our infantry

was within musket range. Without awaiting the shock the enemy's

cavalry moved off to the Haft Mull eh pass. The charge and artillery

fire shook the infantry considerably. Meanwhile our infantry

deployed ; 78th Highlanders and 26th Native Infantry in front,

the 64th and 20th Native Infantry in the second line, and the 2nd

■Brigade and baggage in rear. Skirmishers and cavalry covered

the front, flank and rear. The enemy's round shot passed over the

second line but their shells struck the second line and artillery.

Without awaiting the infantry attack the enemy broke and fled,

234 FRONTIER AND VERSE AS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.