

The following is a precis of the orders
0rders - issued for the attack :—

1. The war vessels and transport to move up the Shatt-al-'Arab

and anchor four miles below its junction with the Bahman-
shix.

2. During the night, after the arrival of sappers and artillerymen, to

erect a mortar battery on Dubbar island

3. The mortars to open fire on the enemy's works at dawn ; the war

vessels to move to the south-west point of the island and open
fire at 800 yards, closing as opportunity offers.

4. The troops to be towed to the left bank of the Shatt-al-'Arab and

be landed immediately below Jabis fort.

5. Orders giving details of disembarkation.

Soon after daylight on the 24th March the fleet was ready to

Rendezvous start for the second rendezvous at Hartheh.

The fleet consisted of 14 steamers and 21

transports, besides smaller craft. The enemy made no attempt at

molestation. At noon the Hartheh battery was passed and found

to be deserted, it was well placed to rake

Preliminary arrangements. . , , ,

the river. At 1 p.m. the fleet anchored
off Hartheh, within sight of Muhammareh. The Arabs, putting
off from the shore, gave information about the enemy. Dubbar
island proving too swampy to permit of the erection of a battery,
it was decided to construct a raft for four mortars, which would
be towed up during the night within range of the batteries. On
the 25th the arrangements were completed. The enemy continued
to throw up breastworks on either bank of the Hafiar.

At daylight on the 26th the mortar battery, placed in position

Bombard e during the previous night, opened fire with

effect from the two 8 -inch mortars, the

range being too long for the 5j-inch ones. The enemy soon found

PERSIA. 239

the range, and, had they possessed any enterprise, they might have
captured or destroyed it before ths arrival of the steamers. The
latter started at 6-30 a.m., passed the southern batteries, near the
point of Dubbar, and opened fire ; two taking station near the mouth
of the Bahmanshir within two hundred yards of the batteries. Both
sides made excellent practice. The bombardment continued until
8 A.M. At 9-30 the transports advanced, a gun from 'Abbadan
opening upon them in succession. The steamer carrying the High-
landers passed within 100 yards of the batteries but, though struck
in hull and rigging, the decks escaped. The transports pushed on
to the ground above the batteries, which had ceased firing, under
the fire of two field-pieces.

The Highlanders and the Grenadiers of the 64th now landed

and advanced in skirmishing order ; the
infantry attack. rema i D der of the infantry, with a battery

and fifty of the Sind Horse, were on shore by 2 p.m. and the
rising tide making the ground impassable for the horse artillery
and troop of the 14th Dragoons, the General determined to advance
with the troops which were already on shore.

As soon as the batteries were silent, musketry fire was opened from

them, as well as from the breastworks, and