

throwing away their arms, accoutrements, and even their clothing,

our artillery followed and the cavalry formed up for a second

charge and pursued for three miles, returning to camp at 10 a.m.

The enemy's horse displayed no courage nor courted an engage-

Casuaities ment. The Persians left 700 dead upon

the field. The British losses were two

officers and eighteen men killed and four officers and sixty men

wounded. Nothing but the paucity of our cavalry prevented

the total destruction of the enemy and the capture of all their guas,

two of which they abandoned.

The force bivouacked at midday near the field of action. Rain

began to fall and continued incessantly for

ncemen wea msi. several days, accompanied by a cold wind.

At 8 p.m. the force commenced its return march, through

country which was now a swamp and ankle -deep in mud.

About midnight a broad stream was crossed, which caused some
confusion. At 5-30 a.m. Chaghadak was neared ; but, the guide
losing his way, a halt was made till daybreak. Chahgadak was
reached at 7 a.m., and here the artillery, cavalry and Baluch and
rifle battalions halted. The European corps, 20th and 26th Native
„ _ . D , . Infantry resumed ,the maTch at 2 p.m.

Return to JBushire. J <■ • t> 1."

in ihe midst of heavy rain, reaching isusnire
at 9 p.m., tired out but in good spirits ; the remainder of the
force reached camp on the morning of the 10th February. The
whole division was in a deplorable condition. The boots were drag-
ged from the feet by the mud, so that half, at least, of the 78th
returned bare-footed. Next day a new pair of boots was issued to
each soldier gratis. The troops had marched forty-six miles in
foTty-one hours to meet the enemy, and on the night after the battle
had accomplished a march of twenty miles over nearly impassable
country; and after a rest of six hours, twenty-four miles more, the
whole, including the fight, having occupied thirty hours.

From information given by the wounded Persian soldiers

Behaviour of the Persian and the Intelligence Department, it was

troop*- ascertained that the Shuja'-ul-Mulk received

his first information of the advance of the English army on the 4th

February, one day after the force marched. The Persian cavalry

retired from the field at the very outset of the action and made

PERSIA. 236

straight for the Haft Mulleh pass. After the cavalry charge,
the officers of the infantry, who were mounted, abandoned their
men. The Shahin-Shah gave his version of the affair in the Tehran
The shah's account of Gazette Extraordinary. Briefly put, his army
the engagement, had proved victorious and pursued the

enemy within ten miles of Bushire, when the latter received rein-
forcements and turned back to fight, the Persians, only numbering
three thousand, enthusiastically taking up the challenge. They
fought heroically for four hours, twice breaking into the English
squares. The battle had to be broken off on account of the in-
tensity of the rain, each side abandoning guns which stuck in
the mud. The English loss is roughly put at one thousand while
the Persian army lost about half that number.