

Accordingly, on the evening of 3rd February, the following
force marched from camp. Four hundred cavalry, 18 guns, 120
Sappers, the 1st and 2nd Brigades, 1st Division, and the 1st
Brigade, 2nd Division. About two thousand troops were left to
guard the camp.

No tents were taken ; the men carried two days' cooked rations
and the commissariat three days' provisions for the force. At 6-30
a.m. on the 4thChah Kutah was reached and the troops halted for
the day on a fine, open plain. Two good wells furnished an abun-
dance of water.

At 4 p.m. the troops started again in a north-easterly direction.
At seven miles lrom Chah Kutah the village of 'Isa vand was reached,
a few Persian horsemen galloping out at the same time. At ten miles
a halt, in the order of march, was made on rising ground close to
the village of Khush Ab. Heavy rain fell for four hours and severely
tried the force, which had marched thirty miles. At 7 a.m.
on the 5th the march was resumed. At two miles Khush Ab, four
miles from Borazjun, was passed ; this place was screened from view
by date groves, that on the right containing wells of good water;
the General occupied this with the intention of attacking the town
from the south-east. The grovet were found to be unoccupied

232 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Gaining the heights overlooking the town, the enemy were seen
. to be deserting their camp to the north-

east of it and to be moving towards the
Haft Mulleh pass and the hills three miles distant. The horse
artillery and cavalry moved in pursuit of several large bodies
moving to the south-east along the foot of the hills, but
desisted.

During the retirement, the enemy's cavalry covering the re-
treat advanced and opened a sharp skirmish with our cavalry,
dashing by and discharging their muskets while at full gallop and
wounding three men. Although the ground was very difficult and
unsuited to our cavalry, the Persians galloped over it, being driven
off by a few shots from our rear-guard. The troops were those
of the Ilkhani of the Qashqai irregulars, the stoutest of the
Persian forces. The regular troops and guns, under the Shuja'-ul-
Mulk, had retired to Daliki. The Ilkhani's cavalry hovered
around the rear-guard and killed two dhooly-bearers.

The force bivouacked in the enemy's camp, where was found
,...,, a large quantity of stores and ammuni-

Oocupation of enemy e camp. 01 j

tion.

An alarm on the night of the 6th caused the troops to stand
to their arms, but finding them prepared and it being a bright
moonlight night, the enemy drew off. Intercourse between the
camp and village was encouraged and the villagers became civil,
if not friendy, and gave no trouble.

The General, hearing that the enemy was moving with his
OrderB for return to artillery into the Mulleh pass, and provi-
ushire ' sions beginning to fail, abandoned the

idea of following them up, and issued orders for the return of the
force to Bushire. Accordingly at 8 p.m. on the 7th the return
march commenced, the enemy's stock of powder, sheila and
combustibles being destroyed.