

No. 3 Troop, Horse Artillery, 6 guns
14th Dragoons (troop)
Sind Horse
64th Regiment

78th Highlanders
Light Battalion
26th Native Infantry
23rd Native Infantry
Madras Sappers and Minora 2
Bombay Sappers and Miners

166
166
89
704
830
920
716
749
124
109

1 This suicide was followed three daya Navy.
later by that of Commodore Ethersey, who * Now the 2nd (Q. O.) Sappers and

had a distinguished career in the Indian Miners.

PEBBIA. 237

The total strength of tbe expedition was 392 horses ; 1,534
European and 2,385 Native Infantry ; 342 Artillery and 12 guns.
Total 4,886 men with 4 armed steamers and 2 sloops of war.

Under the command of General Jacob at Bushire there re-
_ . , „ , . mained two field batteries and the moun-

Garnson of Bushire. . ...

tain train, the cavalry of the 1st Division,
and three companies each of H. M.'s 64th, the 4th Rifles, 20th Native
Infantry and Baluch Battalion.

Sir James Outram, weighing the advantages of an advance on
Shushtar or Shiraz, decided in favour of the former on military,
sanitary, and political considerations.

Previous to the sailing of the expedition, a mission proceeded
to Muhammareh to secure the friendly co-

Mission to Muhammareh. ,• <■ , i » i ., -i . i *x

operation of the Arab tribes to whom it
belonged, and to obtain information regarding the strength of the
Persian army, the defensive works, the navigation of the Shatt-al-
'Arab, etc.

Six James Outram hoped to raise levies among the nomads

Organization of levies. on the confines of Western Persia. Lord

Clarendon's instructions had assumed that
there were independent tribes among those with whom the General
would come into contact, and, to avoid complications, had restricted
him from seeking the aid of others. But whether independent or
semi-independent, the sovereignty of the soil on which they lived
was a question which could not be disregarded. Outram's idea was
that we could avail ourselves of the services of the nomads living,
some in Turkish, some on Persian territory, and some migrating
periodically from one to the other, provided that at the close of
the war, an amnesty were proclaimed to all who befriended us
while the war lasted. *

The expedition started six weeks later than had been expected
owing to the non- arrival of reinforcements
xpe i ion. ^ n( j ^ e unexpected strength of the arma-
ments prepared by the enemy before Bushire. The rendezvous
below Muhammareh was reached between the 21st and 23rd. At
the anchorage the river was three-quarters of a mile broad, and both
banks were covered with date-groves. The reports concerning

238 FRONTIER AND VERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

the Arabs were reassuring, and they brought off sheep and

supplies to the ships.

General Outram resolved to attack the enemy's batteries with
.,. , t . . the armed ships and, as soon as the fire

Plan of attack. r

was nearly silenced, to land the force two
miles above the northern point of the Haffar canal, and immediately
attack the entrenched camp.