

Preparations were now made for the expedition to Muham-
Preparations for expedi- mareh. Materials for the barracks for
tion to Muhammarch. one European regiment were provided at
Bushire. Hospitals were prepared at Kharag, which was
found remarkably healthy when formerly held. The remainder of
the month of February was passed in comparative idleness awaiting
the arrival of the Second Division, which was delayed by heavy
weather. Strong north-west winds also delayed the embarkation

of the expedition. The supplies brought

in decreased after the action of the 8th, and

forage in particular became scarce. Every regiment furnished

daily three hundred men as a working-party, which duty had a most

beneficial effect upon the health of the men. Five strong redoubts

were built and armed with guns of position.

Defences. . or

The prevailing high winds caused great
annoyance from the drifting sand, blowing from the north-west
from 9 a.m. till sun-down.

By the 1st March the 3rd Troop, Horse Artillery, was embarked.

Startoftheexpodition. 0n the 6th and 6th th<J 64th ftnd E detach '

ment 78th Highlanders sailed for the
rendezvous off Muhammareh. A troop of the 14th Dragoons,
arriving unexpectedly, also proceeded with the expedition. The
duration of the voyage to Muhammareh was only thirty hours.

On the 9th March, a wing of the 26th Native Infantry embarked,
delayed in the operation by heavy weather.

236

FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

On the 6th March three more companies of the Light Battalion
arrived off Bushire, and shortly after the 4th Troop, Horse Artillery,
one troop, 3rd Cavalry, and the remaining company of the Light
Battalion, and all passed on towards Muhammareh.

The Turks remonstrated against the movement on Muham-
Objcchons by Turkish Gov- mareh, as it necessitated the navigation of
eminent. the Shatt-al-Arab, the right bank of which

is in Turkish territory. They also advanced a claim to the town,
and the question arose whether it should be made over to the Pasha
of Baghdad when captured. The local tribes objecting to Turkish
rule, the claim was kept in abeyance ; but the^circumstance was
considered to be of no moment.

On the 14th March General Stalker shot himself in a
moment of mental derangement. 1 He was

Suicide of General Stalker. ^ t • ,■■ n mi_ _:„_ U,r

most popular with all. The senior by
service to Sir James Outram, the latter had, with his well known
generosity, arranged to allow General Stalker to carry out the cap-
ture of Bushire, should it still be holding out when he arrived
and proposed to leave him in command of that place, while he
himself proceeded to Muhammareh and Shushtar. General Jacob
was placed in command at Bushire.

The 4th Troop, Horse Artillery, returned to Bushire from
Muhammareh on the 19th March. The Persian attempts to
strengthen that place were reported to have been very successful.

On this day the headquarters of the Muhammareh Expedi-
tionary Force left Bushire.

Men.
No. 2 Light Field Battery, 6 guns.. .. ..176