

Repulse of the troop,. § enelal TetTeat to ° k P laCe and the h ° W "

itzer was abandoned, the force seeking
cover behind the sandy hillocks below the castle walls. All at-
tempts to rescue the howitzer being frustrated, the troops remained

under cover until darkness fell, when they

Re-embarkation. re-embarked without molestation. The

fort now suffered much damage from the

fire of the gun-boats, and a second summons to surrender was sent to

the commander under threat of a further and heavier bombardment.

At dawn a man was seen waving a Union Jack from the walls.

Daring action by Lieutenant Lieutenant Hall, of the Bombay Marine, had
Hall, Indian Navy. gone on shorG) alon6) dm [ ng tne night and

advanced to the gate. The fortress had been already abandoned
by most of its defenders and the remainder fled, not supposing

THE ARABIAN PENINSULA, ETC. 249

that an individual would advance without support. The town
and fortifications were taken possession of and eleven dhows

burned.

On the arrival of the expedition at Shanas on the 31st Decem-
ber a summons to surrender was sent to

Attack on Shanas. ^ ^^ ^ to ^^ he iepUed fey &

prompt refusal. An ineffective bombardment was thereupon
opened. On the following morning the troops were landed and
encamped on the shore. The fortress was again heavily bombarded
throughout the night of the 2nd January and early on the morning
of the 3rd a second summons to surrender was sent, but the
Chief answered that he preferred death. He and his followers made

a desperate resistance, but when the fortress

Desperate resistance. n , , i , j ,i_

was about to be stormed the garrison
surrendered. The enemy's loss is said to have been one thousand.
The expedition returned to Bombay.

Second expedition to Ras al-Khaimah, 1819.

In 1819 the Bombay Government, resolving to take decisive
measures for extinguishing piracy in the
.Persian Gulf, assembled a powerful arma-
ment at Bombay.

The troops numbered one thousand six hundred and forty -five
Europeans and one thousand four hundred

Composition of force. A

and twenty-four sepoys, under the com-
mand of Major-General Sir W. G. Keir. The force consisted of
one company of artillery, His Majesty's 47th and 65th Regiments,
the 1st Battalion, 1 2nd Regiment Native Infantry, the flank com-
panies of the 1st Battalion, 3rd 2 Native Infantry, the Marine* Bat-
talion, and half a company of Pioneers. A number of His Majesty's
and the Company's ships formed part of the expedition. Eighteen
transports conveyed the troops and stores.

The artillery and British regiments embarked on the 30th

October and the native troops on the

following day. Store and hospital ships

were taken up during the next two days, and on the 3rd November,

1 Now 103rd Light Infantry. 2 n ow 105th ^ight Infantry.

3 Now 121st Pioneers.

JJ60 Frontier and overseas expeditions Prom iNbiA.

Sir Grant Keir having embarked, the first division proceeded to
sea. The remainder of the expedition sailed for the Gulf a few
days later. The expedition was undertaken none too soon, for a
pirate fleet of sixty -four sail was reported in October to have been
cruising off Kattiawar and Kutch, and thirty-five sail of the Joasmi
were off the coasts of Makran and Sind.