

party. On the morning of the 6th three

Cannonade of town. is-pounders opened on the fort, and with

a couple of howitzers and 6-pounders nearly silenced the enemy's

fire. The Liverpool also opened on the town, but at too great

a range to have much effect. The enemy

Counter-attack by enemy. sallied f ort h at 8 o'clock this evening

along the whole front of our entrenchments, crept unperceived close
up to the mortar battery, 'and, spearing the sentries, entered it.
The party which occupied it was obliged to retire, but, reinforced,
charged and drove the enemy out with considerable loss. The
covering party instantaneously repelled the attack on the left.
The enemy renewed his attacks towards morning, but was repulsed.

"During the night of the 7th the remaining guns and mortars
were brought up, and placed in battery with two 24-pounders

from the Liverpool, and in the morning

Opening of Mie batteries. ^ whole o{ Qur ordnance ope ned On the

fort and fired, with scarcely any intermission, till sunset, when the
breach on the curtain was reported nearly practicable and the towerB

252 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

almost untenable. Immediate arrangements were made for the
assault, and the troops were ordered to man the trenches at day-
break next morning. The breaches were completed by 8 a.m.
Orders were issued for the attack and measures taken to gtiard
against possible failure ; these precautions were, however, un-
, t . necessary. The storming party moved for-

Occupfttion of fort. J ° L

ward about 8 o'clock and entered the fort
without firing a shot ; and it soon appeared that the enemy had
evacuated the place. The town was taken possession of and found
to be almost entirely deserted. Our loss was much less than could
have been expected."

After the capture of Ras-al-Khaimahthe Curlew, Aurora, and
™ . , , „ Nautilus were despatched to blockade Rams,

Blorkacle of Kams. . x

six miles to the north-east. The town
was found to have been abandoned, but its inhabitants were
supposed to have taken shelter in the hill fort of Dhayah,
situated at the head of a creek two miles from the coast.
This place was held by over four hundred men under a
former vakil of the famous Wahabi Chief, Shaikh Husain
Bin ' Ali, whom it was necessary to subdue, as from his talents
and lawless habits, as well as from the strength and advantageous
position of his fort, he was likely to revive the piratical system
at the first favourable opportunity. The squadron proceeded
thither with thirty artillerymen, with two brass 12-pounders,
two 8-inch mortars, and four field pieces ; His Majesty's 65th Regi-
ment and the flank companies of the 1st battalion, 2nd Regiment
Native Infantry ; but the General, on his arrival, discovering that
the fortifications were more formidable than had been represented
ordered up the 47th and the flank companies of the 1st battalion,
3rd Native Infantry. Two 24-pounders were also landed from the
Liverpool.

The service that ensued, though short, was arduous in the extreme,