

To insure his army fighting to the last, the Shah had ordered
™ „, , , , . the hill-tribes to close the passes against

The Shah and his troops. . • j

them, leaving them no retreat. Five hundred
cavalry would therefore have secured for us the whole Persian
army. It is a pity that mismanagement should have lost the
opportunity.

At the end of April General Outram visited Kharag and Bushire,
Selection of place for gar" with the object of providing healthy shelter

for the force. After securing General Jacob's
consent to remain in command on his eventual departure for India,
he proceeded to Baghdad to arrange for the despatch of amission
to superintend the evacuation of Herat, finally leaving Persia on
June 17th.

Early in May the force at Muhammareh began to disperse ;

the Highlanders, horse artillery, mountain train and Madras Sappers

and Miners being the first to leave for India.

vol. vi , 6A

244 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

_ , . The troops at Bushire were organized as

Bushire garrison. °

follows : —
Cavalry Brigade — 3rd Eegiment Light Cavalry, Sind Horse, Poona Horse,

Aden troop, 14th King's Light Dragoons.
Artillery Brigade — 4th Troop Horse Artillery, 3rd, 5th, and 8th Light

Field Batteries, 3 companies, 2nd Battalion Artillery, 4 companies

4th Battalion Artillery.
Infantry —

1st Brigade, 20th and 26th Native Infantry.
2nd Brigade, 4th Bombay Native Infantry.
23rd Regiment, Light Infantry, and Baluch Battalion.
By the treaty of the 4th March 1857 the Shah engaged to
Provisions of the Treaty of withdraw his troops from Herat, to relin-
Pans- quish all claims to sovereignty over it, and

never to demand any marks of obedience from the chiefs. He
further agreed to abstain from all interference with the internal
affairs of Afghanistan. The British mission was to be received at
Tehran with apologies, and the slave trade was to be suppressed
in the Persian Gulf.

General Jacob used every endeavour to complete Bushire
as a depot of supply and to stock it with

Arrangements at Bushire. ^ provisions et(J> SmithSj carpenters

and tools were requisitioned from India, none being procurable
in Persia. The occupation of Bushire lasted until October, when
it was handed over to the Persians. A native infantry regiment
remained at Kharag, which was evacuated in February 1858.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.
Account of British wars with \ Persia. — Litutenant-Colonel M. S.
Bell. v.C, R.E.

CHAPTER XV.

THE ARABIAN PENINSULA AND THE ISLANDS OF PERIM AND SOCOTRA.

The Arabian Peninsula stretches southward from Edom and

the Syrian desert. Its size is about one-
Geographical situation. ^.^ ^ Qf ^^ ^ northem

boundary is a line joining the head of the Gulf of 'Aqabah with
that of the Persian Gulf — very nearly the parallel of 30° N.
On the west, south and east its shores are bathed respectively by
the waters of the Gulf of 'Aqabah and the Red Sea, of the Indian
Ocean and of the Persian Gulf. The west coast is almost a straight
line. It has open roadsteads but no true harbours. Towards the
south there are small islands, of which the most important is Perim,
at the entrance of the strait of Bab-al-Mandab. The south coast,
from the strait to Ras-al-Hadd, has some good harbours. Near
Ras-al-Hadd is Lashkharah, the head-quarters of theBanl-bu-'Ali
Arabs, Aden, Dafur, and Qishn. The east coast is nearly parallel
to the west, and has the almost land locked harbour of Masqat.
Close to the entrance to the Gulf lies the island of Qishm. To the
west of the Ruus-al-Jibal promontory is Ras al-Khaimah, for long
the stronghold of the Joasmi pirates. West of Qishm is the town
of Lingeh, visited by the expedition of 1820. Bahrain, famous for
its pearl-fisheries, is about 200 miles due west of Ras-al-Khaimah.
Kuwait is at the head of the Gulf. Sur is on the east coast of
'Oman. Aden is almost the most southerly point on the Arabian
coast and is a peninsula of an irregular oval form, about fifteen
miles in circumference, and connected with the mainland by a
narrow, eandy isthmus.