

chiefs, and on arrival a pilot was sent ashore in a boat ; the surf
being high, he swam ashore with the letter, but, on landing, was
cut to pieces. The boat's crew opened fire and killed several of
the natives. Captain Thompson determined to take measures to
punish this act of treachery, and a force consisting of six com-
panies of the 1st Battalion, 2nd Native In-
oxpe jo . f an t r y and Marine Battalion 1 with a party of
artillerymen and eight guns, was embarked and sailed for Masqat,
which was reached on the 11th October ; and quitted on the 22nd

after a plan of operations had been arranged

Co-operation of the Imam. •,■, ,-, T ct • 'j a vj i_ i_- i_ -j.

1 with the Imam, Saiyid ba id, by which it

was agreed that, as the landing at Lashkharah was nearly
impracticable and could not be supported by His Highness'
contingent of two thousand men, the expedition should proceed
to Sur and there be joined by the Imam's troops. A party of one
hundred seamen was landed to accompany the force, but owing to
Disagreement of Naval and differences between Captain Thompson and
Military Commanders. the Senior Naval officer, the Military Com-
mander declined the aid of the seamen, who re-embarked. This,
as will be seen, may be said to have mainly contributed to the
subsequent disaster.

On the 1st November the detachment marched from Sur,
accompanied by the Imam's contingent, com-
manded by the Prince in person, and taking
with them two 6-pounders, two howitzers, and two iron 18-pound-
ers, with nine hundred camels and other draught cattle. After a
Arrival at Baiad B»ni-bu- fatiguing march the force arrived within
H *"* n - three miles of Balad Bani-bu-Hasan, the

capital of the tribe, on the 8th November. An entrenched camp was
Summons to surrender formed and a demand was sent for the sur-
■ ent - render of their fortifications and town to-

gether with the murderers of the pilot. The summons was sent

* Now the 121st Pioneers.

THE ARABIAN PENINSULA, ETC. 255

in the name of the Imam, but conveyed an intimation from the
Political Agent that the British had entered upon hostilities to
punish the tribe for acts of piracy and, though they acted in
concert, the Imam and British were actuated by quite distinct
causes. The Bani-bu-'Ali professed themselves willing to comply,

with the exception of the rendering up of
Bad diplomacy. their arms _ Unhappily Captain Thompson

refused to waive the point. 1

Accordingly the force, with the exception of a camp-guard,
consisting of three hundred and eighty

Attack on> town. gepoyg ftud twQ ttousand of the I mam ' s

troops, moved on the following morning against the enemy's town,
which was situated with its rear resting on a date grove round
which it was necessary to pass to reach the assailable front, which
faced the sandy plain, and was protected by ditches. On arrival
near the town the light company of the 2nd Native Infantry
opened fire and began to fall back, according to orders, and soon
after about nine hundred of the enemy appeared in motion on some
elevated ground with the apparent design of turning the right flank.
The troops formed column of sections to the right but hesitated
to obey the order to fix bayonets. They