

owing to the difficulties of transporting
Skirmishes. ^ gung and storeS) and the re80 i u te defence

made by the enemy. Desultory firing took place between the 18th
and 22nd December, during which an officer was killed. At half-past
eight on the 22nd fire was opened from the batteries ; one to breach
the fort on the north-east side, and the second to destroy the

THE ARABIAN PENINSULA, ETO. 253

defences of the Shaikh's house in the town to the westward. In two

hours a practicable breach was effected, but, just as the assaulting

column was about to advance, a white flag
was displayed, and, after some little delay,

the garrison of nearly four hundred fighting men marched out.

The British flag was hoisted on the fort and Shaikh's house, and the

prisoners were taken on board the squadron,

T QSISBS _j

and landed at Ras-al-Khaimah. The British

loss was one officer and three men killed and sixteen wounded.

The column, after destroying the fortifications, returned to camp at

A „ , T „ . , Ras-al-Khaimah on the 26th December. Here

Return to Ras-al-Khaiman.

on the 8th January, 1820, a general treaty
of peace was concluded between Sir. W. G. Keir on the part of

the British Government, and nearly all the

chiefs of the maritime tribes of Arabs in the

Persian Gulf, the scope being the entire suppression of piracy and

the adoption of measures of precaution and co-operation as seemed

best adapted to attain the end in view. A separate treaty was

concluded the same day with the Joasmi Chief of Ras-al-Khaimah,

stipulating for the release of all Indian prisoners, the occupation of

Ras-al-Khaimah and Mahara, and the surrender of all his vessels,

with the exception of those employed in the pearl-fisheries of Bahrein.

In February the fleet proceeded to the island of Kenn to water,

^ , , , and here the expeditionary force was broken

End of expedition. _, , . , ' _«. . , ,

up. Early in March His Majesty's 47th
and 65th Regiments arrived in Bombay and ten days later the
remaining five transports reached port. Twenty artillerymen, the
1st battalion, 2nd Regiment Native Infantry, two companies of the
Marine Battalion, and the flank companies of the 1st battalion,
3rd Native Infantry, were left to garrison Ras-al-Khaimah. The
town was finally abandoned by the British garrison in July 1820.

The Bani-Bu-Ali expedition, 1810.

In 1820 complications arose with the Bani-bu-'Ali Arabs, a

Events leading up to ex- fierce and turbulent race inhabiting Ja'alan,

pedition. a province belonging to the Imam, whose

authority they had thrown off in June of this year. Government

having heard of some irregular proceedings on the part of the people

254 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

of Lashkharah, a small place on the seacoast, near Ras-al-Hadd,
belonging to the Bani-bu-'Ali Arabs, Captain Thompson was directed
to proceed against them, in the event of the conduct complain-
ed of being piratical. The Mercury was
pio . accordingly despatched with a letter to the