

First Expedition to Ras-al-Khaimah, 1809.

Partly to relieve the Imam from the power of the Wahabis,
„ .... , and partly to suppress the Joasmi pirates,

Political causes. L J rr .

the Bombay Government organized an ex-
pedition to th. Pers-ian Gulf in 1809. The naval portion consisted

246 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

of two ships of His Majesty's Royal Navy and nine of the Company's

cruisers. The troops, who were embarked on

Composition of the force. A . , -

lour transports, were : — His Majesty s 65tn
Regiment; flank companies of His Majesty's 47th Regiment; a
detachment of Bombay Artillery, and about one thousand sepoys ;
the whole under the command of Colonel Smith of the 65th
Regiment.

The fleet sailed from Bombay in September and, after a long
. . , . , passage reached Masqat, where it remained

Arrival at Masqat. , rn, t i a.a. i

some days. The Imam regarded an attack
by so small a force on Ras-al-Khaimah as ill-advised, but the British
officers and men were sanguine of success. The fleet sailed and
met with^a desperate resistance which did not belie the Joasmi
reputation for courage.

The ships arrived at Ras-al-Khaimah on the 11th November but,
Arrival at Ras-al-Khaimah. owing to the shallowness of the water, could

not approach within four miles ; the Com-
pany's cruisers, however, anchored as near as two miles from
shore.

The narrow, low peninsula on which Ras-al-Khaimah stands, is
Description of Ras-ai- about three-quarters of a mile in length and
Khaimah. a q uar t er f a mile broad ; across the isthmus

was a high wall flanked by four towers, and along the shore, in front
of the town, were numerous batteries and entrenchments, evidently
erected under European supervision. The harbour, formed by the
peninsula and mainland, is about half a mile bro .d. The number
of armed men in the place was about five thousand, but within a
few days reinfoi cements could be sent in from the adjacent ports.
Towards the outer end of the harbour the houses were so close to
the beach that to land seemed impossible. After the ships of
the fleet had bombarded the fort it was arranged to land the
troops early on the morning of the 13th November.

Two gun-boats and the ship's boats with a few troops pulled
in towards the mouth of the harbour and at dawn opened a heavy
fire upon the north end of the town. The enemy gave their whole

attention to this party and the main body,

Landing of main body. landing at ^ ^^ en( j of the town ,

moved directly against the wall. The enemy came down, sword m

the Arabian peninsula, etc. 247

hand, to dispute the landing, and when barely one company had
disembarked a desperate attack was threatened on their left.
The gun-boats, reserving their fire till the last moment, checked
the enemy with a shower of grape and so gave time for the forma-
tion of the British advanced guard. These, in their turn, made

a successful charge and at sunrise the

Capture of Ras-al-Khaimah. ^^ fl&g ^^ frQm the towers of