

At 10 a.m. the landing took place. To deceive the enemy
three separate detachments were formed.

Stratagem. .... . .

each in single rank, to simulate regi-
ments in brigade, the jungle facilitating the carrying out of the
ruse.

A single line of skirmishers at ten paces interval issued from the
bushes in view of the enemy, followed by supports in single rank at
one hundred yards distance. At a similar distance of one hundred
yards the main detachments advanced with two hundred yards
intervals. Demoralised by his previous experience, the Shahzadeh

m . , . . „ . retired, leaving the supplies to their fate.

Flight of Persians. ° rr

The village Shaikh came out to claim pro-
tection and tender his submission. The Persians, although the

range was less than five hundred yards,

Supineness of Persians. .., t i , n o <• .i_ l,^„ +

neither replied to the fire of the gun- boat
nor opened on the town.

About noon a shell was pitched close to a small mosque where
the Shahzadeh had his head-quarters, and, taking the detachment
for the advanced guard of General Outram's main body, the enemy,
numbering ten thousand, retired before three hundred, preferring
starvation in a retirement on Shushtar to another engage-
ment.

As much flour and wheat as possible was placed in the steamers
,, . , .. and the remainder handed over to the Arabs.

Captured supplies. _,

Fifteen cases of firelocks and bayonets, ntty-
8ix mules, a number of pack-saddles, numerous entrenching tools
and a large number of sheep were also taken.

As the steamers could not be got past the river bunds, the
Retum to Muh.mm.ieh. P ro P° 8 al to follow up the starving army

to Wais, which might then have surren-
dered was abandoned. The expedition remained at Ahwaz on

PERSIA. 243

the 2nd April, and next day, running with the stream, reached
Muhammareh at 8 p.m.
General Outram's letter General Outram wrote to the Chairman
to court of Directors. of the Court of Directors as follows :—

" A more daring feat is not on record perhaps than that of a
party of three hundred infantry, backed by three small river-boats
following up an army of some eight thousand men, braving it by
opening fire, deliberately landing and destroying the enemy's maga-
zines, and capturing one of his guns in the face of his entire army,
and actually compelling that army to fly before them, and then
occupying for three whole days the position they had compelled
the enemy to vacate. The effect will be to clear Khuzistan entirely
of the Persians ; and the entire province, including Shushtar and
Dizful, is now at our command, and the Persians will never make
head again in the province, for they have neither troops nor
guns, nor stores nor munitions of war, wherewith to reinforce
and supply their troops in this quarter."

The news of the treaty of peace concluded at Paris on the 4th
Treat p ri March was received and promulgated.

The troops were in good health and condi-
tion, acclimatized and inured to exposure in all weathers. The
Comet proceeded to Baghdad to ascertain the conditions of peace.