

Bad tactics. -i/> ij_j_i *_• -i j.

opened fire, but the enemy continued to
press forward and fell upon the wavering ranks, and instantly
a terrible scene of confusion and slaughter ensued. The officers
Repulse of the British attempted to rally their men, who broke,
force - and, throwing themselves on the Imam's

troops in rear, infected them with the same spirit of fear. The broken
troops fled, pursued by the enemy, and sought refuge in the en-
trenched camp. Six out of eight officers

Casualties. j , , , n n ,

and two hundred and seventy men were
killed in this affair. The enemy gave no quarter. The Imam,

Bravery of imam. who displayed great personal courage, was

shot through the hand while endea-
vouring to save an artilleryman. During the night the enemy
Niriit tt k b attacked the camp but were repulsed, and

the British force retired to Masqat, which

l The retention of their arms by Arabs is a point of honour on which they wil|

never yield.

256 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

was reached on the 17th November. The Imam rendered much

assistance and was warmlv eulogised by

Retreat to Masqat. .mi <v • i

Captain Thompson in his official despatch.
The remnant of the force, about four hundred and sixty men of
whom half were camp-followers, returned to Deristan. Shortly-
after their return the 2-12th Native Infantry arrived to relieve them.
Fearing an attack upon Deristan, the troops were transported to

the island of Qishm. The intense heat

e Qis m amson. ^^ responsible for the death of five of

six officers, a large proportion during their eighteen

months' stay. During the expedition against the Bani-bu-'Ali, the

detachment of the Marine Battalion, consisting of two companies,

r iL * r • t> * lost one European and four native officers,

Losses of the Marine Bat- r _ '

taiion. and eighty -four non-commissioned officers

and men, only twenty men having survived.

As soon as the news of this disastrous expedition reached the
„ .. . . t, Bombay Government they took steps to

Reception of news in Bom- - J f

bay. retrieve it and restore our influence in the

Persian Gulf, at the same time recalling Captain Thompson
and expressing their disapproval of his proceedings.

Second Expedition. A British force under Major

His Majesty's 65th Regiment. General Lionel Smith, c.b., consist-

Bombay European Regiment. , ' _ 7

1st Troop, Bombay Horse Artillery, ing of the troops detailed in the

bav th Fo C ot m Anmery nd Battflli0n ' ^ ™W» embarked on board fifteen
1st Battalion. 7th Native infantry. i transports and ten baghlahs, and

1st Battalion, 2nd Native Tnfantry. 2 ,-■ m . jj n • ' i txt i

2nd Battalion. 2nd Native Infantry the TeignmOUth, Prince of Wales,

(flank companies). 3 Psyche, and Vesta, cruisers of the

1st Battalion, 3rd Native Infantry. ~ ' , . ,

1st Battalion, 4th Native infantry, Company s marine, acted as

2nd Battalion, 9th Native Infantry. 5 consorts.
3Td Company, Pioneer Battalion.*

The expedition sailed from Bombay on the 11th January,
1821, and arrived at Sur on the 27th