

By the 17th November the expedition had assembled at Qishm,

. . , , , v , and the naval and military chiefs interview-

Amvai at Qisl m. ...

ed the Imam, who promised his cooperation.
As it was considered of importance that a reconnaissance should
Reconnaissance of °e made of the defences of Ras-al-Khaimah,
Ras-ai-Khaimah. $[ T Grant Keir proceeded thither in the

Liverpool on the 25th December, and the same day met the
Company's steamer Benares with Dr. Jukes, who had preceded
the expedition to obtain the Imam's assistance, and a commissariat
officer, who was to arrange for provisioning the force at Qishm.
As it was desirable to blockade Ras-al-Khaimah, the two ships sailed
thither in company. Sir Grant Keir and his commanding engineer
reconnoitred the town on the 26th and 27th November and came to
the conclusion that the force at Qishm would suffice for its reduction,
without waiting for the four other transports from Bombay. The
Benares was accordingly despatched to summon the fleet, and on

its arrival on the 2nd December arrange-

Arrival of the troops. . .. , ,. , ■,

ments were made immediately to disembark
the troops. During the afternoon the remaining four transports
hove in sight, and the Imam arrived with two frigates and six
hundred men, considerably less than he had promised, but his
zeal appeared unabated and his cooperation was of no little
value.

On the following day the disembarkation was effected with sur-
prising celerity and good order, considering

Disembarkation. ^ digtance of the anchora g e f rom the town

and the insufficiency of means of transport. Little resistance
was encountered in landing, due in a great measure to a diversion
caused by two gunboats which were brought up to the mouth of
the creek and opened a heavy fire in that direction.

To assist in the siege operations five
Anunce of seamen. hundred seam en were landed.

THE ARABIAN PENINSULA, ETC. 25l

The following description of the operations is extracted from
Sir W. G. Keir's despatch : —

"The troops were formed across the isthmus, which connects
Sir w. g. Keir's account ' the peninsula, on which the town stands,
of the operations. w ith the neighbouring country. On the

morning of the 4th the light troops were ordered to advance, sup-
ported by the piquets, to dislodge the enemy from a bank within
900 yards of the outer fort, which would serve as cover for the
men and a depot for stores.

" The Arabs were driven with great gallantry from a date grove
and over this bank, followed by the
y piques. piquets, which took post at the sand-bank
while the light troops skirmished in front. The enemy, during
these movements, kept up a sharp fire of cannon and musketry
and Major Molesworth was killed at the head of the piquets. The
troops maintained their position during the day, and at night
effected a lodgement within three hundred yards of the southern-
most tower, and erected a battery for four guns with a mortar
battery on the right and a trench for the protection of the covering