

Ras-al-Khaimah.

The British forces were eager to advance into the heart of the
town, but wiser counsels prevailed, and the land- wall with its towers
and a few of the buildings in the vicinity were occupied and field-
pieces, ammunition and scaling ladders brought up. When prepared
to advance into the town, the most commanding buildings, which
were flat-roofed and provided with numerous loopholes, were first
attacked under cover of the fire of the field-pieces and musketry from
adjacent houses, but the obstinate defence showed that progress
by this method would be very tedious. The small huts, which were
interspersed among the larger buildings, were therefore set on
fire, and the Joasmis were gradually smoked out of their positions.
The defenders of some of the buildings, however, made a gallant
resistance. In one instance a large house was defended even after

the British had gained the roof and drop-
Bravery of enemy. ii_i j^i 1 i. i ii_

J ped hand-grenades through holes made by

their bayonets, when at last the defenders rushed out and made a
gallant, though fruitless, effort to cut their way through the sur-
rounding troops.

It was two o'clock in the afternoon before the British troops
reached the centre of the town, and the enemy were soon dis-
lodged from the Shaikh's palace. The heights of this building
gave such a command over the neighbourhood that the enemy
found resistance vain ; they, however, still defended the northern
end of the town while the inhabitants escaped across the harbour
in boats.

By four o'clock the seamen had set fire to fifty vessels.
Ras-al-Khaimah was found to contain goods

Burning of pirnto vofhhIh. t ■ i i 1 1 l . 1 j.-

ol considerable value but no looting was
permitted, and only a little treasure and some jewels were taken off
to the ships. The town was set on fire and quickly reduced to ashes

248 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Considering the resistance offered, the British loss was trifling,
but at least three hundred Joasmis were
Losses. killed. The p Un i s h m ent thus meted out

was condign and terrible, but the deterrent effects were largely
neutralised by the hasty re-embarkation of the troops on the morn-
ing of the 14th. This and the advent of a large body of Arabs
from the interior reassured the Joasmis, who again opened fire upon
the troops, and during the embarkation they assembled on the
shore brandishing spears and firing off muskets in all directions.

The expedition now proceeded to Lingeh, a flourishing Joasmi

Lin port near the island of Qishm. From this

place the people fled to the mountains, and

the place was occupied without resistance, and burned. The larger

part of the troops was now sent to Barkah, about forty miles to

the west of Masqat, to obtain supplies.

After fruitless negotiations for twenty-four hours, the
(ii . T , troops were landed at Laft, a Joasmi

Attack on Luft. r . ^. ,

port on the northern side of yishm, on the
afternoon of the 27th November. A slight skirmish took place on the
beach, and the troops advanced towards the fortress, which was
strong with only one small entrance. It was intended to blow in
this gate with a howitzer and then take the place by storm,
but the troops were received with such a brisk fire that a