

Disembarkation at Snr. wW ifc dispmbarked 0w j ng to ft ^ of

caution on the part of the General, the expedition was within an
ace of suffering a severe reverse before it started on the march to the

» Now il3th. i Now loath Light Infantry.

* Now 103rd Light Tnfantry. 5 \' w 107th.

• Now I04th Wellesley's Rifles. • Now 118th

THE ARABIAN PENINSULA, ETC. 257

interior, the Bani-bu-'Ali Arabs making a night attack which was
nearly successful. The British camp had been pitched about one
and a half miles from the beach, the General, with his staff, and the
Bombay European Regiment, taking up their quarters near the

shore. The Arabs determined to attack the

Attack on General's camp.

General s camp and kill or capture the
entire party. Three hundred of them made a flank march of fifty
miles on the night of the 10th February, and attacked the sleeping
camp before they were discovered. They were, however, repulsed
after some hard fighting, which entailed a loss upon the British force
of one officer and sixteen men killed and three officers and twenty-
three men wounded. Some of the wounded lost their arms by a
single stroke from the Arab sabre. Eleven of the enemy were
killed and twelve wounded, including their Chief, who was captured.
After this experience the General moved his quarters to the
main camp.

Sufficient camels and draught cattle having been obtained from
the Imam, the division marched for the

March on the capital. . . , , ,

interior, accompanied, by sixty seamen, and

the remainder of the ill-fated detachment of the Marine Battalion,

and on the 2nd March arrived before the capital of the tribe.

Disdaining the protection of their earth-
Desperate conflict. . i t. i ■ - -i j •

works, the Bedouins advanced to give

battle on the open plain. A short but desperate struggle ensued.
The Bani-bu-'Ali, thinking to repeat their former tactics, charged
down upon the ranks of bayonets with broad sword and target.
With a desperate valour which astonished the veteran officers who
had been engaged throughout the Mahratta War, and disregarding
the showers of grape from the 12-pounders, they strove, with their
swords, to find the weak points in the line, and, with the fanaticism
of their religion, threw themselves upon the bayonets with reckless
c , t ; ^ impetuosity. Of less than one thousand

warriors, five hundred were left on the field
dead or wounded, and two hundred and thirty-six, of whom ninety-
six were wounded, were made prisoners. The main attack was
directed on the right brigade, consisting of four hundred men of
the 6th and three hundred of the 7th Native Infantry, and
of the total loss of twenty -nine killed and one hundred and

Vol. VI. xi

258 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

seventy-three wounded, the 65th lost four killed and thirty-eight
wounded, and the 7th Native Infantry twenty -two killed and one
hundred and twenty-six wounded. After the repulse of the main
attack the fort was cannonaded and surrendered, and so ended this