

Capture of Sha.kh Othman. . * .

some hillocks, but were dislodged by the skir-
mishers. About 500 Arabs disputed the ground with bravery and
considerable skill, but in less than an hour gave way. Shaikh
Othman was captured and the Arabs spread themselves over the
country to dispute a further advance. Shortly afterwards a parley
was demanded, and, satisfied with their good faith, the Brigadier
entered on his return march, having first blown up the fort and
village.

266 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Operations in the Aden Hinterland 1900.

In the year 1900 trouble occurred on the northern Haushabi boun-
dary between the Turkish tribe of Humar
and the Haushabi. The representative of
Turkish authority in those regions at that time was an Arab of
Humar origin, by name Muhammad Nasir Mukbil, an astute
but intriguing and dangerous man, as well as possessing very
considerable influence with the Turks, he had come to an under-
standing with the 'Abdali Sultan, (still, though not openly, on bad
terms with the Haushabi), to divert caravan traffic from Haushabi
territory by the erection of towers at certain points. This arrange-
ment fell through, but in the early part of 1900 Muhammad Nasir
erected a tower at Kafuf, about two miles to the north-west of the
village of Ad Daraijah, and well within Haushabi limits, from which
he and his Humars were able to cause considerable annoyance to the
Turkish intervention. Haushabi. Representations to the Tur-
kish authorities produced promises of evacu-
ation but no action Fighting ensued, but the Haushabi were unable
„ ... r ,. to turn out the Humar unaided, and in July,

British expedition. . . . .

1901, a British force, consisting 01 two
hundred each Royal West Kent Regiment, and 5th Bombay Light
Infantry, 1 a camel battery of 7-pounder guns, some Sappers, and
the Aden Troop, were despatched under Major Rowe, of the Royal
West Kent Regiment, to eject them.

In the meantime Muhammad Nasir, by misrepresentations to

the Turkish authorities at Taiz, that the

Turks assist Humar. n ■,■ ■, f ■, ■, . •■

British iorce was intended to commit a
wanton aggression on Turkish territory, induced them to despatch
a force of four hundred men, who proceeded to Kafuf and occu-
pied the tower.

On the arrival of the British force, the heights near the village of
Ad Daraijah were found to be occupied by

Action near Ad Daraijah. .

the Humar. They were attacked and put to
flight, and the attack was then directed on the tower, which was
mainly defended by the Turks. When night fell, the Turks were still
in possession of the tower, but they evacuated it during the night,

1 Now 100th JMahratta Light Infantry.

ADEti. 267

leaving five dead on the ground and eight prisoners. Their total
casualties were estimated at forty. The British force lost four killed
and five wounded.

As a consequence of this contretemps, the Porte, who had
, ,. .^ x . previously rejected offers of demarcation of

Frontier delimitation. f - i