

attack was made upon Aden by the
united Arab tribes. A party of about 250 men succeeded in
entering the works, but were driven out. On each occasion
timely information had been received by the British authori-
ties.

In July, 1840, the garrison was increased by 300 men of
Her Majesty's 6th Eegiment, and none

Garrison increased. i n i_

too soon, tor 200 sepoys had been in-
valided and three-fourths of the remainder were affected with
scurvy. The European portion of the garrison was comparatively
healthy.

Before the arrival of the re-inforcements from Bombay, the
Arabs made a third attempt to retake Aden,
a emp . This final effort was made at 2-45 a.m. on

the 5th July. The enemy, who numbered about 5,000, ad-
vanced against the isthmus defences with great impetuosity; but
the sudden and unexpected fire from a boat moored within twenty
yards of the shore staggered them, while the fire from the line
of works completed their discomfiture, and they retreated with
a loss of 200. The Arabs retired to Bir Ahmad, where they
could intercept communication with the interior. Here they
built a fort and began a series of raids.

In September, 1841, the Auckland failed for Aden with troops,
™ .,..,., an d, immediatelv on their landing, orders

Attack on Shaikh Mehdi. *.■,■",, , T i.1.-

were given to dislodge the enemy from tne
position which he held at the tower, called after its owner, Shaikh

ADEtf. 265

Mehdi. A force of 400 Europeans, 200 natives, and a detachment
of artillery, was despatched inland for this purpose, which was
effected with small loss. The column returned to Aden, having
marched forty miles in twenty four hours.

In the early part of 1845 Aden was again threatened with an

attack from the Arabs. The garrison and

gamson. S q Ua( j r0 n were, therefore, reinforced, and in

March there were 1,200 European and 1,300 native troops in

Aden.

In August 1846 a fanatic, Saiyid Ismail, preached a jehad
and made his way to the vicinity of Aden.

Attack by Saiyid Ismail. ^ ^ mh ^^ ^ QQ q{ ^ trQops

reconnoitred Aden, but were driven back with loss. On the
26th a body of 2,000 again advanced, but were repulsed by a
well-directed fire from the line of works and the boats of the
Company's ships of war in the harbour.

Towards the end of 1857 the 'Abdali began to plunder the sup.
plies coming from Bir Ahmad to Aden, and
the British Political Agent broke off all
communication with him and discontinued the payment of his
stipend. ' Ali Mahsin retaliated by prohibiting his tribe from sending
supplies into Aden. He then occupied the fort and village of
Shaikh Othman, a few miles from the isthmus line of works, and
filled up all the wells, except those required for his own people.
The Brigadier now decided to have recourse to arms, and on the
18th March, 1858, marched out with two or three companies of Her
Majesty's 57th Regiment, a wing of the 29th Bombay Infantry, and
a detachment from the Elphinstone.

The force was unopposed until within two miles of Shaikh
n „ . , , 01 ... „ , Othman when the Arabs opened fire from