

which commanded the pass, and mounted

First party lands. ft 9 . pounder . This f ort was reinforced On

the following morning, and fire opened on the pass, by which a large
body of men was driven back. On the following day the gun and
party were removed. Up to the 17th December a rigorous block-
ade was enforced, and on that day the Sultan begged a three
days' truce, which he treacherously employed in sending a boat
to the African coast, whence supplies were drawn, to bribe
the Somalis to murder all the English who landed there. A
skirmish took place off Sirah island on the 11th January, 1839,
when two seamen were wounded and about thirty Arabs placed
hors de combat.

During these skirmishes the Bombay European Regiment
behaved with much gallantry.

Meanwhile the Bombay Government had despatched a
small expedition to take possession of

Reinforcement*!. x . .

Aden, consisting of two ships of war, four

262 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

hundred men of the European Regiment, the whole of the 24th 1
Bombay Native Infantry, with the 4th Company, 1st Battalion
Artillery, and the 6th Company Artillery. The expedition arrived
in Aden Back Bay on 16th January.

Commander Haines, having received an unsatisfactory reply
to his summons to surrender, requested the Military and Naval
Chiefs to take the necessary steps to occupy the place.

It was decided that the attack should be made on the eastern
side and that the ships were first to bom-
bard the island of Sirah and the town, and
that then the troops were to be landed for the assault.

On the 17th a reconnaissance was made. An attempt to land
some suns and artillerymen that night

A reconnaissance. . t . ,

on a small island on the north side,
to act as a diversion, failed, and the following day the expedi-
tion sailed round to the Front Bay, or Aden Road, and
anchored.

On the following morning, the four ships of war having arrived
with the transports, the signal was made to prepare for attack,
and for the troops to be held in readiness to land in two divisions.

At 9-30 a.m. two of the ships opened fire on

Shelling of Sirah. . , . ^

the battery on Sirah island and the enemy
replied with spirit from all their batteries, but their shot flew high.
At 10 a.m. the other two ships opened fire. In a short time two guns
were dismounted, and most of the defenders were driven from the
batteries, but kept up an incessant musketry fire from the ruins,
and were with difficulty dislodged. The Make was now taken
rif?ht up to the work, and after firing a couple of broadsides, the
crew boarded the battery, when the enemy fled.

At 11-30 the signal was made to land the troops, which
was effected under a musketry fire which

Landing of troops. . _, .. . .

caused some loss. Both the divisions
formed up steadily, and advanced through the town, the enemy
retiring before them, and the BombayEuropean Regiment seized
the Sultan's palace, and planted the British flag. On debouching
from the town a flag of truce was hoisted at the principal Muham-
madan mosque and a piquet was posted to collect the arms.