

the frontier, themselves proposed it.
The offer was accepted, and in January, 1902, the British
v.. .. n . . Commissioners proceeded to Dhali', the

frontier Commission. .

portion of the boundary which seemed to
promise the most difficulty. The first meeting with the Turkish
Commissioners took place soon after. The history of the early pro-
ceedings of the International Commission is out of place here, and it
is not proposed to do more than give a short account of the military
operations which took place in the ensuing year. A further ex-
pedition to Balhaf was necessary and the tower there was
destroyed.

During 1902 negotiations with the Turkish Commissioners
proceeded but slowly owing to Turkish obstruction, and at the
beginning of 1903 matter? were little more advanced than they
had been a year before. The escort of the British Commission had
originally been a double company of native infantry, but owing
to the demeanour of the Turks, who were still occupying Jalilah, a
village in Amiri territory, within three miles of the town of Dhali'
it was found necessary to exert pressure, and in January 1903

i- j- • . ~, ,., a column was despatched to Dhali' consisting

Expedition to Dhnh . r ...

of some three hundred British and two
hundred Indian soldiers. This was still further strengthened in
the ensuing month, till in March there was present a force of seven
hundred British infantry, eight hundred and sixty indian infantry,
and eight mountain guns (Abbottabad Mountain Battery, and a
section of camel 7-pounders, with details of No. 45 Company,
Royal Garrison Artillery), or a total of two thousand two hundred
fighting men. No. 6 British Mountain Battery arrived soon after,
and two cruisers from the Mediterranean Squadron were despatched
to Aden to hold themselves in readiness. A force of four hundred
British and Native infantry, two 9-pounder field guns, and two
'-pounder camel guns occupied Dar 'Aqqan, a post commanding the
Tiban valley route.

268 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Towards the end of March the Turks received orders to evacuate
Jalilah and to retire to Qa'tabah ; the British Commission followed
th*m to Sanah, an Amiri village some two miles from Qa'tabah,
and in these places they remained until the end of the year.

The only tribes that had shown any disposition to give trouble
. . it , were the Al Aiud of the Radfan ranee. In

Arabs attack a convoy. J °

May 1903 the Ahl 'Abdullah attacked a con-
voy on its way to Dhali', and killed an Arab belonging to it.

It was necessary to teach them a lesson, and a column consisting
Punitive column °^ * wo nun dred British and Indian infantry,

with four guns of No. 6 Mountain Battery,
the whole under Major Dowell, Royal Garrison Artillery, was
despatched from Dhali' on the 17th May. On the 20th, tribesmen of
the Bakri and Mahlai sections collected on the heights round the
British camp in the Rabwa valley, and made a hostile demonstration.
Some firing ensued, and the Arabs were dispersed by artillery and
rifle fire. Two British soldiers were wounded.