

BIBLIOGRAPHY.
" History of the Indian Navy." — C. R. Low.

Vol. VI. 17A

CHAPTER XVI.

ADEN.

«

Aden was anciently one of the most celebrated cities of Arabia,
History anc ^ owe d its riches and importance to being

the general entrepot of the great carrying
trade which existed between India, Persia, Arabia, and Africa and
the various nations of Europe, Egypt, and Phoenicia. Aden was
destroyed by the Romans, probably under Claudius Caesar. It con-
tinued to monopolise the Indian trade till the sixteenth century,
when the Portuguese opened the route via the Cape of Good Hope.
As late as 1809 it was still of considerable importance from a trad-
ing point of view, but it was completely ruined by 1835, when its
population was reduced to five or six hundred Jews, Arabs, and
Somalis. Since its capture by the British in 1839 it has rapidly
gTown in importance. The first British vessel to visit Aden was the
Honourable Company's ship Ascension in April, 1609. The captain
was made a prisoner by the Governor, who seized goods to the
value of 2,500 dollars. In November of the following year Sir
Henry Middleton arrived with three ships, and proceeded with
two of them to Mokha where he was captured and imprisoned. An
attempt was made by the Turks to capture the Company's ship

Darlinq ; but after desperate fighting, with

Attack on tho Darling. . * . „ r ,,jj

the exception of one man, the one hundred
and fifty Turks were killed. Sir Henry eventually escaped and forced
the Governor to pay an indemnity of 18,000 dollars. In 1614 a
Dutch fleet, and in 1708 two French ships visited Aden. In 1762
the Red Sea was visited by a scientific expedition organized by
King Frederick V of Denmark. In 1799 a small body of three
hundred troops proceeded to Aden from Perim, and were hospitably
received by Shaikh Ahmad, who in 1802 concluded a Treaty of
Commerce with Sir Home Popham. During the Wahabi war.
Aden offered a sturdy resistance to this sect of religious reformers.
Ahmad was succeeded by his nephew, who was a very different
character. In January, 1837, a Madras ship, sailing under British

ADEN. 261

colours, went on shore a few miles from Aden and the Arabs
Causes leading up to the plundered her and grossly maltreated her
expedition. passengers and crew. In December Com-

mander Haines arrived at Aden to endeavour to purchase the
vessel and demanded 12,000 dollars as an indemnity for the
outrage. A plot was made to capture him, but he evaded the
interview arranged with that object, and returned to Bombay.
This led to the first expedition.

Expedition to Aden.

In October,1838, Commander Haines left Bombay with a detach-
The expedition leaves Bom- ment of the Bombay European Regiment,
bay# to take possession of Aden, upon the terms

arranged with the Chief. He arrived on the 24th October and
demanded of the Sultan the fulfilment of his contract, but
The Sultan declines to sur- his requisition was met with insults,
render. Q n ^g 20th November his people com-

mitted an act of open aggression by firing upon a recon-
noitring party. On the return of the boat it was again
despatched to the shore, but was fired upon from the forts.
The same evening a small party took possession of an island