

little war. The troops marched back to

Return of expedition. A ... i_ 1 j

Sur, whence the British division embarked
for India. By a General Order, dated the 11th February, 1831, the
Government's recognition Company's troops engaged in the expedi-
of services. tj on were permitted to bear on their

colours and appointments the word " Bani-bu-'Ali ", and His
Majesty's 6oth Regiment also bear the word " Arabia " to com-
memorate their services at Ras-al-Khaimah and in the action of the
2nd March, 1821.

Perim.

To assist in thwarting the French schemes in Egypt the
British Government depatched, in 1799, a naval force from England
to cruise in the Red Sea.

At the same time orders were sent to the Bombay Government
tj.. , .. to secure and fortifv the island of Perim,

t irst occupation. J

with the intention of commanding the
waters of the Red Sea. The European pirates under Avory and
Kidd had first occupied the island, but were obliged to evacuate
it on account of want of water.

In accordance with their orders the Bombay Government,
in April 1799, despatched some of their ships, with three hundred
European and native troops, under the command of Colonel (after-
wards General Sir John) Murray, who was appointed Political
Commissioner for the Red Sea ; and on the 3rd May, Perim, not being
claimed by any Government, was formally taken possession of
by the East India Company.

The island only remained in the occupation of the English
until the 1st September following, when it was evacuated owing
to want of water, the troops being withdrawn to Aden, whose
Chief, Ahmad, offered them an asylum. In the following March
the troops were brought back to Bombay.

THE ARABIAN PENINSULA, ETC. 259

In 1856 the Home Government issued orders for the re-occupa-
o , .. tion of Perim and for the construction of a

second occupation.

light-house on the most commanding point.
As a military position it was considered that the island could
never be of any real importance owing to the scarcity of water, and,
in those days, on account of the impossibility of commanding the
strait on the African side by the fire of ordnance from the island.
The increased steam navigation of the Red Sea and political con-
siderations necessitated its re-occupation, which was effected none
too soon, as contemporaneously the French were bent on the same
purpose.

The island was again formally taken possession of in January
1857, fifty Sappers and a party of artillerymen being landed to
erect the necessary buildings and occupy the island perma-
nently.

Sokotra.

This island, eighty- two miles in length and twenty in width, is
148 miles from Cape Gardafui on the African mainland. The Indian
Government wished to secure it as a coaling station in 1834, and as
the Sultan would not come to terms, some native infantry were
despatched from Bombay to take possession. The troops, two
companies, were withdrawn on the capture of Aden in 1839.
Sokotra is politically connected with the Aden Residency, the
Sultan being in subsidiary alliance, on the same footing as other
Chiefs in the vicinity. The population is about 2,000 and the
gross revenues amount to 1,000 dollars.