

1 Now the 124th fialuchii.

ADED. 263

At 1 p.m. the flank companies of the European Regiment proceeded
to seize the gateway at the northern pass.

The enemy still kept up a desultory fire from the heights on the
right as the column advanced, but without effect. On approaching
the defile skirmishers were sent out to dislodge a party of Arabs
from the heights. The gate was found to be deserted and, posting
a piquet, the detachment returned to the town. About 150
prisoners were disarmed, and while this proceeding was being
carried out, through some misunderstanding several of the pri-
soners attacked their guards.

The total loss in effecting this important conquest was only
sixteen killed and wounded, and considering

Casualties.

the desperate courage subsequently dis-
played by these Arab tribes, it was very creditable to the small
British force that they were able to defeat over 1,000 well-armed
warriors. The enemy's losses were very heavy.

For many years after the capture of Aden, much hard fighting
Attempts to rc-eaptmc for its defence was necessitated by the re-
Men, peated attempts of the Arabs to re-take the
stronghold. A line of field works was constructed across the
isthmus, and a treaty was made with the 'Abdali Sultan who, how-
ever, quickly forgot his obligations, and on the 11th November
made an attempt to re-take Aden.

Notice of the impending attack having been received, ar-
rangements were made to meet it. The

First attmnp* . l ■ -i 1 •

neck ot sand, which connects the penin-
sula with the mainland, is intersected by a wall nearly one mile m
length, both extremities of which touch the sea at high water ;
at either end was a field work, mounting two guns, while single
guns were placed in redoubts at 300 yards interval. Early on the
morning of the 11th November some men were seen prowling
about near the advanced sentries, but, on being challenged they
dispersed. Soon after more were seen creeping round the left
field-work. At about 4 a.m. the sentry fired, and the Arabs,
with a shout, rushed on in three columns of 2,000 each, but
were quickly checked by a well-directed fire of grape and
musketry, while the Company's brig Euphrates enfiladed their
columns with great precision. The centre column alone reached

264 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS EROM INDIA.

the wall, within which about 250 found their way, later on joined
by another 150, who had crawled round the left field work, while
the remainder were obliged to retreat, i inding themselves cut off
they made a rush at the heights commanding the wall, but in vain.
Eventually nearly all were either killed or captured. The enemy
now being at a considerable distance, the order was given to
cease fire. Immediately the Arabs, thinking the defenders'
ammunition supply had given out, rushed on again in five
columns with the same result as before. The British suffered
no loss.

The subsidy paid to the 'Abdali Chief was now stopped,
and on the 21st May 1840 a second

Second attempt. , - . .. ,