

The column subsequently proceeded to the village of Dabra
belonging to the Ahl 'Abdullah, the original aggressors, where three
towers were blown up by gun-cotton and a fourth demolished by
artillery fire. This was the first occasion on which the new
10-pounder B. L. mountain gun was fired on field service.

The column returned to Dhali' on the 25th May. The Abbottabad

Mountain Battery returned to India in June,
Return to Dhali'. leaving their 8-pounder M. L. guns at

Aden.
In September a survey party was sent to carry out work in
the Shaibi country and in the district of Rubai'atain, with an escort
of two hundred British and Indian infantry, a maxim, and
a section of No. 6 Mountain Battery, under Major Delamain, 123rd
Outram's Rifles. They arrived and encamped at the village of Awabil

on the 1st. On the 4th a party of Arabs from

Attack on survey party. * . .... ,1

Hadara opened fire on the party, kilnngtne
surveyor and wounding a sepoy. The fire was returned, and
reinforcements being sent from camp, Hadara was shelled and the
principal towers blown up. The survey party, with Major Delamain'a
column, moved on to Rubai' atain on the 9th September, being
relieved at Awabil by another column of somewhat similar strength.

ADEN. 269

Saleh bin 'Umr, who had formerly been in receipt of a stipend
from the Turks, which had now been discontinued, was discontented

and bent on mischief, and attacked the
Attack on Awabil camp. Awabil camp on the 13tll September with

five hundred Arabs. The action lasted from 7 a.m. till 2 p.m., when
the Arabs retired with a loss of twenty killed and more wounded.
The British casualties were one killed and five wounded. A reinforce-
ment of three hundred British infantry and two sections No. 6
Mountain Battery, under the General Officer Commanding, now
arrived at Awabil, but there were no further hostilities and the' force
returned toDhali'.

The Danbari tribe of the Radf an group shortly after this began
to rob caravans and murder wayfarers, and finally looted the
mail. A column under Lieutenant- Colonel English of 200 British
and 100 Indian infantry, Math a proportion of guns, was sent against
the marauders' village of Nakhlen in the Danbari country. While
Punitive expedition to proceeding up the valley in which the
Nakhlen. village is situated, the column was sniped.

Several towers and some crops were destroyed, and the force retired.
The tribesmen following up, a series of rear-guard actions were
fought with a loss to the British of one killed and five wounded,
and two followers killed.

The Kotaibi tribe having become troublesome, a post had
been placed at Sulaiq garrisoned by seventy of the 102nd
Grenadiers under Captain Lloyd-Jones. At the end of October
the Kotaibi looted the mail at Hardaba and killed the two
sowars who were escorting it. They then surrounded the Sulaiq

post. A force of 300 British and Indian

Attack on Sulaiq. . c ir.ii

infantry, with two guns, under Colonel
Scallon, left Dhali ' on the night of the 28th, and on the following