

lands in the interior is always some degrees lower than in the
city of Port Louis and the coast districts. The climate at
Curepipe, 1,700 to 1,900 feet above sea-level, resembles that of
the south of France. The hurricane season, when the island is
sometimes almost devastated, extends from December to the end
of April, and the cyclones range from about 8° to 30° S. latitude.
The mean annual rainfall ranges from about 48 inches at the
observatory to 125 inches at Curepipe. At the time of the

* See nap at ond of chapter.

288 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

expedition to Mauritius in 1810, the water-supply was obtained
from the abundant streams. 1

Mauritius was discovered by the Portuguese in 1507 and
named by the Dutch, who occupied it first in any great numbers
in 1598. The Dutch built a fort at Grand Port, but abandoned
the island in 1712. A party of French landed in 1715 and
it was formally taken possession of by the French East India
Company in 1721, and by the Crown of France in 1767, when
the name was changed to He de France. The original Dutch
name of Mauritius was restored on the British occupation of the'
island in 1810.

Rodrigues, the most important dependency of Mauritius, is

situated in latitude S. 19°41', and longi-

Rodngues. t ^ e E ^ ^, j t ig 344 nautical miles from

Mauritius. The island is eighteen miles long by seven miles
broad and is surrounded by coral reefs, extending in some
places five or six miles from the shore. The island is volcanic,
mountainous, rising to 1,760 feet above the sea level, and
in some parts well wooded. The temperature differs littlfi
from that of Mauritius, although breezes are stronger and
hurricanes more frequent and severe. The climate is healthy.
The principal industries are fishing, and rearing of cattle and goats
for which there is excellent pasturage. The soil is good, sugar-
cane, cotton, coffee, rice, maize, and vanilla grow luxuriantly.
The ordinary tropical fruits abound. Cultivation has been neg-
lected since the abolition of slavery, owing to the want of labour
and of regular communication. At the time of its capture in
1 809, the island was almost uninhabited.

1 A reservoir on the Grande Riviere has The Europeans are mainly of French

during recent years been constructed for extraction.

the supply of Port Louis. Works have The Indian population dates from tho

also b?en completed to supply the chief emancipation of the slaves in 1834-9. The

centres of population with water from the immigration from India commenced in

upland springs. 1834, and has gone on ever since. The

The population in 1901 consisted of : — descendants of these immigrants are

F«r»on» of European, African, or steadily increasing in numbers, and pre-

i^wSL™. nf Indian " 108,8 * 7 dominate in the domestic, commercial, and

iDaoHaantias persons oi inaian . ,

descent born in the island 108,958 agricultural callings, and the amount oi

Other Indiana «2,022 land held by them as small planters is

CniDCfle ,. .. .. 3,.->09 . ., •' *