

This matter became the ground for several demands on the
part of the British, accompanied by threats, which were answered
by incursions into British territory ; whereupon war was declared
and troops were sent against Kandy, which was taken on the 21st
February 1803. The place was found to be so unhealthy that the
force was soon withdrawn, except 300 men of His Majesty's 19th
Regiment, 700 Malays, and some Bengal and Madras Artillery, all
under Major Davie. By June almost the whole of the 19th Regiment
was in hospital, and Europeans were dying at the rate of six a day,
many of the Malays were ill or had deserted ; and little food
remained. This weak party was suddenly attacked on June 24th
by the Kandyans in great numbers, and after a defence of 10 hours,
Major Davie agreed to capitulate. All military stores were to be
given up, but the men were permitted to take their arms, and
the Kandyans engaged to take care of the sick till they could be
removed.

1 For further particulars pen. — Historical Sketch of the conquest of

Eleven years in Ceylon. — Forbes. Ceylon by the British. — Henry Marshall

Precis of information concerning the Is- (contains the best account of military oper-

land of Ceylon. -War Office, 1SS2. ations 1803 — 1834).
Acc( unt of the Island of Ceylon. — Percival- Expedition to Kandy.— Captain John-
Bo iription of Ceylon.— Reverend J. Cor- ston. 1810.

diner. Tennent's Ceylon.

281 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Major Davie left Kandy accordingly, and marched to the Maha-
weli Ganga, which was unfordable. No boats being procurable
he was obliged to halt. The next da\ the officers were enticed to
a private interview, at which they were seized. The men were
then told that their officers had crossed the river, and that they
would be taken to join them provided they laid down their arms.
Having done this, they were successively murdered in small parties
out of sight of their comrades. This success encouraged the king to
attempt the expulsion of the British from the island. The Kandyans
were, however, everywhere repulsed and the king himself badly
defeated on the 6th September 1803 at Hanwella by a detach-
ment under Captain Pollock. The war continued without any
definite result until 1805, when hostilities ceased by mutual consent,
but without any final agreement. The chief incident was Captain
Johnston's advance from Batticaloa to Kandy with 300 men
in 1804, and his retirement thence to Trincomalee. This brilliant
achievement was the result of a mistake in orders.

The King of Kandy now showed such indiscriminate cruelty
that the whole country became disaffected. Consequently when
troops were again sent against Kandy in 1815, they were joined by
the principal chiefs and by the people. No opposition was met
with, and the capital was taken possession of on the 14th February
1815. The king was captured on the 18th and was deposed, and
the Government assumed by the British on March 2nd, with the
consent of the chiefs.

