

The inhabitants are not warlike ; the mode of warfare they
adopted against the Europeans was as
follows : — Owing to the absence of roads,
the baggage of an 7 force could only be carried by coolies, who
were not only si >w but also extremely timid and undisciplined.
The Kandyans used to allow a force to penetrate into the
mountains with little opposition except the harassing of the line
of march by ambuscades or the cutting up of the coolie tran-
sport, which could be done with impunity. Then, having allowed
the expedition to advance, and even to capture Kandy, they would
retire to mountain fastnesses where they would wait until the
climate and want of food (supplies being difficult to obtain
owing to the difficulty of protecting the line of communi-
cations) reduced the numbers and ammunition of the invaders.
They would then attack the attenuated force, generally with
success.

ciiYwti. 277

Little is known of the early history of Ceylon. For centuries
the Singhalese were constantly fighting
lfe 0Ty " among themselves, and when the Tamils

(B.C. 204) first invaded Ceylon they easily over-ran the greater
part of the island and were not expelled for 40 years. From
that time there were various Tamil invasions, and sometimes the
Singhalese and at other times the Tamils had the upper hand.
However by A.D. 1410 the Singhalese had completely subdued
the Tamils. The Portuguese first visited the island in 1505 and in
1518 built a fort at Colombo. They occupied the lands round the
coast, but their conquests never extended very far inland. The
Dutch in 1658 finally ousted them, and were in turn supplanted
by the English ; the Kings of Kandy, however, maintained their
control over the interior until they were expelled in 1815.

The English first appeared in Ceylon in 1763, when the Madras
Government despatched an embassy to the King of Kandy, which
not only failed to produce any satisfactory result but left an
unfavourable impression of English power and policy on the minds
of the Kandyans.

Military Operations.

In 1782, Great Britain being at war with Holland, the capture

of the Dutch settlements in Southern India
i Trincomaiec, 1782. and Ceyl(m was decided on. Admiral

Sir Edward Hughes and General Sir Hector Munro took com-
mand of a combined naval and military expedition. After
the capture of Negapatam, the Admiral sailed for Trincomalee
with his squadron on January 2nd, 1782, having the following
troops on board, under command of Captain Bonnevaux : —

Madras Artillery . . Captain . . . . 1

Corporals . . . . 2

Matrossea . . . . 6

Subadar „. 1

Naik . . 1

Privates . . ... 20

Total .. „. 31

278 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Battalion of sepoys

Subalterns

. .

5

(formed by volunteers

Sergeants

4

from 9th, 10th, 13th)

Subadars

7

and 23rd battalions).

Jemadars

7

Havildars

. ,

.. 35

Naiks

. .

.. 35

Drummers

. .

6

Fifers

, .

3

Puckallies

. .

7

Sepoys

.. 420

Total

.. 529

Pioneers under Lieutenant Abbott . . . . 200