The people were at first satisfied, but, after the terror caused
by the cruelties of the king had subsided, they began to regret
the loss of their national independence. Led by their chiefs,
who felt the diminution of their position and power, they broke
out into rebellion about the end of 1817.

Troops were sent against the insurgents, but the impenetrable
nature of the country and unhealthiness of
the climate caused much difficulty and loss,
while no compensating advantages were gained. Consequently,
on the 21st February, 1818, the Governor informed the Madras
Government that his hopes of subduing the rebellion had been
disappointed, and that a reinforcement of 2,000 native infantry
and 4,000 pioneers was urgently required. Owing to the Mahratta

CEYLON. 285

War then in progress some difficulty was experienced in com-
plying with the request of the Ceylon Government, but great
exertions having been made, the 1st battalion, 15th Madras
Native Infantry, embarked at Madras on the 11th March in
H. M. S. Minden and the transport Grant, and was followed on the
6th and 9th April by the 2nd battalion, 18th Madras *Native
Infantry. In addition, five companies of 2nd battalion. 7th Madras
Native Infantry, marched from Palamcottah to Tuticorin on the
27th March, whence they sailed for Ceylon a few days later. 1

No pioneers being available, orders were issued to entertain
4,000 men of the labouring classes in the districts of Tinnevelly,
Madura, Tanjore, and Trichinopoly, to serve in Ceylon as pioneers
and army followers.

The operations took the form of a guerilla war, in which the
troops, traversing damp forests by jungle tracks and mountain
passes, were less distressed by the enemy than by exposure, pri-
vations, and disease. For a considerable time the issue seemed
doubtful, but towards the close of 1818, the Kandyans harassed
by the destruction of their villages and cattle, rendered destitute
by the devastation of their country, and disheartened by the
loss of upwards of 10,000 persons either fallen in the field or
destroyed by famine or fever, began to show signs of submission.
The rebellious chiefs were captured ; the pretender, whom they
had set up, fled ; ' ' the sacred tooth ' ' of Buddha, which had been
stolen and paraded to arouse the fanatical enthusiasm of the people,
was recovered and restored to its depository in Kandy ; and before
the end 'of the year the whole country returned to tranquillity and
order. Though very few fell by the weapons of the Kandyans, the
rebellion is estimated to have cost the British one thousand lives.

The Indian troops were at first under the command of Major
Limond and subsequently under Lieutenant-Colonel Molesworth.
The troops wer& distributed as follows, and were actively employed
until the termination of the rebellion in October.

1 1st Battalion, lilh Regiment (29th Madras Native Infantry). — 10 Officers, 1 Surgeon,

Native Infantry). — M:i.jor Lirnond and 2 Dressers, 1!) Native Officers, 49 Havil-

8 officers, 1 Surgeon and 2 Dresners, 1 dare, 834 Rank and file. 20 Drummers,