

CHAPTER XVII.

CEYLON.

The Island of Ceylon* lies between 5° 55' and 9° 51' north
latitude and 79° 42' and 81° 55' east longitude, and is separated

from the southern extremity of India by

Geographical position. p^^ g^^ ^ ^^ ^ ^ ^3^

square miles, the extreme length being 240 miles and extreme breadth
120 miles. The greater part of the island is covered by dense
jungles of tropical vegetation, extremely difficult to penetrate, and
traversed by paths known to the local inhabitants, but very mislead-
ing to anyone not acquainted with them and unaccustomed to
forest country. Prior to 1817 there were no roads through the
island.

The chief physical features are the sandy low-lying cocoa-
nut-f rinsed coast and adjoining districts

Description of the island. ,, , ., ,, ,. , , .

on the west side ; the high mountain range
in the centre ; and the bold rocky shores of the south and east.
The mountain ranges are confined to a comparatively small area,
roughly one -sixth of the island, in the south central portion ; these
formed the stronghold of the old kings of Kandy, and prior to
the existence of roads were very difficult of access. The highest
point is Mount Pedro, 8,326 feet ; but Adam's Peak (7,358')
is the most prominent. The remainder of the country is prac-
tically level ; this low country occupies the whole northern part,
and on the cast, south, and west forms a belt of from thirty
to eighty miles in width, surrounding the mountainous district.

* See map on facing page.
Vol. VI 18

274 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The whole of the low country is thickly covered with vegetation
and vast tracts of impenetrable jungle, only occasionally broken
by the scattered settlements of the natives.

There is no lack of water, and numerous rivers, descending
rapidly from the hills, carry large quantities of earthy matter
which is deposited along the coast in the form of long bars, the
gulf stream meeting the river's mouth preventing the mud from
being swept out to sea. The most important river is the Maha-
weli Ganga, nearly 200 miles in length, and draining an area of
over 4,000 square miles. Eising in the Piduruta lagala mountain, it
winds to the west and north of Kandy, and after an easterly descent
of nearly 1,000 feet sweeps suddenly to the north, and, travers-
ing a fine well- watered country, flows into the sea by several mouths
near Trincomalee.

The coast line is very uniform, and, with the exception of
Trincomalee, one of the finest harbours in the world, has no good
natural harbours. Colombo, however, has been converted into
a fine artificial harbour, and is now the capital of the island and
chief port of call for ships. Galle at the southern extremity wag
the chief seaport before Colombo was made, but is unsafe during the
south-west monsoon.

Owing to its position Ceylon possesses a climate of peculiar
uniformity in temperature. The lowlands

Climate. . .' . -, . • ■,

or maritime provinces nave a tropical
climate with a temperature ranging from 75° to 85° Fahr., the actual
mean being 80 -7° Fahr. There is, however, a considerable difference
in the daily temperature of the hill districts, where the mean is consid-
erably lower ; at Diyatalawa the average is 68° 1' , and at Nuwara
Eliya 58° 1'. The chief determinant of the climate is the moun-
tain range of South Central Ceylon, which lies across the line of
direction of the two monsoons. The south-west monsoon (April to
September) brings much rain to the west side of the hills and to the
south-west plains, but little elsewhere. The north-east monsoon
(October to March) brings at first rain to all parts, but, later,
chiefly to the east side of the hills. The principal climatic zones are
thus : the " wet low country " from Negombo to Matara, with rain
at all times (least in January to March) ; the ' ' dry low country '