

CETLON. 275

comprising the rest of the plains, principally in the north and east,
with rain chiefly from October to January, while the remaining
months are dry ; and the mountain zones of various
elevations.

The rainfall is so well distributed over the year that it is ex-
tremely rare to have more than three dry weeks consecutively.
The mean annual rainfall varies from 30 to 40 inches in the north-
west and south-east to 200 inches in the interior. There are
roughly speaking, these two seasons in Ceylon — the south-west
and north-east monsoons — and the prevailing winds blow
accordingly.

Generally speaking the climate is very healthy and compares
favourably with that of India. Certain localities, however, all of
which are well-known, are, after rain, liable to malaria and infested
at particular seasons with ague and fever. These pestilential spot
are chiefly at the foot of mountains, and, strange to say, in the
vicinity of some active rivers, whilst the vast plains of stagnant
water and rice fields are seldom productive of disease. Few persons
can remain for any time in some of the low jungles without having
more or less severe fever. The high grounds at the heads of valleys
which terminate in a malarious district are also unsafe, as the
draught up the valley brings mias.ua with it.

In the war of 1803-4 the troops suffered terribly from disease.

Mortality amongst troops Dr. Marshall says that the death rate of

in 1804 and 1818. the mh R eg i me , lt> part i v at Trincomalee

and partly at Kandy, was 400 per 1,000, and that the fatal conse-
quences of exposure to an insalubrious climate combined with
fatigue and privations, continued for some time after the troops
had been removed to another station. In 1804 the rate of mor-
tality of the. 19th Regiment at Trincomalee was 200 per 1,000.
In 1818 the mortality in the unhealthy districts seems to have been
even greater. The 73rd Regiment, which was chiefly engaged in
the Kandyan country, lost at the rate of 412 per 1,000 ; the same
after-effects occurred as in 1804 ; the rate in the year subsequent
to the termination of hostilities was 282 per 1,000. It should be
noticed that in 1817-18 the ordinary method of marching troops
through the disaffected districts was suspended, and an endeavour

Voi,. VI. 18 a

276 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

made to perform these duties under the obscurity of night, the
chilly dews of which were fertile sources of disease. Scarcity of
food was also severely felt in many places. It is, therefore, unlikely
that such mortality would occur again even if active operations
were carried on ; but great sickness must be the result of any
operations in the notoriously unhealthy districts or in the jungle
country in the unhealthy season, during and just after the
rains.

The great bulk of the population are Singhalese, a
people peculiar to Ceylon. They are

Inhabitants. f f f , . . ,,

an Aryan race, who originally came
from the north of India and eventually established themselves
as rulers in Ceylon. In the north the Tamils predominate. They
are of the Dravidian race, and immigrated to Ceylon from India
in two different periods. In past centuries they came as invaders
and in more recent times in search of labour on coffee and tea
estates. There are also a few pre- Aryan aborigines known as
Veddahs who roam about the forests, and some Muhamma-
dans of Malay and Arabic origin. The Eurasians are known
as Burghers. By far the greater portion of the people are
Buddhists.