

Major Geils accompanied the force as Chief Engineer.

On the 4th January the .squadron anchored in Trincomalee
Bay. The next day the marines, with two 16-pounders and the
artillery, were landed about three miles to the north of Trinco-
malee Fort, and by evening the whole force had disembarked.

,. , t, , ^ . ^ Trincomalee Fort was taken by surprise

Assault of Fort Ostenburg. . .

and stormed by the marines that night.
The principal part of the garrison retired to Fort Ostenburg,
on the top of a high hill, which commanded the entrance to the
harbour.

On the 7th Sir Edward Hughes directed the formation of a
body of pioneers from the Volunteer Battalion. Three companies
were formed accordingly, each consisting of 1 sergeant, 1 native
officer, 3 havildars, 3 naiks and 44 privates. Lieutenant Abbott
was placed in command of the whole, with Ensigns Byrne and
Wright as subalterns.

The same day Major Geils reconnoitred the heights near
Fort Ostenburg. On the 8th January the whole force moved off
towards the fort, and on the 9th, with great labour and fatigue,
got possession of a hill not more than 300 paces from it. It was
found impracticable, however, to get heavy guns up the hill. As
the governor declined to surrender, Fort Ostenburg was assaulted
at gun-fire on the 11th and the enemy driven from their guns and
posts in a very short time. The British loss was 1 officer and

CEYLON. 2?'J

20 men killed and 2 officers and 40 men wounded. The enemy-
only lost 13 killed, including 2 officers. The Governor and 425
officers and men were taken prisoners.

Shortly after this the Admiral re-embarked the seamen and ma-
rines, leaving the troops under Captain Bon-
Departure of the Admiral. ° ,11 ?\ n/r i_

nevaux to garrison the place. Un March

26th a reinforcement was embarked at Madras consisting of : —

1 Lieutenant.

2 Sergeants.

4 Native Officers.
10 Havildars.
172 Rank and file.
52 Artillerymen (European and native).
62 European invalids (Infantry).

Total 303

During July the garrison was further strengthened by 200
men of His Majesty's 42nd and 78th Regiments under Captain
Hay MacDowall who superseded Captain Bonnevaux.

On Captain MacDo wall's arrival, he found the two forts,
particularly the lower one, in a very weak state of defence, and
the stores and ammunition so injudiciously distributed that the
greatest part of the powder lay in one fort while the balls were
in the other. Captain MacDowall had scarcely begun to remedy
this before the French Admiral Suffrien appeared off the place
While at Trincomalee, the troops had also been greatly weakened
by sickness. In May, Captain Bonnevaux had reported — " An
epidemical disorder is arising among white and black, and by it
alone we have lost at least 50 Europeans, with many blacks.
It "is a cramp and mul de chien which seizes those in best health
and despatches them to the other world in less than four hours."
rr ■ , Admiral Suffrien with a considerable force

Innnomalee raptured bv _ .

the French under Admiral appeared before Trincomalee about August
SulTrion - 25th. 1782, and at once laid siege to it