

The Malays are sub-divided into an immense number of tribes,
in the most varied stages of civilisation and broadly separated from
■each other by physical and linguistic characteristics. Of chief note
are the Malays proper, the Javanese, the Bugis of Celebes, the Taga-
las and Biscayas, the people of the Moluccas, the Dayaks of Borneo ,
the Battahs of Sumatra, and the Sulu Islanders. Besides these t
whose connection with the archipelago dates from before the dawn
of history, there is a variety of foreign blood. A Hindu strain is
evident in Java and other western islands ; Muhammadans of various
countries, from Arabia to India, are found more or less amalgamated
with many of the Malay peoples ; and the Chinese in the more
civilised districts are of importance in the community ; they
established themselves at an early date, and the first Dutch invaders
found them at Jacatra ; many v in Ternate and elsewhere, have
even acquired the Malay speech to the disuse of their native
tongue.

The first Europeans to visit the Indian Ocean were the Portu-
guese. Prior to their appearance off
y " Sumatra in 1509, a Hindu civilisation,

having its chief seat in Java, had flourished and waned, and Muham-
inadanism had succeeded to a considerable share of its inheritance.
When the Portuguese name had become familiar in the islands, the
Spaniards under Magellan, in 1521, made their appearance from

Vol. VI 20

806 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

the east. Hostilities ensued, which continued until the treaty
of 1529 by which the boundary between the Spaniards and
Portuguese was fixed. The two powers remained undisturbed,
except by an unimportant French expedition, until 1596, when.
the Dutch reached what was destined to be the scene of their
greatest colonial achievements. In that year Cornelis Hautman
appeared before Bantam, the chief town of the powerful kingdom
of Java, and his expedition was the precursor of many fromi
Holland. The commercial success of these enterprises led, in
1602, to the establishment of the Dutch East India Company,-
which obtained by government charter the monopoly of the Dutch
trade of the countries between the Straits of Magellan and the-
Cape of Good Hope, with the right of concluding treaties and ap-
pointing governors. The first fleet sent out by the new Company
under Van der Hagan captured the Portuguese fort of Amboina ; and
the peace of Treves in 1609 freed the Dutch from the interference
of the Spaniards. In the same year the States General appointed a
governor of the East Indies, giving the Company the right of ap-
pointing his successor, subject to their approval.

The instructions given to Pieter Both, the first governor,
struck the key-note of that policy which has brought so much
obloquy on the Dutch name, and prevented the better features
of their colonial administration from being appreciated. He
was to " give all endeavour in order that the commerce of the
Moluccas, Amboina, and Banda should belong to the Company
and that no other nation in the world should have the least part."
When he came into power there were already Dutch forts at
Jilolo, Ternate, and Batchian, and the people of Banda had
granted the Dutch the monopoly of the nutmeg trade. It was to
the fourth governor (J. P. Coen, 1619-1623 and 1627-1629), who
founded Batavia in 1620, that the Company was most indebted
for territorial aggrandisement. During his rule a treaty was con-
cluded between the English and Dutch companies, but the good-
will which resulted was not of long duration. The governorship
of Van Diemen, 1636-1645, was signalised by a series of successes
over the Portuguese, and during the latter part of this century
Dutch power extended rapidly over the archipelago. Peace was
made with Portugal in 1661 and various native kingdoms were