

; Lieut. -General the Honourable John Abercrombie, who had
recently been appointed to the command of the troops destined
for the expedition to Mauritius, and Major Caldwell of the Madras
Engineers, were both on board the Ceylon.

Expedition to Mauritius, 1810.

The Indian Government had long seen the necessity of
wresting Mauritius from the French, who, as has already
been related, made it a centre for their depredations on
British commerce in the Indian Ocean. Preparations were
accordingly made both at the Cape and in India, and a large
force under Lieut. -General the Hon'ble John Abercrombie was
despatched in 1810. The troops were assembled at Rodrigues
Island, where all arrived by the 21st November, and the naval
portion of the force, under Vice-Admiral Bertie, set sail the follow,
ing morning, arriving off Mauritius on the 28th. The fleet and
transports, in all seventy sail, anchored in Grand Bay, twelve
miles from Port Louis, on the 29th, and the same day the army
landed without opposition, with artillery and stores, a body of
marines, and a party of seamen under Captain Montagu.

298 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The force was distributed as follows : —

First Brigade, Lieut. -Colonel Picton, His Majesty's 12th Foot.

His Majesty's 12th and 22nd, and fright wing Madras Volunteer

Battalion.
Second Brigade, Lieut.-Colonel Gibbs, His Majesty's 59th Foot.
His Majesty's 59th ; 300, 89th; one company, 87th ; left wing Madras

Volunteer Battalion.
Third Brigade, Lieut.-Colonel Kelso.
His Majesty's 14th, and 2nd Bengal Volunteers.
Fourth Brigade, Lieut.-Colonel McLeod, His Majesty's 69th.
His Majesty's 69th, Koyal Marines 300, flank companies 6th and

12th Madras Native Infantry.
Fifth Brigade, Lieut.-Colonel Smith, His Majesty's 65th.
Troop His Majesty's 25th Dragoons, His Majesty's 65th, and 1st

Bengal Volunteers. 1
Reserve Brigade, Lieut.-Colonel Keating.
Flank companies, His Majesty's 12th and 33rd, His Majesty's 84th, and

a detachment of Bombay Native Infantry under Captain Mclach.

The troops at Fort Malartic near the head of the bay had retir-
ed to Port Louis on the appearance of the fleet.

The fifth brigade was left to secure the landing place, with
orders to follow next day with the ammunition and stores. The
remainder of the force marched at once about five miles along
the coast, and bivouacked for the night. During this advance the
reserve brigade, which was leading, was fired upon as it emerged
from a wood into the plain, and Colonel Keating and Lieutenant
Ashe of the 12th were wounded, and two men killed, but the
enemy made no stand.

The march was resumed on the morning of the 30th, but the
heat was so great that the force was obliged to halt and encamp
at Moulin a Poudre, six miles from Port Louis.

During the afternoon a reconnoitring party under the French
General Decaen attacked the piquets,.

Action with the French. , „ , ,. , .. , . , -l •__

and compelled them to retire ; but being
reinforced, they advanced and drove back the enemy with some
loss. Before daylight on the 1st December Colonel McLeod was