

296 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

including Lieutenant Morlett (33rd Foot) and Lieutenant Aid-
winkle (1st Battalion, Madras Artillery) killed, and Lieutenant
Needhall (69th Foot) wounded. The Magicienne was abandoned
at 7 p.m. on the 24th, and set on fire, and blew up at 11 p.m.
On the 25th the Iphigenia attempted to get the Sirius off, but
failing in this, the ship was abandoned and blown up. On the 27th
the French were reinforced by four ships of war from Port Louis,
and on the same day Captain Lambert of the Iphiqenia was
called upon by the French Captain General Decaon to surrender
the officers and crews of the squadron within one hour.
The surrender took place at 10 a.m. on the 29th.

The English squadron now being reduced to Commodore
Rowley's ship Boadicea, the sloop Otter, and the gun-brig Staunch,
the French turned the tables, blockaded the island of Bourbon, and
captured some transports carrying troops and provisions for the
projected expedition against Mauritius.

This blockade was maintained until the 12th September,
on which day the Africaine frigate, Captain Corbett, arrived off
St. Denis, when the Commodore with the Boadicea, Otter, and
Staunch put out from St. Paul to meet it, having received informa-
tion of its arrival from Colonel Keating. The blockading ships
at this time were the Astree, the Iphigenia (captured at He de la
Passe), and the brig Entreprenant, which last, apparently in con-
sequence of a signal from the others, made sail to the north-east
soon after the appearance of the Africaine, and was quickly out
of sight. Commodore Rowley then endeavoured to come into
action with the French, but the Boadicea was a bad sailer, and at
2 A.M. on the 13th, when the Africaine had got close to the Astree,
the Boadicea was still four or five miles to leeward, and the Otter
and Staunch out of sight.

Captain Corbett, knowing that the frigates were within a few
hours' run of Port Louis in Mauritius, and expecting that the Boa-
dicea would come up, determined to engage, notwithstanding the
disparity of force, but he was over-matched, and the Africaine struck
her colours about 4-45 a.m., with the loss of 49 killed and 114
wounded. Captain Corbett was mortally wounded at the beginning
of the action. Out of a detachment of one officer and
twenty-five men of the 86th Foot, which had been taken on

MAURITIUS AND BOURBON OR REUNION. 297

board at St. Denis, five were killed and eighteen wounded,
including the officer, Captain Robert Elliot, 5th Native Infantry.

About 7 a.m., the Boadicea was joined by her two consorts,
and the wind having freshened, the Commodore bore up for the
frigates, which were making slow progress owing to the crippled
state of the prize, which had been much damaged both in her
masts and hull. The French deserted her about 3-30 p.m., and the
Boadicea, coming up about 5 o'clock, towed her back to St.
Paul, where she arrived on the 15th.

On the morning of the 18th, three ships having appeared in
the offing, Commodore Rowley made sail after them. They turned
out to be the French frigate Venus and the corvette Victor, the lat-
ter having in tow the British frigate Ceylon of thirty-two guns,
which they had captured on the preceding day. The Victor cast
off the prize about 3 p.m., and stood off to the eastward. The
Boadicea came up with the Venus about 5 p.m., and compelled her
to strike her colours in about ten minutes. She had lost her mizzen>
mast and topmasts in the action with the Ceylon, and consequently
made a poor defence.