

By 7 a.m. the troops were in possession of the first, second and
third batteries. Captain Willoughby with his seamen then turned

1 Now 104th Wellesley'a Rifles.
Vol. Vi 19 a

292 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

the captured guns on to the shipping, from the fire of which, chiefly
grape and within pistol shot of the shore, the force had suffered
considerably. The enemy made a stand behind a stone wall near
the third battery, but were soon driven back. The French, having
been reinforced from the hills, and by a party of 110 soldiers from
the frigate Caroline, the guns of the first and second batteries
were spiked, and the seamen sent to man the third battery, which
soon opened its fire upon the Caroline and her consorts. The
fourth and fifth batteries shared the fate of the others, and by
8-30 a.m., the town batteries, magazines, eight field pieces, 117 new
and heavy guns of different calibres, and all the public stores,
with several prisoners, were in possession of Colonel Keating
and his small force. In the meantime the British squadron,
having stood into the Bay, had opened a heavy fire on the French
frigate, two captured Indiamen, and other armed vessels in
her company, as well as upon some batteries, and then having
anchored in the road, close off the town of St. Paul, began
taking measures to secure the Caroline and the rest of the French
ships, all of which had cut their cables and were drifting on
shore. The seamen of the squadron, howover, soon succeeded in
heaving the ships off without any material injury. "Thus wan
effected," says James (Naval History), "in the course of a few
hours, by a British f < rce of inconsiderable amount, the capture of
the only safe anchorage at Isle Bourbon, together with its strong
defences and shipping, and that with a total loss of fifteen killed,
fifty-eight wounded and three missing." By evening the demoli-
tion of the different gun and mortar batteries, and of the maga-
zines was complete, and the whole of the troops, seamen, and
marines returned on board their ships.

On the 23r,l, at daybreak, they were all in the boats, ready again
to land, when terms for the delivery of all

Suliinis.-Miin nf the Frrnrh. ... . ,

public property in the town were drawn up
and agreed to. General Des Brusleys having shot himself, through
chagrin, as alleged, at the success of the British, a prolongation of
the armistice was granted for five days. On the 28th the truce ex-
pired, and the British force immediately began shipping the provi-
sions, ordnance stores, and small remainder of the cargo** of the
captured Indiamen. This done, the squadron set sail with the

MAURITIUS AND BOURBON OR REUNION. 293

In di am en from the Bay of St. Paul. After this brilliant exploit,
Colonel Keating returned to Rodrigues, where he arrived on the
^5th October, and immediately began to build store-houses, bar-
racks, and houses for the officers.

Expedition to Bourbon, 1810.

On hearing of this success, the Government resolved to attempt
Madras Artillery . . loo the complete reduction of the