

Flank Coys. His Majesty's French islands. On the 8th May

12th and 33rd regiments ..400 . . /

Hh Majesty's 69th Kegiment .. 730 1810, the force detailed in the

86th „ . . 420 margin embarked at Madras for

_ . , „ -,~I~ Rodrigues under command of

Total Europeans .. 1,650 o

1st Battalion, 6th Madrasi Lieut.-Colonel Hastings Fraser,

Native infantry .. 850 jj M.'s 86th Regiment.

2nd Battalion, 12th Madras 2

Native infantry. . . . . 850 The troops arrived on the 20th

Detachment, 2nd battalion June, and, Colonel Keating having

Pioneers .. ..200 ' b 6

assumed command, the expedition,

Total natives .. 1,900 which consisted of 14 transports,
escorted by the Boadicea and Nereide, sailed on the 3rd July for St.
Denis, the capital of Bourbon, and approached the place of debarka-
tion on the 6th. The regular force at Bourbon at this time
amounted to 576 men, but there was a militia force of 2,717 as
well. The first brigade, under Lieut.-Colonel Fraser, composed
of H. M.'s 86th, the 1st Battalion, 6th Madras Native Infantry,
with a party, of artillery and pioneers, was ordered to land at the
Grande Chaloupe, about six miles west of St. Denis, which is on the
northern coast of the island. The remaining three brigades, under
command of Colonel Ke ating, were ordered to land near the Rivier
des Pluies, about three miles east of the town, viz. : — The second
brigade under Lieut.-Colonel Drummond, composed of a party of
Royal Marines and the 2nd Battalion, 12th Madras Native Infant-
ry. The third brigade under Lieut.-Colonel McLeod, consisting of
H. M.'s 69th, and a detachment of Bombay Native Infantry. The
fourth brigade under Lieut.-Colonel Campbell, composed of the
flank companies, H. M.'s 12th and 33rd Regiments, a detachment
H. M.'s 56th, and a party of pioneers.

1 Now the 63th Punjabis. 2 Now the 81th Punjabis.

294 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The disembarkation began at 2 p.m. on the 7th, and about
. 300 men of the third and fourth brigades

1 laembarkition. -1/^1 i -**- -r i <• .

under Colonel McLeod, together with a few
seamen under Captain Willoughby, had landed, when the surf
became so heavy that nothing more could be done. Upon this
Colonel McLeod moved a short distance to the eastward as far as
St. Marie, where he took possession of a battery and remained there
during the night.

The first brigade succeeded in landing at Grande Chaloupe
without loss*, and Colonel Fraser, pushing on towards the town,
occupied the western heights above it with a view to preventing the
entrance of any reinforcements from St. Paul. Early on the morning
of the 8th the Colonel, leaving the 6th Battalion to protect his rear,
descended the hill towards the town with the Europeans, and at-
tacked the enemy, who were drawn up in columns on the plain with
two field-pieces, and supported on the flank by a redoubt. They
were quickly driven back by the bayonet, broken, and pursued so
closely that they retreated into the town, leaving the redoubt in our
possession. The guns were then turned upon the place, and the rest
of the troops coming up about 4 o'clock in the afternoon, the com-
mandant surrendered and a capitulation