

Surrender of the island. . . i ■ i i 1 1 • i n

was signed by which the whole island,
together with all public property, was ceded to the British.
The troops became prisoners of war. The British loss amounted
to eighteen killed and eighty -four wounded, including five seamen.
Of these, eleven killed and fifty-eight wounded belonged to H. M.'s
86th Regiment.

Lieut. -Colonel Campbell was detached with his brigade to St-
Paul on the 10th, and took possession of that place, where 1,500
men laid down their arms. One hundred and forty-five pieces of
ordnance, 195,000 tbs of gunpowder, and a quantity of small arms
and military stores fell into the hands of the victors. On the
24th August an order was issued by the Governor-General in Council
in which the officers and men engaged in the expedition were
thanked for the zeal, courage and perseverance by which a conquest
of so much importance to the national interests had been achieved-

• 950 men. with some howitzers and the necessary ammunition, were landed on
on open Veach in two hovirs and ft half.

MAURITIUS AND BOURBON OR REUNION. 295

Capture of He de la Passe.

On the night of the 13th August the He de la Passe, a rocky
islet situated at the mouth of Grand Port, the harbour at the south-
eastern extremity of Mauritius, was taken by a party of seventy-
one marines and seamen in the boats of the Sirius and Iphigenia
Lieutenant Norman of the Sirius and six men were killed and eigh-
teen men wounded. A garrison of 130 men was placed on the island,
and Lieutenant Davis of the Engineers was entrusted with the duty
of improving the defences. Captain Willoughby of the Nereide,
having been placed in charge of the island, made preparations for
attacking some of the enemy'? posts on the mainland, and leaving
Captain Todd, His Majesty's 32nd, in command, he embarked a
detachment of 170 officers and men, detailed in the margin, in the
Lieutenant Moriett, 33rd Foot. boats of the Nereide and Staunch

Needhall, 69th „ 50 men. at i A-M . on fa e 17^ an( J carried
Pye, Royal Marine.^ by agsault the f ort at p int de

Deacon, Royal Navy. ^ Diable, which commanded the
Wiess, „ „ 50 men. north-eastern entrance into the
Grand Port. Having spiked the guns, destroyed the carriages, and
blown up the magazine, Captain Willoughby advanced to the town
of Grand Port, distant about twelve miles, after having dispersed
a party of the enemy by whom he was opposed on the march.
He returned to his ship the same evening. Landing again next
day with the same force, he destroyed the signal-house at the
port of Grande Riviere, about five miles north of Point de Diable,
to which place he returned, and having destroyed the works, went
back to the He de la Passe.

These successes were quickly followed by a series of disasters
„...,,. to the squadron. On the 22nd August

British disaster?. \ " a ■ ■ i ■ t

the Sinus and Nereide made an attempt
to attack the French vessels in the Grand Port, but the Sirius
having grounded near the entrance, nothing was effected. The
Iphigenia and Magicienne having arrived next day, the attempt
was renewed by the four ships, but two of them having
grounded, the other two were unable to cope with the combined
fire of the enemy's ships and batteries. The Nereide was obliged
to strike her flag about 10 p.m., after having had 230 seamen,
marines and soldiers killed and wounded, out of a total of 281,