

1 The Madras and Bengal Volunteer Battalions were made up of volunteer*
from various regiments of those Presidencies.

MAURITIUS AND BOURBON OR REUNION. 299

detached with the fourth brigade to take possession of the batteries
at the bays of Tortue and Tombeau, about a couple of miles to the
right of the line of march, which service was successfully per-
formed. •

About 5 o'clock the main body moved on towards Port Louis
for about two miles, when some 300 of the enemy, with 2 field
pieces, were found assembled to dispute the passage of the river
Tombeau. They were soon driven back, and the troops crossed the
bridge, which, having been partially destroyed, would not admit of
the passage of the guns. These had to cross by a ford lower down,
thus causing some delay. About two miles farther on opposition
was met with at the river Seche, but the enemy were driven back
with the loss of about a hundred men, and pursued to the river
Lataniers, near the outworks of the town. The force was then
withdrawn beyond the range of the batteries, and encamped for
the night. The total British loss amounted to Lieut. -Colonel
Campbell, Major O'Keefe and twenty-six men killed, ninety-four
wounded, and forty-five missing.

Next morning General Decaen proposed terms of capitulation,
_, .. , L . . „ which were ratified on the 3rd December

Capitulation of Mauritius.

when the whole island was surrendered,
together with 209 pieces of heavy ordnance, and a large quantity
of ammunition and stores. The garrison consisted of only 1,300
regular troops, although there were upwards of 10,000 militia men
who were, however, almost useless. The French troops and
seamen were sent to France with their arms and colours and their
personal effects at the expense of the British Government. Eight
ships of war and 29 merchant vessels were captured in the harbour,
as well as 3 British Indiamen which had been taken by the
French, and about 2,000 English seamen and soldiers were released
from confinement.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.
History of the Madras Army — Wilson.
History of the Indian Navy — Low.
Colonial Office List.
Naval History — James.

PART IV.

THE MALAY PENINSULA AND ARCHIPELAGO.

THE MALAY PENINSULA AND ARCHIPELAGO-

CHAPTER XIX.

THE MALAY ARCHIPELAGO ; THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE.

The group of islands called the Malay Archipelago,* lie between

latitude 10° N. and 10° S. and longitude 95° E. and 150° E.

General description of the to the south-east of Asia and north-west

Archipelago. f Australia. They include Sumatra,

Java, Borneo, Celebes, Banca, the Moluccas or Spice Islands, New

Guinea, and the Philippines.

These islands nearly all present bold and picturesque profiles,
though, at the same time, the character of the scenery varies from
island to island and even from district to district ; from hot, steamy }
low-lying swamps on the coast to forest-clad mountains inland.
The mountains run for the most part in lines, either north-west and
south-east, as in Sumatra, or from west to east, as in Java. The
whole region is volcanic, a remarkable feature being the number and
distribution of volcanoes both active and extinct. In the form of
a rough horse-shoe they run south-east through Sumatra, and east ?
through Java and the southern isles, to Timor ; thence curving
northwards through the Moluccas and again north from the end
of Celebes through the whole line of the Philippines. The loftiest
volcanic peaks are Indrapura in Sumatra (12,255 feet) and Semeru
in Java (12,238 feet). Java, Sumatra, Borneo, and the lesser
islands between them and the Asiatic mainland, all rest on a great
submerged bank nowhere more than 100 fathoms below the surface
of the sea, which may be considered a continuation of the continent.
The Philippines, on the other hand, are almost surrounded by deep
sea, but are connected with Borneo by two narrow submarine banks.