

Most of the islands belong to the great
equatorial forest belt which covers hills
and plains with thick forests and luxuriant herbage. The vegeta-
tion, whether natural or cultivated, is very varied. In no part of

* See map 18 in pocket.

304 FRONTIER AHP OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA,

«

the world perhaps are the wants ot man so easily supplied and with.
bo little agricultural labour. In the lowlands are extensive rice-
fields, and a large variety of fruits and vegetables which are obtain-
able throughout the year. On the mountains are large forests of
teak and other trees. Sugar, coffee, and tea are largely cultivated,
while various spices formed for a long time the most important
articles of commerce. Tobacco, cotton, and indigo also flourish,
and in hilly tracts wheat, barley, and oats are grown in small quanti-
ties. The only mineral of any importance is tin, which is obtained
in Banca ; though some coal is found in Sumatra and other
places.

The heat of the sun renders some of the low-lying districts

near the coast very trying; but the

Climate. J J °

climate as a whole cannot be said to be
oppressive or unhealthy. The temperature at sea level is high and
subject only to slight variations, averaging about 80° throughout
the year. There is, however, considerable variety of climate, as the
islands are situated in the tropics, while the altitudes vary from
sea level to 12,000 feet.

The north-west monsoon blows from about October to March,
the south-east is prevalent during the rest of the year. The principal
rainfall is during the north-west monsoon ; as much as 28 inches
has been recorded at Padang Pandjang in Sumatra, and in most
places the annual rainfall is from 100 inches upwards. The climate
is comparatively dry and the vegetation less luxurious in the dis-
tricts reached by the south-east monsoon, after passing over Aus-
tralia. For instance, the east end of Java has less rainfall (about 58
inches) than the west, and the distribution of rain is quite different
on the northern and southern coasts. The fauna, like the flora, are
abundant and varied, and in both cases Asiatic and Australasian
forms are represented ; the Sunda and western islands abounding
in the former, while New Guinea and the eastern isles exhibit the
latter. The sea yields an abundance of fish.

With regard to ethnology there are at least two main native races,

the brown, long-haired Malay and the

ep*-npe. darker skinned, frizzly-haired Papuan.

To these, a third and more thoroughly aboriginal race must be added.

THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 305

The Malays, who were the last to enter the region, predominate in
the Sunda Islands, whence they have spread sporadically over the
-eastern half of the archipelago. The type, however, is much mixed
with Black Papuan in the eastern isles and with a pre-Malay Caucasic
element in the west. The Malays of the coast are a maritime people.
They were long famous for the daring character of their acts of piracy,
but are now peaceful fisher-folk. Inland they live on the banks of
rivers and build their houses on piles. Cocoanut, betel, sugar, and
fruit trees and rice-fields, which furnish the staple article of food>
surround their dwellings. They are not wanting in courage but
prefer fighting behind stockades, which they are very skilful
in constructing. The Malays are Sunni Muhammadans, but
on the majority of them their religion sits very lightly. Prior to
their conversion to Islam, the Malays were subject to a considerable
Hindu influence, as indicated by their superstitions.