

other maritime victories, no French sail could appear in safety

m the Mediterranean, or from the coast of Portugal across the

broad Atlantic to the Spanish Main ; but there still remained

French cruisers which, harbouring off the coasts of Bourbon and

Mauritius, put out to sea at intervals, and ravaged British

commerce in the Indian Ocean. Moreover, in 1798 an expedition

was organized and despatched from Mauritius to the aid of Tippu

Sultan of Mysore, comprising a small body of French who landed

at Mangalore from the frigate La Preneuse on April 26th of

that year and subsequently took part in the defence of Seringa-

patam.

Between 1792 and 1809 the trade of the British East India
Company suffered severely from the attacks of French men-of-war
and of privateers sent from these islands, but the Government
were long averse to incur the expense of sending expeditions
beyond seas. In 1794 preparations were made for an expedi-
tion against the French islands, a force being assembled in
Madras, but the enterprise was abandoned. At length the
losses became so serious that it was resolved to establish a
blockade, and to take possession of the island of Rodrigues as
a depot for stores and provisions and as a station for the squa-
dron. *

-

I B Topo. Dj No fi.9«7
Eld. C. J. A . October 190T

No. 4,183-L, 1907.

MAURITIUS AND fiOURBON OR REUNION. 291

'Rodrigues was accordingly occupied by a detachment from
.«. Bombay, consisting of 200 of the 56th

ccupa ion o 1 . p oo:t? an( j an e q Ua ] nU mber, of the 2nd Bat-

talion, 2nd Bombay Native Infantry, * under the command of Lieut..
Colonel H. S. Keating of the 56th. During August and the
early part of September 1809, ordnance, stores, and provisions
were landed, roads were made and the troops were exercised pre-
paratory to an attempt to surprise the town of St. Paul, situated
on the west coast of the island of Bourbon. The Bay of St.
Paul had long been the rendezvous of French cruisers, and
sheltered them and their prizes. Captain Josias Rowley of the
Raisonable, senior officer of the British squadron cruising off the
islands, accordingly concerted with Lieut. -Colonel Keating a
plan for the capture of the batteries and shipping at this port.

On the 16th September 1809, a detachment of 368 officers
and men embarked at Fort Duncan on board the Nereide, 36 guns
Captain Robert Corbett, the Otter, 18-gun sloop, Captain Willough-
by, and the East India Company's schooner Wasp, Lieutenant
Watkins. On the evening of the 18th these joined the rest of the
squadron, off Port Louis, Mauritius, consisting of the Raisonable
and the frigates Sirius, Captain Pym, and Boadicea, Captain Hatley.
On the 19th a force of 236 sailors and marines from tbe
Raisonable and Otter were put on board the Nereide ; the squadron
stood towards Bourbon, and early on the following morning
arrived off the east end of the island. On approaching the Bay
of St. Paul, the Nereide, to prevent suspicion, preceded the other
ships, and at daybreak on the 21st, having anchored close to the
beach, the troops were disembarked about seven miles from St.
Paul. The troops and marines, commanded by Colonel Keating,
and the detachment of seamen under Captain "Willoughby, im-
mediately advanced with a view to crossing the causeway over
the lake before the French could discover their approach. This
important object was accomplished, nor had the French time to
form in any force until after Colonel Keating and his party had
passed the strongest position.