

rapidly growing.

373,337

I. B Topo Dy No 6.968
Rxd. C. J. A.. October liKVT

No. 4,184-L, 1907.

MAURITIUS AND BOURBON OR REUNION. 289

The island of Bourbon or Reunion* is situated in the Indian
Ocean between 20° 15' and 21° 23' S.

Bourbon or Reunion. ^^ ^ ^ gfl/ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^^

tude. It was named lie Bourbon on its occupation by France
in 1649, the name being changed to He de la Reunion in 1794
at the time of the French Revolution. The original French namo
was reverted to on the Bourbon restoration in 1815, but in 1848
the republican name He de la Reunion was restored. The
superficial area of the island is 625,000 acres.

Reunion is of volcanic origin, and surrounded by coral reefs,
like the other islands of the group. Its highest point is the Piton
desNeiges, an extinct volcano rising to 10,230 feet above sea level ;
another volcano, the Piton de Fournaise, 8,751 feet, is still
active, producing frequent lava-flows.

The island is generally mountainous, the mountains forming
two distinct groups rising from the Plaine des Capes, a plateau
5,000 feet in height. There is a harbour at Pointe des Galets,
near St. Paul and another at St. Pierre, besides several landing
stages and anchorages on the windward side of the island, and two
on the leeward side.

There are numerous watercourses, many of them perennial
streams, which become torrents during the rainy season. There
are now also several canals, of importance for drinking and irriga-
tion purposes.

The climate is generally equable, the maximum tempera-
ture being 102° in the shade, reduced

Climate. c • m

about 1° for every 300 feet of rise. There
are two seasons, Vhivernage from November to April, when
heat, rain, and cyclones prevail, and Fhiver du pays, the fine and
cool season from May to October.

The soil is very fertile, cultivation being, however, principally
p , confined to a strip some six miles broad along

the coast. Sugar-cane, rice, corn and spices
are the principal products, and the usual tropical fruit abounds.

When discovered, the island was covered with dense forest
but so much of this was cleared for the cultivation of sugar-cane
that it had to be reafforested.

* Sou map at end of chapter.
Vol. VI 19

290 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The population now consists of some 170,000, more than one
~ . . . third of whom are Caffres, natives of India,

Population. . ' '

and Malagasies. French is the language
of the educated classes and Creole— a debased compound of French,
Caffres, Malagash, and Hindustani— that of the mass of the people.
The chief town, St. Denis, the seat of government, has a popula-
tion of 30,000. The town contains many fine buildings, and the
roadstead is the most important in the island.

MILITARY OPERATIONS.

Expedition to St. Paul, He de Bourbon.

It is commonly but erroneously supposed that the destruction

Affairs in the Indian °^ * ne French and Spanish fleets off Cape

0cean - Trafalgar in 1805 had given us command of

the sea all the world over. After that great battle, following on