

316 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The Banda Isles (Lat. 4° 31' S., Long. 130° E.) are a group of 10
small islands. The Dutch had exterminated the aborigines and
confined the cultivation of nutmegs to the group in the same way
as that of cloves to Amboyna. Consequently, nearly the entire
surface of the islands was divided into plantations. The Dutch
first possessed themselves of Lontor or Great Banda, the largest
island, which is about 9 miles long and 2£ broad at its widest part ;
on this they built Fort Hollandia which was afterwards allowed
to go to ruin. A narrow strait separates it on the north from Neira,
an island 2\ miles long by £ mile broad. This was defended by
two forts — Nassau, which, commanded the passage between the two
isles ; and Belgica directly above it. Nassau was a square fort
entirely commanded by Fort Belgica, which was of stone and in shape
a pentagon. The anchorage is abreast of Gonang Apce, a volcanic
islet 1,500 feet high, lying to the west of Neira and separated from
it by a narrow strait.

Ternate is a small island west of Jilolo. The King of Ternate
formerly exercised sovereignty over all the adjacent Molucca Islands
including the northern half of Jilolo and Bachian, the fort of the
Portuguese who first visited them in 1510. On the Dutch taking
possession in 1607, the native princes were forced to submit to the
humiliating conditions of their new conquerors ; but although the
importance of the state declined, the King of Ternate was still at
this time the most powerful of the Molucca princes.

The island is of small extent, and the Dutch had spared no pains

or expense to render Jhe fortifications as formidable as they could

in order to keep off intruders. They had built three forts named

Orange, Holland, and Williamstadt. Orange on the east side,

the principal fort, was situated by the chief town (Lat. 0° 50 N«»

Long. 127° 32' E.) on the shore with a good anchorage close by^

The Malacca expedition. On the 23rd July 1795 an expedition against

1795 - Malacca, composed of the troops detailed

tt r«Trtuier d 7 men ' Mftd " in tbe margin, under command of Major

MOofficere and men, 1st Archibald Brown of the Madras Army, sailed

.nd : rd European f Madras. No opposition was offered

Battalion. , • J *l.

100 Pioneere. to the landing, and on being summoned, tnfr

Fort at Malacca surrendered on 18th August.

MALACCA AND THE BPICE ISLANDS. 317

At the close of the year a force was organized at Malacca
against Amboyna and other possessions of
m oyna ' the Dutch in the Eastern Seas. It sailed

from Malacca on 6th January 1796 under Bear Admiral Eainier.
The Squadron consisted of H. M. Ships Suffolk 74, Centurion 50,
Resistance 44, Orpheus 32, Swift 16 guns ; one or two of the East
India Company's ships ; and three transports.

The troops, under the command of Major Urban Vigors, con-
sisted of —

Detachment, Madras Artillery.
2 Flank Companies, 3rd European Battalion.
2 Battalion Companies, 2nd European Battalion.
7 Companies, 17th Native Infantry, Captain Gordon.
51 Pioneers, Lieutenant Heitland.
On the 16th February the expedition arrived off Amboyna.
The troops landed that afternoon and took possession without
resistance. One hundred and sixty-four guns, 7 mortars, _51,900ft>
of gunpowder, 1,118 muskets, and a large quantity of stores were
found in the works. Leaving two companies of Europeans and
3 companies of the 17th Native Infantry as a garrison, Rear- Admiral
Rainier sailed for the Banda Islands.