

The expedition reached Banda-Neira on 7th March and early in
the afternoon of the 8th, the troops and

Banda-Neira, 1700. . iit <• -r -.«■ «

marines disembarked under cover of H.M.S.
Orpheus and East India Company's Harling.

There was some firing between these two ships and two bat-
teries of two guns each, but the batteries were soon silenced. Banda-
Neira surrendered without further fighting. Three hundred and
sixty-seven pieces of ordnance and 45,050lb of gunpowder were
found on the various islands.

In February two companies of European Infantry left Madras
v, . , t for Malacca, and in July some further rein-

Keinforcements. J

forcements sailed for Amboyna and Banda
under Major Macneile.

In November 1799, the garrison of Malacca, Amboyna, and
Banda was fixed at : —

1 Company Artillery.

1 Regiment European Infantry.

1 Battalion Native Infantry.

318 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

On August 11th the Bengal Marine Battalion, 747 strong, with
289 followers, including women and children, embarked at Madras
for the relief of the Madras native troops at Malacca and Amboyna.

Expedition to Ternate, 1801.

Early in 1801, at the instance of Mr. Farquhar, Eesident at
Amboyna, Colonel Burr, commanding the troops in the Moluccas,
organized an expedition against Ternate.

The troops employed were : —

Madras Artillery — 22 Europeans and 8 gun lascars, (Captain Ross).
Madras European Regiment — 83 rank and file, (Captain Walker, 4th

Madras Native Infantry).
Bombay Marine — 40 Europeans, (Lieutenant Hayes, Indian Navy).
Wurtemberg Company — 36 Europeans, (Captain Gaupp).
Madras Pioneers— 20 men, (Lieutenant Wissett, 9th Madras Native

Infantry ).
Bengal Marine Battalion — 60 men, (Lieutenant Gill).
First Bengal Native Infantry — 9 men.

Volunteer Corps — 53 men, (Captain Boles, 3rd Madras Native Infantry).
Europeans 178, Natives 170, Total 348.

Although the force was small, it was considered sufficient, as
Captain Astle, the senior naval officer on the station, had promised
to cooperate.

The Dutch force was supposed not to exceed 50 Europeans
and 2,000 trained natives. The detachment left Amboyna on
22nd January under the escort of H. M. frigate La Virginie
and the sloop Hobart, accompanied by the Company's armed
vessels Ternate and Splinter. The fleet anchored off Ternate
on the 10th February, and arrangements were made to attack Fort
Orange next day ; but as Captain Astle insisted that a detached
work should be taken before any attempt was made on the principal
fort, Colonel Burr was obliged to give way.

The boats containing the troops left the ships about 11 a.m. on
the 11th, and reached the shore about 1 p.m. The ships kept
up a fire all the time, but from such a distance that many of the shot
fell short. The jungle at the landing-place was bo dense that the de-
tachment was obliged to make a considerable detour. After being
led by guides for about an hour along a path so narrow that the men

MALACCA AND THE SPICE ISLANDS. 319"