

In the neighbourhood of Manila the principal tribe is the
Tagalas, a physically well-developed race, rice-eaters, dwelling in
houses built on piles.

When the expedition arrived before Manila, the garrison of
the town consisted of only about 800

The garrison in 1762. . , -. i ■»*• • l 17-11

Spanish troops under the Marquis de Villa
Medina ; there were, however, a large number of half-castes, and
thousands of natives came in to their assistance.
The troop? of the garrison were : —

Life Guard of the Governor.

A weak battalion of the King's Regiment, commanded by Don Migue
de Valdez.

Some Spanish marines.

A corps of artillery.

A company of cadets.

A company of Irregular Pampangos 1 or natives of the Isle de Luzon.

The Archbishop of the Philippines was at this time the Governor ;
from his intrepidity and resolution, a determined resistance
was expected, and, as the Spaniards were totally unprepared, it
was decided to lose no time in striking an effective blow.

A convenient landing-place having been selected two miles south

of Manila, three frigates stood in close to the

Landing effected. , . ., -. , , ,. mL

snore to cover the disembarkation, lne
troops, with three field-pieces and a mortar fixed in the long-boats,

'Pampango, the namn of a d is trio t and tribe to the north of Manila, was apparently
applied to all the Spanish native auxiliaries.

310 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

assembled in boats, and at about 6 p.m. on 23rd September pushed
off for the shore under Colonel Draper. The landing was difficult
owing to the surf, and the boats in many instances were flung against
each other and dashed to pieces. Much ammunition was damaged,
and many arms, but fortunately no lives, were lost. The enemy had
collected in force to oppose the landing, but under cover of the fire
of the frigates this was successfully achieved, and next day a bat-
talion of 632 seamen was landed to co-operate.

On 25th the Polverista, a fort which the Spaniards had aban-
,,.,., .. . doned, was seized as a place of arms, and

Military operations. ' -t

a detachment of 200 men, under Colonel
Monson, was sent to reconnoitre the approaches to the town,
the suburbs of which were now in flames, having been set fire to by
the Spaniards. It was found that the town was of great extent,
with regular fortifications which were not, however, complete. In
many important places the ditch had not been finished, the covered-
way was out of repair, the glacis too low, and some of the earth-
works were without cannon.

The half -ruined suburbs afforded shelter to the besiegers. The
Hermita Church and priest's house, some 900 yards from the walls,
were occupied by the 79th, for the post was now of consequence as
the monsoon had broken and the surf was more dangerous than ever,
making communication with the fleet difficult. The artillery and
stores were nevertheless landed, though at much risk. The whole
country was deluged by rain, compelling the troops to seek shelter
anywhere ; they frequently occupied scattered houses under fire
from the walls and too Dear the town for safety. On the 26th Sep-
tember, 400 Spaniards with two field-pieces made a sortie, but were
driven back by the 79th with the loss of a gun. Operations were
now pushed forward with unremitting vigour, and batteries for
guns and mortars were raised. The bombardment continued day
and night. " The post we were obliged to attack," wrote Colonel
Draper, " was defended by the bastions of St. Diego and St.
Anrew with orillons and retired flanks ; a ravelin, which covered
the Koyal Gate, a wet ditch, covered way, and glacis. The
bastions were in excellent order, and lined with a great number of
fine brass cannon." As the force was too small to invest the city,
two sides were constantly open to those who brought in provisions