

Vox.. VI 2i

322 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

exposed to a heavy fire ; the success of the troops, however, now
enabled it to anchor in safety in Portuguese Bay. During the night
Batto-Gantong was reinforced by forty men and two field-pieces,
and the guns abandoned by the enemy were unspiked. Early on.
17th fire was opened on the town and Fort Victoria with consider-
able effect, and the commandant agreed to capitulate for the sur-
render of the whole island. The British loss amounted to four
Europeans killed and one Lieutenant and ten men wounded.

Banda-Neira, 1810.
On the 6th May 1810, two companies of the Madras European
Regiment, under Captain Nixon, sailed from Madras for Amboyna
in the frigates Caroline and Piedmontaise of thirty-six and thirty-
eight guns respectively, and the 18-gun brig Barracouta. Captain
Cole of the Caroline, who commanded the squadron, having re-
ceived permission to attempt the second reduction of the Banda
Isles en route to Amboyna, touched at Penang, where he took in
some military stores and scaling ladders. The Barracouta was
detached to Malacca, where she embarked twenty men of the
Madras Artillery and two field-pieces under Lieutenant Yeates.
These preparations having been completed, the squadron proceeded
on its voyage and arrived off the Banda Isles on August 8th.

Banda-Neira, the principal island, was selected for attack.
Great trouble had been taken over the defences of this island
since its former capture by the British- It was defended by ten
batteries exclusive of Fort Nassau and Fort Belgica ; this last was
considered impregnable, and mounted fifty-two guns commanding
the rest of the defences. The garrison of Banda-Neira was 700
regular troops and 800 militia.

Captain Cole had determined to attempt a surprise, but at
9 p.m., when still several miles from Banda-Neira, he was fired at
from th.0 small island of Rnsensgan, showing that the enemy were
on the Alert. The only chance of a .surprise now lay in a boat-
attack Jby night. The squadron was consequently brought to about
9-30 p.m., and the boats were hoisted out and filled with one day's
provisions and 50 rounds of ball cartridge for each man. At 10 p.m.
the moon set, and the night became dark and squally. At about
11 p.m. the boats started on this long pull, carrying a landing-
party of 140 seamen and marines and 40 soldiers of the Madras

MALACCA AND THE SPICE ISLANDS. 323

European Regiment, under the command of Captain Cole. After
a pull of about 4 hours the boats assembled off the island, and
made for the point of attack. About 100 yards from the shore
and directly opposite the battery of Voerzigtighcid, the boats
grounded on a coral reef. The storm was so violent however that
they were not detected. The men, leaping into the water, launched
the boats over the reef and about l£ hours before day-light the
little force landed in a sandy cove. The battery was instantly
attacked in rear by a party of seamen armed with pikes under
Captain Kenah and Lieutenant Carew. The surprise was so com-
plete that the sentry was killed and an officer and sixty men cap-
tured without creating an alarm.