

The conditions involved the cession of the whole Philippine
„ ,. . , Archipelago and the payment of 4,000,000

Conditions of surrender- A ° *«■ m <■

dollars to save Manila from pillage. A
vast quantity of munitions of war and 675 cannon of various kinds
were taken.

The natives continued hostile after the capture, and it would
Events subsequent to appear that, excepting the capital, most of
the rapture of the town. the country remained in possession of the
enemy. In a report to the Madras Government, dated 25th
December 1762, the following occurs : " The small garrison we
have at present is but barely sufficient to 'secure us from attempts
even within our own walls. . . ; until your honour can re-
inforce us we shall be little better than the nominal masters of
these new possessions ; we therefore most earnestly entreat you will
be pleased to send us as soon as possible 2,000 sepoys, with whom,
and the Europeans we have, we do not despair of. . . settling the
country in due time." In this expedition there is a curious instance
of the use of mounted infantry ; the report goes on : " To keep the
enemy's horse in awe, which are very numerous, General Draper
thought proper to mount 50 sepoys upon the horses that were found
straggling here ; we have already experienced their use, and as
cavalry can be kept up at a very small charge in this country, we
propo se augmenting this troop to 100 men as soon as we have sepoy
enough to spare from the walls. 1 " Tie troops were withdrawn from

1 In the Mahratta War of 1817-18, General Smith employed sepoys aa mounted
iafantry in the itng maimer for the pursuit of Baji R*o, Paahwa.

TEE EXPEDITION TO MANILA. 313

Manila in 1764 ; in this movement, gross mismanagement occurred,
which fostered a strong dislike for foreign service among the
sepoys. One detachment of 300 sepoys did not reach Madras until
the end of August,, 1767, by which time their numbers had been
reduced to 200 from bad and insufficient food and overcrowding*

" A ': <'1

CHAPTER XXI.

MALACCA AND THE SPICE ISLANDS.

In 1784 a detachment of four companies native infantry was sent

from Bengal to reinforce the Company's
settlement at Fort Marlborough, Bencoolen,
on the south-west coast of Sumatra, where disturbances were threa-
tened ; one object in despatching these troops was to overcome the
aversion of the sepoys to service beyond the seas ; the detachment
Teturned in December, having suffered much loss from sickness.
In January 1791, two companies 30th Battalion, Bengal
Native Infantry, were detached on service
Pennng, 1791. to Prince of Wales Island, Penang, which

had in 1785 been ceded by the Raja of
.Kedah in consideration for an annual payment. In the following
April these companies were employed in some operations in Kedah
territory on the coast of Malacca. A semi-piratical body of Malays,
with 110 boats and a considerable land force, had assembled on
the mainland in Province Wellesley. Here they raised stockades
at Point Pria and sent a defiance to Penang. Consequently, a force
was landed under Captain Glass consisting of : —