

had to advance in single file, the force came in sight of the fort
standing in an open clearing. The troops, after a short halt, ad-
vanced to the assault, but were received with so heavy a fire of grape
and musketry, aided by that of two field-pieces which opened on
their right flank, that they were obliged to retreat with considerable
loss. Meanwhile the Ternate and Splinter engaged the sea
face of the fort, but their guns were too light to make any
impression.

Colonel Burr, on the 12th, urged Captain Astle to cooperate
with him effectually by anchoring closer to the fort. As he declined,,
the expedition returned to Amboyna, leaving behind several wounded
and two field- pieces, which, owing to the surf, could not be reambark-
ed. Colonel Burr attributed the failure to want of cooperation on
the part of Captain Astle, who withheld the assistance he had pro-
mised in the shape of seamen and marines.

The Albion transport, which had sailed for Madras with 150
sepoys, was obliged to put back early in March owing to stress of
weather. Colonel Burr and Mr. Farquhar, being anxious to retrieve
the failure, took advantage of this to make another attempt. On
the 2nd April a detachment of Europeans and natives, amounting
to 329 fighting men, sailed for Ternate under the escort of the East
India Company's squadron, composed of the Swift, commanded
by Lieutenant Hayes, the !Star, the Splinter, and the Resource.
Captain Astle declined to join the expedition.

The ships anchored off Ternate on the 23rd April ; the troops
were landed and operations began a few days afterwards. The
strong redoubt of Kaya-Meira surrendered on the 8th May,
but, being commanded by the hill of Talangnamy, the acquisition
was of little immediate use. A few days later, a party detached
from camp near the captured redoubt constructed a battery from
which fire was opened on Talangnamy on the 17th. The enemy
immediately made a vigorous sortie, which was repulsed, but they
renewed the attack on the 18th, and were not driven back unti*
after a sharp struggle, in which twelve men were killed and many
wounded.

The battery continued to fire on Talangnamy, which was
abandoned by the enemy, who carried off their guns on the night of
the 22nd. Twice during the month Lieutenant Hayes cannonaded:

320 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Fort Orange without producing much effect, though he himself
lost several men killed and wounded while the Swift sustained
some damage.

Slow progress was made during the early part of June owing
to the smallness of the force, the obstinate resistance of the enemy,
and the number of detached works to be reduced before Fort Orange
could be closely invested. This was at length effected, and, several
boats laden with provisions having been intercepted by the squad-
ron, the garrison became distressed. On the morning of the 21st
June, Fort Orange, with its dependencies, was surrendered. The
place was found to be so strong that it could not have been taken
by the weak force before it, had it not been destitute of provisions.
Captain J. Walker with a small garrison was left in charge of
the island and the remainder of the expedition returned to
Amboyna.