

In 1802 all the foreign settlements which had been captured,
Ceylon excepted, were restored.

Amboyna, 1810.

The peace of Amiens in 1802, by which all conquests in the
„ , , . ,„,„ Malav Archipelago were restored, was not

Peace of Amiens, 1802. - r

of long duration. War soon broke out again,
and the British arms in India were speedily triumphant. The
security of India being thus ensured, the Indian Government were
in a position to direct attention to expeditions beyond the seas,
and in October 1809 the frigate Dover of 38 guns, the Corn-
wallis of 44 guns, and the sloop Samarang of 18 guns, sailed for the
Dutch settlements in the Eastern Isles, having on board a de-
tachment of Madras Artillery under Captain Court, and one of the
Madras European regiments under Captain Phillips. Captain
Tucker of the Dover was in command of the whole.

The expedition arrived at Amboyna on the 13th or 14th Feb-
ruary 1810, and anchored some little distance from the land in order
to reconnoitre the defences. The principal of these was Fort Victoria
and the batteries to the right and left of it, mounting altogether
215 cannon, with an extremely strong sea-face. A little further
to the right of the fort was the Wagoo battery, mounting nine
guns ; and, far out in the sea, built upon piles, was a battery of
10 guns. On the heights Wanetto mounted five 12, two 8, and two

MALACCA AND THE SPICE ISLANDS. 321

<5-prs. and two 5^-inch howitzers, and Batto-Gantong had
four 12 and one 9-prs. Both these batteries commanded the town of
Amboyna as well as Fort Victoria and the anchorage. The garrison
consisted of 130 European and 1,000 Javanese and Madurese
troops, supplemented by 220 officers and seamen.

The boats left the ships with the troops about 1 A.M., on the
15th, but they missed the landing-place in the dark, and a discharge
of rockets from the fort indicating that the enemy were prepared,
the attempt at a surprise was abandoned and the boats returned to
the squadron.

About 2 p.m. on 16th, after a further reconnaissance, the troops
landed under cover of the fire of the ships. The landing party
•consisted of —

Detachment Madras Artillery . . . . 46 (Lieutenant Stewart).

Madras European Regiment . . . . 130

Seamen and Marines . . . . 225

Total .. 401 men.

A division of 180 men under Captain Phillips immediately
advanced against the battery at Wanetto, which was carried after
determined opposition. Three of the captured guns were brought
to bear upon the retreating enemy, and subsequently upon the
position of Batto-Gantong ; this battery had opened fire upon the
British, the instant they had taken possession of Wanetto. Captain
Phillips, leaving a small party in Wanetto, then proceeded to
attack Batto-Gantong, but finding the approach barred by an
impracticable ravine, he was obliged to desist. The possession of
"\\ anetto also gave the British the command of the Wayoo battery,
which the enemy deserted soon after the guns of the former were
turned upon it. In the meantime, Captain Court, with the remain-
der of the force, proceeded along the heights to turn the enemy's
position at Batto-Gantong. After a most fatiguing march through
thick underwood, this party, a little after sunset, reached an emi-
nence that commanded Batto-Gantong ; whereupon the enemy
spiked the guns and retreated. Captain Court then took possession
of this important post and thereby rendered the AVater battery un-
tenable. During the advance of the troops against the batteries on
the heights, the fleet had engaged the shore batteries and was itself