

1 Company, Native Artillery.

2 Companies, 30th Bengal Native Infantry under Lieutenant

Yromar Williamson.
20 Europeans.

This small body at once attacked the enemy's entrenched posi-
tion, the advance being covered by the fire of four gunboats. The
Malays were unprepared for such an assault, and after a feeble
resistance were defeated and driven off. Next day the gunboats
attacked the Malay prahus, and two days later finally defeated and
•dispersed them. During these operations only four men were
killed and twenty wounded, including Lieutenant Williamson.

Intelligence of the union of Holland with France in 1795 was
Holland united with received at Madras about June. Operations
Franco. 1795. were therefore undertaken against the

Dutch settlements in the East Indies.

MALACCA AND THE SPICE ISLANDS. 315

Before narrating the operations against Malacca, Amboyna,
the Banda Islands, and Ternate, it will be as well to give a short
Account of these places. r

Malacca (latitude 2° 1' N. and longitude 102° 14' E.) is

Description of Malacca, situated on the western side of the Malay

Amboyna, The Banda isles, Peninsula. It was settled by the Portuguese

in 1511 and passed into the hands of the
Dutch in 1641 ; its importance as the only foreign entrepot for mer-
chandise in the East was retained until after the founding of Penang
(which was in turn eclipsed by Singapore in 1837) in 1785, when its
fortunes as a port rapidly declined. The climate is hot and moist,
the temperature varying from 72°— 80° Fahr., but is notwith-
standing remarkably healthy. The country is undulating, the only
mountain being Mount Ophir (4,400 feet). Tin mines were opened
in 1793 and worked until comparatively recent times.

Amboyna was at this time the capital and seat of government
of the Spice Islands. It is about 60 miles in extent north and south,
and was the next settlement to Batavia in wealth and consequence.
The fort was founded by the Portuguese and captured from them by
the Dutch in 1605. The island is characterised by wooded hills
and green valleys enriched with cultivation. When the Dutch by
1627 had obtained possession of the whole of the Spice Islands, they
•entered on a policy of laying waste all other clove plantations,
and confining the cultivation of cloves to Amboyna with a view
of securing the monopoly.

The bay on which the town (Lat. 3° 40' S., Long. 128° 15' E.) is
situated stretches about 20 miles inland, nearly separating the island
into two parts. The entrance is between two high and steep points
six miles apart, and the bay gradually narrows towards the
town where it is about two miles across. The principal fort is Fort
Victoria on the sea face of the town ; redoubts defend other
parts. The two principal were Battoo Gantong on the heights west
of the town, and Wanetto some 1,500 yards furth r west, on a
small hill.

The Amboynese are Muhammadans ; they are taller, less stub-
born and more amenable to discipline than most other of the island
tribes ; they made excellent soldiers and were largely enlisted by
the Dutch.