

THE EXPEDITION TO MANILA. 311

and to the hordes of natives of whose services the commandant
availed himself ; but the attacks of these molested rather than
obstructed the besiegers. On October 1st there was a heavy
•storm which endangered the fleet and cut off all communication
with it ; but as the roaring of the waves prevented the Spaniards
from hearing, the attackers, who worked all night, availed themselves
of it to complete a new battery for 24- pounders and 13-inch mortars.
About three hours before daybreak on the 4th, over 1,000 Pampan-
gos, encouraged by the conviction that the incessant rain would
render the firearms useless, attacked the seamen. Armed only
with bows and spears, they approached unseen along the bed of a
rivulet bordered by thick bushes, and completely surprised the
sailors, who, however, held their ground until daybreak, when a
strong piquet of the 79th attacked the enemy in flank and
routed them with a loss of 300. In this affair Captain Porter
of the Norfolk and many seamen were killed. Simultaneously,
the enemy made another sortie at a different point, and the sepoys
who held a church, being driven back, the building was occupied by
Spanish musketeers of the Royal Regiment. Field-pieces were
brought up to dislodge them, and they were driven inside the walls
with the loss of seventy men ; but not before Captain Strachan and
forty men of the 79th were wounded. After the failure of these
two sorties the natives lost heart, and all, except 1,800, aban-
doned the city to its fate.

The fire from the garrison now grew fainter, while the besiegers'
fire was stronger than ever. Before long a breach became practicable,
which, strange to say, the Spaniards made no attempt to repair ;
neither did they make preparations to defend it. At daybreak on
Cth October the troops were under arms and advanced towards the
breach in the bastion of St. Andrew. A large body of Spaniards
appeared, but, on some shells exploding among them, they re-
tired. "We took immediate advantage of this," says Colonel Draper,
" and by the signal of a general discharge of our artillery and mortars
r ushed furiously to the assault under cover of a thick smoke that
blew directly towards the town." Lieutenant Russell of the 49th
with sixty Volunteers, led the way, followed by the grenadiers and
the engineers with the pioneers and workmen. Behind them " Colo-
nel Mjnson and Major More led two grand divisions of the 79th ;

312 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

the battalion of seamen advanced next, sustained by two other divi-
sions of the 79th ; the Company's troops closing the rear." In
this order they stormed the breach. Little resistance was offered
except at the Eoyal Gate, where Major More was shot by an arrow,,
and in the Grand Square, from the houses of which the Royal
Regiment d'Espana fired briskly and inflicted considerable loss. la
the guard-house above the Royal Gate 100 Spaniards and natives,
who refused all terms, were put to the sword, and 300 more, who
endeavoured to escape over the river, were drowned. The Arch-
bishop and principal officers retired to the town house, where,
after a time, they capitulated.