

THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 307

acquired. The Dutch remained supreme until the latter part of
the 18th century, when their power was greatly reduced by the
rapidly growing predominance of the English in India. On the
union of Holland with France in 1795 England declared war, and
the Indian Government despatched their first expedition against
the Dutch colonies.

?ou VI JO A

CHAPTER XX.

TEE EXPEDITION TO MANILA.

The British East India Company was for a long time merely a tra-
ding company, but its rivalry with the French and the outbreak of
war compelled it to start raising troops in 1746. These were first
employed overseas on the outbreak of war with Spain in 1762.

The declaration of war was read to the garrison of Fort St.

Expedition to Manila, 1 George in June 1762, and preparations

Compositira~7f" the ex- were made for an expedition against

pedition:— Manila*. Brigadier-General Draper was

His Majesty's 79th Regi- ■ * j x j xv * a

ment (Draper's) about 450 appointed, to command the troops de-

£adl A S£ y :: 30° tailed in the margin, Colonel Masson

2 companies Foreign de- being 2nd-in- command and Major Scott,

icotjny co^es 2. •.' 7, HIb Majesty's 79th Highland Regiment,

l company Topasses 3 eo Adjutant- General. The naval portion

Pioneers (Europeans) . . 60 <. . , •.... -i j i j

Madras sepoys* . . 650 °* ^ ne expedition, under the command

Nawab's European In- { Admiral Sir Samuel Cornish, consisted

of fourteen sail, ten of which carried fifty

Total . . L670 gung and upwar( ls.

The first division of the fleet sailed from Madras on 21st July and

the remainder on August 1st. At Malacca a great quantity*of ratoon?

were/hipped for use as gabions. On 23rd September the squadron

„ ... , ,. ., came to anchor in Manila Bay. Manila,

Description of Manila.

the capital of the Philippines, is in the Isl*-
de Luzon, the largest of the group. The island is 40,885 square miles
in extent, having a main range of mountains running north and
south. The country to the south-west and in the neighbourhood
of Manila is flat, and in the dry season almost bare of vegeta-
tion.

1 These were unreliable and nearly the in the Madras Army,
whole had deserted before the island was 'Portuguese half-castes.

evacuated in 1764. * Composed of details from various bat-

* Africans, who were largely employed talions.

* See map 18 in ] ocket.

THE EXPEDITION TO MANILA. 30&

The town itself is situated on the eastern shore of a bay 120
nautical miles in circumference, and on the south bank of the river
Passig, which is navigable as far as a lake some 30 miles east, whence
it takes its rise. The climate is healthy, the mean temperature
being 82*6 Fahr. The hot weather lasts from March to June,
storms being frequent during the rest of the year. The harbour
is unsafe during the north-east and south-west monsoons. The
original inhabitants were Njgretos, who still exist in limited numbers.
They were driven into the more inaccessible parts by successive
invasions of Malays, who in different stages of civilisation now form
the bulk of the population.