

The force at the disposal of General Janssens amounted to 13,000
regular troops, but no exact information

French forces. . . . . . .

is forthcoming with regard to their com-
position. There was at least one regiment of voltvjeurs, lately
arrived from Europe. There was also a proportion of cavalry, and a
practically unlimited supply of ordnance and military stores. It
seems probable, judging by the comparatively feeble resistance they
offered, that the greater part of the force consisted of natives, dis-
ciplined and officered by Europeans.

Ten thousand of these were in the fortified camp at Cornells,
whilst the remainder formed an advanced post at Weltevreden,
between that place and Batavia.

A landing was effected by the British at Chillingching, ten
miles to the east of Batavia, on the morning

Advance on Batavia.

of August 4th, 1811. The landing place was
protected by vessels placed in suitable positions, but the disembarka-
tion was unopposed ; and Colonel Gillespie's force, which was the
first to disembark, took up a position on the road to Cornells, cover-
ing the landing of the remainder of the troops, which occupied the
road to Batavia. Before nightfall the advanced posts were pushed
on two miles from the landing-place, and the troops were formed in
two lines, — one fronting Batavia and one Cornells.

The horse artillery and cavalry were landed on the 5th,
and the position of the army was advanced in the direction of
Batavia.

The country here was lowlying, but the position occupied by
the British was a strong one, their right resting on the sea ; and

THE CONQUEST OF JAVA AND SUMATRA. 32t>'

their left on a canal which ran parallel with the shore. The
village of Chillingching was directly inland from the landing-
place and across the canal, over which the enemy had left a
bridge ; had this been destroyed, the Dutch could have cannonaded
the British with impunity ; as it was, Colonel Gillespie occupied
the ground beyond Chillingching and guarded the road to Cornells,
whilst the reserve halted at the landing-place to support either
advance as necessity arose. Stores and provisions for ten days
were landed, all private followers, except one to each officer, being
taken for the public service, so that all those who did not bear arms
were obliged to carry a load.

Information having been received that a column of the enemy
had arrived within four miles, the advance was pushed forward
about six miles towards Cornells. The enemy thereupon retreated
and the force returned to Chillingching, having suffered severely
from the heat.

It was the intention of the Commander-in-Chief to make a
feint in the direction of Batavia, thus drawing off the enemy's at
tenlion from the Cornells road, along which the main advance would
then be made. But finding his advance unopposed and the enemy
inactive, the Commander-in-Chief determined to move direct on
Batavia, and on 7th August the infantry of Colonel Gillespie's
brigade crossed the Anjole river at 10 p.m. by a bridge- of- boats that
had been rowed in after dark for that purpose under the direction
of the officers of the Leda, Hesper, and Procris. A part of the
horse artillery and the Bengal Light Infantry battalion were drawn
up behind the banks to protect the passage.