

PLAN of ATTACK
OF THE FORTIFIED LINES OF

OORNELIS.

26th August 1811.

Campong Malayo

00 a

REFERENCES.

A")>rlnclpal attack Commanded by Colonel R. R. Gillespie.

LEADING COLUMN

1 Rifle Company H M. 14th Regiment. Lieut. Coglan.

2 Oet. Madras Pioneers. Captain Smythwayte.

3 Grenadier Company H. M. 78th Regiment. Captain Mc Leod.

4 Right Flank Battalion. Major Miller, 14th Regiment.

6 Left Flank Battalion. Captain Forbes, 78th Regiment,
e Det. H. M. 89th Regiment (8 Cos.) Major Butler.

7 Royal Marines. Captain Bunoe.

8 Det. Dismounted Dragoons, 22nd, Regt. Lieut Dudley.
Det. Govr General's Bodyguard, Capt Gall.

10 One wing Light Infantry Volunteer Battalion. Capt Eraser.

11 One wing 4th Bengal Volunteer Battalion. Major P. Grant.

12 Det. Royal Artillery. Capt Byers.
COLONEL GIBBS BRIGADE

13 Grenadier Company H. M. 14th Regiment Capt Kennedy.

14 59th do. CaptOlphert.

15 89th do. Capt Ross.
18 H. M. 59th Regiment Lieut-Colonel A. Mc Leod.

17 One wing Light Infantry Volunteer Battalion. Major Dalton.

18 One wing 4th Bengal Volunteer Battalion. Capt Knight.

19 Det Royal Artillery.
"B'Attack on the enemy's left commanded by Lieut-Colonel IN. Mc Leod

at the head of H. M. 89th Regiment.
"C''Attack on the Enemy's rear at Campong Malaga by the Column under
Major Vule.

1 Detachment Pioneers.

2 Grenadiers 20th Regiment Bengal N. I.

3 Two Guns Madras Horse Artillery.

4 A Troop H. M. 22nd Dragoons.

5 Two Cos H M. 89th Regiment.

6 Flank Battalion of the Resent.
"D'British Batteries and Entrenchments the remainder of the Army station!*

here under Major-General Wetherall joined by a Column of seamen under
Capt Sayer R. N threatened the front of Enemy's position.
"E'Corps In Reseroe occupying the lines at Struiswiek. The Fortified lines
of Cornells comprise about floe miles in Circumference defended by
280 pieces of cannon.

W. Mc Leod.

Bridge
4 Guns Horse Battery

800

S'tle.

^

yards

I, If. Tono. Dy, No I,1M.
Et<1. C. J. A.. July IMS

THE CONQUEST OF JAVA AND SUMATRA. 331

The enemy's loss amounted to some 500 men and four guns, whilst
.a large quantity of stores and over 300 pieces of ordnance were
found abandoned in the cantonment.

After this action a position was taken up within 800 yards of
Bombardment and battle the enemy's outworks at Cornelis. General
of Cornehs. Janssens had here concentrated his whole

force in a strongly entrenched camp, defended by 280 pieces of
cannon, between the river Jacatra and the Slokan, both of which
were unfordable. " This position was shut up by a deep trench,
strongly palisaded ; seven redoubts and many batteries, mounted
with heavy cannon, occupied the most commanding ground within
the lines ; the fort of Cornelis was in the centre ; and the whole of
the works were defended by a numerous and well-organized artil-
lery." — (Sir S. Auchmuty's Despatch.)

Some time was occupied by the invaders in landing a battering
train, and it was not until the night of the 20th August that ground
was broken within 600 yards of the enemy's works. Three batteries
of guns, howitzers, and mortars were constructed for the bombard-
ment, and guns were placed in position on the morning of the 22nd
August. The enemy, seeing the progress that was being made by
the besiegers, now made a sortie, attacking the batteries in front,
whilst a column with four horse artillery guns made a detour to
attack the British left. They gained temporary possession of one of
the batteries, but were immediately expelled by a part of the 59th
and 78th Regiments, and the hostile column retired aftei' firing a
few rounds from their guns, not awaiting the attack of the 69th
which advanced against them. In this action six officers were killed
and four wounded, and about eighty men killed and wounded,
whilst the enemy suffered heavy loss.