

Although the nature of the country offered great facilities
for defence, no opposition was encountered, and by midnight the
whole party had crossed, and were posted before dawn among the
canals and rivulets within a mile of the town. The " line " was in
the meantime moved towards the river. The following morning
Batavia was entered without opposition, the enemy's scouts gal-
loping off in the direction of Weltevreden. A number of guns and
a quantity of naval and military stores were taken in the castle
and in the arsenals on the wharf.

As an attack was expected at night, the troops were fallen
in in the grand square in front of the town-house at 11 p.m., just as-

330 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

a column of the enemy appeared and opened fire on a piquet at
the bridge on the Weltevreden road, where the draw-bridge was
raised only just in time. Firing now took place all round the town,
but Colonel Gillespie moved out with a force on the enemy's flank
and obliged them to retire. Several of the enemy were killed,
but there were no casualties on the British side, as the troops had
been ordered to use the bayonet only, and so did not expose them-
selves to the fire of the French. Next morning the garrison was
joined by some horse artillery and a troop of dragoons. The reason
of the abandonment of the capital to the invaders almost without a
shot being fired in its defence appears to have been that Gen-
eral Janssens' idea was to allow the invading force to occupy
Batavia and the low ground on the coast in the expectation that its
unhealthiness would so reduce it in numbers that it would be com-
pletely crippled. This design was however frustrated by the result
of the combat of Weltervreden.

Whilst the remainder of the British army was crossing the
Anjole river on the morning of August 10th,

Comb.it of Weltevreden. ~, , , ~,- u . , , .,, -, . ■■ • j

Colonel Gillespie marched with his brigade
towards Weltervreden, where he arrived at daybreak and
found the cantonment deserted. The enemy had retreated a
mile farther in the direction of Cornells with their left on the
Great Kiver and their right on the Slokan. The road was
blockaded and swept by four of the hostile guns, whilst from a
wood, which ran along both sides of the road, the enemy's infantry
kept up a galling fire. The guns were engaged by three British
pieces, and the sharpshooters were extended along the whole
front to occupy the enemy's attention whilst his flanks were
turned, and the villages he was in possession of were fired. A
detachment of the 89th Foot under Major Butler now charged
the hostile guns and captured them at the point of the bayonet,
and the French troops fled towards Cornells, pursued up to
the very batteries of that place by a squadron of the 22nd
Dragoons under Colonel Gillespie.

This action was of importance, as it secured to the invaders the
healthy cantonment of Weltevreden and a point cTappui with-
in striking distance of Cornells. The British loss was one officer and
sixteen men killed, and seven officers and sixty-six men wounded.