

Leaving a small guard in this battery, the detachment rapidly
advanced against Fort Belgica and arrived within 100 yards before
being discovered. An ineffectual fire of musketry was opened, but
the assaulting party rushed forward, and, placing ladders against
the walls, was instantly in possession of the outer works. The
ladders were then hauled up and placed against the inner wall but
proved too short. Fortunately, however, the gate was at this moment
opened to admit the commandant, who lived outside. The British
at once made a rush and by 5-uO a.m. were in possession of the fort ;
the Dutch colonel and ten others were killed and forty-four prisoners
taken. Shortly after daylight the men-of-war stood into the har-
bour, and as Fort Belgica commanded the town and fortifications,
the enemy surrendered unconditionally together with the dependent
islands. This brilliant capture was achieved without the loss of a
single man.

Capture of Ternate, 1810.

On the 21st August 1810, a detachment under the command of
Captain Forbes, with Lieutenants Forbes and Cursham, all of the
Madras European Regiment, embarked on H. M. S. Dover at
Amboyna on the requisition of Captain Tucker, for an attempt
upon Ternate, the last remaining Dutch possession of any conse-
quence in the Moluccas. The garrison consisted of 500 regulars,
203 European inhabitants and seamen, and some 500 of the Raja
of Ternate's native troops. It was determined to attack first the
detached work — Fort Kayo-Meira. A landing was effected at Sasa,

Vol. VI 21 A

324 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

a village screened by a point of land from Kayo -Meira and its fire,

about 7 a.m. on 28th.

The troops commanded by Captain David Forbes consisted of —
Madras Europeans . . . . . . 74

Amboynese . . . . . . . . 32

Marines . . . . . . . . 36

Seamen . . . . . . . . 32

Total . . 174

Captain Forbes marched inland towards a height which was
supposed to command Fort Kayo-Meira and to have been occupied
by our troops in the previous expedition in 1801. It was
reached about noon, but, owing to thick forest, nothing could be
seen from it. Captain Forbes, having determined to storm Kayo-
Meira, set out again about 7 p.m., in the direction of the fort.
Finding the road rendered impassable by large trees which had
been cut down and thrown across it, he turned to the right
and advanced, with much difficulty and in total darkness, along
the course of a stream. He reached the beach about 10 p.m., and
brought his party to within a hundred yards of the fort before being
discovered. The enemy then opened fire, but the attacking party,
pressing forward, crossed the ditch and speedily escaladed and
captured the fort. Owing to the darkness and rapidity of the
advance, the casualties were only three killed and 14 wounded.
At daylight on August 29th the battery of Kota Barro (a fort
between Kayo-Meira and Fort Orange) opened a heavy fire.
About 2 p.m. Captain Tucker succeeded in laying H.M.S. Dover
opposite this battery and quickly silenced it. He thenjpassed
on towards another shore battery, and, becoming exposed to Fort
Orange, was hotly engaged, when the enemy recommenced their
fire fTom Kota Barro. Captain Tucker had to return and had
just silenced it a second time when it was taken in rear and captured
by Lieutenant Cursham, who had been sent from Kayo-Meira by
CaptaiD Forbes for that purpose. Kota Barro being secured, its
guns were turned against the town and the Dover reopened
her fire against the Strand Batteries and Fort Orange. The
garrison, having suffered severely from this fire, surrendered about
5 P.M. The British took possession on August 31st and found
ninety mounted and twenty-nine dismounted guns in the works.