

On June 11th the expedition sailed for Singapore, and thence,
after calling at High Islands and experiencing some very rough
weather, passed round the coast of Borneo, and reached Point
Sambar on July 20th. The fleet arrived at Bumpkin Island on the
30th, where a halt was made until the arrival of Colonel Mackenzie,
who had been detached to reconnoitre for a landing-place, and who
returned on August 2nd with the requisite information. It having
been decided to effect a landing at Chillingching, ten miles east of
Batavia, the fleet again set sail, and having made Cape Carawang
on the evening of August 3rd, ran into the mouth of the Marandi
river next morning and anchored off the point selected for the
descent.

THE CONQUEST OF JAVA AND SUMATRA. 327

Before proceeding further with the narrative, it is advisable to
give some account of the country which
The island of Java. was to be the scene of the approaching con-
flict.
This island, one of the most considerable and certainly the
most important of Malaysia, had been occupied by the Portuguese
but had been taken from them by the Dutch, under whose rule-
it had formerly attained a condition of great prosperity which had
declined with the decay of the Dutch nation.

On the incorporation of Holland with the French republican
system, Java passed under the domination of the French, and thus
became an object for British conquest, which, owing to our com-
mand of the sea, could be carried out with comparative ease. The
only difficulties were the fact that available charts were inferior
and that the voyage in an equatorial climate would be trying in
the small ships available for transports.

The island is crossed from east to west by the great forest-
clad Blue Mountain range. On the south the land rises abruptly
from the sea, but it slopes gently down on the northern side.
In the vicinity of this northern coast, which is the populous
district, the country is flat and the forest has been cleared, giving
place to open marshland, intersected by numerous streams and
canals, and laid out in rice and tobacco fields and coffee planta-
tions.

From Bantam to the eastern extremity of the island, a
military road, 700 miles in length, had been constructed by General
Daendels, the able predecessor of General Janssens, who was in
1811 Governor and Commander-in-Chief of Java and its depend-
encies in the neighbouring islands of Sumatra, Borneo, and
Madura.

Batavia, the chief town, was surrounded by a nearly stagnant
ditch ; every street was intersected by canals, and the whole neigh-
bouring country covered with rice-fields. The fortifications had been
destroyed and the troops withdrawn to Weltevreden and Cornells
owing to the unhealthiness of the capital. The country was well
watered by rivers and canals, some crossed by stone and wooden
bridges, and some by bamboo rafts, constructed like flying bridges, on
which vehicles and artillery could be conveyed across.

328 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

This island, 630 miles in length and 150 in extreme breadth,,
was inhabited by some five million people. The European colonists
and the half-caste descendants of Portuguese and Dutch settlers
formed a small proportion of these numbers, and there were 100,000
Chinese. The residue of the population consisted of Javanese and
Malays, the latter sub-divided into various tribes which, in the city
of Batavia, lived in separate " campongs," each under a chief
who was responsible for their behaviour. The great mass of the
population consisted of Javanese inhabiting the interior and culti-
vating the land, a physically fine race, possessed of some warlike
qualities.