

CHAPTER XXII.

THE CONQUEST OF JAVA AND SUMATRA.

The practicability of the conquest of Java, which, together

with the other settlements of the Dutch
a ^ a ' ' in the Eastern seas, had been incorporated

with the French Empire, had, for some time, been under con-
sideration ; but the undertaking was postponed until after the cap-
ture of the Mauritius which was accomplished in December 1810.
Preparations were then made both at Madras and in Bengal,
and these were completed early in 1811.

This expedition, under the command of Sir Samuol Auchmuty,
„ .,. , v , was composed as follows: — The army of

Composition of the expe- r J

ditionary force- invasion

namely,
The advance, commanded by Colonel

consisting of : —
Right Flank Battalion
Left Flank Battalion
Detachment, 89th Regiment
Royal Marines

Bengal Light Infantry Volunteer Battalion 1
Governor-General's Body-Guard
Pioneers
Horse Artillery
Detachment, 22nd Dragoons

The line, commanded by Major- General Wetherall, and com
prising : —

Left Brigade. — Lieutenant-Colonel

Adams.
H. M. 78th Regiment — Major Lindsey,

was divided into three parts,
K. Gillespie,

R.

nd

Major Miller.
Major Fraser.
Major Butler.
Captain Liardet.
Major Dalton.
Captain Gall.
Captain Smith wayte.
Captain Noble.
Major Travers.

Right Brigade. — Colonel Gibbs.

6th Battalion, Bengal Volunteers —
Major Raban.

H. M. 69th Regiment — Lieutenant-Colo-
nel McLeod.

H. M. 59th Regiment — Lieu-
tenant-Colonel McLeod,

5th Battalion, Bengal Volun-
teers — Captain Griffiths.

H. M. 14th Regiment — Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Watson.

Native troops were not formerly enlisted for service overseas; and for such expedi
tions Volunteers were called for from various regiments, and formed into battalions.

326 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The Reserve, commanded by Colonel Wood, and composed of : —

4th Battalion, Bengal Volunteers . . . . Major Grant.

1st Battalion, 20th or Marine Regiment . . Lieut.-Col. Loveday.

3rd Battalion, Bengal Volunteers

Flank Battalion .. .. .. .. Major Yule.

There were, in addition, detachments of Pioneers," Bengal
Artillery, Royal Artillery, and Engineers. The whole force amounted
to 324 officers, 123 native officers, 5,144 European rank and
file, 5,530 native rank and file, 839 pioneers, lascars, etc. : total
11,960; but of these 1,200 were left sick at Malacca and 1,500
were sick on landing in Java.

The fleet employed for this expedition was composed of four
line-of-battle-ships, fourteen frigates, seven sloops, eight of the
Honourable Company's cruisers, fifty-seven transports and several
gunboats, amounting in all to one hundred sail.

The first division of the expeditionary force, under command

of Colonel Robert Rollo Gillespie, set sail

\oyagetoJava. from Madras roads on April 18th, 1811,

the remainder following a week later under Major- General Weth-
erall. During one of the violent hurricanes, to which these seas are
subject, several vessels, including H. M. S. Dover, were driven on
shore and lost, whilst in the second convoy forty horses died of suffo-
cation during a storm. The first rendezvous was at Penang, which
was reached on May 18th and 21st. At Malacca, the next port,
the force was joined by the Bengal troops, and by Lord Minto,
the Governor- General, and Sir Samuel Auchmuty.