

Expedition to Pelambang. „ , ,. . -n l i. j;j.;~„

1 Dutch factory at Pelambang, an expedition

was fitted out at Batavia and despatched under Colonel Gillespie
on the 20th March 1812. This force consisted of three companies,
59th Regiment, five companies, 89th Regiment, and some details
of Madras and Bengal artillery and infantry, conveyed in four
transports and escorted by seven ships of war and gunboats.

The passage up the Pelambang river was made in boats, and
after great difficulties, including the capture of the enemy's batteries

THE CONQUEST OF JAVA AND SUMATRA. 335

at Borang, the force arrived on the 24th April within 20 miles of
the Sultan's capital. The latter fled on hearing of the approach
of the British, abandoning his city to massacre and plunder. The
following morning Colonel Gillespie, accompanied only by a few
officers and 17 grenadiers of the 59th, left the main body and
travelling in canoes and boats, arrived at Pelambang after
nightfall, the remaining force under Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod
having orders to follow as quickly as possible.

Colonel Gillespie barricaded all the entrances of the palace but
one, and stationed a guard of grenadiers at the principal gateway.
At midnight sixty men of the 89th Begiment arrived, and the-
remainder of the force joined in the early morning.

By theseproceedings the fort, armed with 242 pieces of cannon,
was occupied without loss, the people being overawed by the
bearing of the British commander. The Sultan's adherents fled,,
and the British flag was hoisted on the Sultan's bastion on
April 28th. After protracted negotiations, the younger brother
of the Sultan was placed on the throne under the auspices of
the British Government. The island of Banca was ceded to the
British, and formally taken possession of and named Duke of
York's Island by Colonel Gillespie on the 20th May 1812.

This expedition having been brought to a successful issue, the
British commander sailed for Batavia, arriving there on June
1st, but left at once for Samarang, where fresh work awaited
him.

The Sultan of Mataram, who had his fort at Jogyakarta, stood
Hostilities with the Sultan at the head of a general confederacy of the
of Mataram. native princes of Java, whom he proposed

to combine for the destruction of all the Europeans in the island.
On the 17th June the Lieutenant-Governor and Colonel
Gillespie arrived at the fort, and attempted to come to amicable
terms with the Sultan. The latter, however, would not listen to
reason, but sent out strong bodies of horse to intercept the com-
munications by burning and destroying the bridges and laying waste
the country. The British force at this time consisted only of de-
tachments of the 14th Foot, the Bengal Light Infantry, and the
3rd Volunteer Battalion, with a few guns and two troops of the
22nd Dragoons.

-336 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Colonel Gillespie at once went out with fifty dragoons t o recon-
noitre the country, but was careful to avoid hostilities, in .spite of
the threatening attitude of the people.