

The artillery duel was now continued, and a heavy cannonade
proceeded throughout the 24th and 25th, causing considerable loss
on both sides. On the British side five hundred seamen assisted
at the batteries. It became evident to Sir Samuel Auchmuty that
a frontal attack could not be carried out, and it was therefore de-
termined to surprise the enemy's right and enter his position by
iihe narrow bridge over the Slokan on that flank, which was de-
fended by a redoubt, whilst the auxiliary attacks were made
simultaneously on his front and rear. Both the plan and the

332 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

execution of the main attack were entrusted to Colonel Gil-
lespie.

Before daybreak on August 26th Colonel Gillespie's column,
supported by a second body under Colonel Gibbs, and guided by a
sergeant who had deserted from the enemy, crossed the Slokan and
proceeded by a path through the jungle in the direction of the
enemy's lines. The distance to be traversed was some 2,000 yards,
and shortly before sunrise the head of the column arrived near the
enemy's works, when it was discovered that they had lost touch with
the support. It was nearly dawn, and the success of the enterprise
demanded instant action. Colonel Gillespie accordingly decided to'
attack the redoubt with his handful of men. He was entirely
successful, and, driving the enemy from their defences, seized the
passage over the Slokan which formed the key to the hostile
position.

At this moment Colonel Gibbs arrived at the head of the grena-
diers of the 14th, 59th and 69th Regiments, and wheeling to the
right captured another redoubt, where the enemy fired a powder-
magazine.

All the hostile batteries were now captured in succession, and
the enemy's park and reserve were taken by a charge of the 59th, a
party of whom also repulsed the cavalry who were threatening to
charge. A last rally was made at Fort Cornelis, but nothing could
withstand the onslaught of the British bayonets, and the enemy
broke and fled in all directions.

In the meantime two other attacks were being carried out — one
on the opposite side of the Great River by the column under Major
Yule at Campong Malayo, which, finding the bridge in flames, could
only fire with their artillery on the retreating enemy ; the other
under Colonel William McLeod, who carried a redoubt, but himself
fell at the moment of victory.

The dragoons now came up, and Colonel Gillespie, mounting a
horse which he cut from one of the enemy's guns, headed the
cavalry, and by a fine charge dispersed the remnant of the
defenders. He then pursued them for over fifteen miles, nearly
half-way to the strong post of Buitenzorg.

The flying foe attempted to rally at Campong Macassar, but the
cavalry, led by Colonel Gillespie, charged in sections through the

THE CONQUEST OF JAVA AND SUMATRA.

333

different avenues and bore down all opposition. Over 6,000 prisoners
were taken in the pursuit, including 3 general officers, and many-
thousands were killed and wounded. Two hundred and eighty
pieces of ordnance and several stand of colours were taken in
the works at Cornells. The British loss in this and the preceding
actions is shown in the subjoined table : —