

Towards evening the Sultan sent out a large body of troops

with a flag of truce to demand the surrender of the British, and

•during the night the outposts in the Dutch town were attacked, as

well as the piquets posted to keep the communications open on

the road by which reinforcements were expected.

On the morning of the 19th June Lieutenant-Colonel McLeod
arrived with a detachment, Royal Artillery, the grenadiers of the
-59th Regiment, the flank companies and rifle company of the 78th,
a small party of Hussars, and a detachment of Madras Horse Ar-
tillery. Preparation was then made by firing the campongs for
an assault on the Crattan. In the evening all troops were assem-
bled, and just before dawn on 20th June three columns escaladed
the walls, and after a severe conflict which lasted three hours,
the place was captured and the Sultan taken prisoner. The
British loss amounted to twenty -three rank and file killed, nine
officers (one mortally) and sixty-seven men wounded.

The success of this enterprise ensured the safety of the islands.
The natives at Bantam, Cheribon, Surabaya, and other places
were ready to rise at the first signal, and had already attempted to
do so at the latter town. But the capture of Jogyakarta and its
Sultan put an end to all fear of insurrection, and peace was now
established on a firm basis throughout Java and itf dependencies.

In 1812 an expedition was undertaken against the Sultan
of Sambas, in Borneo, a town situated forty
Sambas 1812-13. miles up the south branch of the river of

that name.

The piratical enterprises of the Sultan had rendered it unsafe
for trading vessels to venture near any port of the island, particularly
the north-west portion. So great was the terror inspired by this
chieftain among both traders and neighbouring states, that the
Sultan of Pontianak applied to Java for a British garrison.

Accordingly the Lieutenant-Governor of Java, in October 1812,
despatched up the Sambas H. M. Ships Procris, Barracouta, and
Phceniz with some gunboats and 100 men of the 78th Highlanders,
but, being unable to force the defences, the expedition had to return.

THE CONQUEST OF JAVA AND SUMATRA. 337

After this, a blockade of the river was maintained until
a sufficient force could be collected to punish, the Sultan.

In June 1813 a second expedition consisting of the following
troops proceeded to Sambas : —

14th Regiment, Colonel Watson ; who commanded the force.

A company of Bengal Artillery.

3rd Bengal Volunteer Battalion.

Captain G. Sayer commanded the naval portion of the expedition,

consisting of fourteen ships (including five gunboats) of His

Majesty's and the Company's service.

The squadron arrived off Sambas on the 22nd June, and, having
entered the river in boats on the 25th, anchored off the branch leading
to Sambas on the night of 26th. From here two parties were detached
to attack the fort and town in rear. The first detachment under
Lieutenant Bolton, consisting of part of the 14th Foot and some sea-
men, was to penetrate inland from the main river. The other, con-
sisting of seamen and marines and 100 sepoys under Captain Brooke,
was to pass through a cut higher up leading into the Sambas river,
down which they were to come in rear of the town. The remainder
of the force proceeded up the river, and on the night of the 27th
anchored below and beyond the range of the batteries.