

346 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

in advance were destroyed, eight being at Bukit Seboosa and
seven others betweeen Bell's stockade and Priggi-to-Datus.

The advance was resumed on May 25th when Bukit Seboosa,
which had been again stockaded, was carried, one officer and eighteen
men being wounded. The hill was now occupied and guns were
mounted, Captain Wallace being left in command. Having heard
that the strong stockades at Bukit Pur- Ling, a mile in advance*
which overlooked the Mullikee plain and were practically the key to
Taboo, were temporarily unoccupied, this officer pushed rapidly for-
ward on the 27th, and seized the position on his own responsibility.
The enemy, who hitherto had always had timely notice of the ap-
proach of the British as they leisurely cut their way through the
forest, did not expect this change of tactics; when too late, they
made a rush to regain the stockades, but were driven back with loss
and defeated in every subsequent attempt to recapture them. This
success was important, as it opened the way to Taboo and also
marked the end of the forest ; beyond Bukit Pur -Ling the thick
jungle ended and gave place to extensive paddy fields interspersed
with clumps of fruit trees. It was not until June 8th, however,
that the main body of the force left Bell's Stockade and, moving past
Bukit Pur-Ling, descended into the Mullikee plain. On the 14th
the covering party reconnoitred to the edge of a paddy field on the
far side of which a line of strong stockades was observed, which
proved to be the Bangkall Munji stockades forming the right flank
defences of Taboo.

The Taboo defences consisted of a line of stockades defended in
front by paddy fields knee deep in water, intersected by a deep nala
only fordable in a few places. The right flank was defended by the
Bangkall Munji defences and the left by some stockades on a hill
known as Execution Hill, which Colonel Herbert decided to carry
on the 15th June. Accordingly two companies of the 5th Madras
Native Infantry, the Sappers and Miners, a 12-pr. howitzer, and
a 5-inch mortar, advanced against the Bangkall Munji defences.
The enemy at once opened fire, to which the guns replied. This
party being reinforced by another company about 11 a.m., it was
decided to assault the stockades, and a turning party moved off to
the left to make a flank attack; before this could be delivered,
however, the fire of the artillery caused the enemy to evacuate the

THE MALAY PENINSULA. 347

nearest stockade ; thereupon some men advanced across the paddy
and seized it ; the flanking party now arrived and pushed on past
the first stockade to take the Taboo lines proper. Meanwhile, the
stockades on Execution Hill on the other flank had been carried ;
whereupon, as the howitzer could not be brought up further
owing to felled trees, the remainder of the infantry advanced into
the paddy fields to attack the lines in front. The enemy opened
fire with the 6-pr. guns captured in the first expedition, but finding
their flank turned by the troops advancing from the Bangkall Munji
stockades, fled with precipitation. The sun was setting as
the defences, two breastworks and eight stockades, were carried.
The casualties were only one subadar and four men wounded.
His capital being now taken, the Panghooloo could make no
further opposition. Several military posts were established and
maintained until March 1834, when the Panghooloo surrendered
to Government.