

By tbeir presence in Upper Perak the troops kept the dis-
affected chiefs in check and prevented them from joining in the
disturbances lower down the river.

THE MALAY PENINSULA. 349

From Kuala Kangsa, a small force was sent up stream on the 4th
January 1875 to attack Katah Lamah, a noted resort of free-
booters and bad characters. The party met with no opposition,
and a quantity of arms were captured. Whilst searching the houses
of the village, however, the detachment was suddenly attacked by
fifty or sixty Malays with spears, who rushed out from the 'jungle.
The search party had to fall back to the river, and Major Hawkins,
who had unfortunately got separated from his men, and three men
were killed. Soon after this the Kotah Lamah people began to
erect stockades, so a further expedition was sent against them.
The Malays after offering slight opposition were easily driven out
of their villages at Kotah Lamah, Enggar, and Perak. The power
of the Kotah Lamah Chief was completely broken and the troops
returned to Kuala Kangsa.

MeanwTiile another column under General Colborne, composed
of troops from Singapore and other places in the Far East had as-
cended the river in boats to Blanja whence they had marched to
Kinta ; some slight opposition was met with but was easily over-
come.

The country was now completely in British hands. Simul-
taneously with these operations a detach-
ment of 250 Gurkhas and half a battery >
Royal Artillery, were sent under Colonel Clay to assist in some
minor operations in Sungei Ujong near Malacca. On the arrival
of this detachment it was determined to drive the Malays from
their stronghold, a narrow defile between two jungle-covered hills,
called the Bukit Patus pass.

The attacking force was divided into two parts, one making
a turning movement so as to get in rear, while the main body, 280
strong, attacked in front.

On December 20th 1875, the main body reached the foot of
the pass and an officer and twenty-five Gurkhas were sent ahead to
reconnoitre. Advancing cautiously through the dense jungle, they
got within a few yards of the defences without being seen. Seizing
their opportunity, they rushed into the nearest stockade, and in a
few minutes cleared it of its defenders with the loss of one killed and
one wounded. The stockade thus captured was found to command
a considerable part of the position, and after half an hour's steady

350 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

firing, the Malays were dislodged from their remaining defences
and put to flight. No further resistance was met with.

This brought the campaign to an end and the Indian troops.
in Perak, being no longer required, were withdrawn after about
a year's occupation of the country.

PART V.

CHINA.

J>2°i w

I. B. Topo. Dy. So. 8,084
Kid. C J A. April l»OS.

No. 4.810.-L. 1909.

CHAPTER XXIV.

THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE.

China Proper is about 1,474 miles in length and its breadth
is about 1,355 miles. The coast line measures some 2,500 miles
and the land frontier is described as being 4,400 miles in length.
Several ranges of high mountains, in connection with the mountain
system of Central Asia, enter the western provinces, and, after
traversing the western and southern parts in various directions,
descend to low hills as they approach the sea coast. The exception
to this, and one of the most noticeable features of the surface
of China, is the immense delta plain in the north-eastern portion
of the empire. This plain, curving round the mountainous districts
of Shan-tung, extends about 700 miles in a southerly direction
from the neighbourhood of Peking, and varies from 150 to 500
miles in breadth.