

On the 10th a party escorting two 18-pounder carronades
from Malacca was attacked at Roombiyah, but drove off the enemy.

On the 12th the covering party in advance was fired on from a
stockade across some paddy and lost one man killed and five wound-
ed ; Lieutenant Wright, calling on his men to follow, rushed forward
to assault it, but was only followed by his orderly, as the rest of the
company were demoralised by the sudden fire. Lieutenant Wright
fell in the paddy field, his thigh being broken by a musket ball,
but was saved by his orderly, who knelt over him and kept the
Malays at bay till the men of the company recovered themselves

THE MALAY PENINSULA. 345

and came to the rescue. In consequence of this mishap, artillery
was after this attached to the covering parties.

On the 17th April, owing to a mistake in conveying orders
another more serious reverse occurred. Colonel Herbert had re-
ceived information that some strong stockades had been erected
half a mile in advance at Priggi-to-Datus, near a clearing. He
therefore ordered the covering party to attack the stockades if on
the near side of the clearing, and this was construed into a positive
order to destroy them. The stockades were found to be occupied
in force beyond a paddy field. The enemy opened fire, inflicting
some casualties. The artillerv shelled the stockades for some time
but the hostile fire being unsubdued, a party under Ensign Thomson
was directed to make a detour across the paddy field and take the
stockades in reverse. This party, however, came unexpectedly
upon another stockade on the right rear of the covering party.
At the first volley from it Ensign Thomson was wounded and six
men fell. The remainder with their officer had to retreat to the
main body. After two and a half hours' fighting, by which time
the casualties amounted to twenty-seven out of an original strength
of fifty-four, the party fell back to the edge of the cleared jungle-
Emboldened by this success, the enemy the same day attacked
the rear of the camp, but a few discharges of canister quickly
repulsed them.

On the 20th offensive operations were discontinued owing to
about 300 of the force being in hospital. On the 25th April stockades
thrown up by the enemy at Soongei Pattye and Koombiyah in
rear of the camps were destroyed ; as was also a third on the Sebang
road on the 27th.

The piquets in front of the camp were attacked and driven in
on May 3rd, but on the supports coming up, the enemy were com-
pelled to retire to a hill on the left front, called Bukit Lanjoot,
which was crowned by a strong stockade. Fire was opened on this
with a 12-pr. howitzer and a party sent to take it in reverse.
The stockade was captured with the loss of Ensign Walker killed,
and two or three wounded. On the 13th a reinforcement of one
company of the 46th Native Infantry from Penang was received,
and another company arrived on the 17th. Hardly a night passed
without the piquets being attacked. On the 21st fifteen stockades