

Lieutenant-Colonel C. Herbert, Commanding.

Captain J. S. Wyllie, 29th Native Infantry, Brigade -Major.

Lieutenant J. H. Bell, Superintending Engineer.

Captain F. Bond, Commanding the Artillery.

Lieutenant Milnes, Commissariat Officer.

Major P. Farquharson, Commanding 5th Native Infantry.

By the end of January 1832 nearly the whole force had
arrived, and preparations were now made for an immediate advance
into the interior. In the interval that had elapsed since the
termination of the first expedition, the local authorities at Malacca
had employed, for months together, coolies in cutting down the
jungle on the road to Nanning as far as Roombiyah, to the width
of eighty yards on each side. Timber had also been cut and
•collected at Roombiyah for the purpose of constructing a stockade,
as it was intended to form a depot there. In order to protect these
cutters, a body of Malays was raised, and armed with muskets, to
which was given the name of the Malay Contingent. On the 7th
February, the advanced guard marched for Roombiyah ; though the
enemy were heard in the vicinity, no hostilities took place, as they
had selected Soongei Pattye as a fortunate spot for reopening the
campaign. The plan adopted in this expedition was to cut a road
through the jungle to Taboo, and the forest was cleared to a width of
eighty yards on each side, so that the communications could not be
interrupted. The expedition was carried on by detachments ;
parties varying in strength from one to two companies going out

344 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

daily as covering parties to the Sappers and Miners ; the senior
officer present with the covering parties carried on the operations for
the day.

The troops were gradually brought up in detachments. On
22nd February a reconnoitring party fell in with nine stockades
erected during the first expedition, and destroyed them. Colonel
Herbert joined the advance on the 2nd March ; all this time progress
was very slow, as the road was being cut through the Roombiyah
forest. On the 17th the enemy, becoming emboldened by the
inactivity of the troops, fired some shots into the working -party ;
whereupon the covering party moved forward and captured five
stockades. The casualties were one man wounded by musketry
and eight by ranjows. From this day constant skirmishing oc-
curred, accompanied by occasional casualties. On March 22nd the
advance reached So ongie Patty e, and on the 25th five stockades at
Kalama were carried with the loss of one killed and three wounded.

Two more in a lateral direction were destroyed the same day,
and on the 27th five stockades w^re destroyed at Malacca Pinda,
across the river. On the 29th August Lieutenant Harding was
killed, and a subadar and two or three others of the 29th
Madras Native Infantry were severely wounded in taking a
strong stockade at Ayer Mangis ; next day some more stockades
at Loondoo and Pangkallang Nanning were destroyed.

The whole force advanced to Dattoo Membangin, about 100
yards beyond Alu Gaja, distant two miles and five furlongs from
Soongei Pattye, on April 3rd. Here another defensive post was
established and named Bell's Stockade, subsequently known as
Fort Lismore.