

The garrison of Malacca at this time consisted of 4 companies
of the 29th Madras Nati ve Infantry and half a company of Madras

Artillery. The expedition now undertaken

1st expedite, I83I. comprised 2 SUDa ltern S and 150 men of

the 29th Native Infantry and a detachment of artillery with two
6-prs. drawn by buffaloes, the whole commanded by Captain
Wyllie of the 29th.

Meanwhile the Panghooloo of Nanning had induced the Raja '
of Rainbow and two or three other chiefs to make common cause
with him.

The expedition started on the 5th August, the supplies having
been sent off under a guard in boats the day before to Soongei
Pattye. On arrival at Malin, five miles from Malacca, the force
learnt that, owing to insufficient water, the supplies were stopped
at Ching. The guard was therefore increased, and orders were sent

l^Vide page 342.

THE MALAY PENINSULA. 341

to bring on the supplies by coolies. On the 6th the column reached!
Soongei Pattye, and next day, though the supplies had not arrived,
the advance was continued, as the men had two days' provisions with
them. Opposition was first experienced on entering Nanning terri-
tory ; the advance continued through dense jungle, the enemy
keeping up a sniping fire from the flanks which was, however, soon
silenced by grape. At 1-30 p.m., Alu Gaja, only two miles from Soon-
gei Pattye was reached. Here one day's supply of rice was obtain-
ed. On the 8th the expedition took 7f hours to march if miles,
the Malays sniping as usual. On the 9th after a few hundred yards,
the troops reached the foot of Bukit Seboosa, or Seboosa Hill.
Here the enemy had built a stockade on the brow of the hill, and
felled trees across the road. The leading gun opened with grape
and the stockade was evacuated, whereupon the column, clearing
away the obstructions as it advanced, crossed over the hill and,
descending into the plain, camped at Mullikee only five miles from
Taboo . On this day and the morning of the 10th small parties were
sent back to bring up the supplies, but were unable to get through.
As there was therefore no longer any prospect of reaching Taboo,
the camp baggage was destroyed and the retreat commenced at
11 a.m. The enemy harassed the retreat at every step by pouring
in a fire from the flanks and rear, and inflicted some casualties.
Though the column had been permitted to advance comparatively
unobstructed through eighteen miles of dense forest, the path had
been closed behind it, by trees felled across it every twenty or thirty
yards. All these it was necessary to cut through to enable the
guns to pass. At Kalana the head of the column was brought to a
standstill by fire from the front. A party of the 29th, however,
succeeded in clearing the way, and the force reached Soongei Pattye
at 7 p.m., bringing with it seventeen wounded. Here the supplies
were found.

The havildar * (Pir Muhammed) in charge had been attacked
the night before, but after a defence of ten hours had repulsed
his assailants.

The 1 1th and 12th August were employed in building a stockade
round the government bungalow at Soongei Pattye, and in clearing