

At three on the following morning, a column under Captain
Watson, consisting of 100 men of the 14th Foot, 80 men of 3rd Bengal
Volunteers, a detachment of artillery, and some seamen and marines,
landed to attack the works, and after surmounting many natural
obstacles came in sight of the defences at 9-30 a.m. These were
immediately assaulted, and in half an hour the two principal batteries
and three redoubts in their rear were carried. A battery and
five redoubts on the other side of the river were then evacuated by
the enemy. The entire piratical fleet was captured and the force
returned to Java.

Soon after, another expedition was sent against Raja Boni
•m ici,i °f Macassar, in Celebes, who was guilty

of frequent acts of hostility towards the
British. In April 1814, a combined military and naval force
was fitted out at Java under Major-General Nightingall, and arrived
at Macassar on June 7th prepared to attack the Raja, who had
refused to make the reparation demanded. The ships having bat-

Vol. VI 22

338 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

tered the defences of the town, the troops under Lieutenant- Colonel
McLeod assaulted at dawn and carried all the barriers in suc-
cession, though not without some loss. Within an hour the town
and palace were in possession of the British. The Raja had es-
caped during the night, but in his residence, which was committed
to the flames, were found five guns, and a large quantity of gun-
powder and arms. The enemy, whose strength was 3,000, suffered
considerable loss. The Raja was deposed and, it being con-
sidered that the arrangements made by General Nightingall would
assure the tranquillity of the island, the expedition returned.

In June 1816, however, the Raja of Boni had again become ag-
gressive and had taken up a position about eight miles from Macas-
sar, at the entrance of the Baliangan pass. This pass led to a hill,
where he had entrenched his force in fifteen strong redoubts flanked
on both sides by nearly precipitous rocks containing caverns which
were used as magazines or for shelter from artillery fire.

A force under Major Dalton advanced to dislodge him, con-
sisting of : —

A detachment of Bengal Artillery.
4th Bengal Volunteer Battalion.
340 European Regiment.
U5 Seamen and Marines.

Two 18-pounders, two howitzers, and one 6-pounder were
attached to the force.

The attack commenced at daylight on the 8th June and con-
tinued until four in the afternoon. At that hour, the enemy,
after a most desperate resistance, was driven with great loss from
the whole of his entrenchments. In this action 11 men were
killed and 63 wounded, of whom 8 died. The enemy's force was
estimated at 2,000, and their loss was computed at 500 men, in
eluding the Raja himself.

In August 1814, all their former possessions in the Eastern
Islands were restored to the Dutch, and on the 19th August 1816,
Java and its dependencies were handed over to them.

CHAPTER XXIII.

THE MALAY PENINSULA.

In 1824 Fort Marlborough and all the British possessions