

Perak, 1875.

Perak is one of the little states of the Malay Peninsula
adjoining the southern boundary of Province Wellesley. The coast
line is about a hundred miles long, and the State extends about
fifty miles into the interior. The Perak river, the great water-
way of the country, intersects the central plain from north to south.
On the west are fertile lands reaching to the sea, and on the east
the country rises to the great central range of the Peninsula. The
northern district of Perak, which is known as Laroot, is rich in tin.

In October 1871 the Chinese miners in Laroot, who numbered
about 20,000, quarrelled amongst themselves. The Muntri, or Malay
Ohief of Laroot, was powerless to restore order, and all trade came to
a standstill. In addition there was trouble as to the succession
to the Sultanate of Perak. The result was a chronic state of disorder.
With a view of bringing this state of affairs to an end, the leading
Malay Chiefs were induced to sign an agreement, known as the
Pangkore Treaty, on 20th January 1874. By this a Resident and
Assistant Resident were appointed and the general administration of
the country virtually placed in British hands. The chiefs, however,
immediately began to regret their agreement. At length on the 1st
November 1875 an attack was made on a man who was posting up
an obnoxious proclamation at the village of Passir Sala, and in the

348 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

ensuing scuffle the British Resident was killed. A party sent up
the river against Passir Sala a few days later were repulsed with
some loss. The Governor of the Straits Settlements, being
apprehensive of a general rising, now telegraphed to India for
1,500 men. Such fighting as there was practically came to an end
before the arrival of the Indian contingent, but the expedition is
noteworthy for the rapidity with which the troops were des-
patched ; the first portion reaching Penang on the 27th November.
The force was designed for jungle fighting and consisted of : —

Head-Quarters and 600 men, H. M. 3rd Regiment (The Buffs) — Colcmel

Cox, C. B.
Head Quarters and 400 men, 1st Gurkhas.
3-5th Royal Artillery, with 4 Mountain Guns(7-pr. M.L.R. steel,

150ft).
Two 5£-inch Mortars, with 500 rounds per piece and 200 rockets.
A Field telegraph of 100 miles of wire, one superintendent and ten

signallers.
One company, Madras Sappers and Miners.
Medical Officers, doolies, and doolie-bearers.

The whole was despatched with sea provisions for six weeks
and shore provisions for ten days, camp equipage, light tents, and
" lascars' pals." Brigadier-General Ross was in command with
staff as follows : —

Major Mark Heathcote, A.Q.M.G.

Major K. .J. Hawkins, Major of Brigade.

Lieutenant Preston, Rifle Brigade, A.D.C.

Captain Badcock, D.A.A.G.

Major Tarigg . . "^

Captain Oawfurd . . }-R. E., Field Engineers.

Lieutenant North . . J

The Indian column was detailed to occupy the upper portion
of the country and had to march through Laroot to Kuala Kangsa
on the upper portion of the Perak river. This was accomplished
without opposition, detachments being left at Bukit Gantong
and Campong Boyah.