

The rivers are very numerous, and, with the canals, form some
of the most frequented highways in the empire. The two largest
rivers are the Huang-ho and Yang-tse Kiang, but the former, owing
to its shifting bed and shoals at the mouth, is of little value for
navigation. The Yang-tse Kiang, which after a course of 2,900
miles, empties itself into the Yellow Sea about 31° latitude, is
navigable for steamers as far as I-chang, upwards of 1,200 miles
from its mouth. The tide is felt as far as Nan-king, the principal
city of mid-China, 200 miles from the sea. The principal artificial
waterway is the Grand Canal running from Hang-Chou Fu on the
Yang-tse Kiang to Tien-tsin on the Pei-ho, and connecting Peking,
the capital, with Nan-king.

China proper is divided into nineteen provinces, each presided

over by a viceroy who is supreme within his

System of government. j ur i s di c tion, and is answerable to the Em-

peror at Peking.

The principal religions of China are Buddhism and Taoism, 1 to

which must be added Muhammadanism,
Iglon " and the cult of the system of philosophy

1 Laou-tsze the founder of the Taoist sect, sophy resembles that of the Manichteists.
ivos a contemporary of Confucius. His philo-

354 ~ FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

taught by Confucius. Buddhism was introduced from India during
the first century of the Christian era and now claims most adherents.
But, while Buddhism and Taoism find their adherents among
the common people, the real religion is ancestral worship.

In daily life the Chinese are frugal, sober, and industrious,

but exceedingly grasping and avari-
Habits of the people. cjous> Their wants are few and easily

satisfied. The poorer classes live almost entirely on rice 1 and
vegetables, to which they sometimes add small pieces of fish or
meat. Their clothes are of the cheapest ; 2 and they are so ac-
customed to crowded apartments that house rent forms an in-
significant item in a Chinaman's expenditure.

The climate and products of such a vast empire naturally differ

widely in various parts. The climate of

Climate. / r . .

the theatre of operations and its effects
on the troops will be described in the succeeding narrative.

With a view to defence the empire was divided into two por-
tions, North and South ; North China, con-
11 ary orgamzvion prior g j s ^ n g f fae provinces of Chili, Shan-tung,

and all territory to the north and eastward
of them ; South China, comprising the rest of this vast empire.
Such an unequal sub-division points to the preponderating impor-
tance given to the province in which lies the Imperial City of
-Peking. Each division was under a Chief Commissioner, who was
also Commander-in-Chief of all its naval and military forces.

The military government of each province had the command
of its local land and sea forces. Each general had his headquarters,
where he collected the bulk of his command; the rest he distributed
bstween the different posts under his orders : the troops were
quartered in camps, generally on commanding s>ites outside the
towns ; each regiment, from 500 to 600 strong, built, as a rule, its
own fort or camp, and the necessary interior huts for its own ac-
commodation.