

1 This havildar was promoted to Native Officer by the Commander-in-Chief for his
gallant conduct.

342 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

e

the neighbouring jungle. The Malays meanwhile erected stockades
round it and blocked the road through the Roombiyah forest to
Malacca with felled trees. By this time a universal panic pervaded
Malacca, so Captain Wyllie returned to consult with the authorities.
On his arrival he despatched a reinforcement, and a day or two later,
a subadar's party with ammunition. Both these parties suffered
severely from the enemy's fire and ranjows. These last are made
of the spiny processes of the sago palm, or of sharpened bamboo.
They are planted in the grass and inflict wounds more difficult to
cure than gunshot wounds ; in these operations they were much
used and caused many casualties.

The force in the stockade now consisted of 100 men including
wounded, who bore a high proportion to the whole. Between 1 a.m.
and daybreak of the 19th, the enemy made three assaults but
were each time driven back into the jungle. On the 20th, the
garrison was reduced to one barrel of ammunition and there were
so many casualties that every wounded man who could pul]
a trigger had to assist in the defence. However, about 3 p.m.
on this day they were relieved by the light company of the 29th from
Singapore, which fought its way in, having amongst other casualties
Lieutenant White mortally wounded. This company, taking with
it the most severely wounded, returned to Malacca on the 22nd
August, leaving sixty men and a plentiful supply of ammunition in
the stockade. Meanwhile, the authorities bought off the Raja of
Rambow's adherents, and having received a promise that the
retreat would be unmolested, sent a detachment of forty men»
under Lieutenant Hurlock, to the stockade. He brought impera-
tive orders for the retreat of the detachment, with the guns, the
carriages and limbers of which were to be destroyed. The detach-
ment was ordered to leave at 8 p.m. on the 25th, and troops from
Malacca were to move out to their assistance.

When the detachment was well clear of the stockade, the enemy
at once appeared in swarms, firing on the retreating column and
harassing it in its tedious progress through the Roombiyah forest.
The guns, swung on bamboos, had to be lifted over a succes-
sion of felled trees, and, eventually, owing to the breakdown
of the coolies, had to be abandoned. At 4 a.m. Malin,atthe
edge of the forest, was reached, the troops having taken eight

THE MALAY PENINSULA. 343

hours to march as many miles. All opposition now ceased, the
column resumed its march after half an hour's rest, and arrived at
Malacca at 6 a.m. A chain of piquets was maintained round
the town for the remainder of the year and the country aban-
doned to the enemy.

It was now determined to send a larger force, and reinforce-
ments from Madras were despatched to
2nd expedition, 1832. Malacca< The force consisted of the 5th

Madras Native Infantry, five companies of the 29th Madras
Infantry, two companies of Sappers and Miners, and a proportion
of European and Native Artillery, with a good park. Cattle for
the Ordnance and Commissariat Departments were also obtained.
The staff was as follows : —