

in the island of Sumatra were ceded to the
escnp ion. Netherlands in exchange for Malacca and

its dependencies. From this date, therefore, the Malay Peninsula
naturally came under the protection of the British Government.
The peninsula is generally mountainous, being destitute of
extensive plains or valleys. The greater part is covered with
primeval forest, in the midst of which the seats of the different
states and principa lities appear as scattered and inconsiderable
patches of cultivation, usually situated at the mouths of rivers-
Malacca, Singapore, and Penang (including Province Wellesley),
known as the Straits Settlements, are directly under British rule.

The rest of the peninsula is divided into several small native
states. On the west coast are Kedah, Perakh, Negri Sembilan,
and Selangor. At the extremity of the peninsula is Johore,
and northwards along the east coast are Pahang, Tringganu,
Kalantan, and Patani. Patani is tributary to Siam, but the rest
of the peninsula is now under British protection, with the title
of the Federated Malay States.

Operations against Chief Nanning.

In 1828 Dool Syed, the Panghooloo Chief of Nanning, refused
~ . . , „ to obey a summons to Malacca or to

Description of Nanning. ■ . . .

acknowledge British authority. The
matter was referred to the East India Company's Court of
Directors, and in 1831 orders were received in Malacca to
reduce the refractory chief to obedience by force of arms. The po-
pulation of Nanning in 1831 was estimated at about 6,000, of whom
1,500 were capable of bearing arms. The state comprised about
400 square miles, the village of Taboo, 22 miles north-west from the
town of Malacca, being the capital. The surface of the country is
undulating, interspersed with high knolls and thickly clothed with
jungle. The level ground between these undulations, where the

Vol. VI 28 A

340 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

water lodges in the rainy season, averages seventy to eighty yards in
width, and forms either swamps or paddy fields according to the
industry or otherwise of the natives in the vicinity.

The Malacca river is formed by two branches which unite near
Sabang in Nanning ; thence it flows in a westerly direction, and
-quitting Nanning near SoongeiPattye, thirteen miles from Malacca,
falls into the sea at the latter place. It is navigable for boats as
far as Ching, about six miles from Malacca, and thence for sampans
(Malayan canoes) as far as Sabang.

The native roads are mere footpaths cut by the Malays with
their parangs (knives) as they go along ; they run over the bunds
of the paddy fields, which frequently break down, and over which
the natives throw a bamboo or two as a bridge ; similarly the streams
are bridged by nothing better than felled trees. These paths are
particularly liable to obstruction from felled trees, a fact of which
the Nanningites took full advantage during the operations.

In open ground the Malays as an enemy are not of much account.
The plan they adopt is one of incessantly harassing the communica-
tions, building stockades, and retreating ; and when they retreat
they plant ranjows 1 in their rear. This system is well suited to a
country covered with forest, where every tree is a stronghold and
every road a defile.