

EVENTS LEADING UP TO HOSTILITIES IN CHINA 1840.

Our relations with the Chinese Empire during the continuance

Events leading up to the of the chartered privileges of the East India

war of 1840. Company were generally maintained on a

fairly satisfactory footing by the prudence of the Company's agents ;

nevertheless disputes and difficulties and occasional stoppages

•of trade did arise. In 1834 a Superintendent of British Trade was

appointed from England. The consequent change from the East

India Company's submissive style to the assertion of commercial

rights, made by the representative of the British Government,

was, therefore, not understood by the Chinese.

From 1820 1 an extensive trade in opium had been carried on
between India and Canton, the vessels containing the drug anchoring
at Whampoa. In 1830, 15 to 20 opium vessels lying off Lintin,
below Whampoa, were expelled from Whampoa by imperial edict
and the sale of the drug was prohibited. With the exception occa-
sionally of a fierce edict, no other steps were taken to prevent the
traffic, as it was a source of great profit to every one of the Canton
officials and was connived at by them.

Between the years 1830 and 1835 numerous onerous restrictions
were placed upon foreign trade generally by
the Chinese officials. Lord Napier, sent out
from England to be Superintendent of British Trade, was treated
by them with the utmost indignity, and his death was primarily
occasioned by the mental vexation caused by being compelled to
submit to the daily insults of the Chinese authorities in his
attempts to carry out the orders of his Government.

In 1837, from the frequent piracies in and about Canton, it
was necessary to have one or more of Her

1837. . .

Majesty's ships-of-war convenient to that
city and in communication with the Superintendent. Opium

Mortin's " China.'

358 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Was made by the authorities the excuse for justifying many-
questionable acts* with reference to foreigners, with a view to their
humiliation and expulsion from the country. On the 2nd December
1837, the British flag was struck at Canton, and the Principal
Superintendent of Trade, Captain Elliot, withdrew to Macao.

In 1838 Her Majesty's ship Wellesley arrived off Canton, and
the Chinese were informed that, as trade

1838.

was open, British war-ships would fre-
quently visit China with peaceful intentions.

There is believed to have been in Peking at this time a reform
party, favourable to foreign intercourse, struggling to show its head
and guided by the Empress, a woman of great personal attractions
and extraordinary force of character.

Memorials favourable to both views — i.e., to the opening of
China to trade, and to its total exclusion — were presented to the
Throne ; the one based on its importance to China, the impossibility
of prohibiting it, and the virtue of bowing to necessity; the other
founded on patriotism, national pride, and adherence to the maxims
of former Emperors, as well as on the ill-eftects caused by the use
of opium on the health of the people and the drain of silver from
the country in order to pay for it. The death of the Emperor's
son from the effects of an over-dose of opium decided the Emperor
Taokuang to favour the party advocating the exclusion of the
foreigner and all trade.