

From the mouth, the first defences were Chuen-pi fort on the
"left bank -and Tai-kok-tau on the right bank. The former was
some 150 feet above the river, on the island of that name. The
latter was a strong work close to the river bank on a low spit
of land on the south-west of Tai-kok-tau island. Higher up the
Anung-hai island, 1,500 feet high, forms the east or left bank of the
Bocca Tigris ; the. works on it formed the principal defences of the
Bogue. North and South Wan-tung are two rocky islands lying
nearly in mid-channel, abreast of Anung-hoi, forming the western
side of the Bocca Tigris. They are about 600 yards apart, sur-
rounded by a bank which extends 1| miles south-east by south.
They were both fortified. Tiger island lies 1| miles north of North
Wan-tung ; there was a low open battery on it. These works were
known Collectively as the Bogue Forts.

Above Tiger island the banks cease to be barren and rocky,

*fi»e hills recede, and the immediate banks become well defined

afld assume the character of low-lying rice fields. Above Tiger

1 Pearl-river.

THE THEATRE OF WAR, 18-10-41-42. 365

t-.

island the defences were the first bar battery and the barrier forts,
all in the Whampoa passage. Five and a half miles above second
bar the river divides into two main branches, the Whampoa and
Blenheim passages, which meet again at Ho-nan point just above
Canton City and opposite the foreign settlement. The distances
by the respective passages are fourteen and sixteen and a half
miles, respectively. Whampoa, the anchorage for foreign vessels,
is eight miles below the city.

The city of Canton is surrounded by a wall about six miles in
circumference, varying from twenty to

Canton city. •■,'•!, ip , .

thirty-five feet in height and from twenty-
five to thirty feet in thickness. The city proper, the walled
enclosure, is nearly square in form and lies between the river and the
low hills 2-| miles distant on the north. The southern suburb,
the most populous part of the city, lies between the south wall
and the river, and the Tartar quarter is the north-western por-
tion. To the west, the country lying between the city and Li-
Min-Kuan arsenal on Sulphur creek is practically roadless ; but
narrow paved roads, three feet wide, exist here and there ; the country
is highly cultivated and irrigated. To the northward of this cul-
tivated district stretches a dry undulating country, passable by all
arms, with bare, broad-topped rugged slopes. West of this and north
of the city lie the lower spurs of the White Cloud range. Blue
Jacket Fort, Gough Fort, and Marine Fort occupy the crests of steep
hill-sides. These hills command the city. An offshoot known as
Magazine Hill is included within the walls to the east of the north
gate and rises to a height of over 200 feet ; the city wall crosses the
ridge to the northwards some sixty feet below. This position is the
key of the city and was held by the troops during the occupa-
tion of Canton. To the north-east of the city is a wide cultivated
valley, beyond which are the White Cloud mountains, whence low,
barren, grave-covered undulations stretch in a south-easterly
direction to Tai-shu-tsun and the Sha-ho creek. Between them and
the river lie a succession of irrigated gardens and rice-fields.