

resort of foreign vessels in Chinese waters. The hostility of
Commissioner Lin against the English showed itself in his
occupation of the Kowloon promontory, on the mainland opposite
the harbour, by considerable bodies of troops.

At Macao measures were also taken by the Chinese authorities
to distress and annoy the British refugees, by intercepting the
supplies of food from the mainland, upon which the Portuguese
settlement there exclusively depended, and by compelling all the
Chinese servants in the employ of the British to quit their houses,
and forbidding all sale of provisions to them.

On the 31st August all villagers were incited by proclamation

to fire upon and destroy or drive back the English whenever they

were seen to approach their shores in search of food or water.

On receipt of this document, Captain Elliot called upon Captain

„, , „ , Smith to establish a blockade of the port

Blockade of Ginton. . j

of Canton ; a public notice of the blockade
was issued on the 11th September, but it was never rigidly enforced.
A few days previous to this declaration the harbour of Kowloon had
been made the scene of the first hostilities, Captain Douglas
having successfully dispersed some war junks, whose presence
before the town of Kowloon prevented the supply of provisions.

Early in September, Her Majesty's ship Hyacinth had joined
the Volage. These corvettes, Captain Elliot on board the Volage,
proceeded on the 28th October to the Bogue, where a communi-
cation was sent on shore threatening active measures of retalia-
tion should British shipping be molested. On the following
morning, the corvettes in the meanwhile having dropped two oi"

three miles down the river, the despatch was

War junks dispersed. .. . j

returned unopened, and shortly afterwards
twenty-nine war junks approached. A sharp action ensued, result-
ing in the rout of the Chinese with the loss of three junks sunk and
three disabled.

Subsequently the British ships were for the most part moved
from Kowloon bay to Urmston harbour, also known as Toang-ku
roads, below the Bogue, at the mouth of the river, the anchorage
at the former place being rendered unsafe by the erection of batteries
commanding it, and the frequent drifting of fire junks upon the
shipping.

EVENTS LEADING UP TO HOSTILITIES IN CHINA, 1840. 361

1 During the early part of 1840 the majority of the British
community resided on board merchant

1840. .

ships at the anchorage of Toang-ku near
the island of Lin-tin. Early in January the Emperor issued
an edict expressing his satisfaction at the stoppage of all British
trade. The tone now adopted by Lin became undisguisedly
hostile, and large bounties were set upon the heads of the
British.

Every means having failed to arrange matters with the Chinese
authorities, there was no alternative but to awaken the Emperor
and his ministers to a sense of justice. 2 The whole tenor of
Lord Palmerston's instructions was to demand reparation for
past injuries and some security for the future ; and the critical state
of affairs at last engaged the serious attention of Her Majesty's
Government.