

On the 24th June the fleet proceeded northward, a amall
force only being left at the Bogue to maintain the blockade.

See map facing page — (at beginning of page ).

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1840. 369

On the 4th July the Wellesley and other ships of the squadron
Expedition to Chusan. entered the harbour of Ting-hai, the capital

of Chusan, and, without the slightest
attempt being made to prevent them, dropped their anchors close
in shore.

On the morning of the 5th July all the transports entered the
harbour. The Chinese, who were altogether unprepared for this
hostile visit, nevertheless made a show of resistance. The British
men-of-war anchored in a line at a distance of 200 yards from the
wharf. They consisted of the Wellesley, 74 ; Conway and Alligator,
28 ; Cruiser and Algerine, 18 ; and ten gun-brigs. The bombard-
Bombardment of Ting-hai. ment of Tin g" hai be § an at 2 p - M -> and

lasted but a few minutes, when the

fire of the enemy ceased, and the soldiers on the wharves dis-
persed.

The grenadiers of the 18th Royal Irish and a detachment of

Royal Marines landed and occupied Joss-
Storming of Ting-hai. houge Hil]j tQ the right of the guburb of

Ting-hai. Some guns of the Madras Artillery, the Cameronians,
and a detachment of Sappers also landed, and, defiling through the
narrow streets near the water's edge, gained a partially cultivated
plain within 500 yards of the city rampart, whence fire was opened
against it. The fire of the Chinese had but little effect, but the
continued din of gongs and display of banners within the city
indicated that a serious resistance might be expected. No attack
was made that night, the troops bivouacking in the suburb.
When morning dawned, Colonel Burrell advanced with a party
of the 18th Regiment, only to find the city abandoned and the
gates blocked by a few grain-bags. Regulations were now drawn
up for the government of the island, Colonel Burrell being
appointed Military Commandant and Civil Commissioner.

A messenger was despatched in a steamer to Chen-hai, at
Me, ; enger s,nt to Chen- the mouth of the Ningpo river, to deliver
hai. to the authorities there a copy of Lord

Palmerston's letter to the chief advisers of the Emperor. The
letter was returned with an intimation that its contents and
style were not such as could be exposed to the glance of the
imperial eye.

Vol. VI 24

370 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA

Captain Boucchier, of the Blonde frigate, 42, was charged with a
similar commission to Amov, where, on the

Amoy visited. p , . *

refusal of the mandarins to receive the letter
or to hold any communication with the ship, and on their firing
treacherously on an unarmed boat, the frigate opened her broadside
upon the fort and town walls. No troops were landed, there being
none available for land service. The Chinese made the most of the
frigate quitting the harbour without landing troops, ascribed it to
fear, and reported to Peking that a victory had been gained, and the
barbarians beaten off.