

The climate is tropical and very trying from May to October,
when the thermometer stands high and the,

Climate of C'antcn. . .

atmosphere is damp. The soutn-west mon-
soon lasts from about April to September and the north-east from

366 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

October to March. The changes of the monsoon are particularly-
trying seasons. May to August are the rainy months, and the cold
weather does not fairly set in before December. Winter is most
favourable for land operations, as from April to October the rice-
fields are impassable. For water operations, however, summer and
autumn are best, the creeks being then full and accessible to vessels
of considerable draught.

Eeturning to the northern theatre, the province of Kiang-su
lies immediately to the north of Chekiang
iang s U . a ^ . g bounded on the east by the sea. It

has an area of 45,000 square miles and forms part of the great
northern plain. It is watered as no other Chinese province is.
The Grand Canal runs through it from north to south and the
Yang-tse Kiang crosses its southern portion from west to east.

The Yang-tse Kiang is the most important river in China. It
is subject to great periodic changes of level

The Yang-tse Kiang. J *.-■,}. -,

and its essential features, as regards navi-
gation, alter so rapidly that a chart cannot be considered a safe
guide after six months or a year. In the months of September and
October the river is not difficult to navigate if proper care and
caution be employed, the water being then many feet higher than
its winter level. In September it begins to fall, and in
November and December sinks very rapidly, on which account
these two months are considered the most difficult for navigation.
The estuary is seventy miles broad and the tide is felt as far as
Nanking, the former capital of China, 200 miles inland. The
river falls into the sea by three channels, of which the southern is
the recognised entrance.

Chin-kiang Fu, a walled city about four miles in circumference,
accessible to sea-going vessels of the heaviest
liing burden, is situated on the right bank of the

river 170 miles from the sea. It is one of the most important points
in the empire, being situated where sea navigation may be said to
end and the difficulties of river navigation to begin, at the junction
of the Grand Canal with the Yang-tse Kiang. It is in water com-
munication with Shanghai, Hang-chau, and Ningpo on the south,
^ind to the north with the Yellow River, the Pei-ho, Tientsin, and
Peking. Thus a great part of the waterways of the Empire meet at

~$u

CANTON

and the surrounding Country
from an original Survey.
Scale 7 Inch to ) Mile

cu r ^ ■'' =

■o OV

U'''

. . ;gt$. ''■/if%

m*^ •rfy/iit: T.:

JK\ ■•:/,,'/

ily^^SPy^

i R Topo D 7 No 8,097
Kxd C J. A May 1909

Scale I inch = I mile

■mm No. 4.854-L, 1909.

1 Cultivated- fairly dry.
1 Barren and rugged hills.

3 Low, dry undulation*.

4 Causeway, 6'— 10" wide.

REFERENCES.

5 Causeway, 5' wide