

In February, 1839, a Chinese, accused of dealing in opium,

was strangled in front of the foreign
factories. Captain Elliot, Chief Superin-
tendent of Trade, remonstrated to the Governor of Canton against
.this insult.

On the 10th March Commissioner Lin reached Canton with
• imperial authority to crush the opium traffic.

On the 18th Mp.rch two edicts were issued, requiring all the
opium on the store ships to be surrendered, and bonds to be given
by the owners that they would never bring any more, on penalty of
death. Three days were given for a reply.

On the 21st March, all foreigners were forbidden to go to-
Macao ; communication with Whampoa was cut off, and the foreigni
factories were surrounded by soldiers.

■EVENTS LEADING UP TO HOSTILITIES IN CHINA, 1840. 359

On the 24th March, Captain Elliot demanded passports. Pro-
visions were stopped, and a triple cordon of boats placed in front
of the factories. At this time, Her Majesty's sloop Lame having
been despatched to Calcutta, there was not a single British ship-of-
war in Chinese waters. The Superintendent was both helpless to
protect others, and was himself a prisoner under his country's flag,
whilst opposed to an overbearing Commissioner armed with un-
limited powers.

On the 26th March Captain Elliot received commands from the
Chief Commissioner Lin to deliver over all opium in the possession
of British subjects; this he consented to do, viz., 20,283 chests.

On the 5th May the cordon of observation was withdrawn,
and trade nominally resumed, whilst the Chinese took measures to
fortify the river and place booms across it.

On the 24th May Captain Elliot, in consequence of an edict of
death being published against all introducers of opium into the
empire, retired from Canton leaving not more than twenty-seven
foreigners behind him, and pointing out to them that Canton was
a place in which they could no longer reside with either safety or
honour. Captain Elliot had promised to use all his influence to pre-
vent ships entering Cantonese waters, yet, on the other hand, Com-
missioner Lin was in reality most desirous that vessels should enter,
provided their owners would sign a bond never again to bring opium.
The foreign trade was fully recognised by Lin to be essential to
the imperial revenue, amounting as it did to £10,000,000.

Most of the British community now abandoned Canton
and removed to Macao.

On the 1st June the edict to destroy the opium arrived. The
Prefect of Canton gave a receipt for the 20,383 chests above re-,
ferred to and burnt them.

Lin appeared to have reached the pinnacle of his power, to
have expelled the British, and to have made the Portuguese sub-
missive to his will. His fertile brain now schemed to gain
possession of the Macao forts and to poison the English at
Hong-Kong.

1 Hong-Kong, where supplies of live stock and vegetables were
readily obtainable, even in seasons of difficulty, now became the

1 Oohterlony.

360 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.