

6 Dry, low, rugged undulation*.

7 Irrigation; impassable.

8 Firm banks.

9 Firm, (helving bancs.

10 Allied Landing Place. 1867.

11 More or lest open.

12 Under view of the Five-»toried Pagoda.

NOTE: 8ee Admiralty Chart! 1,739 and 2,562, Canton River.

THE THEATRE OF WAR, 1840-41-42. 367

€hin-kiang Fu, and in 1842 its capture did more to hasten the con-
clusion of a treaty than the fall of numerous other places occupying
a less important position.

In climate and temperature there is little difference between

Chin-kiang Fu and Shanghai. In Shanghai

Climate of Shanghai and the annua i range f the thermometer is

Chin-k.ang Fu. ° .

from 25 to 96 , and in spring and autumn
a change of temperature of 20° in 24 hours is not infrequent. The
annual mean is 62 ■ 5° Farh., and the mean rainfall about fifty inches.
The south-west monsoon is barely felt at Shanghai. During autumn,
winter, and spring, north-easterly winds prevail. From January
to April it is often damp and rainy ; the winter months are,
however, salubrious. Snow usually falls in December and January.
April and May are genial months. The sickly season extends from
June to September, at which period the prevailing winds are souther-
ly and the absence of a tempering breeze is acutely felt.

CHAPTER XXVII.

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1840.

The Eastern Expeditionary Force.

A compact and serviceable body of troops, mustering about 3,600

bayonets, with a due proportion of artillery

Rendezvous. " <• T t i "

and ordnance stores from India, and a
squadron of three men-of-war and two steamers, assembled at
Singapore early in May, 1840. Later on in May, Captain Sir Gordon
Bremer took command of the squadron, then consisting of the
Wellesley, 74 ; Conway. 28 ; Alligator, 28 ; Cruiser, 18 ; Lame,
20 ; Algerine, 10 ; Rattlesnake, 6 ; and the Atalanta and the
Madagascar, steamers of the Indian service. With these were
twenty-six transports and store-ships, having on board Her
Majesty's 18th, 26th, and 49th Eegiments of Foot ; 1 battalion
of Bengal Sepoys, volunteers collected from 10 regiments of the
line ; 2 batteries of Royal Artillery with 9-pounder field-pieces and
12-pounder howitzers ; 2 companies of Sappers and Miners, and
a large Engineer establishment from Madras. Colonel Burrell,
18th Regiment, commanded the troops at the rendezvous ; Colonel
Cameron, of the Cameronians, was second in command. After a
detention of three weeks at Singapore, the squadron arrived off
the Ladrones, near Macao, on the 21st June.

The Commodore Sir Gordon Bremer, and Captain Elliot, the
Superintendent of Trade, met to concert

Blockade of Canton.* _ r , ■ j

measures at Macao. A notice was issued
establishing a blockade of the river and port of Canton from the 28th
June, 1840. A circular was also issued to the forces, reminding them
that the object of the war was to obtain satisfaction, not from the
people, but from the Government, and exhorting them to adopt,
in their intercourse with the former, all the means in their power
to conciliate their good-will.