

THE THEATRE OF WAR, 1840-41-42. 363

Che-kiang is the smallest of the eighteen provinces of China, its

area being computed at 39,000 square miles,

Che-kiang province. and occupieg the southeTn r terminal

portion of the great central delta plain, of which the adjacent pro-
vince of Kiang-su, bordering Che-kiang on the north, constitutes
the rich and productive centre. On the east the frontier is formed
by the Eastern Sea, on the west by Kiang-si and An-hui, and on
the south by the mountains of Fu-kien.

All the most celebrated staples of China are produced in the
province of Che-kiang, and its internal waterways are numerous and
good.

The capital of Che-Eiang is Hang-chau Fu, on a plain about
two miles from the north bank of the river

Hang-chau Fu. . ., .

Tsien-tang, twenty miles above its en-
trance and eighty miles from the sea. It was the metropolis of China
under the Lung dynasty. The southern termination of the Grand
Canal is at Hang-chau Fu, but it has no opening into the river ;
there is also continuous water communication with Shanghai and
with Ningpo.

The Chinese city of Ningpo is situated on the Kiver Yung,

immediately above the junction of its two

1 n sr°- branches, its walls extending along the river

side, up both of them, in latitude 29° 55' 12" north and longitude

I2r" 22' east,

Amoy island occupies the northern portion of the great bight
between Chen-hai and Hu-i-tau points. The city of Amoy stands on

the south-west part of the island, abreast
the island of Ku-lang-su, which affords pro-
tection to the inner harbour, one of the best and most easy
of access on the coast of China. Ku-lang-su island has a circum-
ference of four miles ; it is principally of granite, and fresh-
water from wells is plentiful. There are two distinct ridges the
summit of which is 300 feet high.

Canton,* or Kuang-chou Fu, is the capital of Kwang-tung,
t, ... . ' one 6f the wealthiest provinces and the

i'ositionof Canton. . r

most important city in south China. Nature
has afforded it unparalleled facilities for navigation. To an
inland position, with its agricultural and defensive facilities are

* See map facing page— (at beginning of Chapter 2BV

364 FliONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FfiMl INDIA.

added the advantages of communication by means of three great
rivers and their feeders. These are the Si Kiang or West River
(also called the Blue river), the Pe Kiang or North River, and the
Tung-Kiang or East River. The Si Kiang falls into the sea nine miles
south-south-west from Macao, after receiving at San-shui, seventy
five miles from the sea, where its course turns from east to south
the waters of the Pe Kiang. The Tung Kiang empties itself into
the estuary of the Chu Kiang 1 or Canton river, above the second bar.
The delta of these rivers forms a large tract of alluvial land between
Macao, San-Shui, and Canton.

Canton itself stands on the north bank of the Chu Kiang about
70 miles from the sea. The Chu Kiang rises about 100 miles from
the sea in two streams which unite ten mileis above the city. At
this junction a long narrow stream connects it with the Pe Kiang
by two branches, one of which is at Sanshui. The entrance of
the Canton river, formed by the islands of Chuen-pi (left bank)
and Tai-kok-tau (right bank), is divided by North and South Wan?
tung islands into two channels, the eastern of which, the Bocca
Tigris, is generally used by vessels of large draught ; the western
is called the Bremer channel.