

Early in the year orders were received from England by the
Governor-General of India to organize a small, but efficient, force

for service in China, to start from Calcutta

Expedition organized.

and Madras. Reprisals were directed to
be made in the China seas, and an embargo placed on Chinese
vessels.

The object of the British Government was to limit the
operations to the simple occupation of an advantageous insular
Object of the British Gov- position to serve as a depot ; and from
ernment. there to establish a close blockade of all the

more important seaports. This measure, it was thought, would
cause great distress to the numerous traders of the coast and to the
exporting manufacturers, and thereby would induce the Chinese
Government to accede to our conditions. The utter fallacy of this
notion was subsequently established. At first the operations were
confined to the capture and occupation of various ports, but even-
tually the war was terminated by the occupation of Nanking, which
brought pressure to bear on Peking by cutting off supplies from the
south .

Ochterlony. 2 Martin, Volume II, page 39.

"■J •
CHAPTER XXVI.

THE THEATRE OF WAR, 1840-41-42.

The opening scene of hostilities in 1840 was in the neighbour-
c , , hood of the Chusan Archipelago, a large

assemblage of islands lying at the mouth
of Hang-chou bay, of which Chusan is the principal.

Chusan island is fifty-one miles in circumference ; its extreme
length in a north-west and south-east direction being twenty-one
miles, and its greatest breadth 10| miles. From the beach at Ting-
hai, on the south side of the island, to the northern shore, the
distance across is seven miles ; towards the eastern end it becomes
narrower. Of the numerous small streams which run from the
mountains, the most considerable is the Tung Kiang, which falls
into Ting-hai harbour. The products are rice, millet, wheat, sweet
potatoes, and yams ; cotton is largely cultivated near the sea.
Besides the principal harbour of Ting-hai there are three commer-
cial ports, — viz., Chinkeamun at the south-east end of the island,
Ching-kiang or Singkong on the north-west side, and Shaaon at
the north end.

The town of Ting-hai w?.s If miles in circumference, and sur-
rouuded by a wall 14f feet high and thirteen
feet wide, surmounted by a parapet 14| feet
high. A canal, thirty-three feet wide and three feet deep, nearly
encircle the city, entering it near the south gate, which was
about half a mile from the shore of the harbour. Canals formed
the principal means of transport, the roads being merely foot-
paths on the stone embankments, which prevented the encroach-
ment of the sea on the rice-fields. Every large field had its canal
for the purpose of carrying away the produce. The swampy
nature of the country caused the first occupation of the island to
be attended with considerable sickness. This sickness was un-
known during the second occupation by the British — an immunity
due to good food, good water, and avoiding the rising ground, the
summit of which was at night wreathed in a cold damp fog.