

1 In North China millet is cheaper and 2 Nankeen or blue cotton blouse with

more abundant than rice, and together with straw hat in summer ; the same quilted

corn forms the staple food of the poorer or padded with cotton in winter ; shoes

classes, with thick, stiff, papier m4ch6 soles.

THE COUNTRY AND PEOPLE. 355

Besides these camps, the various fortresses of the empire
were occupied by Tartar troops, commanded by a Chiang-Chun,
who obeyed no one but the Emperor, and whose business it was
•to watch over and keep in respect the high civil authorities who
might be meditating revolt.

Each provincial government raised its own local forces under
the nominal direction of the Peking Board and the Chief Commis-
sioner for Defence, and was alone responsible for their efficiency, a
fact which led to great military weakness.

The Chinese made little difference between the land and sea
forces ; their chief officers were interchangeable as favouritism or
policy dictated.

The Chinese have been settled in China from a remote period
and early attained a high degree of civilisa-

Early History. . '' . f P . .

tion. The teachings of Contuci as inculcate
the doctrine that the past was best and should be imitated as far
as possible. This, combined with freedom from contact with out-
side influences, has caused China not only to stagnate in civilisation
for many centuries, but to fall into decay. The Tartars are first
heard of as making incursions into Chinese territory about 936 B.C.
but it was not until 1644 that the present Manchu dynasty treacher-
ously overthrew the Ming dynasty, and established itself as the
reigning house.

The British East India Company early established a profitable
and increasing trade, but all kinds of unjust exactions were demand-
ed from merchants, and many acts of injustice were committed on
the persons of Englishmen. So notorious at length did these become
that in 1793 Lord Macartney was sent on a mission to Peking.
He was graciously received by and had an interview with the
Emperor, but the concessions he sought for his countrymen were
not accorded. As the condition of the merchants at Canton did
not improve, in 1816 a second embassy under Lord Amherst was
Bent to Peking. As, however, the Chinese demanded that he
should kowtow to the Emperor, which he declined to do, Lord
Amherst left Peking on the day of his arrival. Consequently the
mission was barren of result.

Vol. VI 23i

356 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The earliest direct interference of the British in China was in

British Expedition to Macao. 1808 ' when an expedition, 1 accompanied by
1808. six vessels of war, was sent to Macao to

prevent that island from falling into the hands of the French. The
Chinese, however, took offence and stopped all trade. The troops
were re-embarked on 23rd December 1808, and returned to India
in February 1809.

1 Two Companies, Her Majesty's 30th Regiment ; two Companies, Bengal Europeans,.

600 sepoys.

CHAPTER XXV.