

Land attack on Canton. villa S e of Tsing-pu, being conveyed in

Chinese decked passage boats collected
during the reconnaissance.

On the 25th the left column, about 1,800 strong, landed under
the command of Major-General Burrell, and marched against the
heights to the north of Canton. Four forts crowned these heights,
mounting some forty-two guns of various calibre. Two 6-pounder
guns r.nd two 12 -pounder howitzers having been brought up and
placed in position within 300 or 400 yards of the forts, a heavy
fire was opened upon them at 8 a.m. after which they were carried
at the point of the bayonet.

The Chinese opened a heavy fire on the forts from their rampart

guns and jingals, causing considerable losses to their successful
assailants. They also detached a party of some 500 Tartars to
attack the landing-place at Tsing-pu ; these were, however, defeated
by details hastily collected by Captain Hall of the Nemesis.

The weather was extremely sultrj T during the whole of the 25th,
and about mid-day of the 26th rain fell in torrents — a circumstance
which tended greatly to the fatigue of the attacking columns.
By the night of the 26th, by the strenuous exertions of the artillery,,
fifteen pieces were in position along the chain of heights which com-
manded the city on the north-east face, and a plentiful supply of shot
and shell was collected. The country intervening between the British
position and the landing-place was broken and difficult for artillery,
much cut up by swampy paddy-fields, and covered with knolls used
by the Chinese as burial-grounds. 1

1 N.B. — A better line of advance would be found to the north of that taken
over a more undulating and less swnmpy country.

980 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Whilst our troops were thus engaged, the Calliope, Conway,

Naval operations. HeTal d, and Alligator pushed up the Whampoa

passage with the flood-tide, to secure the naval

arsenal opposite the city, and to act as circumstances directed. At

the same time the Hyacinth, Modeste, Cruiser, and Columbine took

up a position near the factories and secured the Dutch and French

forts. These ships gained possession of the whole of the river frontage

of Canton, capturing many forts and war junks in a gallant style.

With the city thus at our mercy an armistice was again agreed

, . . to. A ransom of six millions of dollars was

Armistice. .

accepted, the Tartar troops being allowed
to march out without banners or music. The considerations that
influenced Captain Elliot in acceding to an armistice were : —

(1) The strength of the force under arms before Canton on the 27th

May did not exceed 2,200 men, whilst within the city were not
less than 20,000.

(2) Sickness from the inclemency of the weather at this season of the

year, the temptations of plunder, and the likelihood of the troops
obtaining intoxicating liquors, were greatly to be feared.

(3) The sacking and firing of the city by a vindictive and rancorous populace

