

During the five months of negotiation in the north, Macao, which
„ ....^ , „ was hitherto considered neutral ground, had

Hostilities in the South. .. .

assumed a very hostile and disturbed ap-
pearance, from the large influx of Chinese troops, and the frequent
attacks on British subjects. Everything indicated that an attack
would be made on Macao. Captain Smith clearly perceiving
that it was the intention of the Chinese to cut off all com-
munication between Macao and the mainland, anticipated
their designs, and brought the guns of Her Majesty's ships
Lame and Hyacinth, with those of the steamer Enterprise
And the Louisa cutter, to bear against the barrier across the

Vol. VI. 24 a ,

372 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

spit of land connecting the Portuguese and Chinese possessions.
Their fire was speedily answered by the Chinese from a battery of
seventeen guns constructed on the beach, north of the barrier. A.
brisk fire was kept up for an hour on both sides, when, a single gun
being landed on the beach, the Chinese guns were soon silenced ,*
and about 300 troops, composed of marines, the small-arm men of
the Druid, and two companies, Bengal Volunteers, having landed,,
the Chinese were driven from every position, although 5,000 strong.
All was over in four hours, and the vessels retired to their usual
anchorage. Four men were wounded on the British side. The
Chinese withdrew to a fort near CasaBianca, which they repaired
and occupied, removing thither their spiked guns.

No further active operations took place during the year 1840.
By the end of the year the force at the mouth of the Canton river-
had been reinforced by the Calliope and Samarang and the 37th
Regiment, Madras Native Infantry.

The policy of Keeshen 1 was pacific ; but the state of the public
mind in Canton and the activity displayed by the military authorities
at the Bogue tended to create a belief that hostilities were but
dormant. Towards the close of the year the arrival of convalescents
who had been sent from Chusan to Hong-Kong to recuperate, and of
seven companies of the 37th Madras Native Infantry 2 from
India, who were landed on an island near Lintin, south of the
Bogue, placed at the disposal of Captain Elliot a complete and
effective force.

1 The Chinese High Commissioner. periem ed a terrific typhoon in which the-

2 The four transports which conveyed Golconda, having on board the Regimental
t he 37th Mndras Native Infantry ex- Head Quarters and Staff, foundered.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1841.

"When it became evident that the object of prolonging negotia-

Attaok on the Bogue tions was to g ain time for the completion
forts - of the arrangements for defence, Captain

Elliot determined on active hostilities, and on the morning of the
'7th January, 1841, the troops (about 1,400 strong) destined for the
land attack on the Chuen-pi fort, having been put on board the
Nemesis, Enterprise, and Madagascar steamers, were landed, at 8-30
a.m., two miles to the southward of the point of attack. At
the same time the eastern squadron, consisting of the Calliope,
Lame, Hyacinth, and Queen and Nemesis steamers, stood in until
abreast of the Chinese batteries, when they dropped their anchors
and began the action.