

The force was now divided, the 18th Regiment being directed
to advance against the long battery and Joss-house Hill, the re-
mainder to pursue the enemy and effect an entrance into the city.
This latter column achieved its object without loss, the rapidity of
the advance not permitting the Chinese to recover from their panic.
On the right, the 18th Regiment and Royal Marines had some
sharp encounters with the enemy, who rallied from time to time,
and they suffered some loss before the Joss-house Hill was gained.
The loss of the Chinese was considerable. On the British side two
were killed and nineteen wounded.

The Chinese array melted away after their rout, and large
supplies of iron, shot, musket balls, and powder fell into the
hands of the victors.

The inhabitants of the island proved a hardy and independent
race, and up to the end of the war it was dangerous for the garrison
to leave the town. Several camp-followers and private soldiers were
kidnapped, men being sent over from the mainland expressly for
this purpose.

384 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Leaving detachments of the 18th and 55th, Artillery, and Sap-
pers to garrison Joss-house Hill and Tirig-hai, the combined foree r
on the 9th October, anchored off Ju3t-in-the-way Eock, in mid-
channel of the entrance to the Ningpo river.

A reconnaissance showed the heights on either side of the river
to be crowded with troops, and bristling with batteries and intrench-
ments, while the entrance to the river was impeded by a double row of
piles, extending nearly the whole way across its mouth and defended
by a row of war junks. The citadel, which occupied the summit
of a sharp and craggy hill to the right of the river's mouth,
had been strengthened, and at every bay or point where facility
or landing was afforded, strong eatrthen batteries had been thrown
up.

Early on the morning of the 10th October, a strong column

Attack on Chen-hai. ( left colum n of attack) of infantry and artil-
lery was landed upon a sandy beach on
the southern side of the river, far to the eastward of the Chinese
position, and made a circuit round the base of the hills on which
the main body of the enemy were posted, so as to get well in their
rear. At the same time their attention was diverted by another
column (centre column) which landed near the mouth of the river,
and by the fire of the men-of-war and steamers, anchored as close
inshore as the shoaling of the water would allow, in order to demolish
the defences oE the citadel, and to throw shells into the batteries and
entrenchments on the heights.

A small detachment of Sappers and Miners having been attached
to Sir W. Parker's column, the duty of carrying all the enemy's
works on the left, or west, bank of the river was assigned to the
naval portion of the force, consisting of the seamen battalion,
400 men ; Royal Marines, 276 men ; Royal Artillery, 23 men ;
Madras Sappers, 30 men with two 5£ inch mortars ; and some 9-and
12-pounder rockets.

