

A blockade of the Ningpo river and of the coast northward,
as far as the Yang-tse Kiang, being proclaimed, and the Conway
left to explore the mouth of the latter river, a squadron, consisting
of the Wellesley, 74 ; the Blonde, 42 ; the Modeste, 20 ; the Pylades,
20 ; the Volage, 28 ; and Madagascar steamer and two or three
transports, sailed for the Pei-ho.

Colonel Burrell did not permit any of the public buildings or
„. , . temples in the city of Ting -hai to be occupied,

Ting-hai. . r / ° . \

with the exception of that crowning Joss-
house Hill, held by the 18th Regiment; the rest of the force
occupied tents, exposed by day to the sun and by night to the
unwholesome exhalations which arose from the damp irrigated soil
and paddy-fields. Fever and dysentery in consequence soon made
fatal ravages amongst the men, but an application made for the use
of an unemployed transport as a hospital ship was refused. 1

Proceeding northward, the Pi-chih-li expedition passed the
promontory of Shan-tung on the 5th

Expedition to the Pei-ho. r . , , . , j & .i„

August, and on the 9th anchored on tne
mouth of the Pei-ho, in six fathoms at low tide, at a considerable
distance (eight or nine miles) from the low mud banks which
gird it.

1 Table of admissions into hospital and deaths which occurred in the European
Regiments at Chusan from \Zth July to 31st December 1840 : —

Admissions. Deaths.
Madras Artillery .. .. 575 16

18th Regiment .. .. 1.341 52

26th Regiment .. .. 1,545 i238

49thBegiment .. .. 1,868 142

Total .. 5,329 448

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1840. 371

Crossing the bar on a spring tide, the Wellesley, drawing 1 1 \ feet ,
.anchored unexpectedly off the Taku forts on the 10th, causing im-
mense astonishment to the multitudes who assembled to gaze at
her. Negotiations were opened, and eventually on the 8th Sep-
tember, after considerable discussion and delay, the Emperor's reply
arrived that the matters in question could be better discussed at
Canton, whither Keeshen had been deputed. This being acceded
to, the fleet left the anchorage on the 15th, steering for the Miao-
tao islands and promontory of Shan-tung.

On the day after the arrival of the squadron at Chusan, the Ad-
miral issued an official notification of the

TrucG.

truce agreed upon with the Imperial High
Commissioner (Keeshen) and called upon all to respect it. This
truce was limited to the latitude of Chusan, and was not in force
in the South. Elepoo, the viceroy of Che-kiang, evinced his satisf ac -
tion by sending over bullocks to Chusan for the use of the British
there.

Enquiries were set on foot to investigate the cause of the great
sickness prevalent amongst the troops occupying Chusan, and active
measures were at once taken to fortify the British position there,
especially that of Joss-house Hill, where the building of a small
fort, surrounded by an outer wall, was begun.

On the 15th November, the Admiral, with the greater part of the
fleet, took his departure for the south, to meet Keeshen, leaving
Captain Bourchier, of the Blonde, in command of the naval force,
with the Conway, Alligator, Nimrod, Algerine, and Young Hebe
and Atalanta steamer.