

The Blenheim and Queen anchored close abreast of the great
Anung-hoi battery, and the Melville off the extremity of the fort,
with her larboard bow guns bearing on the eastern half-moon
battery of Wan-tung, and by noon the action here became general.

The Wellesley, Druid, and Modeste entered the western channel,
and anchored abreast of the battery on North Wan-tung, which they
engaged with starboard broadsides, while shot and shell were
thrown from their larboard 68-pounders against a fort on the right
bank, behind which was an extensive encampment of troops.

The advanced squadron, consisting of the Calliope, Herald,
Samarang, Alligator, &c, passed on to the northward of the Chinese
defences, firing their starboard broadsides into the lower Wan-tung
battery as they passed. After the cannonade had lasted an hour
Sir LeF. Senhouse landed under Anung-hoi with 300 seamen and
marines and carried the work with little resistance. North Wan-
tung was carried in like manner, the Chinese troops, 1,500 in
number, flying in disorder when the British troops were seen
nearing the shore

The Nemesis, with some boats of the Wellesley, at 4 p.m., pro-
ceeded to attack the Tai-kok-tau fort and camp. Upon the marines
landing from the boats, and entering by the embrasures of the forts,
the Chinese abandoned their works and dispersed over the hills.

The tents, stores, houses, &c, were fired. The British loss
was 5 men slightly wounded. Of the Chinese some 500 must
have fallen, the proportion of mandarins being very small.
Amongst them fell the valiant Admiral Kuan. Thirteen hundred
prisoners were taken and set at liberty. Many were shot down

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1841. 377

by the Indian troops in consequence of their not understanding
the command of the British naval officers to cease firing.

Some 400 pieces of cannon were captured, some 68-pounders
and a good many 42, 32, 24, and 18-pounders ; the majority
however of less calibre. The enemy's magazines furnished an
ample supply of powder whereby the imposing granite fortifica-
tions were soon reduced to ruins. The works of North Man-
tling were left untouched, and were occupied on the 28th by a
detachment of troops with some guns. The greater part of the
ordnance taken, being next to useless, was destroyed.

Leaving the 74-gun ships and the transports at the Bogue, the
advanced squadron under Captain Herbert of the Calliope, with
the Alligator, Herald, Sulphur, Modeste, and Madagascar and
Nemesis steamers,'proceeded up the river to attack a formidable
position which the enemy had taken up at the second bar, where a
strong raft had been constructed from bank to bank, flanked on
one side by the guns of an extensive earthwork, in which were 2,000
troops, and on the other by the battery of the Cambridge, a ship
which had been purchased by the Chinese for warlike purposes
before the arrival of the expedition. The attack on this posi-
tion made on the 27th February resulted in the carrying of the
entrenchments, the cutting of the raft, and the capture and
destruction of the Cambridge. The Cambridge was heavily
armed, but was moored head and stern in a manner to prohibit
the use of her guns. The Chinese were not sufficiently
acquainted with naval tactics to enable them to make the best
use of the resources at their command.