

Captain Herbert's squadron anchored at Whampoa reach,
and on the 2nd March the bulphur, with a division of boats, carried
the river defences to Napier's island — the Herald, Alligator, Modeste
and Sulphur anchoring off the island. The advantage of light
draught steamers during these operations was most marked.

The fall of the Bogue defences, considered to be impregnable
by the Chinese, created a degree of alarm in the public mind without
parallel since the Tartar conquest. On the 3rd March a suspension
of hostilities was agreed to. This was a conciliatory piece of leniency
on the part of the British, its negotiator, the Prefect of Canton, hav-
ing no powers.

378 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA

Hostilities were resumed on the 7th March, and by the 18th, with
a loss on the British side of one officer and six men wounded, the
Dutch Folly 1 was occupied, and all the river defences destroyed,
including those of the Macao passage, without loss on the British
side.

On the 20th March an armistice was agreed to, and Canton
Wi.s re-opened to all who might proceed there for lawful trade.

On the 12th and 13th March the Nemesis, with a small flotilla
of boats (three) in tow, threaded the shallow and narrow passages
leading from the Broadway to the Canton river, carrying all the
batteries met with in her course and destroying nine war junks and
105 pieces of cannon.

After the armistice was concluded, a few of the light craft of
Dispersion of the force. Captain Herbert's squadron anchored off

Canton, and the transports of the garrison
of North Wan-tung remained at the Bogue ; the rest of the force, to-
gether with the Chusan garrison, assembled at Hong-Kong, where
Sir H. Gough, who had arrived from India on the 2nd March, lost
no time in remodelling and reorganizing it. The regiment of Bengal
Volunteers proceeded to Singapore, and all invalids were despatched
to India and to Europe. The Melville sailed for England, and
the Samarang, the Queen, and Madagascar to Calcutta.

Early in April an edict was received from Peking, annulling

War preparations a ^ ^e concessions made by the imperial

agents. Measures of defence were actively
pushed on in Chusan, and at Chen-hai and Amoy. Captain Stead,
landing on Chusan island after its evacuation, was murdered, and
all redress refused by the governor of Che-kiang. Towards the
middle of April large bodies of troops poured into Canton.

On the 20th May the main portion of the British force again

„ ...... , passed the Bogue, and on the 21st the Blen-

Hostilities resumpd.

Jieim anchored in the Macao passage, six
miles below Canton.

On the night of the 21st, without warning, numerous fire-rafts
were sent adrift against the Louisa cutter and schooner Aurora
lying off the factories, and at the same time fire was opened from

1 An island S. W. of Canton city.

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1841. 379-

guns mounted in temporary batteries along the wharves. The rafts
were ingeniously constructed, being composed of boats chained to-
gether by twos and threes, so that, drifting down with the tide, they
might hang across the bows of a ship. Little damage, however,,
was done, as the boats of the squadron invariably towed them clear.
The main fleet assembled near Whampoa on the 23rd May,
having sailed from Hong-Kong on the 18th. On the 24th May
the force was divided into two columns, the right being directed
to land and occupy the factories (near the new Shamien site)
the left to proceed up the Sulphur creek, by way of Blenheim ^
rea-ch, previously reconnoitred on the 23rd May, and to land at the