

footing.
4th— The trade of Canton to be opened within ten days after the Chinese

new year.
Hong-Kong was taken formal possession of on the 26th January,
and shortly afterwards proclamations were issued relating to the

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1841. 375

government of the island, while the evacuation of Chusan by the
British was at once ordered.

A written ratification of the Chuen-pi treaty not being accorded ,
Captain Elliot reluctantly ordered the resumption of hostilities.
On the 20th February Sir G. Bremer proceeded to the vicinity of
Anung-hoi with the fleet, the light division of which consisted of
the Calliope, Samarang 7 Herald, Alligator, Sulphur, and Nemesis.
On the 23rd Captain Herbert, with the Nemesis and four pin-
naces, attacked a Chinese force engaged in obstructing the river
channel at the back of Anung-hoi. The enemy's works, compris-
ing a masked battery and field-works, were carried by the seamen
and marines without the loss of a man; about thirty Chinese
were killed and eighty guns spiked and untrunnioned.

On the 25th the fleet assembled near the island of South
Wan-tung. Two channels exist by which vessels of considerable
burden can enter the Canton river, one on either side of North
and South Wan-tung islands. The western passage was imperfectly

known, the eastern being the ordinary

The Bosue defences. , i -» T • i -i l i

passage taken. JNo pains had been spared
to make the western passage as difficult and dangerous as possible
by bringing the fire of two formidable batteries, of 45 and 40 guns,
respectively, to bear upon it, — one constructed on the western
extremity of North Wan-tung, the other on the right bank of the
river. From Anung-hoi a strong chain had been carried right across
the eastern passage, to a rocky point near a formidable battery,
which had for years existed on the eastern tongue of North
Wan-tung, where its end was made fast, the chain being held up
to within a few feet of the surface of the water by means of a line
of rafts.

South Wan-tung island was unoccupied, and advantage was
taken of this neglect to establish there a battery which enfiladed
the batteries on North Wan-tung.

On the 25th a working party of Royal and Madras Artillery,

covered by 150 men of the 37th Madras Native Infantry and the

Attack on the Boguo de- Nemesis, erected a sandbag battery on a

fences ' saddle in the centre of South Wan-tung,

and on the morning of the 26th, two 8-inch iron and one

24-pounder brass howitzers were in position. The working party

376 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

suffered no loss, although heavily fired upon during the night.
At daybreak the howitzers opened fire, and effectively shelled the
low batteries at the extremities of North Wan-tung, as well as the
camp formed along its southern slope, protected in front by a sand-
bag parapet connecting the masonry batteries, and having at in-
tervals guns mounted behind embrasures cut in commanding situa-
tions. A calm and a strong ebb-tide prevented the co-operation of
the fleet till 11 a.m. Yet, notwithstanding this, and that many
guns in the southern horns of the half-moon batteries on North Wan-
tung bore upon the South Wan-tung battery, no casualty
occurred.