were to be dreaded.

After the lapse of five days, the ransom being paid, the troops
were re-embarked, and the whole of the force, including the North
Wan-tung garrison, was conveyed to the general rendezvous at
Hong-Kong.

Before, however, the British troops had evacuated their posi-
tion on the heights, and after the conclusion of the armistice, it be-
came necessary on the 30th of May to act against armed bands of vil-
lagers, who assembled in large numbers upon a range of low hills
to the west of the city.

The total loss of the British during this series of operations in
killed, wounded, and missing, fell short of 130 (15 killed).

At this period Captain Elliot was recalled,

Treaty annulled. ^ ^^ digapproved> and Co l one l Sir

H. Pottinger appointed in his place. Rear-Admiral Sir W. Parker
was appointed to the command of the expedition about to proceed
to the north.

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1841. 381

The season of midsummer is always the most trying in the south-
ern latitudes of China, and was rendered more fatal to the health
of the men from exposure during the latter part of May before
Canton. Sickness seriously delayed the preparations for the advance
of the small force upon Amoy and Chusan, eleven per cent, being on
the sick list ; two severe typhoons towards the end of July also
caused such extensive damage to the transports that it was found
impossible to move the force, as proposed, early in August.

On the 3rd August Sir W. Parker and Sir H. Pottinger arrived..
The first act of the latter was to refuse to negotiate with his inferior
in rank, the Prefect of Canton — a circumstance which exalted his
rank greatly in Chinese eyes.

On the 20th August the Wellesley, Blenheim, Druid, Blonde, Mo-
deste, Pylades, Columbine, Cruiser, and Alqe-

Hostilities resumed. . „ _ <■-, ,

nne, oesostns, and Queen steam frigates, and
Nemesis and Phlegethon, iron steamers, with twenty-one transports,
sailed northwards. The transports conveyed the 18th Royal Irish,,
four companies of the 26th Cameronians, the 49th and 55th Regi-
ments, detachments of the Royal and Madras Artillery, two com-
panies of Madras Sappers and Miners, a rifle company of the 36th
Regiment Madras Native Infantry — in all 2,700 fighting men, with
a numerous train of light field artillery and a rocket brigade. The
general rendezvous was to be Chapel Island near Amoy.

The garrison left at Hong-Kong under the command of Colonel
Burrell consisted of five companies of the 26th Regiment, a detach-
ment of the 18th, two companies of Bengal Volunteers, the 37th
Madras Native Infantry, and a few Madras Artillery and Sappers
and Miners. A fort was constructed on Kellett's island to over-
awe Kow'loon, and other defensive measures were taken.

The fleet anchored off Amoy, after a favourable passage, on
Attack o„ Amoy. the 24th August. Some strong and well de-

signed batteries had been constructed on the
island of Ku-lang-su, mounting some seventy -six guns, and also along
the shore contiguous to the island of Amoy. The two seventy-
fours were laid alongside the great shore batteries, whilst the Druid,
Blonde, and light-draught vessels engaged the batteries of Ku-lang-
bu, and the steamers were employed in landing the troops and des-
troying the war-junks and gun-boat flotilla.