

382

FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The bombardment lasted two hours, the batteries suffering
but slight damage, not a gun being dismounted ; the troops then
landed and carried the works, the Chinese making a trifling
resistance. The heat during the day was very great and fatiguing.
The troops bivouacked on some heights near the city of Amoy ; the
Chinese evacuating it during the night, it was entered next
morning without opposition.

The troops operating against Amoy were : —

Officers.

Men.

Artillery

9

240

18th Kegiment

30

648

26th „ ..

8

153

49th „ .. .

24

460

55th ,,

26

731

Madras Sappers . .

6

Total J 03

184

2,416

The ships were the Wellesley, 74 ; Blenheim, 74 ; Blonde, 44
Druid, 44 ; Modeste, 18 ; Cruiser, 18 ; Pylades, 18; Columbine, 16
Bzntinck, 10 ; Algerine, 10 ; Sesostris, 4 ; Phlegethon, 4 ; Nemesis, 4
Queen, 4 ; — the four last named being steamers.

A garrison, consisting of the four companies of the Cameronians,
the left wing of the 18th Regiment, with a detachment of Artillery
and Sappers, was left in the island of Ku-lang-su, to overawe the
fort and town of Amoy. The Druid, Pylades, and Algerine remained
to blockade the port and protect Ku-lang-su from attacks by water.
No fewer than 500 cannon were taken, together with large stores of
ammunition, saltpetre, and sulphur, and an attempt was made to
destroy the various works of defence.

On the 4th September the fleet sailed for the Chusan Archipel-
ago ; owing to baffling winds and thick fogs many of the transports
separated, and did not re-unite near Chusan till the close of the
month. During the passage the Nemesis visited the harbour of
Sheipu, destroying its forts and many war-junks lyirig there for
shelter.

The fortifications that had been raised by the Chinese at Ting-
hai Bince its evacuation by the British, aldng the eastern shore of the
island, the sea -front, and Josa-house Hill, were of a formidable

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1841. 383

type, save that, according to their usual custom, the embrasures
had no splay and allowed of a range of fire of about 10° only.
The Chinese had, moreover, entirely overlooked the necessity of

protecting their flanks from being turned.

Attack on Ting-h a i. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ q{ ^ ^^ ^ ^

of the enemy's position, was unoccupied. This point was selected
for the attack, whilst the howitzer battery (one 68-pounder gun
and two 24-pounder howitzers) constructed on Trumbal] island, on
the eastern side of the inner harbour, within good range, occupied
the attention of the batteries.

On the 1st October, the 55th, 49th, 26th, and 18th Regiments,
with the Rifles (Madras Native Infantry), Artillery, and Sappers,
disembarked under the brow of the hill above mentioned, which
the enemy had now occupied in considerable force, and attacked it.
Several of the men-df-war brought their guns to bear on the right
flank of the long battery, mounting 150 to 200 guns, which stretched
across the mouth of the valley. The 55th carried the heights in
front of them, suffering some loss in their ascent up the slope of the
hill, the enemy abandoning everything and flying across the low
ground which separated their position from the city.