

The total naval force consisted of the Wellesley, 74 ; Blenheim,
74 ; Melville, 74 ; Calliope ; Samarang, 28 ; Druid, 44 ; Sulphur ;
Lame, 18; Hyacinth, 18; Modeste, 18 ; Columbine, 18 ; Starling;
and steamers Queen, Nemesis, Madagascar, and Enterprise.

The troops mentioned above consisted of a battalion of the
Royal Marines, convalescents of the 18th, 26th, and 49th Regi-
ments, the regiment of Bengal Volunteers, the 37th Regiment,
Madras Native Infantry, r.nd a detachment of Royal Artillery
and Madras Artillery. Major Pratt of the 26th Regiment in com-
mand, formed them into two columns and pushed on immediately
for the fort.

The ships-of-war ceased to fire upon the fort as soon as the heads
of the land columns came under fire of its ramparts. The fort waa
carried at a rush, the boats of the squadron at the same time
pushing on shore and their crews entering the position from the
sea side. The Chinese made but a show of resistance, and, the loss
of the British amounted to only thirty-eight men wounded, many
-of them slightly.

374 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

During the operations at Chuen-pi, on the northern bank of
the river, Captain Scott, E.N., with the western squadron, consist-
ing of the Samarang (26), Druid (44), Modeste (18), and Columbine
(16), proceeded a short distance higher up towards Tai-kok-tau
fort, a powerful battery built upon the water's edge, and, anchor-
ing abreast of it, bombarded it for the space of an hour, when, the
fire of the Chinese slackening, marines and troops were landed,,
who, climbing over the shattered parapet, soon drove the enemy
from their works after a hand-to-hand combat.

In the meantime, the 74- gun ships proceeded higher up the
river, to prepare for the attack upon the defences of the Bogue,
as soon as the troops and squadron engaged in the reduction
of Chuen-pi and Tai-kok-tau had been withdrawn from the
forts.

During the 7th and 8th January the captured works were dis-
mantled, the guns (97 in number) disabled, and all buildings and
stores destroyed. Many of the guns were not mounted, many were
only 6-pounders ; the majority corresponded to our 12-pounders
On our side forty men were wounded and none killed, showing # that
the Chinese were most inefficiently armed.

On the 8th the troops re-embarked, and the fleet, in the wake of
the Blenheim, under sail, gradually closed upon the great Anung-ho 1
battery, which formed the main defence of the Bogue. A flag
of truce was then sent on board the Wellesley, with a request that
hostilities might be suspended pending a further discussion of the
terms for a treaty to be entered into at once. An armistice was
accordingly agreed to with a view to giving the High Commissioner
time to consider the terms offered for his acceptance. The preli-
minary peace arrangements involved the following conditions : —
1st — The cession of the island and harbour of Hong-Kong, in perpetuity,

to the British Crown.
2nd — An indemnity of six millions of dollars.
3rd — Direct official intercourse between the two countries upon an equal