

Our loss during the day was three officers and thirty-one other
ranks, killed ; fourteen officers, ninety-two other ranks, wounded.
Of the marines, one officer and two privates were killed, while
five officers and fifteen men of the navy were wounded.

With the capture of Chin-kiang Fu the great object of the
Yang-tse Kiang campaign had been accomplished, the empire
severed in two, and the utter incapacity of the Government
to defend its people exemplified.

General Schoedde's brigade was now told off to occupy Chin-
kiang Fu. Two regiments took up a position on the hills overlooking

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1842. 395

"the city, a breach, thirty yards wide in the walls being made near
their camp to enable troops to enter it if necessary. The remain-
ing battalion occupied buildings near the southern mouth of the
Grand Canal. Many strong, hardy northern ponies had been found
in the cavalry stables of the city, which enabled a half troop of

mounted infantry to be formed, who per-

Moun ted infantry. J L

iormed many useful duties, — scouring the
country, collecting supplies, etc.

Before the troops embarked for Nanking, much desultory
fighting took place, and, it being found impossible to restrain the
mob, Chin-kiang Fu was left more or less a ruin.

Ilipu x now treated for peace, and endeavoured by promises
to delay the movements of the fleet. As the conditions of peace
were already well known, a cessation of hostilities was refused,
until, und^r the seal of the Emperor, authority to conclude a treaty
of peace based upon them should be produced.

The Cornwallis and several of the men-of-war, with the trans-
ports, leaving Chin-kiang on the 1st and 2nd August, arrived off
Nanking on the 8th. The Cornwallis moved on the 10th August into a
position from which the northern angle of the wall could be battered,
and the Blonde frigate was towed down the creek to co-operate.
Deducting the garrison at Chin-kiang Fu and the sick, the troops
for the attack of the city amounted to 3,400 men, exclusive of officers
— a force sufficient to capture it, but insufficient to maintain itself
there. On the evening of the 10th, Lord Saltoun's brigade disem-
barked at the lower extremity of the creek and occupied buildings
in the vicinity. The artillery landed at the same point, and every
preparation was made to move by the paved road, which com-
menced at the landing-place, five miles distant from the Tartar
city, where the gateways, being situated in tunnels without
bastion defence, could be readily blown in.

Lord Saltoun's brigade advanced by the paved road and
bivouacked at the village of Makur-keou (Mucou) ; the 3rd brigade
then disembarked. During the 11th and 12th, the artillery were
engaged in getting some 9-pounders and howitzers (10-inch) on
shore, and by the 13th every preparation had been made for the

1 Imperial High Commissioner.

596 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

attack, and the force collected about Makurkeou, which provided
excellent billets and stabling, and abundance of forage and litter.
The promptness of these movements had the effect of causing
Ilipu to produce an authority sufficient