

Chinese joss-houses and dwelling-houses are well built for
isolated defence, having generally but a single entrance in an outer
enclosure wall, which is otherwise entire. In their interior there is
generally a square paved court, surrounded by ranges of halls or
rooms, their fronts, towards the court, being composed of wooden
trellis-work, from behind which a most effective musketry fire can
be brought to bear upon anybody forcing the entrance gates.

To reduce the building, it was necessary to bring up artil-
lery and blow in the outer walls by powder, and eventually to fire
the building (roof timbers are generally of an inflammable pine).
.Some four hours were expended in reducing this place.

Of the British force engaged on the 18th May, 2 officers were
killed and 6 wounded ; and of non-commissioned officers, rank
and file, of all arms, 8 were killed and 44 wounded. The enemy

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1842. 391

left some 500 or 600 men dead, or dieing on the field. The Chinese
wounded were well treated, and the kindness they received at Cha-
pu produced important results in inducing their countrymen to
treat our prisoners well.

It was now decided not to attack Hang-chau. On the 28th May
the troops re-embarked, and after a voyage of fifteen days the
transports and fleet anchored off Wu-sung, about 100 miles dis-
tant from Cha-pu.

Shanghai, on account of the importance of its trade, was the
Attack on Wu-sung and first point north of Hang-chau bay selected
occupation of Shanghai. f or attack. On the 15th June the survey-
ing boats, without molestation, buoyed off a line of anchorage in
in front of the long battery covering the approach into the Wu-sung
river. The defences consisted of a line of ramparts, pierced
with embrasures, and extending along the river-bank towards
Pao-shan. Not a single flanking defence had been constructed.
After a short bombardment the works fell to a few boats' crews and
marines. Our loss amounted to two killed and twenty wounded,
the enemy losing some thirty only.

On the 16th June the force was strengthened by the arrival of
the Dido, 20 guns, convoying a large division of transports con-
taining 2,500 reinforcements from India.

No resistance being expected at Shanghai, only the 2nd Regi-
ment of Madras Native Infantry and detachments of Sappers and
Miners and Artillery were landed. The land force, consisting of
1,000 men, including the 18th and 49th Regiments, with detach-
ments of Royal Artillery, Madras Horse Artillery, and Sappers and
Miners, marched along the left bank of the river. The men-of-war,
the North Star, Modeste, Clio, and Columbine, each in tow of a
steamer, with the rest of the troops on board, proceeded up the
river to Shanghai without accident, a few broadsides from the
fleet sufficing to put the gunners in the enemy's batteries to flight.

The land force occupied the town, almost without mobestation,
and at once took measures to preserve it from mob violence, by
constantly patrolling the streets in all directions.