After an effective cannonade of the citadel, a portion of this
latter force landed, and, scaling the rocky height, entered by
a gateway already partially ruined, and gained the position, from
which the Chinese fled as they approached. The city ramparts
were then escaladed, and the city occupied without resist-
ance.

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1841. 385

On the right bank of the river the centre column, consisting of
the 49th Regiment, detachments of Aitillery and Sappers, two
12-pounder howitzers and two 9-pounder field guns — in all 440
men and forty shot-carriers — landed near the mouth of the river,
and drove before it the Chinese, who retired towards a bridge
of boats thrown across the river up-stream. The left column
{5 companies of the 55th Regiment, a wing of the 18th, a company
of Madras Artillery, and some Sappers, — in all 1,040 men, — with
4 light howitzers, two 5l-inch mortars, and 100 shot-carriers),
having overcome all opposition, debouched upon the bank
of the river in time to intercept the retreat of this dense mass
of the enemy, who, overwhelmed by the fire of a complete semi-
circle of musketry, lost heavily.

Many prisoners were captured, as well as a large amount of
military stores, together with brass cannon, junks, and armed
boats. The prisoners were liberated, deprived of their arms, and
many of them of their pig tails ; the latter degradation an outrage
on Chinese feelings, and likely to have intensified their hatred of
the invaders. The British loss was 3 killed and 16 wounded.

A garrison, consisting of the 55th Regiment and detachments
of Artillery and Sappers was left at Chen-hai, with the Blonde
in support, to hold the fortifications there ; and on the 13th
October the ! steamers, with the Modeste, Cruiser, Bentinck, and

Columbine as a light squadron, advanced

Attack on Nineno. .i _ , -, vr*

61 up the river toward Ningpo, a passage

having been first opened through the barrier of piles and bridge
of boats. The, land force on board consisted of some 750 bayonets
besides Artillery and Sappers.

The lesson taught the Chinese on the 10th had been too severe
to allow of a rally at so early a period, and the city was found de-
serted. Vast stores of rice and other grain were taken. The ponies
captured were found most useful for the transport of ammunition
boxes and the other necessary appendages of a field train hitherto
chiefly carried by " shot-carriers."

Had the troops been able to advance on Chaa-pu, and Hang-chau
Fu, the provincial capital of Che-kiang, it is not improbable that
the campaign would have been brought to an end ; they were,
however, not in sufficient numbers.

Vol. VI 26

386 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

No further hostilities being contemplated, the troops at Ningpo

employed themselves in adopting all the

measures of precaution required to meet

cold weather. Some joss-houses and mandarins' quarters near the

north-western angle of the ramparts were taken possession of as a

cantonment.