

On the 23rd June Shanghai was evacuated, one division embar-
king on board the steamers in the river, the other marching by land
with the guns to Wu-sung. The force now collected at Wu-sung num-

392 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

bered 9,000, exclusive of marines. Of the Indian reinforcements,
the 39th Madras Native Infantry remained in garrison at Hong-
Kong, and the 41st at Chusan. The apprehension of our advance
on Peking by way of the River Peiho was now so great that Chinese
troops destined forSu-chou Fa were directed to Tientsin.

The whole of the land force under Sir H. Grough was divided
into three brigades : the first, under Lord Saltoun, C.B., consisted
of the 26th Cameronians, the 98th Regiment, the battalion of Bengal
Volunteers, and the flank companies of the 41st Madras Native
Infantry — total 83 officers, 2,235 other ranks ; the second, of the
55th Regiment, the 36th Madras Rifles, with the 2nd and 6th Regi-
ments, Madras Native Infantry — total 60 officers, 1,772 other
ranks ; and the third, of the 18th and 49th Regiments and the 14th
Madras Native Infantry — total 68 officers, 2,087 other ranks.
The Royal and Madras Artillery formed a separate brigade, which
was composed of one troop of horse and 4^ companies of foot
artillery — total 32 officers, 318 Europeans, and 252 natives ; and
4 companies of gun lascars, natives of Madras, entertained to
assist in dragging the pieces where horses could not be employed, and
to carry ammunition (" shot-earriirs "). The Engineer department
and three companies of Madras Sappers formed a distinct command,
detachments of them being attached to each brigade, when mov-
ing against the enemy.

The fleet consisted of —

H. M. Ships Cornwallis, Blonde, Calliope, North Star, Dido, Modeste,
Endymion, Clio, Columbine, and Algerine— men-of-war ;
Belle Isle, Apollo, Sapphire, Jupiter, and Rattlesnake—
armed troop-ships ;
„ Plover and Starling — armed surveying vessels ;

„ Vixen and the E. I. Co.'s Sesostris, Auckland, Queen,

and Tenasserim — steam frigates ;
E. I. Co.'s Nemesis, Phlegethon, Pluto, Proserpine, and Medusa-
iron steamers ;

and 40 transports totalling 30,000 tons. The transports were
formed into five divisions, each conducted by a man-of-war, and
to each division a steamer was attached to render assistance-
Surveying ships preceded the convoy and signalled dangers and
soundings. The fleet weighed anchor on the 6th July, and or*

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1842. 393

the 19th, after experiencing slight resistance, although points
favourable to defence were numerous, reached Chin-kiang Fu.

The expectations entertained that the Chinese would here
make a most desperate resistance were disappointed, for the fleet
was allowed to ride quietly at anchor within short range of the city
ramparts ; the place appeared to have been entirely deserted.
The Chinese appear to have defended the lines to the capital and
Shanghai only, and to have entirely neglected that of the Yang-
tse, which indicated the weakness of the Government and the
insignificance of their military resources, for, during a period of
forty days, two batteries only had been erected between Wu-sung
and Chin-kiang Fu, on the banks of a river which afforded many
admirable positions, each of which could only have been carried
by the disembarkation of troops.