

Reinforcements. . _ , _ T . . ._ .

of Bengal Volunteers 1 (Rajputs), the 2nd
and 41st Regiments, Madras Native Infantry, with some artillery
and horses, reinforced it ; several steamers and ships-of-war —
the Vixen, Tenasserim, Auckland, Ariadne, Medusa, and others
from Bombay and Calcutta (Hooghly steamers), well armed and
adapted for river navigation, also joined.

Difficulties of tides and currents, and supply and transport,
had prevented operations being carried out against the important
and strongly garrisoned town of Hang-chau ; it was, therefore,
determined that the town of Cha-pu, thirty to thirty-five miles
distant from it, should now be attacked. The transports
occupied nine days in reaching Cha-pu from Chen-hai, a distance
of sixty miles only.

Ningpo was evacuated on the 7th May, and the troops embarked
on board the Queen, Sesostris, and Phlegethon steamers. This was.
represented to the Emperor as a great victory gained.

The position of Cha-pu is exposed, and the adjoining coast
offers facilities for landing troops at many points, the town itself
being commanded by heights within short range. The Tartar

1 Note 1. — Composed of one company dices prevented them cooking except

from each of the following regiments: — on shore, suffered many privations.

3rd, 15th, 17th, 23rd, 32nd, 41st, 52nd, They landed at Nanking 760 strong,

50th Bengal Native Infantry. having arrived 900 strong. On return

Note 2 — During the Yang-tse opera- to Calcutta early in 1843 they did not

lions the Rajputs, whose caste preju- muster 400 men.

-390 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

garrison of Cha-pu, contrary to custom, quitted their quarters
„, in the north-western angle of the city, and

Cha-pu. .

entrenched themselves on the hills com-
manding the shore where the British force would be landed.

On the 18th May, the anchorage and landing-place having
been previously surveyed, the troops landed, and, supported
by seamen and marines, formed two columns ; the right,
consisting of the 26th and 55th Regiments, with the Artillery
and Rifles, to turn the left of the enemy's position, which
was parallel to the shore, and to advance round its rear to-
wards the town ; the left, the 18th and 49th Regiments, to
advance up the heights, take the Chinese entrenchments in flank,
and drive their defenders into the plain, towards the right' column.
The steamers co-operated by shelling the position.

About one in ten of the Chinese had firearms, the rest having

only spears, swords, bows and arrows. They made no effectual

resistance, but, abandoning their positions, fled in confusion. The

_. . ... T , right column of attack, gaining Cha-pu,

Defence of the Joss-house. ° ' ° ° r

escaladed the walls at the north-east angle
and occupied the ramparts, leaving to their rear a band of 300
Tartar troops in occupation of a joss-house, who, finding their
Tetreat cut off, offered a desperate resistance to the left column
and the naval brigade, which had landed on the rocky point facing
the harbour battery.