

Vol. VI 25 a

388 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

tants, however, were friendly to the troops and supplied them
with abundance of fresh provisions.

On the early morning of the 10th March, Ir.rge columns of
Chinese troops made a sudden attack upon

Attack on Ningpo by XT . . , , . ,, . , ■ r

Chinese. JNingpo, held by small detachments of

troops only, chiefly attacking the west and

south gates. After a sharp fight the enemy succeeded in forcing

entrance through the latter gate, but were quickly expelled by a

company of the 49th Eegiment.

A sortie from the west gate, aided by an artillery detachment
working a howitzer, caused immense slaughter amongst the Chinese
troops occupying in dense masses the narrow streets and alleys
of the suburbs. On our side not a single man was killed, but
the enemy's cr.sur.lties amounted to 400.

Simultaneously with this attack on Ningpo, an attempt was
made to surprise the £ ates of Chen-hai, but without success. Fire-
vessels were there also sent adrift against the shipping, but were
driven on shore by the boats of the Blonde and Hyacinth.

Sir W. Parker arrived off Ningpo on the 14th March with the
Queen, Nemesis, and Phlegethon, and formed a detachment of 900
men of all arms with 4 light field-pieces (8-pounders) for operations
against TsiiK'i, where the enemy were reported to be in force.

On the morning of the 15th the whole embarked on board the
. . Queen, Nemesis, and Phlegethon steamers,

and proceeding up the river in a north-
east direction, disembarked four miles from Tsii K'i, and pushed
forward towards a high range of hills, on which the enemy had
taken up a position.

The troops advanced in three columns, — the right column, con-
sisting of the 18th Regiment and rifle company, 36th Madras Native
Infantry, making towards the left of the enemy's position, in a
direction to cut off their retreat.

The 49th Regiment in the centre, and the seamen and marines
on the left, speedily gained the summit of the heights, and at the
point of the bayonet drove the enemy out of their entrenchments,
following them in pursuit down the reverse slope. The ioss ot
the British was 3 killed, 15 wounded ; that of the Chinese exceeded
500 killed and wounded. The British bivouacked on the heights.

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1842. 389

The enemy's force was estimated at between 7,000 and 8,000,
composed chiefly of Northern men, more hardy and warlike than
the ordinary troops of the central and maritime provinces, and
who had never previously encountered British troops.

On the 16th March the wounded were embarked on board the
steamers, the camp fired, and the troops advanced towards the
Chang-ki pass, distant six or seven miles from Tsii K'i, but were too
late to capture the military chest and main magazine of the Che-
kiang army, which the Chinese carried off. On the 17th the force
returned to their base, a party traversing the land route to
Chen-hai, which was found practicable by the branches of the
canal.

Early in 1842 the 26th Regiment and the Cornwallis joined the
force. During April and May a fresh corps