

The Nemesis and other light draught steamers were found
most useful in keeping up communication between Chusan and
Ningpo, in beating up the quarters of war junks, searching for
fire-rafts, dispersing troops, reconnoitring the islands and rivers,,
and in rapidly conveying troops from point to point. By
their means operations were carried out against Yii-yao, on the
north-west branch of the Ningpo river and Tzii K'i, as well as
Fung-wah, the results of which were most effective, creating alarm
and enabling the British to show good feeling and forbearance to
the people when in their power and abandoned by their own autho-
rities. During the progress of these successful operations in the
north, towards the end of September it became necessary to destroy
the fortifications of North Wan-tung in consequence of the Hong-
Kong force being too weak to detach 200 men to hold them.

At the close of 1841, peace seemed far distant, and the con-
fident and determined tone of the Emperor's edicts, combined with
an absence of all indications of anxiety to treat with us on any
terms, seemed to offer the prospect of a protracted w^.r.

/""*

CHAPTER XXIX.

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1842.

The garrison in the island of Hong-Kong, early in 1842, con-
sisted of the 26th Cameronians, the 37th
ong- ong. Regiment, Madras Native Infantry, 2 com-

panies Bengal Volunteers, and detachments of the 18th and 49th
Regiments, Artillery, and Madras Sappers and Miners. The Indian
troops were accommodated in temporary barracks on shore, the
European regiments remaining in their transport ships. Early in the
year the Cameronians joined the head-quarters of the army ; and
the 37th Madras Native Infantry, which had suffered severely
through shipwreck, fever and dysentery, was sent back to India.
The Chinese, in the meantime, from experience gained in May
1841 had constructed formidable works

Chinese war preparations. . . , . „ , . . .

blocking all the mam river approaches to
Canton, the Macao passage, etc., and also near the two creeks
called Junk river and Fiddler's reach, showing a skill in their
construction and in the selection of sites much in advance of
former years. Dams, formed of huge crates or cradles of stout
timber, firmly bound with iron, floated into position, and then
weighted and sunk in lines, were constructed across all navigable
branches of the main river. By removing the packing of these
crates the navigation of the river could be readily restored.

The Portuguese from Macao carried on a lucrative and extensive
traffic in cannon, small-arms, and ammunition with Canton.
Some 500 to 600 pieces of cannon had been passed up the Broadway
in spite of all the efforts of our men-of-war's boats to intercept
the junks in which they were transported as soon as they
emerged from the Portuguese inner harbour.

During the winter, at Ningpo, Chusan, and the other towns
occupied, the Chinese still carried on a dar-

Kidnapping. . . . . . . . . .

ing system ol kidnapping, which was not
lessened until summary executions had taken place. The inhabi-