

On the 21st July orders were issued for the whole of the land
force to be disembarked at daybreak.

Attack on Chin-kiang Fu. __ . .- , ~ . . , , . . . m ..

Major-General Schoedde s brigade (2nd) was
directed to land to the east of the town, drawing the attention
of the enemy to that quarter, whilst Major-General Bartley's column
(3rd brigade) landed to the west of it and carried out the direct
attack. Lord Saltoun's (1st) brigade, detailed for the attack of
entrenched position on a low range of hills to the south, five
or six miles distant, also landed to the west of the town
opposite Golden Island. The landing was carried out in a most
irregular manner, owing to the strength of the tide and the
distance apart of the transports ; the majority of the troops, how-
ever, were on shore by 7 a.m. The landing, notwithstanding
its difficulty, was unopposed. The day was intensely hot.

Lord Saltoun's brigade advanced over the undulating country

against the Chinese entrenched position in

Right attack. , . . .

two columns ; the one directed its march to
turn the enemy's left, the other so as to press upon their right ; but
the Chinese gave way before their retreat could be intercepted. Thir-
teen men of the 98th Regiment died from sunstroke this day.

The brigade of Major-General Schoedde landed without
, , opposition, and the 55th Regiment occu-

Left attack. Y* B

pied a commanding slope within 300 yards
of the walls.

394 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Seeing the enemy retreat before Lord Saltoun's column, and
hearing heavy firing in the direction of the attack of the 3rd
brigade, General Schoedde determined to escalade the city walls,
which was done without loss. The progress of the force towards
the west gate was, however, hotly opposed, the Tartars fighting with
great bravery.

Meanwhile the 3rd brigade moved through the suburb
towards the west gate, and, occupying the houses lining the canal,
brought a heavy fire of musketry, shot, and shell to bear upon the
ramparts manned by the Tartars.

About noon, three powder-bags (containing about 160-lb)
were placed in position against the gates, and a heavy fire being
brought to bear upon the defenders of the ramparts, the brigade
"formed in close column of sections in the streets of the suburb, in
readiness to charge through the gateway. The explosion was suc-
cessful, and the storming party rushed through the west gate.

About the same time a party of marines who, by the line
of the Grand Canal, had reached the scene of action in the boats of
the Cornwallis, escaladed the wall near a small postern, landing for
the purpose close under the right flank of the gateway bastion.

The 2nd and 3rd brigades now took post at the various gates
of the town, and proceeded to occupy such quarters as were
available for the night.

The Tartars, having stabbed their wives and children, made a
final rally in the vicinity of their barracks, and during the night
continued to make desperate rushes upon sentries and
guards. Encounters took place even inside houses occupied as
billets, in which Tartars were concealed.