

lreaty of peace. . .. .,. .

to justify a suspension of hostilities. After
several preliminary meetings, a treaty of peace was signed on board
the Cornwallis by the plenipotentiari es, Sir Henry Pottinger and
Ilipu, on the 29th August 1842, of which the following were the
articles —

1. — Lasting peace and friendship between the two nations.

2- — China to pay 21 millions of dollars within three years.

3. — The ports of Canton, Amoy, Fu-chou, Ningpo, and Shanghai to be
thrown open to British merchants. Consular officers to be ap-
pointed to reside at them, and regular and just tariff of imports
and exports to be established.

4. — Hong-Kong to be ceded in perpetuity to Great Britain.

5. — All subjects of Her Britannic Majesty to be at once unconditionally
released.

6. — An amnesty to be granted to all Chinese subjects who had held
intercourse with the British.

7. — Correspondence to be conducted on terms of perfect equality amongst
the officers of both Governments.

8. — On the Emperor's assent being received to the treaty and six million
of dollars paid, the British forces to retire from the Yang-tse, hold-
ing Ku-lang-su and Chusan until the money payments and
arrangements for opening the ports were completed.

Ilipu was most anxious that the fleet should leave the Yang-
tse prior to the ratification of the treaty by the Emperor ; this our
Commissioner wisely declined to do; for so long as the Chinese
could shift the scene of the drama from one point to another, they
were less likely to yield to the necessity of making peace, short of
our dictating terms at Peking itself. The stoppage of the Yang-
tse trade had been the heaviest blow yet struck, but many still
thought that nothing short of the capture of Peking itself, at some
future date, would compel the Chinese to hold intercourse with
us and keep faith.

The troops suffered greatly from the intense heat on the Yang-
tse, and one regiment (the 98th) before embarking for India had
lost 130 men, while 430 more were in hospital.

MILITARY OPERATIONS, 1842. 397

On the 15th September the Emperor's assent to the treaty

Break-up of the expedi- signed on the 29th August was received at

ti°n. Nanking.

All the transports were on their way down the river by the 20th

September, and, after a rendezvous at Chusan on the 12th and 14th

October, they left in divisions for Hong-Kong, assembling there

about the 18th November.

Lord Saltoun was left in command of the forces in China, which
consisted of the wreck of the 98th Regiment,
the left wing of the 55th, the right wing of
the 41st Madras Native Infantry, one company, Royal Artillery,
one company gun lascars, and one company Madras Sappers and
Miners, a force of about 1,250 effectives. On the 20th December
1842 the rest of the expeditionary force was withdrawn from
€hina.

APPENDIX A.

British and Chinese losses during the War, from 5th July 1840 to 21st July 1842 ■

(including camp-followers).

British and
Indian Forces.

Chinese.

Name of Action.