

On the 8th January, the gunboats moved up the river to the
-attack, the land force advancing against the village in two columns
by narrow roads. The enemy evacuated the village after firing a

few shots. In the village was found corre-

Chine Se perfidy. S p ndence showing that the Emperor had

no intention of carrying out the treaty of Tientsin, and that secret
orders had been issued to prevent our again entering the Pei-ho
river or trading on the Yang-tse. It became evident, too, that the
Viceroy of Canton, the imperial commissioner, acting under secret
instructions, was the upholder of the patriotic bands. The village
was destroyed, a retaliatory measure which had a good effect, no
further annoyance being attempted by the patriots.

Towards the end of January reconnaissances were pushed to
Fatshan, Tai-liek, Fayuen, Shaon-hing, and Shuntuk.

The British garrison holding Canton towards the close of 1859

consisted, speaking generally, of a division,

garrison. ^^ brigade of which was composed of British

-and one of Bengal troops. The British troops were the 2nd Battalion

Royal Regiment 1 ; 1st Battalion, 3rd Buffs ; 67th Regiment. The

1 Now the Royal Scots.

EVENTS FROM 1842 TO 1860. 411

divisional troops consisted of a battalion of Royal Marines ;the 8th
and 10th Companies, Royal Engineers ; 6th Battery, 12th Brigade,
Royal Artillery ; Rotton's Battery, Royal Artillery ; a detachment
of Military -Train and departments. The Bengal brigade consisted
of the 47th, 65th, and 70th Regiments, Bengal Native Infantry.

The force at the beginning of April 1860 was reduced to
the strength of a brigade, the Bengal brigade returning to India
on relief by the 3rd and 5th Regiments, Bombay Native Infantry ;
and the Royal Regiment, Buffs, 67th Regiment, Marines, the 10th
Company, Royal Engineers, Rotton's Battery, and details proceed-
ing to the north to join the field force being organized to operate
against Peking. The 21st Regiment, Madras Native Infantry, arrived
to do duty at Hong-Kong on the 2nd April.

An expedition to the north, undertaken for the purpose of
Expedition to the Pei-ho, ratifying the treaty of June 1858, sailed
1859. {rom Hong-Kong on the 26th May 1859,

and visited Amoy, Fu-chou, Ningpo, and Shanghai en route, the
Chinese Commissioners endeavouring by every means in their power
to protract negotiations. The existence of the Emperor's secret
edict, already alluded to, led to the belief that it would be necessary
again to force the entrance to the Pei-ho. Admiral Hope
therefore, took all the necessary measures for reinforcing the naval
squadron by one battalion of Marines and a company of Engineer
from Canton. On the 12th June the Expedition sailed from the
Yang-tse Kiang, reaching the rendezvous at Sha-lui-tien island on
the 16th June. On the 17th a reconnaissance showed the passage
of the river to be barred by a line of stakes, a cable floated across
it, and a boom. On the 21st the French and American squadrons
arrived at the anchorage.