

The gunboats, advancing up the river, aided by the assaulting
parties on land, carried the river defences to Taku, where a barrier
of junks, flanked by a battery of eighteen field-pieces, barred further
progress. The chief pieces of cannon taken consisted of brass

EVENTS FROM 1842 TO 1860. 409'

guns throwing 68-pound shot, 6-pounder field-pieces, iron guns
throwing an 18-pound ball, and gingalls. Our loss was slight, and
that of the Chinese about 200 men.

On the 26th Tientsin was reached without further opposi-
tion, and there the moral pressure of our

Tientsin occupied. . . , , , , , , .

minister s presence, backed by the prestige
of recent victory, by an army of 2,500 men still on their way
from England, and by the naval force then on the station,
extorted from the Peking court a treaty of a more extended
scope than that which was granted to Sir H. Pottinger only after
two-thirds of the seaboard had been ravaged, and the principal
cities of the empire captured. The total force landed at Tientsin
did not exceed 600 men, who occupied a defensible peninsula
formed by a deep bend of the river.

The treaty of peace was signed on the
Treaty of peace. 26th June 1858, and was assented to by the

Emperor.
On the 6th of July the force quitted Tientsin without visiting
Peking. At this time those who knew the Chinese character
criticised adversely the retirement of our troops without visiting
Peking in the character of conquerors, and foretold its eventual
necessity.

Meanwhile on the 3rd June a Chinese encampment at Sam-
po-huei was attacked and its garrison dispersed.

During the subsequent months of the summer desultory attacks
were made by armed parties against various parts of the British
position at Canton. In spite of the conclusion of peace the camps
of braves still remained in the neighbourhood, being kept, up by
the patriotic party, who levied heavy fines on all natives who
served the British.

On the 11th August a force of 500 men under General Strau-
benzee, aided by a party from Hong-Kong

Attack on Namtou. , -, -, ,, , n . ji .

captured by escalade and burnt the town
of Namtou on the Canton river, with the loss of 10 killed and 35
wounded. The attack was rendered necessary in consequence of
placards of an objectionable nature having emanated from it, and
its capture had the effect oi rendering the patriotic party less ac-
tively hostile.

410 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA

[ By November the extreme heat had passed. The country was
now quiet, notwithstanding that camps of braves still existed in
the neighbourhood of Mong-kong and Shek-tsin.

The braves having taken up their position about Shek-tsin,

Shek-tsin visited ** became necessary early in 1859 to dislodge

them, they being under no official control
and their operations directed by the patriotic committee. Between
Shek-tsin and Canton lies a plain of paddy, dotted over with villages,
backed by groves of trees and thickets of bamboo, and slightly
broken by a chain of low hills, which rendered Shek-tsin invisible
from the plain. Shek-tsin is situated on a low ridge, about 100
feet high, at the foot of which runs a river, 60 yards wide and 5 or
6 feet deet> ; its importance arises from the fine stone bridge which
here spans the river, and over which the roads north of Canton
lead, that to Fayuen being one. The neighbourhood of
Shek-tsin is much intersected by watercourses. The bridge
was strongly held and flanked by batteries ; the river was staked
down-stream, and protected by the direct fire of cannon.