

south under the soi-disant liimperor lien-
tih, who proclaimed the rule of "celestial virtue," and displayed
banners inscribed with ' ' Extermination of the Tartars, and
restoration of the Ming dynasty."

It was the policy of the Chinese at this time studiously to en-
deavour to force the British to reside at
Hong-Kong, and, on the plea of the inadvisa-
bility of arousing the mob, to close Canton to them. This unsatis-

• See map facin? page — • (at beginning of Chapter 25.)

" : EVENTS FROM 1842 TO 1860. "\ 401

factory state of affairs lasted till 1857, when, during the viceroyalty
of Yeh, a man of restless energy and great obstinacy of character,
and an advocate of the exclusion of foreigners from the empire,
matters were brought to a climax by indignities offered by him to
the British flag.

On the 8th October 1856 the lorcha Arrow was boarded, while
at anchor at Canton, by a party of Chinese,

Canton river defences ^ geized 12 q{ ^ei crew and hauled

seized, 1856.

down the British flag. All apology

being pointedly avoided, retaliatory measures were taken and

the Canton river defences seized by the Navy with trifling loss.

The High Commissioner Yeh still refusing all redress, it was

determined to collect at Hong-Kong a force sufficient to occupy

the city of Canton, without declaring war against the Empire,

treating the dispute as a local one. The state of affairs in

India for a time drew aside the force sent from England to

effect this purpose, and it was not till late in 1857 that sufficient

troops arrived. In the meantime the fleet held the river

approaches to Canton, and destroyed some Chinese war junks in

two engagements at Escape Creek and Fatshan Creek on 25th May

and 1st June 1857, in which fourteen men were killed and seventy

wounded.

On the 28th October, 500 marines arrived at Hong-Kong from

England, and were disembarked at Wan-
War preparations. ° . . , „ e j

tung. A commissariat depot was formed on

Tiger island, and the 59th Regiment garrisoned Hong-Kong. A
transport department of 750 Chinese coolies, (" Hakkas," or men
drawn from a mountain district, and having little respect for man-
darin authority), was organized to act as general transport and
gun-carriers, sixteen being told off to carry each gun. A corps
of engineers and sappers and miners was formed from troops of
the line.

Early in December, reinforcements, numbering about

1,000 bayonets arrived, bringing up the total of troops between

Canton and Hong-Kong to 7,000 men, of whom 4,000 could be used

for field operations. The French force co-operating consisted of

3 frigates, 2 corvettes, 4 gunboats, and about 1,000 men, nut of

which 600 could be landed.

Vou vi 2a

402

FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS' FROM INDIA.

The ships- of- war on the China station at this time were aa
below : —

At Hong-Kong.
British.
The Algerine, gunboat (3). The

The Bittern, sloop (12). The

The Bustard, gunboat (2). The

The Clown, gunboat (2). The

The Coromandel, steamer (3). The