

To the communication made requesting permission for Mr.
Bruce to proceed to Peking, an answer was received that the road
via Pehtang]should be taken. This suggestion was rejected, and,
on the 25th June Admiral Hope proceeded to attempt to carry
out his instructions to open a passage by the Pei-ho. Measures
were accordingly taken to remove the obstructions at the river's
Unsuccessful attack on mouth ; at which a heavy fire was at once
thcTaku forts. opened from the hitherto masked forts.

ihe ships of the fleet, thereupon, engaged the forts, and an

412 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

attacking party was landed but failed to take the works. Our
loss was considerable in killed and wounded ; the Kestrd, and
Lee had sunk in deep water, and the Plover and Cormorant had
grounded. The means at the disposal of Admiral Hope being con-
sidered unequal to the task of forcing a passage to Peking, or even
of the forts and barriers closing the Pei-ho at Taku, the squadron
sailed southward on the 11th July.

To atone for the outrage of firing upon the British flag,
Demands of British Gov- the British Government required an ample
ernment refused. apology and the restoration of the guns,

material, and ships abandoned on that occasion ; that the ratifica-
tion of the treaty of Peking should be exchanged at once at Pe-
king, and full effect given to that treaty ; failing acceptance, the
Emperor was informed that means would be taken to compel him
to observe his engagements. With these demands the Chinese
authorities in April 1860 refused compliance.

J. B. Topo. Dy. Xo. 8.074
Bxd. G. J A. Jon* I90tt

S** 1 * linjimm or 1-014 Inches to 48 Miles

I I i =c

_J»o Miles

No. 4,869,1, 1909.

Scale on 39' Uat.

CHAPTER XXKI.

SCENE OF OPERATIONS, 1860.

The province of Chih-li, in which is situated Peking, the capital
.. of the empire, occupies an area of 58,949

square miles. It forms part of the great
delta plain of China, with the exception of the mountain ranges,
which define its northern and western frontiers. It may be des-
cribed generally as an alluvial plain, extending some 300 miles
from Shan-hai-kuan (where the mountain barrier approaches the
sea) in a south-westerly direction, with a width varying from 50
to 100 miles. In this plain are Peking and the other great cities
of the province.

To the north are vast mountain ranges, traversing which

the Great Wall of China, marks the ancient boundary of the empire.

The coast is at most points unapproachable for shipping. The

principal rivers are the Pei-ho, Pei-tang-ho, and Luan-ho, of which,

in a mercantile sense, the Pei-ho is by far the most important,

serving to supply the capital from the coast, and to transport the

tributary grain thither from all parts of the empire. All these

rivers and their tributaries from time to time inundate parts of

the plain to a great extent, and, like all rivers in a flat country,

run in deep loops and bends, continually changing their direction.

The roads in the province of Chih-li are, notwithstanding their