

The villages are rarely more than 4 miles apart in barren dis-
tricts ; usually much closer (from | to 1 mile apart), in
fertile districts ; and as roads lead from every village to every
other it may be assumed that when the country is not flooded
or crossed by one of the three great rivers — the Pei-ho, the Pei-
tang-ho and the Luan-ho, — an army would find no difficulty
in moving in a tolerably straight line from any one point to
another. But the case becomes very different when the mountains
are reached. Here it would be dangerous to count on any road
of which tolerably accurate information had not previously been
obtained. The best of the roads are bad ; often they merely
follow the bed of a stream, -and many are quite impracticable for
wheeled traffic of any description.

The alluvial plain that forms the major portion of the province
ig perfectly flat, and very little raised above the level of the sea.
Peking itself, at the foot of the mountains, and 115 miles inland
by road, is but 100 feet above sea level. There are plenty of trees
in the country, each village being surrounded by many ; these are
mostlv willows ; and there is no lack of fresh water in the
villages. The part near the coast is comparatively barren ; the
coast line is, for the most part, a desert waste; further north-
wards the country is fertile, and agriculture thrives ; under
ordinary circumstances, crops of millet, wheat, and Indian oorn
abound.

1 From March onward.

SCENE OF OPERATIONS, 1860. 415

The climate is, on the whole, healthy. Although the heat in
summer is excessive, it is only of some

Climate. , . ml . .

two months duration. 1 he spring is dry,
pleasant, and invigorating, in spite of the dust-storms which
usually prevail. In winter, the vicinity of Peking is colder than
countries of the same latitude in Europe, and the rivers become
frozen about the middle of December. The autumn is liable
to a recurrence of the rains, but the abundance of the cropa
at this season is a great advantage, and the tall millet, rising
seven and eight feet high, would take the place of woods in
affording concealment for the movements of troops.

The winter lasts from the middle of November to the middle
of March, and during these four months the country is generally
covered with snow and the cold at night is intense. The hottest
months are June, July, and August, when the thermometer often
rises to 90° and sometimes to 105°, but it is not as relaxing as in
tropical countries and in the Gulf. The range of temperature in
the twenty- four hours is great. The rainy season begins as
a rule at the end of May or early in June, and lasts some six
weeks. From the middle of December to the middle of March
communication by water is stopped owing to the ice, and no
port in the province is then open.

Millet and Indian corn are the principal crops, but the produce
^ , of the country is insufficient for the people.

Produce. -tit p ...

and a considerable amount ot grain is im-
ported. No hay or grass is procurable, but in spring the young
wheat is available as green food for animals. The usual fodder
of the country is, however, the chopped straw of Indian corn
and millet.