

of Royal Marines, 59th Regiment, Royal Artillery, Sappers.
French brigade on the left.

Colonel Holloway's brigade in reserve with Royal Marine Artillery.
After getting into position, the allied forces will remain in line of con-
tiguous columns of brigade until further orders for an advance, which will
be made to a position for the night, preparatory to active service in the
morning.

The British naval brigade consisted of three divisions —
1st division . . . . 584 officers and men.

2nd „ .. .. 474

3rd ,, . . . . 446

Total .. 1,504

The bombardment and landing was carried out as directed, the
landing being effected in Kuper (or Sha-ho)

Attack on Canton. , . . . . ., . , ,. . , ,

creek, which falls into the river about one
mile to the east of the south-east corner of the city. After a shor
battering from the 9-povinder field-pieces, Fort Lin was n^anlted

406 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

and carried, and shortly afterwards the Magazine heights and
Gough's Fort were captured from the enemy after only a slight
resistance.

The allied losses in killed and wounded were — British 96,
French 34. The Chinese lost about 200 killed ; the number of
their wounded is unknown.

The troops bivouacked in the open or occupied buildings on
Magazine hill. During the action the coolie corps did excejlent
service, carrying ammunition close up to the rear of the columns.

Notwithstanding the occupation of the Magazine heights, Yeh
made no offers of submission or prayers

ccupa ion o an on. ^ protection. On the 5th January 1858

the troops entered the city, secured the treasure, and captured Yeh
and the chief officials, together with the Tartar General.

Viceroy Yeh was sent to Calcutta as a political prisoner in Feb-
ruary 1858. The four great powers, England, France, America, and
Russia, were now in accord, and determined to send a general
statement of grievances and demands to Peking, proceeding to
Shanghai to negotiate. To the communication made by the plenipo-
tentiaries of the four Powers to Peking, that a minister possessing
full powers should be sent to Shanghai before the end of March
to treat on the several points of disagreement and to place our rela-
tions with China on a safer and more satisfactory basis, an unsatis-
factory and evasive answer was received, whereupon Lord Elgin
announced his intention, of which the Imperial Court had been
previously informed in the above-mentioned communication, of
proceeding at once to the north in order to place himself in more
direct communication with the high officers of the Imperia^Gov-
ernment at the capital. „

On the 1st April, no imperial commissioner having arrived

at Shanghai, it was decided to move north-
Expedition to the Pei-ho. , , . „ .

wards. On the 0th April, Lord Elgin

accompanied by a small squadron composed of the Pique, the

Cormorant, and the Slaney, together with the Amerika (Russian),

Audacieuse (French), and Minnesota (American), left Shanghai, and,

arriving off the Pei-ho on the 15th, awaited the arrival of the