

bad state of repair, passable by artillery

and the carts of the country. In the summer

the whole of the flat country is liable to inundation, and the roads

become very heavy, and many quite impracticable.

Generally cart tracks are so numerous that transport as well
as troops of all arms can move in all directions. These cart tracks
are to be preferred to the high roads, for, all roads being unmetalled,
the loss traffic that takes place over them the better. Cavalry
can move in all directions in the spring ; when the autumnal crops

CHAPTER XXKI.

SCENE OF OPERATIONS, 1860.

The province of Chih-li, in which is situated Peking, the capital
.. of the empire, occupies an area of 58,949

square miles. It forms part of the great
delta plain of China, with the exception of the mountain ranges,
which define its northern and western frontiers. It may be des-
cribed generally as an alluvial plain, extending some 300 miles
from Shan-hai-kuan (where the mountain barrier approaches the
sea) in a south-westerly direction, with a width varying from 50
to 100 miles. In this plain are Peking and the other great cities
of the province.

To the north are vast mountain ranges, traversing which
the Great Wall of China, marks the ancient boundary of the empire.
The coast is at most points unapproachable for shipping. The
principal rivers are the Pei-ho, Pei-tang-ho, and Luan-ho, of which,
in a mercantile sense, the Pei-ho is by far the most important,
serving to supply the capital from the coast, and to transport the
tributary grain thither from all parts of the empire. All these
rivers and their tributaries from time to time inundate parts of
the plain to a great extent, and, like all rivers in a flat country,
run in deep loops and bends, continually changing their direction.
The roads in the province of Chih-li are, notwithstanding their
bad state of repair, passable by artillery
and the carts of the country. In the summer
the whole of the flat country is liable to inundation, and the roads
become very heavy, and many quite impracticable.

Generally cart tracks are so numerous that transport as well
as troops of all arms can move in all "directions. These cart tracks
are to be preferred to the high roads, for, all roads being unmetalled,
the less traffic that takes place over them the better. Cavalry
ean move in all directions in the spring ; when the autumnal crops

414 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

are well grown, both view and movements are more restricted ;
after the autumnal crops are cut, the millet fields are difficult
to cross in consequence of the stout stumps of its stalks which
are left standing to a height of six inches above the ground. These
are, after a time, grubbed up for fuel. The spring 1 is the season of
all others that a military commander would choose for a campaign,
and at this time, after the dry autumn and the frosts of winter,
the roads are hard and firm.

The plain to the south of the mountains, forming the northern
boundary of Chih-li, is marvellously fertile, and consequently is
thickly populated. The country inland is, as a rule, flat or
gently undulating.