

1. The troops under command of Major-General Van Straubenzee
Organization of the land force C -B., will be formed into brigades as follows:—
to attack Canton. i st> ^ Colonel Holloway's Brigade— 1st Battalion,

Royal Marine Light Infantry ; 2nd Battalion, ditto.

2nd, or Colonel Graham's Brigade — Royal Engineers and Volunteer
company of Sappers ; Royal Artillery and Royal Marine Artillery ; Provisional
Battalion, Royal Marine Light Infantry ; 59th Regiment ; 38th Madras
Native Infantry.

The whole of the artillery will be placed under the orders of Colonel

Dunlop r.a.
General Ordei directing The General Order published by the

operations. Admiral was as follows : —

Dated before Canton, December 26.

The naval and military Commanders-in-Chief of the Allied Forces before
Canton have agreed to the following order of operations against the city.
First bombardment to commence at daybreak on Monday morning, the
28th December : —

The Actceon, Phlegethon and gunboats, on the signal hereafter in-
dicated being made, will open fire on the south-west angles of the city
walls, with a view to breach them and impede the communication of the
Chinese troops along their parapets to the eastward.

The Milraille, Fusee, Cruiser, Hornet, gunboats Niger and Avalanche,
and the Dutch Folly fort, with a similar object, will breach the city walls
opposite the Vicreoy's residence, the mortars in the Dutch Folly likewise
shelling the city and Gough heights.

The Nimrod, Surprise, Dragonne, Marceau, gunboats, between the
Dutch Folly and the French Folly forts, will open fire on the south-east angles
of the new and old city walls, and the walls forming the east side of the
■city.

EVENTS FROM 1842 TO 1860. 405

These three several attacks will commence simultaneously, when a white
ensign shall be hoisted at the fore of the Actceon, and a yellow flag as a corre-
sponding signal at the same time hoisted at the fore of the Phlegethon.

The Hornet and the Avalanche will repeat these signals at their fore so
long as the flags remain flying on the above-mentioned ships.

The bombardment is to be in very slow time, and continued day and night,
not to exceed 60 rounds per each gun employed (except the Nimrod, Surprise,
Dragonne, Marceau, which will fire 100 rounds) during the first 24 hours.

Immediately the bombardment opens, the landing of the allied troops
will take place at the creek in Kuper (where the British and French flags
will be planted) in the following order, commencing at daylight : —

1. Sappers and Miners, 59th Eegiment, Royal Artillery, stores, ammuni-
tion, etc.

2. The French Naval Brigade, stores, etc.

3. The Naval Brigade under the orders of Commodore the Honourable

C. Elliot.

4. The Naval Brigade from Canton.

5. Lieutenant-Colonel Lemon's battalion of Royal Marines.

6. Colonel Holloway's, etc., etc.

The following will be the disposition of the united forces after landing : —
British Naval Brigade on the right.
Centre brigade, composed of Lieutenant- Colonel Lemon's battalion