

CHINA CAMPAIGN OF I860- 423

Odin Bay ; the Military Train at Bustard Creek and at a small
stream falling into Victoria Bay. Markets were established in each
bay, and agents were sent round to the villages inviting supplies,
which came in plentifully.

Leaving behind depots of stores at their respective places of ren-
dezvous, and sailing northward on the same day, the French were
to effect a landing at Chi-K'ou, the Eriglish at Pei-tang, and a simul-
taneous advance was to be made against the Pei-ho fort3. It was
hoped that with their capture the Court of Peking would agree to the
terms offered. A peculiarity of this war was that the invaders were
compelled to be careful of the true interests of the Imperial
Government lest a severe defeat might endanger the entire fabric of
the Empire. The successes of the Taiping rebels and their occu-
pation of Nanking, the southern capital, made a defeat all the
more likely to prove fatal to the Chinese Emperor.

The French, after a reconnaissance of the coast, not finding
sufficient water for their ships off Chi-K'ou, desired to land with the
British at Pei-tang, and the delay at Ta -lien- wan was due to the
backwardness of ihe preparations of our allies. On the 21st July
the final re-embarkation commenced, on the 25th the ships got
into the positions assigned to them, and on the 26th all weighed
anchor.

The depot left at Odin Bay consisted of 4 companies of the 99th
Regiment, 417 men of the 19th Punjab Infantry, 100 men of the
Royal Artillery, with 6 guns, besides 200 European and 100 Indian
soldiers in hospital.

By the 28th July the fleet had arrived at the rendezvous off
the Pei-ho. The gunboats towed a number of Chinese junks, with
ten days' provisions and fuel for the whole army on board. On the
30th July, the fleet bore in-shore, and anchored about nine
miles off.

Orders were issued for the force 1 to land on the 31st, but the day
proving too boisterous, it was postponed till the 1st August.
Rain fell during the morning of the 1st. The tide was full. at
4 p.m., and gunboats drawing six feet were able to cross the bar
at 1 p.m.

1 See Appendix D.

424 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The 2nd Brigade of the 1st Division, with a rocket battery,
and one of 9-pounders, forming the land-
ing a ei- ang. - Q g party, were towed in flat-bottomed
troop-boats, thirty feet long, constructed at Canton, by the
small gun- vessels, each towing six launches and each boat contain-
ing fifty men.

At half-past four 200 of the 2nd Queen's and an equal
number of French put off in boats ; but, the tide being unusually
high and kept up by the wind, they could not get within about 100
yards of the shore. After a delay of half an hour the troops landed
about one mile seaward of the South fort, in: water and mud knee-
deep, which continued so for the first half mile, beyond which, after
traversing 400 or 500 yards of deep, sticky mud, a hard surface of
mud was reached.

By 6 p.m. the brigade had landed, the Rifles forming on the
right, the 15th Punjabis in the centre, and the Queen's on the left.
The French force consisted of the 101st and 102nd Regiments, the
Chasseurs, a few troopers mounted on Japanese ponies, and some
rifled cannon, — in all some 5,000 men. The troops pushed on to-
wards the causeway leading to Hsin-ho, on which they bivouacked
for the night, it not being yet ascertained whether the village of
Pei-tang, close at hand, was occupied or not, and it being desirable
to save the town the horrors of a sack.