

Generally between Tientsin and Taku lies a dreary flat country,
liable to be flooded, and intersected in

Adjacent country. . . . 1

various directions by roads raised several
feet above the dead-level of the surrounding country. Here and
there the country is intersected by irrigation canals, the water from
which (but slightly below the surface of the ground) is raised on to
the fields by means of baskets worked rapidly by hand. Trees are
few, and these of small size (elms, willows, and poplars). There
is little cultivation, except along the main Taku-Tientsin
road. The detached cottages bordering it stand in orchards.
Vineyards are frequent, especially about and north of Tientsin.
Villages are of small size and slightly raised, with a few trees of
moderate size growing round them. Huts of mud ; roofs of mud
or thatch and mud. Soil, alluvial and dry, often covered with a
saline efflorescence (chloride of sodium) and there are numerous
salt pans in the vicinity of Taku.

1 £arte trayene the streams, but can only pass each other here and there,

SCENE OF OPERATIONS, I860. 419

The Taku forts at the mouth of the Pei-ho are situated on
„, , „ a wide stretch of mud flats on both banks,

Taku forts. . . '

preventing large ships from approaching

nearer than from six to eight miles, and rendering attack by

landing parties difficult.

The Pei-ho is the largest river between the Yellow river and

_,, _ . , Shan-hai-kuan, the terminus of the Great

The Pei-ho. .

Wall. It is the great waterway to Peking.
Tientsin is situated at its junction with the Yii-ho (Grand Canal).

The Pei-ho is very tortuous. The distance from Taku to Tien-
tsin by river is fifty miles, and by land thirty miles. It is deep oft
the steep banks ; below high water the mud is very soft ; vessels
drawing ten feet find no difficulty in navigating it at high tide ;
if fortunate, vessels crossing the bar on a rising tide, can run up
the river on the flood ; if too heavily laden, and they run aground,
two or three days may be taken in the passage. If the vessel draws
over eight feet there are two places that must be passed at high
tide, three and nine miles below Tientsin respectively.

At Tientsin the river is 200 to 300 feet wide ; above, it
contracts and shallows very rapidly ; 6 miles above the city
reaches are met carrying only 5 and 6 feet at high tide.

Trading junks of all sizes ascend to Tientsin. From May
to October they crowd the river, and leave but a narrow fairway.
Above Tientsin large junks ascend to Tunchou, whence goods
are transhipped and conveyed by the Yuliang-ho canal to Peking
(twelve miles).

From the entrance to the Pei-ho, a low impassable shore
fronted by an extensive flat runs north
six miles to the entrance of the Pei-tang-ho.
The Pei-tang, though a smaller river than the Pei-ho, has a deeper
channel easier of approach. It has from 12 to 15 feet of water
as far las Lu-tai, which is capable of being made into a goodj port :
but the depth eight miles off shore from the river's mouth is
only 4 \ fathoms. The village and fort of Pei-tang are at the mouth
of the river.