

About 6 a.m. one of the magazines exploded in the fort

Attack and capture of attacked; by 7 A. M. all its heavy artillery

the north Pei-ho forts. wag silenced, and the columns of attack

formed, the French assaulting the angle of the work resting on

the river, the 44th and 67th Regiments advancing straight to

their front against the gate of the work.

The pontoon bridge required to bridge the ditch could not be got
into position, and the storming party waded across the muddy
ditch, having water nearly up to their arm-pits. Two wet ditches

CHINA CAMPAIGN OF 1860. 429

ran along the face of the work, with the intervening space of twenty
feet planted thickly with sharp bamboo stakes ; stakes were also
planted beyond the inner ditch along the berm. To cross these
obstacles under fire was a most arduous and dangerous task.
Missiles of all sorts, from pots filled with lime to round shot thrown
by hand, were showered from the work. The flanking fire from the
upper south fort was very effective, and it was during this period
of the assault that the greatest loss was incurred. It was some
time before a sufficient number of men had collected under the walls
of the fort to risk an assault. The French got three or four ladders
across the ditches, but at first failed in their attempts to raise them,
the Tartars being most active in their close defence. Eventually
the French by escalade, and a party of the 67th by assault, reached
the top of the parapet about the same time ; others entered by
the gate, in which a hole had been blown by our howitzers. The
garrison had no means of retreat, and lost heavily.

Preparations were at once made to assault the large (lower)
northern fort, the 3rd Buffs and 8th Punjab Infantry being sent
forward for that purpose from Tang-ku. The heavy guns (two
8-inch howitzers) were advanced to the left of the captured
work, and those in its cavalier turned upon it. The forts were
1,000 yards apart, a raised causeway running between them, with
wet ditches on either side.

A party sent out to reconnoitre the fort was fired upon, when
suddenly a white flag was hoisted in the large southern fort
and immediately afterwards in the others.

All firing ceased about 9 a.m. The terms of capitulation
offered not being acceded to, our troops, 3rd Buffs and 8th Punjab
Infantry, at 2 p.m. advanced and occupied the lower north fort,
its garrison of 2,000 men surrendering without firing a shot, and,
after having thrown away their arms and disencumbered themselves
of their uniform, by which means a Chinese soldier can readily
convert himself into a peaceful citizen, they were liberated and
dispersed.

This fort commanded the large south fort, and was very strong
on the sea side. Heavy rain now began to fall, so that it was found
impossible to remove the heavy guns, and the return march to the
flooded camp was most tedious. The mud, however, rapidly

430 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

hardens under the influence of a hot sun, if not previously worked
up into slush.