

The 1st Division, having arrived within 1,400 yards of the
Hsin-ho position, deployed, the French to the left, our troops
to the right. The guns of both nations opened fire at a distance

426 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

of 1,000 yards on the numerous bodies of cavalry in and around
the works. After a rapid discharge of matchlocks and jingalls,
the enemy abandoned their entrenchments and fled.

The Tartar cavalry, 6,000 or 7,000 strong, armed for the most
part with bows and arrows and spears, and
only a small proportion with matchlocks
behaved on this, as well as on subsequent occasions, with courage.
The loss of the enemy was variously estimated at from 100 to 500
men. Our casualties amounted to three officers of the Irregulars
wounded, two sowars killed and about twenty wounded.

The armies halted at Hsin-ho ; the cavalry and 2nd Division
to the south-west with a fine open plain in their front, and their
left resting on two tidal canals running to the south of the
village ; the French and 1st Division to the south and east of the
village. Large stacks of forage were found on the ground, and
plenty of corn in the town.

A ditched causeway led from Hsin-ho to Tang-ku, the next
fortified village towards Taku. Round Tang-ku there was a castel-
lated mud wall, about 10 feet high and 3j feet wide at the
top, provided with a banquette. There were five Tartar camps,
all walled in and ditched round, within the space between the
earthwork and the village. Along the faces of the work, facing
Hsin-ho and Taku, were numerous barbettes for guns and jingalls.
These faces were about 1,300 yards long ; the river face was of
the same length, but open. The northern face, 800 yards long,
mounted no guns, being fronted and protected by swampy ground.
Two gateways, facing the west, gave access to the causeways from
Hsin-ho and Pei-tang, and one on the eastern face, to the road
leading to the bridge of boats connecting Tang-ku and Taku.

On the 13th, reconnaissances showed that the enemy's field
troops had retired beyond the river. On the night of that day
a trench was dug at 480 yards from the works, extending from the
Pei-ho for a distance of some 200 yards along its front. Several canals
were bridged during the day to facilitate the attack on Tang-ku.

On the 14th, the 1st Division led the attack against the works,
„ . , with the 2nd Division in reserve. The British

Tang-ku occupied. . .

right flank rested on the Pei-ho, the south
bank of which was marshy and covered by a belt of reeds for some

CHINA CAMPAIGN OF 1860. 42?

hundreds of yards, giving cover from view. An annoying, but
harmless, fire was opened from a small battery and some tombs
on that bank, which was, however, soon silenced by artillery.

The French advanced on the British left, their left resting on
the Tang-ku causeway : the whole of the artillery (the French
having 12 and we 24 guns in line,) opened fire at 900 yards, the
enemy replying from their guns, 14 in number, and numerous
jingalls. The 60th Rifles having occupied the trench dug
during the previous night, the artillery advanced to within
450 yards of the work. A fire of rockets was opened against the
attacking force from the opposite bank, without inflicting any loss.
The work was stormed by the men of the 60th, followed by the Queen's
and the 31st Regiment, at its extreme left flank. The number of the
Chinese within the works was estimated at from 2,000 to 6,000
men. Our loss amounted to 3 wounded, while the French had some
12 men wounded.