

The 2nd Division occupied the entrenchments, the 1st Divi-
sion returning to camp between Hsin-ho and the Pei-ho. Detach-
ments occupied posts on the Pei-tang road, and the cavalry the
post at Chah-pung. The cavalry brigade encamped to the west of
Hsin-ho ; the French in and around the south side of Hsin-ho.

The troops remained in these positions till the 20th, await-
ing the collection of ten days' provisions and the arrival of the
engineers' park and heavy guns at Tang-ku, where a depot was
formed. The engineers of both armies began the construction
of a bridge across the Pei-ho, close to the camp of the 1st Divi-
sion, at a spot where the river was about 270 yards wide.

From Tang-ku to the nearest fort on the north bank is under
two miles. This fort overlooked the similar one on the south bank,
enfiladed the whole length of the great southern one, and took all the
sea defences of the large northern one in reverse. The Commander-
in-Chief and Sir Robert Napier both considered it to be the true
point of attack. The French desired to contain the northern
and to attack the southern , forts in force, at the same time
cutting off the retreat of their garrisons from Tientsin. Sir Hope
Grant, with the small force at his command, considered such an
enterprise to be too hazardous, and feared to leave his line of com*
munications with Pei«tang open to the large force of Tartar

428 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

cavalry in the field, with the northern forts as points d'appui.
On the 18th the French established a post on the opposite bank
(right) to protect the construction of the bridge. By the night of
the 20th August a road had been made towards the north fort ;
and the necessary bridges and causeways and batteries for the
guns constructed. The British had sixteen guns and three
mortars in battery, the French four guns, all of which opened
fire on the 21st, the enemy responding from all available guns.
I -.-,; Four of our gun-boats, the Janus, Drake, Clown, and Woodcock,
and two of the French, took up positions outside range of the
forts, and shelled them. No other gunboats co-operated. The
river entrance had been closed by rows of booms, hawsers, piles,
and sharp-pointed stakes of iron, each several tons in weight.
Rows of stakes protected the sea-front of the forts, rendering their
attack from this side next to impossible.

The attacking force mustered 2,500 men, and consisted of a
wing of the 44th, a wing of the 67th, supported by the other wings
of those regiments ; the Royal Marines, Graham's Company of
Engineers, 200 Madras Sappers, — the whole under Brigadier Reeves.
The French had 1,000 infantry and six 12-pounder rifled cannon.

The artillery was disposed as follows : — A French 24-pounder
battery of 6 pieces, one English 8-inch gun, and 2 Armstrongs,
were planted to play on the inner south fort. Two Armstrong
guns and two 9-pounders were to fire from Tang-ku at an entrench-
ment across the river. Three 8-inch mortars, an Armstrong battery,
two 32-pounder guns, two 8-inch howitzers, two 9-pounder guns,
four 24-pounder howitzers, and a rocket battery, at close ranges,
600 to 800 yards, played on the inner north fort. The Chinese
returned a heavy fire, but at too great an elevation.