

Peking* lies in a sandy plain 13 miles north-west of the
Pei-ho and 120 miles west-north-west
Peking. of its mouth, in 39° 54' ll" north lati-

tude and 116° 27' east longitude. A canal runs from under the
south-east corner of the Tartar city wall to Tung-chou where it
communicates with the Pei-ho. The town is divided into two
parts, the Tartar city and the Chinese city. The former lies to>

* So j map facing page 486.

416 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA

the north, and is the most important, as it contains the imperial
-city, the palace, and nowadays the foreign legations.

Its general shape may be represented by a square (the Tartar
city) placed upon an oblong (the Chinese city). The whole of
the capital is walled, the wall round the Tartar city, complete
in itself, being of an average height of 50 feet. Portions of the
north wall reach the height of 60 feet ; the average width is
40 feet, with variations from 22 to 57 feet. The breadth varies
in different places. The outer face is nearly perpendicular, and
the inner slopes are in place? considerable. Parapets are erected
on both the inner and outer faces of the wall, that on the latter
being loopholed and crenelated. Buttresses occur externally at
every 50 or 60 yards, generally 15 feet to 20 feet square, and
parapeted. The walls are constructed of stone and brick. The
space between the facings is filled up with horizontal layers of
concrete and earth alternately, each some 10 feet thick. The
terreplem is paved with large slabs of granite. The concrete
below the terreplein is of good quality, and to be removed only
by blasting. The faces of the walls are free of vegetation. On the
terrepleins, however, shrubs in places flourish in great luxuriance.

The wall surrounding the Chinese city i3 about 30 feet high,
25 feet thick at the base, with a terreplein 15 feet wide : it is
provided with parapet and buttresses.

Entrance to the two cities is obtained through the following

-gates :— Tartar city. — To the north 2 gates, south 3, east 2, west 2.

Chinese city. — To the north (outside Tartar city) 2 gates, south

3 gates, east 1, we3t 1. One gate from each point of the compass

•leads from the Tartar into the Imperial city.

The Tartar city consists of three enclosures, each surrounded
„ , ... by its own wall : the innermost contains the

Tartar city. • 1 1

Imperial palace and its surrounding build-
ings enclosed by a wall 2 miles in circumference, with 4 gates
and internally divided into three portions by walls. The
second enclosure is chiefly occupied by Tartar officials and Manchus,
and contains many private residences, besides temples, lakes, parks,
-enclosures, the hill of coal (said to be reserved to meet the cou-

The military forces residing in the Tartar city are exclusively Tartar or Manchus

soldiers.

SCENE OF OPERATIONS, 1860. 417

tingencies of a siege), etc. The outer enclosure is occupied by
private residences and shops. The Imperial city has a cir-
cumference of about 6 miles : its wall is nearly as solid as that
round the city. There is a tower at each corner, and one over each
gateway. These and other buildings bordering the walls afford
accommodation to the troops, military stores, and workshops.
Entrance is strictly prohibited.