

The wall round the official city is 15 to 20 feet high and
3 to 6 feet thick. It has no rampart or ditch. It is skirted
on the west side by a canal flowing from the south wall. This
canal is dry in summer, and is crossed by three bridges within a
short distance of each other and to the south-west of the palace
(Yu-ho-chiaos) ; it is 66 feet wide, and during heavy rains is a broad
stream. The ditch round the city is fed from the Tung-hwu
river ; sluices regulate the supply.

Flagstaffs in pairs denote all official residences. The city is
laid out in wide avenues, and contains many handsome temples
and shops. The whole city, however, has an air of decay, and
little attention is paid to sanitation.

The Tartar city is some 15 miles in circumference. From east
to west its total length is 4 J miles, and from north to south 3|
miles.

Excellent billets are to be found within the Tartar city for
a large force in the various temples, enclosures and foreign lega-
tion buildings. These are surrounded by substantial brick walls.
All important buildings are of brick and stone ; roofs are generally
tiled. Stabling and picketing ground are sufficient to meet the
requirements of a large force.

The circumference of the wall surrounding the Chinese city is
„, about fourteen miles, or ten miles from its

Chinese city. . ... ...

points of junction with the east and west
ends of the Tartar city wall. Outside the walls, good billets, and
stabling, can be obtained in the various suburbs, temples, and
villages. These are most numerous to the north and east of
Peking.

The Chinese estimate the population of the city to be 1,300,000,
of whom 900,000 reside in the Tartar city and 400,000 in the
Chinese city ; these numbers are probably over-estimated.

Vol. VI 27

418 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

There is no direct foreign trade with Peking. Tientsin may
be said to be its port. It is noted for no special manufactures,
and the only trade is the supply of its inhabitants with food and
the necessaries and luxuries of life. These are to be obtained in
Peking, and along the river line to Tientsin. Beef and mutton
come from Mongolia ; coal from the hills to the north-west ; grain
and salt from Tientsin.

The port of Tientsin is the natural inlet and outlet of eastern
. Mongolia, the provinces of Chih-li and

.Tientsin. ^ . #

ohansi, and the northern portions of the
provinces of Shan-tung and Ho-nan. It is both strategically and
commercially the key of Peking, its port as well as its granary,
and a city of great commercial importance, occupying a space
round and including the point of junction between the imperial
canal and the Pei-ho. It is 80 miles from Peking by river and 50
from Taku. Its streets and houses resemble those of all Chinese
cities, being narrow 1 and low respectively. The walled portion
is small compared with the suburbs, the circumference of the
walls being a little over three miles. The principal trade is carried
on in the suburbs. The city proper is ill-drained and very dirty.
The rate of mortality is high.