

The landing was altogether unopposed ; not a shot was fired
from the forts. During the night it was ascertained that the village
and forts were unoccupied. Under cover of darkness a party of
the enemy's cavalry came close up to the piquets and caused an
alarm.

On the morning of the 2nd August, the landing was continued
and the troops moved into Pei-tang, the French occupying the river-
side half of the town, the British the land-side. The guns of
the fort had been removed to Taku. Considerable quantities of
hay, with forage sufficient for the requirements of the force during
its stay at Pei-tang, were found ; water was the great difficulty.
Wharves and piers (four) were constructed, and the landing of
stores rapidly pushed on, the gun boats in this service proving
invaluable, although the shallowness of the water over the bar
was Buch that they could often make but one trip a tide, the fleet

CHINA CAMPAIGN OF I860. 426

lying some eight miles off shore. The coolie corps, numbering
about 2,500, was of the greatest use.

On the 3rd and the 9th reconnaissances were pushed in the direc-
tion of Hsin-ho, whereby it was ascertained that firm ground
existed to the right of the causeway leading to that place, which was
entrenched. Owing to the rain, which fell almost daily, the streets
of Pei-tang were ankle-deep in mud. It rained both on the 10th
and 11th August ; on the 12th the advance was made from Pei-tang.

The 2nd Division with the cavalry brigade was to move by
the right of the causeway, and turn the left

Advance on Hsin-ho. ,, . , TT . , , ..

oi tlie enemy s position at Hsin-ho, whilst
the 1st Division and French advanced by the causeway against its
front. At 4 a.m. the 2nd Division began to file across the only
bridge leading out of Pei-tang. The mud, on account of the recent
rain, was very deep, and the artillery experienced the utmost
difficulty in reaching the higher and firmer ground. Three am-
munition wagons stuck immovably and had to be abandoned.
Owing to the slow progress of the cavalry over the heavy ground,
the 1st Division did not begin to file over the bridge till a quarter
past seven o'clock ; the whole force had not crossed till some minutes
after ten, the main body of the French being even then in the town.
The 99th and baggage parties from each regiment held the village.
When the 2nd Division had marched three miles to the right of
the causeway, line of battle was formed, the cavalry taking position
on the right in echelon. The Tartar cavalry attacked bravely, being
chiefly repulsed by artillery fire (fifteen Armstrong field-guns),
those coming to close quarters being met by the Sikh cavalry,
who scattered and pursued them ; but their horses not
having galloped for months, the hardy Tartar ponies kept
ahead of them. Stirling's half battery, being unable to follow
the movements of the cavalry on such heavy ground, had been
left in rear with an escort of 30 of Fane's Horse. Seeing their
opportunity, 100 Tartars charged the guns, but were put to flight
by the escort, whose commanding officer, Lieutenant Macgregor,
was severely wounded.