

Vol. VI 27 a

CHAPTER XXII.

CHINA CAMPAIGN OF I860- 1

The British and French Governments having entered into an
alliance for the purpose of enforcing, if necessary by arms, the
stipulations of their respective treaties made at Tientsin on the
26th June 1858 with the Imperial Government of China, it was
agreed that a British army of about 10,000 men and a French
force of 7,000 should be despatched to China. The latter went
direct from France ; the British from England, the Cape of Good
Hope (1st battalion, 2nd Queen's), and India, the bulk from
the latter country. 2 The French collected their force at Shanghai ;
the British, at Hong-Kong.

The force began to rendezvous at Hong-Kong in March, and
the Commander-in-Chief, Sir Hope Grant, and staff, the latter
nominated by the Commander-in-Chief in India, arrived on the 13th
of that month.

Nothing was known of the resources of North- East China ;
consequently every requisite for an army
in the field had to accompany the force.
Hay and forage for the horses were brought from Bombay.

Transport was another great difficulty. Very good ponies were
procurable in Japan, Manila, and in Shan-tung and other parts of
China, but in insufficient numbers. The Indian mules and bullocks
proved to be the most efficient. To supplement local transport
and organize the animals bought through native dealers, at from
twenty to forty dollars apiece, a battalion of the Military Train
was sent from England.

• A coolie corps was, under the direction of Major Temple, raised
at Canton and Hong-Kong, and these, notwithstanding that they
were recruited from the scum of the population, did willing and

1 Chiefly compiled from the Account of from the Journal of the Quarter Master-

the campaign by Lieutenant-Colonel Wolse- General's Department and General Orders.

by with notes from the^works of Swinhoe * See Appendix A- & B>
tod McGhee, supplemented ) byj^extracts

CBINA CAMPAIGN OF 1860. 421

excellent service. Each man received nine dollars a month, two
suits of clothes, and rations. The corps, which numbered 5,000
men, was chiefly ofiicered by the Eoyal Marines. A number of
Manila men and bullock-drivers from Madras and Bombay were
also enlisted as mule drivers. \

The heterogeneous composition of the army added im-
mensely to the difficulties of the commissariat.

On the 8th March 1860 a despatch was forwarded by Mr. Bruce,

the British Minister in China, to the Imperial

Negotiations. Government of Peking, stating the very

moderate terms upon which we were prepared to condone the

insult offered to our flag in 1859 at the Taku forts, and to reopen

friendly intercourse. They were —

1. An ample apology for the act of the troops firing on Her Britannic
Majesty's ships from the forts at Taku in June 1859.

2. That the ratification of the treaty of Tientsin be exchanged at Peking,
Her Britannic Maj esty's Minister proceeding there for that purpose
by the Pei-ho river.

3. That full effect be given to the treaty, and the indemnity of 4,000,000
taels promptly paid, as well as a contribution towards the expense
of the present expedition. „ <