

On receiving an unsatisfactory answer to these demands, it was

determined at once to occupy Chusan and

blockade all the forts north of the Yang-tse

Kiang. On further consideration, the latter measure, directed by

the Home Government, was not given effect to, the objects hoped

for appearing illusory.

To occupy Ting-hai, a force consisting of the 67th and 99th
Regiments, 4 companies of Royal Marines, Major Rotton's battery
of Royal Artillery, a company of Royal Engineers (10th), and
300 of the Chinese coolie corps, with a due proportion of com-
missariat and medical staffs, under the command of Brigadier-
General Reeves, was embarked at Hong-Kong on the 1st April,
and directed to rendezvous at the island of Kingtang, opposite
Chen-hai and the mouth of the Ningpo river. The French contingent
accompanying it consisted of a couple of hundred marines from
Canton. Ting-hai was peacefully entered on the 21st of April, a guard

422 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

of fifty men of each nation landing and occupying the custom house
and Joss-house Hill.

Towards the latter end of May all preparations for the campaign
Organization of the in the north were completed, and the troops
land forces. embarked, the army being organized as

shown in Appendix C.

The total force amounted to 14,000 of all ranks, conveyed in
120 transports with a naval escort of 70 ships of war.

The sailing transports left Hong-Kong about the middle of May ;

the cavalry and horse batteries of artillery,

Sailing of the expedition- J . ,

ary force. towed by steamers, leaving the harbour in

June.
Owing to the capture of Su-chou by the Taipings, a battalion
of marines, the Ludhiana Regiment of

Garrison at Shanghai. „., , n , , . , °~. .

Sikhs, and the 11th Punjab Kegiment
occupied the approaches to Shanghai, the north gate, a Joss-house
on the Su-chou creek, and the Ningpo guild-house.

The plan of operations agreed upon was, that the French should
rendezvous at Chi-Fu. The Shan-tung province is rich in cattle,
of which (and of draught animals in particular) they were much in
want. During the operations a depot was to be left there.

The British were to rendezvous at Ta-lien-wan Bay, where they
disembarked on the 28th June.

Ta-lien-wan Bay is about eight miles from north to south, and

Occupation of Ta-iien-wan. thirteen miles from east to west, having

within it a series of smaller bays, known as
Victoria Bay, Hand Bay, Pearl Bay, Odin Bay, and Bustard Cove,
where the shelter is good. The shores are everywhere enclosed with
barren hills averaging 200 to 700 feet in height ; trees are rare and of
small size. Running streams afford a water-supply sufficient for a
small force ; there are also wells in all the villages, and water in most
places is near the surface. It is colonised by emigrants from Shan-
tung and Shan-si. Odin Bay can be easily defended, and was, on
this account, selected as the position for the depot. Kin-chou, the
chief city in the vicinity, shut its gates, and entry was not insisted
upon, or the collection of supplies would have been facilitated.
The 1st Division encamped (in bell tents) to the west of Victoria
Bay ; the 2nd Division at Hand Bay ; the cavalry and artillery at