

at Shanghai, Lieutenant Anderson, five men of the King's Dragoon
Guards, twenty- one sowars of Fane's Horse and one of Probyn's,
proceeded to Tung-chou to meet the Commissioners to arrange for
the reception of Lord Elgin and the camping of the force. En

1 Afterwards Lord Loch and Sir H. Parkes.

CHINA CAMPAIGN OF 1860. 433

route they saw unmistakable evidence of the presence of a large force.
Notwithstanding these indications that treachery was to be
expected, Mr. Parkes, after his meeting with the Chinese
Commissioners, divided his small party, Mr. Bowlby, Mr. de
Norman, Lieutenant Anderson, and seventeen sowars remain-
ing at Tung-chou, whilst he, Mr. Loch, Colonel Walker, Assistant
Commissary-General Thompson, five men of the King's Dragoon
Guards, and four sowars returned towards Ma-tou. Arrived there,
and seeing a large force of the enemy in occupation of a strong posi-
tion, he returned with Trooper Phipps, King's Dragoon Guards, to
Tung-chou to remonstrate. Meanwhile Mr. Loch and three sowars
galloped back to the column which had left Ho-hsi-wu later in the
morning, to announce that all points had been satisfactorily arranged
with the Imperial Commissioners, and to report at the same time
the presence of a large army in the immediate vicinity. Colonel
Walker with the escort remained on the ground to examine the
enemy's position.

The force that marched from Ho-hsi-wu on the morning of the
18th consisted of the cavalry brigade, with Stirling's half battery,
two field batteries, the 2nd Foot, the 15th Punjab Infantry, Royal
Marines, the 99th Regiment, and detachments of Engineers and
Military Train. One French regiment and one field battery followed.

The allied force, on approaching the village of Li-erh-tse,
halted on finding itself in the presence of a large army. It was
here that Mr. Loch rode in to report the state of affairs. The
presence of Mr. Parkes and his party in the hands of the enemy at
Tung-chou and of Colonel Walker and his'party within the enemy's
lines, was a great drag on the allied movements. Mr. Loch and
Captain Brabazon, Deputy Assistant Quarter-Master General to
the Artillery, volunteered to go back to Tung-chou, in order to
direct their return, and started at 8 a.m., accompanied by two
sowars carrying a flag of truce, while the cavalry moved to the
flanks to observe the enemy, who were attempting a surround-
ing movement.

Meanwhile, Colonel Walker and his party, acting with great
caution, refused to dismount, and on indignities being offered to
him he charged through the enemy's force with a loss of only twa
men wounded and one horse shot.

Vol. VI 26

434 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA. "'

The Chinese intention was to induce the allies to encamp, and
then to fall upon them with their whole force and butcher them,
but the action of Colonel Walker, which occurred between 10 and
11 A.M., precipitated matters.

The right of the Chinese position rested on the old walled town
n of Chang-kia-wan, and its left upon the Pei-