

On the 9th October the French joined our forces facing the
An-ting gate, and an ultimatum was forwarded to Prince Kung,
requiring the surrender, by noon on the 13th, of one of the gates
of the city if he wished to save it from bombardment. At noon

CHINA CAMPAIGN OF 1860. 437

on the 13th October the An-ting gate was thrown open and

our troops, entering the city, occupied the

Peking occupied. ^^ extending thence to the T e-sheng-

men and the south-east corner of the city.

Of the 26 English and 13 French subjects who were cap-
tured at Tung-chou, 13 English and six French had been sent
back by the 14th October ; the remainder had been tortured
to death with the exception of Mr. Parkes, Mr. Lock, and a
Frenchman, who were lodged in prison in Peking.

On the 18th October the Summer Palace, within the pre-
cincts of which several of the British captives had been sub-
jected to the grossest indignities, was destroyed.

Lord Elgin entered Peking in great state on the 24th October
to sign the treaty of peace, the occasion
Peace. being seized to make an impressive mili-

tary spectacle.

On the 22nd October the siege train was sent to Tientsin ;
the sick and wounded were sent by cart to Tung-chou, and thence
by boat to Tientsin. The French army, with the exception of
one battalion left for Baron Gros' protection, left Peking on the
l3t November. On the 7th November the 2nd Division left the
capital, being followed by the 1st Division on the 8th. Our
army had all re-embarked at Tientsin by the end of Novem-
ber. The cavalry embarked at Taku. During the march and
the after -exposure on the gunboats, fifteen of the horses of
Probyn's Regiment died from the effects of severe cold.

The garrison left at Tientsin (until the indemnity should be
paid) consisted of the 2nd Battalion, 60th

Garrison of Tien-tsin. - n . n ., „„., ~ . , 01 ,

Rifles ; the 67th Regiment ; one wing, 31st
Regiment ; a battery of Royal Artillery, one company of Royal
Engineers, Fane's Horse, and a battalion of the Military Train, with
a due proportion of medical and commissariat staff, — Brigadier
Staveley, C.B., in command. The force billeted in the town.
The French force, consisting of the 101st and 102nd Regiments
and some artillery, occupied the left bank of the river ; one wing of
the 31st Begiment garrisoned Taku.

7 .;-A
APPENDIX A.

China Expedition, 1860.

Extracts from correspondence relating to the despatch of a Force from India to-
China.

Dated War Office, the 26th November 1859.

From — The Right Honourable Sidney Herbert, Esq., M.P.,
To — The Right Honourable Sir Charles Wood, Bart., M.P. r
G.C.B., etc.

The amount of force to be sent from India to China being finally agreed
upon, I have the honcur to request that you will give the necessary directions
to the Governor General of India to despatch to the China waters the force
which, in accordance with private communications, there is reason to believe
is being prepared, in addition to that which has already been sent to reinforce
the troops at Hong-Kong and Canton under the command of Major-General
Sir C. Van Straubenzee.