

Her Majesty's Government have despatched from the Cape of Good Hope
one battalion of Infantry, namely, the First Battalion of the Second Foot*
made up to 1,200 strong, rank and file.

There i3 also gone from England via the Cape one battalion of the Military
Train, consisting of 289, all ranks.

We are further about to send, via, Suez and the Red Sea, two batteries
of Field Artillery of 214 men each, rank and file.

The force which Her Majesty's Government have decided on sending from
Strength of the expedi- India will consist of three battalions of British infan-
tion, ere. try, in addition to the two stated to be already gone

to Hong-Kong, or five battalions in all ; and three batteries of Artillery,
namely, one battery of Horse Artillery and two of Field Artillery, and
a company of Royal Engineers, two squadrons of British cavalry, with some
native irregular cavalry and infantry, and a company of Madras Sappers*
making up the whole force, including that which proceeds from England and
the Cape, to about 10,000 men of all ranks, of whom about 8,100 would be
from India.

Orders were given to Sir C. Van Straubenzee on the 10th of October last
to collect mules and horses for the use of the expedition, but it will be necessary
that the horses of the British cavalry, and of some portion of the artillery
at least, should be sent from India.

APFENDWE3. 439

These troops should be despatched as soon as possible, and, as the passage
from Singapore northward while the monsoon is blowing is very difficult, and
the season during which operations are possible in the north of China is very
short, whatever steam tonnage is available for these troops should be engaged.

It is important that Admiral Hope and Lieutenant- General Sir Hope
Grant should be kept informed of the probable date of departure of every
vessel, in order that they may make arrangements for the reception of the
troops, and send to Singapore orders as to their destination on the coast of
China.

Instructions will be given by this mail to Admiral Hope to send down
orders to Singapore, as to the destination to which the vessels carrying these
troops should proceed, and also to send any steamers that he may have
available for the purpose of assisting the sailing vessels in facing the
monsoon from Singapore northwards.

I enclose a memorandum, furnished by the Admiralty, as to the dates
at which the sailing vessels should leave and should reach the various points
on the voyage.

P.S. — It has further been decided to despatch forthwith a siege train
composed of ten 8-inch guns of 52 cwt., ten 24-pounder guns of 50 cwt.,
five 8-inch mortars, and five 5^-inch mortars, with a proportionate amount
of ammunition.

APPENDIX B.
List of Troops that sailed for China from Calcutta in 1859 and 1860.

Dates of doparture.

Ships.

Regiments.

Officers.

Non-Com-

missioned

Officers

and

Men.

Native
troops.

1859.

*3rd September ..

^twiraluin . .

87th Regiment

19

284

■•

■» >i

Indomitable

Do

18

