

Our cavalry did great execution (over a most difficult country
■cut up by hollow roads) in this, as in all other actions of the war :
the artillery also fired with good effect. The pursuit ceased about
six miles from Peking, our force returning to the U-liang-ho.
The British loss during the day was only 2 killed and 29
wounded ; the loss of the French was also slight. The enemy
are supposed to have numbered 50,000 men, chiefly cavalry.
It was now decided to remain at the U-liang-ho till the siege
guns and reinforcements arrived, as it was realised that it would
be useless to advance on Peking until the allied force was strong
•enough to enforce its demands.

On the 29th September the siege guns arrived, and by the
3rd October all reinforcements had come up, the regiments advanc-
ing by double marches from Tientsin. The garrison at Tientsin
consisted of a wing of the Buffs, 500 marines landed from the fleet, 2
batteries of Koyal Artillery, Madras Artillery, and 25 irregular
cavalry. A battalion of Marines and 400 French soldiers were posted
at Tung-chou, the north gate of which was held, and between which
point and Tientsin a regular flotilla service of country boats was

Vol VI 2Ha

436 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

established. Tung-chou soon became a large store depot, from
whence ten days' supplies were forwarded to the front in carts
and wagons. At Chang-kia-wan a post of 100 French, 1 officer,,
and 10 sowars was established. In consequence of armed villagers
firing upon orderlies carrying mails and despatches, Ma-tou was
burnt — an example which had the effect of putting a stop to such
practices.

The paved road which rims from Tung-chou to Peking was
in such bad order that an unpaved one running all the way on the
north side of the canal was selected for the advance.

During the halt on the U-liang-ho many diplomatic notes
passed between Prince Kung, the Emperor's brother, who had
been appointed High Commissioner, and our camp ; but Lord
Elgin, refusing to recognise Mr. Parkes and his party as prisoners
of war, made their surrender a sine qua non before he would
even suspend hostilities.

On the 3rd October, Prince Kung having failed to comply
with our demands, the allied force, over 10,000 strong, crossed the
canal by a bridge of boats, and advanced towards Peking.
The march was continued on the 5th, on the evening of which day
the force halted in a strong position to the North-east of the capital.
On the 6th the advance continued, the men's knapsacks being
left under the protection of a small guard in a strong post
formed by some high brick-kilns. The advance was made across
a very close country, to the old entrenchment, which was entered
at its north-east angle, our cavalry taking up a position on the
main road which led out from the Tesheng-men gate towards Jehol.
The enemy observed the advance with numerous bodies of
cavalry, and later in the day they retired without offering any re-
sistance.

The British bivouacked in the city suburb and along the road
leading to the An-ting gate, around a large Lhama temple, close to
the Tartar parade ground, while the French proceeded to the
gardens of the Summer Palace.