

On the British side, 22 officers were wounded, 22 men killed
and 156 wounded. The French had 150 casualties. The enemy
lost about 2,000 men, amongst them being the general commanding
the upper north fort.

Before nightfall Governor-General Hung had signed a capi-
tulation, surrendering all the country and strong positions up the
river, as far as Tientsin, including that city itself. On the 21st
the gunboats removed the river obstructions, aod in a few hours
opened a passage for themselves.

In the Taku defences some 500 pieces of cannon were found.
The village contained a forge and shot factory, besides large stores
of powder, shot, sulphur, etc. Admiral Hope, with some French
and English gunboats, pushed on to Tientsin on the 23rd, and on
the 25th Lord Elgin and the Commander-in-Chief followed, whilst
m . . . the 1st Royals, the 67th Regiment, and a

Advance on Tientsin. J . °

battery of artillery were conveyed there
in gunboats. The cavalry began their march on the 25th»
and, moving up the left bank of the river, passed through Cheun-
leang-ching, over open plains of grass, and reached Tientsin in two
days. The 1st Division moved along the right bank, the French
marching by the other ; and 2nd Division followed the 1st ; the 3rd
Regiment was left to occupy Taku and the Rifles to protect the
Hsin-ho bridge.

The siege guns and ammunition were re-embarked, and all.
spare baggage collected in the south fort. The three batteries
of Royal Artillery, and the Madras Artillery attached to the
siege train, took up their quarters in this fort ; baggage and stores
were, as required, forwarded to the front by the naval authorities.

The roads traversed were good cart-tracks, over hardened mud ;
there was no good ground found for encampments.

At Pei-tang-k'ou were four forts sweeping a reach of the stream.
This position was intended as a second line of defence and the Works
round Tientsin as a third, but the rapid advance of the gunboats
prevented the army reorganizing there for resistance. The Indian
com and millet, averaging six feet to ten feet in height, prohibited
all distant view. Supplies of all sorts were sold to the troops

CHINA CAMPAIGN OF 1860. 431

at a moderate cost, and there was an abundance of grain for the
horses. Junks rilled with commissariat stores were towed up the

river.

Shortly after the arrival of the force at Tientsin, Commissioners
Were appointed for the arrangement of affairs, Messrs. Wade and
Parkes acting for the allies. After wasting eight days of most
valuable time it was found that the Chinese Commissioners were
not armed with the necessary powers to treat, and that their only
object Was to cause delay, inorder that winter might overtake us
during the operations.

Orders were now given for the allies to concentrate, with a
view to advancing on Peking. Odin bay in Ta-lien-wan was aban-
doned, as, from the abundance of supplies available on the spot, it
was no longer required as a commissariat depot, and the 19th
Punjabis and the Royal Artillery were ordered to the front.