

Action at Chang-kia-'wan. , .. „ . „ ...

ho, a distance oi three or four miles ; in its
rear was the Siaou-ho stream, fordable everywhere. > Batteries had
been thrown up at the village of Li-erh-tse, about 1,000 yards
from the Pei-ho, along the raised Tung-chou causeway, and at other
points, the whole being flanked by a battery constructed at right
angles to the general front about one mile distant from the suburb
of Chang-kia-wan ; another work was on the left flank, mounting
about 60 pieces of cannon, besides which were field-pieces drawn by
ponies.

The French, numbering 1,000 men, with a battery of artillery
and a squadron of Fane's Horse, were on the right of the allied
attack, the cavalry sweeping round to protect the flank and
doing excellent service. The villages on this flank rendered it
very strong, and the Tartars made an obstinate resistance. Sir
Hope Grant disposed a 9-pounder battery on some high ground
to tVe right of his line of attack, with Fane's Horse and a squadron
of the King's Dragoon Guards in support ; the 99th Regiment was
directed to advance up the road against the village in front, sup-
ported by two 9-pounders ; the 15th Punjab Infantry, with 'two
Armstrong guns, took ground to the left ; the 2nd Regiment
(Queen's) with Stirling's 6-pounder battery and the cavalry, were
to make a wide flank movement to our left ; the remaining regi-
ments in reserve ; the 99th in the right centre.

The 15th Punjab Infantry carried the batteries flanking the
•enemy's line, whereupon the two Armstrong guns with it were sent
to aid the movement being made to turn the enemy's right, the force
carrying out which, under Sir J. Michel, swept round to the south
of Chang-kia-wan, the 15th Punjab Infantry and 99th Regiment
advancing through that village. The enemy gave way at all
points, and suffered severely, leaving some 80 guns in our hands.
Their force was estimated at 30,000 men. The British loss was 1
killed and 19 wounded ; the French loss, 2 killed and 14 wounded.

CHINA CAMPAIGN OF 1860. 435

The village of Chang-kia-wan was given over to loot, and the troops
occupied camps in its vicinity and the houses of the town.

The following day, Mr. AVade, under a flag of truce, proceeded
to Tung-chou, and ascertained that the captured envoy and escort
had been removed inland.

On the 20th September a cavalry reconnaissance showed the
■enemy to be in force about Pa-li-chiao. On the 21st their position
was attacked, the baggage being previously parked in a village

close by. The French, 3,000 strong, ad-
c ion a a- i-c iao. vance( j against Pa-li-chiao (bridge over the

tJ-liang-ho, at a point where the paved road from Tung-chou crosses
it), the British attacking to their left, and the cavalry making a
wide turning movement still further to the left, so as to drive the
enemy's right upon their centre, and force them to cross the canal at
the points against which the allied advance was being made. The
enemy displayed a large force, and with their cavalry endeavoured
to turn the left flank of the allies, their infantry occupying the
numerous clumps of trees and enclosures which bordered the canal,
but they gave way at all points.