

The means of land transport were limited ; and as no information
existed as to the supplies to be procured en route, it was determined
that the troops should advance by detachments.

Brigadier Reeves, with the 99th Regiment, 200 Marines,
Barry's and Stirling's Batteries, the King's

Advance on Peking. _ ^ _. . ° , _, , TT °

Dragoon Guards, and .bane s Horse, were
directed to start on the 8th September ; the French, about 3,000
men, on the 10th ; Sir John Michel with the 2nd Brigade, Des-
borough's Battery, and Probyn's Horse, on the 12th. The 2nd Divi-
sion were to remain temporarily at Tientsin. The first march was
to Huk'ou, the second to Yang-tsun.

Taking advantage of a violent thunderstorm, the Chinese
drivers, frightened by the threats of Government underlings,
deserted during the night of the 10th, rendering an advance on
the 11th impossible. No other land carriage being available,
several junks were seized and the baggage transported by water.

On the 13th September the British reached Ho-hsi-wu, the
largest village between Tientsin and Tung-chou, and about equi-
distant from both places (forty miles). Here a supply depot and a
large field hospital were established. The inhabitants, who hitherto
had been friendly along the route and remained in their villages, now
deserted them on our approach and shunned all communication,
with us.

432 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Ho-hsi-wu, like other villages, was deserted, but grapes, vege*
tables, yams, and sweet potatoes were
o- si-wu. found in abundance. The water of the

river, here scarcely fifty yards wide, was clear and good, and
there were numerous wells in the neighbourhood.

On account of the difficulties of land transport, Admiral Hope

organized flotillas of from sixty to seventy

Transport. junks; an English sailor lived onboard

each junk, and each flotilla was under a commander, aided by a due

proportion of naval officers. The siege train was floated up the

Pei-ho on pontoons.

In order to collect the troops, a halt at Ho-hsi-wu was indis-
pensable. On the 13th September, Messrs. Wade and Parkes, with

Negotiations. an escort of twent Y cavalry, proceeded

to Tung-chou to deliberate with the Chinese
Commissioners, when it was finally settled that the allied forces
were to advance to within five li (If miles) of Chang-kia-wan,
and halt there, Lord Elgin, with an escort of 1,000 men, proceeding
to Tung-chou, where the convention was to be signed, and thence
to Peking with the same escort, for the purpose of ratifying the old
treaty.

On the 16th September, Sir J. Michel's force arrived at Ho-hsi-
wu, and on the 17th the army and 1,000 French marched to Ma-
tou, leaving at Ho-hsi-wu the 2nd Foot, 3 guns, and 25 cavalry,
together with Lord Elgin's escort of 1,000 irregular cavalry.

A detachment of cavalry occupied Yang-tsun. On the 18th
September, the 2nd Foot, having been relieved by the 60th
Rifles, joined head-quarters. Early on the 18th, Messrs. Loch and
Parkes, 1 Lieutenant-Colonel Walker, Assistant Quartermaster Gene-
ral to the Cavalry, Assistant Commissary- General Thompson, Mr.
Envoy and escort, cap- Bowlby, the Times' correspondent, Mr.
tured by treachery. <je Norman, an Attache to our Minister