

On the 29th August the Government of India gave orders for
the organization, equipment and despatch of a remount depot
of 260 horses from Calcutta to Hong-Kong, for the supply of re-
mounts to the artillery and cavalry of the British foroe.

458 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The embarkation of the whole of the troops belonging to the
v , . ,. . . , British contingent of the China Expedi-

.hmbarkation completed . ° r

tionary Force was completed by the depar-
ture of the Ulwar Infantry from Calcutta in the s. s. Ludhiana and
Landaura on the 14th September 1900 ; and on the 9th October
the movement of the three additional batteries of Eoyal Field
Artillery and the four British infantry battalions, which had been
warned for service in China in the middle of July, was finally
countermanded.

On the 8th August Australia sent a naval brigade, consisting
.. of 200 men from Victoria and 300 from

Australian forces. .

New South Wales. The brigade embarked
at Sydney in the transport Falamas, and arrived atTaku on 9th
September. The men were employed on shore, part at Tientsin
and part (the New South Wales contingent) formed the garrison
of Peking after the 8th October. Besides the naval brigade,
the South Australian cruiser Protector was employed for some
time in the Gulf of Chih-li, where her services were most useful.
She returned to Australia on the 2nd November.

APPENDIX.

Extract from Amalgamated Scheme for the Despatch of an Expeditionary Force
to China, as finally approved by the Government of India, 1900.

PART I.— TROOPS.

1. At the request of the Imperial Government, a Force of all Arms to be
entitled " The China Expeditionary Force," as detailed below, will be mobi-
lized at once and despatched to China : —

2. Composition of the force —
Cavalry Brigade —

" B " Battery, Royal Horse Artillery.

R-2 Ammunition Column Unit.

1st Bengal Lancers.

3rd Bombay Cavalry.

16th Bengal Lancers.

Section A, No. 22 British Field Hospital.

Section C, No. 62 Native Field Hospital.

Sections A and B, No. 57 Native Field Hospital.

No. 1 Brigade Supply Column.

1st Infantry Brigade —
7th Bengal Infantry.
26th Bombay Infantry.
1st Sikh Infantry.
24th Punjab Infantry.
No. 39 Native Field Hospital.
No. 43 Native Field Hospital.
No. 2 Brigade Supply Column.
2nd Infantry Brigade —
2nd Bengal Infantry.

14th Sikhs.

l-4th Gurkha Rifles.

30th Bombay Infantry.

No. 63 Native Field Hospital.

No. 66 Native Field Hospital.

No. 3 Brigade Supply Column.

160 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

3rd Infantry Brigade —

6th Bengal Infantry.

4th Punjab Infantry.

20th Punjab Infantry.

34th Pioneers.

No. 51 Native Field Hospital.

No. 61 Native Field Hospital.

No. 5 Brigade Supply Column.
4th Infantry Brigade —

28th Madras Infantry.

31st Madias Infantry (6th Burma Battalion).

Alwar lnfantiy (Imperial Service Troops).

Bikaner Infantry (Imperial Service Troops).

No. 53 Native Field Hospital.

No. 58 Native Field Hospital.

No. 6 Brigade Supply Column.
Divisional Troops —