

Officii powerless. and gpread deva8tation through the land.

They professed to be able to "smell out" converts or others who
had foreign sympathies, and any who offended them or whose wealth
they coveted, were straightway accused on one or other of these

EVENTS WHIOH LED UP TO THE WAR OF 1900, ETC. 451

grounds and promptly murdered. Thus, a commander in Tung
Fu-Hsiang's army who attempted to argue with a band of Boxers in
one of the main streets of Peking was at once accused of being a
friend of foreigners, and was dragged off his horse and butchered.
It was only natural, therefore, that the officials avoided all inter-
ference with the Boxers, who had thus unrestrained liberty to
commit any outrage they pleased.

Meanwhile the foreign ministers were vainly demanding the
suppression of the Boxers. The Tsung-li

Events immediately pre- _ rl „ -i < i . i • n

ceding the attack on the Yamen proiessed to be taking all means in
Legations. their power to suppress the rising, and

assured the ministers that the safety of the legations Would be
the especial care of the Chinese Government, who regarded the
Boxers as rebels and outlaws.

While, however, the Tsung-li Yamen was giving these
assurances to the foreign ministers, the Manchu party, notably
Kang-yi, was doing all in its power to encourage the Boxers and
assure them of the favour of the Empress Dowager.

On the 28th May the Boxers burnt Feng-tai railway station,
and tore up part of the line, which, however, was quickly repaired.
The ministers now considered that the situation in Peking had
become critical and telegraphed to Tientsin for armed guards for
the legations. These were forthwith despatched, and, to the num-
ber of 337 men, reached the capital without opposition on the 31st
May.

The Boxers had also begun to destroy the railway at Pao- ting
Fu, and the European railway employes left that place on the 29th
May by river for Tientsin. They were, however, pursued and
attacked by Boxers, and four of their number were killed.

Meanwhile Tung Fu-hsiang's Kan-suh troops, wild, undis-
ciplined, anti-foreign Muhammadans, who had been removed from
the neighbourhood of Peking at the instance of the foreign ministers
during the winter of 1898-99, were ordered back to the capital and
immediately fraternised with the Boxers.

On the 7th June General Nieh's troops, which had been protect-
ing the railway line from Tientsin to Peking, were ordered to return
to their camps at Lu-tai, but they remained in the neighbourhood
of Yang-tsun for several days.

Vol. VI. 29 a

452 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

All communication between the legations and the outside
world was by this time cut off, and the Boxers were soon openly
drilling in Peking itself. On the 9th, Tung Fu-hsiang's troops
entered the capital and with them came hosts of Boxers, who, in
the uniform of their society, and armed with swords and spears,
boldly paraded the streets, declaring that their mission was to ex-
terminate the foreigners.