

On the 11th June the Japanese Chancellor, Mr. Sugiyama,
was murdered by Tung Fu-hsiang's troops at the Yung-ting- men,
or south gate of the Chinese city.

On the 13th June the Boxers first attacked the legations,
„„ and on the same day began their wholesale

The legations attacked. . „, . «, • , •

massacre ot Chinese Christians.
While the situation at Peking was becoming critical, the state
et t , _. .„,.,,. of affairs in other parts of Chih-li was caus-

State of affairs in Chih-li. . . r .

ing great uneasiness. Much anxiety was felt
as to what was to be the outcome of the Boxer rising. The
demeanour of the natives was also unsatisfactory, and there was
a general feeling of unrest and insecurity. On 5th and 6th May 1900,
detachments of the Chinese regiments escorting the boundary
commission at Wei-hai-wei were fiercely attacked, but the assailants
were driven off with heavy loss.

In the meantime the anxiety at Tientsin was increasing, and
it was reported that the anti-foreign movement was spreading and
steadily drawing nearer to the settlement. Constant rumours of
Boxer outrages arrived, while the railway was reported to be
damaged at several points. This was the general situation until the
night of June 9th, when Admiral Sir E. Seymour, Naval Commander-
in-Chief on the China station, received a telegram from the British
Minister at Peking, informing him that unless the Europeans in
Peking were at once enabled to withdraw to the coast, their retire-
ment at a later date would be impossible.

A mixed naval brigade of British, Austrians, Italians, French,

Peking relief column Germans, Japanese, Americans, and Rus-

formed. sians, amounting to 2,066 in all, was at once

formed, and on the 10th left Tientsin for Peking under Admiral

Seymour. After 15th June the communications of this force with

Tientsin were interrupted.

EVENTS WHICH LED UP TO THE WAR OF 1900, ETC. 453

On the departure of Admiral Seymour with the relief force

Capture of the Taku forts, the command devolved on Rear- Admiral

Bruce. It becoming imperative to secure the communications with

Tientsin, the allied naval forces attacked and captured the Taku

forts on 17th June.

Meanwhile the position at Tientsin was grave. After the de-
Tientsin attacked and iso- parture of the relief column under Admiral
lated - Seymour, the garrison left there was approxi-

mately 2,536. On the 16th the Boxers attacked the place, and by
the 18th communication with Taku was cut off. The Chinese re-
giment from Wei-hai-wei and reinforcements from Hong-Kong and
Singapore were being hurriedly brought up to Taku, the first
detachment arriving there on 21st. The other powers were also
forwarding troops as fast as possible.

On June 23rd Tientsin was relieved by a mixed force from
«,.„,„,. Taku. Meanwhile news had reached Tien-

Relief of Tientsin. . ,

tsin that Admiral Seymour s relief column
had been unable to reach Peking, and Was holding the Hsi-Ku
Retirement of Peking Re- armoury a few miles north of Tientsin but
lief Column to Tientsin. required assistance to bring in his sick
and wounded. A mixed Russian and British force was organized
for its relief and by 9 a.m. on the 26th the retirement to Tientsin was
successfully accomplished.