

The Boxers rapidly increased in numbers. The mysterious
powers, which their teachers professed to confer on their followers,
appealed to the imagination of the young men and boys of the
country, who flocked to join their ranks, while the prospect of
rapine and loot attracted all the ruffians within a wide radius.

The rising was further helped by natural causes. For two
years past there had been great scarcity of rain, resulting in the
failure of crops, and, as has been already said, the Boxers proclaimed
that this state of things was due to the influence of the f oreiguer,
and that until he was removed the rain would be withheld. In
the Shan-si province, where the foreigners had made surveys and
opened mines, the outlook was particularly bad, and great scarcity
prevailed, resulting in famine and suffering. The Boxer teaching
Vol. VI 3»

450 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

was, therefore, readily believed by the superstitious Chinese. Boxer
professors appeared everywhere, and each village had its bands of
youths, who practised the Boxer exercises and rites whereby they
were to become invulnerable to foreign bullets, donned the Boxer
uniform, and armed themselves with swords and spears. Firearms
and all such devices were at first discarded as of foreign invention,
and therefore contrary to their beliefs.

The early attacks of the Boxers were directed against the
_ . A Catholic converts, many of whom had their

harly attacks on foreigners. , , , , . „ , .

houses burnt and possessions confiscated,
while a few were killed. From being unchecked, the desire for vio-
lence grew, and very soon the Protestant converts shared the same
fate as the Catholics ; all were " secondary devils," and only less
obnoxious than the pure foreigners.

At first the Boxers confined their operations to Shan-tung,
but towards the end of 1899 they spread into the southern part of
Chih-li, where the persecution of the Christians also began.

Yuan-shih Kai, the Governor of Shan-tung, while remaining
loyal to the Government, maintained order in his province
throughout the troubles. Very different, however, was the state
of affairs in the neighbouring provinces of Chih-li and Shan-si.
The officials had been informed that the Government was favour-
ably disposed towards the Boxers, who were not to be treated
harshly. Compelled, therefore, at first to tolerate the society, they
soon found themselves powerless to restrain it, and a reign of terror
began. With unchecked powf.r to do harm, and free indulgence in
lawlessness, the desire for looting and violence increased, and
terrible tales of outrage, committed on Protestant and Catholic
converts alike, began to arrive at Peking from the south, and
these reports showed that the Boxer movement was spreading
steadily northwards towards the capital, till it was certain that
Boxers were training and recruiting close to its walls.

Gaining courage as their numbers increased, the Boxers openly

defied and terrorised the provincial officials,