

After this the allied forces acte d for some time strictly on the
defensive, the troops being fully occupied in guarding Taku
Tang-ku and Tientsin, and the lines of communication between
these places. On the 13th and 14th July, however, after severe
fighting, the native city of Tientsin was captured and the Chinese
severely defeated and put to flight. After this the country in the
vicinity of Tientsin remained quiet and reinforcements from India
began to arrive on 18th July.

/ ^1 /

CHAPTER XXXV.

DESPATCH OF THE BRITISH CONTINGENT, CHINA EXPEDITIONARY

FORCE, FROM INDIA.

The outbreak of the anti -foreigner movement in North China,
and the spread of the Boxers towards Peking, as reported by tele-
gram, had been watched with great interest in India.

On the 14th June all the available troops at Hong-Kong had

Troops ordered to Singa- been despatched to Taku at the request
pore and Hong-Kong. f gi r E. Seymour, and on the 16th the
Secretary of State telegraphed to the Viceroy asking for the
immediate despatch of troops to Singapore and Hong-Kong to
replace those withdrawn. The 7th Kegiment of Bengal Infantry
and 1st Regiment of Sikh Infantry were in consequence ordered
to be in readiness to proceed to China.

On the 18th June the Secretary of State again wired that the

Despatch of Expeditionary position of affairs at Peking and Tientsin
Force ordered. Was n ow very grave, and requested that

the Government of Iifdia would take up the necessary steamer
transport and arrange for the immediate despatch of an expedi-
tionary force to China, consisting of one battery of horse or field
artillery, one regiment of native cavalry, three battalions of
native infantry, and one company of sappers and miners, with
land transport. This force to be in addition to the two native
infantry battalions already ordered to proceed on garrison duty
to Singapore and Hong-Kong.

Brigadier-General Sir Alfred Gaselee, K.C.B., A.D.C., was
Belected to command the expedition, and Colonel E. G. Barrow,
C.B., was appointed second-in-command, and infantry brigadier.
On the 22nd June Lord Curzon telegraphed to the Secretary
of State for India, asking to be informed if there was any pro-
bability of more troops being required for China. On the same day
Ijord George Hamilton replied that as the situation in Chih-li was
Incoming more and more serious, Her Majesty's Government

bBSPAfCH OF THE BRITISH CONTINGENT, ETC. 455

considered it desirable to increase the force from India to a
strength of 10,000 native soldiers, including another cavalry regi-
ment, more sappers and miners, and, if possible, another battery.

In view of the increased strength of the force, the temporary
rank of Major- General, with the local rank of Lieutenant-General,
was conferred on Sir Alfred Gaselee, and Brigadier-General E. G.
Barrow was appointed Chief of the Staff, with the local rank of
Major- General, it being intended that, if the necessity arose, he
should succeed General Gaselee in chief command.