

For active service the Bannermen were formed into various
Yinga or divisions, the most important of which the "Shen-Chi-
Ying " or Peking Field Force, was organized in 1862 as a result
■of the campaign of i860.

The victories gained by England in 1842, 1857, and 1860 disclosed

the uselessness of the Chinese military
drilled Troops™ 611 forces, which was further emphasised

by the success of the Taiping insurgents.
To suppress the rebellion a special force was raised and officered

448 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

by Europeans. Co-operating with this was a purely Chinese force,
organized by Li-hung Chang ; while a similar force was raised by
Tso-tsung Tang to deal with the Muhammadan rebellion in
the north-west (1868-1878). Li-hung Chang's troops, called the
" Huai Chun," were the first of what are now known as the foreign-
drilled troops and formed the nucleus of the modern army.

The China-Japanese war of 1894-95 gave a great impetus to
the organization of troops on the foreign system, and when the
Boxer troubles of 1900 finally demonstrated the comparative help-
lessness of the Chinese when opposed to modern troops, the Govern-
ment developed a feverish anxiety to raise a large army of
foreign-drilled troops. Frequent imperial edicts were issued
exhorting the viceroys and Governors to spare no efforts to
organize numerous and efficient forces. In Chih-li, Viceroy Yuan-
shi Kai made a determined effort to organize an efficient army
on German and Japanese lines, and in 1903 he had some 20,000
men well-trained and well armed, known as the " Chang-pei Chun." 1

In 1903 the idea was conceived of amalgamating the military
strength of the empire and reducing the organization to one uni-
form system, and with this object the " Lien-ping Chu " or Board
of Military Administration was instituted on the 4th December of
that year. The Board proposed a programme of reform, the basis of
which was the organization of 36 Divisions (360,000 men). The
organization of the Chang-pei Chun was taken as a model and the
programme was to be completed by 1922.

1 Subsequently known as the " Pei-yang Lu Chun".

CHAPTER XXXIV.

EVENTS WHICH LED OP TO THE WAR OF 1900, AND HOSTILITIES PRIOR TO
THE ARRIVAL OF THE TROOPS FROM INDIA.

Before proceeding to describe the series of military events
Origin of the Boxer mov which culminated in the relief of the
ment. foreign legations in Peking and the occu-

pation of the capital of China by the contingents of the allied
powers, it may be of interest to give some account of the rise and
spread of the Boxer movement.

The real origin of the I-ho-cJi'uan, or " Fists of Patriotic Union,"
commonly known under the title of " Boxers," is difficult to trace,
for whereas some authorities assert that it was tin outcome of the
cession of Kiao-chou to the Germans, and had for its object the de-
fence of the province of Shan-tung against the invasion of the
foreigner, others maintain that it is really an old society, which the
general state of unrest had brought to life again. Whatever its
origin, it is now a matter of history that the obscure society, which
in the beginning might have been easily suppressed, grew rapidly
into a vast and dangerous association of brigands, which the Govern-
ment soon found beyond its powers to control.