

9 - 45 -inch howitzers, and four 4 '7-inch quick-firing guns, on travel-
ling carriages, with personnel and 500 rounds per piece, would
shortly be despatched to North China from South Africa. This
heavy ordnance with 15 officers and 305 men of the Royal
Garrison Artillery, under command of Colonel Perrott, R.A., left
Capetown for Hong-Kong on the 23rd July. To draw these guns
1,304 siege-train bullocks were sent to Wei-hai-wei from India, but
long before the guns arrived, Peking had been captured by the allies
and the fighting was practically at an end. The guns remained
at Wei-hai-wei, and the siege train bullocks were sold by auc-
tion.

On the 7th July it was decided to send a cavalry brigade to
China and orders for its mobilization were now issued. Khan Baha-
dur Dhanjibhoy, of Rawal Pindi, provided

Cwalry Brigade formed. ^ ambu]ance tongas with twenty horae8 ,

the necessary personnel, and twelve months' supply of repairing
material, for service with this brigade

DESPATCH OF THE BRITISH CONTINGENT, ETC. 467

On the 12th July it was announced from England that a balloon
section would be sent to China.

On the 19th July the Maharaja Scindia of Gwalior offered to
equip and maintain a hospital ship, at a cost of twenty lakhs, and
present it to the British Government for the use of the China Ex-
peditionary Force ; his offer was accepted by Her Majesty and
acknowledged in terms of high appreciation. The Maharaja even-
tually selected the S. S. Zayathla for the purpose, and after
being refitted and renamed the Gwalior, it sailed on its first trip
from Calcutta on the 23rd September, and subsequently rendered
most valuable service to the Expeditionary Force.

On the 16th July Sir Alfred Gaselee and General Gascoigne had
recommended that the Hong-Kong Eegiment should be employed
in North China, its place at Hong-Kong being taken by a third native
infantry battalion from India, and the 34th Pioneers were detailed
for this duty. On the 20th July orders were issued for the despatch
of a survey party to China, and the following day a detachment
of mounted sappers was sanctioned for the force.

On the 25th the American hospital ship Maine, which had been
working in connection, with the British forces in South Africa, was
placed at the disposal of the Indian Government, for service in China,
by the Atlantic Transport Company and the Committee of American
ladies. As the British contingent was already provided with two
hospital ships, the Gwalior and the Carthage, which were ample for
its requirements, the Maine was principally used by the United States
contingent of the allied force.

On the 2nd and 6th August orders for a third and fourth
infantry brigade for China were issued. Details of the composition
of these brigades are given in Appendix A. The troops forming the
4th Brigade were all to be armed with -303-inch Lee-Metford
weapons, as in the case of the other brigades. Two special signal-
ling units, one British and one native, were attached to both
the 3rd and 4th brigades.