

Sir Alfred Gaselee was also appointed to the chief command
of all Imperial British troops in .North China, and orders were
received from England that, as the cost of the expedition was to be
borne by the Imperial Treasury, the direction of operations would
be undertaken by the Home Government, which would issue
instructions to the Secretary of State for India.

The force Was organized in two brigades with divisional troops,
details of which are given in Appendix A.

Wei-hai-wei had been selected by the War Office as the base
for the troops in North China, and Colonel Lome Campbell was
appointed Commandant of the base, with the local rank of Brigadier-
General.

Five British officers were attached to the force for duty with
Chinese transport, to be organized locally, and a number of special
service officers were appointed later for duty at the treaty ports.

The despatch of the expedition was pressed forward with

Despatch of the cxpedi. a11 haste ' and the first detachment to leave
tion. India for North China was the left wing

of the 7th Bengal Infantry, which sailed from Calcutta in the
British India s.s. Nerbudda, on the 25th June, and arrived at Taku
on the 17th July. It was followed on the 29th June by the right
wing of the regiment, in the s.s. Palamcotta, and after that date an
almost continuous stream of transports carried away troops and
stores from Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, Karachi, and Rangoon,
up to the middle of September. On the 3rd July Sir Alfred Gaselee
with his staff embarked at Calcutta on board the s.s. Zebenghla,
and arrived at Hong-Kong on the 15th July.

General Gaselee remained at Hong-Kong three days. On the
17th July the Viceroy Li Hung-ehang arrived at Hong-Kong

456 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

from Canton on his way to Shanghai, and had an interview with the
Governor, at which Generals Gaselee, Gascoigne, and Barrow
were present. On the 18th the ZebengMa left Hong-Kong for
the north, but on the 21st was stopped at sea by H. M. S. Bona-
ventwe, which took off Sir Alfred Gaselee and General Barrow to
Shanghai, to confer with the local authorities on measures.
„ , „ , . for the proper defence of the port. As

Garrison of Shanghai. u * £• ■ •* n i n 1

a result of his visit General Gaselee gave
his opinion that the minimum garrison, which would suffice
for the defence of Shanghai, would be 3,000 men, and consi-
dered that a suitable force for the purpose would consist of a battery
of artillery, a native cavalry regiment, a brigade of native infantry
and a company of sappers and miners. The Second Brigade of
the China Expeditionary Force was consequently diverted to Shan-
ghai, where it remained throughout the subsequent operations in
North China. Generals Gaselee and Barrow rejoined the ZebengMa
at Wei-hai-wei on the 24th July, and reached Taku the following
day.

In the meantime, on the 5th July, the Secretary of State
for India telegraphed to the Viceroy that

Troops from South Africa. fouf g ^ breec h-loading howitzers, two