

Before describing the forward march of the relieving force on
,„. . Peking, it is necessary, for the proper appre-

Climatic conditions. • a- * .1 x a i *■ 4-u

ciation of the operations, to reter to the
abnormal climatic conditions of the year 1900. Both it and the
previous year had been exceedingly dry — in fact, years of famine
in which the rains had failed ; and it was greatly due to this cir-
cumstance that the rapid advance was possible. Had the ordinary

4 guns Naval Brigade.

12th Battery, R. F. A.

Hong Kong 2 guns.

Artillery 4 Maxims.

Detachment, R. E.

R. M. L. I.

300 Men

R. Welsh Fusiliers

300 „

1st Bengal Lenrers. .

400 „

7th Bengal Infantry

600 „

24th Punjab Infantry

300 „

1st Sikhs

500 „

Hong Kong Regiment

100 „

Chinese Regiment

100 „

ADVANCE OF THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN, ETO. 471

conditions prevailed, it is impossible to say to what extent the pro-
gress of the column would have been affected, but it is quite certain
that the difficulties of the allies would have been infinitely greater
than they were.

Itisof interest to notice that the year 1860 was also a dry year.

In an average year the rains in July and August are very heavy,
especially in the hills to the north and west of the Chih-li plain, and
the water, pouring into the rivers from countless tributaries, causes
them to overflow their banks and inundate the whole of the flat
country between Peking and the coast. The Hun-ho, in particular,
discharges a flood of water through its left bank, which transforms
the country south of the Hunting Park, as far east as Ma-tou and
Ho-hsi-wu, into a vast swamp, out of which the railway, the village,
and the embankments alone stand high and dry.

The country east of the Pei-ho is in a similar condition
in time of flood. The surplus water is carried off in the direction
of the Pei-tang-ho by canals, and these, overflowing their banks,
also inundate large tracts. All communication, except by boat or
along the few raised roads and the railway, becomes impossible,
for, even where the water is shallow, the low-lying unme tailed roads
are quickly churned into deep mud, and become unfit for traffic.
Under these conditions the only line of advance for the relieving force
would have been by boats on the river, and along the narrow raised
roads on its banks, which, however, were out of repair and breached
in several places, and much time would have been lost in making
them passable. The advantages to the Chinese in opposing an
advance on such a narrow front are too obvious to require comment.
The railway had been destroyed, and its sixty-five bridges between
Tientsin and Peking had been broken, so it could have been of
little use as an alternative line.

By great good fortune the actual conditions were entirely
different. The country, with the exception of a small tract on the
left bank of the Pei-ho noted below, was not inundated ; the actions
of Pei-tsang and Yang-tsun were fought over ground which, in an
ordinary year, would have been covered with water ; the columns
throughout the advance marched on a broad front and the trans-
port moved freely by the cross-country roads, seldom using the
embankments.