

About 4 a.m. dawn began to break, and soon afterwards the
two batteries of the Japanese right wing came into action on the
embankment and opened fire on Tang-chia-wan. The Chinese,
however, had got the range of the embankment accurately, and
several casualties occurred from their shell and rifle fire. >■■

About the same time the infantry of the Japanese right wing
became engaged with the enemy, who were entrenched in a wood
to the south-west of Tang-chia-wan, where sharp fighting had oc-
curred in the reconnaissance of the 30th July. The fighting was
very fierce, but the Japanese gradually gained ground, and by about
5-30 a.m. had occupied both Tang-chia-wan and Hsin-chuang, a
village lying a little further to the north.

Meanwhile the British troops were moving north be-
tween the two wings of the Japanese ; and the Americans, further
to the east, were supporting the Japanese in Tang-chia-wan along
the main roa,d. The British naval guns were also bombarding the
enemy's position from a point on the right bank of the Pei-ho, just
north of the Hsi-ku armoury, but, as it was extremely difficult
to follow the movements of the troops in the high crops, their fire
was confined to the Chinese entrenchments along the railway em-
bankment, and in the neighbourhood of Pei-ts'ang. The French
and Russian batteries also shelled the enemy from the left bank.

About 5 a.m., the batteries of the Japanese left wing came into
action against Ma-chang from a point about half a mile north of the
magazine, and soon afterwards the Japanese artillery of the right
wing and the British field battery joined in from the west of Tang-
chia-wan.

The Chinese now fell back to their second entrenched position,
which ran west from the river bank, to the south of Pei-ts'ang, in the
direction of Kan-chia-ju, but from this they were soon expelled, and
Wang-chuang was captured by the Japanese about 8-30 a.m.,
the enemy falling back on Pei-ts'ang, while many fled to the north

474 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

up the right bank. About 10-30 a.m. the boat bridge at Pei-
ts'ang was captured, and the Chinese, finding their right flank turned,
began to withdraw towards Yang-tsun by the left bank, between
the river and the railway, being shelled in their retirement by the
12th Battery R.F.A. with some effect.

As it was impossible to transport the guns and troops rapidly
across the boat bridge, an attempt was made to advance on Yang-
tsun by the right bank, but after proceeding about half a mile a
deep swamp was met with, stretching far to the west, in which the
horses sank to their girths. Farther on, to the north of the village
of Niu-chuang, was a deep unfordable stream, and, as advance in
this direction was proved to be impossible until the road had been
repaired, the attempt was abandoned, and it was decided to halt
at Pei-ts'ang for the night, outposts being thrown out to the north.
The heat had been intense and the troops had been on the move
for about twelve hours.