

469

formations rendering them conspicuous. It was accordingly
decided to withdraw the troops, and the retirement began
about twelve noon. The object of the reconnaissance, which
was to uncover the Chinese right and ascertain if they had bodies
of troops on the right bank, had only been partially successful.

The apex of their position, covered by the river and the
unfordable cut mentioned above, had been disclosed, and the cavalry
had penetrated some distance up the right bank, but had failed to
discover the entrenched position, which the Chinese had prepared
some dista-nce further back. On the extreme left the Japanese
had advanced to a powder magazine, about three miles west of the
river, and had cleared out a few of the enemy, but found no other
troops in that direction.

It was now quite certain that the Chinese were in strong force
in the neighbourhood of Pei-ts'ang, and, at a conference of the
general officers, held on the 3rd August, it was decided to drive
them out of their position on the 5th August, and to advance
as far as Yang-tsun, where the railway, river, and road routes to
Peking converge. Pending the success of the preliminary operations
the question of a further advance towards the capital was left
in abeyance.

The strength of the allied force available for the march on

strength of the allied forces. Peking, was, in round numbers, as

follows : —

Men.
10,000

Guns.

Japanese

24

Russians

4,000

16

British

3,000

12

Americans

2,000

6

French

800

12

Germans . .

200

. .

Austrians

Italians

Total

100

. .

20,100

70

470 FRONTIER AND Of ERSE AS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The first objective was the Chinese position at Pei-ts'ang,

which it was intended to attack on the

Plan of operations.

morning ottne 5th August. From native
information it had been ascertained that considerable reinforcements
of troops and stores had been arriving from the direction of the
Grand Canal, while the powder magazine, discovered by the Japanese
on the 30th July, was now reported to be strongly held by the
enemy, and connected with Pei-ts'ang by a line of entrenchments.

The plan agreed upon was that the Japanese, British, and
United States troops should operate on the right bank of the Pei-ho,
so as to turn the Chinese right flank, while the remainder of the
allies threatened their left on the left bank of the river. It Was
further agreed with the Japanese and American generals that the
attack on the right bank should take the form of a turning movement
from the embankment, which runs from Hsi-ku village towards
the powder magazine, the Japanese leading, with the British and
Americans following in succession.

The British force, composed of the troops named in the margin,
moved out of the settlement on the afternoon of the 4th, and bivou-
acked to the south of the em-
bankment, a short distance
west of Hsi-ku village. The
British were followed by the
Americans, who bivouacked on
their right rear in the direction
of the armoury. During the
night the Japanese marched
past the British bivouac, and
moved straight to their assigned
position on the extreme left, so as to be in readiness to attack
the powder magazine before dawn.