

embankment. The left of the road was
intended for the Eussians and French, who, however, never came
into line. The British cavalry moved out to the right flank, as
did the American artillery, which came into action to the east of
the railway. The British and Eussian guns occupied positions
on the left flank, the latter echeloned in rear of the former.

The British advance was in widely extended lines of skirmishers,
the 1st Sikhs leading, supported by the Eoyal Welsh Fusiliers
and the 24th Punjab Infantry, and it was noticeable how quickly

476 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIa.

the khaki uniforms blended with the crops and became difficult
to distinguish. The blue shirts of the Americans, who kept in much
closer formation, and often in groups, were, on the other hand, very
conspicuous, and this fact no doubt accounted for their numerous
casualties, as, though the British carried the position, their casu-
alties in killed and wounded only amounted to about half those
among the United States troops.

About 2,000 yards from the enemy's entrenchments the troops
came under a very heavy shell and rifle fire, but the attack was
pressed steadily forward, and the position was carried without a
check. The Chinese, who were well covered by their earthworks,
had probably not suffered very heavily, and effected their retreat
on the town of Yang-tsun, which lay about a mile and a half further
to the north. This place was afterwards found to be very strongly
entrenched, but the enemy made no attempt to hold it. The bulk
of their forces crossed by two boat bridges to the right bank of the
river and retired, utterly demoralised, towards Peking, while a con-
siderable number fled north along the left bank. They managed
to withdraw most of their guns, which had been kept well retired
and out of reach of the advancing allies.

During the attack the rifle fire of the Chinese, though heavy,
had been wild, but their guns had got the range accurately, and
dropped their shells right among the advancing infantry, without,
however, inflicting much loss.

The British casualties amounted to six men killed ; one died
of sunstroke ; Lieutenant Costello, 1st Sikhs,
and 37 men were wounded. The Americans
had about 80 casualties, including many cases of sunstroke.

The British and American troops halted at the railway.
The heat was intense, and the troops suffered much in consequence,

The Russians arrived at the embankment near the railway
bridge about an hour later, and shortly. afterwards moved forward
towards the town, and took up their quarters to the north of it.
The French remained with the British and Americans on the river
bank near the railway bridge.

In the meantime the Japanese on the extreme right, who,
owing to their position, had taken no part in the assault, marched
straight on to Yang-tsun, and occupied the town at about 2-30 p.m.

ADVANCE OF THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN, ETO. 477

without meeting with any opposition. Their main body, in its
advance along the right bank of the river, had been delayed by
having to construct bridges over the streams and cuts in the road,
and did not reach Yang-tsun till, about 6 p.m.