

The railway all the way from Tientsin had been wrecked ;
the rails, sleepers, fish-plates, etc., had all been torn up and removed.
The railway station was a total ruin, but the large girder bridge
over the Pei-ho had suffered little damage, the girders at the shore
end, on the right bank, only having been slightly displaced. Had
the Chinese succeeded in destroying the bridge, the girders, lying
in the stream below, would have rendered the onward progress of
the junks carrying our supplies almost impossible.

On the 7th August the whole force halted for the day at Yang-
tsun. The Japanese sent forward a covering party of one regiment
of infantry, a squadron of cavalry, two batteries of artillery, and
a company of engineers up the right bank of the river to Nan-tsai -
tsun, which they occupied after a skirmish with the enemy.

A conference of the allied generals was held during the day,
Conference of allied an( l ^ was decided that, as the resistance of
generals. the Chinese had apparently been broken,

the advance on Peking should at once be vigorously pushed on,
without giving the enemy time to recover. They were now thoroughly
demoralised, and said to be suffering greatly from the heat. Yu-lu,
the Viceroy of Chih-li province, was said to have committed suicide
the previous day, after witnessing the defeat of his troops, though
another report stated that he had been killed by a fragment of
one of our shells.

It was further arranged at the conference that in the onward
march the troops would move in the following

The advance on Peking. . °

order : Japanese, Russians, Americans,
British. The French, having no transport, were to remain for the
present and garrison Yang-tsun, being supported by detachments
of 150 men each from the British, Japanese, and American forces.
The Japanese and Russians were to take it in turns to supply
one battalion as a right flank guard on the left bank of the Pei-ho,
and the British, Russian, and Japanese cavalry were to act together
in covering the front of the whole force, under the orders of the
commander of the Japanese cavalry.

478 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

It had been found that the water in the wells, contrary to ex-
pectation, was excellent, cold and clear, while that from the Pei-ho
was full of sand and mud, and took a long time to settle. The troops
generally used well-water throughout the advance and no ill-
effects were experienced.

On the 7th the water in the Pei-ho had suddenly fallen about
18 inches. This had delayed the arrival of the junks carrying
the Russian supplies, and in consequence they were not ready to start
next morning.

At 4 a.m. on the 8th the Japanese moved off, followed by the
Americans. The British marched at 7 a.m., and reached their
bivouac on the bank of the river at Nan-tsai-tsun about 11 a.m.
The heat was intense, and marching through the high crops ex-
ceedingly trying. The Japanese occupied the villages, as they
continued to do throughout the march on the capital, and the
Americans bivouacked alongside the British. Most of the junks
came up in the course of the day, and the Russians arrived in the
evening.