

At the beginning of August the northernmost outpost of the
allies was in the Hsi-ku armoury, which was held by the Russians.
From this point a considerable force of Chinese could be seen
busily entrenching about a mile to the north, between the river
and the railway, the bridges of which had been destroyed.
Their principal camp was visible near the village of Pei-ts'ang,
about five miles from Hsi-ku, and they seemed to be parti-
cularly active on the railway embankment, just north of the broken
fifth bridge from the Tientsin railway station.

It was, however, impossible to determine the exact form or
extent of their position, on account of the high crops, which com-

Vol. VI 30 A

468 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

pletely covered the flat plain, and prevented observation, even
by mounted men. The horses of the 1st Bengal Lancers had just
come off board ship, and as yet were hardly fit for reconnaissance
work, so were given a rest preparatory to the forward movement
on Peking. Russian and Japanese patrols had been searching the
country on both banks of the river, and had frequently been fired
on from villages, or by riflemen concealed in the crops, without,
however, being able to ascertain much of the enemy's dispositions
or strength.

With a view to clearing up the situation and obtaining further
„ , information on these points, the Japanese

ReconnaiBsmce :n force. L . ■"■ ,

undertook a reconnaissance in force on tne
morning of the 30th July. The Japanese force, which was accom-
panied by Lieutenant- General Yamaguchi and his staff, consisted of
one brigade of six battalions, one battery of six 7-pr. mountain guns,
firing black powder, and one squadron of cavalry. General
Gaselee, Major- General Norman Stewart, commanding the 1st
Brigade, and some officers of their respective staff watched the
operation.

The Japanese rendezvoused at 4 a.m. at the Hung-ch'iao or
Red Bridge, north of Tientsin city, and, leaving two battalions
in reserve near the bridge, advanced parallel to the river, along
the right bank, to the village of Ting-tzu-ku, just north of the Hsi-ku
armoury. A short distance beyond this point, at about 6 a.m.,
they came in contact with the Chinese, who were holding a small
house on the main road. From this the Japanese expelled them,
and then found that the main Chinese position was in the village
of Mun-chia-chuang, on the opposite bank of the river, from which
a heavy fire opened.

About 7 a.m., the Japanese passed a company across the river
at Ting-tzu-ku, which occupied the village of Tien-chih, but then
found their further progress barred by a deep unfordable water-
cut, extending east from the Pei-ho to the broken fifth bridge on
the railway, the opposite bank being strongly held by the Chinese,
protected by entrenchments.

It was now evidently impossible to get nearer the Chinese,
and the reconnaissance resolved itself into an action in which
the Japanese suffered severely, their white uniforms and close

ADVANCE OF THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN, ETC.