

On the left bank the Russians and French had been stopped
by the inundations and had taken no part in the fighting.

During the day the Japanese casualties amounted to over 300
killed and wounded. The British lost 26
Losses. killed and wounded, while the other allies

reported no casualties. It was impossible to estimate the Chinese
losses accurately, but they left over 300 dead on the field, and it
was reported by spies that more than 600 wounded had been
removed up-stream in junks. As a result of their defeat large
numbers deserted, and the " yings, " or camps, were reported to
have dwindled from 500 to about 200 men each.

As will be seen from the above account the Japanese monopo-
lised all the fighting, and carried the enemy's positions in succession
with the greatest gallantry. It was, however, almost impossible
to get a very clear idea of the various phases of the fight, as the high
crops and the morning mist greatly restricted the view in every
direction.

The march on Yang-tsun was resumed at 6 a.m. on the 6th
August. The main body of the Japanese

Advance on Yang-tsun. ° , .,,,», i • »

advanced by the right bank of the river,
while the rest of the allies and a detachment of Japanese marched
on the left bank. The British were the last to start, but owing

ADVANCE OF THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN, ETC. 475

to the somewhat slow progress of the Eussians and the French,
andtotaking a shorter route, they soon passed the two last-named,
and the order of march arranged itself into the British on the left next
the river, with the Americans on the right between them and the
railway, while the Japanese detachment was still farther to the east
beyond the railway. The Eussians and French were some distance
in rear of the British.

At about 10 a.m. the head of the column reached the village of
Hsin-chuang, about three miles south of the railway bridge over the
Pei-ho, near Yang-tsun, and from two small sandhills, immediately
to the north of the village, an excellent view of the enemy's posi-
tion was obtained. It stretched along the high railway embankment,
with its right resting on the village of Chu-chuang, south-east of the
big railway bridge, while the extreme left was in some villages con-
siderably to the east of the railway line. It was afterwards found
that they had also constructed lines of entrenchments on the low
ground in front of the embankment, but these could not at first
be seen on account of the crops.

Before the action, a body of Cossacks came in contact with
the Chinese near Chu-chuang, and drew a heavy fire. They were
dismounted in a dry water course near the village, and there they
remained, unwilling to advance or retire, until the position was
captured.

The attack was begun by the British and Americans about
11 a.m., without waiting for the Eussians and French, who had
not yet arrived.

The British extended to the right of the road leading straight

from the sandhills to Chu-chuang, with the

Action at at Yang-tsun. Americans on their right towards the railway