

Rifles.
Deputy Assistant Quarter-Master Captain F. T. Williams. 26th Madras

General, Infantry.

464

FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Deputy Assistant Adjutant-General Captain H. D. Watson, 2-2nd Gurkha

for Imperial Service Troops. Rifles.

Brigade Signalling Officer . . Captain W. R. Walker, 15th Madras

Infantry.
(g) Line of Communications and Base Staff —
Base Commandant and in charge of Colonel L. R. H. D. Campbell, i.s.o.

Line of Communications (with local

rank of Major-General).
Deputy Assistant Adjutant and Lieutenant-Colonel J. C. Swann, 1st

Quarter-Master General, Base and Bombay Grenadiers.

Communications.
Commanding Royal Engineers (with Major G. K. Scott-Moncrieff, r.e.

local rank of Lieutenant-Colonel).
Principal Medical Officer, Line of Lieutenant-Colonel H. F. P. F.

Communications. Esmond-White, i.m.s.

Principal Medical Officer, Shanghai Lieutenant-Colonel P. F. O'Connor,

Commandant, Native Military Base

Depot.
Base Ordnance Officer
In charge, Veterinary Store Depot

I.M.S.

Major W. S. Delamain, 23rd Bombay
Rifles.
Captain M. S. C. Campbell, r.a.
Veterinary Lieutenant W. R. Wrighti

A.V.D.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

ADVANCE OF THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN ; BELIEF OF TEE LEGATIONS
AND OCCUPATION OF PEKING.

Before proceeding from Taku to Tientsin, General Gaselee and
his Chief of the Staff attended a conference of the admirals and
senior naval officers of the allied powers, on board H. M.S. Bar flew,
on the forenoon of the 26th July. He immediately afterwards
proceeded to Sinho, about three miles above Taug-ku, on the left
bank of the river, which had been selected as the landing-place
for the British troops and stores. This place was connected by
a branch line with the railway from Tang-ku to Tientsin, and
arrangements had been made with the Russian railway officials
to run two trains, of fifteen vehicles each, daily from Sinho to
Tientsin, one starting in the morning and the other in the
evening. By filling the trucks three-quarters full with kit and stores
and allowing the men to sit on the top, the troops were quickly
transferred to Tientsin with all their baggage complete, as they
arrived from the tranports. The largest trucks were capable of
carrying nineteen horses or twenty-four mules. Having inspected
the arrangements at Sinho and given such orders as were neces-
sary, General Gaselee proceeded to Tientsin by river, and arrived
there at 8-30 a.m. on the 27th.

Since the capture of the native city on the 14th July, every -
, . thine in and around Tientsin had been com-

Affairs at Tientsin. .

paratively quiet. The French Concession was
in ruins, but the British Concession had not suffered nearly so much,
though most of the houses were more or less damaged by shell fire,
and, owing to the flight of the Chinese employed in the settlements,
the place was extremely insanitary. To prevent an outbreak of
sickness among the troops immediate steps had to be taken to
improve matters.

The all-important business now was the immediate relief of