

the legations in Peking, though this view was not shared by all the

allies. On the 10th August the Russian Minister of War stated

that the advance of the allied forces on Peking was impracticable

Vox* VI 30

466 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

for two or three weeks, though four days earlier, on the 6th, effective
opposition to the advance of the troops on the part of the Chinese
had been finally crushed at the battle of Yang-tsun.

The latest news from Peking was more than three weeks old,
and caused the gravest anxiety, as the British Minister then stated
that, under favourable circumstances, he did not consider that the
hard-pressed garrison could hold out more than two or three weeks.
It was therefore possible that the catastrophe had already happened,
and it was certain that any attempt at rescue must be made at once.
There were two other reasons for an early advance. The rainy
Reasons for an early season, which had so far held off, might at
advance on Peking. an y time set in, and a few heavy storms
would render the country impassable. Secondly, the Chinese
forces, which, after the capture of Tientsin, had scattered in
a demoralised condition, were now beginning to collect again,
and a considerable body was known to be in position barring
the road to the capital. They had cut the river banks with a view
to flooding the low-lying country, and every day the inundations
were spreading ; while their defensive works were increasing in
strength, and fresh reinforcements were arriving to oppose the allies.
At first the allied commanders were disinclined to agree with
General Gaselee' s arguments for an early advance. They considered
that the march on Peking could not begin before the middle of
August at the earliest. Major- General Chaffee, commanding the
troops of the United States, wished to await the arrival of his artil-
lery, which was shortly expected ; while Lieut. -General Yamaguchi,
commanding the Japanese troops, considered the force too small
for the attempt. The allies had expected General Gaselee to
arrive with a force of some 10,000 men, whereas, owing to the 2nd
Brigade having been deflected to Shanghai, he had less than 4,000
available for the advance, and could expect no increase to his
strength for some weeks. The Eussian General Stessel appeared to
be chiefly concerned with the progress of affairs in Manchuria,
and consequently averse to withdrawing Russian troops from the
neighbourhood of the coast.

On the 1st August Lieut. -General Linievitch arrived in
Tientsin and took over command of the Russian forces from
General Stessel. He at first opposed the forward move, on the

ADVANCE OF THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN, ETO. 467

plea that the troops then available were insufficient to make
success a certainty, and that a reverse would do incalculable
harm and could not be risked. He asked for two days to con-
sider the situation, and then agreed to co-operate.

In the expectation that the British contingent would number
10,000 troops, the Japanese had arranged
apanose con mgcn . fa&t their own force should consist of
about 6,000 men, and had made all their plans on this basis.
Their junks could only carry about nine days' supplies for this
number, and their small land supply column was only capable of
carrying one extra day's rations. With three days in regimental
charge, this gave supplies for 6,000 men for thirteen days. Much
credit is due to them, that when it was found that the British
could only furnish about 3,000 men, the deficit was made up from
the Japanese forces, who responded most loyally to the call, though
at great inconvenience. With transport sufficient only for the
requirements of 6,000 men, the Japanese undertook to advance
with double that number to Peking, and to attempt to make up
the deficiencies in food and transport from the country as they
advanced. By capturing several junks at Yang-tsun they were
able to reorganize their river transport, but the land supply
column could not be increased, with the result that a great deal
of extra work was thrown upon it, and in spite of daily double
journeys, the troops had occasionally to go without food, picking
up what they could in the villages. When Tung-chou was reached
immense quantities of rice were captured in the town, and no
further difficulty in feeding their troops was experienced.