

CHAPTER XXXVII.

, PR0QRES8 OF EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO THE OCCUPATION OF PEKING.

The final expulsion of the Chinese troops and Boxers from
Peking, as described in Chapter XXXVI, completed the occupation
of the capital, and the allied troops began to settle down in
their new quarters.

On the morning of the 16th August a convoy Was despatched
to Tung-chou to bring up rations.

Looting was general throughout the city. General Gaselee
had from the first given strict orders against the confiscation of
property, but as almost all civilians, both European and Chinese,
and also the troops of most of the allied powers, were busily engaged
in appropriating large quantities of valuables of all sorts, it was
only natural that our own men were greatly disappointed at being
debarred from annexing a share. It was evident that their not
being allowed to participate would in no way enable the original
owners to retain their property, as it would certainly be con-
fiscated by others and merely go to swell their hoards. Most of
the houses of the well-to-do in Peking were lying open, with their
contents at the mercy of the first comer, their owners having
fled, either during the disturbed times of the siege or on the
arrival of the relieving troops. General Gaselee accordingly
issuad an order which, while forbidding promiscuous looting
by individuals, allowed the collection of booty by organized
parties, from the houses of Chinese known to be hostile to foreigners
or connected with the Boxers. These parties were to be under the
charge of officers, and all confiscated property was to be deposited
in a large building in the Imperial Carriage Park, under the charge
of a military guard. The accumulated loot was afterwards sold
by auction, the money realised forming a prize fund, for dis-
tribution among all the British troops who took part in the relief
of the legations.

Soon after the capture of Peking, the city was divided into
districts, which were allotted to the various nations for control and

PROGRESS OF EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO THE OCCUPATION OF PEKING. 489

administration, and the troops of any one Power were debarred
from going into the parts of the city told off to the charge of another
nation, but certain main roads, leading to all parts of the city,
were reserved for general use. Steps were also taken to reassure
the peaceful Chinese inhabitants and to protect their property.

The rain, which had fortunately held off during the advance
of the relieving force from Tientsin, had fallen in considerable
quantities during the last few days, and rendered the forwarding
of stores from the junks at Tung-chou a matter of great difficulty
on acount of the state of the roads.

The telegraph line was brought into Peking on the 1 7th August.
The entire line between Peking and Tientsin had been totally
destroyed during the anti-foreign insurrection, and therefore a new
line had to be constructed. Unfortunately only materials for repair
had been sent from India, and the personnel had been calculated
on the same basis. An arrangement had therefore to be made
with the American Signal Corps, which also was numerically weak,
to erect a combined Anglo-American line, and in spite of deficiency
of materials, an office was open in the British Legation only three
days after the relieving force marched in.