

Through the Legation Quarter runs a broad water channel,
which in time of heavy rain carries off the surplus water from the
Tartar City, through an opening in the Tartar City wall called
the sluice gate. It was known from Sir Claude MacDonald's
cypher message that the portion of the city wall, on both sides of
the sluice gate, was in possession of the legation troops at the
time when the message was despatched, and it was expected that
if they were still holding out, a comparatively easy entrance could
be effected into the legations through this gate. Great anxiety
was, however, felt as to the fate of the defenders, for it was now
guessed that much of the heavy firing heard during the previous
night must have been directed against the legations, presumably in
a last attempt by the Chinese to overwhelm them before help
arrived. Of the result of this attack nothing was known.

On reaching a point about due south of the sluice gate, General
Gaselee, with some of his staff officers and about seventy men of the
1st Sikhs and 7th Bengal Infantry, turned north and marched through

i i

LEGATIONS

,yAt2 j4QPM

R

At 7 P.M. ^,r- tjf

\

"' foff fco' Bata/IHeil- ZBaUalionsat 10 P.M.

ChieTL-ixien

Occupied by Americans \

at

*:*/ 'Attacked by Russians

^V.^^/ o" 1 ": •;' <• ;•' :«.««££•

ShaTmo uieii

British at 12 -30 pm.

a

TEMP/LE OF l HEA^EN

24th PI

W

J

IWB.L

i

o

CZP

RELIEF
OF THE

LEGATIONS

14th August 1900.

REFERENCES
British ) )

Americans ■> i t>

Ru8Sian» ( , t , tt ->t ttt ,< + ...>
Japanese ^. ..>

4 «

Detachment

Mmg -ting men

' a f naB ^^muwa a ammmumnnBaBmaan2nu i

•muaaama.

a Tope Oy. Ho 8,078
lad C. J. A Jwn* 1909

*?•

500

Scale 3 inches - I mile.

No. 4.877-L, 1909.

1000

1600

sooo

*soo Yards

ADVANCE OF THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN, ETC. 483

the narrow lanes, until the edge of the moat outside the Tartar City
wall was reached. From this point the British, American, and
Russian flags could be seen floating on the wall about 200 yards to
the west. A signalman then appeared near the foot of the American
flag, and sent the message "Come up Sluice Street by the water," and
on moving towards him the troops soon caught sight of the arch of
the sluice gate, under the part of the wall on which he was standing.
Doubling across the moat, under an ill-aimed fusillade, the party
was soon under cover in the sluice ditch.

Relief of the Legations. ^ . n .

Further progress was barred by two strong
gratings of upright timbers, but a few of the bars were quickly
displaced, and about 2-40 P.M. the first of the relieving force found
themselves passing through the British and Russian legations
amid cheering crowds of European and Chinese refugees.

Preparations were at once made to drive off the Chinese, who
still kept up a heavy fire on the legations. A party of the 1st
Sikhs escort, moved out through the defences on the western face
of the British Legation, to drive the enemy out of the houses on
that side, while the detachment of the 7th Bengal Infantry, which
had also entered the Tartar City by the sluice gate, relieved the
legation troops on duty on the defences.