

Meanwhile the main column, consisting of the 12th Battery,
R.F.A., the Maxim detachments, the Royal Welsh Fusibers,
and the 1st Sikhs, had continued its advance on the Ch'ien men,
or great central gate in the south wall of the Tartar City. This
they were preparing to assault when a small body of American
marines, belonging to the legation Guard, advanced along the wall
and seized the main guard-house over the gate. At the same time
our troops got in by the gate below, and two of the Maxims came into
action. The Chinese made a plucky charge, but were repulsed and
driven out of the houses between the Ch'ien men and the Legation
Quarter, suffering heavily in their retirement. Eventually two
guns of the 12th Battery, R.F.A., and the 1st Sikhs marched into
the British Legation and the rest of the main column retired
to the Temple of Heaven, where they took up their quarters for
the night.

On nearing the Temple of Heaven it was seen that the Yung-
ting men, or southern gate of the Chinese City, was still held by the

Vol. VI 31 a

484 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

enemy's troops. These were promptly driven out with considerable
loss, and the gate was seized and occupied by a British detachment.
About 4-30 p.m. General Chaffee arrived at the legations by the
sluice gate, and the Ch'ien men was occupied by the United States
troops. The Eussian detachments, found by the Americans at the
Tung-pien men, entered the Chinese City with them, and, moving
west, followed the British troops into the Tartar City by the Ch'ien
men. The main body of the Russians also entered the Chinese
City by the Tung-pien men, and General Linievitch arrived at the
legations about 6 p.m. by the sluice gate. The troops with him
moved east to the Ha-ta men, and opened it for the entrance of their
main body, who afterwards occupied the south-east quarter of the
Tartar City. Major- General Fukushima with a battalion of Japanese
infantry also reached the Japanese Legation in the evening by the
same route.

The Japanese, however, had not abandoned their attack on
the eastern gates of the Tartar ^ty, and about 9 p.m., the outer
gate of the Tung-chih men was blown in, and very shortly after-
wards the inner gate was also destroyed. The infantry at once
occupied the wall and guard-houses, and advanced towards the Chih-
k ho men, while a detachment moved north towards the An-ting men.

In the meantime the outer gate of the Chih-ho men had also
been assaulted and blown in about 9-40 p.m., and ten minutes
later the inner gate was similarly entered, and the infantry
stormed the wall and advanced along it north and south, two
battalions eventually marching along the wall to the Legation
Quarter.

These various assaults had entailed heavy fighting, and the
Japanese casualties throughout the day
amounted to one officer and thirty-three
men killed and seven officers and 123 men wounded. The Russians
lost fairly heavily in their unsuccessful attack on the Tung-pien
men, but tht> remainder of the Allies had very few casualties.
The British casualties amounted to one man died, three wounded,
one missing.