

In the afternoon a native Christian arrived in the Japanese
, , L . camp with letters from the legations in

News from the legations. , r °

Peking, which stated that the Europeans
there were still holding out successfully, and had provisions up to the
16th. He also brought a cypher message to General Gaselee from Sir
Claude MacDonald, recommending him to attack Peking from the
south and to endeavour to effect an entrance into the Tartar City by
the sluice gate under the wall, to the south of the Legation Quarter.

On the 9th the advance was continued to Ho-hsi-wu, the
British marching again at 7 a.m. in rear of the other contingents.
The distance is only eleven miles, but the march was an extremely
trying one on account of the intense heat and stifling dust. The
progress was also very slow from continual checks in front. Many
of the Americans were prostrated by the heat, owing, it was thought,
to their head-dress not being sufficient protection from the
powerful sun, but even the natives of India suffered considerably.

The Japanese were again in front, and on nearing Ho-hsi-wu

found the place occupied by the enemy.

The Chinese were quickly driven out and

pursued as far as Ma-tou, the troops occupying Mu-chang for the

ADVANCE OF THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN, ETC. 479

night. Near Ho-hsi-wu a squadron of the 1st Bengal Lancers
came in contact with a force of about 300 Chinese cavalry.
Owing to the high crops, cavalry action was difficult, but about
forty Chinese were killed, our own troops having only two men
wounded.

The British column did not reach Ho-hsi-wu till late in the
afternoon, and bivouacked on the right bank of the river, just south
of the village. After their experience on the 9th it was decided that
the infantry should not march the following day until the evening.
The cavalry and artillery, however, went on at 10-30 a.m., but,
taking the wrong road, got into deep sand and lost several horses
from exhaustion.

During the 10th, most of the junks arrived and the sappers
were busy constructing a post, as it had been decided to leave
a guard at this point. About 4-30 p.m. the infantry started, but
it was still so hot that a long halt was made after the first
mile.

Two companies of French troops, with a battery of light guns,
had rejoined the force at Ho-hsi-wu, in order to participate in
the entry into Peking.

Ma-tou was reached about 2-30 a.m. on the 11th. Later in
the morning the Japanese advanced to Chang-chia-wan, followed
by the Russians. On nearing that place their advance guard
was fired on by the Chinese, and after a smart fight, which lasted
about an hour, the enemy were driven out of their position, leaving
about forty dead on the field. The Japanese then pressed forward
and were again fired at from the village of Kao-chia-chuang, which
they captured after a slight resistance, and advanced to another
village about a mile further on, when they found themselves within
3,000 yards of the walled city of Tung-chou. Chinese troops
were visible on and in front of the walls, and a Japanese battery
came into action and shelled the town for a short time, without
drawing any reply.