

reinforced by detachments, of about 400

Relief of the Tci-fang. . * ,, -p, ... , -, -n

men each, from the British and Kussian con-
tingents, while the Japanese co-operated from the north, moving
round from that side of the Imperial City. Leaving the Ch'ien
men, the southern column marched west against the Shiin-chih
men, or western gate, in the south wall of the Tartar City, which
was still occupied by Chinese troops. The gate was bombarded
by a 12-pr. of the Hong-Kong Artillery, posted on the Ch'ien men,
and by the French guns at close quarters, whereupon the garrison
at once fled. The gate was then occupied by the French, and was
afterwards held by a guard of British troops.

The column next turned north and marched up the main road
from the Shun-chih men till it arrived opposite the Hsi-an men,
or west gate of the Imperial City. This gate had already been forced
by the Japanese, who were engaged with the enemy occupying two
strong barricades constructed across the road facing the gate, and
also the houses on each side of the road. After some sharp fighting
the barricades were captured, and the enemy were driven out of
the houses, manv of which were set on fire. The relief of the Pei-
t'ang, which lies inside the Imperial City to the north-east of and
close to the Hsi-an men, was thus effected.

The troops continued to fight their way east till they arrived
at the marble bridge across the imperial lakes. Crossing this
'they occupied the Empress Dowager's temple at the east end,
and then moved north and east to the Mei-shan or Coal Hill.
The Japanese seized the Hsi-hua men, or western gate of the
Forbidden City, of which they now guarded the north, east, and
west gates, while the United States troops held the south gate,
but it was decided that for the present no one was to be allowed
inside.

ADVANCE OF THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN, ETC. 487

After a short rest, a force of French and British troops cleared
all the Chinese out of the houses to the east and north-east of the
Pei-t'ang, and then returned to the Coal Hill, where the various
detachments bivouacked for the night. The French occupied
the Hall of Ancestors to the north of Coal Hill, and here General
Frey established his head-quarters. The Russians occupied the
Winter Palace.

In the fighting the Japanese had one man killed and seven
wounded. The French had four men killed and two officers and three
men wounded. The British had no casualties, as they formed
the reserve, and had taken no active part in the attack on the Hsi-
an men. The Chinese lost very heavily.

To return to the Pei-t'ang. The small garrison had
made a gallant defence. It originally consisted of thirty-five French
marines, eleven Italian marines, the Roman Catholic priests, and a
few native converts, for whom, however, very few rifles were avail-
able. Yet this small force had held a perimeter over half-a-mile
in length, and had successfully repulsed all the attacks of the
Chinese. It had withstood an even longer and fiercer siegs than
the legations, had been subject to a heavier shell fire, and had
been responsible for the safety of about 2,500 nuns and native
converts, most of the latter being women and children. Nearly all
the brave defenders had been wounded, and several killed,
and, with the necessity of defending so long a line, it was
inconceivable that the place could have held out. Only the
cowardice of the attackers, who could not screw up their courage
to rush some point of the defence, had saved the garrison from
destruction.