

The British marched at 5-30 p.m., preceded by the Americans.
The march was an easy one and Chang-chai-wan was reached
before midnight. The place is low-lying and marshy and the
water supply was bad.

480 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

On the morning of the 12th August the Japanese moved
forward in the early morning, on the south-

Tung-chou occupied. , , . i_ . . * m

east and south-west gates of Tung-chou,
and blew them in ; but, on entering, it was found that the whole
of the Chinese troops had retired towards Peking during the night.

The Japanese occupied the town. The British took up their
quarters on the river bank to the south-east, where is the landing-
place for the junks. The Eussians and Americans bivouacked
near the south-west gate.

In the afternoon a conference of the British, American, Russian,
and Japanese generals was held, at which it was decided that the
troops should halt at Tung-chou on the 13th, while reconnaissances
were made to examine the. country towards Peking. On the 14th
the combined force was to move foiward to a position outside the
walls of Peking, ready to assault the city on the morning of the
15th August. The British, American, and Japanese generals were
anxious to attack on the 14th, but, in deference to the wishes of
General Linievitch, who expressed his inability to move earlier, the
attack was postponed to the 15th.

The forward movement on the city was to be made in the
following order. The Japanese to march

Arrangements for the &] th ed rQad frQm Tung-choU to-

attack on Peking. . ,

wards the Chih-ho men, or eastern gate of the
Tartar City ; the Russians by roads north of the Japanese on the
Tung-chih men, or north gate, on the eastern side of the Tartar
City ; the Americans by the road along the south bank of the canal
from Tung-chou to Peking, on the Tung-pien-men, or north-east
gate of the Chinese City ; and the British by roads further to the
south on the left of the Americans, on the Sha-huo men, or east
gate of the Chinese City.

Reconnoitring parties moved forward on the morning of the
13th. The British detachment, consisting of the 1st Bengal
Lancers, and 7th Rajputs, advanced to the village of Pan-pu-tien-
erh, about three miles from the Sha-huo men, and occupied a
walled enclosure round a temple. The Americans were near the
British on their right, and the Japanese were at Ting-fu village on
the paved road. Their cavalry reconnoitred towards Peking, where
they reported that^there was little sign of activity on the walls,

ADVANCE OF THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN, ETC. 481

During the night of the 13th-14th heavy firing was heard in the
direction of Peking, and this was supposed to be an attack by the
Chinese, either on some of the allied outposts, or upon the legations.

It was subsequently discovered that the Kussians had passed
the Japanese in the darkness, and had attacked the Tung-pien men,
the gate allotted to the Americans. They apparently succeeded
in getting on to the wall of the Chinese City, in the neighbourhood
of the gate, without any opposition, but had failed in their further
advance along the foot of the south wall of the Tartar
City, and, meeting with a heavy fire from the Tartar wall, had had
to retire and seek shelter in the suburbs.