

The British troops at Tung-chou, hearing the heavy firing in
front, fell in about 2 a.m. and marched towards Peking. Soon
after 6 a.m. the Japanese advanced troops, at the urgent appeal
of the Russians for support, attacked the Chih-ho men, near which
place their main body arrived about 9 a.m., and, as the gate was
very strongly held, the Japanese commander decided to bombard
it and the Tung-chih men, before attempting to storm them. Ac-
cordingly fifty- four guns were brought up into position, and opened
fire on the two gates and the wall between them.

About 2 p.m. another attempt was made to blow in the Chih-ho
men, but the party was driven back, and it was then decided to
wait till dusk before making any further attempt, when a simul-
taneous assault was to be made on both the Tung-chih men and
Chih-ho men. With this object in view the 21st Infantry Regiment
and a company of Engineers moved off from the rendezvous of the
Japanese main body, to the east of Chih-ho men, and marched
towards the Tung-chih men.

While these events were happening on the right, the British
cavalry had left their bivouac in the early morning and reconnoitred
towards the Sha-huo men, but were stopped by rifle fire from the
crops. They then moved to their right and got in touch with
the Americans on the canal.

About 7 a.m. the main body of the United States troops began
to come up, and about 8 a.m. the British, who had had furthest
to march, also arrived. After a rest the American and British
columns moved slowly forward towards their respective gates,
meeting with little opposition. On arrival at the Tung-pien

Vol. VI 31

482 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

men about 12-30 p.m., the Americans found the Russian column
taking cover in the houses outside the city. Bringing up their
artillery they soon succeeded in breaking in the gate and entered
the Chinese City, about the same time as the British arrived at the
Sha-huo men. The latter gate, being found practically undefended,
was quickly broken open and the troops streamed into the town.

The British column marched steadily west, meeting with very

Advance of the British little opposition, until it arrived at the cross

column. roads about half a mile south of the Ha-ta

men of the Tartar City, where a short halt was made to enable the

straggling and exhausted column to close up. A good deal of firing

could be heard in the north-east corner of the Chinese City, where

the Americans were evidently engaged. The 1st Bengal Lancers

and 24th Punjab Infantry were now ordered to march straight

to the Temple of Heaven, in the surrounding parks of which General

Gaselee intended to quarter the bulk of the British troops. At

the same time a portion of the 7th Bengal Infantry was detached

towards the Ha-ta men, to cover the right flank of the column in

its advance, and to get in touch, if possible, with the Americans.

The remainder of the troops continued their advance westwards

towards the middle of the Chinese City.