

One of the first measures to be undertaken was the recon-
struction of the railway from Tientsin to Peking, so as to ensure
the troops being properly supplied with necessaries of all kinds, in
the event of their having to remain in the capital during the winter.
The Russians put forward a claim to the entire control of the rail-
way, but this was opposed by General Gaselee, and the question
remained in abeyance.

On the 19th a combined force of British, Americans, Austrians,
Defeat of the Boxers and Japanese, about 1,000 strong, moved
near Tientsin. out of Tientsin, under comman d f Brigadier-

General Dorward, and attacked a strong force of Boxers, who had
occupied some villages about eight miles to the south-west of
the settlements. The enemy were successfully dispersed with
the loss of 300 killed and 60 prisoners. The allies had eleven men
wounded.

On the morning of the 22nd, contrary to agreement, the

Summei Palace occupied Summer Palace was occupied by the Rus-

b y tho Russia™. 8 i a ns, to the exclusion of the other allies,

and they remained in possession for about two months. This

490 TROtlTIBR AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Palace, called the Wan-shou-shan had been built by the
Empress-Dowager to replace the Yuan-ming-yuan, destroyed
by the allies in 1860. It had been finished only a few years before
1900, and in it were collected most of the priceless treasures which
her Imperial Majesty had brought together from all parts of the
empire, during the preceding forty years.

The same day the 5th Kegiment of United States Infantry,
with two batteries of American artillery, reached Tientsin, and
the following day the 16th Bengal Lancers began to arrive.

While these events Were happening the administration of the
city was being organized, and there were constant reconnaissances
with occasional skirmishes, outside the walls.

On the 25th August the Kussians occupied Ma-chia-pu, the
terminus of the Tientsin line, which lies about one and a half miles
to the south-west of the Yung-ting men, and close to the north-west
cover of the Hunting Park. The British had placed a small
detachment there a week before, but it had been withdrawn, owing
to a baBeless rumour that a large Boxer force was advancing against
the place from the south, and it had since remained unoccupied.

The same day a conference of the military commanders was
held, and, after much discussion, it was decided that detachments of
the allied troops should make a triumphal march through the
Forbidden City on the 28th August, the order of march being
arranged in accordance with the declared strength of the
respective contingents. The Russians were to lead with 800 men,
followed in order by the Japanese 800, British 400, Americans 400,
French 400, Germans 200, Austrians and Italians.

On the evening of the 27th the great guard-house above the
Triumphal march through Ch'ien men accidentally caught fire and was
the Forbidden City. burnt down. The incident was looked upon
as a most unlucky omen by the Chinese, as the Ch'ien men is the
principal gate of the Tartar City, and faces the Imperial Palaces in
the Forbidden City.