

The building was still burning when the contingents of the
allied forces paraded in front of the south gate of the Imperial City,
for the march through the Forbidden City. Lieutenant-General
Linievitch arrogated to himself the chief position in the
ceremonial. Behind him and his staff came the ministers of the

PROGRESS OE EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO THE OCCUPATION OF PEKING. 491

various powers, and then the detachments of Russian, Japanese,
British, American, French, German, Austrian, and Italian troops, in
the order named. As the head of the column started, the 12th
battery, Royal Field Artillery, fired a general salute.

Crossing the next courtyard and passing through another large
gate, the troops entered the great court, at the north end of which
stands the southern and principal gate of the Forbidden City, through
which no foreigner had ever previously passed. The columD
marched with bands playing, through the gate, and over an artifi-
cial moat, spanned by five marble bridges, and across great courts,
till it reached the foot of the high marble terrace, which forms the
central and highest part of the Forbidden City. After the march
through the City the troops returned to quarters.

On the 30th August, to nullify the effects of the Russian
action at Ma-chia-pu, a British detachment occupied Feng-tai, the
next station to Ma-chia-pu, and the junction of the Lu-han and
Tientsin railways. The place had contained large railway work-
shops, all of which had been destroyed, along with a number
of locomotives. The Russians from Ma-chia-pu were busy level-
ling the line and collecting sleepers and rails from the adjacent
fields and villages, where they had been hidden, and the British
were soon employed on the same work between Teng-tai and the
next station, Huang-tsun.

On the 31st August the British occupied Kung-ch'i-ch'eng,
an important strategical point, where the main road from Peking
to the south crosses the Hun-ho by the massive stone bridge of
Lu-kou-ch'iao. Some 300 yards higher up, the river is spanned
by a fine iron girder bridge, over which runs the Lu-han rail-
way.

On the same day the Naval Brigade, and the Marines of the
Legation Guard, who had fought so well during the siege, left
Peking for Tung-chou, on their way to rejoin the fleet.

On the 1st September the 3rd Bombay Cavalry arrived at
Tientsin, and two days later the 34th Pioneers reached the same
place.

Everything was now quiet in the capital, and on the 3rd
September Prince Ch'ing arrived in Peking, and took up his
residence in the Japanese Quarter. He was supposed to be

492 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITION FROM INDIA.

accredited as a plenipotentiary from the Court, but had no
powers to treat with the allies.

On the 5th September " B " Battery, R. H. A., reached Tien-
tsin, and the detachment of mounted Bengal Sappers, attached
to the Cavalry Brigade, arrived on the following day.

There were still a good many Boxers and disbanded soldiers
scattered about the country, and skirmishes were of constant
occurrence between them and the patrols of the allies. On the
night of the 6th the enemy attacked the Russian railway camp
near Ma-chia-pu, and killed an officer and some men. In conse-
quence the Russians made a raid to the south, along the west wall
of the Nan-hai-tze, burnt some villages, and killed a number of
Chinese, including some Boxers.