

It was impossible to get any reliable information at this time
about the disposition of the Chinese forces, but it was generally
supposed that the Court and high officials had left Peking some

ADVANCE OE THE ALLIES FROM TIENTSIN, ETC. 485

time before, on receiving news of the advance of the relieving
columns. As a matter of fact the Emperor and Empress Dowager
were still in the Forbidden City, and did not leave till the morning
of the 15th August, but this was not known till some days later.
No doubt the defeat of the Chinese troops had been kept secret,
and their Majesties imagined themselves perfectly safe within
the massive walls of the capital, which, had they been defended
by resolute troops, might have set the small force of the allies at
defiance, unprovided as it was with heavy guns.

On the 15th the allies were busily engaged in clearing the
,-, .. ... city of Chinese troops, who still occupi-

Occupation of the city. J ...

ed many parts of it in considerable force.
The British cleared the houses near the legations and also a large
part of the Chinese city. The engineers blew a hole in the wall of
the Imperial City, to the north of the British legation, just west
of the sluice channel, and the south-east part of the Imperial City
was cleared and occupied by the Royal WelshTusiliers. This hole
was afterwards enlarged into a gateway to admit carts, and was
known as "The hole in the wall" ; and eventually General
Gaselee established his head- quarters in this part of the town.

The 42nd Regiment of Japanese Infantry advanced early in
the morning west from the Chih-ho men, and broke in the Tung-
an men, or eastern gate of the Imperial City, meeting with consider-
able opposition from a large body of Chinese troops. The 21st Regi-
ment had also succeeded in capturing the Ti-an men, or north gate of
the Imperial City, and had inflicted heavy loss on the Chinese. They
had further cleared the whole of the north-east part of the Tartar
City, and before evening had seized the An-ting men and Te-sheng
men, the two great gates in the north city wall. Their casualties
during the day were seventeen killed and eighty-eight wounded.

The Americans captured the great gates leading north from
the Ch'ien men to the Forbidden City. These had to be assaulted
in succession and, as they were stubbornly defended, the attacking
troops had several of their number killed and wounded.

The Russians cleared the south-cast part of the Tartar City.

The French had bivouacked on the canal for the night, and
did not enter Peking till the morning of the 15th, when they bom-
barded the Forbidden City from the wall near the sluicegate.

486 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

On the morning of the 16th, a conference of the general officers
was held, and preliminary dispositions were arranged for the occu-
pation of the city by the allied troops, and for the relief of
the Pei-t'ang Cathedral, which was still being besieged by the
Chinese.

On the morning of the 16th a column, under the command
of Major-General Frey, commanding the French troops, started to
relieve the Pei-t'ang. It was composed of the French troops,