

On the 8th September an expedition left Tientsin for Tu-liu,
on the Grand Canal, which was reported to be occupied by Boxers.
The town was entered without opposition, and, as the enemy
had retired from the neighbourhood, the place was burnt, and
the troops returned to Tientsin on the 14th September.

On the 11th September a German force of about 800 infantry
and 6 guns attacked the walled town of Liang-hsiang-hsien,
which stands on the main road to Pao-ting Fu, about eighteen
miles south-west of Peking. As they had no cavalry they were
accompanied by forty-four sowars of the 1st Bengal Lancers.
A Maxim gun, from the British detachment at Kang-ch'i-ch'eng,
also joined the force. The German Krupp guns were each drawn
by a team of six Chinese mules, and, as the road was very heavy
after the late rains, their progress was very slow. To the east
of Liang-hsiang-hsien, across the railway, is a prominent pagoda,
standing on a small, bare hill. As our cavalry approached
the town they found it occupied by large numbers of Boxers,
who rushed out to the attack, but, on the guns coming into action at
long range, they retired, and began to disperse rapidly in all direc-
tions through the high crops. The principal body marched out in
regular order by the southern road towards Pao-ting Fu, and got
away unharmed, but the cavalry killed about thirty armed Boxers
moving off towards the west. After much delay the Germans finally
blew in the east gate and entered the town, which they completely
burnt, killing many of the inhabitants. The force returned

PR00RE88 OF E7ENTB SUBSEQUENT TO THE OCCUPATION OF PEKING. 493

the same evening to Kung-ch'i-ch'eng, and the following day to
Peking.

On the 13th a detachment of British cavalry, with a force of
Japanese, occupied Huang-tsun, near the south-west corner of
the Nan-hai-tze, after driving out the Boxers, of whom about
thirty were killed- The Japanese then began the repair of the
railway, working north towards Feng-tai.

On the 14th September a serious explosion occurred at
Tung-chou, resulting in twenty-nine deaths among the British
troops, including Captain Hill of the Chinese Regiment. The men
were employed, at the time of the accident, in removing and des-
troying Chinese powder from the temple near the junk landing-
place, when from some cause, which has not been satisfactorily ex-
plained, a large quantity exploded.

On the 16th the Australian Naval Brigade arrived at Tien-
tsin, and on the same day a force, consisting of 800 British and
800 Americans, under command of Brigadier-General Wilson of
the United States Army, accompanied by Major-General Barrow,
the British Chief of the Staff, moved out by the paved road from
the western gate of the Chinese City to Kung-ch'i-ch'eng, where
it halted in the evening. It was intended that a converging attack
should be made at daybreak the following morning on the
temples of Pa-ta-ch'ti in the Western Hills, where a large body of
Boxers were reported to have their head- quarters. The British and
Americans were to operate from the south and west, the Japanese
from the north, and a party of Germans were to move out from
Peking and attack the position from the east. The British and
American column left Kung-ch'i-cheng at 1-30 a.m. on the 17th
September, and reached Pei-hsing-an about 5 a.m. From there
one body of troops moved by Mo-shih-k'ou on to the ridge west
of Pa-ta-ch'ii, while the remainder moved along the foot of the
hills. The Japanese were early in position to the north, but the
Germans arrived after the affair was over. The Boxers had no
warning of our approach, and were cooking their food when the
first shots were fired. They rapidly dispersed through the gap
left by the non-arrival of the Germans, losing a few of their number
in their flight. At the same time a party of British cavalry visited
San-chia-tien on the Hun-ho, and destroyed the arsenal there.