

After the dispersal of the Chinese forces in the neighbourhood

Punitive expedition to of Peking, by far the greater part of them re-

Pao-ting Ph. tjred to t j ie sou th-west, which was also the

direction from which any reinforcements of fresh troops might be
expected to arrive, and it was reported that a considerable force,
said to be under the command of Tung-fu Hsiang, had its head-
quarters at Pao-ting Fu, while every town and village south of the
HuQ-ho was occupied by bands of Boxers and Imperial soldiers.

PROGRESS OF EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO THE OCCUPATION OF PEKING. 499

It was evident that before anything more could be done with regard
to settling the country, all armed bodies within a wide radius of
Peking must be broken up and dispersed, and the first step to be
taken in this direction appeared to be the occupation of Pao-ting
Fu, the head-quarters of the Chinese forces. There were other reasons
why an early visit to this particular city appeared to be desirable.
It is the provincial capital of the Chih-li province, and there, under
the fostering care of its officials, the Boxer movement first declared
itself in open attacks upon foreigners. As early as the month of
May several British and American missionaries had been mur-
dered by the populace just outside the walls of the city, and it was
reported that three or four Europeans were still prisoners in the
hands of the officials.

On the 28th September, 1900, General Gaselee called upon the
Field-Marshal at Tientsin, and it was arranged that two columns
should move out from Peking' and Tientsin, with the object of
making a combined attack on Pao-ting Fu. At first it was intended
that this force should consist of British, German, and Italian troops
only.

The Americans, Japanese, and Russians did not wish to partici-
pate in the operations, and the French troops were not under
Count Waldersee's orders. The British were prepared to start
at once, but the German arrangements were as yet incomplete.
They were deficient of transport, and much of their clothing and
supplies Was still on board their ships. There seemed therefore
to be every prospect of a long delay, when the news got
about that the French were preparing to undertake a similar
expedition to the same place with their own troops. This
accelerated the German preparations, and it was arranged
between the Field-Marshal and General Voyron, commanding the
French forces, that the latter should combine with the two columns,
which Count Waldersec proposed to despatch from Peking and
Tientsin, in carrying out a general advance on Pao-ting Fu. It
was further arranged that the command of the Tientsin column
should be given to Major-General Bailloudof the French Army,
while the column from Peking would be under General Gaselee,
who would assume command of both columns on their junction
in the neighbourhood of Pao-ting Fu.

Vou VI 32 a

500 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Preparations now went rapidly forward, and the two columns
started from Peking and Tientsin respectively on the 12th Octo-
ber. The Peking column numbered about 3,500 men, and con-
sisted of : —