

On nearing the city the column was met by the Fen-tai, the
chief magistrate of Pao-ting Fu, and a number of other officials.
General Gaselee decided that the troops should remain outside for
the night, and that the formal entry should be made next day,
when the question of the occupation of the town and the portions
to be allotted to each contingent would be decided.

Accordingly, on the morning of the 20th October, the General
and his staff, accompanied by the other commanders with their
staff and mounted escorts, rode all through the city, which is divid-
ed into four quarters by main streets running north and south
and east and west. Immediately after visiting the town a con-
ference of the commanders was held, when it was decided that the
British should occupy and police the north-west quarter of the city,
the French should take charge of the south-west quarter, the Ger-
mans of the north-east quarter, and the Italians of the south-
east quarter.

502 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

The commanders of the other three nations decided to march
their troops into the city, and quarter them in the houses, but the
British contingent remained outside, encamped to the north of the
town. General Gaselee, however, removed his head- quarters into
the north-west section allotted to the British, and a strong force of
police, under an officer, also took up their quarters in this district,
while a strong British guard held the North Gate.

Cavalry reconnoitring parties were sent out into {he hills to
the west and north-west of Pao-ting Fu, where Boxers were report-
ed to be collected in considerable numbers, and these had one or two
small skirmishes with the enemy.

Immediately after the arrival of the columns at Pao-ting Fu,
grave suspicion fell upon the local officials of complicity with the
Boxers in the murders of the British and American Missionaries,
which had been committed at the outbreak of the recent troubles.
To enquire into these charges General Gaselee appointed an In-
ternational Commission, with General Bailloud as President.

Several officials were taken into custody on suspicion, and the
cases were all tried before the International Commission, with the
result that T'ing-yung, the Fen-tai ; Kuei-heng, the Tartar gov-
ernor, commanding the Manchu garrison ; and Wang-chan-kuei, a
colonel commanding 'the provincial troops, to whom the missionaries
had in vain applied for protection from the Boxers, were sen-
tenced to be beheaded. These sentences were duly carried out on
the 6th November, outside the south-east corner of the city wall,
at the spot where the missionaries had been murdered three
months before.

In addition to these executions, several Boxers implicated in
the murders of the missionaries were captured, tried, and shot;
and, as a punishment to the town itself, the city temple, dedicated
to the tutelary deities, and also the temple in which the Boxers
practised their rights, and in which the missionaries had been con-
fined while awaiting death, were blown up and totally destroyed by
fire. The south-east corner of the city wall, outside which the mis-
sionaries had been murdered, was also razed to the ground, and
a heavy fine was imposed on the town.