

British. — Three squadrons 16th Bengal Lancers, four guns 12th
battery, K. F. A., a half company of Madras Sappers and Miners,
and 600 native infantry from the 1st Sikhs, 24th Punjab Infantry.
and 26th Bombay Infantry; all under command of Major-General
Richardson.

French. — Two battalions of marine infantry.

German and Italian. — Six guns, two battalions of German infantry,
and one battalion of Italian infantry ; all under command of Colonel
von Normann.

The Tientsin column was numerically stronger, and con-
sisted of : — ' <

British. — " B " Battery, R. H. A., two squadrons 3rd Bombay Cav-
alry, and one troop 1st Bengal Lancers; one company Victoria
Naval Brigade, with two Maxims and one 12-pr. naval gun, six
companies 20th Punjab Infantry, four companies Hong-Kong Regi-
ment, two companies 1st Madras Pioneers, and half a company Bom-
bay Sappers and Miners ; all under command of Major-General
Lome Campbell.

French. — Two battalions of infantry, one squadron of cavalry, with
some guns and engineers.

German and Italian. — Four guns, one troop of cavalry, and two battalions
of German infantry. One Italian battery, three companies of
Bersagheri, and a pioneer detachment; all under command of Major
General von Kettler.

The Peking column marched by the direct road to Pao-ting
Fu, the various contingents taking it in turn each day to lead the
march. The Tientsin column marched by three roads, the
French and German-Italian detachments to the north of the
Pao-ting Fu river, and the British contingent following a road to
the south. The river was utilised for the transport of supplies.

No opposition was encountered, as the Chinese took care to keep
out of the way of the advancing columns. There are eight regular
stageB between Peking and Pao-ting Fu, but as the march had to be
accomplished in seven days, it entailed a slight alteration in the

PROGRESS OF EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO THE OCCUPATION OF PEKING. 601

halting-places. However, there was nowhere any difficulty od this
account, as the country passed through is a rich one. The ne-
cessary supplies were everywhere obtainable, and water was
fairly plentiful.

Pao-ting Fu was reached on the 19th October. Throughout
the march the British pitched their camp at each halting-place,
while the other troops were billeted in the villages and towns.

The column from Tientsin arrived within a day's march
of Pao-ting Fu on the 17th, and halted for a day. The British con-
tingent of this column was, however, delayed, as the route it had
followed to the south of the river proved much longer and
more difficult than was expected, and, in consequence, it did not
reach Pao-ting Fu till the 21st October.

A small French column of about 1,000 men had preceded
the main column from Tientsin, and had arrived at Pao-ting Fu
some days in advance of the rest of the allied force. They had
occupied all the gates of the city, but were said to have been ordered
by their General to remain outside, until the main columns arrived.
They had also seized the railway, which was in working order from
about six miles north of Pao-ting Fu as far south as Ting-chou,
and when the Peking column arrived they were already busy
repairing it.