

The punishment of Pao-ting Fu having been effected, General
Gaselee determined to withdraw his troops, as did the commander

PROGRESS OF EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO THE OCCUPATION OF PEKING. 503

of the Italian contingent, but the Germans and French decided to
retain garrisons at this point during the winter. The troops from
Peking were to return, on a broad front, by three roads, different
from that taken on the march south, and the British column from
Tientsin was also to return by a slightly different road from the
one it had used in its advance on Pao-ting Fu, with the object of
visiting certain Boxer villages.

The first column to start was a battalion of German infantry,
which would march via Yi-chou and the foot of the western hills
to Peking. With it were some of the 16th Bengal Lancers, the de-
tachment of mounted Sappeis, and three companies of Italian in-
fantry, all under command of Colonel von Normann. They left
Pao-ting Fu on the 23rd October, and, after visiting the Imperial
tombs at Yi-chou, moved west into the hills, and encountered
a considerable force of Chinese troops near the Great WalL
which they dispersed with heavy loss. They af cerwards continued
their march on Peking, which was reached without further
incident.

On the 27th October the British column for Tientsin started
and reached the latter place on the 6th November, having visited
and punished several Boxer, villages, collected a large number
of mules and cattle, and captured and destroyed a large amount of
arms and ammunition, and a quantity of gunpowder loaded
upon junks.

On the following day the British column took a road which
was well to the east of the main road, and which led through
Yung-ch'ing-hsien and Lang-fang. General Gaselee started the
same day direct for Peking, where he arrived on the 1st November.

The Italian Column, consisting of a battery of artillery and
three companies of Bersaglieri, together with a battalion of German
infantry and a few German cavalry, all under the comand of Colo-
nel Garioni, started on the 29th October, by a road passing
through Ku-an-hsien, and running at some distance to the east of
the direct road to Peking.

The British column, consisting of all the remainder of the

British troops, commanded by Major-

Yung-chinghsienviRited. General Richardson, reached Yung-ch'ing-

hsien on the 31st October, and here a halt was made for a day, to

504 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

enquire into the murder of two British missionaries, Messrs.
Norman and Robinson, in the beginning of June.

General Richardson imposed a fine of 40,000 taels on the town,
and, in addition, ordered the total destruction of the town temple,
and also of another temple, commonly used by the Boxers ; and of
the north gate of the town, near which Mr. Robinson had been
murdered. The villages of Wu-chia-ying, and Ta-cheh-hsiang,
where a chapel had been destroyed and several Chinese Chris-
tians murdered, were also completely burnt down.

Near Lang-fang certain Boxer villages were also burnt, before
the force continued its march to Peking, which was reached on
the 6th November, on which day the German column from Yi-
chou arrived at the capital, the Italian column having come
in the day before.