

With the return of the allied troops from Pao-ting Fu active
Termination of aotive military operations in North China practi-
operations. cally ceased. It had been conclusively

proved that there was no Chinese force in the field, which had the
least wish to oppose our troops, and the Boxer bands had all been
dispersed and scattered, and were being hunted down by the
Imperial soldiery. The Russian and Japanese Governments were
even withdrawing their troops from Chih-li, and were preparing
to reduce their garrisons, before the intense cold of winter set in.

The widespread upheaval in the north had naturally caused
Unrest in Central and g reat excitement throughout the empire,
South China. and the wildest reports as to the doings

of the Boxers, and their victories over the " foreign devils," were
everywhere in circulation. In view of the universal distrust and
hatred of foreigners throughout China, it was felt that the
disturbances would almost certainly spread to the Yang-tse valley,
and probably to Canton and the West River as well, the provinces
of Kuang-si and Kuang-tung in the south being notoriously
turbulent, and always ripe for rebellion. Hu-nan and Kuang-si
to the south of the Yang-tse are also notably anti-foreign
provinces, and might be expected to give trouble.

To protect British interests on the Yang-tse, H.M.S. Hermion
and Linnet were ordered, on the 15th June, to proceed to
Nanking and Hankow, respectively, and to convey to Liu K'un-yi

"?".

PEKING

14th, 15th, and 16th August 1900.

Scale 3 inches 2 miles.

I0OO *QOO 3<WO

*opo Yards

(*\ Te-shen j£,-m&n

H An- ting-men

]Tun^-chih-men

Haipien-mpn

Japanese ffenc/ez vo us
14** Auqust

)*••••••••<•• §•••!#•■ »••••••

Sion-mof

: gft Tun^-pien men

Sha-huo men

I. B. Topo. T>j No. 8,077.
1*4. C.J. A. Jaws 1909.

'Nan shi m&n

Chiang-tstu m&n

No. 4,878-1.. 3909.

PROGRESS OP EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO THE OCCUPATION OF PEKlNO. 505

and Chang Chih-tung, the Viceroys at these places, assurances of
the assistance of the British Government in maintaining peace
in their jurisdictions.

On the 24th June the British consuls at Canton, Chung-king,
and Ningpo all applied for gunboats, to protect British life and
property at those treaty ports, but as no vessels were then available
they were informed that gunboats could not be sent, but that in
case of danger all Europeans must withdraw for safety to Hong-
Kong or Shanghai. These places were never seriously threatened.

> >>

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

EVENTS FROM 1901 TO THE CONCLUSION OF THE CAMPAIGN.

On the 1st

January, 1901, the

strength of the combatants,

troops of the allied forces in Chih-li was approximately as fol-

lows : —

In and around

Peking.

British

. . Cavalry

. 4 squadrons.

Artillery .

. 6 guns.

Infantry .

. 4 battalions and 2 companies.

Engineers .

. 1 company and details.

French

. .

. . Artillery .

. 24 guns.

Infantry

. 5 battalions.

Germans

. . Cavalry

. 2 squadrons.

Artillery .

. 3 guns.

Infantry

. 6 battalions and 3 companies.