

Admiral Seymour suggested that British troops should be land-
ed to carry out the occupation. These troops could be conveniently
drawn from the 3rd Brigade, which was quartered at Wei-hai-wei,
and, on the arrival of General Gaselee from Peking on the 28th,
he was directed by the Field-Marshal to make such arrangements
as he considered suitable for the despatch of troops to Shan-hai-
kuan.

He immediately ordered Major-General Reid to proceed from

Wei-hai-wei, with the 4th Punjab Infantry and 6th Bengal Infantry,

and to occupy Shan-hai-kuan. The 34th Pioneers from Tientsin,

the Jodhpur Lancers from Shanghai and Hong-Kong, and the Maler

Kotla Sappers from Hong-Kong were also ordered to the same place,

while the 4th Brigade at Hong-Kong was ordered up to Tientsin.

On the evening of the 29th September H.M.S. " Pigmy," with

Sir Walter Hillier and Lieutenant-Colonel Powell on board, left

Taku, and arrived off Shan-hai-kuan the following morning under a

flag of truce. The Chinese were summoned to hand over the forts

to the allies, and this they at once agreed to do. Sir Walter Hillier

and Lieutenant-Colonel Powell then landed a guard of eighteen

bluejackets and marines, under Lieutenant Briggs, R.N., and the

Pigmy returned to Taku to report. The guard took up its quarter

Vol. VI 33

498 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

in the railway station, and found that the line was in good order,
and the trains were running daily towards both Tong-shan and
Chin-chou.

On the morning of the 1st October the British flag was hoisted
on all the forts, and on the powder magazine, and guards were
placed where possible. The Union Jack was also hoisted at Ching-
wang-tao. The same evening a force of Russians landed at Shan-
hai-kuan from Taku, and the following morning the rest of the allies
arrived. Later in the day a large force of Russians arrived from
Tong-shan by train, and attempted to seize the railway station,
but this was not allowed. They, however, laid claim to the
whole line, and to the entire management of it.

On the 2nd the French landed at Ching- wang-tao, and marched
on Tang-ho railway station, which they found occupied by
Russian troops, but, mistaking them for Boxers, opened fire. The
fire was returned, with the result that the French had one officer
and two men killed and eight wounded, the Russians losing two
men killed and three wounded.

Owing to a breakdown in telegraphic communication with Wei-
hai-wei, the bulk of the British infantry did not reach Shan-hai-
kuan till the evening of the 2nd October.

The Field Marshal now issued orders that the fortifica-
tions and railway station were to be occupied by the allies in
common.

By an army order of the 19th October the German, Austrian,
Italian, and Japanese troops in the neighbourhood of Shan-hai-
kuan, were placed under the orders of Major-General Reid.
This tended to bring about a better state of affairs, as much law-
lessness had previously prevailed among the troops, and the
surrounding country was being pillaged by Chinese banditti.