

494 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

A party of Americans had also been out on an expedition to
the north-east, from which they returned on the 21st September.
They found the country quite quiet, and the people busy with
the harvest.

On the 18th September the 20th Punjab Infantry reached Sin-
Arrival of 3rd infantry ho, and on the 20th and two following days
Brigade. ^ rema i n( j er f the 3rd Infantry Brigade

reached Wei-hai-wei. This brigade had sailed from Calcutta between
the 13th and 24th August, and had arrived at Hong-Kong in the
first days of September, where they were detained till the 15th.

On the 20th September the Pei-t'ang forts to the north of

Tang-ku were captured, and occupied

Capture of Pei-fang forts, by a combined f orce of Russians, Germans,

and French.
The Russians, after the capture of the forts, pushed along
the railway to Lu-tai in the direction of Tong-shan.

On the 23rd September Major-General Richardson and the
staff of the Cavalry Brigade arrived at Peking with the 16th Bengal
Lancers.

On the 25th General Gaselee proceeded on a visit to Tien-
tsin. On the same day His Excellency Field Marshal Count
von Waldersee arrived at Taku, and reached Tientsin on the 27th,
where he was received by guards of honour of all nations.

Meanwhile arrangements were actively proceeding in Peking
and elsewhere for the housing and maintenance of the British
troops remaining in garrison in North China for the winter.

In view of the large forces which the other Powers proposed
r«_ • xt L ™_. to retain in North China, Her Majesty's

Troops in North China. . ' J .

Government decided on the following
distribution of the British contingent : —

In Chih-li. — 1st and 4th Infantry Brigades, Cavalry Brigade,

including the Horse Artillery Battery, 12th Field Battery,

three companies of Sappers, Jodhpur Lancers, Maler Kotla

Sappers, etc.

At Wei-hai-wei. — 3rd Infantry Brigade, Hong-Kong Regiment,

and heavy guns.
At Shanghai. — 2nd Infantry Brigade.

PROGRESS Or EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO THE OCCUPATION OF PEKING. 495

This was practically the actual distribution during the winter,
except that some troops, including the 1st Bengal Lancers, and
one company of Madras Sappers, were sent to Hong-Kong and
Shanghai, and the 3rd Infantry Brigade wintered at Shan-hai-
kuan, while the Hong-Kong Regiment were at Tientsin instead
of at Wei-hai-wei, which was garrisoned by the 28th Madras
Infantry and the 1st Madras Pioneers.

The approximate strength of the allies' contingents which
were present in China at the time of Field-Marshal Count von
Waldersee's arrival at Taku, at the end of September, was as
follows : —

America.
4 battalions of Infantry.
1^ regiments of Cavalry.
1 Field Artillery battery (6 guns).
1 company of Engineers.

British.

\ battalion of British Infantry.

\ battalion of Australian Naval Brigade.
18 battalions of Native Infantry from India.
16 squadrons of Native Cavalry from India.

1 Horse Artillery battery -\

1 Field Artillery battery M4 field guns.