

2 Naval ]2-pr. guns J
4 1-pr. Maxim-Nordenfclts.

21 Maxim guns.
12 siege guns.
4 companies of Sappers.

French.
11 battalions of Infantry.
2 squadrons of Cavalry.

6 batteries of Artillery.

2 companies of Engineers.

Oerman.
10 battalions of Infantry.

3 squadrons of Cavalry.

7 batteries of Artillery (40 guns).
3} companies technical troop

496 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

Italian.

2 battalions of Infantry.
4 Gardner guns.

Japanese.
13 battalions of Infantry.

3 squadrons of Cavalry.

9 batteries of Artillery (54 guns).
1 heavy battery (4 guns).
3 companies Pioneers.
J Railway battalion.

Russian.
8 battalions of Infantry.
3 squadrons of Cavalry.

3 batteries of Artillery (22 gunB).

4 technical companies.

Colonel J. M. Grierson, M.v.o., r.f.a., and Brevet-Lieutenant-
Colonel C. H. Powell, Indian Staff Corps, were appointed British
military representatives on the staff of the Field -Marshal. The
French avoided appointing any officer, and the American army
was also unrepresented ; and it soon became apparent that the
Russian officers considered their position ambiguous, as they
asserted that the Field-Marshal was not now in command of the
Russian troops at all, since that arrangement had only been made
with the object of conducting operations for the relief of the
legations in Peking, and, as that had already been accomplished,
the appointment no longer held good.

The instructions sent to General Gaselee by the Secretary of
State for India, regarding the appointment of Count Waldersee
as Commander-in-Chief in North China, wore as follows: — " Field-
Marshal Count von Waldersee, of the German Army, will shortly
proceed to North China to assume ' supreme direction ' of the
military operations to be conducted in the Province of Chih-li.
You will, as General Commanding the Forces of a loyal ally*
afford him every support in carrying out the operations that he
may decide upon. You will foster, by every means in your
power, the most friendly relations and feelings of true comrade-
ship between all ranks under your command, and the soldiers of

PROGRESS OF EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO THE OCCUPATION OF PEKING. 497

all the foreign contingents employed in North China. The com-
mand of the troops supplied by us will, however, rest always
with you, and the superior officers will be under your orders
(although their special sphere of action, or the part they are to
take in any particular operation, will be decided by Field-Marshal
Count von Waldersee), and all orders to the force under your com-
mand should be given through you or your Brigadiers. You will
have complete control over your own equipment, transport, com-
missariat, and medical arrangements ; and, whilst helping the troops
of the allies, when you can afford to do so, without detriment to
the interests 7 of your own troops, you must remember that the estab-
lishments sent with your force are only calculated to supply its
wants."

Immediately on his arrival at Taku the Field-Marshal requested
Admiral Seymour to concert measures with Admiral Bendemann
for the occupation of Shan-hai-kuan for the use of the allied con-
tingents.