

• Lieutenant Stirling, ^ho was awarded the P. S. O. for his gallantry on this occa-
*ion, was killed in an action with raiders near Bi-nnu in March 1910.

512 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

six men were wounded, and th^ column had to retreat on Fu-ning.
Reinforcements, consisting of the rest of the 4th Punjab Infantry,
under Colonel Radford, 100 men of the 6th Jats, a squadron of the
Jodhpur Lancers, and a detachment of 200 Japanese, were at once
despatched from Shan-hai-kuan. This force, which was subse-
quently joined by a company of French Zouaves, advanced on
Tai-tou-ying on the 22nd, and captured it after some resistance,
inflicting severe loss on the Chinese, who were driven beyond the
Great Wall.

The question of the reduction of the whole allied force in North
The reduction of the China was now assuming definite shape,
allied forces. Qn the 2nd May orders were issued for the

return to India of No. 3 Company, Southern Division, Royal
Garrison Artillery, the 1st Bengal Lancers, 1st Madras Pioneers,
28th Madras Infantry, and No. 3 Company, Madras Sappers and
Miners. At the same time No. 15 Company, Western Division,
Royal Garrison Artillery, and the 4th Balloon Section, Royal En-
gineers, were warned to be in readiness to embark for England.

On the 20th May General Gaselee received sanction from the
British Government for the further reduction of the British force
inChih-li, by the return to India of the 1st Infantry Brigade, "B "
Battery, Royal Horse Artillery, and the Jodhpur Lancers. These
reductions were to be carried out pari passu with those of other
contingents.

On the 25th May General Gaselee was directed to take
measures at once to reduce the British forces in China to the
strength proposed for the transition period, and to forward
suggestions for the reduction of the garrisons of Hong-Kong and
Shanghai.

General Gaselee then suggested the following as the British
, * T . ™ . garrison to be left in North China during

Garrison of North China. ° 4

the ensuing winter :—

Legation Guard — Peking.

2 companies, Royal Welsh Fusiliers.

Detachment No. 2 company, Southern Division, R.G.A.

2 Naval 12-pr. Q. F. guns.

2 siege trains, 6-inch howitzers from Hong-Kong, and maxims.

EVENTS FROM 1901 TO THE CONCLUSION OF THE CAMPAIGN. 513

Tientsin to Shan-hai-kuan.

3 sections of pompoms.

2 companies, Royal Welsh Fusiliers.

14th Sikhs.

1st Battalion, 4th Gurkha Rifles.

31st Madras Infantry.

Hong-Kong Regiment.

Half a British Field Hospital.

2 Native Field Hospitals.

Shanghai.
Detachment of pompoms.

2nd Bengal Infantry. »

30th Bombay Infantry.

1 section of a British Field Hospital.

2 sections of a Native Field Hospital.

The whole force to be commanded by Major-General Creagh,
v.c, with his head-quarters at Tientsin, and a full staff.

On the 1st June the Field- Marshal announced that he had
received orders from the German Emperor for the breaking up
of the Army Headquarters, and their return to Europe. In con-
sequence, Count Waldersee, with most of his staff, left Peking on
the morning of the 3rd June.