

A recrudescence of the Boxer movement, which took place
Eecrudescencc of Boxer towards the end of May, in the districts
movement. lying to the south of Pao -ting Eu and east

of Cheng-ting Eu, was easily suppressed. A Erench column con-
sisting of about 1,500 Erench troops, under General Bailloud, moved
out from Pao-ting Eu, and, in conjunction with a force of Chinese
regulars under General Lu, attacked the Boxers and completely
dispersed them. At the same time German columns, in the*hills to
the west of Pao-ting Eu, encountered several bands of Boxers, pro-
bably fugitives from the fights with the Erench troops. These the
Germany scattered, inflicting heavy loss. Quiet having thus been
completely restored, the outlay detachments of French and
German troops were gradually withdrawn to Pao-ting Eu and
Peking.

Everything was now quiet in Chih-li except for the presence
of large bands of armed banditti in the mountains to the north-
west of Shan-hai-kuan, who threatened to give trouble by invading

Von. VI. 88

514 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA

the villages on the plains, but the Chinese Government was doing
its best to make headway against these brigands with Imperial
troops, and, meanwhile, the withdrawal of the allied contingents
from North China was proceeding rapidly.

As the China Expeditionary Force might now be considered
to have broken up, General Gaselee handed over command of the
British troops in North China to Major- General Creagh, v. a, on the
21s't July, and two days later left Chih-li for England.

At the end of July the attitude of Li Hung-chang became ao
obstructive and insolent, that the British Minister requested
Gtafceral Creagh to occupy the Summer Palace, with a view to
bringing pressure to bear on Li, and the 12th Battery, Royal
Field Artillery, and two companies of the 7th Bengal Infantry
wer» accordingly quartered there for a short time.

At this time the Home Government suggested that the garrison
of Shanghai might be further reduced to one battalion of infantry.
The 2nd Bengal Infantry Regiment was accordingly sent to Hong-
Kong from Shanghai in the beginning of September.

Towards. the end of August the British Minister reported that he
Strength of troops remain- considered that the British troops in Cbih-
ing in Chih-li. \{ were too few for the work they had to

perform. At, this time the strength of the other foreign contin-
gents remaining in Chih-li were estimated as follows : —

Qermans
•• French
Russians
Italians
Americans
Japanese

3,690
. . 3,860
1,900
1,170
300
3. 060

Total .. 14,580

Against these the strength of the British force would be about
3,450 men, when the reduction was completed, but, from having
to guard the long line of railway, very few troops were available
for other duties, and the British garrisons at Tientsin and Shan-
hai-kuan were unduly weak, especially in view of possible trouble
with armed robbers in the neighbourhood of Shan-hai-kuan, and
of the report that the Russians intended to have a considerably