

The West Arsenal at Tientsin, which, is of no military im-
portance, was not to be razed ; and the high mud wall, which lies
in the Russian concession, was to be placed at the disposal of the
Russian authorities.

The strength of the garrison to be permanently left in Chih-li,
for guarding the line of communication between Peking and the
sea, was fixed as follows, exclusive of the guards of the legations
in Peking: —

Tientsin to be held by 2,000 men, with a further force of 1,500
men at Shan-hai-kuan and Ching-wang-tao, while the following
nine posts along the railway were to be occupied by garrisons of
about 250 or 300 men each: — Huang-tsun, Lang-fang, Yang-tsun
Chun-liang-ch'eng, Tang-ku, Lu-tai, Tong-shan, Lan-chou, and
Ch'ang-U ; making a total of about 6,000 men.

It was further decided that these posts should be held as fol-
lows : — The Italians should furnish the guard at Huang-tsun, the Ger-
mans those at Lang-fang and Yang-tsun; the French those at
Chiin-liang-ch'eng and Tang'ku, the British those at Lu-tai and
Tong-shan, and the Japanese those at Lan-chou and Ch'ang-li, while,
as long as the railway remained under British military administra-
tion, that nation should maintain a small guard at each station for
police purposes, and no other nation should interfere with the rail-
way stations or their policing. All five nations were to furnish
approximately equal proportions of the garrisons at Tientsin and

EVENTS FROM 1901 TO TEE CONCLUSION OF THE CAMPAIGN. 511

Shan-hai-kuan ; and, for the present, until the Chinese Government
was fully re-established in power, an additional force of 4,000 men
would be maintained at Tientsin, to be furnished in equal propor-
tions by France, Germany, Great Britain, and Japan, with a
smaller contingent of Italians.

The appointment of a Commander-in-Chief for the whole of
the international guards was suggested, but considered impracticable.

The strength of the Legation guards was fixed at about 2,000
men, made up as follows : —

America . . . . . . . . . . 150 men.

Germany . .

France

Great Britain

Japan

Italy

Austria-Hungary

Russia

300
300
250
300
200
200
300

4th Infantry Brigade
broken up.

On the 11th April orders were issued for the 4th Brigade of the
British Contingent, China Expeditionary
Force, to be broken up. The brigade staff
and Ulwar and Bikanir regiments were to return to India as soon
as transports could be provided, and the 28th and 31st Madras
Infantry were to be transferred to the lines of communication. The
1st Bengal Lancers at Hong-Kong, the 14th Sikhs and four sec-
tions of "pompoms," at Shanghai, were ordered up to Tientsin.
On the following day orders were issued for the move of No. 3
Company, Madras Sappers and Miners, from Shanghai, and a wing
of the 1st Madras Pioneers from Tientsin for duty at Wei-hai-wei.
On the 20th April a party of the 4th Punjab Infantry, under
Skirmish with ciiincso Major Browning, when reconnoitring to the
brigands near Tai-ton-ying. north of Fu-ning-hsien came in contact with
a force of Chinese brigands near the town of Tai-tou-ying. The
enemy was strongly posted, under cover, in a village near the
town, and Major Browning determined to attempt to dislodge
them, This, however, he failed to do, and in the fighting that
ensued he and one sepoy were killed, Lieutenant Stirling* and