

This clearly pointed to the possibility of an expedition being
sent into the Shan-si province, and as such it was undoubtedly
regarded by the Chinese plenipotentiaries, who immediately wired
to the Court at Hsi-an Fu, urging the acceptance of the demands
of the foreign ministers, with regard to the punishments of the
high officials implicated in the Boxer troubles and in the attacks
upon the legati ons in Peking. The result was a reply from the Court,
accepting the terms in full, and the publication of a satisfactory

EVENTS FROM 1901 TO THE CONCLUSION OF THE CAMPAIGN. 509

edict, specifying the penalties to be inflicted on the persons
whose names were included in the list presented by the foreign
plenipotentiaries. In consequence of this action on the part of the
Chinese, the expedition was postponed, and eventually abandoned.
The railway was now working well, and trains were running
punctually.

Towards the end of March the Field-Marshal suggested that
the negotiations for peace should be pushed forward with all
speed, to allow of the reduction of the allied forces in Chih-li. He
pointed out that troops with nothing to do were apt to cause trouble,
that the hot weather with its attendant ill-health was approaching,
and that the monsoon season would add to the difficulties of trans-
porting troops by sea.

The approximate strength of troops in the various allied con-
Strength of Allies on 1st tingents on the 1st April 1901 was as fol-
April. i ows ._

Germans

. .

. . 21,295

British

. • . .

.. 18,181

French

. .

. . 15,670

Japanese

. .

6,408

Russians

2,900

Italia ns . .

. .

2,155

Americans

. .

1,750

Austrians . .

. • • •■■
Total

300

. . 68,659

At a conference of general officers, held at Peking on the 6th

Conference of general April, the Field-Marshal's proposition was
officers. accepted, that the following fortifications,

which by their nature and position might interfere with free com-
munication between Peking and the sea, should be razed : —

1. The Military Camp at south exit from Yang-tsnn, if not required
for the accommodation of the garrison to be left there.

2. The Military Magazine of Hsi-ku.

3. The Yellow Fort.

4. The Black Fort (citadel).

5. The East Arsenal.

6. The two camps at Chii-liang-ch'eng.

)

)

Tientsin.

510 FRONTIER AND OVERSEAS EXPEDITIONS FROM INDIA.

7. The four camps at Sin-ho.

8 All the fortifiactions at Taku, viz., on the right bank of the Pei-ho,
the coast battery with the camp attached to it, and the South Fort of Taku
with its camp ; and on the left bank, the North-West and North Forts.

9. All the fortifications at Pei-t'ang, viz., the South Fort, the Central
and North Forts, the two earthworks to the north of these, and the camps
between the line of forts and the railway. '

10. All the camps at Lu-tai, within a distance of 2,000 metres from
the railway . embankment.

11. The camps between Tang-ho and Shan-hai-kuan within a distance
of 2,000 metres of the railway.

12. All the forts at Shan-hai-kuan, except those required for the ac-
commodation of the international garrison to be left at Shan-hai-kuan, which
might be temporarily retained.