                           Acknowledgements

I thank the European University Institute, the British Academy, and the John
Simon Guggenheim Foundation for fellowships that have enabled me to research
this book in Italy and France, and would like to acknowledge the support pro-
vided by the Emiliana Pasca Noether Chair in Modern Italian History at the
University of Connecticut. Sabbatical leave gave me the opportunity to start writ-
ing the book, and a generous invitation from Professor Lester Little to spend time
at the American Academy in Rome as a Resident provided an unforgettably con-
genial and stimulating environment in which to do so.
   It is a pleasure to record my thanks to the countless archivists and librarians
who have offered guidance and assistance; in particular, the directors and staff of
the Archivio di Stato in Naples, the Archivio di Stato in Foggia, the Archives
Nationales in Paris, the Archives de Guerre at Vincennes, and the Public Record
Ofﬁce in London. My thanks also to Prince Murat and his family for permission to
consult and quote from the papers of Joachim and Caroline Murat. In Naples, as
well as the librarians and staff at the Biblioteca Nazionale Vittorio Emmanuele II,
I am especially grateful to the staff of the city’s wonderful Biblioteca di Storia Patria
and to its present and former directors, Professor Renata de Lorenzo and Professor
Giuseppe Galasso. My thanks also to the staff of the Istituto per la Storia del
Risorgimento in Rome, and its director, Professor Giuseppe Talamo; to Christina
Huemer, the Librarian at the AAR; to the staff and directors of the Biblioteca
Nazionale and the Biblioteca di Storia Moderna e Contemporanea in Rome, of the
Biblioteca Civica in Cosenza, and of the British Library; and to Peter Allison and
his colleagues at the University of Connecticut’s Homer Babbidge Library.
   Naples has been an extraordinarily welcoming and rewarding city in which to
work. The Istituto Italiano per gli Studi Filosoﬁci, its director, Avvocato Gerardo
Marotta, and its administrator, Professor Antonio Gargano, have for many years
provided me with opportunities to teach and discuss my work with Italian students
and scholars, for which I am very grateful. I also thank Angela Catello, Gabriella
Corona, Ermelinda De Rosa and her family, Cesare and Tullia de Seta, Gennaro
and Cristina Incarnato, Paolo Macry, Giovanni and Linda Muto, Walter Palmieri,
Anna Maria Rao, Maria Gabriella Rienzo, and Giulia Rispoli and her family for
their friendship and generous hospitality over many years. It is a great sadness that I
did not ﬁnish the book in time to share it with Luigi de Rosa and Filippo Mazzonis,
two generous scholars and close friends whose presence I greatly miss.
   On this side of the Atlantic, my thanks to the East Coast italianisti—Ruth Ben
Ghiat, Mary Gibson, Stephen Hughes, Alice Kelikian, David Kertzer, Silvana
Patriarca, Marta Petrusewicz, Jane and Peter Schneider, and Nadia Urbinati—and
to the members of the Columbia Italian History seminar whose comments on
