                                              Introduction                                                 5

Italy’s liberal Risorgimento, the ‘passive revolution’ and the backwardness the
South thereafter acquired a central place in the master narratives of the new Italy.¹⁰
   The South soon found a similar place in the annals of Napoleonic Europe. The
numerous studies published shortly after the turn of the new century to mark the
centenary celebrations of France’s ﬁrst empire included a closely documented
study of Joseph Bonaparte’s reforms in Naples by the distinguished French
archivist Jacques Rambaud. In keeping with the spirit of the time, Rambaud por-
trayed Napoleon as a stern but wise schoolmaster who had brought the lessons of
modernity to a continent still locked in the black night of the ancien régime. In
this perspective, the Neapolitans inevitably ﬁgured as inattentive pupils who had
been unwilling to learn from the models set by the Grande Nation, and Rambaud
sadly concluded that there was no clearer warning of the fate that awaited those
who failed to heed the empire’s civilizing mission than the sad state of southern
Italy a century after the French had departed.¹¹
   In the meantime, as the rapid industrialization of many parts of northern Italy
further accentuated the relative backwardness of the South, Croce’s optimistic
claim that the new Italy would solve the problems of the South was coming under
increasingly critical scrutiny. For socialists, in particular, the backwardness of the
South revealed not only the limits of national unity but was also the principal
obstacle to the progress of democracy in Italy.¹² Once the crisis that followed the
First World War had swept away Italy’s fragile constitutional monarchy and led to
the establishment of the Fascist dictatorship, those arguments were taken up and
developed by one of Mussolini’s most eminent victims, the communist leader
Antonio Gramsci.
   Gramsci devoted his long and painful conﬁnement in Fascist jails to reworking
Croce’s liberal master narrative of the Risorgimento in Marxist terms, and in what
would later be known as the Prison Notebooks the struggles for Italian Uniﬁcation
were portrayed instead as the victory of a narrow and deeply conservative ruling
class that never fully acquired the qualities of a modern capitalist bourgeoisie.
Following the lead given by earlier socialist observers like Gaetano Salvemini,
Gramsci argued that the backwardness of the South was the rock on which the
democratic aspirations of the Risorgimento had foundered.
   At this point Gramsci also invoked Vincenzo Cuoco’s ‘passive revolution’,
although unlike Croce he acknowledged that the abolition of feudalism at the
beginning of the nineteenth century had brought important changes in the South,
most notably the wholesale expropriation of the southern peasantry who lost the

   ¹⁰ See Davis (1999), 350–7.
   ¹¹ ‘Educateurs sévères et peu modérés sur le prix de leurs lecons, les Français n’ont pas trouvé
l’affection de leurs élèves: c’est le sort des “professeurs d’energie”. Cependant les Français étaient la
nation la plus capable de sympathies pour Naples . . . On peut déplorer pour le pays lui-meme qu’il
n’ait pas consenti à se plier avantage à la forte et nécessaire discipline, qui peuvent peut-être faire de
l’Etat de la péninsule le plus vaste et le plus peuplé, le promoteur de la fédération, sinon de l’unité ital-
ienne’: Rambaud (1911), 555–6.                                    ¹² Villari (1961/70), Part II, 181–490.
