4                                   Introduction

and corruption of southern society than the fate of the short-lived Neapolitan
Republic of 1799.
   The Republic had been established following the defeat of the royal army in the
winter of 1798, and after the king of Naples had unwisely yielded to pressure from
his British allies to attack the small French garrison that had occupied Rome and
set up a Republic there earlier in the year. The defeat of the Bourbon army and the
ﬂight of the king and his courtiers to Sicily on Nelson’s men-o’-war, led to a
French invasion and the declaration of a Republic in Naples in January 1799. The
Neapolitan Republic had a very short life and like its sister republics elsewhere in
Italy was left defenceless once the French Directory decided to withdraw its troops
from the Italian peninsula in April. But when the Republic fell in June, the imme-
diate agents of its destruction were Admiral Lord Nelson’s warships and the
counter-revolutionary masses that rallied enthusiastically to the banners of the
Holy Faith—the Santafede—raised by Cardinal Fabrizio Ruffo.
   Writing a century after the event, Croce transformed the rise and fall of the
Neapolitan Republic of 1799 into one of the founding myths of the new Italian
state. The young visionaries who had supported the Republic were portrayed as
the ﬁrst martyrs of the new Italy, although Croce also argued that their lives had
been sacriﬁced in a noble but hopeless cause. Although they had allowed them-
selves to be inﬂuenced too heavily by foreign political models, the cultural back-
wardness of the South meant that their lofty ideals could never have been realized.
In any case the true voices of the South in 1799 were not theirs, but those of the
ignorant and brutish masses who ﬂocked to the banners of the Santafede, urged on
by a fanatical clergy and a corrupt ruling class.
   For Croce, the triumph of the counter-revolution in 1799 revealed why in the
South the innovative and creative forces of the revolutionary era were destined to
lead only to forms of ‘passive revolution’. When another French army invaded the
South in 1806 to place Joseph Bonaparte on the throne of Naples, the outcome
would inevitably be the same. As a good Italian nationalist, Croce again refused to
accept that reforms introduced by a foreign force of occupation could have any
constructive force. In any case it was already too late; everything creative in the
South had already been destroyed in the tragedy of the Republic. The reforms
introduced by the French were bound to fail. They were based on alien models
imposed from above and took little account of Neapolitan customs and culture.
Above all they evoked no creative responses in a society that was irretrievably
corrupted and incapable of achieving its own redemption.⁹
   By demonstrating that the regeneration of the pre-Uniﬁcation South could not
come from within, but only through the emancipating force of the liberal values
and institutions of which the new Italy was the bearer, Croce brilliantly reconciled
the backwardness of the South with the creative spirit of the Risorgimento.
Once stamped with the authoritative imprimatur of the leading champion of

                  ⁹ Croce (1897), pp. vi–x; idem (1924/1967), 197–212.
