6                                          Introduction

customary rights they formerly exercised on the feudal estates and the common
lands of the rural communities. However, Gramsci insisted that the French reforms
had failed to create a new capitalist landowning class, leading instead to a ‘passive
revolution’ that both anticipated and determined Italy’s later ‘missing bourgeois
revolution’. Just as the backward and reactionary South had blocked the demo-
cratic forces of the Risorgimento, once Uniﬁcation had been achieved the backward
South and its reactionary landowners remained the principal obstacles to the polit-
ical development of the new Italian state.¹³
   When Gramsci’s prison writings were published posthumously after the fall of
Mussolini’s regime they ensured that the South would hold a central place in the
debates on the historical roots of Fascism that followed. But the South was already
at the centre of Italy’s new political agendas. The southern regions had borne the
brunt of the interwar Depression and the Fascist regime’s economic and colonial
policies, and following the invasion of Sicily in 1943 had for two years been sub-
ject to military operations and Allied occupation. The damage to the economy
and the sufferings of the civilian population were as terrible as anywhere in
Europe, and lay behind the social unrest and political protests that continued well
after the end of the Second World War.
   Among the political parties that founded Italy’s new democratic Republic in
1947 there was broad agreement that the need to ﬁnd a solution to the ‘Southern
Problem’ was one of the most pressing challenges for Italy’s reborn democracy.¹⁴
However, those concerns were also shared outside Italy, and as fears grew that the
discontents of the southern population might give rise to communist inﬁltration
the South ceased to be simply an Italian problem, and the Italian Mezzogiorno
was to be the theatre for the biggest internationally funded rural development
programme in post-Second World War Europe. Economists, anthropologists, and
sociologists came from all over the world, but mainly from the United States, to
test the latest development theories and turn the South into the foremost site of
pre-modernity in contemporary Europe.¹⁵
   Meanwhile, the South was acquiring notoriety through other channels, ﬁrst lit-
erature and then cinema. The South was the leading protagonist in both of Italy’s
post-war international best-selling novels—Carlo Levi’s Christ Stopped at Eboli
and Tomasi di Lampedusa’s The Leopard. In both the South was portrayed as a
world that had somehow remained outside history and resisted the encroaching
forces of modernity. Through cinema and television those images reached even
wider international audiences and turned the South into a universally recogniz-
able metaphor of pre-modernity.¹⁶

   ¹³ See especially ‘Alcuni temi della quistione meridionale’ (ed. De Felice and Parlato, 1966),
121–60, but also Fubini (ed.) (1959) and Hoare and Nowell Smith (1971).
   ¹⁴ Allum (1973), Tarrow (1973).           ¹⁵ D’Antone (ed.) (1996).
   ¹⁶ While there are now a number of studies on earlier stereotyping of the South (e.g. Dickie, 1999;
Moe, 2003), much less has been written about contemporary perceptions of the South. For the South
in contemporary Italian literature, however, see Dombroski in Schneider (ed.) (1998) 261–76.
