10                                  Introduction

of southern liberals. But the carefully contrived retrospective reconstructions of
the fate of the Neapolitan Republic deliberately failed to acknowledge that in
1799 Italy as a whole was the theatre for a second Vendée, or that the Neapolitan
Republic was in all essential respects remarkably similar to its sister republics in
the rest of Italy.
   The exceptionality of the South has been heavily overstated, but what is missing
most crucially from the imagery of the ‘passive revolution’ are the quite exceptional
forms of political mobilization taking place in many different parts of the South by
the end of the eighteenth century. These found expression in the political battles
that followed the founding of the Republic, but they can also be traced to the
earlier campaigns against feudalism. There were many reasons for this, not least
being the monarchy’s efforts to recruit the local communities to its campaign
against feudal privilege. The actions of the royal courts, together with the presence
of the masonic lodges that with government support spread to the most remote
provincial centres in the closing decade, all contributed to generate forms of polit-
ical mobilization that had no parallels elsewhere in Italy.
   As a result, local conﬂicts in the South were drawn into broader political and
juridical struggles whose vocabularies they assimilated. This would be evident in
the struggles that followed the founding of the Republic in 1799, and again dur-
ing the short period of French rule. As in the rest of Italy, French rule in the South
met with ﬁerce opposition as well as active support and collaboration. Like the
other Italian states, the South paid heavy sacriﬁces to the imperial cause in terms
not only of lives and tributes, but also of persistent danger and disorder. The
Kingdom was permanently at risk of attack and invasion, while the escalation
of brigandage was a direct consequence not only of conscription and economic
hardship but also of the massive volume of contraband goods that ﬂooded into
southern Italy as a direct result of the emperor’s Continental blockade.
   Murat’s own insecurity in the imperial enterprise and the Kingdom’s vulnerable
position on the frontier of empire created important political opportunities that
the southern elites did not let pass, and in particular gave rise to demands for con-
stitutional government that found wide support in southern Italy during the ﬁnal
years of French rule. The breadth of support for the constitutional project is not
easily reconciled with the later imagery of the ‘passive revolution’, and suggests
that the South had embarked on a path of political development that was not so
much different but in some respects precocious in comparison with the other
Italian states.
   Those differences were also evident in 1815 when the restored Bourbon rulers
retained the administrative and institutional changes made by their French prede-
cessors more fully than any other Italian rulers. Indeed, in 1816 these were
extended to Sicily as well, which as a result lost its centuries-old autonomy as a
separate crown. The consolidation of a post-feudal bureaucratic autocracy gave
new impetus to the demands for constitutional government, which found expres-
sion in the revolutions of 1820–1 on the mainland and in Sicily.
