8                                        Introduction

contrasts between a modernizing North and a backward South are anachronisms
that have subsequently come to distort the history of the North before Uniﬁcation
no less seriously than that of the South. A reconsideration of what made the South
different before Uniﬁcation therefore calls for a more general reconsideration of
the dynamics of political change in Italy as a whole in the century before
Uniﬁcation.
   This book began as a study of the brief period of Napoleonic rule at the start of
the nineteenth century that was supposedly the site of the original ‘passive revolu-
tion’. In the light of modern scholarship on the Napoleonic enterprise, however,
both the notion of the ‘passive revolution’ and that of the exceptionality of the
South in the century before Uniﬁcation become questionable. Seen in the broader
context of Napoleonic Europe, southern Italy was not the norm but an anomaly.
No comparable reforms were attempted in any of the other peripheral imperial
territories. In Poland, for example, even the political privileges of the nobility sur-
vived, and despite the abolition of feudalism the seigneurial order was not
touched in the German territories. The reasons for this seemed obvious enough to
Count Beugnot, one of the empire’s most seasoned administrators, who reported
that feudalism was so deeply embedded in the fabric of the countries that made up
the Kingdom of Westphalia that to eradicate it would take decades, perhaps even
centuries: ‘one would have to go back four or ﬁve centuries to ﬁnd similar examples
in France’.²² But even in those states that were closer to France in terms of political
and institutional organization, recent studies show that the reforming zeal of
the French administrators has often been exaggerated. Despite the emperor’s
obsessive insistence, attempts to implement key reforms—for example, the intro-
duction of the Code Napoléon—were generally minimalist, and very often it was
the local elites who took the initiative to rewrite imperial prescriptions to suit their
own political agendas.²³
   Why, then, the attempt to make Naples a model of the empire’s modernizing
mission? Once that question is posed, the weakness of the claim that everything
was imposed from above becomes evident. There was nothing in the career pro-
ﬁles of either Joseph Bonaparte or Joachim Murat to indicate an active commit-
ment to reform. To be sure, the men Napoleon sent to advise his brother were
‘experts in the business of annexation’.²⁴ All were seasoned administrators who
were also deeply skilled in the more sinister political arts, but all but one left with
Joseph in 1808. Thereafter, Murat relied more heavily on Neapolitan adminis-
trators, but although their roles were important, their presence and collaboration
alone are not sufﬁcient to explain either the momentum of change or the very var-
ied responses to change.

But it was dramatic history’. An even more extreme version of the Manichaean view of the historical
origins of the North–South divide can be found in Putnam (1994).
   ²² Woolf (1991), 52.         ²³ Fahrmeir, in Rowe (ed.) (2003), 107–20.
   ²⁴ Woolf (1991), 50.
