                                          Introduction                                             3

   It was in this context of apprehension and introspection that the ‘Southern
Problem’ forced itself on the attention of the new nation. There had been serious
unrest in the South in the years immediately after Uniﬁcation, the scale of which
the authorities attempted to minimize by dismissing the disturbances as mere acts
of brigandage. However, more troops were needed to suppress the so-called brig-
andage, and more lives were lost than in all the Italian wars of independence.⁶
By the 1890s, although the epicentre of popular unrest had shifted to the North,
the discontents of the South had exposed the desperate conditions of poverty
and distress that persisted there thirty years after Uniﬁcation. The evident dispar-
ities between the two Italies were an open contradiction to claims that the
Risorgimento had uniﬁed Italians, while the mass emigration that followed, as at
ﬁrst thousands and then millions of southerners abandoned their homes in search
of work and better lives across the Atlantic, raised even greater fears. Many of the
new nation’s staunchest supporters saw in the mass exodus a haemorrhage of the
nation’s life-blood that posed a mortal threat to its survival.⁷
   Against these forebodings, ways had to be found to defend the Risorgimento,
reassert national unity, and absolve the new Italy of responsibility for the condi-
tions of the South. Not for the ﬁrst time history came to be written backwards,
and the creative force of the Risorgimento was salvaged by insisting that the
Southern Problem was primarily a legacy of the past. The principal architect of
this interpretation was one of the most formidable intellectual champions of the
Risorgimento, the Neapolitan philosopher and historian Benedetto Croce.
   A southerner himself, and deeply proud of his southern origins, Croce was
among the ﬁrst to argue that centuries of foreign misrule and exploitation had
turned the South into ‘a paradise inhabited by devils’.⁸ It was Croce who ﬁrst
adopted and adapted the term ‘passive revolution’ to describe the South’s failure to
respond to the innovative forces of the modern era. The phrase had originally
been coined by Vincenzo Cuoco, a member of the Neapolitan Republic in 1799
who shortly afterwards became its ﬁrst historian, but it was only when Croce bor-
rowed it a century later that the ‘passive revolution’ came to encapsulate every-
thing that had made the pre-Uniﬁcation South different. For Croce, the deep
moral decay of southern society was the reason the emancipating forces unleashed
by the Enlightenment and the European revolutions had resulted in nothing more
than a ‘passive revolution’ in the South. The forces of change had evoked strongly
positive responses, but only from a progressive and isolated minority, which was
why the reform movement that had ﬂourished in Naples in the second half of the
eighteenth century failed to achieve signiﬁcant or lasting changes. However, for
Croce nothing demonstrated more dramatically or tragically the backwardness


   ⁶ Davis (1988), 168–86; Riall (1997).
   ⁷ On perceptions of the South before and after Uniﬁcation see Dickie (1999) and Moe (2002).
   ⁸ Davis (1999), 350–7. On the origins of the ‘paradise inhabited by devils’ see Croce’s often mis-
represented essay in Uomini e cose della vecchia Italia (1956), i. 69–87.
