2                                        Introduction

founded.³ But what has attracted attention above all to the brief interlude of
French rule in southern Italy are the reforms that were undertaken. Within
months of taking control, the new French rulers set about remodelling the
Kingdom in accordance with the templates established by the revolution in
France and its aftermath. Feudalism was abolished and the monarchy was
reorganized around the system of central and local administration established by
the Constitution of Year VIII in France. The tax system was similarly brought into
line with France, and direct taxes were reorganized around a single land tax. The
debts of the previous monarchy were redeemed through the sale of the lands of
over 1,300 religious houses, the Code Napoléon was introduced and the adminis-
tration of justice reorganized. In 1810 Joachim Murat established a feudal com-
mission that visited every community in the Kingdom to resolve outstanding
litigation over former feudal rights, and at the same time divided the former
feudal and common lands amongst the inhabitants of the rural communities.
    Writing shortly after the event, Pietro Colletta claimed that ‘Never has society
undergone political convulsions comparable to those experienced in the Kingdom
of Naples at the start of the nineteenth century.’⁴ Allowing for a degree of exag-
geration, it was nonetheless true that there was nothing comparable in the other
territories ruled directly or indirectly by France to the reforms that took place in
southern Italy. Yet for over a century, historians of modern Italy have argued that
the failure of those reforms to take root in the South marked the decisive moment
when the destinies of the two Italies—the North and the South—became ﬁnally
and irrevocably set on different and divergent paths. While the rest of Italy
embraced modernity and moved closer to the political and cultural models set
by the most advanced western European nations, the South turned its back and
limped into the nineteenth century still shackled to the ancien régime.
    These arguments were not made at the time, however, but much later in the
closing decade of a century that had seen Italy achieve independence and nation-
hood. Yet, while the ﬁrst generation of Italian historians was hard at work celebrat-
ing Italy’s heroic struggles for independence and forging the founding myths of
the new nation, the country faced a prolonged economic and political crisis that
came close to overthrowing the fragile constitutional monarchy established barely
three decades earlier. In addition to serious and widespread internal unrest that
resulted in the military occupation of Sicily in 1893 and of the city of Milan in
1898, Italy also suffered a devastating and humiliating colonial defeat at the
battle of Adowa in 1896 that came as a heavy psychological blow to the most
ardent supporters of the new nation.⁵


   ³ ‘[T]he very notion of Napoleon’s empire as a conceivable, potentially durable form of European
international politics, or as a leading one, is a contradiction in terms’: Schroeder (1994), 394.
   ⁴ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 214.
   ⁵ On Italian insecurities, see Chabod (1962); the most thorough English account of the crisis of
the 1890s is Duggan (2002), 640–7.
