                                          Introduction                                            7

   As those metaphors have become more universal they have inevitably also
moved further and further from both present and past realities, while more recent
research has begun to question many of the fundamental assumptions on which
they are premised. Quite apart from the sheer improbability that a chunk of pre-
modern Europe might miraculously survive unchanged down to the present, the
images of backwardness and immobility are of little help in explaining why the
South is still in many respects a problem today. The rural world that constituted
the ‘Southern Problem’ after the Second World War has long since vanished.
Living standards in the South today are around the national norms, while levels
of consumption are comparable to those in the wealthiest parts of Europe. Yet
levels of productivity in southern Italy also remain among the lowest in Europe,
economic and social infrastructures are poor, and organized crime, maﬁa, and
political corruption persist.¹⁷ The problems present in the South today seem,
however, to be more directly the consequence of the ways in which the southern
regions have been incorporated into the modern Italian state than that of some
vague and in any case immeasurable notion of ‘backwardness’.¹⁸
   Rethinking what makes the South different today raises questions about the
past, and above all about the ideological models that have reduced Italian history
to a simple Manichean struggle between modernity and backwardness embodied
by the North and the South. That dichotomy is based on nineteenth-century
notions about state building and progress that can only appear outdated at a time
when historians are more ready to acknowledge both the inherently contradictory
forces of modernity and the persistence of the Old Order in even the most
advanced of the nineteenth-century states.¹⁹ But these dichotomies also derive
from abstract and often deeply ahistorical generalizations that ﬁt the North no
better than the South, and take little if any account of the deep economic, polit-
ical, cultural, and historical diversities that feature no less prominently in the
North than in the South. Even in geographical terms the boundaries that separate
the North from the South remain elusive.²⁰
   Although outdated these dichotomies continue to colour the ways in which
Italy’s political and social histories in the age of the Risorgimento and since
are portrayed.²¹ It is the central contention of this book, however, that the neat

   ¹⁷ See Bevilacqua (1994), Lumley and Morris (eds.) (1997), and the special issue of the JMIS
(2006, vol. 11/2) on political development since 1945. See also Allum (1973), Tarrow (1967), and
Ginsborg (2003).                                                    ¹⁸ e.g. De Rosa (2004), 129–36.
   ¹⁹ See for example Mayer (1981), but see also Breuilly, in Rowe (ed.) (2003), 121–53.
   ²⁰ On the false North–South distinctions see Bevilacqua (1994), Questione Settentrionale
(Meridiana 16, 1993) and Meriggi (1996). For a critical review of these debates in English see Davis
(1998), 205–24; Riall (1998), 32–57; Lumley and Morris (1997); Schneider (ed.) (1998).
   ²¹ For a recent unreconstructed Crocean view see the editor’s Introduction to Imbruglia (ed.)
(2000), 1: ‘An eighteenth century state, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was constituted, developed
and died between 1734 and 1799. It was born as a monarchy in 1734, and ended as a revolutionary
Republic in June 1799. Conquered again by the Bourbons, after a phase of anarchy, it became a sort
of Mediterranean despotism, a Catholic variant of Asian or Moslem despotic states. Its destiny—
monarchy, republic, anarchy, despotism—could well be taken from the pages of the Esprit des Lois.
