                                     Introduction

         Naples, Napoleon, and the Origins of the Two Italies


For nearly ten years, from 1806 to 1815, Naples and southern Italy formed part of
Napoleon’s continental enterprise. Although Napoleon never once set foot in
Naples, during this brief decade southern Italy was a peripheral but also an
integral part of the imperial system. Like the other territories ruled directly and
indirectly by France, the Kingdom’s function was to supply men, equipment,
and money for the emperor’s wars, raw materials for French manufactures, and
markets for French products. However, because the French never succeeded in
dislodging the former Bourbon rulers and their British allies from Sicily, the long
coastlines of the southern Italian mainland formed the empire’s most southerly
frontier and for almost ten years only the narrow Straits of Messina separated the
emperor’s troops from those of France’s principal adversary.¹
   Napoleon’s Mediterranean Kingdom also had an important part to play in the
dynastic politics of empire. Its ﬁrst ruler was the emperor’s brother Joseph, until
he was moved to Madrid in 1808 to ﬁll the recently vacated Spanish throne and
succeeded by Napoleon’s brother-in-law, Joachim Murat. The tensions with Paris
that developed after Murat’s arrival in Naples would vividly expose the deep con-
tradictions on which the imperial project was founded, and in 1811 Murat came
very close to sharing the fate of Louis Bonaparte, who had been deposed as king
of Holland a year earlier. Unlike Louis, Murat survived but the tensions
remained, and in the hope of retaining his kingdom in 1814 Murat joined forces
with the emperor’s enemies. A year later Murat rallied once again to the imperial
cause after Napoleon’s ﬂight from Elba, but his defeat shortly afterwards by the
Austrians at the battle of Tolentino in May 1815 brought the ‘Napoleonic
episode’ in Italy to a ﬁnal close, although Murat’s personal denouement was still
to come.²
   The history of Napoleon’s Mediterranean Kingdom illustrates many of the
broader contradictions on which the short-lived imperial enterprise was

   ¹ ‘The southern end of the Italian peninsula was, in one sense, the strategic centre or turning point
of the great war between France and England’: Johnson (1904) i., p. viii. However, that is more true
for the period before rather than after 1806; see Mackesy (1957).
   ² For the ‘Napoleonic episode’ see Bergeron (1972). The principal modern biographers of Murat
are Valente (1941/65) and Tulard (1983), but the most comprehensive modern historian of the
period is Pasquale Villani (see Villani, ‘Il decennio francese’, in Galasso and Romeo (eds.) (1986),
now reprinted in Rao and Villani (1995), 179–282).
