                                           Introduction                                             9

   To a far greater extent than historians have been prepared to acknowledge, the
changes that took place in southern Italy after 1806 were driven and shaped from
below. In part, the scale of the French reforms reﬂected the gravity of the crisis of
the ancien régime monarchy in the South, which confronted the French invaders
with challenges that could not safely be deferred. Public ﬁnances were on the
point of collapse and the creditors of the ancien régime monarchy were threatened
with ruin. There was no cash in the government treasuries and taxes were not
being raised. Public administration and the administration of justice were in
chaos and needed to be completely reconstructed.
   From the moment that the French rulers set about these tasks, however,
their initiatives were shaped by the interventions of different social groups and
interests. To explain why, it is necessary to turn back to the earlier period of
Bourbon reformism, which is where this book begins. The pursuit of dynastic
autonomy led the Kingdom’s new Bourbon rulers to copy initiatives being taken
by other Italian and European rulers in the same period. It was not the initiatives
taken to strengthen the monarchy and its resources that made the South different,
but the context in which these were attempted. As these questions carry us
backwards in time into the eighteenth century, the images of an immobile
and unchanging South begin to disintegrate and instead reveal a society, an
economy, and a political system inseparably caught up in the changes that were
everywhere beginning to undermine the fabric of the European ancien régime.
   The changes taking place in the South in the half century that preceded the
revolution in France were often experienced in particularly intense and disruptive
forms, but they differed in degree, not in kind, from those concurrently taking
place elsewhere in Italy and Europe. The same was true of the political crisis that
overwhelmed the Bourbon monarchy in the ﬁnal decade of the eighteenth cen-
tury. In every Italian state, attempts by the rulers to establish more effective forms
of centralized bureaucratic government created deep political divisions, gaining
support in some quarters but provoking powerful resistance in others. While in
some important respects distinctive, in substance the crisis in the South was
rooted in the same contradictions and tensions that caused the Habsburg rulers
of Tuscany and Lombardy to abandon reform and reverse measures already
implemented.²⁵
   In the South, those reactions were particularly polarized, but were not
essentially different, nor did the crisis of the ancient régime monarchy in the
South follow lines essentially different from those of other Italian states. In reality
the South in 1799 never quite lived up to its later notoriety as the home of the
Italian counter-revolution. The savagery of the Neapolitan Sanfedists was not
invented and quickly acquired a notoriety that haunted successive generations

  ²⁵ For the economic forces that were transforming the European ancien régime, see Aymard
(1978). For the political repercussions in the Habsburg territories see Capra (2005), for Tuscany, see
Turi (1969/1999).
