18                                  Absolutist Naples

of the Grand Tour. Many began to ﬁnd their way to Naples, where they might well
have been entertained by Sir William Hamilton, who even wrote to London to
express his concern over the amounts of money they spent.⁸
   These wealthy travellers were living testimony of the consumer revolutions tak-
ing place by the mid-century elsewhere in Europe.⁹ They did not bring these
revolutions to Italy, but the growing numbers of foreign merchant ships beginning
to visit the Mediterranean ports revealed how economic expansion in other parts of
Europe was already giving rise to new demand for goods that the Mediterranean
economies produced in plenty, in particular grain, olive oil, silk, wool, and citrus
fruits. Especially during the years of the long European peace that preceded the
revolutionary wars, British and French merchants and shipping were only the most
prominent among those visiting the ports of the Mediterranean and the Levant.
Exports grew at quite a modest pace, but enough to cause commodity prices to rise
and generate powerful new incentives for increasing agricultural output.¹⁰
   The consequences were deeply contradictory. Except in the fertile Po valley
and the irrigated lower Milanese plain that won the admiration of the English
agronomist Arthur Young at the end of the century, in most parts of Italy farming
was geared mainly to subsistence needs and access to more distant markets was
limited.¹¹ In most cases, agricultural production could be increased only by bring-
ing more land under cultivation. But everywhere land was a scarce and inelastic
resource. In part, geography and climate were the reasons for this since much of
the Italian peninsula is dominated by the chain of the Apennine Mountains
that runs from the Alps to Sicily. Outside the Po valley, good irrigated farmland
was hard to ﬁnd, and many of the principal cereal-growing regions—such as
the Apulian plateau known as the Tavoliere or the hinterlands of central Sicily—
suffered from lack of irrigation and severely inadequate rainfall, which resulted in
thin and infertile topsoils that required extended periods of fallow and grazing
between crops.
   There were also pockets of more fertile land, of course, which in the South were
often found close to the main cities—the Neapolitan Campagna Felix, the Terra di
Bari, and the area around Reggio Calabria: in Sicily, Palermo’s fabled Conca d’Oro
and the areas surrounding Messina, Catania, Siracusa, and Noto. However, over
the centuries soil erosion had also turned vast areas of previously fertile farm land
into malaria-infested and uninhabitable swamps, a problem aggravated by the
clearance of woodland from the lower upland slopes that caused thin topsoils to
be washed from the hillsides by spring rains. As demand for wheat and other cash-
crops grew, woodland clearances were already assuming a scale in many parts of
southern Italy that seriously alarmed contemporaries.¹²

  ⁸ Acton (1965), 169.        ⁹ De Seta (1996).
 ¹⁰ Caracciolo (1973); Chorley (1965); Romano (1951).
 ¹¹ See Cafagna (1962). For Arthur Young see Okey (ed.) (1915).
 ¹² Sereni (1961/89); Bevilacqua (1988), 337–62; Corona and Bevilacqua (1998), pp. xi–xvii,
27–62, 191–201.
