12                                  Introduction

survival of independent dynastic states on the Italian peninsula increasingly difﬁ-
cult. Even the most powerful, the Kingdom of Piedmont–Sardinia, survived the
crisis by ceasing to be a regional dynastic state. The forces that brought about the
collapse of the Bourbon monarchy in the South were essentially the same as those
that undid the other Italian rulers.
   The retrospective contrasts between a modernizing North and a backward
South have not only imposed differences that did not exist, but also obscured
those that did. The Napoleonic decade was a critical moment in the history of the
Italian South, as it was in the histories of the Italian peninsula and of Europe.
However, it was not the decisive turning point that subsequently came to dom-
inate the master narratives of Italian history. The political and social changes
taking place in the South in the half century before Italian Uniﬁcation mirrored,
and in many cases even anticipated, those occurring in other parts of Italy.
Everywhere in Italy those changes brought new insecurities, even though in the
South the impact of these changes would prove to be especially disruptive.
   Two ﬁnal points: throughout this Introduction and in the pages that follow the
South refers to the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, in other words the southern
mainland and Sicily. But although Sicily has a critical role in different parts of the
narrative that this book seeks to unfold, it is not treated in as much detail as the
mainland or as it deserves. The reasons for this are essentially practical. Sicily and
the mainland were different countries, with different institutions, laws, and cus-
toms. To have written as fully about Sicily as the mainland provinces would have
required extensive additional archival research that would have made a long book
even longer, but this inevitably results in imbalances of which I am very much
aware.
   Secondly, anyone writing about this period must be enormously indebted to
the remarkable expansion in historical research and debate on the pre-Uniﬁcation
South in recent decades. Some of the breadth of that research will be evident from
the bibliographies that follow, without which this study could not have been
attempted. Since overwhelmingly this is the work of Italian historians, which is
not easily accessible to those who do not read Italian, it is important to remind
anglophone readers that far from travelling some distant or exotic terre incognitae
the chapters that follow move across some of the most deeply researched and
closely debated territories in modern Italian history.
