                              The Ancien Régime in the South                                     17

exemptions and many important exclusive rights. The monarchy’s jurisdictions
were limited, and to make matters worse most of its revenues had been permanently
disposed of by the Spanish rulers in the previous century. During the early years of
Spanish rule the Kingdom’s ﬁnancial and administrative institutions had been
extensively reorganized, but these constructive developments had been overthrown
in the ﬁnancial crisis that overwhelmed the Spanish monarchy in the seventeenth
century when the Kingdom’s principal assets and revenues were plundered to
ﬁnance Spain’s European wars and pay its creditors. The beneﬁciaries were the
privileged orders and corporations who exploited the needs and weaknesses of
the Spanish monarchy to increase their privileges, powers, and exemptions, as well
as hordes of small investors who purchased venal ofﬁces and shares in the tax farms
put up for sale.⁶
   By the start of the eighteenth century, therefore, both the degree to which
power was decentralized in the South and the institutional weakness of the south-
ern monarchy were indeed exceptional in comparison with the other major Italian
principalities. Much of the Kingdom was ruled not by the royal courts, but by the
feudal courts that answered to lay and ecclesiastical feudatories or to the tribunals
that represented powerful corporate bodies like the city of Naples.
   The new rulers nonetheless tried to follow the lead set by other European
princes to acquire the revenues without which neither the trappings nor the sub-
stance of dynastic autonomy could be attained. As the king’s chief minister,
Bernardo Tanucci, put it: ‘Principini, ville e casini: Principoni armate e cannoni.’⁷
The Bourbon rulers of Naples wanted big palaces, big guns, big armies, and
big ships, too. Yet none of these could be achieved without reducing the ﬁscal
exemptions, autonomous jurisdiction, and power sharing on which the whole
political ediﬁce of the ancien régime in the South was founded. That meant
conﬂict with the most powerful interests in the Kingdom: the privileged orders,
the Church, and the great self-governing corporations.
   Similar dramas were being played out in absolutist states throughout Europe,
and although from state to state the balances between the different forces varied,
everywhere the Old Order resisted. As in the rest of Europe, the dynastic projects
of the Bourbon rulers were also played out against a backdrop of changes that were
undermining the economic as well as the political foundations of the European
ancien régime. Even though the origins of these changes were often distant, they
nonetheless had far-reaching consequences throughout the European peripheries,
including the Italian peninsula. One of the most tangible signs of the changes that
were the source of new wealth and a new capacity for consumption could be seen
in the growing numbers of curious foreign travellers who tramped the itineraries


  ⁶ The tax farms were known as arrendamenti, from the Spanish word arrendar (‘to yield’). See
De Rosa (1958/2005) and Calabria (1991).
  ⁷ ‘Little princes need little palaces and little villas: big princes need big armies and big guns.’
Simioni (1925), 40.
