20                                   Absolutist Naples

complicated by the prevalence of transhumant grazing along most of the
Apennine chain in central and southern Italy. Every spring and autumn, millions
of sheep made their way back and forth between upland summer pastures and
winter grazing on the coastal plains. For these seasonal migrations to take place,
the ﬂocks enjoyed rights of passage across private and public land that had been
protected by law since the ﬁfteenth century. However, as enclosures spread, as
more land came under the plough and as woodland was cleared, the transit routes
were threatened, which created other potentially dangerous conﬂicts. Powerful
interests were at stake, and it was no accident that brigandage and the transhu-
mant economy were closely linked since many of the larger ﬂocks were owned by
powerful landowners who did not hesitate to employ armed retainers to defend
their property and their rights.¹⁶
   Changes being felt throughout all the agrarian economies of the Italian penin-
sula, therefore, were often experienced in particularly dramatic and disruptive
form in the South. Not all parts of southern Italy and Sicily were affected in equal
ways, or indeed even at the same time. However, the fragility of the southern
economies, the delicate balances between scant resources and the needs and inter-
ests of different sections of the population, made change not only difﬁcult, but
also ensured that it could rarely be achieved gradually. As a result, the forces of
change often gave rise to conﬂicts that challenged the foundations of the agrarian
order and undermined the forms of agrarian paternalism and deference that in
other parts of Italy would survive until much later.
   Unwittingly, the monarchy’s campaign against feudalism in the South served to
exacerbate these conﬂicts. Throughout Europe, more or less enlightened attempts
by the rulers to reduce feudal privileges and give more freedom to market forces
gave rise to varied forms of popular resistance, which in many cases caused these
initiatives to be abandoned. This was the case both in Austria and in Lombardy,
where in the ﬁnal decade of the eighteenth century many of Joseph II’s earlier
reforms were abandoned or even reversed. The same happened even in the prover-
bially tranquil Grand Duchy of Tuscany, where at the end of the century popular
resistance also caused many of the liberal reforms introduced by Grand Duke
Peter Leopold to be abandoned.¹⁷
   In southern Italy, however, the impact of the monarchy’s campaign against
feudalism was different. Because the monarchy had no bureaucracy of its own, it
relied primarily on the royal courts and tribunals to challenge and check feudal
privileges. For that reason, the crown’s agents actively encouraged local commu-
nities to bring legal suits against powerful feudal neighbours. Ironically, these
attempts to use feudal law—as opposed to more arbitrary and absolutist
measures—to combat feudal abuses brought the campaign against feudalism to

  ¹⁶ See esp. Villari (1961), 14–58; Marino (1988), 255–9; Russo (2002).
  ¹⁷ On the Habsburg territories see Capra (2005) 218–33; on Tuscany, Cochrane (1973), Lichﬁeld
(1986), and Turi (1969/99).
