                                            1
               The Ancien Régime in the South

              INTRODUCTION: HOW THE EUROPEAN
                  REVOLUTION CAME SOUTH

Sir William Hamilton, who from 1763 served for thirty-six years as Britain’s spe-
cial envoy to the rulers of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, liked to describe his
posting as a ‘remote and indolent corner of the world’. In the closing years of the
century, however, this remote corner of the world found itself at the centre of the
political storms that swept through Europe in the wake of the revolution in
France.¹ In part this was because the central and eastern Mediterranean had in the
intervening decades come to acquire new importance in European politics. Trade
between the Mediterranean countries and northern Europe had increased notably
in these years, but the region’s new strategic importance derived above all from the
colonial struggles between Britain and France that after the American War of
Independence had shifted to the Indian subcontinent. In the meantime, the
expansionist projects of Tsarist Russia had led to a sequence of conﬂicts with the
Ottoman Turks that culminated in the Russian annexation of the Crimea in 1783
and a major war begun in 1787 and fought by the Russians and the Austrians
against the Turks. These conﬂicts were a new cause of political uncertainty for the
whole of south-eastern Europe and for the states that bordered on the Adriatic and
the eastern Mediterranean.
   Those broader connections would become apparent when Napoleon
Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt in 1798 threw southern Italy into crisis. The expedi-
tion’s aim was to cut England’s lines of communications with India, a project
that was wrecked by Nelson’s victory at the battle of the Nile on 1 August 1798.
The wider signiﬁcance of Nelson’s victory was evident not only from the
baronetcy and the acclaim won by the British admiral, but also from the hand-
some cash bounty he received from the grateful governors of the East India
Company.²
   Naples and its rulers were less fortunate. After his victory, the hero of the
Nile headed for Naples to repair his ships, recover from his wounds, and become

  ¹ Sir William served as the British envoy in Naples until 1799; see Constantine (2001) and
Fothergill (1969).                                                     ² Vincent (2003), 272.
