                                      Introduction                                       11

   The nine months of constitutional government and freedom of speech that
followed demonstrate how profoundly the retrospective lens of the ‘passive
revolution’ has distorted the histories of both the North and the South before
Uniﬁcation. The revolutions of 1820–1 in the South were the epilogue to the
decade of French reforms, and the debates that took place in the local and regional
assemblies and in the petitions submitted to the National Parliament focused
above all on the threats that the centralist and autocratic reorganization of the
state posed to regional and local autonomies.
   Although those debates took place only in the South in 1820–1, similar develop-
ments were taking place in every other Italian state. Everywhere the post-feudal
order was founded on the expansion and extension of centralized power at the
expense of local autonomies, and especially the powers formerly exercised at local
levels by sections of the elites. Everywhere in Italy these tendencies were the prin-
cipal cause of political tension in the Restoration states, and everywhere opposition
to the new forms of centralized autocracy came as much from the old patrician
families who were the principal victims of the new forms of autocratic power as
from the elites of more recent origin.²⁶ The difference was that in the South these
changes had come earlier and more abruptly. This was partly because of the scale of
the crisis of the ancien régime monarchy and partly because of the ways in which
forms of agrarian paternalism and deference that in other parts of Italy would
survive until much later in the century were eroded at a much earlier stage.
   In March 1821 the precocious political dialogue in the South was abruptly cut
off by the Austrian invasion, which was also a reminder that political develop-
ments in pre-Uniﬁcation Italy were determined as much by realities of imperial
subordination as by the force of revolution. The South was not unique in this
respect either: all the Italian rulers, even the House of Savoy, were dependent on
direct or indirect foreign support. But again the consequences were especially
acute in the South, where the Bourbon dreams of dynastic autonomy had been
amongst the ﬁrst victims of the revolutionary wars. In 1815 the South passed from
formal imperial subjection to France and informal colonial subordination to
Great Britain to become a satellite of the Habsburg monarchy. In 1821 Habsburg
bayonets enabled the Bourbon rulers to regain their throne, but the realities of
colonial subordination caused the monarchy to make a bid for autonomy by pro-
moting the Kingdom’s economy and protecting its nascent industrial centres.
That bid ended in conﬂict with Great Britain and failure, but even though the
Bourbon bid for economic autonomy was motivated exclusively by dynastic
objectives it anticipated the policies that would be adopted by the rulers of the
Kingdom of Piedmont–Savoy two decades later.
   Retrospectively, Italians wrote the history of Uniﬁcation around the idea of
the nation and nationalism, so it is easy to forget the other forces that made the
  ²⁶ On the importance of patrician discontent as a factor in opposition to Habsburg rule in
Lombardy see Meriggi (1983, 1987), and on Tuscany see the important recent study by Thomas
Kroll (2005).
