16                               Absolutist Naples

infatuated with Sir William Hamilton’s young wife, Emma. The crisis of the
Neapolitan monarchy quickly followed. The king of Naples, Ferdinand IV, had
already been pressed into the coalition against France in 1793, and now he came
under renewed pressure from Nelson, the Hamiltons, and the queen to launch an
offensive against the French forces that had occupied Rome earlier in the year.
   The campaign was a disaster. The Neapolitan army was defeated and disinte-
grated; the king ﬂed and was carried on Nelson’s ships with his courtiers to the
safety of Sicily. The mainland, in the meantime, was invaded by a French army
and in January 1799 a republican government was proclaimed in Naples. In June
the monarchy was restored, thanks to Nelson’s ships and a popular royalist insur-
rection, aided and directed by Russian and Turkish troops.
   The presence of the Russian, Albanian, and Turkish troops that joined the
assault on the Republic and its French ally in 1799 was a clear sign of the broader
dimensions of the conﬂict that momentarily converged on the central
Mediterranean and the Italian peninsula. But only the particular constellation of
powers and forces was new. Like the other Italian states southern Italy was used to
living on the peripheries of empire and its destinies had always been shaped by the
shifting alignments and counter-alignments of Europe’s power politics.³
   The immediate cause of the crisis of the Neapolitan monarchy in 1799 was the
renewal of war in Europe, but it was also driven by internal tensions and conﬂicts
directly linked to the attempts by the Bourbon rulers to transform their kingdom
into a viable dynastic state. Before it became an independent dynastic state in
1734, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies had for two centuries been the eastern
frontier of the Spanish empire and its ﬁrst line of defence against the Ottoman
Turks.⁴ After a brief interlude of Austrian government the Kingdom acquired its
autonomy with the accession of a cadet branch of the Spanish Bourbons. The
Kingdom’s new rulers were now faced with the same challenges that confronted
their counterparts throughout Europe. To secure their kingdom and their dyn-
astic ambitions, the new rulers needed to improve its defences and strengthen its
military forces. However, that required revenues and resources that the monarchy
did not have and could only acquire by increasing its power and authority. That in
turn meant diminishing the autonomous jurisdictions, the privileges, and
monopolies exercised by the feudal nobility, by the Church, and by the self-governing
corporations with which the ancien régime princes shared power.⁵
   It was not the dynastic ambitions of the Neapolitan Bourbons that were
unusual, but the scale of the obstacles to achieving them. The Kingdom was poor
and weak. It had no effective army or navy, while the royal administration was
limited. The Kingdom consisted of the separate crowns of Naples and Sicily
that were joined only in the person of the ruler: both Kingdoms had their own
laws, customs, institutions, and constitutions, and in both Naples and Sicily the
privileged orders exercised independent jurisdictions, and enjoyed wide ﬁscal

     ³ See Galasso (1994).    ⁴ Ibid.      ⁵ Scott (ed.) (1990); Bonney (ed.) (1999).
