                             The Ancien Régime in the South                                   19

   The scarcity of land was also a consequence of feudalism. In eighteenth-century
Europe feudalism took many different forms. While serfdom survived only in the
East, in many parts of western Europe feudatories no longer exercised independ-
ent jurisdictions, although they did enjoy important ﬁscal and political privileges.
In Italy, the meaning of feudal titles and the scale of feudal property varied not
only from state to state, but also within states. In the Tuscan Grand Duchy it was
unknown, but remained extensive in Piedmont and Lombardy, although in both
cases the ﬁscal and political privileges of the feudatories had in most cases been
heavily curtailed.¹³
   In the South by no means was all land held in feudal tenure, but feudal property
was nonetheless more extensive than in any other part of Italy or indeed western
Europe. In most parts of the Kingdom, feudal courts were responsible for the day-
to-day administration of justice and the maintenance of order. Feudal landowners
were entitled to raise levies over the local communities subject to their feudal juris-
diction. These rights and levies were countered, without being balanced, by the
numerous collective use-rights that the local communities exercised on feudal
land as well as on the extensive common lands that constituted one of the prin-
cipal resources of the rural poor. These included the right to pasture animals at
certain times of year, to fell timber for fuel and building, to glean after the harvest,
to gather chestnuts, to hunt for game in the woodlands, or to ﬁsh in the ponds and
swamps. Unlike private property, the ownership of feudal land was therefore
strictly conditional and the land remained subject to multiple uses and rights.¹⁴
   As unprecedented rates of demographic expansion caused demand for land to
increase during the course of the eighteenth century, the constraints imposed by
feudal obligations and collective use-rights became more visible and vexatious,
and the title by which both were exercised began to be challenged. As these rights
became more contentious, so did all forms of property rights, giving rise not only
to growing confusion but also to conﬂict. In response to rising commodity prices
and land rents, the feudal landowners were often the ﬁrst to violate feudal regula-
tions by creating illegal enclosures, denying the local communities their collective
use-rights, or occupying sections of the common lands. Given the inelastic supply
of land, these actions threatened the livelihood of the rural communities, whose
survival depended on their customary and seasonal use-rights on feudal land and
access to common land. The assault on these collective rights triggered reactions
similar to those that brought market forces and the moral economies of the rural
communities into conﬂict in eighteenth-century England.¹⁵
   In many parts of southern Italy these developments gave rise to conﬂicts
not only between rural communities and neighbouring lay and ecclesiastical
feudatories, but also between neighbouring villages. The situation was further

   ¹³ Villari (1961).       ¹⁴ Villani (1974); Villari (1961).
   ¹⁵ On the ways in which rising prices and population growth caused the relative value of feudal
revenues to decline, see Aymard (1978), 1155–69, Thompson (1994).
