                              The Ancien Régime in the South                                      25

becoming a colonial supplier of raw materials to Britain.³⁹ These fears also fuelled
rumours that the queen and Acton were agents of British commercial interests,
and these were eagerly seized on by the remnants of the pro-Spanish faction that
had never hidden its hostility to the Austrian queen.⁴⁰ But those attacks were also
directed at the increasingly absolutist and arbitrary style of government adopted
by the queen and her favourite minister.


                                      THE CHURCH

Perhaps the most dangerous enemy of the new dynasty was the Pope. For cen-
turies the papacy had claimed that the rulers of the Kingdom were its feudal vas-
sals, which meant that the Pope claimed the exclusive right to sanction any change
of dynasty. In symbolic recognition of their status as vassals the rulers of Naples
every year made the gift to the Pope of a white palfrey (known as the chinea) laden
with gold and precious jewels.⁴¹ However, the Pope’s power in the Kingdom was
far from symbolic, and as well as important jurisdictional rights and the revenues
attached to them Rome was the source of extensive and very lucrative ecclesiastical
patronage. For that reason it also exercised great political inﬂuence, and had many
committed supporters amongst the feudal aristocracy as well as the clergy.
   In the early eighteenth century Rome’s power and patronage in the Kingdom
came under attack. The case against Rome was set out most cogently in Pietro
Giannone’s Civil History of the Kingdom of Naples, a treatise ﬁrst published in
1723 which subsequently became an obligatory point of reference for the later
Neapolitan reform movement. In his tract, Giannone depicted the history of the
South as a prolonged struggle for freedom from the papacy, which had always
been the ally of the Kingdom’s foreign invaders. He concluded that the Kingdom
would never be free of papal oppression until it was ruled by an independent
secular prince.⁴²
   Giannone’s treatise drew on a much older tradition of hostility to the papacy,
and earlier Neapolitan writers had frequently depicted Spain as the papacy’s
accomplice in suppressing Neapolitan liberties. In the seventeenth century, papal
hostility to all forms of new learning, to science and the new rationalist philo-
sophies, had encouraged the popularity of ‘libertine’, rationalist, and secularist
philosophies in southern Italy. Since the university was closely controlled by the


   ³⁹ Galanti, Breve Descrizione (1792), ii. 334–5.The surplus with France probably offset the deﬁcit
in the Kingdom’s accounts through bills discounted in England and Holland, but either way this was
clear evidence that the volume of the Kingdom’s foreign trade was increasing in the second half of the
century: see Salvemini in Imbuglia (2000), 44–69; also Chorley (1965), 13–38; Romano (1951),
92–5.                                                                   ⁴⁰ Nuzzo (1990), 437–535.
   ⁴¹ This ceremony was one of the most colourful of the annual pageants of papal Rome: Tanucci
threatened to end it in 1767 but this did not happen until 1788 at the height of the anti-curial cam-
paign: see Rambaud (1908), 294.                                         ⁴² Chiosi (1987), 371–467.
