                               The Ancien Régime in the South                                       27

another million in Sicily. The Kingdom also contained Italy’s two largest cities.
Naples, whose population was estimated at between 350,000 and 400,000 at the
end of the eighteenth century, was still the third largest city in Europe after
London and Paris. Palermo, with around 120,000 inhabitants was much smaller,
but at the end of the century still slightly larger than Rome. The other southern
cities were both smaller and less numerous than their northern counterparts.⁴⁹
   For the French traveller Charles de Brosse, Naples was the only Italian city in
the eighteenth century that had the feel of a capital, and the new Bourbon
rulers set out to make it a monument to their dynastic ambitions.⁵⁰ Naples was in
many respects the perfect theatre for such an enterprise. Set in surroundings of
extraordinary natural beauty and drama, the city was also a treasure-trove for
eighteenth-century tastes. Here the traveller could admire the spectacle of Mount
Vesuvius in eruption, visit the sites of the ancient cities of Herculaneum and
Pompeii where excavations had recently begun to yield remarkable artefacts of
antiquity, or tour the fabled Phlegrean Fields, which offered an unrivalled choice
of classical sites, mythological references, and natural wonders.
   As well as some of the ﬁnest Baroque architecture in Italy, the city’s streets and
public squares were a constant pageant of folklore and festival that was outshone
only by papal Rome. Scarcely a day passed without processions to celebrate a
neighbourhood saint or patron, in which monks and friars from the many reli-
gious houses, members of the lay confraternities, the penitents, the sick, the halt,
the maimed, the lame, and the blind formed the permanent supporting cast. Nor
could the visitor miss the famous lazzaroni, most often depicted as exotic beggars
idly reclining in picaresque semi-nudity on the harbour walls.⁵¹
   Even more exotic was the fabled cuccagna, an elaborately choreographed spect-
acle that was part public charity and part display of royal muniﬁcence. For days
food, ﬂour, wine, meats, and live animals—cows, calves, goats, kids, sheep, lamb,
geese, capons, and other fowl—were piled high on towers constructed in one of
the main piazze of the city. On the appointed day and hour a signal was given, the
guards stood back and the populace invaded the piazza to take whatever could
be carried. The pell-mell that ensued took place under the benevolent gaze of the
prince and his courtiers, who watched from the lofty safety of a balcony.
   More often cited than seen, the cuccagna embodied the exotic and the barbaric
that caught the travellers’ fascination. But if the city’s pageantry had deep roots in
   ⁴⁹ The next largest on the mainland was Foggia with 20,000 inhabitants, followed by a number of
towns whose populations varied between 10,000 and 20,000. In Sicily, Catania and Messina were the
largest cities after Palermo, with a number of other towns of around 8,000 inhabitants: see Galasso
(1997), 42–4.
   ⁵⁰ Many other reactions were far less complimentary; discerning discourses in travellers’ tales are a
ﬂourishing industry: see Calaresu (1999), Moe (2002), Naddeo (2005), but the fullest critical
anthologies remain Mozzillo (1992) and Venturi (1972). See also Galasso, ‘Lo stereotipo del napole-
tano’, in idem (1994), 171–225.
   ⁵¹ Johann Wolfgang von Goethe noted perceptively that they were not beggars, but stevedores
whose brief work shifts were combined with long periods of enforced idleness: Naples May 28, 1787,
in Saine and Sammons (1989 ), 262–7; cf. also Boyle (1992), 458–66, 478–81.
