24                                     Absolutist Naples

to imitate the reforms being introduced in Vienna by her brother, the emperor
Joseph II, and she needed a minister willing to assert the power of the monarchy
over the feudal nobility and the Church and build a dynastic army and navy. She
found her man in 1778 when her brother Peter Leopold sent an energetic admin-
istrator named John Acton to Naples to advise on building a navy.
   Born in France but descended from an English Jacobite family, Acton had
served in the French navy before going to Tuscany to advise the Grand Duke on
naval matters. He now followed Tanucci’s footsteps from Florence to Naples,
where his task initially was to advise on naval matters. However, the queen soon
gave him the job of reorganizing the army and expanding the Kingdom’s economy
and trade. Within two years of his arrival, Acton was the queen’s favourite and by
repute also her lover. In 1779 he was appointed Secretary for the Navy and in
1780 acquired the posts of Secretary for War and Finances, making him the most
powerful minister at the Neapolitan Court.³⁵
   Acton’s project for building an independent navy and reorganizing the army
gave the government’s reform programme a new sense of urgency. Anxious to
acquire British approval Acton sought the good ofﬁces of the British envoy, Sir
William Hamilton. The new relations between Naples and Vienna had made the
British less hostile to the Neapolitan government, and as commercial competition
between Britain and France increased, and as the size of France’s Mediterranean
ﬂeet grew, Britain’s interest in developing new markets in the Two Sicilies and in
gaining access to the Sicilian ports had also grown. Although Britain’s principal
trade entrepôt in the western Mediterranean was Livorno in the Grand Duchy of
Tuscany, apart from Gibraltar and the Balearic Islands Britain had no secure naval
stations in the Mediterranean and few allies capable of providing port facilities in
times of war.³⁶
   The Neapolitan government was also interested in ﬁnding ways to promote its
foreign trade. New commercial treaties were negotiated with the Habsburg
Empire, the Ottoman Porte, the Bey of Tripoli, Denmark, the Dutch Republic,
Morocco, Sardinia, and Russia. Negotiations with Britain collapsed, however,
when the British refused to give up the major commercial privileges they enjoyed
under the terms of a very one-sided treaty signed with Spain in 1667.³⁷
   Despite this failure, the volume of British imports—especially salt cod, and
colonial and manufactured goods—grew rapidly in the second half of the century
and faster than France’s trade with Naples, which was also expanding.³⁸ This was
a source of great alarm for the reformers who feared that the Kingdom risked


a child, and so things could not be better’ (Naples, 25 February, 1787): cited in Saine and Sammons
(1989), 152.
   ³⁵ See entry by Nuzzo, in DBI, i. 206–10; Barra (no date), 108.
   ³⁶ De Divitiis and Giura (1997).
   ³⁷ The privileges included a ﬂat rate reduction on all landing duties and the right not to be
inspected by Neapolitan customs ofﬁcers. See Nuzzo (1971), 280–1.              ³⁸ Nuzzo (1990), 457.
