                             The Ancien Régime in the South                                   23

   Commodore Martin’s visitation exposed the Kingdom’s extreme military and
naval vulnerability, and it was only when the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748
brought the War of the Austrian Succession to an end that the Bourbon monarchy
in the South could ﬁnally enjoy some degree of security. This enabled Charles to
turn his attention to reorganizing his Kingdom and building palaces, but his days
in Naples were numbered. Following the death of his hopelessly insane half-
brother, he inherited the throne of Spain and took his leave for Madrid in 1759.²⁸
Since his own eldest son was also mad, his second son took the title of Infante of
Spain, while the crowns of Naples and Sicily went to his eight-year-old third son,
whose own mind was far from stable. The boy-king took the titles of Ferdinand IV
of Naples and Ferdinand III of Sicily,²⁹ and until he came of age in 1767 the king-
dom was governed by a Regency Council headed by Bernardo Tanucci, the Tuscan
lawyer who served as principal minister throughout Charles’s time in Naples.³⁰
   Charles’s departure to Spain occurred in the middle of the Seven Years War
(1756–63), the bloodiest and most costly of Europe’s eighteenth-century conﬂicts
that nonetheless ﬁnally caused France and Austria to become allies. That alliance
brought western Europe the relatively long period of peace that lasted until 1792
that was the background for the numerous experiments in absolutist reform and
the intellectual debates of the Enlightenment.³¹ It also saw Naples leave the diplo-
matic protection of Madrid to enter the orbit of Habsburg Vienna, a diplomatic
shift that was consummated in 1768 when Ferdinand of Naples married the
sixteen-year-old daughter of the Austrian empress Maria Theresa, the Archduchess
Maria Carolina.³²
   The Neapolitan marriage marked an important extension of Habsburg inﬂu-
ence in Italy. Maria Carolina’s bother, the emperor Joseph II, escorted her on her
nuptial journey to Naples. Another brother, Peter Leopold, was Grand Duke of
Tuscany, while her sister Maria Amalia was married to the Duke of Parma, Don
Felipe of Bourbon, who was the ﬁrst cousin of the king of Naples.³³ After giving
birth to her ﬁrst male child in 1776, the young queen exercised her right to
become a member of the Council of State and within a year had engineered
Tanucci’s downfall.
   Tanucci’s fall after forty-four years in government marked the defeat of the ‘pro-
Spanish’ party in Naples, and the queen quickly set about constructing her own
party while the king spent most of his time hunting.³⁴ The young queen’s aim was

   ²⁸ Philip V died in 1746 and was succeeded by Charles’s half-brother, who ruled as Ferdinand VI
until his death in 1759 at the age of forty-six without heirs.
   ²⁹ He is generally known by the Neapolitan title, until the Act of Union in 1816 when he became
Ferdinand I.                                                     ³⁰ Bernardo Tanucci (1698–1793).
   ³¹ Schroeder (1994), 3–52.            ³² Maria Carolina (1752–1814) bore Ferdinand 17 children.
   ³³ Another sister, Maria Cristina, was governor of the Low Countries, while in 1770 yet another
sister, Marie Antoinette, would of course marry the future Louis XVI and in 1774 become the queen
of France: Dumas (1864), i. 190.
   ³⁴ In 1787 Goethe commented, ‘Naples itself appears to be happy, free and lively, vast numbers
of people running about in mingled confusion, the king is out hunting, the queen is expecting
