26                                       Absolutist Naples

Spanish vice-regal authorities and supporters of papal supremacy, a strong tradi-
tion of private schools had also taken root in Naples.⁴³
   In the new political circumstances following the founding of an independent
dynastic state, opposition to Rome would play an important role in creating the
intellectual background from which the Neapolitan reform movement would
emerge. However, hostility to Rome also went hand in hand with asserting the
autonomy of the new dynastic rulers, and helps explain the enthusiastic reception
for Freemasonry in southern Italy. It was the ﬁrst patron of Freemasonry in
Naples, the Prince of Sansevero, who in 1744 appealed to Charles III to follow the
example of the Elector of Prussia and declare himself a mason, create a new aris-
tocracy of the virtuous, and establish a national army.⁴⁴
   The king did not respond to that appeal, but in 1741 the government had negoti-
ated a new Concordat in which Rome made important concessions, including
waiving certain tax exemptions for religious houses. The Concordat also enabled
the government to begin reducing the number of convents and religious houses in
the Kingdom considered to be excessive.⁴⁵ However, the standing of the new ruler
with the opponents of papal power was greatly enhanced in 1744 when the
Archbishop of Naples, Cardinal Spinelli, was accused of secretly plotting with
Rome to introduce the Inquisition into Naples. The charges against Spinelli
mobilized all the opponents of Rome, and the king’s decision to order an inquiry
that conﬁrmed the accusations was warmly greeted by the anti-papal faction. It
also revealed the highly divisive nature of ecclesiastical politics, however. In Rome
the royal intervention was furiously attacked and opposition to the papal curia in
Naples was attributed to the spread of ‘a Republican and British spirit’ encouraged
by the unchecked circulation of works by Giannone, Locke, and Montesquieu.⁴⁶
In Naples, however, the Pope’s protests also found many supporters, including the
Jesuits, most of the regular clergy, and S. Alfonso Maria di Liguori, the city’s most
popular and inﬂuential preacher who in his widely attended sermons regularly
denounced all those who challenged the authority of Rome as libertines and
Freemasons.⁴⁷


                                       THE CAPITAL

The Kingdom that Charles of Bourbon inherited in 1734 was not only the oldest
monarchy on the peninsula, but also the largest.⁴⁸ At the time of Charles’s acces-
sion the population of the mainland was estimated at four million, with nearly

  ⁴³ Chiosi (1987), 371–467.           ⁴⁴ Ibid.; Ferrone (1989/2000); Giarrizzo (1995).
  ⁴⁵ Moricola (1994) 27–8: 22% of the 75,000 priests and clerics in the Kingdom resided in Naples.
  ⁴⁶ Chiosi (2000), 452–4.         ⁴⁷ Ibid.
  ⁴⁸ Before the House of Savoy—the oldest ruling dynasty in Italy, indeed in Europe according to
their apologists—acquired their royal title in 1713, the only other Italian ruler with the title of king
was the Pope; the papa-re.
