30                                      Absolutist Naples

played cards, ate, drank, and conversed while following the action on stage by
means of mirrors set at the rear of the boxes.⁶⁸
   The king was not the only source of artistic patronage, however, as there were
also many private patrons in the city. In the past, the great religious houses and
churches had been the principal patrons of artists and architects, but in the
eighteenth century wealthy lay patrons became more prominent. The glory of
the great palaces built by the new rulers was reﬂected in those of leading nobles
like the Duke della Torre and the Prince of Francavilla, which also housed out-
standing collections of paintings and ﬁne art. The splendid baroque family chapel
of the Prince of Sansevero with its famous masonic devices was built during the
reign of Charles III, while the ‘Vesuvian villas’ built for leading courtiers and
noblemen at Herculaneum were the ﬁnest expression of the Indian summer of the
Kingdom’s eighteenth-century cultural renaissance. Numerous private patrons
played their part in this, including Tanucci’s friend, the wealthy Tuscan banker
Bernardo Intieri, who funded the new chair in political economy at the University
of Naples—the ﬁrst not only in Italy but in Europe—created in 1754 for Antonio
Genovesi. But wealthy patrons were active in many other branches of the arts,
especially music and the theatre.⁶⁹
   By contrast, the monarchy’s promotion of the arts and sciences was always
politically motivated and selective. Tanucci was no friend of the new ideas of the
Enlightenment, but he understood that the arts, sciences, and learning were
essential trappings of the modern prince.⁷⁰ He was responsible for founding the
Accademia del Disegno in 1752, which later became the Accademia delle Belle Arti
and three years later the Accademia Reale Ercolanese, which was responsible for
cataloguing the papyri and other treasures discovered during the excavations at
Herculaneum.
   The complaint most frequently heard in the 1780s, however, was that royal
patronage of the arts and sciences was penny-pinching and uncertain. Whatever
funds were available were directed to prestigious regalian monuments, and even
the plans to transfer the collection of artworks that Charles inherited from his mother
Elizabeth Farnese to Naples ran into major problems. Nor was the monarchy
willing to support wider academic and scientiﬁc projects, and despite repeated
appeals from the world of letters and learning the Royal Academy for Sciences

   ⁶⁸ Rosselli (1984), 82–3; Sorba (2001), 93–153.
   ⁶⁹ Francesco Saverio de Rogati, a jurist and a music lover, was the protégé of Vito Giuseppe
Millico, who was the most acclaimed Neapolitan castrato of the time. De Rogati was director of the
Royal College of Music (later the Conservatory of San Pietro a Majella). The Prince of Campofranco
and the Lucchesi Palli family were also leading patrons of musicians and the theatre: see Di Benedetto
in Imbruglia (2000), 148–9.
   ⁷⁰ He banned possession of Voltaire’s Dictionary and Fénélon’s Reﬂections on the Conscience of
a King as an offence punishable by two years imprisonment on the grounds that ‘We do not hold
it advisable to place in the hands and mouths of the common people ideas that criticise our
rulers.’ See Rotondo (1984), 492; on censorship and publishing in Naples see Rao (1998) and Luise
(2001).
