22                                       Absolutist Naples

a Habsburg Archduke on the throne of Naples.²¹ The Austrians occupied Sicily in
1720 and held the South until the War of the Polish Succession, when Bourbons
once again regained the upper hand. In 1733 it was agreed that the son of King
Philip V of Spain, the Spanish Infante Don Carlos who had inherited from his
mother the title of Duke of Parma, should become the ruler of what would be an
independent kingdom of Naples and Sicily.²² In 1734 a Spanish army retook
Sicily and Naples; Philip V renounced his own claims in favour of Don Carlos,
who became king. The Habsburg emperor Charles VI grudgingly agreed and in
return the Bourbons acknowledged Habsburg claims to Milan, the Duchies of
Parma and Piacenza, and the Grand Duchy of Tuscany. They also pledged that the
thrones of Sicily and Naples should never revert to the Spanish monarchy.²³
    The ﬁrst priority for Charles of Bourbon²⁴ was to secure the safety of his
Kingdom. Spain was too weak to offer effective protection, and for two centuries
the Kingdom had relied on Spanish armies and navies for its defence. As a result
the Kingdom had only a small army and no navy, even though its extensive coast-
line was exposed to attack by other European powers and by Barbary corsairs that
marauded on the Kingdom’s merchant shipping and ﬁshing vessels. The crum-
bling watch towers that remain to this day had been built to warn inhabitants of
the coastal settlements of impending raids, whose principal aim was to capture
prisoners to be sold as slaves in North Africa.²⁵
    The new Kingdom had more powerful enemies, however. Austria remained hos-
tile, as did Great Britain. When Spain and France went to war over the Austrian
Succession in 1740, the new Austrian empress Maria Theresa worked hard to
foment opposition to the new dynasty amongst the Neapolitan and Sicilian nobles,
many of whom remained strongly pro-Austrian. But when Naples remained stub-
bornly neutral, Commodore Martin led a British naval squadron into the Bay of
Naples on 18 August 1742 and threatened to bombard the city unless the Bourbon
rulers joined the coalition against France.²⁶ The pro-Austrian revolt by the nobles
never materialized, however, and two years later at the battle of Velletri the king of
Naples got the better of an Austrian army that had been sent to depose him.²⁷
   ²¹ In 1713 Spain lost Sicily, which under the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht passed to the Duke
Victor Amadeus II of Savoy, whose family ﬁnally acquired an ardently coveted royal title. When the
Austrians occupied Sicily in 1720 the Piedmontese rulers had to make do with the less desirable
island of Sardinia, which nonetheless still carried a royal title that the rulers of the House of Savoy
kept until they became kings of Italy in 1861.
   ²² To win the support of Philip V of Spain, the French monarchy offered to drop its claims to the
Medici and Farnese inheritance in Italy: this was the inheritance of Philip’s wife, Elizabeth Farnese,
the last surviving descendant of the two great families that had dominated central Italy since the six-
teenth century; see Lynch (1989), 137–41.
   ²³ At the Peace of Vienna 1735, which was reconﬁrmed in 1738.
   ²⁴ Don Carlos took the titles Charles VII in Naples and Charles III in Sicily; however, he is always
referred to by the title he assumed upon becoming king of Spain in 1759: Charles III.
   ²⁵ See Colley (2002).
   ²⁶ This was the ﬁrst of four threats by the British navy to bombard Naples in the century that fol-
lowed: the threats were repeated in 1799, 1815, and 1840.
   ²⁷ Treaty of Fontainebleau, 25 October 1743: see Barra (no date), 4–6.
