                             The Ancien Régime in the South                                 21

the most distant towns and villages of the Kingdom and played an important part
in escalating local conﬂicts that neither the crown nor the courts had the means to
resolve.¹⁸
   The monarchy’s campaign against feudalism in the South therefore also played
a critical part in undermining local systems of power and authority. The projects
and ideas of the reformers played a part in this, too, of course, and especially as
their projects began to be debated in the provinces, thanks mainly to the rapid
increase in masonic lodges, whose numbers multiplied in the last decades of the
century, often with the open support of the government.¹⁹
   Well before the revolution of 1789 and the crisis of the Neapolitan monarchy,
there were clear signs that the European revolutions had found their way to the
South by many different paths. By the closing years of the century these gentle-
manly debates were taking place against a noisier background of conﬂicts in which
the voices of the rural poor could also be clearly heard. The South was not a world
locked into some timeless past, where every attempt at change met with resistance
and failure. In every aspect of political, social, economic, and social life, the pre-
vailing idiom had become change, often radical and deeply disruptive change.
Indeed, it was the deeply disruptive impact of change on the fragile foundations of
southern society that explains why the crisis of the ancien régime monarchy at the
end of the century opened the way to a broader crisis of social as well as political
institutions. The crisis that affected the Italian ancien régimes as a whole came in
the South to take forms that were also distinctive.


                               SEEKING SECURIT Y

Before they could change their Kingdom, its new rulers ﬁrst had to secure it. From
1504 to 1707 the crowns of Naples and Sicily had been possessions of the Spanish
monarchy, ruled by Spanish viceroys whose courts were respectively in Naples and
Palermo. The independent dynastic state that came into being in 1734 was a
direct consequence of the decline of Spanish power, and speciﬁcally of the War for
the Spanish Succession that followed the death of the last Spanish Habsburg
emperor, Charles II, in 1700.²⁰
   The conﬂicts lasted nearly half a century and focused on Spain’s possessions in
Italy, which as well as Naples and Sicily included Milan and Sardinia. First the
Spanish were driven out of southern Italy by the Austrians, who in 1707 placed

   ¹⁸ See especially Rao (2002), 63–113, and Rao (2005), 142–67. Sicily was different: see
Chapter 3.
   ¹⁹ Giarrizzo (1995), 406–20. See also Ferrone (1982/1995, 1989/2000); Chiosi (1986, 1992).
   ²⁰ The result was not one but three wars, which started when Louis XIV of France declared his
grandson, the Duke of Anjou, successor to the Spanish crown (the War of the Spanish Succession
(1702–14)), followed by the War of the Polish Succession (1733–8), and ﬁnally the War of the
Austrian Succession (1740–8).
