                               The Ancien Régime in the South                                        29

at Herculaneum had begun in the 1730s, and the fame of the Roman paintings
and designs and of the remarkable collections of papyri found in the villas of
Herculaneum and Pompeii, and other sites at Castellamare, spread across
Europe thanks to the lavishly illustrated volumes published by the royal print-
ing house in Naples in the 1750s. These were followed by colour reproductions
of paintings on the Greek and Roman vases found at the same sites in volumes
edited by mysterious Baron d’Hancarville and Sir William Hamilton.⁶¹ The
city as a result came to be closely identiﬁed with the new enthusiasm for neo-
classical art, and it also provided the English pottery-master Josiah Wedgwood
with the design for the highly successful line of Etruria ware that was directly
inspired by Hamilton’s reproductions of the classical paintings found at
Pompeii and Herculaneum.⁶²
   Vesuvius was hardly less important in linking the city to contemporary fascina-
tion with the natural sciences, although few observers could resist the unscientiﬁc
temptation of linking the volcano to the character of the Neapolitans. Sir William
Hamilton was not only the volcano’s indefatigable record keeper but also its prin-
cipal publicist. He made the difﬁcult and frequently dangerous ascent to the crater
almost seventy times, generally in the company of a retinue of foreign visitors and
often immediately after major eruptions.⁶³
   The city had much else to reﬂect the glory of the new dynasty and long before
the arrival of the Bourbons was famed as the ‘European capital of music’.⁶⁴ With
four conservatories the city continued to attract the leading musical talents of the
age, among them Paisiello and Cimarosa.⁶⁵ In addition to its rich tradition of
street theatres and puppet stalls, where Pulcinella and his entourage drew on an
older Neapolitan tradition of the commedia dell’arte, the city also boasted ﬁve per-
manent theatres.⁶⁶
   One of Charles III’s ﬁrst initiatives was to rebuild and enlarge the San Carlo
theatre to keep an eye, so it was said, on what his nobles were doing at night.
But the broader signiﬁcance of the monarchy’s role as leader and arbiter of cultural
taste was unmistakable.⁶⁷ The new theatre was connected to the royal palace,
making it an extension of the Court. ‘Groundlings’ were admitted on occasion,
but only the nobility and wealthiest non-noble families were eligible for subscrip-
tions to the boxes, which were allocated personally by the king. The season ran
from the Christmas holidays to Lent and was where the nobility met, entertained,

    ⁶¹ And came to play an important role in establishing the neo-classical style: see Jenkins in Jenkins
and Sloan (1996), 40–60.                                                                         ⁶² Ibid.
    ⁶³ See Constantine (2001), 195; on Baron d’Hancarville see Rousseau, in Rousseau and Porter
(1987).
    ⁶⁴ The ﬁrst performance of Pietro Mestasio’s Didone Abbandonata in 1724 made Naples the birth-
place of European melodrama. Handel’s opera Partenope was ﬁrst performed in 1730, while Giovanni
Pergolesi’s Serva Padrona launched the new fashion for opera buffa that would quickly be taken up in
all the courts and capitals of Europe: De Benedetto in Imbruglia (2000), 135–50.                 ⁶⁵ Ibid.
    ⁶⁶ The San Carlo, the Fiorentino, the Teatro Nuovo, the San Carlino, and the Teatro del Fondo.
    ⁶⁷ Croce, I Teatri (1947).
