                                The Ancien Régime in the South                                         33

being shipped through Naples, from where the Kingdom’s products were
exported to Livorno, Genoa, and Marseilles.⁷⁹ The capital was also the principal
point of entry for imports from France, Spain, Britain, Holland, and the German
states.⁸⁰
   Despite these constraints, many provincial centres were showing unmistakable
signs of steady commercial expansion in the second half of the eighteenth century.
This was the case of towns like Bari, Molfetta, and Trani on the Adriatic coast,
which were the principal outlets for the wheat grown in Capitanata.⁸¹ Further
south, Gallipoli was the principal commercial outlet for the olive oil produced in
Apulia and northern and eastern Calabria, nearly all of which was exported
directly to Naples. Despite the decline of the silk industry, Reggio was another
prosperous commercial centre with trading networks that extended throughout
southern Calabria and with strong commercial links with both Naples and the
Sicilian towns.
   In western Sicily, Palermo replicated the role of Naples, while in the east Catania
and Siracusa were both important commercial centres where revenues from the
wealthy lay and ecclesiastical properties in the rural hinterland were consumed.
These towns were also centres for smaller independent commercial networks
that stretched into the rural interior. Messina, by contrast, had not recovered from
the earthquake of 1743, and like the rest of north-eastern Sicily would be badly
damaged again by the devastating earthquake of 1783, whose epicentre was on
the mainland. The rise of Trapani, which became the second largest port in
western Sicily after Palermo, was a further sign of the impact of rising demand.⁸²
So too was the arrival of foreign merchants like the Liverpool merchants John
Woodhouse and another Englishman Benjamin Ingham, who in the closing years
of the century set up an export–import business in Marsala wine and other Sicilian
export goods. Their enterprise did not prosper until after the turn of the century,
but like the French merchants who came to buy raw silk in large quantities in the
Calabrian market towns their presence indicated how the Kingdom was already
being drawn into Europe’s rapidly expanding commercial networks.⁸³
   The new rulers invested principally in Naples, but did not ignore Palermo,
which was the seat of a Royal Viceroy. Numerous public and private palaces were
built and rebuilt, new piazze and thoroughfares were created, and during the

   ⁷⁹ In the 1770s, the English traveller Henry Swinburne listed the Kingdom’s principal exports as
‘wheat, barley, legumes, Indian corn, hemp, linen, cumin, fennel, honey, wax, fruit, manna, saffron,
potash, brimstone (sulphur), nitre, pitch, sumac, skins, cattle, oranges, lemons, brandy, vinegar’. The
single most important export commodity was olive oil (especially from Bari, Otranto, Gallipoli, and
the provinces of the Abruzzi) and the soap industry of Marseilles was its principal foreign buyer.
Merchants from Lyons were also among the leading purchasers of the Kingdom’s raw silk. The prin-
cipal imports were colonial goods, especially ‘sugar, coffee, and spices, as well as ﬁne fabrics, textiles,
household goods, gun barrels, German, Austrian and Brescian ironworks and quality clothing’.
Swinburne (1783), 79–81.                                          ⁸⁰ Chorley (1965); Romano (1951).
   ⁸¹ Chorley (1965), 38.         ⁸² Benigno (1982).
   ⁸³ Trevelyan (1973); d’Angelo (1988), 47–52.
