                                        Projecting Reform                                           39

   As the terrible famine of 1763–4 had shown, however, the most extreme example
of the nobility’s corporate power was the city of Naples. The city’s government
was controlled by a small and exclusive oligarchy of feudal noblemen, to which
only those whose families formed the nobilità di Piazza, the inner elite of the
Neapolitan aristocracy, were admitted. This oligarchy controlled the Tribunal of
San Lorenzo, which was responsible for ‘policing and maintaining public order
and public morality in the capital’. The municipal ofﬁcials were all noblemen,
including the Eletto del Popolo, who represented the city guilds and corporations;
the Regio Portolano, who was responsible for the use of public land and spaces; and
the Regio Giustiziere, who regulated the city’s markets and commodity prices.¹⁴
   The leader of the municipal junta was appointed by the king and held the title
of Presidente dell’Annona, indicating that the most important of the Tribunal’s
responsibilities was management of the regulations that governed the provision-
ing of this vast metropolis. For this reason the Tribunal exercised a massive array of
powers and jurisdictions throughout the Kingdom, and through tribunals in the
provinces the prices at which staple necessities—primarily grain and olive oil but
also silk, wool, and other raw materials needed for the city’s many small manufac-
tures and craftsmen—were purchased by the city’s provisioning authorities (the
Annona). The authority of the city government therefore stretched to every corner
of the Kingdom, and imposed regulations and restrictions now being identiﬁed as
the principal cause of the poverty of the provinces.


                           REFORM AS CIVIL MISSION

In the decades after the famines the condition of the Kingdom and its institutions,
economy, trade, commerce, agriculture, and populations for the ﬁrst time began
to come under close critical scrutiny. The terms of these debates were set out most
fully in the writing and teaching of Antonio Genovesi. The son of a shoemaker,
Genovesi entered the priesthood to make a living and then turned to philosophy.
He was widely sought after as a teacher and thanks to the patronage of a wealthy
Tuscan banker, Bartolomeo Intieri, was appointed in 1754 to the ﬁrst chair in
political economy, not only at the University of Naples but in all of Europe.¹⁵
   ¹⁴ Also known as the Corpo degli Eletti, but nearly always referred to as the Corpo della Città, this
consisted of an executive (the Sedili) nominated by 5 electoral chapels (the piazze) whose members
came from a list of only 119 noble families that formed the Nobili di Piazza, an additional piazza of
‘heads of distinguished families’ made up of many lesser noble families, as well as some non-nobles
who were nominated from each of the city’s 29 administrative districts known as ottine (subdivisions
of the city’s 9 quartieri). From those nominated, the king appointed 29 capitani di ottina and 58
procuratori di ottina who collectively constituted the Piazza del Popolo from which the king again
nominated a single eletto and 10 consultori who formed the ‘governo della Piazza’. The ‘eletto del
Popolo’, along with one ‘eletto’ nominated from each of the noble piazze, constituted the Tribunal of
San Lorenzo. See Battaglini (1992), 114.
   ¹⁵ Antonio Genovesi (1713–69): the patrons who organized the appointment were the Chaplain
Royal, Celestino Galiani, and the wealthy Tuscan administrator and intellectual Bartolomeo Intieri.
See Pii (1984); Villari (1959); Venturi (1962), 3–32.
