40                                   Absolutist Naples

   Genovesi’s Lectures on Commerce published after the famine in 1765 made him
the pivotal ﬁgure in the reform movement in Naples. Contrasting the economic
conditions of the Kingdom with those of Britain, France, and Spain, Genovesi
argued that economic development could not be achieved without rational insti-
tutions and laws that reﬂected just and progressive social values. Genovesi’s ideas
drew heavily on those of earlier Neapolitan writers, especially Giannone and
Giambattista Vico, and his ideas travelled freely between economics and moral
philosophy. He rejected Rousseau’s idealization of the primitive and insisted that
trade and commerce were the attributes of civilization (incivilmento) and could
ﬂourish only in societies whose institutions encouraged individual liberty.
Freedom, honest industry, and civil responsibility were the mainsprings of com-
mercial expansion and public prosperity; reform was essentially a civil and a civil-
izing mission, an ethical mission whose aim was the regeneration of the nation.
   Genovesi was a pragmatist, however, who believed that reform could be
achieved by practical and empirical means and in the words of one of his most
famous students: ‘. . . Genovesi turned philosophy away from theological and
metaphysical abstractions to face reality.’¹⁶ He also identiﬁed those who were to
accomplish that mission:
In every civilised country to be found in Europe today the tone of society is set neither by
the populace nor by the great, but rather by the middling order, by which I mean priests,
friars, teachers of letters, magistrates and private gentlemen. A proper education such as
will form good minds and robust bodies must have its beginnings with such persons. Yet
there are still countries in Europe where these same people are still amongst the worst
educated, and this renders those states arrogant, ignorant and impossible to reason with.¹⁷
The reformers’ ﬁrst task, therefore, was to educate the middle class and their
second task was to educate those who governed.
   For Genovesi, feudal and mercantilist institutions were the principal obstacles
to the regeneration of Neapolitan society. Feudalism was wicked because it
had created irrational and evil institutions and because the feudal mentalities of
privilege, exemption, and idleness had corrupted the nation and prevented
Neapolitans from asserting their independence. Genovesi also frequently con-
trasted the present state of the Kingdom with the prosperity it had enjoyed in
the distant past before it was subject to foreign invasion and occupation, a long
history of exploitation that had begun when the Romans conquered the South.
The rediscovery of the peoples who had inhabited the South before the Roman
conquest—the Daunites, the Lucanians, the Irpinians, and others—gave the writ-
ings of the Neapolitan reformers a strongly nationalist cast. Following Giannone’s
claim that only an independent secular prince could restore to the South its long
lost independence, the reformers also looked to the new rulers to realize their great
project of national regeneration.

          ¹⁶ Vincenzo Cuoco, cited in Soﬁa (1988), 145.     ¹⁷ Venturi (1962), 28.
