38                                     Absolutist Naples

important government functions, but they did so as agents of the crown and not
as independent sources of power and authority.⁹
    In the South, however, the crown’s authority was much more limited. Even
where the royal writ did run on the mainland, royal administration was conducted
on the king’s behalf by three ancient tribunals in the capital. These tribunals com-
bined juridical and administrative roles in ways that were typical of the European
ancien régime, and their task was to oversee the administration of the royal towns
and cities (università), resolve litigation between the crown and the feudatories,
and settle controversies between local communities and their neighbouring lay or
ecclesiastical feudatories.¹⁰
    The tribunals were controlled by a small but immensely powerful oligarchy of
senior magistrates known as the togati (literally ‘men of the robe’). Despite the
title, they were not the equivalent of the French noblesse de la robe since there were
no institutions on the mainland comparable to the French Parlements or Estates
General.¹¹ Their power derived from the centuries of Spanish rule, when the royal
tribunals had become instruments for defending the independence and privileges
of the Neapolitan ‘nation’ against the pretensions of the Spanish monarchy, the
feudatories, and the Church. This illustrated another important distinction
between Naples and Sicily: the establishing of the Holy Ofﬁce of the Inquisition
in Sicily, but not in Naples. This was partly because the Spanish rulers considered
Naples to be ‘an indomitable and uncontrollable city’, but above all because of the
ﬁerce opposition of the togati.¹²
    The togati numbered no more than seventy senior magistrates, but they made
themselves indispensable intermediaries between the Spanish monarchy and the
most powerful interest groups in the Kingdom. A self-recruiting oligarchy,
they ﬁrmly controlled public administration and their power was reinforced by
the monopoly they exercised over the technical procedures of the law, the
arcanum juris.¹³ The togati were as a result one of the most powerful and indepen-
dent corporations of the ancien régime, without whose cooperation the monarchy
could take few political or administrative initiatives.
    The monarchy’s control over its own administration was severely limited in
other respects. The Kingdom’s army was small, but the feudal nobility exercised
the exclusive right of preferment to all commissions. That had major implications
for civil administration too, since following Spanish practice this was conducted
in each province by military tribunals, Udienze, presided over by governors known
as Presidi. Since these were military ofﬁces, the nobility again exercised the exclus-
ive right of preferment.

   ⁹ On Piedmont see Ricuperati, in Merlin et al. (1994), 448–57, 648–64; on Lombardy Capra
(2005), 218–33.
  ¹⁰ The Camera di Santa Chiara, the Sacro Reale Consiglio, and the Camera della Sommaria. See
Villani (1974), 69–75.
  ¹¹ Except in Sicily, but the Sicilian Parliament was dominated by the great lay and ecclesiastical
feudatories not by the togati.                                                ¹² Rovito (1982), 5.
  ¹³ Ajello (1976).
