                                          2
                         Projecting Reform

                      THE GREAT FAMINE 1763–4

In 1763 and 1764 the worst famine of the century struck Italy. Mortality rates
were extremely high in all the major cities, but even worse in rural areas. Like
the earlier Lisbon earthquake of 1755, the famines played an important part in
shaping the reform movements that developed in the Italian states in the follow-
ing decades. Although the causes were natural, many were convinced that their
consequences had been needlessly exacerbated by bad institutions and harmful
regulations.¹
   The effects were especially dramatic in Naples, where it had been clear from the
spring of 1763 that the coming harvest was likely to fail almost completely. But no
measures were taken, and by the summer there was serious unrest in the capital
and throughout the Kingdom. In August, the carriage carrying the young king to
hear mass in the church of San Maria del Carmine was stopped by a crowd of
women protesting against high food prices and shortages. The government feared
a major revolt in the city and to prevent this a military expedition was sent to
Apulia to seize whatever grain could be found to secure the supplies needed for the
capital.
   Grain was forcibly requisitioned in the provinces to feed Naples, causing thou-
sands of starving people to head to the capital in search of food. As news spread in
the following spring that the coming harvest was expected to fail as well, as many
as forty thousand starving immigrants were estimated to have ﬂooded into the city
from the provinces. Daily processions of religious relics were staged in an attempt
to lower tensions, but there was no relief and in April plague began to spread and
carried off an estimated two to three hundred thousand souls.²
   The crisis grew worse but the government was unable to intervene because
the city’s provisioning regulations were the exclusive monopoly of the municipal
government and its tribunals in the city and in the provinces, and of the small aris-
tocratic elite who controlled them. When the noble junta proved unable to agree
on how to act, Bernardo Tanucci, who was head of the Regency government,
authorized the city merchants to purchase grain abroad. He even contemplated

                     ¹ Venturi (1973a), 394–472.     ² Ibid. 436.
