32                                     Absolutist Naples

to build the new poorhouse reﬂected the growing scale of poverty in the city,
which was exacerbated by rising prices, by the closure of many monasteries, and
by the difﬁculties facing many of the city’s confraternities and mutual aid associ-
ations.⁷⁶ But the decision to build the new poorhouse was taken at a moment when
economists in Italy, as in the rest of Europe, were arguing that the indiscriminate
provision of charity by such institutions was the cause not the cure of poverty and
unemployment. The project for the Royal Poorhouse in Naples was untouched by
such considerations, however, and was inspired instead by the great missionary
churches that had been built in Mexico and other parts of Spanish America to
draw the heathen Indians to the true faith. In Fuga’s plan, the central core of the
hospice was a vast church that would perform a similar missionary function in this
teeming European metropolis.⁷⁷
   Although never completed, Fuga’s vast project nonetheless effectively conveyed
the monarchy’s paternalist concern for its subject. Less intentionally, its very
scale signalled the inability to devise effective responses to problems that many
were beginning to argue epitomized deeper inadequacies of the ancien régime: the
alarming increases in pauperism and the excessive size of a city that lacked any
means to support itself beyond revenues drawn from the provinces. In a metaphor
that gained currency in the second half of the century, Naples was a swollen head
that lived parasitically off the shrunken corpse of the provinces.


                             BEYOND THE CAPITAL

In some respects that image was exaggerated. As the Kingdom’s principal com-
mercial as well as political and cultural centre, the capital generated consumer
needs that supported commercial networks that extended from the farms of the
fabled Campania Felix to the towns along the Bay of Naples—Portici, Torre del
Greco, Torre Annunziata, and Castellamare di Stabia—to more distant centres
like Campobasso, Nola, Salerno, and Avellino.⁷⁸ Naples was also the hub for the
pivotal commercial axis that linked the capital with Apulia and the Adriatic coast
where the city’s grain was grown, since this could be carried by ship more easily
and at less cost than overland transport from provinces closer to the city.
   Bari and the Adriatic ports were also at the centre of other commercial net-
works that connected with the Papal States, the Republic of Venice, Trieste, the
Dalmatian and Croatian ports, and the eastern Mediterranean. But it was an
increasing source of resentment in the provinces that the lion’s share of foreign
trade was monopolized by Naples. Olive oil, grain, silk, and other products from
the mainland provinces and from Sicily could only enter the export trade after
  ⁷⁶ At the end of the century there were 146 convents and monasteries, 44 conservatories for
women, 4 hospitals and hospices, and 8 colleges and seminaries in the capital. See Moricolo (1994),
26, 73–9.                                               ⁷⁷ Id.; Valenzi (1995); Migliorini (1992).
  ⁷⁸ Marin, in Clark and Lepetit (1997), 143–216, and Ringrose in ibid. 217–40.
