                                   Projecting Reform                                 37

which all sections of Neapolitan society and all public foundations held shares.⁵
The arrendamenti had as a result become one of the most important ﬁnancial
institutions of the ancien régime monarchy, but could not safely be touched
unless some way was found to redeem the existing creditors. The Kingdom’s
French rulers would later do this by means of mass sales of church lands, but that
was not a conceivable option for the ancien régime rulers, who were forced to see
a large portion of the monarchy’s ﬁscal revenues go to pay the interest owed to the
holders of arrendamenti and to support a huge class of hereditary venal ofﬁce
holders.⁶
   The situation was made worse by the scale of feudal exemptions and ecclesi-
astical mortmain in the Kingdom. As a partial remedy a new hearth tax was
introduced in 1737 to increase direct revenues, which were assessed through a
new tax survey (catasto) of every town and village on the mainland. But since the
monarchy did not have the administrative means to attempt the more accurate
geometric tax surveys being adopted in the Habsburg lands, the new tax was based
on simple estimates. Because all feudal and ecclesiastical properties remained
exempt, the new levy fell almost entirely on the poor.⁷
   For all forms of extraordinary expenditure the monarchy relied on the custom-
ary grants voted by the feudatories. When Charles III needed to raise funds for the
war against Austria in 1744, for example, the lay and ecclesiastical feudatories
granted him a feudal donativo, but in return he was required, as was customary, to
conﬁrm all their privileges and exemptions. By the end of the century little had
changed, and the monarchy remained dependent on the donativi and other levies
that could only be raised with the consent of the feudatories.
   The crown’s ﬁscal and ﬁnancial difﬁculties were reﬂected in its administrative
weaknesses. Not only did it rule Naples and Sicily on different terms, but most of
the Kingdom was governed not by the crown but by the feudatories, the Church,
and great self-governing corporations like the cities of Naples and Palermo. As one
contemporary put it, the Kingdom was divided up into ‘as many little different
monarchies as there are Feudatories’.⁸
   In this respect at least, southern Italy was more similar to countries like Poland
or Hungary on Europe’s eastern peripheries. In the other Italian states, feudal
jurisdictions remained powerful only in the Papal States, in Friuli, and in Savoy
and Sardinia. In the Grand Duchy of Tuscany feudalism in its classical form had
never taken root, while in Austrian Lombardy and in the lands of the House of
Savoy—except in the hereditary Duchy of Savoy—the privileges of the lay
and ecclesiastical nobility and of the Church had been severely curtailed since
the previous century. By the early eighteenth century the House of Savoy in
Piedmont and the Habsburg rulers in Lombardy had both established effective
centralized administrations. In both cases the nobles continued to exercise

        ⁵ De Rosa (1958/2005), pp. x–xii, 3–17.      ⁶ On France see Doyle (1996).
        ⁷ Villani (1974), 192–5.      ⁸ Rao (1984), 41.
