36                                   Absolutist Naples

transferring part of the city’s bloated population to new settlements in the
provinces, but once the danger passed he admitted that the government was
powerless against the noble oligarchy that governed the city, which he described as
‘a Hydra, a beast with many heads’.³
   The famine had dramatically exposed the problems posed not only by the priv-
ileges enjoyed by the capital and the small aristocratic elite that governed the city,
but also by the whole system of regulations and monopolies that seemed to
obstruct every form of production and commercial exchange in the Kingdom. As
a result, Naples would come to epitomize the evils of the archaic and irrational
institutions on which the ancien régime was founded and in the debates that fol-
lowed a new group of writers, thinkers, and teachers began to make institutional
and political reform the premise for the Kingdom’s economic recovery and the
civil regeneration.


                      THE OBSTACLES TO REFORM

By the time that Charles III left for Spain in 1759, the monarchy’s attempts to
increase its authority and revenues had done little more than reveal the scale of the
obstacles that confronted it. In an attempt to overcome the jurisdictions that
limited the monarchy’s ability to govern in 1739 Bernardo Tanucci had created an
ad hoc tribunal, the Supreme Magistracy of Commerce, with the very broad task of
promoting the Kingdom’s internal and external trade and improving the state of
‘agriculture, manufacture and commerce’. To enable it to override the jurisdictions
of all other tribunals, the Magistracy was given a number of extraordinary powers.
But when the existing tribunals refused to recognize these, the new tribunal was
powerless. Similar reactions followed when Tanucci attempted to reorganize the
administration of justice, revise the legal codes, and redeem venal ofﬁces, but with
the same results.⁴
   Nor was progress made towards increasing the crown’s revenues. As a result of
the earlier crisis of the Spanish monarchy, excise duties on the production and sale
of silk, oil, tobacco, manna, soap, playing cards, and countless other goods had
been permanently lost. The revenues were raised by tax farms known as arrenda-
menti, which the Spanish viceroys had sold to private investors. The taxes continued
to be raised, but the greater part went to support hordes of holders of venal ofﬁce,
many of which were hereditary, and to pay the annual interest owed to those who
owned or had inherited shares in the arrendamenti.
   By mortgaging the kingdom’s future ﬁscal revenues to its creditors, the Spanish
viceroys had turned the arrendamenti into a form of consolidated national debt in
  ³ Venturi (1973a), 444.
  ⁴ These tribunals were the Camera della Sommaria, the Magistrato del Commercio, the
Sopraintendenza della Reale Azienda, and the Tribunale della Dogana di Foggia. Chiosi (1987),
371–467.
