                               The Ancien Régime in the South                                       31

founded by the Austrian government in 1732 was not re-established until 1778
and even then suffered from severe lack of resources.⁷¹
    Nonetheless, by the end of the century Naples had become an established station
on the European Grand Tour. That was good for business, but not good enough to
make a signiﬁcant contribution to the city’s economy. In economic terms, the great-
est impact of the monarchy’s initiatives came from the work and demand created by
its building projects, and when it came to promoting trade and manufacturing
enterprises royal interventions followed conventional mercantilist logic. Charles
III’s government established a variety of royal manufactures whose main purpose
was to provide luxury goods and apparel for use at court and to reduce the need for
imports.⁷² There were also a number of more utopian initiatives, and after the
expulsion of the Jesuits in 1767 the convents of San Giuseppe di Chiaia and of
the Carminello were converted into pauper schools under royal patronage.⁷³
    The most unusual of these utopian schemes came toward the end of the
century when in 1789 the Royal Silk Works was founded at San Leucio near the
royal palace at Caserta. The aim was to improve the quality of silk fabrics by
using the most modern techniques, but what made the project remarkable were
the utopian regulations for the community of silk workers introduced three years
later and supposedly drafted by the king himself. They and their families were
provided with housing, schools, and medical services, while strict equality
between the sexes was to be observed and dowries were banned.⁷⁴
    The San Leucio colony was established after the revolution in France and just
before the monarchy cut all its ties with the reform movement and was most prob-
ably inspired by the utopian colonies founded by the Jesuits in Paraguay. Similar
South American models also inspired the greatest monument to the monarchy’s
paternalism, the Royal Hospice for the Poor (Reale Albergo dei Poveri) in Naples.
    This too had been started by Charles III, to match the monumental poorhouse
built earlier in the century by the Austrians in Palermo. The Neapolitan project
was designed on a massive scale by the architect Ferdinando Fuga, and consisted
of a complex of workhouses, hospitals, orphanages, and asylums for the mentally
ill. Its façade measured nearly 500 metres, making it one of the largest poorhouses
in Europe.⁷⁵
    Naples already possessed an immensely rich and varied assortment of charitable
foundations, hospices, and hospitals run by religious and lay groups. The decision

   ⁷¹ Chiosi (2001), 122–3.
   ⁷² These included a royal craft school modelled on the Gobelins factory in Paris, an Academy for
the Design and Working of Precious Stones at S. Carlo la Mortella, a coral factory, a factory for making
crystal glass, a lace factory, and a silk works. His ﬁrst and showiest project, however, was the Royal
Porcelain Works, which was built in 1742 next to the splendid new palace at Capodimonte and mod-
elled directly on the famous Meissen factory of Charles’s father-in-law, the Elector of Saxony.
   ⁷³ The Carminello housed 200 orphan girls, who were taught to spin and weave hemp, and to
make lace and silk merletti. Ferdinand IV later added a dyeing shop, spinning works, and weaving
shed and turned the Carminiello into the ﬁrst royal silk factory in the kingdom.
   ⁷⁴ Tescione (1961), 178–89.             ⁷⁵ See Guerra (1996), 153–215.
