50                                      Absolutist Naples

paid by the feudatories were the donativi that the crown was entitled to raise on
the occasion of major royal events or war. But in return, the crown was obliged to
conﬁrm the feudatories’ rights and privileges.⁵³
   The reformers noted that despite the feudatories’ insistence on their exemp-
tions and privileges, feudal estates were still freely bought and sold and were
attractive to purchasers because of the various forms of patronage, ecclesiastical
beneﬁces, and social status attached to them. This blurred distinctions between
feudal and non-feudal property and was another item on the growing list of objec-
tions to feudalism. An important contribution to that debate came from the cadet
sons of noble families who were disinherited by the system of entails that had been
introduced to protect the integrity of family patrimonies from creditors.⁵⁴ Cadets
excluded from direct inheritance instead received a simple allowance (known as a
secondagenitura) to enable them to ‘live nobly or enter military service’. In the
absence of male heirs, women might inherit an estate, but to avoid this, right of
succession had been extended to the ‘fourth degree when there is descendence in
the direct male line from the original holder of the title’.⁵⁵
   Some of the most outspoken opposition to feudalism came from the cadets of
noble families, of whom Gaetano Filangieri was the most famous. But this was only
one aspect of a broader crisis of identity within the feudal nobility that became
increasingly evident in the ﬁnal decades of the eighteenth century. As the debates
on feudalism developed the nobles and the clergy became divided. Some rallied to
defend feudal practice and privilege, while others denounced the narrow oligarchy
of noble families that governed the capital and monopolized senior commissions in
the army. As in the rest of Europe, the debates on the virtues and functions of a
genuine aristocracy reﬂected a deeper crisis of identity within the nobility. Very
similar divisions were apparent within the ranks of the clergy, and explain why
in 1799 many aristocrats and senior churchmen would see the Republic as an
opportunity to restore both the nobility and religion to their rightful place in society.


     THE AFRICAN DESERT AND BARBAROUS TARTARY:
               THE PASTORAL ECONOMY

Feudalism was the principal but not the only enemy. Echoing ideas that had ﬁrst
been voiced by the French economists known as the Physiocrats, many Neapolitan
writers were especially outraged by the survival of what they considered to be one of

   ⁵³ Charles III raised 5,255,000 ducats in donativi from the feudatories between 1734 and 1759,
including a donativo of 1 million ducats in 1736 to mark his accession to the throne; another million
in 1738 on the occasion of his marriage to Maria Amalia of Saxony; 500,000 ducats in 1741 on the
birth of his daughter; 700,000 ducats in 1748 on the birth of Prince Filippo. The remainder took
the form of war subsidies raised in 1742, 1744, 1746, and 1747. NDG, ii. 44, 123–4.
   ⁵⁴ Known as maggioraschi and ﬁdecomessi: see Villani (1968), 81–97, and Cooper, in Goody (ed.)
(1976), 192–326.                                                                    ⁵⁵ NDG, i. 280.
