                                       Projecting Reform                                  49
How had this come about? Popes, barons, Viceroys, bad laws, tax-farms, the courts? All
these have contributed to the fact that the very nature of the soil and the people has been
changed, causing the nation’s ancient population to fall by two-thirds . . . Our laws,
because governed by the maxims of feudal government, have made the condition of our
agriculture wretched and have beneﬁted only a class of idle men . . . All those amongst us
who have talent and some little fortune turn to the courts or to medicine as a career, or else
become notaries or priests, in such ways we seek to provide for our needs . . . From this
derives the life of idleness and inactivity that renders sad and consumes the inhabitants
of our small provincial towns. The rest of the nation is mainly employed in selling
goods made in foreign countries, in a variety of small artisan enterprises or else as servants
to the rich.⁴⁷
   Galanti estimated that only one million of the more than four million souls
living on the mainland were free of feudal obligations and taxes.⁴⁸ The heaviest
burdens fell on those who lived in towns and villages subject to feudal jurisdic-
tions, who in addition to the tithes paid to the feudatory and the Church also paid
taxes to the crown and to the provincial administration for poor relief, the militia,
and other services. In most parts of the Kingdom, waterways, mills, and public
bread ovens were monopolies of the feudal landowners, abbeys, or convents. The
peasant farmer was taxed ‘to grind his own corn and bake the bread for his own
family’ and in the Terra d’Otranto even sea salt and pebbles were feudal monopolies.
   The consequences were clear to see: the inhabitants of feudal towns lived in
‘pitiful hovels roofed with wood and straw where a single bed shares space with the
swine and beast of burden’.⁴⁹ Although the feudatories no longer had the right to
impose capital punishment, their courts were responsible for maintaining order
and administering justice at a local level. Their orders were carried out by feudal
ofﬁcers with various titles—mastrodatti, portolani—and enforced by armed
retainers known as armigeri or sbirri.
   Feudal landowners were exempt from most of the taxes paid by the rest of the
population. Galanti calculated that of the two and a half million ducats paid
annually in direct taxes, less than one quarter of a million ducats was paid by
the barons. Nor was feudal land subject to the hearth tax introduced in 1737.⁵⁰
The feudatories were supposed to pay tax to both the crown and to the local
communities for land they held by private as opposed to feudal title,⁵¹ but they
generally avoided doing so.
   As feudatories, the barons paid a direct tax called the adoa, which had ori-
ginated in the sixteenth century as a commutation of feudal services. Originally
set at 26 per cent of revenues, inﬂation had by the eighteenth century made the
returns derisory. They were also subject to a heavy inheritance tax at death, the
rate being half an estate’s estimated revenues.⁵² But the estimates were always
contested so that payment was deferred often for generations. The heaviest taxes

        ⁴⁷ Venturi (1962), 974.           ⁴⁸ BDN, iii. 37.    ⁴⁹ NDG, i. 279.
        ⁵⁰ The catasto onciario: see Villani (1968), 56–63.     ⁵¹ Termed burgensatici.
        ⁵² The rilievo.
