                                        Projecting Reform                                         43


                          THE CAPITAL DENOUNCED

Although Galanti’s main concern was the depressed condition of the provinces,
his starting point was the capital whose privileges he like many others now
believed were the principal cause of the poverty of the provinces.
   By the closing decade of the century that swollen head was inhabited by some
550,000 souls, of whom 380,000 lived in the parishes of Naples, with a further
130,000 in the outlying casali and about 40,000 were soldiers and temporary resid-
ents.²⁵ By Galanti’s estimate some 25,000 noble families lived in the capital,²⁶
whose exclusive core was the nobiltà di piazza, the hundred or so families that con-
stituted the four noble Sedili. Galanti had little to say about their economic condi-
tion, but Henry Swinburne, an English Catholic educated in France who visited
Naples in 1776, was struck by the extravagant behaviour of the ‘grandees’ and
by the huge numbers of their retainers and hangers-on, which was why they
were heavily indebted and rarely entertained foreigners. By English standards he
considered the marriage portions modest, and he noted that the nobles no longer
wore swords, although the dress of the middle classes had become increasingly
luxurious.²⁷
   Then came the lawyers, a class Galanti scathingly dismissed as people ‘main-
tained by the litigious character of this nation’: he estimated that there were about
6,000 employed in the law courts in the capital and 26,000 in the Kingdom as a
whole. Then there were the 10,000 physicians, doctors, apothecaries, and leeches
practising in the capital and in the nearby city of Salerno, which was the seat of the
Kingdom’s ancient medical school. Galanti had little to say about the numerous
secular and regular clergy, although he did praise the parish clergy for their role in
maintaining public order and the continuous ‘brilliant festivals’ organized by the
parish churches and lay confraternities that kept the lower classes entertained and
out of mischief. ²⁸
   Henry Swinburne was struck by the orderliness of the city, and commented
that despite its size there was no drunkenness, little theft, and few murders,
which led him to claim that its populace compared very favourably with
‘the mobs of London and Edinburgh’. Galanti reported that there were
fewer than 40 murders a year in the city, but expressed great alarm at the growth
in the number of beggars and vagrants. The supposed cause was that many
artisans were unable to save to provide for their old age, but Galanti echoed
   ²⁵ NDG, i. 190, 311–18.
   ²⁶ Of these, 1,500 were nobili di piazza, fuori piazza, feudatories, nobili viventi, and soldiers.
Another 4,500 noble families lived in the provinces.
   ²⁷ Swinburne also noted that ‘it does not cost a nobleman more to marry a daughter than to make
her a nun’. Entering a nunnery, he was informed, cost about 1,000 pounds sterling, but did require in
addition an annual pension and a portion of the inheritance. On the other hand, ‘servants and artiﬁ-
cers of the city give from 50 to 100 ducats with their daughters: peasants and countrymen go as far as
300 ducats’ ((1783), i. 65–9).                                                       ²⁸ NDG, i. 378.
