44                                      Absolutist Naples

the reformers’ conviction that the indiscriminate charity provided by the
excessive numbers of religious foundations was the main cause of indigence in
the capital.²⁹
   From Galanti’s description, Naples emerges as a city full of shops, taverns, ice-
cream parlours, and above all coffee shops, crammed with clients at all times
of day and the principal meeting place for all classes: ‘even for the humblest work-
men who now regularly drink coffee in the morning since they believe it to be
beneﬁcial for the digestion’. However, the working classes also attracted the
reformers’ disdain: ‘The lower classes of the capital are a little doltish (goffo), they
do everything to live and sell their services cheaply.’³⁰
   Amongst the city’s working people, domestic servants, porters, carriage drivers,
retainers, and ﬂunkeys were the largest occupational groups. At the bottom of the
social scale were the ‘mascalzoni, also known disparagingly as lazzari because of
their nudity . . . . Nearly all are foundlings who live in the street and congregate
especially around the Mercato district where the poorest, most undisciplined
and most rebellious sections of the populace of Naples reside’. However, Galanti
dismissed as gross exaggeration travellers’ stories that the lazzaroni formed a cor-
porate body that elected their own leader and dealt directly with the authorities.³¹
By contrast Henry Swinburne considered the large and relatively prosperous
community of ﬁshermen and their families in the nearby Santa Lucia district to be
‘the handsomest men in Naples: they have true Grecian features and are the most
substantial and best lodged portion of the Neapolitan populace’.³²
   The large number of artisans and merchants reﬂected the city’s role as the prin-
cipal centre of consumption on the mainland. They included silversmiths, silk-
makers, carriage builders and repairers, ceramic makers, and cordswainers, as well
as a growing number of foreign merchants. For Galanti, however, the expansion of
consumption was a source of great misgiving: ‘in general our workshops and man-
ufactures are inferior to those of foreigners, and especially of the English, since our
national spirit is not directed at these affairs. The king has attempted to set good
examples, but these have been little followed.’ Luxury consumption was doubly
dangerous: it encouraged the consumption of foreign goods that the Kingdom
could ill afford and promoted a culture of idleness and indulgence instead of
stimulating interest in new forms of production. The mania for foreign consumer
goods also reinforced the prejudice against manual labour that led persons of
talent and ability to seek more socially acceptable forms of employment, with the
result that rather than engage in trade or industry, ‘our people prefer to make
money through litigation’.
   If the Kingdom was not to become a commercial colony of the English or the
French, Galanti concluded, it must learn to satisfy its own needs from its own

     ²⁹ Galanti, Breve Descrizione di Napoli e del Suo Contorno (henceforth, BDN) (1792), i. 273.
     ³⁰ BDN, i. 270, 383.          ³¹ NDG, i. 169, 268: see Goethe’s comments above p. 27.
     ³² Swinburne (1783), i. 65
