                                      Projecting Reform                                       45

resources. Naples in particular should not be content to consume foreign com-
modities but must learn to develop its own industries.³³


                        THE PROVINCES REVEALED

However, that would never happen until the city learned to live off its resources,
rather than those it drained from the provinces:
The city of Naples enjoys the right to devour the provinces because it has the right to take
for itself their livestock and the fruits of their agriculture, just as Constantinople does from
the provinces of the Ottoman Empire.
The sad result was that Naples ‘has unhappily swallowed the entire kingdom,
making it poor, oppressed and deserted’.³⁴
    The reformers’ great mission was, therefore, to reveal the causes of the impov-
erished state of the provinces because ‘in Naples more is known about the
condition of the island of Tahiti than of our own provinces’.³⁵ Such ignorance
was not easily overcome, since the disastrous state of communications made all
forms of overland travel difﬁcult, slow, and in many seasons of the year impossible.
‘Our kingdom is a peninsula with swamps along its coasts that lie covered in
stagnant water that the unhealthy air has made uninhabitable.’ Ancient neglect
had been aggravated by the uncontrolled clearance of woodland in more recent
times, which accelerated the processes of soil erosion and land slides that clogged
the streams and rivers of the valley bottoms, creating vast and unhealthy swamps.
Even in the fertile province of Campania, huge areas of fertile agricultural land
had been overtaken by swamps. On the mouth of the Volturno River, the ancient
port of Literno had been swallowed up by marshes that had formed around
Vico di Partano. Swamps had also invaded the land between Salerno and Agropoli,
and the Sarno River, navigable in classical times, was no longer passable.
The Marchesato Plain on the Ionian coast between Squillace and the river Neti
was ﬂooded, leaving Crotone as the only city to have survived.³⁶
    In other parts of the Kingdom, lack of rainfall and irrigation were the main
reasons for the population’s decline and the agricultural decay. The Terra
d’Otranto had more than two hundred miles of coast, but contained only four
thinly populated towns. Apulia was ‘a real desert’ where the land could only be
worked thanks to seasonal migrants from the Abruzzi Mountains. In the
Calabrian provinces the population was low: the Marchesato Plain was almost
uninhabited, while the province of Cosenza was empty in winter and spring when
its inhabitants left to work on the harvest on the eastern coast.³⁷

      ³³ BDN, i. 263.         ³⁴ Ibid. 264; iii. 309.
      ³⁵ Cited in Venturi (1962), 973: for debates on luxury in Italy see Wahnbaeck (2004).
      ³⁶ NDG, iii. 122.         ³⁷ Ibid. iii. 124–5, 195–6.
