48                                     Absolutist Naples

   In Reggio, Swinburne was impressed by the fertility of the land around the city
and its thriving silkworm industry, although he noted that the workers were ‘less
expert than the Tuscans, who although more northerly manage to produce two or
three hatchings per year. The silk work houses are owned by wealthy families in
Reggio who furnish rooms, leaves, eggs and every necessary implement; take two
thirds of the proﬁt and leave the rest for the attendant.’ However, the industry had
a strongly subordinate structure. The eggs were not raised locally but imported
from Livorno, while the raw silk was exported without being worked, one reason,
Swinburne argued, being the unjust character of the tax system that took a ﬁxed
percentage in weight of the crop: ‘In general the proﬁts of the silk trade in this
country centre on the Barons and the Revenue Ofﬁces.’ But although the high
levels of taxation gave rise to widespread smuggling, Swinburne reckoned that
Reggio still earned around half a million ducats a year from olive oil exports
alone.⁴⁴
   Swinburne’s own interest in the Kingdom’s resources and products was
designed to satisfy the curiosity of readers in England, and was therefore another
illustration of the reasons Sir William Hamilton’s ‘remote corner’ was becoming
less distant. But Swinburne’s account provides further evidence that incentives
derived from increasing demand were causing existing constraints to be more
apparent and less easily accepted.


             FEUDALISM: ‘ THE CRUELLEST ENEMY OF
                        CIVIL LIBERT Y ’

Among the reform writers a consensus was gaining ground that the Kingdom was
rich in natural resources but impoverished by evil institutions: there were too
many taxes, too many monopolies, too many idle monks and friars, too few roads,
too many consumers, too few producers, too much luxury, too much poverty, too
little knowledge or learning. But the root cause of all these evils was feudalism.
Galanti wrote:
It is feudalism that has burdened agriculture and society with the monopolies, exactions
and regulations that have impoverished the many to the advantage of the few. . . . Feudal
government is the cruellest enemy of civil liberty . . . and it has survived more extensively in
the Kingdom of the Sicilies than in any other part of Italy.⁴⁵
Feudalism had sapped the spirit of enterprise and industry itself so that ‘in
the course of time all land in the kingdom will ﬁnish in the hands of idle
persons who live only from their revenues and who have destroyed all spirit of
industry’.⁴⁶


      ⁴⁴ Swinburne (1783), i. 357–8.        ⁴⁵ NDG, i. 273–4.          ⁴⁶ Ibid. iii. 261–9.
