                                      Projecting Reform                                        47

   Swinburne also visited the nearby Imperiali estates belonging to the Prince of
Francavilla, where cotton had been introduced in rotation with wheat, barley, and
oats before the land was turned over to sheep-grazing for a year. The Imperiali
estates were worked in partnership—‘the proprietor tills it the ﬁrst time; the ten-
ant gives it four subsequent ploughings and furnishes seed; the expense of the
harvest is born equally by both and the proﬁts halved between them.’
   Taranto was less to his liking: ‘it is without doubt the most disgusting habita-
tion of human beings in Europe, except perhaps the Jewish ghetto in Rome’, but
here he met with another leading ﬁgure of the Neapolitan reform movement,
Monsignore Capecelatro, the Archbishop of Taranto, whom the English traveller
acknowledged to be one of his most widely informed sources. Swinburne
then resumed his journey southwards along the difﬁcult roads leading to
Calabria, following the Bradano River to Metapontum and then onwards by way
of Policoro, where he admired another huge estate that had formerly belonged to
the Jesuits.⁴¹
   As he moved further south and through Calabria, however, Swinburne’s com-
ments on the landowners became less admiring:
The Barons are in general very far from considering themselves as the protectors, the polit-
ical fathers of their vassals, but encroach so much on the commons and the cultivated
grounds for the sake of extending their chase that the peasants have neither room nor
opportunity to raise sufﬁcient food for their support: they therefore ﬂy to the mendicant
and other religious orders of friars and take religious habit to procure their subsistence. The
father of a family when pressed for the payments of taxes and sinking beneath the load
of hunger and distress va alla montagna, that is he retires to the woods where he meets
with fellow sufferers, turns smuggler and becomes by degrees an outlaw, a robber and an
assassin.⁴²
   It was not only in Calabria that the rural poor seemed overwhelmed by taxation
and exclusion from the land. ‘Throughout the realm the situation of the husband-
men is truly deplorable: everything is excised and the mode of collecting is cruel
and pernicious.’⁴³ Crossing the plain of Sibari, Swinburne noted how the collapse
of the complex irrigation systems of antiquity had turned one of the greatest cities
of Magna Graecia into a malarial swamp.
   After taking shelter at Capo Rizzuto to avoid a raiding party of Barbary pirates,
Swinburne reached Catanzaro, the principal administrative town of lower
Calabria whose 12,000 inhabitants ‘live by the law and the sale of corn, silk and
oil’. Leaving Catanzaro for Reggio by way of Gerace, Swinburne was fascinated by
the Albanian settlement he visited at Bora, one of the many Greek Orthodox
communities in Calabria and the Abruzzi that dated back to the ﬁfteenth century.

  ⁴¹ Before their expulsion it had supported over 5,000 sheep, 300 cattle, 400 buffalo, 400 goats,
and 200 horses and provided work for more than 200 families, but when Swinburne saw it the farms
had fallen into decay. Ibid. 236, 278.                                             ⁴² Ibid. i. 282.
  ⁴³ Ibid. i. 285.
