42                                       Absolutist Naples


                          DISCOVERING THE NATION

By the time Filangieri died in 1788, a generation of writers inspired by Genovesi’s
call for useful knowledge were already documenting the state of the realm and its
economy. In 1770 the marquis Domenico Grimaldi, a wealthy and widely trav-
elled Calabrian landowner, drew attention to the disastrous consequences of the
regulations imposed by the arrendamenti on the production of oil and silk in
Calabria.²¹ The marquis Giuseppe Palmieri, a wealthy landowner from the Terra
di Otranto, published a detailed study of the obstacles to the production and
export of olive oil (Degli Ulivi, 1794), and the abbé Francesco Longano wrote the
ﬁrst detailed account of economic conditions in the provinces of Molise and
Capitanata, the principal sources of the capital’s wheat. From Teramo in the
mountainous Abruzzi province, Melchiorre Delﬁco denounced the damage to
agriculture caused by taxes, collective customary rights, and transhumant grazing
and argued the beneﬁts of new crops like rice.²²
   The most comprehensive survey of the Kingdom was the work of Giuseppe
Maria Galanti, who between 1782 and 1785 travelled tirelessly through the main-
land provinces. The result was the Nuova Descrizione Storica e Geograﬁca delle
Sicilie, a work of extraordinary breadth and detail acclaimed throughout Europe
as a pioneering and incomparable exercise in the new science of statistics.²³
   Galanti’s purpose was to document Genovesi’s premise that the disastrous con-
dition of the Kingdom was the work of man, not nature:
Men have always toiled to turn into horrible calamities the precious gifts which nature has
bestowed on them. Today we have come to understand that the noble and useful applica-
tion of power derives from imposing the rule of law to make men more virtuous, more
tranquil and more enlightened.
   Better governance and better laws were the secret to moral and economic
progress, and Galanti’s conﬁdence in the restorative power of rational laws and
rational institutions was reinforced by his conviction that the natural resources
of the South were abundant and plentiful: ‘Nowhere outside this Kingdom is
there greater variety and abundance of nature and land: but everything here tends
to render the property of the industrious man uncertain and precarious and hence
oppress agriculture.’²⁴ Reform was, therefore, essentially a matter of liberating
the Kingdom’s natural and human resources.

   ²¹ Saggio sopra l’economia campestre della Calabria.
   ²² Venturi (1962), 1096–171. See also Chorley (1965), 141–203; Marcy (1974), 399–413;
Marino (1988), 35–8, 245–59.
   ²³ An enthusiastic Christian Joseph Jagemann declared from Weimar, ‘there is surely no compar-
able treatise on the constitution of any other European nation today’, and Jean-Marie Alquier would
later describe Galanti as ‘the author of one of the ﬁnest compilations of statistics that have been
achieved in Europe’. Venturi (1958), 973; Soﬁa (1988), 123. On Galanti see Villani (1989), 247–60.
   ²⁴ G. M. Galanti, Nuova Descrizione Storica e Geograﬁca delle Sicilie (henceforth, NDG) (1786), ii. 7.
