                                      Projecting Reform                                      41

   Feudalism was the great symbol of past oppression and the principal cause of
the present decay. It was feudalism that made the nation ‘inferior’ to other leading
European and Italian states and its abolition was the great task awaiting the new
prince who after centuries of foreign oppression would restore the Kingdom’s lost
independence. These were even more central themes in the writings of Gaetano
Filangieri, whose magisterial Scienza della Legislazione was written in the decade
of the American Revolution and published in the one that followed.
   Filangieri insisted on the interlocking and interdependent nature of feudal
institutions, which, he argued, could only be destroyed by abolishing their jurid-
ical premises:
In the present condition of the nations of Europe everything belongs to the few. What is
needed is that everything should belong to the many.
Yet this could not be achieved merely by abolishing internal customs duties and
gabelles, nor even by abolishing particular feudal rights and feudal entails (known
as maggioraschi and ﬁdecomessi) that gave the feudatories a monopoly over land for
which the interests of younger sons were sacriﬁced. What was needed above all
was reform of the law and the magistracy, and the creation of primary schools,
technical schools, and colleges to raise the skills of the population and its moral
awareness. Progress, education, and moral values were inseparable, because with-
out the support of an informed civil society no reform could succeed.¹⁸
   Filangieri was Genovesi’s intellectual heir, but the Scienza della Legislazione set
out a much broader project that would necessitate uprooting the fundamental
institutions of the ancien régime. Only then could the forces needed to give new
vitality to the nation be emancipated. But Filangieri was no less committed than
Genovesi to the need for practical action and intervention: ‘The glory of the man
of letters is to prepare information that will be of use to those who govern.’¹⁹ In
a nation where education for the masses did not exist, reform could be achieved
only through the intervention of an enlightened prince. It was the philosopher’s
duty to enlighten the princes, and for that reason, albeit with great reluctance,
Filangieri was prepared to accept appointments from the monarchy.
   Filangieri’s prodigious correspondence brought him into contact with leading
reform writers and thinkers in both Europe and North America, and his volumin-
ous correspondence reveals how much the intellectual and political world had
changed in the brief period since Genovesi’s ﬁrst publications. He corresponded
proliﬁcally with Benjamin Franklin on the new constitution of the United States,
and as elsewhere in Europe the American War of Independence and the founding
of the new American republic gave new strength in Naples to the belief that
progress and reason were unstoppable.²⁰

  ¹⁸ Ibid. 618–19.         ¹⁹ Chiosi (1987), 66.
  ²⁰ In 1784 Franklin invited the Neapolitan philosopher to Virginia to observe the new political
order at ﬁrsthand: Lo Sardo (1999), 7–8, 108–24.
