46                                     Absolutist Naples

   These migrations were an essential part of the agrarian economies of the
Mezzogiorno. The timing of the harvest in each province varied slightly and from
the late spring onwards huge armies of migrant labourers were on the move seek-
ing work as reapers, gleaners, olive pickers, or whatever was available. As a result,
much of the lowland population and even higher percentages of the upland and
mountain communities led nomadic lives for part of the year.
   The reformers believed lack of population to be the principal cause of the
decline of agriculture in many parts of the South, but they also noted that in the
Campania, Molise, the upland regions stretching from Benevento to Avellino,
and the river Ofanto there were signs that rapid population expansion was causing
acute problems of land shortage.³⁸
   These comments, together with the numerous references to the ecological
problems caused by woodland clearances, were indications of important changes
taking place as the reformers were writing. These were also evident in the account
that Henry Swinburne gave of his travels through the mainland provinces in 1777.
Before setting out on his journey Swinburne spent some months in Naples where
he became acquainted with Galanti and his circle, and as a result obtained invita-
tions to visit many prominent reforming landowners and provincial intellectuals.
   In contrast to the patronizing tones and exotic fantasies that dominated the
tales of most foreign travellers, Swinburne’s observations were remarkably sober.
He took care to explain Neapolitan leases, farming techniques, and customs in
terms his anglophone readers would recognize. His itinerary took him from
Naples along the principal overland route to the Adriatic provinces by way of
Avellino to Foggia and then to Manfredonia and Barletta on the coast. At Trani
the local governor supplied him with letters requiring all convents to provide him
with hospitality: ‘except for letters to private families, there is no better method to
be pursued in a tour through a country so ill-provided with Inns.’ He noted that
much wheat was exported from the Adriatic coastal towns, but added, ‘I am afraid
that industry has taken a long farewell of most of the cities of the coast.’³⁹
   He still found much to admire, including many prosperous monasteries and
especially the huge Dominican house he visited in Giovinazzo. After a short pause
at Bari, the Kingdom’s principal and busiest Adriatic port, he made his way to
Francavilla where he was the guest of the Prince of Oria. He was ﬁlled with
admiration for the model agricultural estate:
At present very little remains unlet; the rents are paid as the crops are got in and sold, not at
stated days of payment. All tithes belong to the Lord of the Manor, who is the lay impropria-
tor; for the Church has only its glebe. Many gentlemen of secondary rank hold their land of
the prince as under-tenants by payment of a ﬁxed ﬁne of investiture nearly in the same manner
as our copy-holders make surrenders and hold estates by copy of court-roll. There are besides
many owners of land, not of noble degree, who pay the tenth of their crops to the Prince.⁴⁰

                       ³⁸ BDG, iii. 260: on the demani see pp. 58–9.
                       ³⁹ Swinburne (1783), i. 181.        ⁴⁰ Ibid. i. 219.
