60                                Absolutist Naples


                     ABSOLUTIST ALTERNATIVES

                                       Sicily
The alternative to changing feudalism from within was absolutism, which was
ﬁrst experimented with in Sicily when in 1781 the government gave its Viceroy
emergency powers to challenge the autonomy of the Sicilian feudatories. Not only
was Sicily an independent crown, but the monarchy’s jurisdictions in Sicily were
even more limited than on the mainland, while the privileges of the Sicilian feuda-
tories were sanctioned by the island’s Parliament. The powers of the royal Viceroy
in Palermo were severely limited and government at all levels was largely in the
hands of the lay and ecclesiastical feudatories. When the crown had attempted to
challenge those privileges in 1773, the Sicilian nobility had responded by staging a
revolt in Palermo.
   It was a sign of the monarchy’s new assertiveness, therefore, when in 1781 the
marchese Domenico Caracciolo was sent to Palermo with special powers to
reduce the inﬂuence of the Sicilian barons and the Parliament.¹⁹ Domenico
Caracciolo was a man of the Enlightenment who at the time of his appointment
was serving in the Neapolitan diplomatic mission in Paris. He had previously rep-
resented the Neapolitan government in London, enjoyed close contacts with the
Neapolitan reformers and with the intellectual salons of Paris, and was an out-
spoken champion of the anti-curial movement. When he ﬁnally reached Palermo,
Caracciolo began by abolishing the Inquisition and then introduced measures to
reduce the power of the clergy and the jurisdictions exercised by the barons. He
instructed the Sicilian courts to demand valid title from all feudal property and
revenues. He intervened to challenge baronial interference in the exercise of just-
ice and in local administration, and attempted to organize a land survey that
would serve as a basis for the introduction of a new tax. Following what had been
proposed in Naples after the famine of 1764, the Viceroy also reduced Palermo’s
right to impose provisioning regulations in the rest of Sicily, and introduced meas-
ures to encourage free trade. He even tried to promote the formation of small
peasant properties by establishing rural credit banks (monte di pietà).²⁰
   As had occurred on the mainland, these measures were strongly supported
by the progressive sections of the Sicilian nobility and clergy. But when in 1782
the Sicilian Parliament rejected Caracciolo’s proposals as an infringement of
Sicilian liberties, the monarchy’s support for its Viceroy crumbled. Even though
the government issued Pragmatic Sanctions in 1788 that ﬂatly rejected the claim
that Sicilian feudal possessions were free of all obligations to the crown,
Caracciolo received no support. When a year later the Viceroy tried to broaden
the reform programme by encouraging the sale and lease of the common lands,
he was recalled to Naples. Although he blamed the failure of his mission in part

      ¹⁹ Marquis Domenico Caracciolo (1715–89).       ²⁰ Giarizzo (1985), 193–212.
