                                 Undermining the Old Order                                       55

the 1770s it was inspired by the more narrowly deﬁned absolutist ambitions of
Maria Carolina and her minister John Acton. The broader model came from
reforms being introduced in the Habsburg territories by Emperor Joseph II that
moved to a broader attack on the Church’s remaining jurisdiction in civil affairs
and on feudal privilege.¹ In Naples even before the fall of Tanucci and in line with
the other Catholic princes the government’s anti-papal stance had hardened. In
1767, the Jesuits were expelled and the Order’s extensive properties in the
Kingdom were placed under royal administration.² After the fall of Tanucci, other
religious orders were suppressed and the government adopted a more aggressive
policy when it began to nominate leading ﬁgures in the anti-curial movement to
vacant bishoprics. Papal authority in the Kingdom was made subject to royal
authorization and the crown claimed the right of preferment to all abbeys and
beneﬁces, as well as a share of their revenues.³ The government’s initiatives were a
much weaker version of the measures adopted in Vienna, and reﬂected the decline
in the international authority of the papacy in the last quarter of the century.
While they won enthusiastic support from the predominantly anti-curial senior
secular clergy in Naples, they also provoked equally strong opposition from those
who supported the papacy’s jurisdictional claims in the Kingdom.⁴
   Once Acton was established as the queen’s principal minister, many of Tanucci’s
earlier initiatives were revived and in 1782 a Supreme Council of Finance was
created. This was similar in many respects to the earlier Magistracy of Commerce,
and its task was to recommend ways to revive the Kingdom’s economy. The difference
was that the government invited leading members of the reform movement to
serve on the council, which as a result brieﬂy came to embody the alliance between
the prince and the philosophers. A year after the creation of the Supreme Council
Filangieri dedicated the third volume of his Scienza della Legislazione to the queen,
with the hope that reform would unite the ‘peaceful philosophers’ and an enlight-
ened prince in a common enterprise.
   For the government, the philosophers were welcome allies. The ascendancy of
the queen and the Kingdom’s new Austrian connection had been ﬁercely opposed
by the pro-Spanish party at court, whose attacks took the form of a viciously
defamatory campaign directed above all against the queen. Like Marie Antoinette
and Catherine the Great, Maria Carolina was portrayed as a depraved harlot with
   ¹ In 1783 civil marriage was separated from church marriage, and in 1791 criminals’ right to seek
sanctuary in holy places was abolished. The monarchy’s civil and criminal law codes were revised, new
measures to limit feudalism were introduced, and in May 1789 an imperial edict made it lawful for
peasants to redeem certain feudal obligations and authorized the sale of feudal lands. See Beales
(2005), 156–81, 207–55.
   ² On instruction from the former king and with strong encouragement from the French minister
Choiseul: Chadwick (1981), 345–68.
   ³ Tanucci threatened to abolish the chinea in 1767 but that was not done until 1788. Rambaud
(1908), 294.
   ⁴ One of the most contentious nominations was that of Andrea Serrao, a leading opponent of
papal supremacy, as Bishop of Potenza: see Chiosi (1981), 267–86. On the decline of papal authority
see Chadwick (1981), 345.
