58                                 Absolutist Naples

or sold, but they could be leased as private property, a solution that Tanucci also
supported on the grounds that it would purge the estates ‘of the tyrannical oppres-
sions that resulted from the fact that the feudatories had controlled the exercise of
justice’. In other words, remove abusive practices without abolishing feudal tenure
or feudal dues. Since the crown administration was also the beneﬁciary of these
dues, however, it had little incentive to abolish them.¹³
   No clear plan had been agreed for the ‘State of Atri’ when in 1792 the death
without heirs of the Prince of Riccia caused another large feudal estate to devolve
to the crown. The outcome again proved to be higher on expectations than results.
The legality of the sequestration was challenged and subsequent litigation
revealed centuries of unresolved disputes to rights and titles in all the neighbour-
ing communities. The most important part of the estate was a difesa, a term that
described any part of a feudal estate that had been enclosed and freed from
promiscuous or customary rights. But since only feudal property was subject to
‘devolution’, could the difesa also be legally sequestered?
   No one knew, and the crown’s agents were never able to resolve whether the
estate was feudal property. Their investigations did reveal, however, that the previ-
ous owners had treated parts of the estate as feudal or allodial (that is to say, as pri-
vate property), depending on which category was most ﬁscally advantageous, a
practice similar to manipulating modern tax codes but without risk of audit.
   The same investigations unearthed litigation that stretched back centuries over
contested claims to the various feudal or non-feudal titles under which different
parts of the estates were held, the dues and levies exacted, and the rights of usage to
which different parts of the estates were subject. What emerged from these invest-
igations was the extreme uncertainty that surrounded all titles, property, and
levies. As the crown courts tried to challenge or verify these titles, the uncertainty
and confusion increased. It also became clear that it was much easier for the crown
administrators to simply pocket the revenues of the estates under their care than
to identify the origins and legitimacy of those revenues.¹⁴


                                  THE DEMANI

Similar situations were revealed in what was the largest reform initiative
attempted by the monarchy and the ﬁnal achievement of the alliance between the
throne and the reformers. This was the edict of 1792 that ordered the division of
all common lands on the mainland, which were to be allocated to those with title
to exercise use-rights on them.
   As in much of the rest of Europe, the common lands (demani) in southern
Italy took a variety of forms: some belonged to the crown, others formed part of
feudal estates subject to seasonal public access, while others had been granted to

                           ¹³ Rao (1984), 42.      ¹⁴ Ibid. 35.
