                                        3
                Undermining the Old Order

                             INTRODUCTION

Change came to the South in many different forms. The most conspicuous
resulted from the actions and interventions of the monarchy and its agents, while
the most audible were the speculations and projects of the reformers. But the mar-
ket was also at work in its own sometimes visible, sometimes invisible, ways,
shaped and directed nonetheless by the reactions of a crowd of different agents,
each with their own interests—landowners, feudatories, clerics, priests, and also
the rural communities. For that reason, the changes taking place in southern Italy
never conformed to a neat antithesis between the narrow aims of an absolutist
monarchy and the broader projects of the reformers. The intentions of both were
complicated by more autonomous developments profoundly changing the founda-
tions of the social as well as the political order in the South.
    For similar reasons, the appearances of unity given by the campaign against feud-
alism proved deceptive. At ﬁrst the campaign seemed to offer opportunities to har-
monize the interests of the princes and the philosophers in an alliance that Gaetano
Filangieri hailed with high expectations in 1783. But those hopes were founded on
profound misunderstandings. The monarchy and the reformers had quite different
objectives, while the campaign gave rise to complex and often contradictory align-
ments. On one hand, the feudatories fought to protect their rights while at the same
time disregarding the constraints imposed by feudal title to enclose their land and
deny access for those who enjoyed customary use rights. On the other, the local
communities rallied to the monarchy’s campaign against feudal abuses, in the belief
that the royal courts would remove abuses and force the feudatories to honour their
collective use-rights. As the monarchy’s war on feudal exemptions and privileges led
its agents to mobilize the rural communities to enforce feudal law custom, its inter-
ventions proved an additional source of conﬂict in a world of growing discord.


                THE PRINCES AND PHILOSOPHERS

The great famine of 1763–4 had played an important part in shaping the aims of
the reform movement, but when the government’s interest in reform revived in
