                                        Projecting Reform                                          51

the surest signs of the primitive state of agriculture: the extensive transhumant
pastoral economy that subjected vast stretches of land to collective use.⁵⁶ For the
reformers the regulations that protected rights of passage and permitted promiscu-
ous grazing along the routes the sheep followed on the biennial migrations were
archaic and intolerable obstacles to the introduction of more rational and intensive
forms of rotation.
   The reality was, of course, more complex. As in other parts of the Mediterranean
world, these seasonal migrations played a critical role in integrating the different
economies of southern Italy. Sheep rearing and its allied industries (textiles, leather,
and cheese production) brought together the economies of the mountain commu-
nities and those of the plains. The migrant sheep left behind the only natural enrich-
ment available on these barren and rain-starved soils, making their presence during
the winter essential to the success of the spring grain harvests on the coastal plains.
   The transhumant system was closely integrated into prevailing natural condi-
tions and resources, and over time had been regulated in ways designed to recon-
cile the potentially conﬂicting interests of pasture and agriculture. Those
regulations had been institutionalized in the ﬁfteenth century during the reign of
Alfonso of Aragon, when the transhumant economy was placed under the protec-
tion of the crown. The system of regulations guaranteed seasonal rights of transit
and established three separate transit routes (known as tratturi) for the biennial
migrations. The destination for the ﬂocks that in summer grazed on the Apennine
uplands was the northern Apulian plateau, where a vast tract of land known as the
Tavoliere was reserved for winter grazing.⁵⁷
   The seasonal migrations and the leasing of the pasture were administered by the
royal customs ofﬁce known as the Dogana delle Pecore della Puglia in Foggia.
When Henry Swinburne visited Foggia in 1777 he described the Dogana as ‘one
of the richest mines of wealth belonging to the Crown of Naples’ and estimated
that between revenue from leases and taxes on sales in Foggia it yielded around
400,000 ducats and provided winter grazing for over a million sheep.⁵⁸

   ⁵⁶ The most prominent members of the ‘school’ were Quesnay, Mirabeau père, P. Mercier de la
Rivière, G. F. L. Trosen, P. S. Dupont de Nemours, and N. Baudeau.The ideas of the Physiocrats were
known in Naples primarily through the writings of the abbe’ Ferdinando Galiani, who from 1759 to
1769 was secretary to the Neapolitan ambassador in Paris. A close friend of Denis Diderot and
Madame d’Epinay, he set out his copious commentaries on the writings of the French economists in
his Dialogues sur le commerce des blés, published anonymously in Naples in 1770. Galiani recognized
the broader virtues of laissez-faire principles, but he also argued that the prevailing economic condi-
tion of the Kingdom made the need for government intervention overwhelming. See L. De Rosa
(1995), 125. On Galiani see also Steegmuller (1991). Robertson (1997), 667–97, sets the Neapolitan
writers in the context of Enlightenment debates on political economy.                 ⁵⁷ Marino (1988).
   ⁵⁸ The Dogana’s revenue derived in part from leases paid by the shepherds and owners of the ﬂocks
and in part from taxes imposed at the Foggia market. Swinburne was told that the shepherds paid
13.20 ducats to graze ﬁve score sheep for the season starting in November, and were in addition
obliged to sell all their produce (milk, cheese, wool, skins) only on the market at Foggia. Swinburne
also described the vast underground deposits where the summer grain was stored, and he noted that
during the summer when all were working in the ﬁelds the town was virtually empty, while during the
winter grazing season it had more than 20,000 inhabitants: Swinburne (1783), i. 145.
