56                                   Absolutist Naples

insatiable sexual appetites, and these attacks came to a head in 1784 when the
Spanish minister Floridablanca called for the queen’s removal from politics on the
grounds of moral turpitude. But Madrid’s patently partisan intervention was
deﬂected by the queen’s Austrian protectors, and also served to strengthen the
alliance with the reformers.⁵
    Until it was disbanded in 1792, the Supreme Council of Finance was the prin-
cipal forum for public debate on the means to improve the state of the realm.
Gaetano Filangieri, Giuseppe Palmieri, Domenico di Gennaro, the Duke of
Cantalupo, and Ferdinando Galiani were amongst the leading ﬁgures in the
reform movement who accepted the government’s invitation to serve. To carry out
its brief the Council commissioned Domenico Grimaldi, Giuseppe Palmieri, and
Giuseppe Maria Galanti to prepare reports on the state of the Kingdom’s olive oil
and silk trades.⁶ In the meantime Acton was busy with projects designed to
increase trade and commerce. In 1785 he went to study the commercial reforms
introduced by Grand Duke Peter Leopold in Tuscany. His greatest achievement,
however, was a round of commercial treaties that concluded with a trade agree-
ment signed with Russia in 1787.⁷
    The practical results were disappointing, however. In 1779 the arrendamento
on tobacco had been abolished, but an attempt to reform the more powerful
arrendamanto della Seta foundered in 1780. In 1786 the monopolies exercised by
the custom houses of Naples, Salerno, and Cava were abolished, but the growing
burden of Acton’s expenditure on the army and navy meant that the government
could ill afford to forgo even small revenues.⁸ By the early 1790s the reformers
were frustrated and the government had lost interest. Its priority had always been
to reorganize the army and build a navy, aims that overrode all other concerns and
came to rely on increasingly absolutist measures.


                       THE ARMY AND THE NOBLES

The project for reforming the army proved to be especially divisive. It met with
strong support from the reformers, who believed that the creation of a national
army was an essential step towards national regeneration. It also found support
amongst many sections of the nobility, but absolute resistance by others. The
reform project began in 1782 when Acton created new militias, and was extended
in 1784 with the creation of an Intendenza Generale with a budget of 2.4 million
ducats whose task was to oversee the reorganization of the army and to create a
navy. Foreign generals were brought to Naples to reorganize and train the infantry
along French lines, and the nobility was deprived of its monopoly over senior
   ⁵ Ajello (1991), 716–33.          ⁶ Chorley (1965), 16, 132; Macry (1974), 457–84.
   ⁷ Nuzzo (1971), 457.
   ⁸ The Council abolished a number of the smaller arrendamenti (on manna in 1785 and on acqua-
vite in 1786), but the means for any broader reform of the tax-farms did not exist.
