                            Undermining the Old Order                             59

local communities as the original source of revenue and to make land available for
grazing or cultivation. Over time, however, the demarcations of the demani had
frequently been lost or became contested. As pressure on land grew in the eight-
eenth century, these issues became increasingly contentious and rival claims to
ownership or use of the demani were a frequent cause of conﬂict within and
between communities throughout southern Italy.¹⁵
   The reformers saw the opportunity for a fundamental reform. Since the royal
domains were not subject to feudal titles and jurisdictions, the crown could dis-
pose of them as it wished. The best place to start, they argued, would be the
crown’s extensive property on the Apulian Tavoliere that was reserved for sheep-
grazing. Sold as private property, or leased as quit-rents, this land could be con-
verted into thousands of small farms that would turn Capitanata into one of the
most productive provinces in the Kingdom. The same solution could be applied
in other regions where the crown owned extensive domain lands, such as the Sila
Forest in Calabria.¹⁶
   From the crown estates it was a small step to envisage the privatization of the
common lands of the local communities, which offered the opportunity for an
even more general reform. In this case, however, the government ﬁrst had to restore
the village commons to their original state, using the courts to get rid of those who
had abusively occupied them. The commons could then be restored to local
communities and divided amongst the inhabitants as small-holdings, or divided
amongst those holding rival claims in proportion to their rights.¹⁷
   The principles on which this massive operation were to be based were simple
and rational. By settling the disputed ownership of the common lands a danger-
ous source of conﬂict would be removed, at the same time creating a new ﬁnancial
base around which local administration could be reorganized. The project
promised one of those virtuous cycles close to the hearts of reformers, but the
symmetry of their logic underestimated the enormous technical problems posed
by such a reform. The government did not have the means to resolve the huge
number of disputes over illegal occupations of common land, while many argued
that the divisions in any case would be disastrous for the pastoral economy and
would deprive the rural communities of their main source of livelihood.
   The edict of 1792 proclaiming the division of the common lands throughout
the mainland was, nonetheless, the government’s single most important reform
initiative. Once again, however, it revealed that the government did not have the
means to implement such a measure, which was delegated to courts already
swamped by existing litigation. Far from resolving these disputes, the edict of
1792 was another example of how government intervention raised expectations
that it had no means of satisfying, further heightening local tensions, and making
property rights even more uncertain.¹⁸

          ¹⁵ Corona (1995), 23–62.     ¹⁶ Ibid. 79–127.      ¹⁷ Ibid. 79–94.
          ¹⁸ Ibid. 179–212.
