52                                  Absolutist Naples

   The Neapolitan reformers did not share Swinburne’s enthusiasm for either
Foggia or the Dogana. For Ferdinando Galiani the Tavoliere had ‘No parallels in
civilised Europe, but only in the African desert and in Barbarous Tartary’.⁵⁹
Melchiorre Delﬁco decried what he called the ‘barbarism of the pastoral economy’
and claimed that the subjection of the Apulian plain to promiscuous grazing had
destroyed its agriculture, leaving the Kingdom’s oldest and most fertile granary
barren. To remove the threat of famine and to improve the Kingdom’s foreign
trade he pleaded for the immediate abolition of the Dogana and for the sale of the
pastures owned by the crown. Sold as copy-hold lease these would yield greater
revenues for the crown and at the same time encourage the development of more
productive forms of agriculture.⁶⁰
   Nicola de Dominicis was one of the few who argued that grazing made an
essential contribution to the southern economy, and that what mattered was how
the competing interests might be reconciled and mediated.⁶¹ But his was a lone
voice. Galanti favoured the suppression of the Dogana and the sale of the crown
pastures. He acknowledged that the Dogana had been created to mediate between
the conﬂicting interests of agriculture and pasture, and between the owners of
large ﬂocks and poorer grazers. But over time the sheep runs had fallen into the
hands of a small group of graziers who now monopolized all the pasture on
the Tavoliere, threatening to deprive the poorer sheep-owners of access to pasture.
The continuing high demand for pasture kept the price of leases high and
removed any incentive to release the land for agriculture.⁶²

               THE CONTRADICTIONS OF CHANGE

The projects that the reformers had begun to formulate ran far beyond the abso-
lutist objective of the monarchy’s own initiatives, however, even though for a brief
period the two seemed to many to be moving in harmony. That was an illusion,
since the rulers wanted to modify feudalism while the reformers wanted to do
away with it. But the reformers’ descriptions also gave a clear picture of how agrar-
ian realities in southern Italy were changing, and with them feudalism. They
described feudalism in the South as a ‘ghost’, not because it was dead, but because
its original purposes had been destroyed. Instead of mediating between poten-
tially conﬂicting interests, feudalism had been stripped of its original elements of
reciprocity. It was increasingly seen simply as an instrument of tyranny in the
hands of feudatories who wanted to transform their feudal estates into what
would later be referred to as latifundia—large monopolistic but private properties.
The reciprocal obligations that had once been inherent in feudal landownership
were destroyed, and the collective rights on which the livelihood of most rural
communities depended were increasingly at risk.
 ⁵⁹ F. Galiani, De Moneta, 1780—cited in Marino (1988), 245.      ⁶⁰ Venturi (1962), 1171.
 ⁶¹ Marino (1988), 38.        ⁶² NDG, ii. 295–303; Marino (1988), 257.
