                                  Undermining the Old Order                                           63

   Zurlo’s account was yet another illustration of how the erosion of public access
to land lay at the heart of the rural conﬂicts spreading to many different parts of
the South. In the case of the Sila, the usurpations of the common lands had
impoverished the rural communities. But they could not escape the struggles
between powerful landowners and graziers, leaving many villagers with no altern-
ative but to join the bands of brigands. Zurlo also noted that those responsible
for the usurpations had established powerful connections in public administra-
tion to ensure that they would be protected and their unlawful actions go unpun-
ished. The Sila was ‘an inexplicable mystery’ only because an explanation obvious
to all was one that in the absence of effective royal government was too dangerous
to be told.²⁶
   Zurlo’s report offered important insights into the conﬂicts bringing lawlessness
and violence to many parts of the Mezzogiorno at the close of the century, but also
revealed that even when it was aware of what was going on the government lacked
the means to intervene.


                          FEUDALISM UNDER REVIEW

The government’s urgent need for resources and revenues lay behind its increas-
ingly interventionist although rarely effective actions. But similar difﬁculties faced
many landowners too, with consequences that served to accelerate changes taking
place from below. Clear evidence of this is provided by the estate records of two
major feudal landowners who were both, although for different reasons, looking
for ways to increase their estate revenues in the ﬁnal decade of the century. In both
cases this resulted in a thorough survey of the principles on which their estates
were managed and the introduction of a series of innovations.²⁷
   In 1789 Antonio Maresca, the Duke of Serradicapriola, decided to make a
thorough review of the management of his estates because he had been appointed
to serve as the Neapolitan ambassador at the Court of the Russian Tsar. But no less
important than his imminent departure for St Petersburg, where he would remain
for forty years, were the heavy losses he had suffered from his investments in
various arrendamenti whose yields had plummeted in the 1780s due to the
government’s ﬁnancial difﬁculties. To restore the lost income the duke needed to
increase the revenues from his estates.
   The review carried out gives a clear picture of the scale of property of a leading,
but by no means very wealthy, feudal family. The core of the family’s extensive
feudal holdings was in the fertile north-eastern corner of Capitanata, with
other properties on the Piano di Sorrento and in Naples where the family owned
   ²⁶ Ibid. The situation in the Sila region suggests interesting parallels with the conﬂicts in the royal
forests of 18th-century England described by E. P. Thompson in Whigs and Hunters (1975).
   ²⁷ My thanks to M. L. Storchi for assistance in selecting these examples from the numerous
records available in the section of Archivi Privati in the ASN.
