                                Undermining the Old Order                                         61

on the hostility of the Sicilian barons, Caracciolo held the government in Naples
primarily responsible.²¹

                             Calabria and the Cassa Sacra
The second experiment in absolutist government took place on the mainland fol-
lowing the terrible earthquake of 1783 that devastated southern Calabria and
much of eastern Sicily. Casualties were impossible to assess and the damage to
property incalculable. The government declared a state of emergency and
despatched an expedition headed by Francesco Pignatelli of Strongoli, with the
title of Royal Vicar General, emergency powers to override all existing jurisdic-
tions, and 100,000 silver ducats. To recover the expedition’s costs, the government
decreed the suppression of all the religious houses in the devastated regions and
incorporated their assets to create a fund known as the Cassa Sacra.²²
    Many Calabrian landowners sympathetic to the principles of the reform move-
ment saw the catastrophe and funds amassed by the Cassa Sacra as an opportunity
to put into practice the projects that reformers had been proposing for more than
a decade. To give an example, Domenico Grimaldi at once set to work to repair
the massive damage that had been done to his experimental farms at Seminara.
Another prominent landowner whose property suffered extensive damage was
Andrea Serrao, the Bishop of Potenza, who was the feudal owner of the town of
Castelmonardo, which was completely destroyed. Like Grimaldi, the bishop took
charge of rebuilding the town, which he renamed Filadelﬁa, a clear sign of the
principles that inspired the project.²³
    The reformers conﬁdently predicted that the sale of the lands of the religious
houses would bring into being a class of sturdy peasant farmers, whose energies
and labour, they claimed, would revitalize the economy of the devastated
provinces. In reality, few if any small properties were created and the land sales
instead proved to be a bonanza for wealthy landowners, among them Bishop
Serrao, who made extensive purchases of land in Maida, Acconia, and Francavilla
from the Cassa. But few of these buyers shared the progressive ideas of the Bishop
of Potenza, while the peasants suffered a double loss. Few had the means to take
part in the land sales, while most who had been tenants of the monasteries lost
their leases when the land passed to new owners. Numerous peasant families were
driven off the land, and even the government was soon forced to admit that for the
rural poor the operations of the Cassa Sacra had been an even greater afﬂiction
than the earthquake. It was also rumoured that the Vicar General had made huge
personal proﬁts and had returned to Naples laden with plate plundered from
Calabrian convents.²⁴ To raise cash quickly the lands of the Calabrian religious
houses had been sold off at low prices to wealthy landowners, and little of the

    ²¹ In Naples he succeeded the Duke of Sambuca as the chief minister, but died a year later.
    ²² Placanica (1970, 1985); Cingari (1978), 25–38.        ²³ Chiosi (1981), 296–300.
    ²⁴ Cortese (1965), 79–115.
