64                                      Absolutist Naples

a casa nobile in the fashionable Chiaja district. Their total value was estimated at
308,203 ducats. The single largest asset, however, was the family’s holdings in
various arrendamenti, valued, in 1782, at 140,183 ducats, that provided an annual
income of 5,465 ducats.²⁸
   Returns from the family’s feudal possessions were much higher, however. The
estates in Serracapriola alone averaged 3,972 ducats per year, those at Chieuti
4,255 ducats, although non-feudal revenues (burgensatici) in both towns were
much lower. Expenses, including taxes owed to the towns (for buonatenenza)
and to the crown (catasto), amounted to 1,159 ducats, leaving a net annual
income of just over 8,000 ducats (not including ‘the costs of cultivation and
improvement’).²⁹ The family also owned eight farms (massarie) between Chieuti,
Serracapriola, and the Marina di Serracapriola, whose capital value was estimated
at 31,140 ducats.³⁰
   The stereotypes of the feudal landowner are not easily reconciled with the
meticulous bookkeeping maintained by the administrators of the Serradicapriola
estates, whose accounts were submitted regularly to Naples for further scrutiny by
the owners’ accountants and attorneys before being forwarded to St Petersburg.
The revenues of each estate were recorded separately, and income from feudal
rights was listed separately from leases and income from livestock and crops.
   When Antonio Maresca decided to disinvest his shares in the arrendamenti³¹ in
1789, he instructed his accountants to carry out a complete survey of the revenues
from his estates and to identify alternative and more rewarding investment oppor-
tunities. This search would thereafter remain the principal theme of the duke’s
correspondence with his administrator in Naples, Francesco Roddi, whose
brother was the manager of the estates in Chieuti.
   Before leaving for Russia, the duke leased the estates to his brother, the march-
ese Don Benedetto Maresca, and when in 1803 the lease came up for renewal, he
urged Roddi to demand a 30 per cent increase on the grounds that over the
previous twenty years ‘all manner of goods with no exception have at least doubled
in value, as can easily be seen from the great rise in living costs here in the Capital’.
He complained that most of the additional proﬁts from his farms had been taken
by the merchants who purchased grain in Capitanata, and he instructed Roddi to


   ²⁸ Land, property, and mortgage loans in the Piano di Sorrento amounted to 62,031 ducats, and
loans in Naples to 26,779 ducats. The family’s casa nobile in Naples was valued at 57,500 ducats and
the difesa of Crepacuore in Capitanata at 20,479 ducats.
   ²⁹ ASN, Archivi Privati: Archivio Maresca di Serra di Capriola: B 167, Stato dei beni di Duca
Antonio Maresca, 1782.
   ³⁰ Ibid. The ﬁrst specialized in raising cattle, the second pigs, the third brood mares, the fourth
sheep and goats, the ﬁfth buffalo. They owned two other mixed farms where livestock rearing was
combined with the cultivation of wheat and forage crops. The most proﬁtable was the pig farm,
because the investment was low and the return from the lease relatively high. The least rewarding
were the brood mares, while all the other operations had an annual yield of over 15%.
   ³¹ The arrendamenti in the Dogana di Napoli, Farina Vecchia, Olio e Sapone, worth 68,918
ducats because they were yielding between only 2.8 and 3.2%.
