                              Undermining the Old Order                                      69

   As they spread to the provinces and to Sicily in the 1780s, the lodges provided
the provincial gentry with cultural and political networks much broader than the
salons of the aristocracy, and quite different from the lay confraternities.⁴⁷ But
Galanti’s appeal for the formation of Patriotic Societies came too late. By 1794 the
government had abandoned all interest in reform, whose supporters were now
treated with suspicion and viewed as potential Jacobins. The masonic lodges and
many of those whose voices had formerly been heard most clearly from the
provinces now found themselves under arrest.


                                 CASACALENDA

The voices of the local communities could also now be heard, although in
most cases only through the mediation of those who took up their cause against
abuses of feudal power. One especially well-documented case was the town of
Casacalenda in Molise, whose struggles were recorded in particular detail because
the town was represented by the brothers Giuseppe and Biase Zurlo.⁴⁸
   Beyond the particular issues at stake, Casacalenda revealed conﬂicts being
repeated in similar forms throughout southern Italy. The petition the brothers
Zurlo made on the town’s behalf set out the origins of the litigation that the com-
munity had brought against the ‘past and present Possessors of the town of
Casacalenda in the local courts, the royal courts, and the superior courts of Lucera
and Foggia and which had over time had created a chaos of undecided litiga-
tion’.⁴⁹ The town claimed that the feudal owners of Casacalenda had ‘always been
intent on depriving the community of its property and its rights, and had for cen-
turies buried it under a mass of costly law suits’:
Royal Governors, Royal Uditori, Caporota, and Provincial Fiscal ofﬁcials, Fiscal Ofﬁcials
and magistrates from the Regia Camera, Tavolarj, Engineers, Agrarian Surveyors, Attitanti,
scribes and all the people that are necessary in these legal procedures have been frequent
visitors to the town.
   When the costs of litigation bankrupted the town, the feudatory demanded
immediate settlement of everything he claimed. Unable to afford recourse to the
courts, the community appealed directly to the king. The petition showed that the
town was engaged in over 200 separate law suits with this single feudatory, many
of which dated back more than a century. If the feudatory’s claims were upheld,
the community stood to lose ‘thousands of acres of land, houses and buildings, as
well as its rights on the Feudal and Demanial lands’. The jurisdictions that
the feudatory abusively claimed would deprive the community of its ‘civic rights,
the customary rates at which ﬁde and terraggi were paid’ and leave it subject to

  ⁴⁷ Giarizzo (1995), 406–20.       ⁴⁸ For other examples see e.g. Corona (1995), 195–202.
  ⁴⁹ ASN: Min Fin f. 1627 (23 June 1802).
