                                Undermining the Old Order                                      65

organize with other landowners to sell their grain independently and cut out the
middle men. He also suggested that longer leases would give leaseholders greater
security and incentives to improve the land, which he believed would enable them
to pay higher leases.³² Roddi replied that the 30% increase was impractical and
patiently suggested that a better alternative would be to speculate on rising olive
oil prices. The speculation would be relatively safe, the risks low, and the potential
proﬁts high.³³
   Although a single example, the Duke of Serradicapriola’s review of the manage-
ment and revenues of his estate was closely connected to broader structural devel-
opments: on one hand, the decline in income from the arrendamenti and, on the
other, the rapid increase in commodity prices. But debt was another powerful
incentive for maximizing revenues, as illustrated by the second example. When in
1788 Don Nicola Toccò Cantelmo Stuard, the Duke of Apice and Sicignano,
became the Duke of Montemiletto, he also inherited his father’s debts. To meet
these, he appointed a lawyer named Gaetano Celani as his ‘Vicar’ to reorganize the
administration of his feudal properties in Ajello. Two additional agents were
subsequently employed to review the management and leases of his estates at
Apice in Principato Ultra and for smaller feudal estates in the Abruzzo. In the
1790s the review was extended to the estates at Montemiletto in Principato Ultra
and to the duke’s more scattered properties in Calabria.
   This was a major operation, and it was not until 1797 that Don Michele Bianco
was appointed as ‘General Agent and Procurator’ to coordinate the different
reports, in which he was assisted by the duke’s treasurer, Gaetano Colella.
Together they wrote a report that gave a clear picture of the organization and
administration of this major feudal property. It began with a detailed description
of the town of Montemiletto and ‘the Palace that is by no means undistinguished
and with all the facilities to be expected in the residence of a great Lord’ that
housed the duke’s staff. These estates consisted of seven separate feudi, overseen by
three Governors of Justice (Governadori di Giustizia).
   Bianco’s ﬁrst recommendation was that the duke should take advantage of the
rising cost of timber resulting from the government’s shipbuilding programme.
He also recommended that fewer loans should be made to the peasant farmers,
because this encouraged ‘idleness’. To encourage the peasants to improve the
land, he recommended that leases be extended to eight years and argued that
the three-year leases customarily used in the region were ruinous for agriculture.
He concluded by recommending that the duke invest in planting trees and
repairing the mills, calculating that an initial investment of 23,130 ducats would
result in an increased annual income of 3,550 ducats that could be expected to
grow by a further 2,544 ducats over a ten-year period.³⁴

   ³² Ibid. B 126 Copia lettere, 1803–4.       ³³ Ibid.
   ³⁴ ASN, Archivi Privati: Archivio Toccò di Montemiletto: B 123 fascio 532, Descrizione del feudo
di Montemiletto.nell’anno, 1799.
