62                                      Absolutist Naples

proceeds were reinvested in Calabria. What was not pillaged by General Pignatelli
went to shore up the monarchy’s rising expenses on the army and navy.
   The experience of the Cassa Sacra in Calabria also indicated the difﬁculty of
applying the reformers’ neat principles to the harsh realities of the rural South.
The rural poor were unable to compete with powerful landowners without more
direct assistance and protection. They had no means to purchase even small plots
of land, and without capital or credit had no means to work it. The Cassa Sacra
would, however, prove to be only the ﬁrst of many schemes designed to beneﬁt the
rural poor that instead deprived them of the lands they had worked as tenants.

                     ‘An Inexplicable Mystery’: The Sila Forest
The government’s involvement in Calabria after the earthquake had drawn atten-
tion to the state of lawlessness and unrest that had for some time existed in the
neighbouring region of the Sila Forest, which resulted in an ofﬁcial investigation
in 1790. This was as much a pretext as a reason for the investigation, however,
since the government’s interest in the Sila Forest related primarily to the heavy
increase in demand for timber resulting from Acton’s shipbuilding programme.
The Sila Forest was the principal source of timber on the mainland, but it was also
part of the crown’s domain that over time had been the subject of widespread
illegal occupations. Its need for timber as prices rose therefore gave the government
new reasons for recovering property that had been illegally occupied and in
reasserting its jurisdictions.
    A senior royal magistrate named Giuseppe Zurlo, who was a prominent mem-
ber of the anti-feudal movement in Naples, was sent to investigate. He quickly
discovered that the whole Sila region had been subject to systematic illegal occu-
pations at the expense not only of the crown but also of the common lands of
the local communities and other landowners, and his report in 1790 revealed
what one later commentator referred to ironically as the ‘inexplicable mystery of
the Sila’.²⁵
    Zurlo’s report explained that the royal domain properties in the Sila Mountains
were particularly extensive and had formerly provided the crown with important
revenues. They also served to guarantee adequate common pasture for the local
communities, and to prevent illegal clearances of woodland. But over time these
common lands had been abusively taken over by a small number of wealthy
landowners who included the owners of the largest herds of sheep and livestock.
These illegal occupations, Zurlo concluded, were the principal causes of the law-
lessness that prevailed throughout the Sila region, and those principally respons-
ible were the powerful landowners who employed armed bands to protect their
animals and their pasture.
   ²⁵ Bianchini (1839), 418–19—ironical since it was no mystery. See also Villani (1974), 222. Luigi
de’ Medici was also sent by the government to investigate the impact of the Cassa Sacra in Calabria in
1790; see Cortese (1965), 100–8.
