                                 Undermining the Old Order                                        67

gentlemen that Genovesi had hailed as the makers of the new age, and they were
especially audible in the regions most directly exposed to new economic and com-
mercial forces where an important refrain was protest at the constraints and
restrictions to which provincial producers were subject.
   After the famine of 1764, merchants and producers in the Apulian provinces
had challenged the legality of the regulations imposed by the provisioning author-
ities in Naples and by the arrendamenti. In Calabria, too, the damage done by
these regulations to the producers of olive oil and raw silk was a dominant theme
in the salons of the reform-minded gentry. But the ideas of the reformers were also
taken up in Molise where the expansion of wheat production in the second half of
the century had brought obstacles to economic growth into sharp focus. The most
obvious of these was the lack of communications, which meant that although
Campobasso was less than a hundred kilometres from Naples it was more eco-
nomical to bring grain by sea from the more distant Apulian provinces.³⁸
   Campobasso was the chief administrative town in the province after Foggia³⁹
and an important administrative centre where the reform ideas found a wide audi-
ence. The group who began to meet regularly in the town included Giuseppe
Maria Galanti, the brothers Giuseppe and Biase Zurlo, Paolo Nicola Giampaolo,
Domenico di Gennaro, Vincenzo Cuoco, Alessandro Petitti, and Francesco De
Attalis. All came from the province and nearly all went on to serve as adminis-
trators in the Bourbon government in the 1780s and early 1790s. Many would
reappear in the administrations of Joseph Bonaparte and Joachim Murat after 1806.
   They all, too, had similar career proﬁles. Giuseppe Maria Galanti came from a
‘distinguished and wealthy family’ in Santa Croce di Morconei, where he had ﬁrst
acquired his hatred of feudalism from the priests who ran the local school, whom
he described as strongly committed to the anti-curial movement and outspoken
critics of the feudal order. At the age of nine Galanti moved to Naples to continue
his studies under the guidance of an uncle in clerical orders, where his ideas were
shaped by the teachings of Genovesi and Filangieri.
   The brothers Giuseppe and Biase Zurlo also attended schools in Molise before
going to Naples to train as lawyers. Once qualiﬁed, they returned to Campobasso
and started their careers by pleading the cases of Molisan villages against neigh-
bouring feudatories. Vincenzo Cuoco, the future historian of the Republic of
1799 and later member of Joachim Murat’s administration, was another member
of the group whose career followed a similar path.⁴⁰
   In Teramo, one of the principal towns in the northern Abruzzi, another group
was headed by Melchiorre Delﬁco and his brother Berardino and included the
abate Berardino Quartapelle, Giovanni Bernadino Thaulero, Alessi Tulli, and

  ³⁸ See Marin, in Clark and Lepetit (1997), 143–216, and Macry (1974), 402–22.
  ³⁹ Strictly speaking Molise did not exist in the eighteenth century: administratively it was part of
Capitanata and only became a separate administrative entity when the French rulers created the king-
dom’s 15 provinces in 1806.
  ⁴⁰ R. Lalli, Introduction to G. Zurlo, 8–15, and De Francesco (1997), 4–9.
