66                                     Absolutist Naples

   Earlier in 1798 the duke sent his ‘secretary and chaplain’ Don Fileno de Pompeis
to reorganize his estates in Calabria. Don Fileno spent a year on the estates, replaced
dishonest administrators, organized the new leases, and recovered various properties
belonging to the landowner. But the timing was not good. At the beginning of the
year the king had ﬂed to Sicily and in January the Republic was declared in Naples.
When de Pompeis arrived to conduct his visitation of a feudal property near
Amantea in March 1799, he was caught in the middle of a royalist uprising. Since it
was known that the duke was a supporter of the Republic in Naples (for which his
lands would shortly be sequestrated by the crown) his agent de Pompeis ‘was seized
by the inhabitants of that Town and shamefully arrested’.³⁵
   The upheavals of 1799 meant that the planned reorganization of the
Montemiletto estates in Calabria was not carried out. In the meantime, however,
with the assistance of the commercial ﬁrm of Becchi in Florence the duke became
active in international trade. His ﬁrst ventures resulted in heavy losses, but
undeterred he invested in trading oil and wheat from Apulia and sulphur from
Sicily. A year later his business improved, and he was working with other noblemen
who were trading on their own account, among them the Prince of Trabia in
Palermo, who exported sulphur from his own estates, and the Prince Belmonte di
Pignatelli, who acted as his agent in Rome. Montemiletto was soon corresponding
with a wide range of commercial houses in London, Hamburg, Amsterdam,
Milan, Livorno, and Venice who supplied him with information about commod-
ities in demand and market prices.³⁶
   These examples indicate that the world of these great feudal landowners was far
from static. Both reveal the different pressures—debts, the crisis of public
ﬁnances, rising commodity prices, and even speculative opportunities—that were
encouraging landowners to increase their incomes and to develop new investment
strategies. Both suggest that the outcomes could be very contradictory, leading to
new forms of investment but also more effective exaction of existing revenues, and
feudal revenues in particular.³⁷ The fate that nearly overtook Don Fileno de
Pompeis in Calabria in March 1799 also indicates the reactions such initiatives
might provoke.


                               PROVINCIAL VOICES

The efforts of these two feudal landowners illustrate the many different ways in
which forces of change were being transmitted to the rural South. Another clear
sign of the wider impact of these changes lay in the emergence of new provincial
voices. They were predominantly those of the priests, administrators, prelates, and

   ³⁵ ASN, Archivi Privati: Archivio Toccò di Montemiletto: B 123 fascio 532, Descrizione del feudo
di Montemiletto.nell’anno, 1799.                                                 ³⁶ Ibid. f. 191–4.
   ³⁷ For similar developments in Sicily see Aymard (1971–2), 67–85.
