68                                       Absolutist Naples

Baron Sterlich, one of the wealthiest landowners in the province.⁴¹ In Lecce, the
marchese Giuseppe Palmieri, the Bishop of Lecce, Filippo Briganti of Gallipoli,
and the physician Giovanni Presto were founders of an agricultural society whose
purpose was to improve local agriculture, especially the production of olive
oil, and debate ‘matters of public interest’.⁴² In Calabria, a similar group of
reform-minded gentry and churchmen met regularly in Cosenza, and before the
earthquake many visitors travelled to admire Domenico Grimaldi’s experimental
estates at Seminara near Reggio where new oil presses from Genoa and
Piedmontese organzine looms for reeling silk had been imported.⁴³
   Nor were these innovations taking place only on the mainland. During the
winter in Florence after the revolution in France Arthur Young was surprised and
delighted to meet the renowned Sicilian agronomist Paolo Balsamo, who was
returning from a visit to study agriculture in England.
A professor of agriculture, in Sicily, being sent by his sovereign, and wisely sent, to England
for instruction in agriculture appears to me to be an epoch in the history of the human
mind. From that island, the most celebrated in Antiquity for fruitfulness and cultiva-
tion . . . whose practice the greatest nations considered as the most worthy of imitations: at
a period too when we were in the woods, condemned to Barbarity and hardly considered
worth the trouble of conquering. What has effected so enormous a change? Two words
explain it: we are become free and Sicily enslaved.⁴⁴
   In 1792 Galanti appealed for agricultural associations to be set up in every
province of the realm. Citing Domenico Grimaldi’s experimental farms in
Calabria as a model, Galanti claimed that the need to improve agriculture was the
most pressing challenge facing the nation. Agricultural associations would enable
landowners, estate administrators, and farmers to learn how to apply the most
modern agricultural procedures of the day, and because of their importance for
the progress of the nation Galanti proposed that they be called Patriotic Societies.⁴⁵
   In addition to the salons of the provincial nobility and prelates, masonic lodges
were also multiplying in the main provincial cities and towns in the 1780s, with
the government’s full support. Following the example of her brother Joseph II, the
queen made herself the patroness of freemasons throughout the Kingdom and
leading courtiers were appointed to preside over the rapidly expanding lodges,
which included a lodge for noblewomen founded by the Princess Ottaiano.⁴⁶

   ⁴¹ Incarnato (1991), 42–9; Clemente (1981), 344–467.               ⁴² Venturi (1962), 1096–7.
   ⁴³ Ibid. 409–28; Chorley (1965), 160–75.             ⁴⁴ Arthur Young (1915), ed. T. Okey, 277.
   ⁴⁵ Just as well that Galanti was unaware of Arthur Young’s scathing comments after visiting the
Patriotic Society in Milan: ‘I looked about me to see a practical farmer enter the room, but I looked in
vain. A goodly company of i Marchesi, i Conti, i Cavalieri, i Abati but not one close-cropped wig or a
dirty pair of breeches to give authority to their proceedings.’ Ibid. 235. See also Villani (1989),
247–60, and De Lorenzo (1998), 1–88.
   ⁴⁶ H. Acton (1956), 151: the Princess Ottaiano was one of the queen’s favourites, and also the sis-
ter of Luigi de’ Medici, who was suspected as a Jacobin in the 1790s but served the monarchy after the
restoration of 1799, and became the leading minister after the restoration of 1815 and again after the
revolutions of 1820–1.
