70                                    Absolutist Naples

‘exactions in kind without proven title, deforestation of feudal land and the loss of
its common lands’.⁵⁰
    This tale of long-standing abuses and exploitation reached a climax in the sec-
ond half of the century in ways that vividly reveal the convergence of forces under-
mining the fabric of agrarian order in the South. Behind the abuses denounced in
the petition can be detected the new pressures to enclose and privatize, which
threatened the lands of all the rural towns and villages. The interventions of the
royal tribunals and of lawyers like the Zurlo brothers did not bring solutions, but
they did legitimize the claims of the rural communities.
    There were prices to be paid, however. In Casacalenda the struggle against the
feudatory was led by the mayor, Domenico di Gennaro, who was also closely
involved in the reform movement in Naples. When in 1794 the government
moved against a suspected pro-Jacobin conspiracy in the capital, di Gennaro was
arrested and imprisoned for two years. He had been denounced by none other than
the Duke of Sangro, the feudatory of Casacalenda who in 1799 when the Republic
was declared in Naples would take his revenge. Arming 10,000 Albanians from a
neighbouring settlement, Casacalenda was sacked and Domenico de Gennaro
brutally put to death.⁵¹


                                    CONCLUSION

Although the Bourbon experiments in absolutism did not attain their declared
goals, they succeeded only too well in exacerbating local conﬂicts and undermin-
ing the legitimacy of the ancien régime in the South. By bringing the war against
feudalism to the remotest corners of the mainland provinces, the crown, its
agents, and the reformers unwittingly inﬂamed conﬂicts that could not easily be
contained.
   The critical role played by the monarchy in exacerbating these disputes is best
illustrated by the contrast with Sicily, where the underlying tendencies were sim-
ilar to those on the mainland. In Sicily important changes were taking place, and
here too the feudal order was also changing from within. The lay and ecclesiastical
feudatories were also increasingly dividing into reactionary and progressive fac-
tions. Although widely resisted, Caracciolo’s moves to partition the common
lands and challenge feudal titles in the 1780s marked the beginning of something
similar. But resistance by the feudatories was more effective, and it was not until
the following century that feudalism became a focus for political conﬂicts similar
to those already present on the mainland in the ﬁnal decades of the eighteenth
century. These conﬂicts were not the reason the Bourbon monarchy collapsed in
1798, but they helped shape the civil war that followed.

 ⁵⁰ ASN: Min Fin f. 1627 (23 June 1802); ﬁde and terragi were dues paid, respectively, for pasture
 and sowing of the feudal demani.                            ⁵¹ Martelli, in Rao (2002), 717–43.
