78                                     Absolutist Naples

    By 1799 the military mobilization had become almost impossible to sustain, and
the decision to launch an offensive against the French forces in Rome was in part an
attempt to break out of the trap. But it was both unwise and unnecessary. The
Directory’s Ambassador at Naples, General Brune, had repeatedly given reassurance
that the French occupation of Rome was purely punitive and that France had no
designs on the Kingdom.³⁵ Bonaparte had opposed the occupation of Rome, which
he believed had dangerously extended the French lines of communications, and the
French representative in Naples informed Paris that there would be no military
advantages from invading Naples. But in July 1798 the newly arrived French vice-
consul, Joseph Sièyes,³⁶ reported that the French were completely shunned in
Naples, trade with France was at a standstill, and British ships were freely entering
the port of Messina contrary to the terms of the Franco–Neapolitan treaty.³⁷
    The king’s hesitations were ﬁnally overcome by Nelson’s victory on the Nile in
August 1798, and he allowed himself to be persuaded that an offensive against the
French forces in Rome could not fail. Yet there were signs that the expedition had
failed before it began. In September a further levy was raised to bring the theoret-
ical strength of the army to 60,000 men. Only 25 ducats were needed to purchase
exemptions, so that the burden fell entirely on the poorest and was ﬁercely resisted
even in the frontier provinces and in the towns of Portici, Barra, and Resina near
the capital provoked open rebellion.³⁸
    There were also ominous signs of insubordination in the ofﬁcer corps and hos-
tility between the old nobles and younger ofﬁcers trained at the Nunziatella.
Incapable of imposing discipline and to cover his own incompetence, General
Mack blamed the defeat on his ofﬁcers: ‘one sixth traitors, four sixths cowards,
and only what remain men of honour’. Francesco Pignatelli of Strongoli, the
Bourbon ﬁeld marshal, claimed that the offensive had been sabotaged by
commanders who secretly sympathized with the French.³⁹


                                    THE REPUBLIC

Before abandoning Naples to its fate on 21 December, the king nominated the
deeply unpopular Marshall Pignatelli Strongoli as his Vicar General with full
powers. On 12 January 1799 Pignatelli signed an armistice with the French com-
mander Championnet, whose forces had reached Sparanise. The nearby fortress
of Capua and the city of Naples were surrendered and it was agreed that an indem-
nity of 2,500,000 ducats would be paid to the French.⁴⁰
  ³⁵ AAEP, CC, Naples 38: buste 104, Nivose Year VI (22 January 1798).
  ³⁶ Joseph Sièyes (1763–99).
  ³⁷ AAEP, CC, Naples 38: buste 116, 7 Messidore Year VI (25 June 1798).
  ³⁸ Ibid.; Simioni (1921), 200.
  ³⁹ Gabriele Manthoné and Oronzio Massa were speciﬁcally accused of deliberately failing to pass
on orders; Simioni (1921), 200–1.
  ⁴⁰ Rao (1987/1995), 475. General Francesco Pignatelli had served as Vicar General in Calabria in
1783. He was the brother of Prince Pignatelli of Strongoli and two of his nephews (Ferdinando Prince
