                           1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic                            73

Hoche was to raise an insurrection in Ireland, while another French army would
invade northern Italy in the classic move designed to force the Austrians to split
their forces on two fronts.⁷
   The Directory’s plans were thrown out of kilter when the rapid and unexpected
victories of the Armée d’Italie, commanded by a 26-year-old general from Corsica,
Napoleon Bonaparte, forced the Austrians to abandon most of northern Italy. The
Piedmontese army was defeated in April, then the Austrians at Lodi (10 May), and
ﬁve days later Bonaparte entered Milan. The remaining Austrian forces regrouped in
the stronghold of Mantua, but Verona, the papal legation cities of Bologna and
Ferrara, and the Duchy of Modena all fell to the French. As the French advanced, the
Neapolitan government urgently sued for an armistice, to which Bonaparte agreed
on 5 June. In return, Naples was obliged to pay a large cash indemnity, to observe
strict neutrality, and to close its ports to British shipping.
   During the winter and spring of 1796–7 Bonaparte was busy organizing the
northern Italian republics, and during the summer held court in the magniﬁcent
Mombello palace on Lake Como.⁸ His political inﬂuence grew further when in
early September he intervened against a threatened monarchist revolt in Paris.⁹
Much more controversial, however, were the terms of the peace of Campoformio
signed with Austria in October with little consultation with the government
in Paris. But Bonaparte’s most ardent Italian supporters were outraged when the
former Venetian Republic passed to Austria in return for the cession of the
southern Netherlands and Lombardy to France.¹⁰
   After Campoformio, Bonaparte returned to Paris with plans to invade
England. But these were postponed in favour of a project that he had outlined to
Talleyrand, the French foreign minister, after occupying the Adriatic port of
Ancona in October 1796: ‘Let us now concentrate all our activities on the navy
and destroy England. That done, Europe is at our feet.’¹¹ That was the object of
the large French expeditionary force that sailed from Toulon in the spring of 1798,
whose undeclared destination was Egypt. The conquest of the Middle East would
place France in control of the Mediterranean and at the same time cut Britain’s
communications with its new colonial empire in India.
   As it passed to the west of Sicily en route for Malta, Napoleon’s ﬂeet caused
great concern in Naples. After Austria’s defeat and Britain’s decision to withdraw
its navy from the Mediterranean, the Kingdom was without allies and in a high
state of alarm following the French occupation of Rome in February 1798, the
arrest of the Pope, and the declaration of a Republic.¹²

   ⁷ Woolf (1991), 162–67; Grab (2003), 154–9.
   ⁸ The Cisalpine Republic was proclaimed in Milan on 29 June 1797, and the creation of the
Ligurian Republic brought the port of Genoa under French control. On 14 May Bonaparte ordered
that Venice be occupied and plundered, bringing to an end the ancient Republic of St Mark.
   ⁹ The coup of 18 Fructidor Year V: 4 September 1797.
  ¹⁰ Treaty of Campoformio, 17 October 1797.           ¹¹ Hardmann (1908), p. x.
  ¹² See Cafﬁero (2005); Tulard (1983), 48–9; Zaghi (1986), 32–88: The pretext for the French
invasion was the death of the French General Duphot, who was accidentally killed by the Pope’s
