72                                    Absolutist Naples


           NAPLES AND THE REVOLUTION IN FRANCE

The revolution in France had at ﬁrst caused little concern in Naples. Melchiorre
Delﬁco and Giuseppe Maria Galanti both believed that the events in France
would serve to revive the monarchy’s reform initiatives, and the government, for
its part, looked to proﬁt from the difﬁculties facing the French rulers. In 1790
Maria Carolina and Ferdinand IV travelled to Vienna¹ and when they returned
new restrictions were imposed on French merchant shipping, while Acton
renewed efforts to establish closer ties with Great Britain.
   The situation changed following the imprisonment of Louis XVI and Marie
Antoinette in 1792. In September, Naples refused to recognize the representative
of the French Republic, Citizen Armand Mackau. Relations worsened when
the French government discovered that Naples had urged the Sublime Porte not
to recognize the representative of the French Republic. In retaliation Rear-Admiral
Latouche-Tréville was ordered to station a squadron of French warships off the
Bay of Naples in December 1792 on the pretext of a courtesy visit.²
   The Neapolitan government was careful not to give offence, but when in
January 1793 the French vice-consul replaced the Bourbon family emblems with
the new republican insignia unknown persons smeared them with ﬁlth.³ The exe-
cutions of Louis XVI in January and of Marie Antoinette in October 1793 pushed
Naples decisively closer to France’s enemies, and in July the Kingdom secretly
entered an offensive treaty with Britain and Austria.⁴ A week after reporting that
Naples would stay out of the war in August 1793, the French consul informed
Paris that he had been wrong and was leaving Naples immediately.⁵
   The treaty gave the British navy access to the Neapolitan and Sicilian ports, and
in return Naples agreed to participate in the expedition that Britain and Spain
were preparing against Toulon.⁶ But the expedition turned into a military and
diplomatic disaster that convinced the king that he had been exploited and re-
inforced the reformers’ belief that England’s aim was to make the Kingdom a colo-
nial market for their goods and manufactures. The toll in lost lives and equipment
was heavy, but even worse Naples lost its neutral status and was thrown into
deeper commercial recession.
   The most serious consequence of the Toulon expedition for the allies was the
defection of Spain, which in September 1795 became France’s ally. By freeing
France from the threat of attack on its southern land borders, the Spanish alliance
enabled the Directory to embark on a major war in Europe. The principal target
was the Rhineland, but two diversionary operations were planned. General


  ¹ For the coronation of the former Tuscan Grand Duke Peter Leopold after the death of his
brother Joseph.                                ² Nicolini (1939), 7–53; Barra (1997), i. 133–41.
  ³ AAEP: Corr Politique (Naples), 38 (1793–1805), 11, 29 Jan 1793.        ⁴ Ibid.
  ⁵ Ibid., 24 August/ 31 August 1793: Lallement to Paris.
  ⁶ Niccolini (1939), 45–53; Nuzzo (972), 22–6.
