80                                     Absolutist Naples

fathers walked the streets with bare feet, the Dominicans and Conventuals were all
out in force.’⁴⁷
   Moliterno was already negotiating secretly with the ‘patriots’. He then released
the political prisoners from the jails and formed a republican committee, and dur-
ing the night of 19 January the patriots took control of the S. Elmo fortress that
dominated the upper part of the city. When it became known that Moliterno was
negotiating the entry of the French troops, the mobs took to the streets. Amongst
their prime targets were noblemen suspected of being pro-French. Ascanio
Filomarino, Duke della Torre, and Clemente Filomarino were dragged from their
houses and butchered; the palaces of the Duke of Melissano and the Duke of
Solimena and the monastery of S. Gaudioso were burned down; the house of the
marquis di Rosa was attacked.
   In an attempt to restore order on 20 January the sacred relics of San Gennaro
were processed and accompanied by huge crowds, but to no effect. On the follow-
ing day De Nicola simply stated, ‘Today has been a day of the worst horrors that
I cannot begin to describe.’⁴⁸
   His despair was echoed by another diarist, the abbate Pietrabondo Drusco:
the anarchy had reached a state of fury and was directed entirely against the Jacobins and to
plunder. The plebs are by nature insane and when they found themselves in power it is easy
to imagine what licence followed. The lives and property of every citizen were in danger,
and in search of safety many voluntarily took refuge in the St Elmo Castle.⁴⁹
  From there on 21 January the Republic was declared and on the following day
Championnet’s troops entered Naples through the Porta Capuana.⁵⁰ The violence
now reached its peak, as De Nicola recorded with alarm:
The events that have taken place in the lower part of the city will not be believed and can-
not be described. Enough to say that we have seen the heart of our city become the theatre
for a violent war.
The people continued to pursue suspected Jacobins ‘as the supporters of the
French are now known’ and they fought ﬁerce battles with the French troops
around the Porta Capuana and the Largo delle Pigne.⁵¹
   Even royalists were taken by surprise at the popular resistance to the French
and loyalty to the monarchy. Relaying information from the Court in Palermo,
Sir William Hamilton reported to Lord Grenville in London on 17 January that
‘the Neapolitan Nobility has shown no loyalty to the Bourbons, but the People
appear to be violently anti-French and loyal to their Sovereign’.⁵² The following
day he reported on Pignatelli’s ‘shameful armistice’ and stated that the ‘Lazzaroni
and populace of the city are in ferment and the Nobility are trying to calm them’.

      ⁴⁷ Carlo De Nicola, Diario Napoletano: 6, 13, 16, 17, 18, 25, 27, 30, 31 January 1799.
      ⁴⁸ De Nicola, 21 January, 39.       ⁴⁹ Drusco (1884), 23 (19 January).
      ⁵⁰ Ibid. 157; Rao (1987/1995), 475.         ⁵¹ De Nicola, 22 January, 42.
      ⁵² PRO London FO 70, vol. 12, Hamilton to Lord Grenville, 17 January 1799.
