76                                    Absolutist Naples

of forcible requisitioning from the provinces because the war had already brought
foreign trade to a standstill and economic conditions in Apulia and Calabria were
disastrous.²⁰ Instead the government authorized the city to incur debts to pur-
chase grain abroad. New loans were raised and for the ﬁrst time the controls on
food prices in the capital were lifted, with the result that bread prices rose to mar-
ket levels. The arrendamenti on grain and other staple foodstuffs were suspended
to prevent prices rising too fast, but new excise duties on wine, building materials,
and luxury goods were introduced in an attempt to maintain the payments owed
to the holders of these arrendamenti.²¹
   The government proved unable to prevent food prices from rising in the capital,
the payments to holders of the arrendamenti had been reduced or suspended, and it
had violated one of the most prized privileges of the nobility. Then in the spring of
1794 a major Jacobin conspiracy was discovered. More than four hundred arrests
were made in Naples alone, and all those who had associated with Latouche-
Tréville and his ofﬁcers or who were suspected of supporting the revolution came
under suspicion. The supposed leaders were executed, and others were exiled or
chose to leave the Kingdom.²² The works of Gaetano Filangieri were banned and
the government’s ﬁtful support for Galanti’s statistical inquiries was abruptly sus-
pended: in 1795 he, too, was subject to investigation on suspicion of treason.
In February 1796 Mario Pagano, who had succeeded Filangieri as the leading pro-
ponent of reform, was arrested and held in prison until he was exiled two years later.²³
   The police operations in 1794 revealed the existence of at least two Jacobin
clubs in Naples: the Club Romo (Republic Or Death) and the Club Lomo
(Liberty or Death).²⁴ Among the organizers were the abate Jerocades, an inﬂuential
teacher, and his student, Carlo Lauberg, a priest who taught chemistry at the
Nunziatella Academy. This was especially alarming because Lauberg had acquired
an enthusiastic following amongst the young cadets at the military academy.
In exile in Paris he would soon become the pivotal ﬁgure in the diaspora of the
Neapolitan ‘patriots’.²⁵
   Whatever Maria Carolina’s sympathies with the reform project might once
have been, the execution of her sister Marie Antoinette had transformed the queen
into an even more committed counter-revolutionary. The government’s suspi-
cions now extended beyond the intellectuals and reformers to the propertied
classes as a whole, and in April 1795 in a letter to the marquis di Gallo the queen
told of her outrage at what she believed to be the treachery of the nobility:
the nobility is the most corrupted and evil of all classes because it wants to have a king
who has no authority, no force, no power and no rights: a mere puppet so that they may be


  ²⁰ Chorley (1965), 38.          ²¹ De Rosa (1958), 6.
  ²² Rao (1992), 63–6; Battaglini (1992), 18.
  ²³ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), i. 313–17. On Pagano see Venturi (1962), 785–832; Galasso (1984),
69–105.                                                           ²⁴ Rao, JMIS (1999, 4/3), 360.
  ²⁵ Battaglini (1992), 18; Rao (1979), 91; De Lorenzo (2001), 17–37.
