74                                    Absolutist Naples

   Paris continued to insist that it had no hostile intent, provided that the
Neapolitan government continued to observe the armistice. But Napoleon’s
Egyptian expedition meanwhile played into the hands of the allies and ensured
that France’s control of the Mediterranean would be short-lived. The French
occupation of Malta had outraged the Russian Tsar, Paul I, and the Knights of the
Order of St John of Jerusalem who ruled the island and were under his protection,
appealed for his assistance. Meanwhile Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt had also
brought the Ottoman sultan into the coalition against France.
   Bonparte’s plan was wrecked when on 1 August Rear Admiral Horatio Nelson
destroyed the French ﬂeet in an especially bloody engagement off Aboukir Bay.
For the allies this was an ideal moment to counter-attack in Italy. A large French
force was still stranded in Palestine and the British navy once again controlled the
Mediterranean. St Petersburg and the Sublime Porte were ready, but the problem
was to get the Austrians back into combat. For this, the king of Naples was to be
the bait and in the months that followed Naples came under intense pressure to
launch an offensive against the French forces occupying Rome.
   The Neapolitans were already heavily compromised since in direct violation of
the armistice with France Nelson had been permitted to provision his ships at
Messina and Syracuse en route to Egypt. The violation was even more ﬂagrant
when Nelson returned to Naples after the battle of the Nile to repair his badly dam-
aged ships and to recuperate from the serious wound he received during the
engagement. He was feted as a hero by the Neapolitan government, while Sir
William and Emma Hamilton took charge of his convalescence. So began his affair
with Lady Hamilton and the no-less-public cuckolding of Sir William. But Emma
Hamilton was already a close—it was rumoured even an intimate—conﬁdante of
the queen, and Nelson and the Hamiltons now worked in concert with Maria
Carolina and Acton to persuade the king to attack the French in Rome.
   On 24 November King Ferdinand set off at the head of an army of more than
50,000 men against the small and scattered French forces in the Papal States. The
attack on Rome was to be coordinated with a naval operation in which Nelson’s
ships would land 10,000 Neapolitan troops in Livorno to cut the lines of the
retreating French armies. Russia and the Ottoman Porte would engage the French
in the Adriatic. To complete the trap, it was hoped that the Austrian emperor
would resume hostilities in northern Italy and retake Mantua.
   None of this happened. Unlike Caesar who ‘came, saw and conquered’, King
Ferdinand ‘came, saw and ﬂed’.¹³ The Neapolitan army entered Rome on
29 November but disintegrated when General MacDonald’s¹⁴ much smaller


police while trying to control a pro-republican demonstration in December 1797. The Directory
ordered Marshal Berthier to occupy Rome and set up a republican government. Pope Pius VI ﬂed to
Tuscany, where he was arrested and taken to France and died a year later in captivity at Valence.
  ¹³ Simioni (1921), 185.
  ¹⁴ General Jacques-Etienne Joseph-Alexandre MacDonald (1765–1840).
