                            1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic                                79

   Carlo De Nicola, a Neapolitan lawyer whose meticulously maintained diary has
survived, recorded the changing reactions in the city. After the ﬂight of the king the
situation was relatively quiet, even though there was no coin to be found and paper
bills had become almost valueless. But ‘the people, Thank God, are quiet. The
urban militia has now been formed.’⁴¹ The situation changed completely, however,
when the armistice and the imminent French occupation became known.
   After the ﬂight of the king, the nobles formed a Deputazione del Buongoverno to
organize the defences of the city, raise a civic militia, maintain law and order, and
take charge of provisioning and the day-to-day government of the city. But the
powers of the king’s Vicar General had not been clearly deﬁned, and were now
challenged by the nobles, who claimed that in time of war or emergency they
alone had the constitutional right to govern in the absence of the king.⁴² The
Deputazione therefore appointed two nobles⁴³ to act as ‘leaders of the People’,
whose task was to arm the city’s fortresses (the Castel Nuovo, Castel dell’Ovo,
S. Elmo, and the Carmine) and win the support of the people through distributions
of ‘bread, wine, cheese, acquavite and money’.⁴⁴
   Carlo Lauberg and Vincenzio Russo⁴⁵ were among the Neapolitan exiles who
accompanied Championnet on his march to Naples, and they warned him that the
aim of the nobles in the city was to establish ‘an Aristocratic Republic like that of
Venice or Genoa’. Inside the city there was also opposition to the aristocratic Eletti
from those who wanted Championnet to enter the city immediately and declare a
republic. These ‘patriots’ now looked for leadership to the Prince of Moliterno, who
as ‘Commander General of the People’ had built up a strong popular following.⁴⁶
   De Nicola described how tensions in the city rose as the noble Eletti and their
opponents began to compete for popular support. On 13 January he noted,
‘There has been some violence because two parties have been formed, one for the
City the other for Pignatelli and both are believed to be armed.’ Serious rioting
began two days later and mobs began attacking those suspected of sympathizing
with the French, the ‘patriots’. De Nicola noted with alarm, ‘The popular revolt
continues and has become more dangerous than I can say. The trouble started
when ﬂyers were distributed before the armistice was signed and was then aggra-
vated by the order that no offence be given the French when they enter the city.’
   Against a background of rising popular unrest, the Vicar General ﬂed the city
on 16 January. Moliterno renewed the efforts to maintain order by distributing
money and at the same time setting up gallows in the main piazze to deter looters.
On 18 January De Nicola reported that the city was quieter ‘and everywhere full
of processions of penitents organized by the religious orders. The Gerolomini

of Strongoli and his brother Mario) were condemned to death for supporting the Republic in 1799,
while two others—Francesco and Vincenzo—became generals in Murat’s army. See Colletta (Cortese,
1957), i. 390 and n. 274.
   ⁴¹ On De Nicola’s diary see especially De Lorenzo (2001).         ⁴² Battaglini (1992), 114–15.
   ⁴³ Girolamo Pignatelli, Prince of Moliterno (1774–1848), and Lucio Carraciolo, Duke of
Roccoromana (1771–1836).                                                 ⁴⁴ Battaglini (1992), 132.
   ⁴⁵ Vincenzio Russo (1770–99).           ⁴⁶ Battaglini (1992), 124.
