90                                    Absolutist Naples


                        THE END OF THE REPUBLIC

On 30 March MacDonald announced that the royalist insurrections in the
Adriatic provinces had been crushed and that communications had ﬁnally been
reopened with Apulia. A week later he received news that General Giuseppe
Schipani, who had been sent to put down insurrections in the Cilento and
Calabria, had been defeated by royalist irregulars led by Sciarpa.⁹⁶
   Naples itself was now under direct threat of attack. On 2 April, coinciding with
the Austro-Russian offensive in northern Italy a squadron of British warships
commanded by Commander Troubridge⁹⁷ had occupied the islands of Procida,
Ventotenne, Ponza, and Capri and placed the capital under blockade. On 11 April
MacDonald reported to Paris that the French position in Naples was no longer
tenable. His communications were overextended and his force of 16,000 men was
every day reduced by disease and attacks by brigands. He could no longer hold the
lines from Naples and Salerno to Rome and Ancona, as well as those from Naples
to Apulia and the Terra di Bari.
Every day there are fresh attacks and acts of brigandage, the patriots are weak, we lack local
resources, there are no supplies or forage, no silver, no corn so that we can only obtain what
we need by force of arms. Since the English squadron has taken up position off the coast
the revolts have increased, the people become more insolent and many patriots are already
leaving in fear because of the feebleness of our forces . . . and because of the number of plac-
ards and incendiary proclamations that seem to presage a general rising.⁹⁸
   The general ordered that grain from Apulia be sent to Rome to supply his
retreating army, even at the risk of letting Naples starve. On 22 April the French
army moved from Naples to the safety of Caserta, leaving behind a small but well-
supplied garrison in the S. Elmo fortress. MacDonald told the provisional govern-
ment that the National Guard should be mobilized. Three days later four of his
battalions were recalled to join the Armée de l’Italie in the North and MacDonald
ordered his ofﬁcers to abandon Apulia and the Abruzzi. On 1 May he informed
Paris that he was leaving Naples ‘to its own resources’ on the following day, although
his withdrawal was delayed until the 7th.⁹⁹ Abrial stayed until 28 May, and before
leaving he told the provisional government that it was now completely free to act
as it wished.¹⁰⁰
   Despite the desperate military situation, on 11 May Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel
hailed the French withdrawal as the moment when the Republic was ﬁnally free.
Patriots, citizens of the Neapolitan Nation, You are now ﬁnally in control of your own des-
tiny and have the opportunity that other reborn Nations have vainly desired: this is the
moment to show your wisdom, to unite your minds, your strength and will so that you
            ⁹⁶ Cassese (1970), 110.       ⁹⁷ Thomas Troubidge (1750–1810).
            ⁹⁸ A de G (Vincennes), B***321, 22 Germinal (11 April 1799).
            ⁹⁹ A de G (Vincennes), B3*** 321, 2–18 Flóreal Year VII (21 April 1799).
           ¹⁰⁰ AAEP: Corr Politique (Naples), 126.
