88                                     Absolutist Naples

South the royalists had already taken control of the provinces and on 2 April
Nelson’s warships had begun to blockade the Bay of Naples.
   In the provinces the ﬁrst republics had been declared well before the Republic
was established in Naples. The French armies that invaded the Kingdom in
December 1798 had ﬁrst occupied the frontier fortress of Civitella del Tronto, and
on 11 December the Abruzzo town of Teramo was the ﬁrst to set up a republican
administration. Its lead was followed by L’Aquila, which on 16 December became
the administrative centre of the new republican provincial administration.⁸⁷
   Other towns in Abruzzo declared for the monarchy, however, making commun-
ication with the capital difﬁcult, problems exacerbated by the bands of royalist
irregulars that were harassing the French invaders in the frontier regions of the
Abruzzi and the Terra di Lavoro. Although the French held the major strongholds
of Gaeta, Capua, and Caserta, their communications were still exposed to attacks
by bands of royalist irregulars. One of the largest bands was based near the town of
Itri and was led by Michele Pezza, better known as Fra Diavolo. Another royalist
force led by Mammone was based nearby at Sora, from where his men could raid
the French positions and their troops as they moved along the highway that was
the principal line of communication between Naples and Rome. In Molise,
republican administrations were set up in Isernia, Venafro, Sulmona, and
Campobasso, but here too many smaller towns joined the royalists.⁸⁸
   In the provinces not directly exposed to the French invasions, most of the prin-
cipal towns opted initially for the Republic. In Apulia, the Terra di Bari was a
republican stronghold by the end of January. The neighbouring towns of Trani,
Bari, Altamura, Ruvo, Corato, Grumo, Gravina, Canosa, and Spinazzola all ini-
tially declared for the Republic, as did Ascoli Satriano and Foggia in Capitanata.
Potenza, the provincial capital of Basilicata (Principato Ultra), had also declared
for the Republic, but many smaller towns remained loyal to the king.⁸⁹
   The ﬁrst spate of anti-republican insurrections began in late January and
February. An important catalyst was the arrival of agents from the provisional gov-
ernment in Naples known as ‘democratisers’ who were sent to reorganize provin-
cial administration and to raise taxes. The immediate response in many towns that
had originally declared for the Republic was to raise the royal insignia and revolt.
   The revolt spread and early in February Championnet dispatched General
Duhesme with 6,000 men to impose the republican order in Capitanata and Apulia.
Making Foggia his base, Duhesme joined forces with Ettore Carafa, Count of
Ruvo,⁹⁰ who had raised an army from his feudal estates in Apulia, and had laid siege
to the royalist town of Andria. When it fell an estimated 4,000 inhabitants were
massacred. Next Ruvo and Duhesme took and sacked the town of Sansevero.⁹¹

   ⁸⁷ Republican administrations were set up in the neighbouring towns of Pescara (24 December),
Chieti (25 December), and Lanciano (1 January 1799).                  ⁸⁸ Battaglini (1992), 172–4.
   ⁸⁹ Rao (1995), 97–100.
   ⁹⁰ Ettore Caraffa, Count of Ruvo (1763–99): a leading feudal landowner, he was involved in the
Jacobin conspiracy in Naples in 1794 and had ﬂed to France. See Nicolini (1939), 100–20.
   ⁹¹ 23 February: Helfert (1885), 139, 155; Rao (1995), 99.
