                            1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic                                81

But he also expressed privately the view that the monarchy had little support and
that there is ‘universal complaint of a total want of Justice and good governance
throughout the Kingdom of Naples and that the provinces are in the most
extreme want and misery, so that few, should it come to trial, would think such a
government worth ﬁghting for’.⁵³ When news reached Palermo of the popular
revolt against Pignatelli, Hamilton warned that ‘it will in all probability end in the
Nobility calling the French army into Naples to quell the populace and save
their persons’.⁵⁴ But by 29 January, when news had still not reached Palermo
of the entry of the French army into Naples a week earlier, Hamilton had
changed his tune: ‘The Neapolitan people have no love for the French, but if by
their means the price of bread and oil could be lowered, they would become their
friends immediately for a true Patriotic Spirit does not, I believe, exist in Italy.’⁵⁵


                   THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT

Within twenty-four hours of entering the city, Championnet restored order
with the help of the patriots and San Gennaro whose blood, with some encourage-
ment from French artillery, obligingly performed a miraculous but unscheduled
liquefaction. On 23 January Championnet formally established a provisional
republican government pending approval from Paris that never arrived. Carlo
Laubert, the most prominent of the exiles, was nominated to preside over a gov-
ernment composed of ﬁfteen members who formed six separate Committees.⁵⁶
   The provisional government was dominated by the exiles, who were referred to
simply as Jacobins.⁵⁷ In Paris their contacts with Filippo Buonarroti had made
Lauberg and Giuseppe Abbonamonti suspect as ‘anarchists’ after the coup of
Thermidor, which was why they like many other Italian exiles left Paris to join the
French armies in Italy in 1796. In Italy, some of the exiles were involved in a
Jacobin-organized revolt at Oneglia in Piedmont in 1796. Giuseppe Abbonamonti,
Matteo Galdi, Saverio Massa, and Francesco Saverio Salﬁ took part in the
Cisapline Republic, but were expelled from Milan by the French authorities.
Mario Pagano and Vincenzio Russo both took part in setting up the Roman
Republic in February 1798.⁵⁸
   The difﬁculties that faced the provisional government were immense. The cap-
ital had to be paciﬁed and measures to procure food supplies, restore the currency,
and revive the economy were needed. The provisional government had also to

  ⁵³ Ibid.          ⁵⁴ Ibid.       ⁵⁵ Ibid., 29 January.
  ⁵⁶ Executive, Legislative, Internal Affairs, War, Finance, Police and Justice.
  ⁵⁷ ‘Jacobin’ was initially the term used by the royalists to denounce all the supporters of the
Republic, but as divisions among the republicans grew, the moderates were referred to as ‘patriots’
and the radicals as ‘Jacobins’.
  ⁵⁸ Filippo Michele Buonarroti (1761–1837) was heavily implicated in the pro-Jacobin plot in
Paris in May 1796 known as the ‘Conspiracy of the Equals’. See Rao (1992), 477.
