82                                     Absolutist Naples

assert its authority in the provinces, which had been thrown into confusion by the
collapse of the monarchy. Throughout the frontier regions, the retreat of the royal
army, the French invasion, and the king’s appeal for a mass rising against the
invaders had created a situation of utter disorder that threatened to escalate into
civil war as towns and villages declared for and against the new government.
To make matters worse the provisional government also had to raise 2,500,000
ducats from the capital to pay the indemnity to the Directory and a further
15,000,000 from the provinces.⁵⁹
   Championnet was inﬂexible in insisting that the indemnity be paid within two
months, but his close adviser and fellow Jacobin Marc-Antoine Jullien⁶⁰ warned
that the French demands would make it impossible to establish stable govern-
ment. The only way to prevent the currency collapsing, he argued, would be to sell
the lands of the crown and the Church.⁶¹
   Another French ofﬁcial warned of the seriousness of the situation:
In Naples we arrived as Liberators. We freed the wealthy classes who are also the patriots.
We have powerful support from the ex-Nobles, the wealthy and the enlightened classes.
They have welcomed us with great enthusiasm, but it is easy to discourage them. We have
demanded from them 60 million francs. This is an exorbitant sum. Everyone knows that
Ferdinand has bankrupted Naples and robbed them even of their plate. He took huge sums
of money with him to Sicily and there is hardly any silver coin to be found. There is no way
that this town can pay 60 millions, and even to raise part of this we shall lose very many of
our supporters . . . . The populace of Naples is ignorant, highly superstitious, fanatically
loyal to Ferdinand and hostile to the French. Had they the opportunity and the means they
would not let one escape. They are terrifying because there are so many of them. If the
English come and bombard the city and make allies of the lazzaroni we will be in the great-
est of danger . . . . The French seem to have forgotten that we are in the land of the Sicilian
Vespers.⁶²
   Carlo De Nicola also noted fearfully that ‘the French troops are not sufﬁciently
numerous to hold Naples in check and put down the insurrections in the king-
dom’. On 3 February he reported that a militia of 1,100 men was to be estab-
lished: ‘all the good patriots are at its head with various ranks, and the rest have
been enrolled from the former nobles and gentry’.⁶³ But the militia consisted of
only six hundred men. All were armed and mounted, but property qualiﬁcations
were set deliberately high to keep out the urban poor.⁶⁴
   The militia patrolled the city in the company of French troops, searching for
arms and for those who had led the popular rising. These patrols were also respons-
ible for setting up Trees of Liberty, the symbol of the new order, in the principal

  ⁵⁹ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 20–1.       ⁶⁰ Marc-Antoine Jullien (1775–1848).
  ⁶¹ Battaglini (1997), 240.
  ⁶² AAEP, CP, Naples, 126: M. David, ‘Notes sur la révolution de Naples’, 10 February 1799 (22
Piovoso an VII).                                               ⁶³ De Nicola, 3 February 1799, i. 61.
  ⁶⁴ Pietro Colletta later commented, ‘few citizens were entered on the lists of the armed militia,
but many were entered on the tax registers’. Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 22.
