84                                  Absolutist Naples

and Faypoult had speciﬁcally denounced Championnet for failing to consult him
before signing the armistice and negotiating with the patriots:
He has taken control of every branch of government. He will not even speak to me. This
strange behaviour will almost certainly result in anarchy.⁶⁸
   In protest at Championnet’s arrest, the provisional government sent a delegation
headed by the Prince of Moliterno to Paris to convey its dismay both at
Championnet’s dismissal and at the ‘more austere and severe’ bearing of his suc-
cessor. But this was also a pretext to protest against the obstacles that the policies of
the French government and its agents placed in the path of the new Republic.
   Despite its best efforts, they argued, the provisional government’s attempts to
raise the money demanded by France had ‘yielded only small sums, and even these
are soaked in bitter and justiﬁed tears’. There was little more that could be done
given the rapidly deteriorating situation in the provinces. The Neapolitan patriots
‘deserve the most special consideration from la Grande Nation’ and in the present
circumstances ‘the Government is paralysed in all its operations by the lack of
ﬁnancial means’, which made it impossible to supply men or money to la Grande
Nation. The government’s great mission was ‘to set the people on the right path’,
but to do this the people had ﬁrst to be ‘caressed and raised up from their abject
state rather than oppressed’ and the delegation implored the Directory to waive or
defer its demands for payment of the indemnity.⁶⁹
   Moliterno’s delegation was not even received in Paris since the Directory
refused to acknowledge its legitimacy on the grounds that Championnet had had
no authority to establish the provisional government in Naples. On 25 Ventoso
(12 March) the provisional government tried another tack and instructed the
delegation’s secretary, Francesco Antonio Ciaja, to point out that the survival of
the Republic was the only way to stop the British and Russians from attacking the
south of France.⁷⁰ That appeal did not get a hearing either.


                     MACDONALD AND FAYPOULT

Two weeks after his arrival, Faypoult reported that only 1,000,000 ducats had
been paid towards the maintenance of the French army since January. He there-
fore demanded the immediate surrender of all the royal palaces, the estates of
the Medici and Farnese families, the lands and goods of the Order of Malta and
the Neapolitan chivalric orders, and the lands of all emigrés, which France now
claimed by right of conquest. He agreed, however, that cash indemnity could be
paid in the form of jewels and plate.⁷¹

  ⁶⁸ AAEP, CP, Naples, 126, 9 Piovoso an VII (28 January 1799); BSPN Documenti Originali,
ms xxxvi a 8, p. 61.                       ⁶⁹ BSPN Documenti Originali, ms xxxvi, pp. 8–33.
  ⁷⁰ Ibid. 41.       ⁷¹ BSPN Documenti Originali, ms xxvi a 8, p. 43; Helfert (1885), 144.
