                            1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic                              83

piazze. The clergy was mobilized to celebrate the Republic with Te Deums and
processions through the city.
   De Nicola continued to emphasize the hostility felt by every class of citizen to
the new government, however, which he attributed in part to the ‘impertinence’
of the French ofﬁcers and the tensions caused by the billeting of French troops.
But a wider cause of grievances came from continuing ‘taxes, the shortages of food
and the almost complete absence of coin’:
The price of food is getting higher every day, while everyone who owns any property is tor-
mented by new taxes which hurt the rest of the population, and in any case fewer and fewer
have anything to spend. Those who have no jobs or who formerly worked for the Court no
longer have clients, so that the artisans are also without work: this causes the discontent to
grow and those who formerly supported the change in government have begun to change
their tune.⁶⁵
   This did not deter the government from attempting to reorganize the Kingdom
along republican lines. On 25 January the former Corpo della Città was abolished
and replaced by a municipality consisting of twenty-ﬁve members, most of whom
were selected from the old nobility. The provinces were reorganized and renamed
by a French ofﬁcial on Championnet’s staff, Jean Bassal. Measures were taken to
restore the currency and prevent the collapse of public ﬁnances: on 29 January
the National Debt was guaranteed, but all payments from the banks, whose last
deposits had been looted by the ﬂeeing monarchy, were suspended and they were
placed under armed guard.⁶⁶


                THE DIRECTORY AND THE REPUBLIC

The political affairs of the Neapolitan Republic were from the start closely con-
trolled by the government of the Directory in Paris, which on 27 February ordered
that Championnet be arrested and recalled to France for disobeying orders.
He was succeeded by his rival General MacDonald, who remained in command
until ordered to abandon the city early in May. In February Guillaume Charles
Faypoult was appointed political commissar, but a month later was replaced by
André Joseph Abrial.
   It is unclear whether the Directory’s decision to arrest Championnet was
motivated by his undisguised Jacobin sympathies or by the well-documented
reports that his generals were out of control and looting at will. The complaints
that led to his arrest came, however, from the Civil Commissar, Guillaume
Faypoult.⁶⁷ The two had been at loggerheads long before they reached Naples,


  ⁶⁵ De Nicola, 1 March 1799, 87.     ⁶⁶ Frigione (1941), 54.
  ⁶⁷ Guillaume Faypoult (1752–1817): Neapolitan historians generally see Faypoult as the villain,
but see Godechot (1937), ii. 242–62.
