86                                     Absolutist Naples


                               COMMISSAR ABRIAL

Abrial reached Naples on 28 March (8 Germinal) and at once reported that there
was total confusion. He blamed Championnet, who had ignored the ruling that in
all ‘occupied territories’ a Political Commissar should be in charge of public
administration. But since it was too late to undo Championnet’s errors without
alienating France’s strongest supporters, Abrial decided to create a new ﬁve-
member Executive Commission and reorganize the larger twenty-ﬁve-member
Legislative Commission. The new Executive Commission would have no powers
to issue orders without the approval of the Political Commissar, making it ‘a mere
façade’, but a useful one since ‘the People see only Neapolitans and in the division
of powers they see the image of a true Republic’.⁷⁸
   Abrial admitted that he knew no one in Naples, so he turned to the patriots and
the ‘popular clubs’: ‘I asked them to recommend individuals of real capability.
Endless lists of names poured into my ofﬁce.’ After careful scrutiny, the
Commissar had created ‘a really excellent government’, two-thirds of whom had
originally been appointed by Championnet.⁷⁹
   The Commissar now urged the provisional government to get rid of
Championnet’s unworkable administration, create an effective National Guard,
and rescue the currency. He also took up the proposals for the abolition of feudal-
ism that were still awaiting MacDonald’s approval.
   On 9 April Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel published in the Monitore Napletano
a long commentary on the debates.⁸⁰ All were agreed, she claimed, that all forms
of personal service should be abolished and the disagreements were over the com-
pensation that should be paid for the abolition of ‘diritti reali’—land and levies
owned in feudal title. The radicals claimed that since feudalism was the result of
theft perpetrated against the nation by the different invaders of the past—‘The
Barbarians from the North’—now that the people (‘the Nation’) was free, it had
the right to reclaim what was its own.
   For the moderates, Mario Pagano argued for a more pragmatic solution and
proposed excluding ‘dues such as tithes and the terratico that arise from contracts
made between noble landowners and peasant farmers’. He also argued that the
feudatories should be compensated for the loss of feudal demani: ‘To abolish
everything, or to leave everything to the barons would be equally unjust.’⁸¹

   ⁷⁸ Battaglini (1992), 252.
   ⁷⁹ The new Legislative Commission included Mario Pagano, Domenico Cirillo, and Giuseppe
Maria Galanti, while Giuseppe Abamonti, Ercole d’Agnese, Giuseppe Albanesi, Ignazio Ciaja, and
Melchiorre Delﬁco (who never reached Naples) formed the Executive. Abrial also established four
ministries: the Interior (De Filippis), Justice and Police (Pigliceli), War (Manthoné), and Finance
(Macedonio). Helfert (1882), 146; Rao (1995), 51–2.
   ⁸⁰ Monitore Napoletano, Decadì 20 Germile Year VII/I1 (Tuesday 9 April)—this issue reported the
debate held earlier on 7 March. In the meantime Lauberg and Cestari—the main supporters of the
radical proposal—had left Naples. See Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 133.
   ⁸¹ Ibid.; Venturi (1962), 829; Galasso (1964), 69–105; Rao (1995), 37–47.
