                           1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic                            89

   The Calabrian provinces were the furthest removed from the French invasions,
but also the closest to the Court and its British allies in Sicily. Even here, however,
support for the Republic was initially solid. Following the Cassa Sacra, hostility to
the former Bourbon government was strong, and in 1798 unrest and lawlessness
had forced the government to abandon attempts to introduce conscription.
   In January Cosenza had been the ﬁrst major city in Upper Calabria to declare for
the Republic, and its lead was copied by the other principal towns: Castrovillari,
Paolo, S. Lucido, Amantea, and Rossano. In Lower Calabria, the royal governor,
Antonio Winspeare, ﬂed to join the Court in Sicily, and Reggio also joined the
Republic. But here too many smaller towns remained loyal to the king.⁹²
   The supporters of the Republic suffered a severe blow, however, when a
joint Russian and Turkish force captured Corfu on 1 March, which left all the
republican towns along the Adriatic coast dangerously exposed to attack. Then
in April a small royalist force led by Cavalier Antoine Micheroux⁹³ landed near
Brindisi. That was the signal for defections, which spread rapidly and culminated
in the fall of Foggia, the principal republican stronghold in the east, on 23 May.
   By then royalist insurrections were sweeping through other provinces that had
initially declared for the Republic. In Basilicata, Matera defected in February and
the republican administration in Potenza was also overthrown. In the Cilento, a
royalist rising at Montesano on 17 February gave the cue for revolts that spread
through the Diano, Policastro, and Lucania valleys.⁹⁴
   When Cardinal Ruffo landed in Calabria on 8 February, the initial response to
his appeal for a ‘Holy Crusade’ against the foreign invader and their Neapolitan
sympathizers had been cool. But at the end of February Monteleone surrendered
to Ruffo’s forces, and from there he moved to take Catanzaro and then Cotrone.
With Lower Calabria in the hands of the royalists, the revolts spread to Upper
Calabria. On 15 March Cosenza fell and was sacked. Still moving cautiously,
Ruffo advanced northwards, taking and sacking the republican stronghold of
Altamura at the end of April. There he waited for reinforcements before advan-
cing by way of Gravina to Spinazzola, Venosa, and then Melﬁ.
   On 2 June Ruffo reached Bovino, where he waited to join forces with
Micheroux. From Bovino, he made contact with the royalist forces led by
Giuseppe Pronio in the Abruzzi, while Micheroux was in communication with
the bands led by Fra Diavolo and Gaetano Mammone that controlled much of the
Terra di Lavoro. On 6 June Micheroux reported that the whole of the Terra di
Bari, Capitanata, Molise, and the Terra di Lavoro had been recaptured for the king
with the assistance of ‘four Russian frigates, 320 soldiers, 120 sailors and 20 pieces
of Russian artillery’.⁹⁵ On June 8 Ruffo entered Avellino and ﬁve days later was at
the gates of Naples.

  ⁹² Cingari (1957), 117, 139–40.
  ⁹³ Antoine Micheroux (1776–1805) was a Belgian Walloon ofﬁcer serving in the Bourbon army
who also performed diplomatic functions.                                ⁹⁴ Cassese (1970), 97.
  ⁹⁵ Maresca (1894), 287–92; on Ruffo see Cingari (1957), 191–210, 242; Helfert (1885), 182.
