                            1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic                             85

    In a separate report, MacDonald complained about the ineffectiveness of the
provisional government: ‘the most difﬁcult thing here is to make the government
effective. It is ﬂawed in every respect, makes every manner of promises and delib-
erates endlessly but never does anything. There is never any agreement . . . it has no
power, no credibility and no energy.’⁷²
    The Legislative Committee set up by Championnet included Mario Pagano,
Domenico Forges Davanzati, Giuseppe Albanesi, and Giuseppe Luogoteta,
and was responsible for drawing up a constitution and drafting laws to abolish
feudalism and reform the judicial system. But it had little freedom of choice,
since the only constitution acceptable to Paris was the French constitution of
Year III.⁷³
    On the question of the common lands (the demani) the situation was clearer
because in 1792 the Bourbon government had already decreed they should be
divided amongst those with use-rights. But like the Bourbon government, the
provisional government lacked the means to implement such a project. Feudalism,
not unexpectedly, proved even more controversial and the Legislative Committee
immediately split into radical and moderate tendencies when Mario Pagano
proposed that the abolition of entails should be made retroactive.⁷⁴
    As news reached Naples of opposition to the Republic in the provinces,
demands that the provisional government move quickly to abolish feudalism
became more insistent. On 16 February the Monitore Napolitano appealed for ‘the
law that will be most useful for the provinces—the abolition of feudalism’.⁷⁵ This,
it argued, was the surest way to end the revolts against the Republic. Two days later
the provisional government debated two proposals, one drafted by Giuseppe
Albanese and Domenico Forges Davanzati, the other a more moderate alternative
drawn up by Mario Pagano. The sticking point was the issue of compensation and
when discussion resumed on 25 February the split between radicals and moder-
ates widened. On 7 March two more proposals were again discussed,⁷⁶ and a com-
promise draft was ﬁnally submitted to MacDonald on 26 March. Two days later
the provisional government urged MacDonald to enact the law quickly:
The delay of your reply regarding approval of the law relating to the abolition of feudal
ﬁefs, which will dissipate the insurrections as the sun melts the clouds and bring the people
to actively support the revolution, has caused us the greatest concern.⁷⁷
  MacDonald’s approval was postponed, however, until the arrival of the new
Commissar, André Joseph Abrial.


  ⁷² A de G (Vincennes), B3*** 321, MacDonald to Directory, 6 Ventoso (24 February 1799) and
1 Germile (21 March 1799).                         ⁷³ Rao (1995), 32–47; Galasso (1984), 69–105.
  ⁷⁴ Ibid.        ⁷⁵ Monitore Napoletano (5), 28 Piovoso Year VII/I (16 February 1799).
  ⁷⁶ One by Giuseppe Cestari and supported by Carlo Laubert and Cesare Paribelli, the other by
Pagano: see Galasso (1984), 69–105.
  ⁷⁷ Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 154: Doc 672. 28 March 1799.
