                           1799: Rise and Fall of the Republic                           87

  Fonseca Pimentel clearly sympathized with the radicals, but Giuseppe Maria
Galanti was among those to urge caution:
It has not escaped my notice that with the abolition of feudalism and feudal tithes there are
those who wish an agrarian law like that of the republics of ancient times. But history con-
stantly warns us . . . of the grave discord to which this would give rise.
Such a law, Galanti warned, would found the new Republic ‘ on civil discord, on
injustice and bad faith’.⁸²
   Carlo De Nicola had also noted in his diary at the end of March that the
Legislative Committee was divided into three factions. The radicals were led by
Carlo Lauberg and included Domenico Bisceglia, Prosdocimo Rotondo, and
Cesare Paribelli. They were opposed by the ‘good republicans’, amongst whom
De Nicola included Mario Pagano, Ignazio Ciaja, and Domenico Forges
Davanzati. Only the latter had the support of the Civil Guard, he claimed, and
alone understood that it was essential to ﬁnd ways of collaborating with the
Directory. Finally there was a third group made up of aristocrats, and included
Luigi de’ Medici, the ex-Prince of Colobritano, and the ex-Prince Santangelo.
De Nicola believed that their aim was to take advantage of the divisions between
the radicals and the patriots in the ‘hope of gaining control of affairs and forming
an aristocratic government; but they are being closely watched’.⁸³
   Commissar Abrial was sympathetic to the radicals, but also believed that the
provisional government had become dangerously unpopular and in early April he
expelled Lauberg. Unlike MacDonald, however, Abrial preferred the more radical
law on feudalism; the draft ﬁnally approved on 26 April still contained many com-
promises.⁸⁴ Nevertheless, the Commissar insisted that it conformed fully to ‘the
principles of French law’. The law was ﬁnally published on 27 April and abolished
all feudal dues, ‘leaving the ex-Barons with only those lands that were not subject
to the right of devolution to the crown’.⁸⁵
   Carlo De Nicola was sceptical: ‘We still await the other law that will abolish the
tax on wheat and wine and reduce the tithe by one third. The Government’s idea is
to make the concessions in order to let the provinces understand the advantages of
the Revolution and so bring the revolts to an end. But they should have done this
sooner.’ ⁸⁶


                                 THE PROVINCES

By April, however, the end had already begun. The Russian–Austrian offensive in
the north forced the Directory to withdraw its armies from Italy, while in the

                ⁸² Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 138–46 (Doc 669).
                ⁸³ Battaglini (1992), 238; De Nicola, 14 April 1799, 135.
                ⁸⁴ Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 132–3.       ⁸⁵ Ibid.
                ⁸⁶ De Nicola, 27 April 1799, 150.
