100                                      Absolutist Naples

    A government announcement stated that the Monitore would ‘give account of
all the operations of the Government’. It was edited by Eleonora Fonseca di
Pimentel²⁴ and supported by the government although also privately funded.
It ran to thirty-ﬁve issues, the last appearing on 8 June, ﬁve days before the fall of
the Republic.²⁵ Other journals included the Veditore Repubblicano, Il Vero
Repubblicano, Il Giornale Estemporaneo, Il Corriere di Napoli e di Sicilia,²⁶ which
all offered a variety of commentaries on the government and its deliberations. But
the fullest accounts of the provisional government and in particular the debates
on the abolition of feudalism were published in the Monitore.
    The press offered unique opportunities for exchanging ideas and debating polit-
ical projects, but the supporters of the Republic well knew that print was not a
medium that enabled them to reach the masses. From the early days of the Republic
numerous attempts were made to reach the people and in February the ﬁrst Halls
of Public Education were opened, where patriotic lectures were given.²⁷
    Popular republican ‘catechisms’ were also seen as an important means of
educating the people, and the Interior Minister, Gianfrancesco Conforti, insisted
on the great inﬂuence of the theatre: ‘the theatres constitute a form of public edu-
cation of the greatest importance not only for the young but also for adults who
have been the subject of stultifying effects of long lasting despotism. . . . Here
instruction can be presented to the citizen in the guise of entertainment.’ But he
also held that censorship was necessary: ‘since the theatre can as easily portray vice
as virtue . . . it should be the subject of rigorous scrutiny by the public authorities
who must ensure that the people are not moved by sentiments other than patri-
otism, virtue and sound morality.’²⁸ The government also expressed concern
that freedom of speech should not be a licence for sedition and warned against the
dangers of seditious meetings and forbade the formation of private societies and
associations.²⁹
    Republican ritual was seen as an even more important means of communica-
tion that was deliberately grafted onto existing civil, religious, and royal rituals.
The key symbol of the new regime was the Liberty Trees set up in the major
squares and public sites in both the capital and the provincial towns. The clergy
and civil authorities participated in these rituals, just as they had in those of the
ancien régimes, singing Te Deums to consecrate the new regime and to celebrate
major public events.
    The provisional government was well aware of the hardship facing the majority
of citizens at a time when commerce was at a standstill and the political crisis had
thrown thousands of public employees out of work. Much energy was devoted

  ²⁴ Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel (1752–99) had moved from Rome to Naples. In 1794 she had
been arrested as a suspected Jacobin and again in November 1798. She was among the political pris-
oners released in January 1799 and edited the Monitore Napolitano; she was hanged on 20 August
1799.          ²⁵ Quarterly subscription cost 6 carlini. See Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1), ii. 83.
  ²⁶ Battaglini (1988).         ²⁷ Rao (1999), 358–64.            ²⁸ Croce (1947), 275.
  ²⁹ Rao (1999), 367.
