                                     Jacobins and Patriots                                     99


               THE REPUBLICAN MOMENT IN NAPLES

Writing about the popular movement in the French Revolution, Richard Cobb
once commented that the reasons for its failure were obvious, but overlooked the
much more interesting question of why France had a popular movement in the
ﬁrst place. In Italy, there was no popular movement comparable to that of Paris but
Cobb’s comment can equally well be applied to the signiﬁcant minority who under
conditions of great risk and danger supported the Italian republican projects.¹⁸
   Everywhere in Italy the supporters of the republics were small minorities who
never succeed in developing a popular following. Circumstances rarely allowed
their projects to be translated into reality, but nonetheless the republics did
offer the ﬁrst brief moment of freedom of speech in modern Italy and one that
would not be repeated until the revolutions of the nineteenth century.¹⁹ It was
during this brief period that it became possible to see how deeply the cultural
and political developments of the previous decade both within and outside Italy
had taken root. This also explains why not only the projects but also the political
strategies employed by the Italian republicans were similar from one end of the
peninsula to the other.
   An example of this was the ways in which the republican elites understood and
tried to overcome an isolation that was as much cultural as political.²⁰ In Naples,
the provisional government and its numerous committees were the principal
forum for political debates, but these were also conducted in a variety of public
places and in the numerous newspapers, journals, and broadsheets launched
after the founding of the Republic.²¹ These publications were also indicative of
the strength of a new print culture that had taken root in the last decades of the
century. Like many other Italian states, Naples had developed an important pub-
lishing industry and book trade in the eighteenth century, and despite censorship
books circulated with ease and in great numbers among the elites.²²
   Of the many journals and broadsheets that came into being after the declara-
tion of the Republic, the one closest to the government was the Monitore
Napolitano, which ﬁrst appeared on 2 February 1799—‘Saturday 14 Piovoso Year
VII of Liberty, Year I of the Neapolitan Republic One & Indivisible’—with the
stirring declaration:
Finally we are free, and for us too the day has come when we too can ﬁnally pronounce the
sacred words Liberty and Equality and announce ourselves to the Mother Republic as
worthy sons, and to the free Peoples of Italy and Europe as their worthy brothers. . . .²³

   ¹⁸ Cobb (1970), p. xiv.
   ¹⁹ Censorship in Napoleonic Italy was pervasive and more effective than under the ancien régime:
see Davis in Goldstein (ed.) (2000), 85–7.                ²⁰ For Rome see Cafﬁero (2004), 3–140.
   ²¹ The most important source is a remarkable collection of documents published and edited by
Mario Battaglini and Augusto Placanica: Battaglini and Placanica (2000–1).
   ²² See Rao (ed.) (1998), and Luise (2001).        ²³ Monitore Napolitano (1), 2 February 1799.
