                                     Jacobins and Patriots                                     97

returned to Milan but were more likely to be treated as suspect ‘anarchists’ than as
friends by the French. Nonetheless, many of the exiles continued to hope that
Napoleon would support the earlier republican project, among them Francesco
Lomonaco, whose Report to Citizen Carnot was published in August 1800.
   Lomonaco’s brief tract was written in the form of an open letter to the French
foreign minister, and it appealed to France to support the creation of an independ-
ent Italian republic. Its author had also participated in the Republic in Naples in
1799, and it coupled a proud defence of the Neapolitan Jacobins with a searing
attack on the Directory and the French commander in Naples, Joseph Méjean,
whose decision to surrender the impregnable S. Elmo fortress had sent the patriots
to certain death.¹¹ Lomonaco gave a detailed description of the horrors of the
Royal Terror and the counter-revolution in Naples, but clearly with the intent of
persuading France’s new government that the only way to guarantee the security
and political stability of the Italian peninsula was to create an independent and
uniﬁed Italian Republic.¹²
   When Vincenzo Cuoco’s Essay appeared a year later, the political climate in
Milan had become even more threatening. A conspiracy involving a number of
Neapolitans had been discovered in the summer of 1801, many exiles had been
arrested, the masonic lodges suspected of providing refuge for ‘anarchists’ and ‘ter-
rorists’ had been closed down, and the fate of the former Cisalpine Republic was
still uncertain.¹³
   In these circumstances, Cuoco needed to use great caution. He, too, was a
prominent Jacobin and like Lomonaco believed that Italy’s political development
could not take place without France’s support. But he also believed that France
must be made to understand that the Italian Republic could be built only by
Italians and, like Lomonaco, Cuoco held that the policies of the Directory had
been the main reason the republican experiment in Italy had failed. But in the pre-
sent circumstances any direct accusations against France would have been both
dangerous and counter-productive, which may explain why Cuoco chose to
blame the leaders of the Neapolitan Republic for errors that had clearly been the
responsibility of Championnet, MacDonald, Faypoult, Abrial, and Paris.¹⁴
   It was France that had forced the Republic to accept the conservative French
constitution of Year III, France that had made ﬁnancial stability impossible,
France that had imposed an unworkable reorganization of provincial administra-
tion, and France that had refused to allow the Republic to raise its own army. The
greatest political error of all, Cuoco claimed, had been the failure to devise an
effective policy toward the provinces. ‘Their ﬁrst error was to fear the capital

   ¹¹ Francesco Lomonaco, Rapporto al Cittadino Carnot (ed. De Francesco, 1999), 224–76.
Lomonaco (1772–1810) was a young democrat from Basilicata who had taken part in the Republic
in Naples where he published a translation of Mably’s Rights and Duties of the Citizen.
   ¹² De Francesco (1999), 254; Rao (1992), 429–40.             ¹³ De Francesco (1999), 60–1.
   ¹⁴ De Francesco (1997), 1–21; for an alternative view see Tessitore (1985), 329–69, and Villani,
Introduction to Cuoco, Saggio Storico sulla rivoluzione napoletana del 1799 (1980), pp. xvii–xlix.
