96                                  Absolutist Naples

government had failed to develop coherent policies or strategies. He was especially
strident in his criticism of the leaders of the Republic, most of whom he claimed
were self-serving aristocrats. They had been eager to pass laws from which they
alone would beneﬁt, such as abolishing the entails that in aristocratic families cut
off cadet sons from the line of inheritance. But when it came to the broader ques-
tion of abolishing feudalism, these aristocratic republicans had proved reluctant.
Cuoco’s other target was the exiles, whom he accused of blindly supporting the
French authorities and of imposing reforms based uncritically on French models
ill-suited to the political and cultural realities of Naples.
    As a result, the provisional government had failed to win over the provinces,
raise a republican army, abolish feudalism until too late, or create democratic
institutions that might have found roots in Neapolitan society. For that reason,
Cuoco argued, the republican experiment in Naples had been a ‘passive revolu-
tion’, inspired by foreign models and guided by leaders who lacked understanding
of local conditions and failed to establish any following among the masses who
remained loyal to the monarchy and their own popular religious practice.⁸
    Cuoco’s account was subsequently taken as persuasive evidence that the paths
of the two Italies had critically diverged during the years of the Jacobin Republics.
Writing a century after the event, Benedetto Croce saw in Cuoco’s ‘passive revolu-
tion’ conﬁrmation of his own conviction that there had been no possibility of
achieving progress in the pre-Uniﬁcation South. Centuries of foreign oppression,
exploitation, and misrule had corrupted and destroyed southern society. This
made the ignorant masses facile tools in the hands of a reactionary ruling
class, abetted by a corrupt and superstitious clergy. Against the forces of reaction
the small group of idealists who had tried to lead the Republic was helpless. For
Croce, what Vincenzo Cuoco had described as the ‘passive revolution’ was the
inevitable consequence of the moral and material backwardness that in 1799
made the fanatical Sanfedist counter-revolution the true voice of the South.⁹
    In Croce’s master-narrative of the Risorgimento, the heroic sacriﬁce of the
Neapolitan republicans—the martyrs of 1799—became one of the most potent
founding myths of the new state. Not surprisingly, therefore, in his Marxist counter-
narrative Antonio Gramsci placed even greater but equally retrospective importance
on Cuoco’s ‘passive revolution’.¹⁰ Today, Cuoco’s essay is known primarily through
these two inﬂuential, but equally retrospective and ideological commentaries. In
both cases Cuoco’s arguments were drilled to serve the needs of two very different
ideological constructs, both of which identiﬁed 1799 as the moment when modern
Italy’s two souls parted ways. But more recent studies suggest that in the process
Cuoco’s arguments have been twisted almost beyond recognition.
    Cuoco’s Essay was written and published at a moment of great political uncer-
tainty when the Italian exiles and survivors of the earlier republics like Cuoco had

            ⁸ Cuoco (ed. Villani, 1980), 90.    ⁹ Croce (1924/1967), 204–12.
           ¹⁰ See Introduction, pp. 4–6.
