                                  Jacobins and Patriots                                  95

What did differ in the South was, however, the scale of the crisis of the monarchy
that these events revealed.
   It was only later that the emphasis shifted to what had made the Neapolitan
Republic different, and certainly nothing contributed more decisively to trans-
forming the Neapolitan Republic of 1799 into myth than its tragic end.² Even at the
time this quickly assumed symbolic signiﬁcance, not least because the Neapolitan
Republic marked both the furthest geographical reach of the republican experi-
ment that had started seven years earlier in France and the beginning of its end.³
   The fanaticism of the counter-revolution, and above all the cold-blooded sav-
agery of the Royal Terror in Naples whose victims included many from the most
noble families in the Kingdom, inspired genuine revulsion. In the ﬁerce political
debates in Paris that preceded the coup of 18th Brumaire (November 1799) later
in the same year, Championnet cited the fate of the Neapolitan Jacobins to
denounce the Directory for betraying the Italian republics and to warn what could
be expected in France should the ci-devant monarchy and its supporters ever
triumph.⁴ Hearing the tales of the Neapolitan exiles who had made their way to
Paris, Maria Helen Williams was also persuaded that the royalist vengeance in
Naples matched only Robespierre’s Terror in scale and inhumanity.⁵
   The comparison was questionable, but the revulsion was real. Even in
Britain, the behaviour of the king of Naples and Nelson’s apparent complicity
were the subject of an outraged denunciation when in the House of Commons in
February 1800 Charles James Fox accused the hero of the Battle of the Nile of
knowingly participating in an atrocity. A decade later in his Life of Nelson Robert
Southey described what had happened in the Bay of Naples in 1799 as:
A deplorable transaction, a stain on the memory of Nelson and upon the honour of
England. To palliate it would be vain: to justify it would be wicked. There is no alternative
for one who will not make himself a participant in guilt but to record the shameful story
with sorrow and shame.⁶
  What subsequently ﬁxed the image of the Republic of 1799 most lastingly,
however, was the Historical Essay Concerning the Late Revolution in Naples by
Vincenzo Cuoco, published in Milan in 1801. Cuoco had been a member of the
provisional republican government in Naples in 1799 and had been arrested in
May but escaped and made his way to France, where like many other Italian exiles
he found himself far from welcome in the sombre political climate after
Brumaire.⁷ After Bonaparte’s victory over the Austrians at Marengo in June 1800,
Cuoco like many of his fellow countrymen moved to Milan where he wrote his
account of the Neapolitan Republic.
  Cuoco acknowledged that the Republic’s fate had been sealed by the with-
drawal of MacDonald’s armies in May, but he also insisted that the republican
      ² Rao (1999, 2002).         ³ Vovelle (1999), 43–59.       ⁴ Rao (1992), 165–82.
      ⁵ Rao, in Di Lorenzo (ed.) (2003), 708–39.        ⁶ Southey (1813), i. 170.
      ⁷ Di Francesco (1997), 29–38; Rao (1992), 393–515.
