92                                       Absolutist Naples

British blockade off Brest and that Admiral Bruix was headed for the Mediterranean
with the aim of joining forces with the Spanish ﬂeet and engaging the British ﬂeet.
   The same news forced Nelson to change course. On 13 June he had set sail
from Palermo to command the action in the Bay of Naples, but Lord Keith now
ordered him to take up station off the west of Sicily to await the expected Franco-
Spanish attack. Nelson ordered Captain Troubridge to join him with the ships
blockading Naples, leaving only some smaller gunboats under the command of
Captain Edward James Foote to keep up the bombardment of the republican
strongholds along the coast.
   The respite was only temporary, however, and even before the return of the main
British battle squadron Foote’s small ﬂotilla had sufﬁcient ﬁre-power to enable the
royalists to take Castellamare. On 13 June, the feast day of St Anthony of Padua,
Ruffo’s forces ﬁnally reached the city gates.¹⁰⁷ A ﬁerce ﬁght for control of the Ponte
della Maddelena lasted all day, but in the early evening Ruffo’s Calabrian irregulars
and a detachment of Micheroux’s Turks forced an entry through the Porta Capuana.
The republican defenders of the Carmine fort were overcome and put to the sword,
and by midnight the royalists were in control of the lower part of the city.¹⁰⁸
   The patriots, however, still held the principal forts: the Castel Nuovo, the
Castel dell’Ovo, and the S. Elmo castle. The latter not only commanded the
higher ground but was garrisoned by the small and well-equipped French force
commanded by Colonel Joseph Méjean. For as long as they held these positions
the patriots were impregnable and had most of the city under their cannon.
   Ruffo and Micheroux could see no way to dislodge the patriots from the forts,
and were increasingly concerned by the anarchy that had overwhelmed the lower
parts of the city where the Sanfedisti and the people were indiscriminately slaugh-
tering suspected supporters of the Republic. With the full agreement of the com-
manders of the Russian and Turkish contingents and of Captain Foote, Ruffo and
Micheroux therefore began negotiating an armistice with the patriots. The terms
permitted the republicans and the French garrison to leave the forts under guaran-
tee of safe conduct and made available transports to take them and their families
and possessions safely to France.
   The armistice was agreed, and for the English signed by Captain Foote on
behalf of Troubridge who was still with Nelson. The next act in the tragedy of the
Neapolitan Republic began on 24 June when Nelson’s ﬂagship, the Foudroyant,
weighed anchor in the Bay of Naples. Nelson immediately declared the armistice
null and void: for two days Ruffo and Micheroux protested and resisted, but
Nelson held ﬁrm. Then on the 26 June he appeared to change his mind: that after-
noon the republicans came voluntarily out of the forts and were shown full mil-
itary honours by the Russian and Turkish commanders, whose troops escorted

   ¹⁰⁷ The royalists had little faith in the traditional protector of Naples, St Gennaro, the miraculous
liquefaction of whose blood had taken place despite the presence of the French invaders in the city.
   ¹⁰⁸ Helfert (1885), 143–4.
