                                                 5
                            Jacobins and Patriots

              HOW THE REPUBLIC BECAME A LEGEND

In the closing years of the nineteenth century, the events of 1799 were brilliantly
transformed into one of the great founding myths of the new Italian nation. The
year 1799 came to represent a watershed, the turning point that separated Italy’s
two destinies. In the North it was during the republican experiments between
1796 and 1799 that the ﬁrst explicit proposals were made for the creation of an
independent and uniﬁed Italian state, which many hailed as the beginning of the
process that would lead to Italy’s political uniﬁcation half a century later.
The South, however, was already different. Here it was not the republicans but
the counter-revolutionary Sanfedists that triumphed. The North had taken the
path of progress and modernity, the South the path of backwardness.
   The distinctions were not made by contemporaries, and indeed they ran dir-
ectly counter to one of the most striking features of this period when in exile
Italians from all over the peninsula were for the ﬁrst time discovering a sense of
common destiny, if not identity.¹ Nor is this surprising, since in most essential
respects the history and the fate of the Republic in Naples were very similar to
those of the other Italian republics. Nor was the South ever the only site of popular
counter-revolutions that were no less intense or widespread in the North after the
French invasions in 1796.
   Like its sister republics in northern and central Italy, the Neapolitan Republic
was founded under the intrusive guardianship of French armies. Its actions were
subordinated to the politics of the Directory, whose principal object was extor-
tion, plunder, and pillage. Like the other Italian republics, the Neapolitan
Republic depended on the support of a small minority drawn from a cross section
of the propertied and educated classes, and like them it failed to win the support
of the masses. It fell because the Directory was forced to withdraw its troops from
Italy in April 1799, leaving all the Italian republics defenceless against the allied
counter-offensive. In its objectives, in its support, and in the reasons for its col-
lapse the Neapolitan Republic was essentially similar to the other Italian republics.
  ¹ The literature on the political signiﬁcance of the republic triennium is vast. In English see Woolf
(1979), 157–74, and Lyttelton (1993), 63–105; for excellent overviews of the Italian literature see
Rao (2002), 63–116 and Cafﬁero (2005), 19–58.
