98                                  Absolutist Naples

too much and the second was not to fear the provinces enough.’¹⁵ Yet the new
administrative system in Naples had been imposed, as Cuoco well knew, by
Championnet’s assistant, Jean Bassal, two days after the founding of the Republic.
In April, Abrial had not hesitated to describe Bassal’s project, which had thrown
all the existing administrative hierarchies into confusion, as an unworkable disas-
ter. By then, of course, it was too late.
   The Directory’s insistence that Naples pay a huge indemnity had wrecked the
chances of rescuing the government from its desperate ﬁnancial state. Marc-
Antoine Jullien had argued in January that the immediate sale of beni nazionali
was the only way to avert catastrophe. But after Jullien’s arrest, Faypoult had
claimed all the crown and public lands as France’s legitimate war booty.
The Directory’s ﬁscal demands had also been the reason for the fatal decision
to send ‘democratizers’ to the provinces, the disastrous consequences were
compounded by the imposition of republican rituals that ‘wounded everything
that the people held most sacred, their gods, their customs and even the very
names of their towns’.¹⁶
   Like Lomonaco, Cuoco had two aims. First to persuade his fellow Italians of
the need to unite, and second to persuade the French of the advantages that a uni-
ﬁed Italian Republic would bring them. The great lesson of 1799 was that the
Italian republics could not stand alone, but nor could they unite without the sup-
port of the Grande Nation. The overriding need, however, was for unity between
the Italian republics, and hence for unity amongst Italians. It was this that led
Cuoco in his Essay to focus on the abyss that had been revealed between the elites
and the masses in the South.
   As Giovanni Gentile noted long ago, this reveals above all Cuoco’s debt to the
ideas of another great Neapolitan thinker, Giambattista Vico. Like Vico, Cuoco
was convinced that no political revolution could succeed unless it was linked to a
broader process of social but above all cultural regeneration. As a public ofﬁcial in
the South later during the Napoleonic period, like many other former Jacobins,
Cuoco would have the opportunity to put those ideas into practice in urging the
case for educational reforms. But his emphasis on the abyss that separated
the elites from the masses in the South in 1799 was designed to illustrate a prob-
lem that existed not only throughout Italy but indeed most of Europe.¹⁷
   Vincenzo Cuoco’s Essay is a remarkable analysis of the complex interactions
between politics and culture in a moment of revolutionary upheaval. But for this
the South was essentially an example, albeit one that Cuoco could describe from
direct personal experience. His purpose was to expose the obstacles facing repub-
licans throughout Europe and Italy, which in the South had taken forms speciﬁc
but not unique. How, why, and whether the South was different were questions
his Essay did not seek to address.

                 ¹⁵ Cuoco (ed. Villani, 1980), 141–5.        ¹⁶ Ibid. 143.
                 ¹⁷ See Gentile (1909), 3–83. See also Dainotto (2001).
