                                  The Counter-revolution                                    109

   After the defeat of the royal army in November 1798, the masse in the frontier
provinces formed the Kingdom’s ﬁrst line of defence. They were mobilized
when the king ordered a levée en masse before leaving for Sicily. As news reached
the Abruzzo town of Lanciano, the pro-republican former Franciscan monk,
Uombuono delle Boccache, recorded that ‘the enthusiasm of the people to take up
arms was incredible, inspired by the appeal of their king, by the appeals of the
royal and baronial ofﬁcers, by the regular and secular clergy, and many of the latter
by exaggerating the threatened dangers awakened in the hearts of the more cour-
ageous the desire to become leaders of the masse and the people or even generals of
a province, to the point that they showed no shame in calling themselves a sover-
eign people and the People of God.’⁶
   In the neighbouring town of Teramo the royalist priest Angelo de Jacobis told
a different tale, however. When the city parlamento had been summoned in
September, the news of a general levy was greeted with dismay: ‘this threatened
every family with ruin, and especially those of the peasants, working men and
those who were heads of households’.⁷ A second appeal was made in January but
when few responded the Preside of Chieti tried to make up numbers by recruiting
prisoners from the jails who immediately rebelled and ﬂed.⁸
   Even before the royal offensive began in November 1798 the French occupa-
tion of Rome earlier in the year had provoked insurrections to the north of the
Kingdom’s frontiers. When the king issued the appeal for a levée en masse in the
frontier provinces the situation quickly became very confused. The Court in
Palermo tried to maintain contact with the capi-masse, and in December, for
example, the leader of one of the largest bands of royalist irregulars in the Abruzzi,
Giuseppe Pronio, was given 200 muskets by the Bourbon General de Gambs, who
before ﬂeeing to join the king in Sicily put him under the orders of the royalist
Baron Luigi de Riseis.⁹ As the French forces advanced, communications with the
capi-masse became increasingly difﬁcult and by January the masse were operating
autonomously and supplied themselves by raiding towns and villages that had
surrendered to the French and joined the Republic.
   The capi-masse had no common career proﬁle. Some had previous military
experience, others had served as guards for the administration of local feudatories.
Most came from families of wealthy peasants, artisans, or craftsmen, a few from
the poorest sections of rural society. But the most successful already had powerful
networks of kinsmen and clients. Pronio, for example, had been a priest before
becoming an armed retainer in the service of the Duke of Vasto and had many
followers in his native town of Introdacqua.¹⁰ Gaetano Mammone, one of two
brothers from Sora who became feared capi-masse, was by contrast a miller whose
signature was to drink the blood from the decapitated heads of his victims.
   ⁶ Uombuono delle Boccache, ‘Saggio storico-critico della città di Lanciano’, in Coppa-Zuccari
(ed.) (1927), i. 30.
   ⁷ Angelo de Jacobis, ‘Cronaca degli Avveniment in Teramo 1796–1823’, in ibid. iii.
   ⁸ Della Boccache, in ibid. i. 47.      ⁹ Maresca (1893–4), 283.        ¹⁰ Helfert (1885), 137.
