104                                     Absolutist Naples

‘give obedience to the government, not out fear but as a duty of conscience with all
their hearts and sincerity as is owed to the temporal power’.⁴⁹
   Clerical support for the Republic also reﬂected the deeper convictions of those
who had formerly been active in the monarchy’s campaign against Rome.
Gianfrancesco Conforti, for example, was strongly committed to the Jansenist-
inspired project for a spiritual reorganization of the Italian churches whose principal
spokesman in Italy had been Scippione de’ Ricci, the Bishop of Pisa and architect of
the religious policies of Grand Duke Peter Leopold in Tuscany.⁵⁰ But when the
Bourbon government mended its quarrels with Rome in 1791, Conforti was ﬁrst
dismissed, then arrested in 1796 before being released and exiled in 1798.⁵¹
   The absolutist reaction after 1794 persuaded Conforti that the republican project
offered a means to reform and reconstitute the Church along Jansenist lines. The
views of Andrea Serra, Bishop of Potenza, were similar. He too had played a leading
role in the monarchy’s campaign against Rome and in 1799 was prominent in organ-
izing support for the Republic.⁵² Domenico Forges Davanzati, Bishop of Canosa,
was a member of the provisional government, and Giuseppe Capecelatro, the Cardinal
Archbishop of Taranto, was another prominent supporter. A writer, collector of
antiquities, and a friend of Sir William Hamilton, Capecelatro was also an energetic
reformer who believed ﬁrmly that the clergy should share useful and practical know-
ledge and had reorganized the curriculum of the seminaries in his diocese.⁵³
   The Republic also found ardent champions among the lesser clergy, especially
the numerous class of abbés.⁵⁴ The abbé Vincenzo Troysi composed a ‘Republican
Mass’, the abbé Michelangelo Cicerone translated the Gospel of St John the
Evangelist into dialect, whereas the abbé Giuseppe Bellini ‘preached the religion
of Liberty and Equality in the piazza Nazionale’.⁵⁵ There were even some regulars
amongst its supporters, including Uombuono dell Boccacche, the former
Franciscan friar who recorded events in the Abruzzo town of Lanciano.
   Municipal allegiances were more complex and expediency was often the decisive
factor. For the towns and villages in the frontier provinces that were in the line of
the invading French armies, the only way to avoid destruction was to raise the
Liberty Tree and sport the republican red cockade, although even that did not
spare them having to pay heavy cash indemnities to the French commanders who
then set up republican municipalities.
   The military strength of the French was overwhelming and the royalist leader,
Antoine Micheroux, later claimed that the expected arrival of a large French army
was the reason why the leading administrative and commercial cities in Apulia
had opted for the Republic in January and February.⁵⁶ But this does not explain

 ⁴⁹ Helfert (1885), 143–4.
 ⁵⁰ See Cochrane (1973). On popular resistance to Jansenist policies see also Turi (1969/1999).
 ⁵¹ Lomonaco, in Rao (ed.) (2002) 189–96.              ⁵² Chiosi (1981), 319–41.
 ⁵³ See entry on Giuseppe Capecelatro (1744–1836) by Chiosi, in DBI, xviii. 448–51.
 ⁵⁴ In Italian abate: the title of those who had taken religious instruction without being ordained.
 ⁵⁵ Helfert (1885), 143–4.             ⁵⁶ Maresca (1894), 515.
