102                                    Absolutist Naples

   In the end, it was not that the republicans did not try to appeal to popular
religious sensibilities, but rather that those sensibilities were manipulated more
skilfully by their enemies. Prominent amongst these were those groups that had
previously been most vehement in their opposition to the monarchy’s anti-curial
and anti-papal policies: not only had they been been reconciled with the mon-
archy after 1794 but they had been charged with mobilizing against the threat of
atheist republicanism.³⁷


                           1799: THE REPUBLICANS

Who were the republicans in 1799? Contemporaries emphasized how many were
nobles. The diarist Carlo De Nicola divided the members of the provisional gov-
ernment into three groups: the patriots (‘the good republicans’), the Jacobins
(‘aspirant despots’), and the ‘aristocrats’.³⁸ This closely reﬂected Vincenzo Cuoco,
who singled out the aristocrats for an especially scathing attack:
The ﬁrst Republicans were all from the most distinguished families in the capital and in
the provinces: many were noblemen, all members of the wealthy gentry and full of learn-
ing, and indeed it was an excess of learning, which far outran their years and experience,
that led them to think that it was easy to do things that in fact proved to be quite impos-
sible because of the conditions in which the popolaccio lived.³⁹
Looking for a more general proﬁle of the supporters of the Republic, Benedetto
Croce cited the chant of the Neapolitans who went to the barricades to prevent
Championnet’s army from entering the city: ‘Chi tenga vino ha da esse Giacobin’
(‘Those who live well are the Jacobins’).⁴⁰
   The Republic’s supporters came from the propertied and educated classes, but
they were not a homogeneous group. Taking the exiles as a statistical base, Anna
Maria Rao has shown that ‘the majority of the Neapolitan republicans came from
the families of the professional, land-owning or mercantile middle class, who had
grown up and been educated during the reform decades.’ Slightly more than half
the exiles were younger than thirty, and nearly 70% were under thirty-ﬁve.⁴¹
   Attempts to press the sociological distinctions further and to associate the sup-
porters of the Republic with a rising professional and landed bourgeoisie are not
convincing, however. In part this was because the republicans represented a
‘middle class that had grown up in the shadow of the feudal nobility’ so that the
boundaries between the two remained uncertain and confused.⁴² But most of
the leading royalists came from similar backgrounds, while a great many
families followed a well-established and universal strategy and split both ways.

        ³⁷ Chiosi (1992), 261–3.           ³⁸ De Nicola, 22 March, 107.
        ³⁹ Cuoco (ed. Villani, 1980), 5–6 (Cuoco’s Preface to the 1806 edn. of the Saggio).
        ⁴⁰ Croce (1897), 47.           ⁴¹ Rao (ed.) (2002), 516.
        ⁴² Ibid., but see also Petraccone (1989), 329–35.
