                                     Jacobins and Patriots                                    105

support for the Republic in Calabria, Molise, Basilicata, and the Salernitano,
provinces that were distant from the invading French armies. These provinces
were all untouched by the invasions, but were nonetheless caught up in the col-
lapse of the royal government after the ﬂight of the king in December.
   Local considerations always predominated, but for those with power and inﬂu-
ence at a local level once the Republic had been declared in Naples in January with
the approval of the king’s Vicar General it became the legitimate government.
As a result, many former royal ofﬁcials and provincial landowners initially rallied
to the Republic, normally with scrupulous attention to proper legal forms, and the
establishment of the new republican municipal authorities was nearly always pre-
ceded by the convocation of the town or village parlamenti, and duly solemnized
by the religious and civil authorities.
   In sociological terms the alignments were very untidy. In Apulia, the Republic
was supported by many powerful feudal families, including Ettore Caraffa,
Conte di Ruvo.⁵⁷ In Calabria, the leading feudal families—the Serra Cassano, the
Gerace, the Pignatelli, the Montemiletto, the Canzano, the Auletta, the Marsico,
and the Roccaromana—were also prominently represented amongst supporters of
the Republic in Naples, although almost exclusively by cadets with no expectation
of inheritance.⁵⁸
   There were very few clear patterns. In some Calabrian towns the new adminis-
trations were composed of families hostile to the local feudatories, while in others,
like Cosenza, most of the republicans were nobles.The feudal owner of the
Calabrian town of Cirò, Princess Spinelli, supported the Republic in Naples and
ordered her agents in Cirò to support the Republic against the local galantuomini,
who had joined the royalists. Prince Diego Pignatelli, marquis of Vaglio and
Monteleone, supported the Republic in Naples and instructed his agents in
Calabria to follow his lead. The agent of the Prince of Montemiletto was nearly
lynched as a Jacobin near Monteleone in March 1799, as we have seen, when it
became known locally that his master was a supporter of the Republic in Naples.
In Catanzaro, however, the republican government was headed by a former royal
ofﬁcial and was supported by both feudal and non-feudal landowners. The same
was true at Tropea, formerly a royal town where the Republic was supported by
noble and non-noble landowners alike.⁵⁹
   Local issues determined local alignments and in his account of the Republic
Vincenzo Cuoco insisted on the importance of local disputes, factional struggles,
and municipal rivalries in shaping alignments for and against the Republic.
Another astute observer, Luigi Blanch, made the same point:
what determined how local factions would take a stand for or against the new order
depended on whether they were friends or enemies of the baron who owned the most land

   ⁵⁷ Lucarelli (1934), 44.
   ⁵⁸ These were the families listed by Maria Carolina when she instructed Ruffo to conﬁscate their
lands: Helfert (1885), 120.                                ⁵⁹ Cingari (1957), 119, 137, 162, 165.
