110                                   Absolutist Naples

   Among the most notorious of the capi-masse was Michele Pezza of Itri in the
Terra di Lavoro, better known by his nom de guerre, Fra Diavolo. The son of an
olive oil dealer and a small landowner in Itri, Pezza had been sentenced to death for
two murders in 1796. The sentence was commuted to service in the Royal Fusiliers,
but Pezza took to the hills rather than perform military service. When French
troops occupied Itri in 1798, they killed Pezza’s father, and Michele joined forces
with bands from neighbouring towns to take up the royalist cause. In February
1799 he was leading some 600 men who harried the French lines of communica-
tion to the north of Naples.¹¹ He maintained close contacts with the Court in
Palermo, attended a war council to plan the ﬁnal attack on Naples held in April on
board HMS Culloden off the coast near Gaeta, and was given a royal commission.¹²


                            MUNICIPAL RIVALRIES

As French forces penetrated more deeply into these provinces, what had begun as
institutionalized resistance became more disorganized. Communications broke
down and the actions of the bands and the troops pursuing them took the form of
reprisals and counter-reprisals from which the rural communities had no means
of escape.
   The cycles of violence intensiﬁed as conﬂicts within communities and between
neighbouring communities grew. The contrasting accounts chronicled by Angelo
de Jacobis in Teramo and Uombuomo delle Boccache in Lanciano reveal how
internal conﬂicts were inseparable from rivalries between neighbouring towns and
over municipal hierarchies.
   As a French army advanced on Teramo in December 1798, a section of the
wealthier classes decided to allow the troops to enter the town unopposed, and
in return the French commander appointed the same men to form a republican
administration. Angelo de Jacobis was scandalized by the way the new republican
administration tried to win the support of the bassa gente of the town with three
days of feasting:
And so we came to see the common folk stuff themselves until they were bursting with macar-
oni, stew, and bread, quafﬁng wine at the tables, pausing only to jump to their feet to declaim
‘Long Live Freedom’. The king was denounced, images of the royal couple were defaced, it was
announced that taxes would be reduced and there would be equal justice for all.¹³
   Although a royalist sympathizer himself, when the same bassa gente staged a roy-
alist rising shortly afterward de Jacobis had deep reservations about their motives:
What a terrible sight to see the people go berserk and tear down, break and splinter fences,
doors, balconies, iron railings, burn linen, mattresses, blankets, utensils, books, documents

              ¹¹ Cingari (1976), 38–59.        ¹² Ibid. 59.
              ¹³ De Jacobis, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), 86 (24 January 1798).
