                                    Jacobins and Patriots                                    103

   The boundaries between the capital and the provinces were also confused, and
the generation that adopted the republican programme most readily was as often
provincial as metropolitan in origin. Vincenzo Cuoco is a good example since his
career was similar to that of many other young professionals from the provinces
who had become involved in the struggles against feudalism and the feudal
landowners before becoming supporters of the Republic.
   Born in Civitacamporomano in Molise in 1772, Cuoco had moved to Naples
to study law in 1787. He had powerful connections in the capital, especially
through his uncle Nicola Vivenzio, who was Procurator Fiscal to the Camera della
Sommaria and in 1792 drafted the edict that restored the demani to the local com-
munities.⁴³ Like many other lawyers newly arrived from the provinces, Cuoco
represented his town in litigation against its powerful feudal neighbour, the Duke
of Sant-Andrea. He also served as an assistant to Giuseppe Maria Galanti, but
then found himself in a politically more radical circle of Domenico Cirillo,
Francesco Conforti, Melchiorre Delﬁco, Mario Pagano, and Vicenzio Russo.⁴⁴
   Cuoco was not involved in the Jacobin clubs discovered in Naples in 1794, but
many other young men from the provinces were, including Domenico Tatà from
the Molisan town of Casalcalendo. His friend Domenico di Gennaro was the
mayor who headed the campaign against the local feudal landowner, the Duke of
Sangro, and Tatà’s arrest in Naples in 1794 led the authorities to trace a network
of connections to the salon run by the wealthy landowner Francesco Carbone and
his wife in the nearby town of Castalbottaccio. That gave the Duke of Sangro the
opportunity to denounce di Gennaro as a Jacobin, and he was duly arrested in
1795. In 1799, as we have seen, di Gennaro paid with his life.⁴⁵
   Not everyone marched to the same step. The Zurlo brothers had been deeply
committed to the anti-feudal movement before 1799, but remained carefully
invisible during the revolution. Giuseppe Maria Galanti was also ﬁrmly opposed
to the Republic and feared that the law abolishing feudalism would provoke a civil
war. Yet others who had been prominent in the earlier reform movement now
participated actively in the Republic. In Teramo, Melchiorre Delﬁco had been
arrested in December 1798, but was then elected president ﬁrst of the new repub-
lican municipality and then of the Regional Administration of the Lower Abruzzi.
In nearby Chieti, Baron Nolli, a leading landowner who had founded the town’s
Patriotic Society, was also elected president.⁴⁶
   The Republic found particularly strong support among the secular clergy,
including more than thirty bishops.⁴⁷ In many cases this was simply a matter of
rendering unto Caesar what was Caesar’s and in his Easter pastoral letter in 1799
the Cardinal Archbishop of Naples, Capece Zurlo,⁴⁸ exhorted the faithful to

    ⁴³ De Francesco (1997), 4–5; Corona (1995), 104–20.            ⁴⁴ De Francesco (1997), 7.
    ⁴⁵ Martelli, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 724–43. See also Chapter 3.
    ⁴⁶ De Lorenzo, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 654–7 and 667–72.
    ⁴⁷ Miele, in Scaramella (ed.) (2000), 3–41.
    ⁴⁸ Chiosi, ‘Capece Zurlo’, DBI, xviii. 462–4; Parente, in Scaramella (ed.) (2000), 45–106.
