                                  Jacobins and Patriots                                101

to public charity and welfare, and the physician Domenico Cirillo proposed
establishing a system ‘of Republican charity to help the great number of people
who because of the change in government have been thrown into destitution’.³⁰
   The government had scant means, however, to redress the growing hardships
that faced the population of the capital. When the French army departed in April,
Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel and the Calabrian ex-monk Francesco Saverio Salﬁ
appealed for more energetic action to win over the people, especially the use of
dialect, street theatre, puppet shows, and ballads to take the message of Liberty
and Equality to the masses.³¹ But by then the city was without food or currency,
was under blockade by Nelson’s warships, and was threatened by Cardinal Ruffo’s
rapidly advancing Sanfedist army.
   Popular religious sensibilities played an important part in the fall of the
Republic, but its supporters had been aware of this danger from the very start,
Championnet having been warned by Marc-Antoine Jullien as they marched
towards Naples in December 1798 that it was essential to avoid giving offence.³²
That was one reason, of course, for the repeated homage paid to the cult of San
Gennaro. Championnet attended an unscheduled performance of the miracle of
the liquefaction of the saint’s blood the day he entered the city, and MacDonald
attended the scheduled miracle in May. The report that appeared the following
day in the Monitore reﬂected the unease of the Republic’s secular supporters, but
also an acknowledgement of the ritual’s political importance:
Even San Gennaro has become a Jacobin! So let the ﬁrst Voice of the People be heard! Can
any Neapolitan not be what San Gennaro is? Long Live the REPUBLIC.³³
   As in the other Italian republics, these gestures to popular folklore were sup-
ported by more measures indicating that strong religious convictions were as
much a component of Italian republicanism as anti-clericalism.³⁴ In Naples,
efforts were made from the outset to win the support of the clergy and in February
Championnet appointed Gianfrancesco Conforti to direct the Ministry of the
Interior. Formerly a leading ﬁgure in the Bourbon government’s earlier anti-curial
campaign, Conforti was widely respected among the anti-curial clergy and he now
worked closely with the pro-republican Cardinal Archbishop of Naples, Giuseppe
Maria Capece Zurlo.³⁵ They made a number of innovations designed speciﬁcally
to make the Republic more popular, including abolition of the deeply resented
fees charged by the clergy for granting marriage dispensations and measures to
shorten the time needed to train and consecrate new priests in order to recruit
clerics sympathetic to the Republic.³⁶

         ³⁰ De Nicola, 10 April, 133.          ³¹ Salﬁ (1821).
         ³² Imbruglia, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 295–324.
         ³³ Monitore Napoletano. Decadì 20 Fiorile Year VII/1 (Thursday 9 May 1799).
         ³⁴ On the Roman Republic see Cafﬁero (2005), 99–140.
         ³⁵ Stella, DBI, xviii. 462–4; Parente, in Scaramella (ed.) (2000), 45–106.
         ³⁶ See Imbruglia, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 295–324; Lomonaco, in ibid. 168–96.
