                                           6
                    The Counter-revolution

                 THE MY THS OF THE SANTAFEDE

The second great myth of 1799 is the Santafede, the fanatical popular counter-
revolution that retrospectively became inseparable from the image of the
Neapolitan Republic. In modern Italian, the term Sanfedist still refers to any form
of reactionary populism, an association that reﬂects how the memory of the
Santafede echoed Genovesi’s fear of the ‘Hottentots that stand at our gates’ and
haunted generations of liberals for years to come.
   The Sanfedists had their champions, of course, the ﬁrst being the apologists
of the Bourbon monarchy. They were followed by nationalist historians in the
early twentieth century who reinvented the Sanfedists as precocious patriots, and
since then all manner of militant causes have claimed them as their own.¹ But
although the legend remained strong, the Santafede never recurred. In 1806 the
monarchy tried every means to resuscitate popular royalism, but without success.
During the revolutions of 1820–1 there was no Sanfedist reaction, and although
there were many peasant revolts in 1848 none adopted the throne and altar as its
banner. Similarly, after the collapse of the Kingdom in 1860 popular discontent
and protest in the South stubbornly refused to make royalism its cause and the
feared Sanfedist reaction never materialized.²
   The reason the Santafede never became a southern Italian variant of Spanish
Carlism was quite simply that the counter-revolution of 1799 was never quite
what the later myths described.³ During the months that preceded the fall of
the Republic, Ruffo and the royalist leaders were struggling to discipline and give
direction to highly localized insurrections. It was only in the eyes of the repub-
licans awaiting the onslaught in Naples and from the perspective of posterity
that these coalesced into a single counter-revolution, driven by a fanatical and
single-minded desire to restore the monarchy and the Holy Faith.
   A second legend would also have it that the South was the principal theatre of
popular counter-revolution in Italy. After the ﬁrst French invasions in 1796,
however, popular insurrections took place throughout Italy: in Liguria (1797),
               ¹ See, e.g., Lumbroso (1932); Rodolico (1926); Dante (1980).
               ² Davis, in Davis and Ginsborg (1991), 1–25.
               ³ On Spanish Carlism see Blinkhorn (1975).
