108                                 Absolutist Naples

in the Valtellina (1798), and throughout central Italy after the occupation of Rome
in February 1798. Following the Russo-Austrian offensive in the spring of 1799,
Italy could rightly claim to be the new Vendée, and popular insurrections in sup-
port of the legitimist rulers and the true faith occurred in Piedmont, Lombardy,
the Veneto, the central duchies and Tuscany, Umbria, the Marche, and Lazio.
   Many of these risings had strong devotional and even messianic overtones. In
Lombardy, a peasant named Viora Branda dreamed that he had been summoned
by Christ to punish the inﬁdel invaders. He and his followers called themselves
the Massa Cristiana and joined the Austrians to drive the French and their sym-
pathizers out of Piedmont. Peasants in Tuscany rallied to the banners of the Virgin
Mary. To the cry of Viva Maria! they threw themselves on the retreating French
armies, hunted down and killed suspected ‘Jacobins’ who fell into their hands, and
laid waste to the Jewish ghettos in Livorno and Siena.⁴
   What took place in the South bore similarities to these movements, but there
were also striking differences, not least the lack of religious motivation that
Cardinal Ruffo repeatedly lamented. The extent to which the counter-revolution
was ‘popular’ also merits closer attention and the Sanfedists were by no means
recruited only from the poorest. Most important of all, the term Santafede did not
describe a spontaneous phenomenon, but was a name chosen deliberately by
Ruffo in an attempt to impose some appearance of unity and purpose on insurrec-
tions that took many different forms: some were counter-revolutions, others were
more institutionalized, while others looked more like civil war.

 ORGANIZED RESISTANCE: THE FRONTIER PROVINCES

Calabria did not become involved until later, however. The ﬁrst royalist insurrec-
tions were in the northern frontier provinces of the Terra di Lavoro, the Abruzzi,
and Molise that Rodolico later called the Italian Vendée. These were the provinces
that bore the full weight of the invading French armies, and here popular
resistance was essentially institutionalized.
   In all the frontier towns there were standing militias, known as masse. In times
of peace they were responsible for maintaining order, but in times of war they
acted as reserves to assist the regular army to defend the Kingdom’s frontiers.
The landowners in each town were required to provide mounts and muskets
for the miliziotti, who were recruited from the wealthier peasants, although in
times of emergency, such as the autumn of 1798, the net was thrown wider. The
miliziotti were paid 3 carlini a day and the money was raised through taxes on local
communities. The masse were commanded by local landowners, who delegated
the task to professional soldiers or others who acted as capo-massa.⁵

  ⁴ See Capra (1978), 364–70; on Piedmont and Lombardy, Ruggiero (1979), 69–70; for Umbria,
Tsoukas (1988); on Tuscany, Tognarini (ed.) (1985) and Turi (1969/1999).
  ⁵ Simoni (1921), 175.
