                                 The Counter-revolution                               119

Principe di Gerace, of the Cassano Serra, and of the Vaglio Monteleone who had
accepted ofﬁce in the ‘so-called Republic’ the cardinal again prevaricated, arguing
that it would be wiser to raise indemnities from republican towns and to invite
donations from royalist landowners: ‘I am making the barons pay only what they
can, taking their corn, silk, oil and horses when I can ﬁnd them.’ He had reduced
the taxes paid by the poorest and had halved the ‘hearth tax and the tax on labour
paid by the poor in the royalist towns, to incite jealousy between the people and
the middling classes and to lessen the burdens on the people who are truly
oppressed by taxes, yet without abolishing them altogether’.⁵⁴ A week later Ruffo
again informed Acton that his aim was ‘to moderate the taxes owed to the barons
without destroying them, to reduce the taxes paid by the poor and to try to get
trade and commerce moving again if possible’.⁵⁵
   The more general reform desired by the queen, Ruffo feared, would alienate the
landowners and allow the popular movement to get completely out of control. By
contrast, his tactic was to win over the sections of the propertied and privileged
classes who had rallied to the Republic. His aim, he told Acton, was not to terror-
ize but to encourage the republicans to defect:
It is like the old medieval wars between the barons, and I ﬁnd that by dividing them with
ﬂattery and rewards, privileges and gifts one half will soon get the rest under control and
will do the task with enthusiasm. But what is the point in punishing them, indeed how is it
possible to punish them when they are so many without resorting to methods of excessive
cruelty?⁵⁶
   Ruffo saw himself in the midst of two wars. One was being fought between the
barons and ceto medio, whom the Republic had divided into opposing factions, or
whose pre-existing factional alliances had regrouped along the division between
royalists and republicans. The other was the war being fought by the people, and
Ruffo agreed that they suffered intolerable burdens (soverchi aggravi). But these
burdens could not be lessened without alienating the landowners and provoking a
social war that could not be controlled.
   The best way to defeat the republicans, Ruffo insisted, was to make it as easy as
possible for them to recant: ‘The Calabrians in general are loyal to the king and
many joined the rebellion through fear rather than enthusiasm.’⁵⁷ When the
republicans in Ascoli Satriano were threatened by a royalist revolt and sued for
terms, he sent a detachment of mounted troops to protect them from the insur-
gents. He was furious when he learned that Captain Troubridge’s men had mas-
sacred all the Jacobins they captured on the island of Procida, arguing that this
would only make the republicans in Naples more intransigent.⁵⁸
   Ruffo’s concern about restoring order was shared by other royalist leaders. In
the Cilento, Bishop Ludovisi of Policastro had voiced his alarm at the lawlessness

        ⁵⁴ Croce (1943), 45—Ruffo to Acton, 3 March.        ⁵⁵ Ibid. 67—14 March.
        ⁵⁶ Ibid. 154—Ruffo to Acton, 30 April (Policoro).     ⁵⁷ Ibid. 39, 45.
        ⁵⁸ Lucarelli (1934), 113.
