120                                   Absolutist Naples

that accompanied the spread of anti-republican revolts. He instructed the parish
priests to organize armed masse to keep the royalist insurgents in check. When this
failed to stop the violence, he appealed to both Troubridge and Ruffo for assist-
ance. Ruffo sent a thousand men headed by the capo-massa Nicola Gualtieri,
known as Panedigrano, to restore order in the Val di Diano and in the townships
around Potenza, which had been in the hands of royalists since the end of
March.⁵⁹
   In Apulia, Antoine Micheroux also stated that it was more difﬁcult to restore
order than to defeat the republicans. As the royalist revolts spread, he told
Acton that ‘a Robesperrian Terror rules everywhere, and the People have brought
down their legitimate governors and magistrates’.⁶⁰ Like Ruffo, he too emphas-
ized the importance of mending the divisions within the ruling classes, which he
considered to be the cause of the popular anarchy. In contrast to the massacres
and reprisals inﬂicted by the French and by Ettore Caraffa’s followers, whenever
possible Micheroux offered the republicans terms and protection. When General
Duhesme had taken Sansevero in March, he had executed six popular royalist
caporioni and conﬁscated the property of the feudatories and landowners who had
supported the monarchy. By contrast, Micheroux deliberately adopted a more
conciliatory line when he captured the republican stronghold of Foggia on
23 May. The royalist prisoners in the city were released and funerals were held for
the royalists who had been killed following the declaration of the Republic, but he
refused to take action against the republican leaders or to seize their lands.⁶¹
   Neither Ruffo nor Micheroux could restrain the violence of capi-masse like the
Mammone brothers and Fra Diavolo, whose actions were condoned by the Court.
But Ruffo feared that this would wreck his own efforts to win over the republicans
by negotiation.⁶² His outcry following the massacres on the Ponte della
Maddelena after the Sanfedisti had forced their way into Naples in June expressed
his sense of impotence:
The responsibility of governing, although it would be more accurate to say trying to
control, a people raised in total anarchy and of giving orders to twenty illiterate and insub-
ordinate leaders of irregular troops, all of whom have no interest other than plunder,
massacre, rape and violence, is something so horrible that it quite exceeds my strength!
They have now brought to me some 1,300 Jacobins and I have nowhere safe to keep them
so they remain here with us on the bridge: some 50 have already been slaughtered and shot
before my eyes without me being able to do anything, while at least 200 more have been
dragged here wounded and naked.⁶³
  Well before Ruffo agreed to the armistice that Nelson and the government later
declared null and void, the royalist leaders had been at loggerheads with the Court.
Disgraced and threatened with arrest, Ruffo left Naples in July for Rome to attend

  ⁵⁹ Cassese, in Cestaro and Laveglia (eds.) (1970), 108–9.
  ⁶⁰ Lucarelli (1934) 45; Maresca (1894), 106–22.          ⁶¹ Maresca (1894), 258–60.
  ⁶² Ibid. 289; Cingari (1978), 54–5.          ⁶³ Maresca (1894), 277, Ruffo to Acton, 21 June.
