114                                Absolutist Naples

regime. The breakdown of order caused by the French invasion was often no more
than the opportunity to settle by force older grievances that the royal courts failed
to resolve, as occurred when the inhabitants of the village of Orsogna in the
Abruzzi settled long-standing disputes by wiping out the neighbouring village of
Guardagrele.²⁸


                         COLLECTIVE VIOLENCE

Contemporaries were nonetheless horriﬁed by the acts of violence involving whole
communities that seemed inseparable from these conﬂicts, and even if many of the
accounts were exaggerated there can be no doubt that collective violence was used
widely and even systematically. Many of the stories of cannibalism and other atrocit-
ies are probably best understood as part of an older collective folk memory, but
there were other cases where acts of collective violence seem to have been a deliber-
ate manifestation of the involvement of the whole community. In Potenza, for
example, the heads of Bishop Serrao and his followers were paraded through the
city on pikes. At Trani, when the republicans were massacred in the prisons on
Easter Monday their mutilated corpses were dragged through the streets and
according to some accounts their livers were hacked out and sold for meat. At
Montesano, Nicola Cestari’s head was paraded through the streets accompanied by
cruciﬁxes before his decapitated body was mutilated and his house pillaged and
burned.²⁹ In Lanciano, when the Giordano family regained power after the fall of
the Republic in Naples they took their ﬁnal revenge on the Carabba, who only two
months earlier had intervened to spare their lives:³⁰ Carabba and his wife were
hacked to death, and their naked and mutilated bodies were then paraded through
the streets on pikes to shouts of ‘Viva la Regina di Francia’.³¹
   Less publicized amongst all this brutality were the attempts made to reconcile
opposing factions and to prevent the conﬂicts from spreading. Aside from the
intervention of the Carabba family in Lanciano to save the Giordano, another
occurred during the royalist rising in Teramo. When the insurgents seized mem-
bers of the leading families—Tulii, Thaulero, Michitelli, Nardo, and the priest
Bernardo Quartapelle—the bishop and the preside Giamberardino Delﬁco inter-
vened to secure their release.³² In Chieti, the preside even persuaded the masse to
leave the province in January to enable the French occupation to take place with
minimal upheaval.³³ The leader of the ﬁrst royalist rising in Chieti, Dott. Pasquale
Tamburri, was also spared: ‘so terriﬁed was he of the prospect of punishment’ that

  ²⁸ Colapietra (1981), 6. See also Spagnoletti, in Rao (ed.) (2002), 635–52.
  ²⁹ Lucarelli (1934), 72; Cassese, in Cestaro and Lavegglia (ed.) (1970), 96.
  ³⁰ Della Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), i. 173–4.           ³¹ Ibid. 178.
  ³² On the Delﬁco family see Clemente (1988), 365–85; idem, DBI, xxxvi. 527–39; Incarnato
(1995), 3–62; and Petraccone (1989), 203–7.
  ³³ Della Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), i. 47.
