                               The Counter-revolution                               111
and everything they can lay their hands on, breaking open barrels of wine and spilling
oil and corn. How many precious legal documents were destroyed, how many pieces of ﬁne
antique furniture burned, because these are the houses of lawyers and gentlemen! What an
uncontrolled mob that under the pretext of ﬁghting for the Crown seeks only to take from
the rich and for that reason calls them Jacobins!¹⁴
   The royalist revolt in Teramo was short-lived and on 22 December a detach-
ment of French troops returned to the town, which, to the horror of de Jacobis,
was sacked: ‘Ill-fated families, ill-fated store-rooms: everything has been carried
off!’ The French took everything they found in the houses of the merchants and
of the ‘lesser gentlemen’, they sacked the bishop’s palace, and they destroyed the
church bells. They ‘shot a number of peasants’, arrested the leading royalists, and
before leaving restored the republican administration.¹⁵
   When neighbouring Lanciano became the target of a royalist insurrection
in early February, the reactions of the pro-republican friar Uombuono delle
Boccacche were similar and he too claimed that the instigators of the revolt were
motivated by ‘the desire to oppress the rich under the false pretext of defending
God, the king, the state and the country’.¹⁶
   Both accounts reveal the class hatreds that permeated these rural communities,
but they also show that far from being spontaneous the popular revolts were in
most cases directed by factions within the elites. As in Teramo, when the ﬁrst
French forces reached Lanciano in early January, the leading families had agreed to
surrender and had donned the ‘tricolour cockade’. General Duhesme ordered that
a new town council be elected by public vote. The nobleman ‘Citizen Felice dei
baroni Gigliani’ and a wealthy merchant, Francesco Paolo de Bucachi, were put
in charge of the new council, which immediately lowered taxes and abolished
the ‘levy imposed on every head and pair of arms that was formerly paid by the
artisans and labourers of the city’.¹⁷
   The revolt that followed was plotted by Vincenzo Giordano and his son
Fioravante, who were described as ‘strong supporters of the Crown and wealthy
public merchants’. But although wealthy, Giordano and his son did not have a
strong popular following in Lanciano, so they had to look outside. That led them
to make contact with the royalist capo-massa, Pronio, which broadened the con-
ﬂict since Pronio also needed more men. To get them, he went to villages known
to have grudges against Lanciano.
   By the last day of Carnival everything was ready. Pronio and his men lay in wait
until Giordano’s followers staged a tumult, the pre-arranged signal to enter the
town. Many republicans were killed in the ﬁghting and their houses burned
down, those that remained alive were arrested, and a general parlamento was held
in piazza S. Maria la Nuova where Giordano was elected head of a new adminis-
tration that declared its loyalty to the king.

         ¹⁴ Ibid. 77.       ¹⁵ Ibid. 67–8 (22 December–6 January).
         ¹⁶ Della Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), i. 148.   ¹⁷ Ibid. 62.
