116                                   Absolutist Naples

for ten hours, the French column ﬁnally escaped, but only after losing over three
hundred men and all its equipment. MacDonald concluded, ‘It would be very dif-
ﬁcult, I can assure you, to take these troops back into that country since they have
the greatest distaste for the cruel and barbarous war in which they have been
engaged with the peasants.’³⁸


      CARDINAL FABRIZIO RUFFO AND THE SANTAFEDE

Cardinal Fabrizio Ruffo’s correspondence is an invaluable and curiously neglected
source for understanding the dynamics of the counter-revolutions in the South in
1799. Ruffo was far from the fanatical condottiere of popular legend, but a man of
considerable political and administrative experience who had begun his career as a
protégé of Giovanni Braschi, who as Pope Pius VI had made him Treasurer
General. This earned him a cardinal’s hat in 1791, but Ruffo fell victim to plots in
the Roman curia and returned to Naples where he was made responsible for the
royal silkworks at S. Leucio.³⁹
   Acton was jealous of him and the queen disliked him, but he was appointed
Vicar General with full powers to reconquer the Kingdom on 25 January 1799
mainly because the Court feared that Messina would declare for the Republic at
the ﬁrst opportunity. While Ruffo also had powerful family connections in
Calabria, he received little support beyond promises of assistance from the English
ﬂeet in the Tyrrhenian, and from the Russian and Turkish troops that were to be
sent to the Adriatic coast.⁴⁰
   Accompanied by Antonio Winspeare, the former Preside of the province, Ruffo
landed in Calabria on the estates of his brother, the Duke of Baronello, near Scilla,
but was not greeted with enthusiasm. On 9 February he reported to Acton, ‘I do
not have the men to resist the torrent that has engulfed these provinces.’ Even on
his brother’s estate he succeeded in raising only eighty volunteers, whom he
described as ‘former guards from the feudal estates and criminals—people of no
good intent or reliability’.⁴¹
   The responses from the local clergy and religious houses proved more positive,
however, and with support from the Bishop of Mileto and with funds raised by
the Carthusian monastery of S. Stefano in Bosco and by the monastery of
S. Domenico di Soriano, the number of his followers began to grow rapidly by the
end of the month.⁴²
   On 28 February the situation turned in Ruffo’s favour when the republican
town of Monteleone surrendered without resistance. Royalist insurrections then
quickly spread through Lower Calabria, and by the beginning of March Ruffo’s

 ³⁸ A de G (Vincennes), B3* 322 MacDonald to Minister of War, 23 Floréal Year VII (12 May 1799).
 ³⁹ Piscitelli (1951), 71–148.      ⁴⁰ Helfert (1885), 87–8.
 ⁴¹ Croce (1943), 14–15; Cingari (1978), 180–5.         ⁴² Helfert (1885), 103.
