                                 The Counter-revolution                                   115

he returned to the town and after explaining his behaviour was restored to good
standing by the supporters of the Republic.³⁴
   In these uncertain times, mercy was not only a valuable currency of patronage
but one that might also provide useful future insurance in a time of rapidly chan-
ging political fortunes. The willingness to spare the leaders of opposing factions was
rarely extended to the bassa gente and the cafoni, however. When the French sup-
pressed the royalist rising in Teramo large numbers of ‘plebe e nobili’ were arrested;
the nobili were released on payment of three to four hundred ducats, but the
French insisted on shooting some seventeen ‘leaders of the yokels and so-called
brigands’.³⁵ None of the commentators showed any concern for the ‘peasants,
yokels and bandits’ who were the most frequent victims of the disorders, and both
Uombuono delle Boccacche and Angelo de Jacobis illustrated the fear and
loathing in which they were held by the educated classes. When it was known in
Teramo, for example, that the royalist capo-massa Sciabolone was headed for
nearby Ascoli, de Jacobis noted, ‘It is rumoured that the men of the mountains, in
other words these brigands and yokels, plan to plunder our city.’³⁶
   The cycles of disorder were also fuelled by the cruel and brutal measures
employed by the French armies. Any town or village that showed signs of resist-
ance, or that did not immediately opt for the Republic and agree to pay taxes, was
liable to ‘military execution’: it was ﬁrst surrounded by troops then torched, and
the inhabitants shot down as they tried to escape.
   As the royalist revolts spread, MacDonald in early March ordered his com-
manders to adopt even more severe measures. Every insurgent town or village
should be destroyed, all ‘Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Curés and
other ministers of Religion shall be held collectively responsible for any armed
garnering or revolt. As soon as these occur, no matter where or when, the ministers
of Religion of the jurisdiction where these events occur must go at once to persuade
the rebels to disperse. Any failure to do this will incur the same punishment for the
minister of Religion as for the rebels.’ The military commanders were authorized
to shoot all rebels caught with arms, all ring leaders, and any priest found amongst
the insurgents. Any village or town in which an insurrection occurred was to be
held collectively responsible. Towns loyal to the republic, on the other hand, were
to be exempted from military billeting and requisitioning provided they had paid
all taxes owed. It was forbidden to ring church bells as a sign of alarm without
permission, and the bells of all rebel towns were to be destroyed.³⁷
   The peasants who joined the royalist insurrections responded in kind, and dur-
ing the retreat from Naples MacDonald vividly described the terror this inspired
amongst his troops. In May one of his detachments had been attacked near the
papal frontier at Antrodoco ‘by a prodigious number of peasants’. After ﬁghting
       ³⁴ Ibid. 77.
       ³⁵ De Jacobis, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), iii. 67–8 (22 December–6 January).
       ³⁶ Ibid. 90 (26 January).
       ³⁷ A de G (Vincennes), B3*** 321. Decree 14 Ventoso (4 March 1799).
