                                 The Counter-revolution                               117

following had increased to about 1,500 men, most of whom were soldiers from
disbanded units of the royal army or members of the militias of the royal courts
and administration.⁴³
   Ruffo was still deeply suspicious of his followers. According to a later royalist
apologist, ‘they included priests of all ranks, many wealthy landowners as well as
workmen and peasants, some were honest and were motivated by attachment to
the King and public order but others were simply assassins and robbers driven by
the hope of plunder, vendetta and murder’.⁴⁴
   In March Ruffo refused to move against the republican stronghold of Crotone,
giving the indiscipline of his followers as his reason:
Were I at the head of a regular force I would not hesitate: but with these people I cannot
take the risk because they do not understand me, they will not follow me and I run the risk
of losing everything that has so far been gained.⁴⁵
   The localized nature of the conﬂicts meant that his ‘army’ could disappear as
quickly as it had been formed. It was for that reason that Ruffo decided to impose on
his followers the emblems and insignia of a royalist crusade, delaying at Mileto to
organize them into three companies under the command of regular ofﬁcers. For the
same purpose and in order to better identify his followers, Ruffo devised the insignia
of the Santafede: the white Bourbon cockade set in a cruciﬁx. The insignia was meant
to impose some semblance of religious purpose and legitimacy on men whom he
continued to mistrust and believed to be ‘of no good intent and without any perman-
ency’. But the Cardinal was neither a fanatical condottiere of the monarchy nor of the
church militant, and he told Acton that his sole purpose in adopting the religious
insignia was ‘so that the people may know that our purpose is to defend religion’.⁴⁶
   Ruffo was also a pragmatist who believed that guns, supplies, and money were
more important for the success of the undertaking than religious enthusiasm:
‘religious fervour and devotion to the person of the King may yield excellent
results. But if we want to maintain the vassals of His Royal Highness in a state of
calm and loyalty to our good cause, a well-ﬁlled war chest is indispensable.’⁴⁷ At
Monteleone he had begun to raise taxes and levies. The revenues of pro-republican
absentee landowners were sequestered to pay the royalist masse, and he appointed
a wealthy landowner from Bagnara, Don Pasquale Versace, to act as Treasurer for
the expedition.⁴⁸
   A month later, the fall of Cosenza and Catanzaro gave the royalists control of
the Calabrias. But Ruffo was still reluctant to move north, and his misgivings
about his followers, now some 4,000, had grown:
I still consider this to be a miracle of Providence, since those who follow me are not the
same from one place to the next, but come from the neighbourhood of the towns we wish

      ⁴³ Ibid. 107.      ⁴⁴ Sacchinelli (1836), 95.
      ⁴⁵ Croce (1943), 29—26 February, Mileto.         ⁴⁶ Croce (1943), 55.
      ⁴⁷ Ibid. 2—Ruffo to Acton 25 January, Palermo.       ⁴⁸ Helfert (1885), 106.
