                                   The Counter-revolution                                    113

Similarly in the Abruzzi, opposition to the republican order swept through the
smaller towns and villages when Chieti was designated the provincial capital and
given responsibility for raising taxes.
   Taxation was a critical issue, of course, and explains why the arrival of the
democratizers often marked the beginning of a more general revolt against the
Republic. In Lanciano Uombuono dell Boccacche simply recorded:
This tax has caused great dismay, since immediate payment in coin is demanded, and great
lamentations are to be heard especially in the smaller villages and hamlets since many
believed that when the French arrived they would not impose additional taxes, but would
instead have removed those taxes that oppress our people.²³
   At Ostuni, in the Terra d’Otranto, the arrival of the democratizers sparked a
popular revolt and the massacre of the republican galantuomini. The same
occurred at Trani and at Molfetta, while at Cirò in Calabria the people simply
declared ‘We don’t want the Republic if we must pay the same taxes as before.’²⁴
   Local autonomies were the central issues and the driving force of the revolt of
the provincial republics when the provisional government in Naples tried to assert
its authority. As Pietro Colletta later noted, the collapse of the monarchy had
inevitably brought much older municipal rivalries into play: ‘being governed as a
republic or a monarchy had little to do with political convictions, but was every-
where a pretext for the display of much older hatreds.’²⁵
   The crisis of the monarchy gave the poorer towns and villages the opportunity
to challenge their subordination to the main provincial centres, and the ﬁrst bids
for freedom came from the outlying hamlets and villages of the major towns.
Since the latter had initially opted for the Republic, it followed that the lesser
towns were soon enthusiastic converts to the royalist cause. Therefore when Bari
declared for the Republic, its outlying casali immediately became royalist.
This was repeated in Calabria and when Monteleone, Cosenza, and Catanzaro
declared for the Republic, their casali rebelled in the name of the king. In Molise,
the Albanian settlements, which were amongst the most impoverished and
disenfranchised in the Kingdom, were the ﬁrst to rise in the name of the king. In
Calabria, however, the Albanian communities were equally rebellious but also
staunchly republican.²⁶
   Administrative hierarchies did not exhaust the sources of municipal rivalries,
nor were these conﬂicts shapeless. The southern peasants, it was said, wore thick
boots but had sharp minds,²⁷ and these apparently random conﬂicts had roots in
disputes that were inseparable from the rapid erosion of the older feudal agrarian
  ²³ Della Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), i. 71.
  ²⁴ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 26; Helfert (1885), 137; Cingari (1957), 300.
  ²⁵ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 38.        ²⁶ Cingari (1957), 123–7.
  ²⁷ Lucarelli (1934), 59–62; on the anti-republican insurrections see also Colapietra (1981), 6;
Cassese, in Cestaro and Laveglia (ed.) (1970), 63–5; Ciasca (1926), 631–51; Caldora (1965), 11–60;
Genoino (1931); Fortunato (1899), 223–45. For the most comprehensive review of the literature on
the counter-revolutions see the Introduction to Rao (ed.) (1999), 9–36.
