112                                  Absolutist Naples

    Within days a detachment of French cavalry reoccupied Lanciano. The royal-
ists were imprisoned, and Giordano escaped execution only because one of the
republican families pleaded for mercy. The republicans were rewarded, Lanciano
was raised to the rank of provincial administrative centre and the republican
landowner Felice Gigliani became president of the provincial government.¹⁸
    The conﬂicts in Lanciano followed fault lines marked out by factional rivalries,
and similar patterns were evident in other regions. In the Val di Diano the ﬁrst
revolt against the Republic took place in Montesano and was the continuation of
much older struggles among three prominent families—the Cestari, Gerbasio,
and Abbatemarco—to win control of the town’s administration and its assets.
    At the time of the fall of the monarchy, Don Nicola Cestari was a man of great
wealth and inﬂuence in the town. He enjoyed extensive contacts in Naples, but
was unpopular in Montesano because of the control that he and his family
exercised over public administration and town lands. He became even more
unpopular in 1796 when he took responsibility for enforcing the government
conscription quotas. His rivals leveraged this discontent to have the village par-
lamento elect two popular leaders in his place. But Cestari used his political inﬂu-
ence in Naples to have the election overturned by the Corte della Sommaria.
    In January 1799 Cestari declared his support for the new republican govern-
ment in Naples, and began to organize and arm a civic guard. But when he
convened the town parlamento to approve new taxes to pay for the civic guard on
17 February, his rivals organized a popular revolt in the name of the king and Cestari
was murdered. His long-standing rival, Don Emerico Gerbasio, was declared pres-
ident of the municipality, and immediately ordered the seizure of the goods and
property of the Cestari family and also of his former ally, the Abbetemarco.¹⁹
    In Potenza, in Basilicata, the royalist riot that led to the murder of Bishop
Andrea Serrao in January reﬂected similar factional struggles and Pietro Colletta
later noted that ‘none of his assassins were plebeian’. Serrao’s attempts to settle con-
tested rights on demani near Potenza and to reorganize the diocese made him the
declared enemy of a number of powerful feudal families and of the local clergy.²⁰
    Similar tales unfolded elsewhere. There was initially strong support for the
Republic in the Apulian provinces, but here too municipal rivalries were the cata-
lyst of royalist revolts. As Vincenzo Cuoco later acknowledged, ‘there is nothing
more delicate in the course of a revolution than the way you change local
government’.²¹ When Trani, the seat of the former Royal Udienza, opted for
the Republic in January, the employees of the royal tribunals, supported by
out-of-work sailors led by a watchmaker, overthrew the new city junta and declared
for the king.²² Matera abandoned the republican cause as soon as the French raised
its rival, Altamura, to the status of the principal administrative town of Basilicata.

       ¹⁸ Della Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), 195.
       ¹⁹ Cassese (ed. Cestaro and Laveglio 1970), 97.        ²⁰ Chiosi (1981), 337–41.
       ²¹ Cuoco (ed. Villani), 153.        ²² Lucarelli (1934), 53–77.
