118                                  Absolutist Naples
to besiege: they are perfectly free to join us or not as they choose, but thank God that so far
we have never been short of them.⁴⁹
   There was still no single Armata Cristianissima, but rather a mass of localized
followings that reconstituted themselves at each new town and village that was to
be taken. Ruffo continued to deny that religious enthusiasm or devotion to the
monarchy were drawing the people to the counter-revolution, but insisted
that the root cause of what he termed the ‘anarchy’ was the neglect of religion for
which he blamed the monarchy for joining in the persecution of the Church.
   In a revealing Pro-Memoria written at Maida after the fall of Catanzaro, Ruffo
argued that the disaster in Calabria was a consequence of the weakness of the
Church, which he blamed on the monarchy and speciﬁcally on the operations of
the Cassa Sacra after the earthquake of 1783. Most of the monasteries in the
region had been closed: at Maida, for example, where there had once been ﬁve,
there was now not one. As a result ‘the labourers in the Lord’s vineyard are so few
in number that these people have been deprived of proper teaching in their
Christian duties.’ But the secular clergy had suffered equally: ‘Because the church
no longer has sufﬁcient land to ﬁnance the priesthood, most parish priests do not
have any form of stipend and are so poor they must beg for their bread. In short,
the sacred cult is in a state of total abandonment.’⁵⁰
   Critical of the monarchy’s anti-curial policies, as beﬁtted the holder of a cardinal’s
hat, Ruffo was also hostile to the Jansenist sympathies of the predominantly anti-
curial Calabrian prelacy. He had been a strong supporter of the devotional mysticism
promoted by the followers of S. Alfonso di Liguori, and had been one of the founders
of the anti-republican and anti-masonic societies that had been established in Naples
after 1794.⁵¹ For Ruffo, therefore, the counter-revolution was an opportunity to
reverse the gains that had been made in the previous century by the anti-curialists and
the Jansenists, and to correct the errors of the monarchy’s anti-curial campaign.⁵²
Such views, however, did not not endear him to his royal masters in Palermo.
   By the end of March, Ruffo’s more immediate concern was to bring an end to
the violence spreading within the regions that had been retaken by the royalists.
But this again brought him into conﬂict with Acton and the queen. The ﬁrst
clash occurred when Maria Carolina instructed him to pre-empt the French by
abolishing feudalism: ‘and especially introduce in advance all those measures
that when they arrive the French will introduce, so that we may in this way win for
ourselves the support of the people’.⁵³
   Ruffo refused, arguing this would alienate the landowners whose allegiance
he was trying to regain. When the queen demanded that he seize the estates of the

  ⁴⁹ Croce (1943), 67—Ruffo to Acton, 14 March.
  ⁵⁰ Ibid. 55—Ruffo to Acton, 8 March.
  ⁵¹ See Chiosi (1984). On the Calabrian clergy see Cingari (1978), 93–8.
  ⁵² Making him the perfect counterpart of Gianfranco Conforti, who saw the Republic as the
means to achieve the Jansenist reform project.
  ⁵³ Helfert (1885), 16—Maria Carolina to Ruffo, 26 February.
