122                                    Absolutist Naples

be governed by a Regio Senato, and its seat was moved to the former monastery of
Monte Oliveto. The other city deputations were also abolished and replaced by
new administrations. The members of all of these new administrations were to be
appointed by the king.⁶⁵
  As Luigi Blanch later noted, the abolition of the Corpo della Cittá was the cul-
mination of the monarchy’s earlier attempts to reduce the political powers of the
nobility. The one remaining political constraint on the monarchy had been
removed and the nobles became simply a privileged administrative class.⁶⁶

                                       The Provinces
Under the reign of terror instituted in July 1799 order was quickly restored in the
capital, but in the provinces the state of lawlessness grew worse. In April, Ruffo
had warned Acton that brigandage and vendettas were bringing chaos to the
Calabrian towns occupied by the royalists. In Apulia, Micheroux had expressed
similar concerns. Many of the capi-masse in the northern provinces refused to dis-
band after the fall of the Republic, and were operating as bandits, making raids
deep into the Papal States on the pretext of pursuing ﬂeeing republicans.
The notorious Fra Diavolo refused to obey orders to disband and was arrested
in Rome, but escaped to Palermo to plead his case to the Court, which offered him
a pension of 2,500 ducats (that was never paid). Scarpia, a former corporal in
the guard of the Royal Udienza in Salerno who became the principal royalist
capo-massa in the Cilento, had better luck and received an estate near Polla worth
3,500 ducats a year.⁶⁷
    To restore order and to punish those who had supported the Republic, the gov-
ernment sent out teams of Royal Visitors to the provinces early in 1800. Their task
initially was to bring those charged with treason to Naples for trial, to investigate
local grievances, and to report on the state of each province. In the provinces it was
widely believed that the Royal Visitors ‘have been charged to take account of
all those subjects who during the recent emergency in the Kingdom have shown
themselves to be meritorious and to have made ﬁnancial sacriﬁces, so that they
may be compensated from the lands of those guilty of treason’.⁶⁸ But these expecta-
tions were quickly disappointed. Ruffo had already warned the government that
the leading republicans from Calabria were all cadets of the major feudal families
and so had few personal possessions.⁶⁹
    The monarchy’s freedom to pursue its vendetta against the former republicans
ended abruptly when in the spring of 1800 Napoleon Bonaparte led a French
army back to northern Italy and defeated the Austrians at Marengo. Fearful
for its safety, the Neapolitan government sued for terms that proved onerous.
   ⁶⁵ ASN: Min. Finance 1532: Decree 25 April 1800.
   ⁶⁶ Blanch (ed. Croce, 1945), i. 35–6.
   ⁶⁷ Cassese, in Cestaro and Laveglia (eds.) (1970), 114.   ⁶⁸ ASN: Min. Finance 1532.
   ⁶⁹ Cingari (1976), 38–59.
