                                 The Counter-revolution                                 125
della Sommaria, nor do the Provincial Delegates nor even do I myself despite the fact that
I have made every possible inquiry here at source.⁷⁵
   The resulting ‘uncertainty and chaos makes the Royal Court and its Ministers
appear ignominious . . . . The weak, the evil minded, the jealous and all those who
are enemies of public order and prosperity, in other words all those whom your
Excellency has succeeded in expelling from the Administration because unworthy
to be part of it, lose no opportunity to spread the word that the Provinces are being
exhausted and that all their money is being taken away to Naples.’⁷⁶
   These ﬁndings were conﬁrmed by Angelo Masci, a close conﬁdant of Zurlo:
the extreme poverty of this province [L’Aquila] . . . is principally due to the fact that the
town taxes fall entirely on the Poor, which renders them incapable no matter how
much they may work to support the means of subsistence and at the same time pay also
what they must to the crown and ﬁnd money to cultivate their land, take care of their
livestock, provide pasture and conduct their trades. . . . In every town I have found a group
of intriguers who have long since usurped control over all elections and over the adminis-
trators. . . . The elections are always ‘ﬁxed’ and as soon as they are over the fraud and the
manoeuvres by which they succeed in dilapidating public funds begin again.⁷⁷



                 THE COLL APSE OF THE MONARCHY

The Visitors’ reports revealed problems whose origins long predated the events of
1799 but which the monarchy was no longer in any condition to address. In 1801
the Peace of Amiens had offered the Kingdom a momentary respite, but when the
war in Europe started again another French Army of Observation returned to
Apulia in 1803. The cost was 4,000,000 ducats, nearly one-third of the govern-
ment’s normal annual revenues. The Russian and Turkish governments also sub-
mitted their accounts for military services rendered in 1799. The harvest failed in
1802, there was virtually no currency in circulation, and by 1803 the bank notes
that Zurlo had issued under guarantee two years earlier had fallen to 30 per cent of
their original value.⁷⁸
   Zurlo became the scapegoat and was replaced by Luigi de’ Medici, Prince of
Ottaiano. The cadet of a noble family, the dukes of Sarno, de’ Medici had been
arrested ﬁrst as a suspected Jacobin in 1794 and then in 1799 by the French as a
suspected royalist, so his political credentials were in good order after the
Restoration. He would later prove to be an able ﬁnancier, but in 1803 there was
no room for manoeuvre. The budget deﬁcits could not be reduced, payments to
public employees were in arrears, the banks’ promissory notes remained almost


   ⁷⁵ ASN: Min. Finance 1630.     ⁷⁶ Ibid.
   ⁷⁷ ASN: Min. Finance 1634: Relazione di Angelo Masci a Giuseppe Zurlo, 25 December
(L’Aquila).                                                  ⁷⁸ Villani (1984), 279–304.
