126                                     Absolutist Naples

valueless, and the payment of interest on most of the arrendamenti had been sus-
pended. Divisions within the government were also deepening. Acton’s star had
fallen and Cardinal Ruffo was recalled in 1802.⁷⁹
   The government faced imminent collapse. The only hope was that the French
would be defeated, and so when it became known that England was trying to reac-
tivate the coalition against France the Neapolitan envoy in London was instructed
in 1805 to renew the alliance. As a result, the Kingdom once again went to war
with France and was once again invaded by a French army. The Bourbon rulers
again sought safety in Palermo under the protection of the British navy, but this
time the French would retain control of the mainland for nearly ten years.


                                      CONCLUSION

The Neapolitan Bourbons were not the only Italian rulers whose government was
thrown into crisis by the events that followed the revolution in France. The British
minister in Turin had been warning since the early 1790s that war with France
threatened to bring about the ﬁnancial collapse of the Piedmontese monarch,
while even the Habsburg rulers faced similar difﬁculties.⁸⁰
   The invasions exposed strong social tensions in most of the Italian states, even
in the proverbially peaceful Grand Duchy of Tuscany, where the popular Viva
Maria! insurrections gave vent to the resentments of the urban and rural poor
against the liberal reforms of Peter Leopold. Throughout Italy, sections of the
clergy were actively mobilizing popular opposition to the atheist republican
invaders and their Italian sympathizers, and in the papal territories public order
had collapsed well before the French occupation of Rome. Nor was it easily
restored. In August 1799 a Neapolitan army occupied Rome and oversaw the
restoration of papal administration, but central Italy remained in chaos.
   The upheavals in the South were part of a broader pattern of political crisis and
social protest whose immediate causes were the French invasion and the allies’
counter-offensives. Nonetheless, in the South the crisis was also a consequence of
the collapse of the monarchy, and exposed the conﬂicts and insecurities that had
been accumulating over the previous decades. By the eve of the next French occu-
pation, the feudal order was visibly disintegrating as were the fragile structures of
government and authority.

   ⁷⁹ Blanch (ed. Croce, 1945), i. 27–9, and Villani (1984), 275–325.
   ⁸⁰ For example, a decade earlier Britain’s envoy in Turin, Sir John Trevor, had warned that mobil-
ization for war might bring about the ﬁnancial collapse of the Piedmontese monarchy (Trevor to Lord
Camarthen, 27 October 1784, PRO FO 67/6).
