                                The Counter-revolution                                 121

the convocation that had been summoned to elect a successor to his former patron,
Pius VI. Far from rallying the masses and the landowners around the monarchy, the
counter-revolution had exacerbated older conﬂicts, although it was not until after
the fall of the Republic that the full scale of the collapse became evident.


                              THE RESTORATION

                                      The Capital
For the diarist Carlo De Nicola, the end of the Republic was simply the start of
‘the third anarchy’. In Naples, this took the form ﬁrst of the popular revolt against
the ‘giacobini’ and then the Royal Terror. Two days after entering the city, Ruffo
set up a Giunta di Stato to try those accused of treason, hoping that this would
calm the popular fury directed at the patriots. But Ruffo’s judges were soon
replaced by the king’s appointees, whose arrival in Naples marked the start of a
more systematic persecution of suspected republicans.
   Some 8,000 individuals were charged with treason and in Naples alone more
than a hundred executions were carried out between July 1799 and September
1800. Those who died included two women who had played different roles in the
Republic. Eleonora Fonseca di Pimentel, who had edited the Monitore Napoletano,
was among the ﬁrst of those to die when she went to the scaffold on 20 August
1799. Luisa Sanfelice, who had inadvertently betrayed the royalist Baccher
conspiracy, was among the last when she was hanged on 11 September 1800.
   The monarchy also settled its scores with the nobility. A royal decree dated
25 April 1800 set out the bill of attainder against those who were supposed to be
the crown’s most solid pillar, its strongest ally and most glorious embellishment.
Instead, during the revolt, ‘The Sedili, known also as the Piazze of the City of
Naples, remained quite indifferent to the fate of the State and allowed their
authority to be exercised by a group of corrupted youths who lacked all sense of
duty to God and to their King and, as is now known, permitted them to attack
Our Supreme Authority.’
   Hence the monarchy decreed that it must give ‘new form to the Nobility of
Naples’ and to that effect:
we do abolish in perpetuity the Piazze or Sedili of the City of Naples and we prohibit any
meeting of that body which from henceforth will be considered a felony. We do hereby also
abolish entirely the Corpo degli Eletti, otherwise known as the Tribunal of San Lorenzo, and
all the other Deputations of the City.⁶⁴
   In their place a new Supremo Tribunale Conservatore della Nobiltà was created,
to which only nobles of ‘proven loyalty’ could be admitted. The capital would now

                      ⁶⁴ ASN: Min. Finance 1532: Decree 25 April 1800.
