130                                  Napoleonic Naples


                      NAPOLEONIC ITALY 1800–1806

On 27 December 1805, following Napoleon’s victory at Austerlitz, a peremptory
imperial edict from the Schönbrunn Place in Vienna proclaimed that ‘the
Bourbon dynasty of Naples had ceased to reign’. The invasion of southern Italy
that followed two months later was ostensibly to punish the Neapolitan Bourbons
for treacherously allying with the emperor’s enemies while signatories to a peace
treaty with France. That treachery made the survival of the Bourbon rulers incom-
patible with the honour of the emperor’s crown, and Marshal Masséna with an
army corps of 40,000 men was sent to install the emperor’s brother, Prince Joseph,
on the throne of Naples.¹
   The treachery of the Bourbon rulers was no more than a pretext for an invasion
that Napoleon had contemplated much earlier and which had a clearly deﬁned part
to play in the broader plan of empire. Well before Austerlitz, France was securely in
control of much of northern and central Italy. In January 1802 the former Cisalpine
Republic was reconstituted as the Italian Republic, which after the proclamation of
the empire was renamed the Kingdom of Italy in March 1805 under the titular vice-
regal government of the emperor’s step-son Eugène Beauharnais. The former papal
territories of Emilia were already part of the Kingdom, which after Austerlitz in
addition acquired Austria’s former Venetian provinces and Istria. Geographically the
Kingdom was divided in two by the Duchies of Parma, Piacenza and Guastalla,
which were occupied by France and nominally ruled by the emperor’s sister
Pauline.² Piedmont had been annexed to France, and Liguria occupied while Elisa
Bonaparte and her husband Felice Baciocchi ruled the small duchies of Piombino
and Lucca.³ Out of deference to the alliance with Spain that continued to assure
France a free hand in the rest of Europe, the former Grand Duchy of Tuscany had
been turned into the ostensibly independent Kingdom of Etruria for the former
Duke of Parma, Louis of Bourbon, and his wife, the Spanish Infanta Maria Luisa.
But this was little more than a mask for French occupation and became redundant as
soon as the Spanish alliance collapsed: in 1807 Tuscany was occupied and a year later
annexed to France.⁴
   Political considerations similarly deferred full French occupation of the Papal
State, since Napoleon initially hoped to win the Pope’s support to heal the danger-
ous legacy of conﬂicts over religion that France had inherited from the revolution.
The new pope Pius VII at ﬁrst seemed compliant and a concordat was agreed on
16 July 1801, but Napoleon’s repeated refusal to comply with its terms and his
occupation of Bologna and the northern papal territories caused relations with the

  ¹ Schroeder (1994), 264, 257–76.
  ² Pauline Bonaparte (1780–1825). In 1797 Pauline married General Victor Emmanuel Leclerc,
and after his death the Roman Prince Camillo Borghese became her second husband in 1803.
  ³ Liguria was annexed in 1805, the duchies in 1808; Zaghi (1986), 367–8; Woolf (1991), 191–3.
  ⁴ Louis of Bourbon, formerly the Duke of Parma, became king of Etruria but died in 1803.
