124                                   Absolutist Naples

    A year after the fall of the Republic, most of the South was still in a state of
anarchy. In November 1800 the Royal Visitor in Molise reported that troops were
urgently needed to ‘put an end to the lawlessness of the dissolute soldiery that
have been left behind by an army that has disintegrated and has been despoiled of
all its equipment and which even now has not been restored to its former state’.
    There was no money or coin to be had because of the ‘seizures made by the
French, the collapse of the banks and family trusts (monti) and the gathering of
many persons in masse who, under the pretext of defending the Kingdom, have
in reality pursued their own particular vendettas and robbed any village they
might’. In the absence of regular troops, it was impossible to enforce the king’s or
a court’s authority. Instead ‘the mass of people who were released from jail during
the recent disturbances now roam openly through the countryside. . . . They have
created a situation of perfect anarchy, greater even than that unleashed by the
ferocity of those miscreants commonly known as the Sanfedists and may well lead
to civil war.’
    Taxes needed to levied on every town to raise an armed troop of Cacciatori di
Montagna, but the revenues of the charitable foundations (Pii Laicali) in most
villages had ‘scandalously been expropriated by the despot Gualantuomini’. The
guards of the former royal tribunals had been disbanded ‘so that the poor shep-
herds and farmers on the Tavoliere are every day robbed and murdered’.⁷²
    In Basilicata, the town of Melﬁ that had rallied to Ruffo in 1799 was still in a
state of ‘perfect anarchy and controlled by a band of criminals led by the Cabelli
and Franchi families’.⁷³ In the Val di Diano the winning factions and commu-
nities had occupied the lands and property of their rivals, making enclosures and
clearing huge tracts of woodland and forest. In the neighbouring Cilento the relat-
ives and supporters of Don Antonio Gariglia were ‘murdering and terrorising
anyone who attempted to give evidence against them’, and the ofﬁcial begged the
king to warn Gariglia and his followers ‘not to gather in armed and mounted
bands, not to sing provocative songs, nor to beat or threaten any person . . . and
not to ﬁre their muskets inside the towns or put up notices of proscription during
the night’.⁷⁴
    In the Abruzzi ‘in most towns public administration is in the hands of persons
of no ability or honesty’ and every form of public and municipal revenue was con-
trolled by private individuals:
What is the total amount of all the taxes paid in this province? What is the yield of each
different tax? What is the state of each revenue? What proportion should be spent within
the Province to meet ordinary and extraordinary expenses? What part should be sent to the
General Treasury in Naples? I will not be speaking insolently if I hazard to say that Your
Excellency does not know the answer to these questions, because neither does the Camera

        ⁷² ASN: Min. Finance 1643: 16 November 1800.
        ⁷³ ASN: Min. Finance 1533: 26 August 1801.
        ⁷⁴ Ibid. 1643 n.d. 1800: see Cassese, in Cestaro and Laveglia (eds.) (1970), 115.
