                                  The Counter-revolution                                    123

The Kingdom was also obliged to pay heavy cash indemnities to compensate
France for the Neapolitan offensive in 1798 and the subsequent French invasion
of the Kingdom. In addition it was now to pay the upkeep of a French Army of
Observation to be stationed in the Abruzzi and at Otranto to enforce the terms of
the treaty, to return all lands seized from the republicans and the rei di stato
(traitors), to end the executions, to offer amnesty to the surviving supporters of
the republic, and to allow the exiles to return.⁷⁰
   These terms were deliberately designed to humiliate the Neapolitan govern-
ment, which was no longer free to conduct its own domestic policy. But they were
also ruinous and came as the ﬁnal blow to the already catastrophic state of the
monarchy’s ﬁnance. In a desperate bid to repair the damage the government called
on Giuseppe Zurlo, the lawyer from Baranello in Molise to make a ﬁnal experi-
ment in absolutist reform.
   Zurlo had risen to the ranks of the togati in 1789 and had conducted the invest-
igation into the royal domains in the Sila in 1790. In 1798, on the eve of the
Republic, he had been appointed Director of Finances (Segreteria d’Azienda),
the most senior position in the government. He had played no part in the
Republic and now in its chaotic aftermath he was given the task of conducting a
complete reform of the Kingdom’s administration.
   In the circumstances the task was impossible, but Zurlo nonetheless showed
remarkable energy and commitment. The whole set of earlier reform schemes, from
proposals to abolish the Dogana di Foggia and the Tavoliere to projects to drain the
swamps on the Volturno basin and the legislation of 1792 on the division of the com-
mon lands, was dusted off, and time was even found to reconsider treatises pressing
the advantages of the cultivation of maize in place of wheat. Now that the nobility
had been defeated Zurlo also set about reorganizing local administration, creating
the new post of the Royal Intendent to represent the government in each province.
He even planned to make government departments prepare budgets, to reform
the banks, and to establish a national debt.⁷¹ But the government had neither the
material nor the political means nor indeed the time to realize any of these projects.

                              The Provincial Visitations
Zurlo stripped the Royal Visitations of their original punitive functions and saw
the opportunity to use the special powers conferred on the royal agents as the
means to enact a wholesale reform of public administration in the provinces. The
Royal Visitors now became Economic Visitors, whose task was to report on what
was needed to revive the provinces. But their reports revealed above all the extent
to which government in the provinces had collapsed.

  ⁷⁰ The armistice of Foligno (18 February 1801) was followed by the Treaty of Florence (28 March
1801), which was negotiated by Joachim Murat the future king of Naples.
  ⁷¹ Villani (1955), 19–78 (now in Villani 1974); Rao (1986), 1–27; De Lorenzo (1998), 35–40.
