138                                  Napoleonic Naples

warned that Joseph should watch him closely and not allow him to steal: ‘He is a
man of character who will prove useful, but he has only agreed to go because he
thinks he can steal another few millions even though he has already made himself
rich enough already.’
    Napoleon’s understanding of empire was very clearly set out when he explained
what he expected of Naples and its rulers: ‘I desire that he will make the people of
Naples pay for everything needed by my troops and my State and that he should
not squander money fattening frippons.’ Miot was to impress on Joseph that
‘I intend to create a family of kings, or rather of Viceroys, since the king of Italy,
the king of Naples and others whom I have yet to name will form part of a federal
system (système fédératif ).’³⁹
    Talleyrand, Napoleon’s Foreign Minister, offered similar but also contradictory
advice: ‘He recommended that the King follow a course of blind devotion and
count on no demonstration of tenderness. . . . Once on the throne of Naples, he
should not make any constitution, leave the nobility and all institutions as they
are and only give ofﬁce to Frenchmen. If he gives any to Neapolitans, he will have
to rely on local factions.’⁴⁰
    When he reached Naples on 15 February, Joseph informed the emperor that he
had at once attended a mass celebrated by the Cardinal Archbishop ‘and I made
San Gennaro a very nice present’.⁴¹ He believed that public opinion was the key to
consolidating the occupation, and that this could be won over by wooing
the propertied classes. As well, Joseph was mindful of the need to satisfy ‘the ﬁve
hundred thousand souls who make up the population of the capital’, so he low-
ered the price of oil and bread and adopted more effective measures against the
Barbary pirates whose raids threatened the livelihood of the Neapolitan ﬁshermen
and sailors.⁴²
    The emperor wanted more strenuous measures: ‘Arm your forts! Disarm,
DISARM, the Neapolitans! Believe me, you will never hold on to the country just
by winning over public opinion, because sooner or later you will have an insurrec-
tion.’⁴³ He told Joseph that he must raise taxes as soon as possible and was
convinced that at least 30,000,000 francs could be had at once from Naples.
‘Naples is richer than Vienna or Milan.’ To raise the money Joseph should do what
Napoleon claimed he had done himself in Cairo during the Egyptian expedition:
‘deport ﬁfteen thousand lazzaroni, surround the city with mortar batteries and
seize all lands belonging to the royal domain’.⁴⁴
    The imperial decree of 30 March 1806 that made Joseph king also laid down
the terms on which he held the throne of Naples. The decree, to which the imper-
ial administration in Paris always subsequently referred to simply as the ‘constitu-
tion of 30 March 1806’, reserved to the emperor command of the French army in
  ³⁹ ANP: AFiv 1714d: Notes prises chez M. le Conte Miot de Melito pendant son séjour à Naples
1806–8.                                                             ⁴⁰ Ibid., Talleyrand to Miot.
  ⁴¹ ANP: AFiv 1714c: 16 February 1806.         ⁴² Ibid. 22 February 1806.
  ⁴³ ANP: AFiv 1714d: 17 March 1806.          ⁴⁴ Ibid., Miot Journal, 17 March 1806.
