                            Naples in the Imperial Enterprise                             131

papacy to deteriorate rapidly.⁵ In October 1805 French troops occupied the papal
port of Ancona and then Civitavecchia in May 1806. Two years later Rome was
occupied on the pretext that the Pope was trading with France’s enemies, and like
his predecessor Pius VII became the emperor’s prisoner.⁶
   The occupation of Rome in 1808 consolidated France’s control of the main-
land Italian peninsula, which had been signiﬁcantly extended by the invasion of
southern Italy two years earlier. The intention had been to conquer Sicily as well,
but despite an easy victory over the Bourbon army on the mainland in March
1806, Napoleon’s armies never managed to cross the narrow Straits of Messina
that separated Sicily from the mainland. In 1810 a major expedition was prepared
but then abandoned, so that the long coastlines of the southern mainland
remained the most southerly frontier of Napoleon’s continental empire.
   Naples was ruled ﬁrst by the emperor’s brother Joseph and then by his brother-
in-law, Joachim Murat. Napoleon often referred dismissively to his Mediterranean
Kingdom and in 1808 while trying to persuade his brother to accept the Spanish
throne he described Naples as ‘the end of the world’.⁷ But the emperor had his
own way with words, and in the same week he told Joachim Murat that Naples
was one of the most beautiful kingdoms in Europe. More revealing than these
casual comments, however, was that the invasion of Rome in 1808 was justiﬁed
not once but on three separate occasions by the overriding need to protect the
security of the Kingdom of Naples.⁸
   There were many reasons why Naples mattered. Apart from its role as a frontier
it had a critical role to play in the attempt to exclude British trade from the
European continent. Geographically it was also the key to establishing French
domination of the Adriatic and challenging British naval supremacy in the
Mediterranean. Its ports offered opportunities to rebuild the Mediterranean ﬂeet
that Nelson destroyed at the Battle of the Nile, a need made even more pressing
by the more recent losses at Trafalgar. Nor had Napoleon abandoned the idea of
re-launching the Egyptian enterprise that had been interrupted by Nelson’s vic-
tory in 1798. Once the European foundations of the imperial project had been
secured, southern Italy offered the jumping-off point for the conquest of the
Middle East and North Africa.
   None of these more ambitious projects would be realized, but that still left the
Kingdom with a critical role to play in enforcing the blockade against British
goods and providing billets for imperial armies during the brief intermissions
between campaigning. Like France’s other colonies, Naples would provide con-
stant ﬂows of men, money, materials, and provisions needed to sustain the
empire’s wars and France’s economy. It was believed to be a land rich in fabulous

   ⁵ Barnaba Chiaramonti (1740–1823) was elected Pope Pius VII on 14 March 1800 at the con-
clave held under Austrian protection in Venice. Bologna and Ferrara were annexed to the Italian
Republic in 1802. The Pope attended the emperor’s coronation in Paris in December 1804, but
Napoleon still refused to make concessions.                         ⁶ Menozzi (1985), 169–82.
   ⁷ Tulard (1983), 124.        ⁸ Rambaud (1908), 294.
