                              Naples in the Imperial Enterprise                               137

Faubourg Saint-Honoré. He also led the negotiations with Lord Cornwallis that
resulted in the Peace of Amiens.³⁵
   Relations between Joseph and his brother became strained, however, when
Napoleon took the title of Consul for Life.³⁶ Because Napoleon’s marriage with
Josephine de Beauharnais³⁷ remained childless, Joseph demanded that as head of
the family Napoleon should name him as heir, but his brother refused. Then when
in May 1803 war with England resumed, Joseph was put in charge of preparing
the invasion forces and was at Boulogne in May 1804 when the constitution of
Year XII making Napoleon hereditary emperor was approved in the Senate.
In November this was conﬁrmed by plebiscite and Joseph acquired the rank of
Grand Elector of the Empire and the title of his Serene Imperial Highness, Prince
Joseph-Napoleon.


                               A RELUCTANT KING

After his coronation in Paris on 2 December 1804, Napoleon offered Joseph the
throne of the Kingdom of Italy but he refused because this would have meant
renouncing his claims as Napoleon’s heir in France. When the crown of Naples
and Sicily became vacant a year later, Napoleon was not prepared to accept
another refusal. In a private interview in Paris on 30 January 1806, he instructed
André Miot,³⁸ whom he had appointed to serve as Joseph’s Minister of War in
Naples, to give his brother the following message:
Tell him that I am making him King of Naples and a Grand Elector of the Empire, and
that I will make no change to his situation in France: but tell him also that the slightest
hesitation, the slightest indecision and he will lose everything. . . . If he accepts, I shall call
him Napoleon and he will become my son. . . . It was his refusal to accept the throne of
Italy that forced me to nominate Eugène as my son. But I am determined to nominate
someone else if Joseph refuses. All feelings of affection must now give way to raison d’Etat.
I only recognise as relatives those who serve me. It is no longer the name of Bonaparte, but
only that of Napoleon that binds my family together now. It is not with the thing in my
breeches that I make sons, but with my ﬁngers. I cannot now love anyone whom I do
not esteem. Joseph must forget all the bonds of childhood and make himself worthy of
my esteem.
   The emperor would make available 40,000 men led by Marshal Masséna for
the invasion, but warned Joseph to ensure that ‘Masséna be prevented from steal-
ing’ in view of the ‘shocking plundering’ for which he had been responsible in
Venice: ‘I do not fear my generals and I will not indulge them.’ The emperor also
decided to send his fellow Corsican Antoine Christophe Saliceti to Naples, but

   ³⁵ 27 March 1802.          ³⁶ 2 August 1802.
   ³⁷ Josephine Tascher de la Pagerie (1763–1814), widow of the Vicomte de Beauharnais, had mar-
ried Napoleon on 9 March 1796.                                           ³⁸ See below pp. 165–6.
