132                                  Napoleonic Naples

and hitherto untapped natural resources that would offer an abundance of raw
materials for French manufactures, as well as captive markets for French exports.
It also offered a valuable source of fat pensions for the emperor’s most trusted ofﬁcers
and an endless supply of jobs for the hordes of place-seekers, adventurers, artists,
soldiers, sailors, and out-of-work administrators that all empires spawn.
    Napoleon’s Mediterranean Kingdom was not remarkable in any of these
respects, but the deep contradictions on which the imperial enterprise was
founded would be very vividly exposed in the exceptionally stormy relations
between Naples and Paris, especially after the arrival of Joachim Murat in 1808.
Down to the ﬁnal days of the empire, the relations between Naples and Paris
exposed both the remarkably dysfunctional nature of the Bonaparte family enter-
prise and the extreme forms of colonial subordination on which this short-lived
imperial project was founded. That makes Naples an excellent vantage point for
understanding the broader mechanisms of the imperial enterprise, but also raises
questions about why the French rulers attempted to reorganize the southern state
at a moment of severe colonial exploitation, prolonged commercial and ﬁnancial
crisis, and constant political upheaval.


                                  TAKING NAPLES

The opportunity for invading southern Italy came as a direct result of Britain’s
efforts to revive the coalition against France after the collapse of the Peace of
Amiens. But in the end it was Napoleon not the British who pushed the allies into
action when he crowned himself King of Italy in Milan in March 1805 and
annexed Genoa.⁹ Austria mobilized, Russia rejoined the coalition, and as before,
the allies chose Naples as their jumping-off point for an offensive in Italy. A British
force of 6,000 men sailed for the Mediterranean, where they were to be joined by
10,000 Russian and 7,000 Neapolitan troops.¹⁰
   What for the Neapolitan government in 1798 had been a gamble was now an
even more desperate bid to rid the Kingdom of a ﬁnancially ruinous French army
of occupation. Despite the fact that his government had already secretly entered
an agreement with the allies, in September the Neapolitan ambassador in Paris
renewed the treaty of neutrality with France. As a result, the commander of the
French Army of Observation in Apulia withdrew his army to join the campaign
against Austria in the North. Shortly after, the Russian and British troops
disembarked in Naples.
   The allies’ expectations were raised when news of Nelson’s ﬁnal victory at
Trafalgar reached Naples in October, and then dashed in December by news of

  ⁹ As Paul Schroeder puts it, ‘the coalition had been planned by Britain and Russia but it was
Napoleon who brought it into being.’ Schroeder (1994), 264, 257–76.
 ¹⁰ Johnson (1904), i. 75. See also Flayhart (1992), 54–169.
