                            Naples in the Imperial Enterprise                             139

Naples as well as the courts and required Naples to provide the imperial treasury
with an annual revenue of 1,000,000 francs, to be paid directly to the emperor
‘in compensation for military expenses and for his personal distribution’.⁴⁵
   Like Eugène Beauharnais in Milan, the king of Naples was required to consult
the emperor before introducing any new law or making any appointment. During
Joseph’s brief reign the legislation needed to refashion the Neapolitan monarchy
along the lines of the centralized bureaucratic autocracy that had emerged
from the revolution in France was introduced. But there were exceptions and
Joseph successfully resisted the emperor’s demands that he introduce conscription
and the Code Civil. When Joseph left Naples for Spain in May 1808 most of the
new legislation was still to be implemented and order had barely been restored
in the Calabrian provinces.
   Joseph’s transfer from Naples to Madrid in the spring of 1808 was determined
by the broader reorganization of the empire after the defeat of Prussia in October
1806 and the peace with Russia concluded at Tilsit in July 1807. This left England
alone against France and meant that Napoleon was now free to pursue the project
of the Continental blockade in the attempt to destroy Britain’s trade. The peremp-
tory demand in August 1807 that the Tagus be closed to British shipping was
simply the pretext for the French invasion of Portugal and Spain.
   In Italy, the end of the alliance with Spain opened the way for France to occupy
Livorno and annex Tuscany and the Papal States while in Spain, the overthrow of
the king started the chain of events that would take Joseph Bonaparte from Naples
to Madrid. The emperor had ﬁrst informed Joseph of the project in Venice in
December 1807, but the decision was not conﬁrmed until the following May.⁴⁶
Joseph Bonaparte entered Madrid on 20 July 1808, but eleven days later he was
forced to abandon the city for safer quarters and did not return until the following
January.⁴⁷ Joachim Murat meanwhile was making his way to Naples.


                                 JOACHIM MURAT

Joachim Murat was born in 1767 at La Bastide-Fortunière (now La Bastide-
Murat) near Cahors. The son of a provincial merchant and innkeeper, his mother
wanted him to be a priest and Murat studied brieﬂy at a seminary in Toulouse
before joining the army.⁴⁸ A forthright anti-royalist, Murat’s career began to
progress after the ﬂight of Louis XVI. He fought in Belgium and Holland and
rose through the ranks, but his strong Jacobin sympathies put him at risk after
the fall of Robespierre. It was the attempted coup of 12–13 Vedémiaire Year III

   ⁴⁵ ASN, Min Esteri f. 5490 fascic 193 Champagny to di Gallo (29 March 1809); see also
Rambaud (1911), 214.                                ⁴⁶ ANP: AFiv 1714d: 16 December 1807, Miot.
   ⁴⁷ Grab (2003), 130: Joseph—known henceforth in Spain as Pepe Botella—returned to Madrid in
January 1809 and remained there until 1813.
   ⁴⁸ 21st Light Cavalry regiment, the Chasseurs d’Auvergne; see Tulard (1983), 7.
