                             Naples in the Imperial Enterprise                              133

Napoleon’s decisive victory at Austerlitz. King Ferdinand wanted to issue an
appeal for a levée en masse, but was advised by his allies that resistance was impos-
sible. Two days later the commander of the British troops in Naples, General Sir
James Craig, was instructed to withdraw to Sicily ‘with or without the permission
of His Sicilian Majesty’. The Russians did likewise.¹¹ Convinced they had been
betrayed by their allies, as in 1798 Ferdinand and Maria Carolina took refuge
in Palermo, leaving the hereditary Prince to organize the military defence of the
Kingdom in Calabria.
   From his military headquarters at Fiorentino, Prince Joseph-Napoleon
Bonaparte, Grand Elector of the Empire, Lieutenant of the Emperor, and
Commander-in-Chief of the Army of Naples, issued a proclamation to the people
of the Kingdom of Naples that mimicked the timeless rhetoric of invading armies:
The French Emperor and King of Italy being desirous to spare you the Calamities of war
signed a treaty of Neutrality with your Court. . . . But despite conﬁrming this treaty, the
King of Naples has joined the Coalition. The Army that I command is marching to punish
this perﬁdy. But you, the People, have nothing to fear. Our arms are not directed against
you. Your altars and your Ministers of Religion are the same as ours. Your laws and your
property will be respected. Your Magistrates will remain in their posts. The French soldiers
will be your brothers.¹²
   A week later Masséna’s Armée de Naples crossed the frontier of the Terra di
Lavoro on 9 February 1806.¹³ The commanders of the Bourbon army, General
Roger Damas and the Hereditary Princes Leopold and Francis, planned to fall
back and give battle in Calabria, where the queen’s agents were busy preparing a
second Sanfedist rising. But in January Uombuono delle Boccache noted that the
queen’s hopes for another ‘Great Neapolitan Vespers’ in the frontier provinces had
failed. Attempts to raise a leva di massa were abandoned when the government
learned that the galantuomini were opposed, while the Minister of Police, the Duke
of Ascoli, prevented the movement of spies sent by the queen ‘who were plotting
to massacre the so-called friends of the French and the families of all those who
were unwilling to rise against them’.¹⁴
   Angelo de Jacobis recorded that when the people of Teramo were informed that
the king had appealed for a leva in massa ‘those charged with this duty met with no
response, because during the ﬁrst war against the French the People had been

   ¹¹ Johnson (1904), i. 75.
   ¹² BNN (Bancone 8 B 21): Napoleon used similar terms at Cairo and two decades later the French
invasion of Algeria was justiﬁed in identical language: see Burke (2002), 41–8.
   ¹³ General André Masséna, Duke of Rivoli, Prince of Essling and Maréchal of France
(1758–1817) served in the Armée d’Italie 1792–8, and led the occupation of Rome in 1798 but was
accused of wide-scale looting and was recalled by the Directory. In November 1799 he replaced
Championnet as commander of the Armée d’Italie. In 1805 he was again appointed commander of
the Armée d’Italie (in place of General Joubert), and in December 1805 commander of the Armée de
Naples and commanded the siege of Gaeta February to June 1806, then took over command in
Calabria. In 1807 he rejoined the Grande Armée.
   ¹⁴ Delle Boccache, in Coppa-Zuccari (ed.) (1927), 565 (January 1806).
