                            Naples in the Imperial Enterprise                             141

followed and in January 1804 Murat was appointed to the lucrative post of
military governor of Paris, which was how he came to be directly involved in the
kidnapping and execution of the Duke of Enghien in March 1804.⁵⁵ As command-
ant of the chateau of Vincennes, Murat was responsible for selecting the court
martial that would sentence the Bourbon prince. He ﬁrst prevaricated but then
complied with Napoleon’s demands, making himself both an accomplice and a
target for later royalist vengeance.⁵⁶
   The royalist conspiracy provided Napoleon with the pretext for establishing
the empire, as a result of which Murat was nominated Marshal of the Empire
and Imperial Grand Admiral. In March 1805 he purchased the Elysée Palace
where he, Caroline, and their three children took up residence.⁵⁷ When the war
against Austria resumed in September 1805, Murat and his cavalry participated in
the French victories at Ulm and Austerlitz. But he was deeply slighted when the
emperor’s step-son, Eugène Beauharnais, was made Viceroy of Italy, nor was
he satisﬁed when Napoleon made him Grand Duke of Berg.⁵⁸
   The Grand Duchy secured Napoleon’s control of the Rhine, but despite Berg’s
economic and industrial importance Murat was disappointed, his ambitious and
jealous wife even more so. He made his triumphal entry into Düsseldorf on
24 March, but he spent little time in the Duchy, which was administered directly
from Paris by the French Minister of Finance, Gandin, because Napoleon claimed
that when Murat acted alone ‘he only makes a mess of things’.⁵⁹ However, Murat
did manage to secure a personal fortune reputedly worth 3,000,000 francs by
1808, and his successor, Count Jacques Claude Beugnot, claimed that he had
‘squeezed the Grand Duchy like an orange until the pips cracked’.⁶⁰
   Caroline Bonaparte never visited Berg, but remained in Paris where she was
reputedly the lover ﬁrst of General Jounot and then of the dashing young Austrian
ambassador, Count Clemenz von Metternich. But both she and Murat were now
deeply involved in the rivalries that had emerged within the imperial family. They
were hostile to Josephine and the Beauharnais, and were also jealous of Louis
Bonaparte, the king of Holland, who had married Josephine’s daughter Hortense
and whose son, Napoleon Charles, the heirless Napoleon seemed inclined to
adopt.⁶¹
   By September 1806 Murat was back in arms, and his cavalry fought at Jena
(14 October) and Prenzlow (29 October 1806). En route to Russia, Napoleon’s
armies were greeted as liberating heroes in Poland, and Jean Tulard claims that the

   ⁵⁵ The discovery in March 1804 of a royalist plot against the First Consul in which generals
Pichegru and Moreau were both implicated led Napoleon to order the kidnapping and execution of
the Bourbon Duke of Enghien.
   ⁵⁶ Tulard (1983), 70. According to Talleyrand the execution was ‘worse than a crime, it was
a mistake’.
   ⁵⁷ Ibid. 73: the children were Achille, Letitia, and Lucien—Louise was born in 1805.
   ⁵⁸ 15 March 1806: a newly created principality that included the Duchies of Berg and Cleves,
which were ceded to France by Prussia under the terms of the Treaty of Pressburg.
   ⁵⁹ Tulard (1983), 65.         ⁶⁰ Ibid. 63.          ⁶¹ Ibid. 94.
