                                    The Costs of Empire                                     149

between Naples and France would be regulated by a new agreement. In 1808 Paris
had imposed a highly disadvantageous commercial treaty on the Kingdom of
Italy, and was eager to extend the same terms to Naples but Murat resisted.³¹
   In July 1809, D’Aubusson cut across these exchanges with a report on the dam-
age that renewal of war with Austria had caused to Neapolitan trade:
The situation is getting worse by the day. The King tells me that he is hoping that His
Majesty will permit him to allow American ships to enter the ports so that he may trade
with them to raise some money to meet the cost of the administration, and especially to
pay the army. The Tour d’Auvergne battalion is virtually without clothing or boots.³²
In September, Murat requested the emperor’s permission to trade with American
vessels:
Sire, the commerce of my Kingdom is absolutely nil: the granaries, depots and warehouses
are ﬁlled with goods but the land is no longer cultivated and there are even some fears for
the harvest. As a result it is impossible to raise taxes. In a word . . . I no longer know how to
pay my troops and at the same time keep the government going.
He requested that he at least be allowed to sell olive oil to the Americans.³³
   Napoleon refused Murat permission to trade with the Americans and instead
demanded that the import duties on French cloth and other manufactures in
Naples be halved. Murat was astounded: ‘If your Majesty’s intentions are put into
effect, he will with a single order have pronounced the total ruin of my Kingdom.’
Attached to Murat’s letter was a memo drafted by Agar, which argued that ‘on the
day when French manufactured goods are admitted free of duty, we shall have to
abandon all forms of manufacture in this kingdom’.³⁴ Privately Agar told Murat
that the French demands would be a ‘mortal blow’ that would leave 60,000 with-
out employment in the province of Naples alone and damage even the production
of coarse cloth used by the ‘inferior classes’.³⁵
   Nonetheless, on 12 November the French chargé d’affaires ‘delivered a demand
that French cloth be allowed to enter Naples free of duty’ on the grounds that this
duty contravened traditional French privileges. He also raised new complaints
against infringements of French consular privileges, navigation rights, and the
denial of warehousing facilities to French ships.³⁶
   The situation deteriorated further when in April 1810 the emperor doubled the
duties on Neapolitan cotton imported to France. Murat objected that this meas-
ure ‘can have no object other than that of destroying this new industry which
I have tried to establish in the kingdom’.³⁷ In October, the emperor escalated the
commercial offensive, decreeing that France enjoyed the exclusive privilege of

    ³¹ Zaghi (1986), 132.
    ³² AAEP: CP Naples, 133: D’Aubusson to Champagny, 1 July 1809.
    ³³ ANP: AFiv 1714a, 16 September 1809.      ³⁴ ANP: AFiv 1714a, 28 October 1809.
    ³⁵ ANP: 31AP43, Mosbourg to Murat 27 October 1809.
    ³⁶ AAEP: CP Naples, 133, 12 November 1809.      ³⁷ ANP: AFiv 1714a, 8 April 1810.
