142                              Napoleonic Naples

tumultuous welcome that Murat received in Warsaw converted him to the cause
of Polish uniﬁcation and independence.⁶² But whatever hope he had of becoming
king of Poland vanished when the war with Russia ended.⁶³ Murat returned to
Paris, where Caroline was now a major ﬁgure in both the imperial court and the
city’s social and cultural life. Without leaving Paris Murat showed new interest in
the affairs of his Grand Duchy, where he was represented by an able administrator
and fellow Cahorsin, Jean-Antoine-Michel Agar.⁶⁴
   Duty next took Murat to Spain where he acted as the emperor’s lieutenant
at Bayonne in February 1808. On 2 May Murat’s Polish cavalry, Egyptian
Mamelukes, and dragoons savagely crushed the popular rising in Madrid,⁶⁵ and
on the same day the emperor offered him a choice: the throne of Naples or
Portugal. Napoleon urged his brother-in-law to take the former: Naples, he said,
was ‘much better than Spain’ and would soon be reunited with Sicily. Nor need
Murat fear that his military career would suffer, since his wife Caroline ‘is quite
capable, should need arise, to be regent’.
   Unknown to Murat, Napoleon had previously offered the throne of Naples to
his brother Lucien on condition that he divorce his wife, but Lucien had
refused.⁶⁶ There was no universal rejoicing in the Bonaparte camp when it was
known that Murat was be king, however, and many felt that Caroline should have
been named regent. The youngest of Napoleon’s sisters, she was also the closest to
him. Talleyrand claimed that she had ‘the head of Cromwell on the shoulders of a
beautiful woman’, while Napoleon himself later claimed that ‘She had a lot of
drive, heaps of personality and boundless ambition’.⁶⁷
   Caroline also had excellent contacts at the highest level of the imperial adminis-
tration. She was a close conﬁdante of Napoleon’s much feared chief of police, Joseph
Fouché, and of the long-standing Bonaparte family patron, Antoine Christophe
Saliceti, who was already in Naples. Murat, by contrast, had few political skills and
would have to seek his own advisers since Napoleon provided none. Although
he tried to keep Caroline’s political role to a minimum, she was from the start the
more powerful of the two and in Naples would become the dominant partner.
   After returning to Paris, Murat and Caroline left for Italy at the end of August.
They made their way to Naples through Turin, Reggio Emilia, Ancona, and
Rome, where the Pope did not offer to receive them. From Rome they continued
to Gaeta, then by way of Capua and Aversa to Naples, where they made their
triumphal entry on 6 September 1808.⁶⁸

      ⁶² Tulard (1983), 104.    ⁶³ Ibid. 108–9.      ⁶⁴ See below.
      ⁶⁵ Tulard (1983), 123.    ⁶⁶ Ibid. 124.     ⁶⁷ Ibid. 159.      ⁶⁸ Ibid. 137.
