                                  The Costs of Empire                                 145

situation of ﬁnancial chaos in Berg.¹⁰ Pignatelli warned Murat, however, that a
month previously the emperor had suspended payment of the half-million ducats
that he had promised towards the cost of maintaining French troops in the
Kingdom, making the Kingdom’s ﬁnancial situation untenable. The principal of a
loan that Joseph’s government had raised in Holland in 1806 had been exhausted,
and Joseph’s considerable removal costs had left the treasury and the banks with-
out cash. Declaring the situation to be beyond him, Pignatelli asked to resign.¹¹
   D’Aubusson conﬁrmed Murat’s description of the situation: ‘It is my duty to
say, and with the greatest regret, that a change was overdue here.’ The ﬁnancial situ-
ation was desperate, there was no proper accounting, everything was haphazard
and confused, and pay for the army and public works was all in arrears. Joseph’s
administration was ﬁlled with ‘favourites and cliques’, the Council of State ‘was
for the greater part composed of men with no vision or ability, who were opposed
to any form of innovation or liberal ideas, and especially to the establishment
of the Napoleonic Code without changes being made to it’. Murat’s description
had ‘contained nothing that is not accurate. . . . Since Joseph had never reviewed
his troops, no-one knew who was being paid and who was not’, but the army’s pay
was at least nine months in arrears when he left for Spain.¹²
   An even sharper confrontation followed when Murat announced on 15
November that he had lowered the interest paid on the Public Debt from 5 to 3%.
The French ambassador in Naples, D’Aubusson, again defended Murat,
but Napoleon was incensed. Murat, he insisted, had acted without his permission
and he denounced the reduction in interest rates as a violation of Treaty of
Bayonne that tarnished the honour of the empire.¹³
   The wrangling over the Kingdom’s obligations and failure to meet them
became interminable. In the ﬁrst of many stern warnings, the Imperial Minister
for External Affairs, Count Jean-Baptiste de Champagny, informed the Marchese
di Gallo, the Neapolitan ambassador in Paris, that Murat’s failure to settle the
outstanding arrears was considered by the emperor to be a second violation of
the Treaty of Bayonne. Champagny warned Murat that the emperor ‘wishes it to
be understood that whatever the King of Naples might consider to be the advant-
age of building roads or establishments of education, he must ﬁrst and foremost
ensure that my troops are paid and that there are no arrears’. He instructed Murat
to implement the terms of the Treaty of Bayonne at once and in full and to intro-
duce the Napoleonic Civil Code without further delay or modiﬁcation.¹⁴
   In December 1808 Murat requested permission to appoint Agar, his former
minister of ﬁnance in Berg. When the imperial administration in Paris approved,
Caroline’s secretary noted that ‘Agar’s nomination was indispensable here, even

  ¹⁰ See Schmidt (1905), 68.
  ¹¹ AAEP CP, Naples 133: D’Aubusson to Champagny 24 February 1809. He described Prince
Pignatelli of Cerchiara as ‘absolument incapable et frippon’.           ¹² Ibid.—1 January.
  ¹³ Le Brethon, vi. 410: Murat to Napoleon, 15 November 1808; D’Aubusson to Champagny.
  ¹⁴ Ibid.
