                                        8
                       The Costs of Empire

                      THE TREAT Y OF BAYONNE

The Kingdom’s colonial status had already been made clear in the obligations
placed on Joseph Bonaparte. Like the empire’s other colonies, its function was to
satisfy the insatiable demands of the imperial treasuries and armies, enforce the
Continental blockade against British goods, supply French manufactures with
raw materials, and French producers with markets. With the accession of Joachim
Murat in 1808, however, these terms became even more onerous and were formal-
ized in the treaty that Murat signed at Bayonne on 30 March 1808.
   The treaty granted Murat the throne of Naples in perpetuity with succession
through the male line only, although Caroline Bonaparte was to succeed as queen
in the event of his death. The treaty was offensive and defensive, and obliged the
king of Naples in time of war to contribute 18,000 infantry, 3,000 cavalry, and
a train of twenty-ﬁve pieces of artillery to France, the costs to be met entirely by
the Neapolitan treasury wherever they served. The Neapolitan government was
in addition required to meet the full cost of the upkeep of the French troops
stationed in the Kingdom, and to build and supply six ships of the line, the ﬁrst
two to be delivered to France by the end of 1809. Finally, the king of Naples had
to undertake to enforce in every way ‘the blockade against England to ensure the
destruction of its trade’.¹
   The secret clauses attached to the treaty placed all of the Murats’ now extensive
property in France in the emperor’s hands as a surety for their good conduct. The
inventory of their assets illustrates the rewards acquired by those who rose to high
rank in the emperor’s service and included ‘their palace in Paris, their house at
Neuilly, the Stables at Artois, the estate at La Motte’ and ‘in general all the goods
that they possess in France without exception and including all moveables, furni-
ture and furnishings in their palaces and houses, all paintings, statues and any
other artistic or decorative object whatever its nature’.²
   The emperor made some concessions. He promised Murat the Farnese proper-
ties in Rome that belonged to the Neapolitan Bourbons and agreed to an annual
subsidy of half a million francs, which effectively halved the annual charge of land

                          ¹ BSPN: ms XXI B5.       ² Ibid.
