148                                 Napoleonic Naples

soap industry, silk yarn for the Lyons weaving industries, and wool (‘very white,
ﬁne and strong’) for the cloth industries of Aix-la-Chapelle, Rouen, Liège, and
Beauvais, as well as liquorice and cotton. But it was also believed that Naples
could offer markets for ‘the ﬁne and middle range woollens’ from Abbeville,
Elbeuf, Languedoc, Liège, and Aix-la-Chapelle, as well as for other ‘small cloths’
and for ‘tanned leather goods’.²⁵
    The emperor’s irritation increased, therefore, when Murat refused to acknow-
ledge French commercial privileges and failed to enforce the Continental block-
ade. As early as December 1808 Murat was denying that he had permitted British
goods to enter his Kingdom: ‘Sire, I can only answer your accusations by saying
that I am neither a rebel, nor an ingrate, nor am I mad, and that I would indeed
deserve to be sent to the Petites Maisons (the madhouse) and every ignominy had
I been capable of such actions.’²⁶
    Champagny asked D’Aubusson directly whether Murat was allowing British
and colonial goods to be freely imported, but the French chargé d’affaires ﬂatly
denied that this was true. When Champagny renewed the accusation a few days
later, D’Aubusson again denied it.²⁷ M. Blanc, the French consul in Naples,
agreed that he had not seen any ‘English colonial goods’ in Naples, but added,
‘I have had cause, however, to inform His Excellency M. D’Aubusson la Feuillade
of my concerns regarding the interlope trade carried out by the English with the
ports of Trieste, Fiume and other ports in the Morea.’ He claimed that it was com-
mon knowledge that there were huge stocks of English goods in both Sicily and
Malta, many of which were being smuggled into the Kingdom. But they were
almost impossible to trace since he did not have agents in every Neapolitan port,
and in any case the goods were landed on empty beaches.²⁸
    The priorities of the imperial administration were clearly set out in the instruc-
tions given to Blanc’s successor, M. Doriol. He was to ensure that ‘the Imperial laws
against trade with England are being fully observed’, to check personally the certiﬁ-
cates of origin for all goods entering the city, and to report to Paris ‘anything that
might be of interest’. While ‘the close ties between the emperor and king Murat
meant that the Neapolitan government could have no interest contrary to that of the
French government, laxities might still occur through the negligence or corruption
of the secondary authorities’, which should be reported.²⁹ Doriol needed little
encouragement and sent off a string of complaints about the failure of the ‘interme-
diary authorities to observe the Imperial decrees’, claiming that large quantities of
English contraband goods were coming into Apulia from Albania and the Morea.³⁰
    The consul’s complaints raised another dispute. In 1806 Joseph’s government
had abolished all existing commercial treaties, and stated that trade relations

  ²⁵ ANP: F12 549–50.210, Mémoire sur un project de traité de commerce avec le Royaume de
Naples.                   ²⁶ Le Brethon, vi, n.3651, 442: Murat to Napoleon, 9 December 1808.
  ²⁷ AAEP: CP Naples, 132: 7 December 1808, 11 December 1808.
  ²⁸ AAEP: CC Naples, 39, 1806–11, 102: 6 December 1808.            ²⁹ Ibid. 120: March 1809.
  ³⁰ Ibid. 135: 12 May 1809, Doriol to Champagny.
