150                                Napoleonic Naples

exporting cotton and silk cloth to Naples without duties, a measure that Murat
claimed ‘will deprive my treasury of a revenue which is not borne by French trade
but by my subjects who are the consumers of these goods’.³⁸
   Murat again begged the emperor to relieve him of the cost of maintaining
French troops in the Kingdom, which since 1808 had risen from 17,404 to
40,154 men: ‘this makes it quite impossible to balance the budget of my state’.³⁹
During the autumn the situation in the Kingdom had become even more grave
and a poor harvest now threatened a serious subsistence crisis in the capital. Murat
renewed his pleas for permission to trade with the Americans and pointed out that
imperial decrees requiring the destruction of all goods seized from English vessels
had caused numerous bankruptcies in Naples. He complained bitterly about the
behaviour of French agents in Naples, his principal target, although unnamed,
being Consul Doriol: ‘In the name of God, Sire, bring to an end the painful
situation in which I ﬁnd myself, I no longer have the strength to struggle against
perﬁdy and bad faith!’⁴⁰
   November brought a further disappointment. Export licences arrived from
Paris, but only for trade with Africa, the Ottoman Porte, and the Kingdom of
Italy. However, permits were not required since Naples was at peace with all these
states. By contrast, there were no permits for trade with Britain, even though
licences issued in Bordeaux now permitted trade with Britain by way of American
ships.⁴¹
   The subsistence crisis facing Naples and the Kingdom was still serious in the
early months of 1811, and Murat’s government adopted a more hostile posture.
The new chargé d’affaires Hue de Grosbois reported in January that the
Neapolitan government was deliberately ﬂouting the imperial decree that gave
privileged status to French textiles.⁴² In March, Doriol reported that the govern-
ment was openly supporting the anti-French attitude of its ofﬁcers.⁴³ In April
exports of cotton seed had been banned, a measure Doriol believed was designed
to destroy attempts to cultivate cotton in France and in the Papal States and was
therefore contrary to the emperor’s plan ‘to encourage the production of colonial
products in order to break the British monopoly’.⁴⁴
   In September, Doriol reported that the government had increased duties on
colonial goods brought into Naples as prizes by French corsairs. Grain exports
in ships of more than 60 tons had also been banned, which Doriol claimed was an
attempt to exclude France from the carrying trade although Murat said it was to
prevent large cargoes falling into the hands of British privateers. Doriol concluded
that this measure would mean that the 8 to 10 million francs that France was
losing each year on its trade with Naples would increase, while France ‘must in


 ³⁸ ANP: AFiv 1714a, Murat to Napoleon, 20 October 1810.          ³⁹ Ibid., 31 October 1810.
 ⁴⁰ Ibid., Murat to Napoleon, 9 November 1810.       ⁴¹ Ibid., 16 November 1810.
 ⁴² AAEP: CP Naples, Gosbois to Duke of Cadore (formerly Champagny), 2 January 1811.
 ⁴³ AAEP: CC Naples, 39, 312: 21 March 1811.        ⁴⁴ AAEP: CP Naples, 136, 4 April 1811.
