146                                  Napoleonic Naples

though we have had to wait long time. There is no-one capable of taking on this min-
istry, which is a real Augean stable. Even Agar, despite his intelligence and energy, will
have to work day and night for at least two years before he gets things in order. It is not
an enviable task and I defy those who are against him from stirring up envy.’¹⁵
   Murat again pointed out that his government ministries required 1,000,000
ducats a month and there were currently only 193,000 ducats available.¹⁶ His
protest was ignored, and when the ﬁrst payments to France under the terms of the
Treaty of Bayonne fell due (1st January 1809), Champagny formally protested
that the Neapolitan government had defaulted on its obligations. Paris now
demanded the immediate transfer of the estates required to fund the six Imperial
ﬁefs and the settlement of the arrears owed for the maintenance of French troops.
   Di Gallo replied that ‘everything which his Imperial and Royal Majesty orders
will be done’. But he also argued that the demands were unreasonable. The heavy
expenses incurred during the ﬁrst six months of the reign, the payments made to
cover the arrears on pay for the army and civil administration, the cost of the mil-
itary operation to regain Capri, and preparations for an expedition to invade Sicily
had prevented Murat from meeting other obligations. He closed by warning
Champagny that malicious gossip was being spread in Paris by sympathizers of the
ci-devant monarchy who were looking to discredit the new ruler.¹⁷
   In February 1809 D’Aubusson wrote to defend Murat’s achievements in
Naples. Amongst these he listed the raising of two corps of an elite praetorian
guard (the Veliti¹⁸) and the reorganization of the Provincial Militia, which had
taken over public order duties from the French regiments being withdrawn for the
campaign against Austria in northern Italy.
   Reassurance came from Paris too, ﬁrst from Saliceti, who reported early in
March that he had spoken to the emperor and that all was well: ‘The Emperor is
the centre of all the dynasties that he has founded and he wishes to direct the opera-
tions of each to ensure that they work together to create the great system that will
set the destiny of the world.’¹⁹
   Marshal Berthier also wrote to reassure Murat of the emperor’s favourable
disposition: ‘This, Sire, is what you must do: Be a King amongst your subjects,
but with the Emperor be a Vice-Roy. Be a Frenchman and never a Neapolitan.
Consult his Imperial Majesty in everything: those things which may seem at this
moment harmful to your subjects are in reality to their advantage, because every-
thing that the Emperor desires forms part of the vast plan of his projects and
his ideas, while the well-being of the nations that are governed by his dynasty
depends on the success of his lofty vision: it is for us simply to follow and obey his
orders and plans without trying to understand their depth.’²⁰

         ¹⁵ Le Brethon, vi. 458: 24 February 1809.
         ¹⁶ Le Brethon, vi. 478: Murat to Napoleon, 6 January 1809.
         ¹⁷ ASN: Min Esteri f. 5490, fascic 193: 5 February 1809.          ¹⁸ See p. 253.
         ¹⁹ Le Brethon, viii. 3835, 53; Saliceti to Murat from Paris, 5 March 1809.
         ²⁰ Ibid., 3838, 59; Berthier to Murat, 5 March 1809.
