                                   The Costs of Empire                                   155

‘humiliated Murat before the whole of Europe’.⁶¹ When the emperor learned that
Murat had ordered his senior ofﬁcers to take a new oath of loyalty, he gave orders
for General Grenier to form an Army of Observation from the French troops
already in the Kingdom and take up offensive positions.⁶²
   This was tantamount to a declaration of war and Naples was again an occupied
territory. Faced by the emperor’s threat of military action, Murat backed down
and agreed to withdraw his decree on French employees. Contemporary accounts
suggest he suffered a mental breakdown, threatened to shoot himself with a pistol,
and after withdrawing to the palace of Capodimonte refused to speak to any of his
ministers. He then dismissed Daure, the War Minister, for plotting against him,
and replaced him with Antonio Maghella, a former protégé of Saliceti.⁶³
   Napoleon now gave the crisis a further twist when he accused Murat of stealing
the Spanish crown jewels that Charles IV of Spain had entrusted to him for
safekeeping during the uprising at Aranjuez in 1808. Their ownership was now in
dispute between the emperor and his brother Joseph Bonaparte, but the jewels
had disappeared and Murat was held responsible.⁶⁴
   This was the opportunity for Caroline Murat to exert her own power. She was
now openly recognized to be the leader of the pro-French faction at Murat’s court
and in September 1811 she travelled to Paris to intercede with Napoleon on her
husband’s behalf. But the queen’s intervention was not the only reason that Murat
escaped the fate of the king of Holland. At the height of the crisis in July 1811
Baron Durand had reported on the strength of anti-French feeling and the growth
of a nationalist awareness amongst the Neapolitans in reaction to the Emperor’s
demands.
The King in truth deludes himself with the state of his country and seems to believe that he
is strong enough to do without the co-operation of the French and rely entirely on
the Neapolitans.
But he also warned against pushing the conﬂict too far since this would beneﬁt
only the English and the Court in Palermo.⁶⁵
   Durand’s warning was heeded in Paris and it was probably the danger that the
British and their Sicilian allies would be the main beneﬁciaries of the rift between
Naples and Paris that secured Murat’s throne for the time being. In any case, Paris
began to make more conciliatory overtures and Marshal Pérignon was sent to
inform Murat that the emperor had no intention of changing the status of the
Kingdom and that Murat was king because the emperor wished it so. But the
Marshal warned Murat to take full note of his duties: ‘duties that the king of
Holland had for a moment forgotten, with the result that he was immediately
removed from the ranks of rulers and his Kingdom ceased to exist’. But Murat was
also informed that the emperor had dismissed the Neapolitan ambassador in

      ⁶¹ Cutolo (1937), 408.      ⁶² Ibid. 411.        ⁶³ Ibid. 414.     ⁶⁴ Ibid. 417.
      ⁶⁵ AAEP: CP, Naples 137, Durand to Cadore, 9 July 1811.
