152                                Napoleonic Naples

   The emperor’s agreement was only provisional, however, and in April Colonel
Leclerc was sent to Naples on a secret mission to report on the feasibility of the
project. Leclerc’s report reached Paris in May and convinced Napoleon that
the expedition could not succeed. But he decided that it would be useful to let it
proceed simply to force the English to divert troops from the Iberian peninsula to
defend Sicily.⁴⁷
   When Murat returned to Naples he ordered his War Minister, Hector Daure, to
prepare an invasion force of 22,000 men and to requisition transports for crossing
the Straits of Messina. On 16 May Murat left Naples with the advance guard
of his army, declaring that he would be in Palermo within two months. Early in
June he established his headquarters at Scilla, above the Straits of Messina. In June
the Imperial Minister of War, Baron Clarke, informed him that 15,000 French
and 2,000 Corsican troops would be available for the expedition, command of
which would be entrusted to a French general nominated by the emperor.⁴⁸
   This was a terrible blow to Murat, who was still unaware that the emperor was
using the threatened invasion simply as a diversion. In that respect, at least, it
was successful. Lord Liverpool suspended all transfers of men from Sicily to Spain
and Portugal, and in anticipation that the invasion would be supported by the
Toulon ﬂeet the British blockade of Corfu was lifted to make more ships available
to defend Sicily.⁴⁹
   In Calabria, however, Murat faced growing difﬁculties in keeping the expedi-
tion force on station. By August, the War Minister, Daure, had still not prepared a
ﬁnancial estimate, pay for the army was in arrears, and the military contractors
had not been paid, nor had the owners or the crews of the transports, which fell
easy prey to English and Bourbon warships.
   The operation ended in ﬁasco and more recriminations. By the end of the
summer Murat ﬁnally realized that the emperor had no intention of allowing him
to carry out the invasion. He quarrelled with the French commander, General
Grenier, and relations between the French and Neapolitan ofﬁcers were deterior-
ating. The Toulon ﬂeet never sailed, and by September the expedition was in
danger of falling to pieces while disease, as usual, was taking a heavy toll.
   On the night of 17 September General Cavaignac crossed the Straits with
3,500 men, by night, landing at dawn near Messina. When the beach-head came
under heavy ﬁre Cavaignac’s force re-embarked and made its way back to the
Calabrian shore with the loss of 600 men and ofﬁcers captured. It was widely sus-
pected that the sortie had merely been a feint to provide Murat with an excuse for
disbanding the expedition, which he did on 1 October. The news provoked
another outburst of imperial fury, and Napoleon accused Murat of disbanding the
expedition without orders and as a result of causing Masséna to be defeated by
the British in Portugal.⁵⁰
   ⁴⁷ Tulard (1983), 164–6.       ⁴⁸ Rambaud (1911b), 435–47; Valente (1968), 164–9.
   ⁴⁹ PRO, WO 1, 308. Abstract of Royal Navy Intelligence Reports (Messina, 8 June 1810).
   ⁵⁰ Espitalier (1912), 59–80.
