160                                   Napoleonic Naples


                                    CONCLUSIONS

Murat’s defection was not consummated until January 1814, when it was already
clear that the end of the empire was imminent. Murat’s main concern was to sell his
services to the allies in the hope of keeping his Kingdom, but his actions also
reﬂected the deeper contradictions on which the imperial enterprise was founded.
In this Naples was not unusual and the frictions between the emperor and his
brother-in-law illustrate Paul Schroeder’s claim that the empire had little function or
purpose beyond Napoleon’s military needs, some of which were constant (such as
the need for men, mounts, materiel, and money) but most of which were passing.⁸²
   Murat came close to being a casualty of the imperial system, and on at least
three occasions he received some form of ultimatum. If he did not suffer the fate
of Louis Bonaparte it was because southern Italy was too far away to be treated like
Holland and as Baron Durand had noted, any political change was likely to bene-
ﬁt the British and their Sicilian allies. As the fortunes of the empire declined after
1811, however, the balance of power shifted and as Murat’s support grew more
important to the emperor so did his bargaining power. But by then the imperial
enterprise was rapidly heading for the rocks.
   The relations between Naples and Paris reveal an unambiguous audit of
Napoleon’s empire, although things were not quite as bad as Murat’s government
made out. The massive increase in military expenditure was a devastating drain on
resources, but most of the imperial demands were never met. Nonetheless, the
prolonged state of war in the Mediterranean had also devastated trade and virtu-
ally every branch of economic activity, which was only partially compensated by
the contraband trade that Doriol rightly suspected had become the Kingdom’s
principal business.⁸³
   Mosbourg’s budget ﬁgures clearly reveal the costs of empire. Between 1806 and
1812 the Kingdom’s direct ﬁscal revenues had grown by more than 50 per cent.
By 1812 80 per cent of those revenues were devoted to military expenditure,
mainly outside the Kingdom, and by 1813 the military budget alone was greater
than the total state budget in 1806. Even though Naples avoided paying much of
what the emperor demanded, it had still paid a great deal—and not in ﬁnancial
terms alone.

   ⁸² ‘The very notion of Napoleon’s empire as a conceivable, potentially durable form of European
international politics, or as a leading one, is a contradiction in terms.’ Schroeder (1994), 394.
   ⁸³ See p. 221 below.
