                                    The Costs of Empire                                     151

addition now pay for charters while her own ships rot in the harbour’. The quar-
antine regulations were also being used to deter French shipping.⁴⁵


                    THE SICILIAN EXPEDITION, 1810

In 1810 another dangerous quarrel developed that did even greater damage to
Murat’s relations with the emperor. The cause was the expedition that Murat pre-
pared for the invasion of Sicily in the summer of 1810. As one of the emperor’s
most renowned commanders, it was not surprising that Murat should have been
eager to demonstrate his military prowess in his own kingdom. In October 1808
he had achieved an easy but important propaganda success by recapturing Capri
from the small British garrison that Joseph had been unable to dislodge. However,
the emperor’s new war against Austria in the spring of 1809 had revealed the
difﬁculty of reconciling the Kingdom’s military needs with those of the empire.
The recall of the French forces had left the Kingdom dangerously exposed to
counter-attack by the British and the Sicilians, who had immediately seized the
opportunity to assemble a major expeditionary force.⁴⁶ The threatened Anglo-
Sicilian invasion never materialized, but nonetheless it convinced Murat of
the need to dislodge the British from Sicily.
   By 1810, however, Murat had other compelling reasons for wanting to get the
British and the Bourbons out of Sicily. For both Murat and Caroline Bonaparte,
Napoleon’s decision to resolve the problems posed by the absence of an heir by
divorcing Josephine and marrying an Austrian princess was a double blow. Not
only was the new marriage likely to produce the long-awaited Bonaparte heir, but
even worse, the emperor’s proposed bride, the Archduchess Marie Louise, was a
favourite granddaughter of Queen Maria Carolina of Naples. Murat and Caroline
were not alone in drawing the conclusion that this could be the prelude to an
accommodation with the Neapolitan Bourbons that might easily cost them their
throne. The danger was the greater because it was well known that Maria Carolina
was at loggerheads with her English protectors and was widely suspected to be
secretly negotiating with the emperor. For Murat, the conquest of Sicily was as
much a dynastic as a military necessity.
   When Napoleon announced his plan to divorce Josephine Beauharnais at the
family conference held in Paris in December 1809, only Murat and Cambacérès
openly opposed it. But when Murat travelled to Paris for the imperial wedding in
March 1810, ﬁrst on the list of his requests to the emperor was permission to go
ahead with the invasion of Sicily. After lengthy waits and many calculated rebuffs,
he ﬁnally got what he wanted and immediately returned to Naples to start prep-
arations for the expedition.

  ⁴⁵ AAEP: CC Naples, 39, 401, 22 October 1811; 413, 23 December 1811.
  ⁴⁶ BNP; Fonds Italiens 1125 (vol. 2): Rapports au Roi 1809; Cavaignac to Murat, 6 July 1809.
