                                    The Costs of Empire                                   159

with Malta’.⁷⁷ The Neapolitan government denied the charges and formally
requested Doriol’s recall.


          1813–1814: NEGOTIATING WITH THE ALLIES

Murat was trying to sell his services to the emperor on the best terms he could obtain,
but the imperial administration in Paris refused to negotiate.⁷⁸ Meanwhile Murat
had started negotiating with the Austrians as well and when news reached Naples that
the emperor had left Paris on 9 April 1813 to join the Grande Armée in Germany, the
Neapolitan government refused to send the troops demanded because ‘the tranquil-
lity of Italy requires that the King remains in command of a strong force’. There had
been a recent uprising in Naples, brigandage was again spreading ‘on a scale that
threatens to assume the form of a guerrilla war on the frontiers of the Kingdom of
Italy and the Empire’. Resistance to conscription was growing throughout Italy, and
in Naples the Provincial Legions had ﬂatly refused to join the regiments of the line. As
soon as it was known that a regiment was to be sent out of the Kingdom, the deser-
tion rates became massive.⁷⁹ Fears of internal unrest led the Neapolitan government
to step up its attempts to establish a concordat with the papacy, which it was hoped
would ‘have important consequences for the internal state of the kingdom at this
moment and most especially in the whole southern region where the Catholic
Religion and religious sentiments are especially vigorous’.⁸⁰
    When in May news reached Naples of Napoleon’s victory at Lützen, the tone of
the Neapolitan diplomatic correspondence changed. In an ostentatious display
of loyalty, the foreign minister, di Gallo, informed the imperial minister of the
celebrations being organized for the emperor’s victory. But he also rejected
Bassano’s insinuation that concerns about internal unrest were an excuse for not
contributing towards the emperor’s campaign. The government was continually
discovering new evidence of the subversive plots being organized in Naples and
the English garrisons in Sicily and Ponza had been reinforced.⁸¹
    Napoleon’s victories persuaded Murat to rejoin the Grande Armée in Germany,
where apart from a brief return to Naples in August, he remained until October.
There was a partial reconciliation, but after a lengthy meeting with Prince
Metternich in Dresden Napoleon still refused the peace terms offered by Austria.
As a result, when Napoleon was defeated at the Battle of the Nations at Leipzig in
October, Murat reopened negotiations with the allies. The emperor attempted to
have him arrested, but on 4 November he returned to Naples and on the 11
Neapolitan ports were opened to allied shipping.

  ⁷⁷ AAEP: CC Naples, 40, 198, Doriol to Bassano, 21 July 1812; ibid. 360, 10 May 1813; ibid.
375, 5 June 1813.                        ⁷⁸ ANP: 31 AP 6, Bassano to Di Gallo, 30 January 1813.
  ⁷⁹ ASN: Min. Esteri f.5545, Carignano to Bassano, 1 June 1813.
  ⁸⁰ ASN: Min. Esteri f.5545, Di Gallo to Carignano, 26 September 1813.
  ⁸¹ Ibid., Di Gallo to Carignano, 17 May 1813.
