                                    The Costs of Empire                                   153


                     IMPERIAL DISCORDS 1809–1811

The crisis between Naples and Paris was coming to a head at a moment when the
imperial project was running into problems on all sides. There were many causes:
the uncertainties raised by Napoleon’s Austrian marriage, the growing difﬁculties
in Spain, and above all the strains felt throughout the empire as a result of renewed
efforts to impose the Continental blockade.
   In Italy, the empire’s position had looked solid when Murat arrived in Naples in
1808. But in the following spring the situation changed dramatically when
Austria took advantage of France’s military commitments in Spain and Portugal to
invade northern Italy. After defeating Prince Eugène at Salice, the Austrians
brieﬂy occupied Venetia. The invasion did not last long, but it caused widespread
unrest and revealed the underlying fragility of French rule in Italy. At its height the
whole of Emilia was in revolt and Bologna under siege, and the situation became
even more chaotic in central Italy when Rome was annexed to France in May and
Pope Pius VII made a prisoner.⁵¹
   Napoleon’s response was the counter-offensive that concluded with the victory
at Wagram in July 1809, which quickly restored order in Italy and brought further
territorial consolidation. The Kingdom of Italy now attained its fullest territorial
reach, placing Prince Eugène in nominal command of territories that stretched
from Sessia in the west to the Isonzo river in the east, from the Brenner in the
north to Emilia-Romagna in the south.⁵²
   Stability, however, was never a lasting feature of Napoleon’s imperial enterprise,
and even in these years when the French empire reached its fullest extent the internal
strains and contradictions were very visible. The single most important source of
discontent was the emperor’s determination to make the Continental blockade
effective, which provoked resistance not only in France’s imperial possessions but
also within France itself, which since 1809 was suffering from economic recession
that showed no signs of slackening.⁵³ Protests from French commercial interests
forced the emperor to compromise, and a series of decrees between July and
September 1810 introduced a system of special licences for trade with Britain.
At the same time, the Fontainbleau Decree imposed severe new penalties in an
attempt to control the massive contraband in British goods expanding through-
out the empire.⁵⁴
   These contradictory measures placed new strains on the fabric of empire and
on the system of imperial alliances, and in December 1810 the Tsar withdrew
Russia from the Continental blockade. The new measures to enforce the blockade

  ⁵¹ Zaghi (1986), 620–4.
  ⁵² But still cut in two from west to east by the former Duchy of Parma and Piacenza, which
had been annexed to France in 1808 following the Treaty of Schönbrunn (October 1809); Zaghi
(1986), 370.                                                        ⁵³ Bergeron (1972), 207–15.
  ⁵⁴ St Cloud decree of July 1810, the Trianon Decrees: Woolf (1991), 141–52.
