154                                   Napoleonic Naples

were also resisted in the satellite and annexed territories, and cost the emperor’s
brother, Louis, his crown in 1810 when he was forced to abdicate the throne of
Holland. In Westphalia and Sweden Jerome and Bernadotte responded more
circumspectly, but only the emperor’s step-son and Viceroy in northern Italy,
Prince Eugène, took the path of abject compliance.⁵⁵


                        THE CRISIS: JUNE–JULY 1811

Murat’s position had already become highly insecure because of the Sicilian
expedition and it was rumoured in October 1810 that his French generals in
Naples had been ordered to depose him.⁵⁶ It was widely expected that he would
soon share the fate of the king of Holland, and in Paris the imperial bureaucracy
seized on Murat’s weakness to press its demands with greater force.
   In February 1811 Baron de Durant was sent as imperial Minister
Plenipotentiary to Naples with instructions that amounted to a bill of attainder.
His orders repeated that the Kingdom’s relations to France were ﬁxed by the ‘con-
stitution of 30 March 1806’, which recognized the Kingdom as part of the empire
and made its crown revertible to the emperor’s family. They listed the three sets of
debts outstanding to the empire.⁵⁷ All were in arrears and most had not been paid.
Nor had the Kingdom met its obligation to build two warships every year: it had
failed to implement the blockade satisfactorily or to agree to a commercial treaty
with France. The French minister was instructed to demand the immediate settle-
ment of all debts owed the emperor and the imperial treasury, the immediate
delivery of the ships, and energetic measures to enforce the blockade.⁵⁸
   A month later Grosbois reported that France was no longer considered a most
favoured nation in Naples, that its envoys were treated coldly, the Code Napoléon
was held openly in contempt, and that Murat did not disassociate himself from
such attitudes.⁵⁹
   Following the birth of Napoleon’s son on 20 March, Murat travelled to Paris
but returned to Naples at the end of May before the baptism and despite the
emperor’s orders that he remain in Paris. The long expected crisis then came to a
head on 14 June when Murat decreed that all French citizens in government
service must apply for Neapolitan nationality.⁶⁰
   The emperor’s response was devastating. On 6 July he decreed that all
French subjects were citizens of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, a measure that
   ⁵⁵ Zaghi (1986), 367–8; Bergeron (1972), 207–15; Schroeder (1994), 402–12.
   ⁵⁶ Notiziastorica (1848), 121–3.
   ⁵⁷ These included the annual payment of 500,000 francs to the emperor; the debt to the Legion
d’Honneur; and the payments owing for the maintenance of French troops in the Kingdom and for
the Neapolitan troops serving outside the Kingdom.
   ⁵⁸ On 17 July the emperor was informed that the Neapolitan debt to France had been recalculated
at 6,037,500 francs.                ⁵⁹ AAEP: Naples CP, 136, Grosbois to Cadore, 11 March 1811.
   ⁶⁰ Ibid., 14 June 1811.
