158                                Napoleonic Naples

On 27 January Le Moniteur in Paris accused Murat of deserting his post in Russia.
Murat demanded an apology, arguing that he had agreed to take his troops only as
far as the Vistula, and that he had been forced to return to Naples by ill health and
the threat of an Anglo-Sicilian invasion of his Kingdom.⁷⁵
   All the issues in contention between Paris and Naples came to a head again.
On 30 January the Duke of Bassano demanded that Naples should immediately
supply 16,000 infantry, 2,500 cavalry, and twenty pieces of artillery for the
Grande Armée. The Neapolitan Minister Plenipotentiary in Paris, the Duke of
Carignano, observed that this was impossible and unlawful since Naples was
threatened by the Anglo-Bourbon forces in Sicily and could not put its own
existence in peril by allowing further troop withdrawals. He agreed, however,
that Murat would impose another round of conscription, but he could not
supply cavalry because ‘there are no horses left in the Kingdom’. The troops left
to defend the Kingdom and keep order were 50 per cent below estimates, and the
Kingdom needed to purchase muskets, side arms, and horses from France. The
government had also been forced to abandon the arming of its maritime defences
for want of funds.
   Attached to the memo was a report drawn up by General Tugny, the Neapolitan
War Minister, who had calculated that by December 1812 Naples had supplied
11,971 infantry, 2,050 cavalry, and 1,994 mounts to the emperor’s forces in Spain
and central Europe, and had provided a total of 19,501 men and 2,471 mounts
for the emperor’s wars since 1808. The Neapolitan government also demanded
the immediate return of the Farnese property in the ci-devant Papal States that
had been ceded to Murat by the secret clauses of the Treaty of Bayonne and which
Napoleon had seized after Murat’s departure from Russia.⁷⁶
   Throughout Murat’s absence in 1812 the French consul in Naples, Doriol, had
kept up his attacks on the Neapolitan government, reporting regularly to Paris
that Naples was breaking the terms of the blockade and trading with Britain. He
also argued that the government was trying to prevent French privateers from
operating off the coast for fear that their prizes might disclose the scale of the
contraband trade.
   In May 1813 Doriol escalated the charges, stating that the Neapolitan govern-
ment had knowingly issued licences to a French commercial house ‘notoriously
acknowledged to be agents of the house of Scott Burns and Co. of London. . . . This
disregard of the rules of the Continental System, together with the infractions that
occur here daily, risks causing the collapse of the entire System.’ The trade in
British colonial goods was now open and the huge stocks that had been built up in
Malta and Sicily were hardly sufﬁcient to meet the rapidly growing demand.
Sugar, in particular, was being imported in vast quantities hidden in cargoes of salt
from Sardinia. In June, Doriol reported that Naples was trading ‘almost openly

             ⁷⁵ ANP: 31 AP 6, Murat to Napoleon, 13 April 1813.
             ⁷⁶ ASN: Min Esteri f.5545, Carignano to Bassano, 30 January 1813.
