                                    The Promise of Change                                      167

past he survived Thermidor and by December 1795 had established close ties with
Paul Barras, the most powerful ﬁgure in the Directory, who sent him to Genoa to
establish contacts with the Italian republicans and prepare for the French invasion
of northern Italy. When the invasion began in January 1796, Saliceti acquired the
powerful and lucrative post of Civil Commissar to the Armée d’Italie and many
believed that his ability in raising money and providing supplies and equipment
was the key to Napoleon’s military successes. In Genoa he developed an extensive
network of contacts with Italian republicans and patriots that made him very
powerful.
   Contemporaries described him as an imposing ﬁgure:
ﬁve foot six inches tall, thin, with abundant black hair that he often wore powdered, a
long, pallid, jaundiced and pock-marked face, somewhat anaemic, constantly plagued by
piles but with ﬁne features, a high forehead, a straight and rounded nose, pale lips but a
vigorously shaped mouth and ﬂamboyant black eyes.
He was considered incorruptible—‘inaccessible to pleasure and money’—but
highly ambitious, a committed patriot and a ‘jacobin à outrance’.¹⁹
   Unlike Bonaparte, Saliceti believed that war was an instrument of revolution,
whose purpose was to liberate peoples still oppressed by tyrants. He saw the
founding of ‘sister-republics’ as a step toward the creation of a universal Republic
and believed the support of the Italian revolutionaries to be crucial for France’s
military success. In January 1796 he worked with Filippo Michele Buonarroti²⁰
and others to organize republican risings in Piedmont and with the Milanese
patriots to prepare the French entry into the city.²¹
   In July 1796 Saliceti directed the French occupation of Livorno and with
Joseph Bonaparte led the expedition that recaptured Corsica from the English. He
then assumed dictatorial power, and reorganized the entire Corsican administra-
tion so that it was controlled by his own followers and the Bonaparte clan. He
recommended a French army be maintained permanently on the island and
organized a gendarmerie composed of local men ‘accustomed to scaling the
mountains’.²²
   Saliceti was still close to Joseph, but his brother Napoleon sensed that he was
becoming too powerful. When he was replaced by André Miot, Saliceti’s relations
with Napoleon deteriorated rapidly and in January 1797 he and Commissar Garrau
were recalled to Paris. In November 1799 Saliceti openly opposed the Coup of
18–19 Brumaire and was dismissed.²³ Saliceti was only partially rehabilitated and

   ¹⁹ Godechot (1937), i. 245.         ²⁰ See above p. 81.
   ²¹ By now Saliceti and his fellow commissar Garrau were responsible for the ‘systematic exploita-
tion of the conquered territories to the beneﬁt both of the armée d’Italie and of the Directorial
Republic that was on the verge of bankruptcy’. He conducted delicate diplomatic negotiations with
the Republic of Genoa, the Papacy, and the Grand Duke of Tuscany and organized the pro-French
revolt in Reggio at the end of 1796; Godechot (1937), i. 402–4.                       ²² Ibid. 480.
   ²³ He was appointed ambassador to Lucca and then to Genoa in 1801, and again sent to assist
Miot to repress the supposed counter-revolution in Corsica.
