166                                     Napoleonic Naples

he pressed for the immediate suppression of religious houses to solve the govern-
ment’s dire ﬁnancial difﬁculties.¹⁵
   Of Joseph’s three senior administrators, Pierre Louis Roederer had the broadest
administrative experience.¹⁶ A close ally of Sièyes, Roederer was a ﬁrm supporter
of the Coup of 18–19 Brumaire in 1799 and of the Constitution of Year VIII
(December 1799) that established the position of First Consul. From December
1799 to September 1802 he served in the Council of State and oversaw the re-
organization of public administration into Prefectures, Sub-prefectures, and
Municipalities. With Joseph Bonaparte in March 1800 he negotiated with the
delegation from the United States, and in 1801 drafted the constitution for
Napoleon’s Italian Republic.¹⁷ It was at Joseph’s request that Roederer travelled
to Naples in February 1806, although it was not until November that Napoleon
ﬁnally agreed to a permanent transfer.
   Roederer was the principal architect of the major reforms introduced in the
summer of 1806: the reorganization of central and local administration along
French lines, the introduction of a standard progressive land tax (fondiaria), aboli-
tion of the tax-farms and arrendamenti, and the redemption of the debts of the
former monarchy through sales of public land and the suppression of the remain-
ing possessioner houses and convents in the Kingdom. In 1808 he followed
Joseph Bonaparte to Spain, by which time progress had been made with the sales
of crown and Church lands, but most of the rest of Roederer’s legislation had
still to be implemented and was already attracting strong criticism. Later in his
memoirs he expressed nothing but contempt for Naples, probably in an attempt
to distance himself from criticism raised by his successors.
   Miot also left with Joseph, so that the only senior French ofﬁcial left when
Joachim Murat reached Naples was the Corsican Antoine Christophe Saliceti.
The only one not to write his memoirs, Saliceti was also the most powerful
but least visible of the senior French ofﬁcials in Naples and deserves some closer
attention since his career is not well known but offers important insights into the
means used to establish the French regime in Naples.
   In Corsica Saliceti had been a leading opponent of Paolo Paoli and the sep-
aratists, and hence an early patron of the Bonaparte family.¹⁸ Despite his Jacobin

   ¹⁵ Miot de Melito, Mémoires (1880), i. Introduction; ii. 286.
   ¹⁶ Born in Metz in 1754, Roederer’s career began with managing the family’s glass works, but he
became actively involved in the political and public debates of the 1780s and won acclaim for a pamphlet
calling for a uniﬁed system of taxes. In 1789 he was elected to the Constituent Assembly and to the
Tax Committee in 1790. In August 1792 he was denounced by Marat, but survived thanks to
Thermidor. See Roederer (ed. Forsyth, 1989), and Roederer (ed. Margerison, 1983).
   ¹⁷ Napoleon had not liked Roederer’s proposals for an electoral system based on lists of notables
for each province, and when he clashed with Chaptal over education policy he was dismissed in
March 1802 and sent to the Senate. But he continued to be entrusted with important tasks, and in
1803 drafted the constitution for the Swiss Confederation.
   ¹⁸ Elected as a delegate to the Estates General in 1789, he became procurator general in Corsica
two years later and in September 1791 was elected to the Convention where he voted for the death of
the king.
