                                          9
                    The Promise of Change

              NAPLES: A MODEL OF THE EMPIRE’S
                  MODERNIZING MISSION?

The circumstances of the French occupation of southern Italy could hardly have
been less promising. The brief decade of French rule in the South took place
against a background of invasive colonial subordination, prolonged commercial
economic recession, intermittent warfare, constant political uncertainty, and
almost permanent internal unrest. Yet the changes that took place within southern
Italy in this brief span of time were remarkable. Pietro Colletta, who had served
Murat as an ofﬁcer and administrator, opened his later account of these years with
the simple statement: ‘Never has a society witnessed greater upheaval or greater
transformation in so short a space of time than the Kingdom of Naples at the
beginning of the nineteenth century.’¹
   The reorganization of the monarchy began within months of the establishment
of the new regime. Feudalism was abolished, public administration was restruc-
tured along French lines, and a new ﬁscal system based on a standard land tax was
introduced. The debts of the former monarchy were liquidated and a new public
debt was established, funded by the sale of the lands expropriated from the
religious orders and from the crown.
   As well as a new system of central and local government, the Napoleonic rulers
introduced the Napoleonic Code Civil, the French commercial and criminal law
codes. They reformed the magistracy and the administration of justice; they
passed laws to promote the establishment of schools and colleges in the provinces.
They reorganized the Kingdom’s vast patrimony of charitable foundations and for
the ﬁrst time introduced military conscription. They established a Feudal
Commission that between 1809 and 1811 settled all litigation arising from the
abolition of feudalism and oversaw the division of the feudal estates between
the former owners and the local communities as well as the division of the former
common lands among the inhabitants of the rural villages.
   Colletta’s claim was an exaggeration, but not a wild one, and in the broader
context of Napoleonic Italy and Napoleonic Europe the reforms that took place in

                          ¹ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 214.
