170                                   Napoleonic Naples

   By chance the absentee Archbishop happened to be in his episcopal seat in
1799. He urged compliance with the republican government in Naples on the
grounds that ‘all governments are in the hand of our Lord’, and then used the same
argument to appeal for obedience to the monarchy as Cardinal Ruffo and the
Russo-Turkish ﬂeet approached the city in March. In October Capecelatro was
arrested as a suspected Jacobin and held until February 1801.
   In 1806 Joseph Bonaparte appointed him to the Council of State and made
him Minister of Church Affairs. Murat persuaded him to become Minister of
the Interior in August 1808, but he resigned and was replaced a year later by
another former Bourbon minister, Giuseppe Zurlo.
   Zurlo had left Naples with the court in 1806 but he and his brother returned,
apparently to prevent the sequestration of his property. The circumstances are
unclear, but he was fully committed to the principles on which the new system of
administration was based and willing to extol them as the realization of the
reforms he had attempted to introduce unsuccessfully after 1802. As Interior
Minister he played the key role in reactivating Joseph Bonaparte’s Feudal
Commission, but became a major target of the opposition. As a result of pressure
from the queen he was dismissed in 1812, but returned to ofﬁce when Murat
joined the allies in 1814.
   When Zurlo became Minister of the Interior he was succeeded as Minister of
Justice by Giuseppe Ricciardi, another young lawyer from the provinces who had
made his career in Naples. Ricciardi did not participate in the Republic in 1799,
but later courageously defended some of those charged with treason. He remained
in Naples after the ﬂight of the monarchy and was appointed to the Council of
State in 1807. As Minister of Justice after 1809 he played a critical role in the reor-
ganization of the magistracy and the courts and in the introduction of the French
legal codes.³¹


                                 FORMING A PART Y

There were many ways in which Neapolitans were incorporated into the new
regime, starting from the Council of State. Taken from the French Constitution of
Year VIII, a Council of State had been established in the Kingdom of Italy in 1805
and took the same form in Naples. A consultative body whose advice was almost
always ignored, it frequently complained that despite lengthy debates the laws
adopted were simply translations of their French originals with no concessions to
local custom or practice.³² But the Council of State was an important means both

  ³¹ Shortly before leaving, Roederer told him that he was ‘the only truly enlightened person I have
had the pleasure to meet in Naples’, but urged him to broaden his reading of Montesquieu and other
writers of the French Enlightenment: Roederer to Ricciardi (20 July 1808).
  ³² See especially De Martino (1984) and Feola (1977). The proceedings of the Consiglio di Stato
have been destroyed.
