168                                    Napoleonic Naples

Napoleon was still very suspicious of him when Joseph left for Naples. But Joseph
trusted him and believed that their experience of Corsican politics made Saliceti
and Miot exceptionally well qualiﬁed for the task of organizing his new Kingdom,
while the fact that they detested one another would ensure that neither became
too powerful.
   As Minister of Police, Saliceti quickly acquired a sinister reputation in Naples.
He took little or no part in the major legislative debates and remains a shadowy
ﬁgure in the central administrative archives. But the local archives tell a different
story and reveal that Saliceti was omnipresent in the political reconstruction of
southern Italy after the invasion. As he had done in Liguria, he built up a powerful
personal network. Thanks to his long-standing contacts with the Italian revolu-
tionaries, he already knew many of the Neapolitan exiles who now returned
in search of jobs. He placed these men in key positions, knowing that they
were dependent on him alone and had no alternative patrons. He took no notice
of jurisdictional boundaries, infuriated the magistrates by intervening in judi-
cial appointments, and interfered in every branch of the administration. Rightly
the Bourbons saw him as their most dangerous enemy and repeatedly tried to
assassinate him: in 1808 he narrowly escaped a bomb that destroyed much of
his house.
   Of the men who had accompanied Joseph Bonaparte to Naples, Saliceti was the
only one who seemed ready to settle there. He married the daughter of a
Neapolitan nobleman, the Duke of Lavello, and easily accommodated to the
new regime since he had been a conﬁdant of Caroline Bonaparte since childhood.
But that also aroused the emperor’s suspicions, which was why he was recalled
to Paris in 1809. Shortly after returning to Naples in December 1809 he died,
probably of a seizure, although poisoning was suspected and Paris demanded an
autopsy.²⁴
   Joachim Murat’s arrival in Naples a year earlier coincided with a new burst of
legislative and military activity. This has often been attributed to the new rulers,
but this seems unlikely.²⁵ In imperial circles he was widely referred to simply as
‘the pillaging cavalier’ and ‘an administrator of exceptional ineptitude’.²⁶ Murat’s
skills were those of a soldier, and although he had performed some important
diplomatic missions, his record as an administrator in Berg was dismal.²⁷
   Saliceti’s death left Murat with few senior French administrators he could trust,
and the choice was further complicated by his determination to keep Caroline
Bonaparte’s political role to a minimum. In this he was not very successful. His most
loyal adviser, the rather shadowy fellow Cahorsin, Jean-Antoine Agar, who had been
his former administrator in Berg, was the queen’s protégé, while he was unaware that


  ²⁴ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 331–2.
  ²⁵ Valente’s (1941) ‘heroic’ portrait of Murat is reproduced uncritically in Tulard (1983).
  ²⁶ ‘Le cavalier pillard’; ‘administrateur incapable par excellence’. See Espitalier (1910), 2, 16,
19—cited in Ermice (2005), 61.                                                 ²⁷ Schmidt (1905), 63.
