162                              Napoleonic Naples

southern Italy in these years had few comparisons. Napoleon’s rulers and adminis-
trators everywhere loudly proclaimed the modernizing mission of the Grande
Nation. But the forms of government adopted in the different imperial satellites,
principalities, annexed territories, and départements réunis varied greatly and were
shaped as much by pragmatism as ideology.
   To explain why southern Italy was the theatre for an exceptionally broad range
of reforms historians have looked to Napoleon’s rulers and their administrators.
But although the key ﬁgures in the government of the emperor’s Mediterranean
colony were men of wide political and administrative experience, none had the
career proﬁle of committed reformers.² More recent studies have emphasized
the importance of the contribution made by Neapolitans, who were indeed the
architects of the most important changes that took place in these years and pro-
vided strong lines of continuity with earlier Bourbon initiatives. Of this there was
no better demonstration than Giuseppe Zurlo, the key ﬁgure in the ﬁnal season of
Bourbon reformism after 1799 and who as Joachim Murat’s Interior Minister
after 1809 implemented the same reform programme through the Feudal
Commission. Zurlo was neither a single nor an isolated example and at every
level the generation that had reached political maturity in the decade of Bourbon
absolutism and the Republic rallied strongly to the promise of modernity offered
by the Grande Nation.³
   Recognition of the importance of the roles played by sections of the Neapolitan
elites serves to modify the crudely top-down models of political and institutional
change that dominate much of the literature, but does not go far enough. To a
much greater degree than has been acknowledged, however, the forces for the
institutional changes that took place after 1806 came from within the Kingdom
and were not imposed from above.
   When Marshal Masséna installed Joseph Bonaparte on the throne of Naples in
1806 the new rulers inherited the crisis of the monarchy that Ferdinand IV had
again abandoned in his ﬂight to Sicily. Despite the ﬁne rhetoric of the new
regime’s modernizing mission, the timing and priority of its interventions were
determined by the pressing practical needs posed by the almost complete collapse
of public administration and public ﬁnances. In a second moment, however,
forces from below began to play a much greater part in shaping the outcome of
interventions that came to acquire a momentum of their own over which the
government and its administrators had little control.
   Nor is this surprising. Despite the change in regime, the central issue that
the French administrators inherited from the crisis of the ancien régime was the
enormously sensitive and complex balance between local and central power.
The campaign against feudalism in the eighteenth century had attempted to

  ² Rambaud (1911), 555–6; Valente (1965), 231–2.
  ³ The most detailed accounts can be found in Villani (1986/1995); De Martino (1984);
De Lorenzo (1984 and 1997); Scirocco (1978).
