164                                   Napoleonic Naples

Police, instructed the former royal governors (Presidi) to make regular reports on
the general conditions and statistics for each province.⁶
    The new government set to work to refashion the ancien régime monarchy
using templates honed and tried in France. In March, the Council of State was
established and the central government was organized around ﬁve ministries. The
major juridical reforms that paved the way for the reorganization of the state
were introduced during the summer, starting with the law of 2 August 1806 that
abolished feudalism. As in France, this was the juridical premise for everything
that followed. By ending all forms of independent and private jurisdiction the
abolition of feudalism established the absolute sovereignty of the state and opened
the way for reconstructing the Neapolitan monarchy from the foundations up.
    The natural sequel was the law of 8 August that introduced the French system of
central and local administration. The Ministry of Justice was stripped of its previous
administrative functions and the Kingdom was divided into fourteen provinces and
the former royal Presidi took the title of Intendents (equivalent to the French ‘Prefect’).
Each Intendent presided over a Provincial Council. Below these a new administrative
substructure of Sotto-Intendenti assisted by District Councils was established.⁷
    The new system was centralized. Every town, village, and hamlet was assigned
its place in an administrative hierarchy based on population and importance. The
municipal parlamenti that had formerly elected local ofﬁcials were abolished, and
new municipal councils were established in every town, recruited from the prop-
ertied classes and headed by a mayor (sindaco) appointed by the Intendent.⁸ On 16
September the Monitore Napoletano explained the ‘former Presidi have become
Intendents’ but these ofﬁcers were now solely responsible for overseeing local
administration, answered only to the Minister of the Interior, and no longer had
any role in the courts, which were now run exclusively by magistrates.⁹
    The law also provided for the establishment of provincial and local assemblies
whose functions, like those of their counterparts in France, were purely adminis-
trative. Their task was to gather information on local conditions and to organize the
distribution of the new land tax (fondiaria). Since time was needed to draw up
the lists of qualiﬁed persons and then to nominate the members of the provincial and
district assemblies, they were to meet for the ﬁrst time in the summer of 1808.¹⁰


                                  THE KING’S MEN

The men who were principally responsible for reorganizing the Kingdom after the
conquest were all seasoned political survivors with a range of different administrative

   ⁶ See below pp. 167–8, 171.        ⁷ The law of 28 Pluviôse Year VIII (16 February 1800).
   ⁸ Those appointed to serve on the District Councils needed to have an annual income of at least
24 ducats: the qualiﬁcation doubled for communities with more than 3,000 and quadrupled for
those over 6,000. The membership of these bodies changed every four years. See Villani (1986);
Scirocco (1978).                                      ⁹ Monitore Napoletano, 16 September 1806.
  ¹⁰ Scirocco (1978); De Lorenzo (1996); De Martino (1984).
