                                    The Promise of Change                                       163

replace the complex devolved power-sharing of the ancien régime with more cen-
tralized and bureaucratic forms of power. This had been a critical issue in the civil
war that followed the founding of the Republic in 1799, where it became clear
that the struggles against feudal power in the provinces were also struggles for
greater local autonomy, not greater central power; hence the collision between the
aspirations of the republican capital and the royalist provinces.
   The crisis of the ancien régime monarchy had left these issues unresolved, but
the uncompromisingly centralist and autocratic administrative templates that the
French rulers sought to impose once again put them at the centre of the political
agenda. Which is why the short period of French rule cannot be considered
either as a clean break with the past or as a simple exercise in ‘rational’ modern
governance, as the French and their supporters like to claim. Indeed, despite
appearances the initiatives of the new government were not driven by the neatly
interlocking logic of the new regime’s promise of modernity, nor by the well-tried
administrative templates that it introduced, nor even by the remarkable zeal
shown by many of its agents. Ideology provided the models but contingent
necessities dictated the priorities. The greatest and most pressing problems facing
the new regime were direct consequences of the collapse of the ancien régime
monarchy, which was the principal reason political and administrative change in
the South took different and distinctive forms. It was also why in 1815 there could
be no turning back in the South. But that situation also offered different social
groups opportunities to develop their own agendas and negotiate their own roles,
making the South the theatre for an experiment in constructing a post-feudal
order that was contradictory but in some respects also unique.


                     ESTABLISHING THE NEW ORDER

Within weeks of their arrival in Naples, Joseph’s ministers were busy gathering
information from every source to acquire a better understanding of their new
Kingdom. They received detailed reports from the former French ambassador in
Naples, read the works and descriptions of leading authorities from Gaetano
Filangieri to Francesco Maria Galanti, and consulted with those who had rallied
to the new regime.⁴
   Joseph’s rapid tour of the provinces in April 1806 yielded a further crop of
reports, and on his instructions ‘statistical surveys’ were drawn up for selected
provinces, giving details of the population of the principal towns and the state
of trade and agriculture.⁵ In April, Antoine Christophe Saliceti, the Minister of

   ⁴ See especially De Martino (1984), 3–71.
   ⁵ See the papers and reports collected by Roederer and Miot de Melito that form the introductory
section of the papers of Joseph Bonaparte (now in the ANP, Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381 AP 2 and
ibid. 381 AP 5: Aperçu Statistique (Province de Bari, Capitanata, Molise, Terra di Lavoro, Principato
Ulteriore)).
