                                   The Promise of Change                                     165

experience. Joseph Bonaparte had been trained in the hard school of Corsican
factional politics and had become a skilled diplomat and political broker, but he had
little experience as an administrator. When he ﬁrst reached Naples, he showed a
certain amount of energy and was the ﬁrst ruler to tour his provinces. But he was
happy to delegate administrative responsibility to the men he chose—or who had
been selected by the emperor—to serve him.
    This was not a bad decision and the three senior administrators sent by
Napoleon to assist his brother were certainly not lightweights. Although they
loathed one another, they were all very well equipped to act as what Stuart Woolf
terms the vectors of the administrative mentalités of the new order.¹¹ Two of them,
André Francois Miot, and Antoine Christophe Saliceti, were chosen by the
emperor, the third, Pierre Louis Roederer, by Joseph.
    Born at Versailles in 1762, André Francois Miot was the son of a grand commis
of the ancien régime who won preferment at an early age in the Ministry of War as
had his father and uncle. Like many high-ranking but non-noble ofﬁcials, Miot
initially supported the Revolution but was soon horriﬁed by its violence.¹² He
survived the coup of Thermidor, and in February 1795 the Directory appointed
him Minister Plenipotentiary in Tuscany. Miot was already a friend of Joseph
Bonaparte and came to know both Napoleon Bonaparte and his civil commissar,
Antoine Christophe Saliceti, in Italy in 1796. In December 1796 Napoleon sent
Miot to help Joseph impose order in Corsica, but also to replace Saliceti, which
was the origin of their subsequent enmity. Miot then served as ambassador to
Turin before joining the French diplomatic mission in Holland.
    A ﬁrm supporter of the Coup of 18–19 Brumaire, Miot was well rewarded.¹³
His relations with Joseph Bonaparte grew closer and in October 1800 he was
sent again to Corsica with instructions ‘to bring the Corsicans into civilization’. In
his second mission to Corsica from March 1801 to September 1802 Miot’s task
was more simply to destroy the enemies of the Bonaparte clan, which he did
with brutal efﬁciency. The administration and courts were purged of Bonaparte’s
opponents who were imprisoned, exiled, or executed as enemies of France.¹⁴
    A proven Bonaparte loyalist, after returning to France in 1802 Miot worked on
the new Code Civil and was appointed Prefect of the left bank of the Rhine. He
was put in charge of security (haute police) during Joseph Bonaparte’s prepara-
tions for the invasion of Britain in 1805, and Napoleon chose him to be his
brother’s principal minister in Naples. Joseph made him Count of Melito, and
ﬁrst named him Minister of War then Minister of the Interior with responsibility
for reorganizing the central administration. Miot’s political and administrative
experience suited him to the task, and as a particularly fervent anti-clerical

   ¹¹ See Woolf (1991), 72–4.
   ¹² To avoid denunciation by the Jacobins, he took part in the brutal repression of the counter-
revolution in the Vendée in 1792 and then moved to the Foreign Ministry.
   ¹³ He was appointed Secretary General at the War Ministry in November 1799, then to the
Tribunat, and in September 1800 to the Council of State.
   ¹⁴ Renucci, Francesco Ottaviano Memorie e Storie di Corsica, cited in Poli (2003), 7–11.
