                                       The Promise of Change                                          169

his most trusted adviser, the Minster of War Hectore Daure, was also one of the
queen’s quite numerous lovers.²⁸ Among the other French ofﬁcials and ofﬁcers who
remained after Joseph’s departure, few had administrative skill or experience.


                                   THE NEAPOLITANS

As Murat’s relations with Paris deteriorated he was widely accused of preferring
Neapolitans to Frenchmen, but of the many accusations levelled against Joachim
Murat these were among the least well founded. He did appoint Neapolitans to a
number of key positions, but because there were no Frenchmen with the necessary
skills or experience needed to implement the many reforms left unstarted by Joseph.
   Neapolitans had also held many senior positions under Joseph Bonaparte, espe-
cially those requiring skills and local knowledge the French ofﬁcials lacked. After
the conquest Joseph’s Minister of Justice was Michelangelo Cianciulli, a leading
Neapolitan jurist whose brilliant career had brought him into the closed circle
of the togati at an early age. Cianciulli had held a series of senior government
positions under the Bourbons and played no part in the Republic, but in 1801
was appointed Crown Attorney. In February 1806 he negotiated the peaceful
entry of the French troops into the Kingdom. Joseph refused to accept his resigna-
tion and appointed him Minister of Justice, enabling Cianciulli to play an active
role in the Council of State. He drafted the law abolishing feudalism and was
responsible for reorganizing the courts and the magistracy. In 1807 Joseph made
him a privy councillor, and in May 1808 Cianciulli was nominated to preside over
the Council of State until the arrival of the new king. He resigned in 1809 and was
replaced by another former togato who had also held high ofﬁce under the
Bourbon monarchy, Giuseppe Zurlo.²⁹
   Joseph entrusted the equally delicate post of Minister of Ecclesiastical Affairs to
the Archbishop of Taranto, Giuseppe Capecelatro. Like Cianciulli, Monsignore
Capecelatro had had a distinguished career under the previous government.
A man of learning and wide interests, he became Archbishop of Taranto in 1778.
A leading opponent of papal jurisdictions in the Kingdom, Capecelatro had
studied with Genovesi at the University in Naples and was a strong believer in the
importance of practical knowledge.³⁰

   ²⁸ Born in 1771 Agar had been captured by the English in Santo Domingo but made his way back
to France in 1795 and joined Murat’s staff in 1805. In Berg he presided over the Council of State and
oversaw the sales of beni nazionali, the suppression of the religious houses, the abolition of Church
tithes, the creation of savings banks, the reorganization of the magistracy, and the introduction of the
Code Napoléon.                                                          ²⁹ Tallarico, in DBI, xxv. 167–9.
   ³⁰ Giuseppe Capacelatro (1744–1836). He deplored the fact that the newly published treatises on
agriculture were destined to ‘remain on the desks of men of letters and win applause that does not go
beyond a room full of university professors, while the peasants are the same as before’. He believed
that priests had a critical role in bringing new ideas and practical training to the rural poor. See Stella,
DBI, xviii. 445–51.
