178                                     Napoleonic Naples

operation concludes that in the process of conversion about 33% of the original
debt was written off.⁵⁴ The Neapolitans could comfort themselves only in the
knowledge that the French had come off even worse, while the burden of the losses
was of course not distributed equally.
   The conversion of the debt was very closely connected with the second of the
major operations carried out by the French rulers, the dissolution of the religious
houses and the sales of their lands, together with former crown property, as beni
nazionali. Even before the operation of converting the debt began, the government
had begun selling crown lands to raise cash to meet its day-to-day needs. In May
the Dogana delle Pecore, long the target of eighteenth-century reformers, was abol-
ished and the crown sheep-runs on the Apulian Tavoliere were put up for sale.⁵⁵
Those who had previously leased the crown grazing lands for farming were entitled
to purchase them as quit-rents (emphyteuts) on payment of an annual rent,
together with an entry fee equivalent to one year’s rent. The Monitore Napoletano
announced on 27 May that land on the Tavoliere would be sold in small plots ‘to
ensure that the land should not be accumulated in large estates owned by the
few’.⁵⁶ The proceeds would be transferred ‘to the fund that had been established to
amortize the public debt’.⁵⁷ But there were few buyers and the measure failed.
   On 1 July 1806 the Monitore Napoletano announced that the government had
decided to abolish the former ‘arrendamenti’ and accepted full responsibility for
these debts. The creditors of the arrendamenti, as well as those of the banks that
had failed and the numerous venal ofﬁces that had been abolished, were to be
incorporated into a new National Debt. All those able to show proper title would
have their credits transferred to the new Gran Libro del Debito Pubblico, on which
they were to receive interest at 5 per cent. The Monitore announced on 4 July that
the capital of the state creditors would be repaid through the sale of beni nazionali.
Recognized state creditors received certiﬁcates (cedole) to the full value of their
credit, which could be in part payment for the purchase of beni nazionali, which
were to be sold free of all feudal or other encumbrances.⁵⁸
   The following day the sale of lands belonging to the Royal Domain for a value
of 10,000,000 ducats was authorized, and then the assets and property of the
religious houses.⁵⁹ Between 1806 and 1811, 1,300 monasteries, convents, and
religious houses were closed and their lands sold by auction.⁶⁰
   ⁵⁴ Ermice (2005), 147: ‘the loss suffered by the creditors of the state can be calculated at
approximately 75 million ducats in capital’. The devaluation resulted from the reduction in interest
rates (from 5 to 3% in 1808) but above all from the fall in the face-value of the cedole, which traded at
around 18–20% of nominal values.                                                ⁵⁵ Marino (1988), 257.
   ⁵⁶ Monitore Napoletano, 27 May 1806.
   ⁵⁷ BNN: Ms SQ IV L.31: Legge sul Tavoliere di Puglia (23 May 1806).
   ⁵⁸ Monitore Napoletano, 4 July 1806.
   ⁵⁹ In a single day, on 19 September, the government suppressed seven houses of the Dominicans,
four Bernabites, two Carmelites, three Conventuals, two Theatines, two Servites, one convent of
Somaschi, and two houses of the Cassino Order: the Carthusians were also expelled from the
monastery of S. Martino. De Nicola (19 September 1806), 286.
   ⁶⁰ De Rosa (1979), 531–51.
