                                  The Promise of Change                                   179

   There were few buyers, however, even though Roederer took measures specif-
ically designed to encourage small buyers to participate. In September General
Cavaignac, the Director of the Administration of the Royal Domains, was
instructed to ensure that the estates put up for sale were divided into their
component parts, each separately valued ‘so that even the poorest classes may
become purchasers and hence increase the number of new proprietors’.⁶¹
   There were still few buyers. The main cause was shortage of cash, the depressed
state of the economy, and the doubts over the government’s future since the
Calabrian provinces were still in open revolt, while the Bourbon government in
Sicily threatened reprisals against purchasers of beni nazionali. Most of the land
sold in 1806 and 1807 was bought by a small group of wealthy purchasers closely
connected to the new government. But the revenues from the sales proved inad-
equate to meet the interest payments on the debt, which in 1806 was estimated at
about 6,000,000 ducats a year.⁶²
   For political reasons it was decided to give priority to private holders of shares
in the former arrendamenti. These were not the only creditors ‘but since the class
of small proprietors is the one that has the most numerous holding of arrenda-
menti and is a very large social group consisting of a great number of families that
would have no other means of subsistence were they to be deprived of this income
and would be reduced to begging’.⁶³
   Payment of interest to corporate share-holders was suspended, however, with
disastrous consequences for the banks and many charitable foundations. But rev-
enues were still insufﬁcient to meet even the reduced cash payments promised to
‘pensioners, giubiliati and other creditors of the Public Treasury’, and in January
1807 Roederer ordered that payments should be made on a discretionary basis.
A month later the creditors were instructed to present their claims to the ofﬁces of
the Commission for the Liquidation of the Public Debt.⁶⁴
   When Joachim Murat reached Naples in 1808 only a small part of the state’s
creditors had been registered on the new Debt, for which they received divi-
dends at 5% while the rest received nothing. Murat’s ﬁnance minister, Pignatelli
della Cerchiara, insisted that Roederer’s project was unworkable and that the
land sales could never yield enough to liquidate the remaining 50,000,000 of
capital debt. He recommended, therefore, that payments be made to all those
with recognized credits, but that the rate of interest be reduced from 5 to 3%.
When Murat did this without consulting Paris he provoked the wrath of
both the emperor and Joseph Bonaparte, but the French minister in Naples
agreed that Murat’s action meant that at least some creditors were now ﬁnally



    ⁶¹ BNN: Bancone 8 B29; Direzione Generale dei Demani, Circolare 22 September 1806.
    ⁶² See Villani (1964), 12; Ermice (2005), 30–4.
    ⁶³ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381AP 5 (doc II), Council of State, 1807.
    ⁶⁴ BNN: Bancone 8B 29; Roederer to Direzione Generale Liquidazione del Debito Pubblico.
