180                                   Napoleonic Naples

receiving some payments even though the nominal value of shares in the new
debt had fallen heavily.⁶⁵
   All the creditors of the old monarchy lost something, but the biggest losers were
the charitable foundations and the banks. It was estimated in Naples alone that
the charitable foundations lost a total of a quarter of a million ducats of annual
revenue.⁶⁶ The losses sustained by the capital’s seven private banks were similar.
In January 1807 a petition to the government claimed that the bank’s 2,000
investors, employees and their families faced utter ruin, and a commission was
appointed to investigate. It did not report until November when the government
agreed to a subsidy of only 12,000 ducats a year.⁶⁷ But the government could ﬁnd
no solution and shortly before he left Naples in May 1808 Roederer ordered the
suppression of the private banks, whose assets were assigned to the liquidation of
the public debt. The creditors of the banks lost everything, as did their employees.
Many smaller credit institutions like the rural ‘corn banks’ (monti frumentari),
established in earlier centuries to make non-usurious advances to enable peasants
to acquire seed corn, were also ruined.⁶⁸
   Private investors at least retained a part of what they were owed, although
many like the Serracapriola family had already suffered heavy losses as a result of
the impact of the ﬁnancial crisis of the Bourbon monarchy on the value of the
arrendamenti in the 1790s. However, it was a sign of the regime’s political suc-
cess that investors preferred to keep their money in the public debt than use it to
purchase beni nazionali. There were many reasons for this, but the most import-
ant was that the low market value of the cedole made it unattractive for small
investors to use them for part-payment for beni nazionali, since they had to pay
the balance in cash. The devalued cedole were nonetheless bought up in large
quantities by those who made the major purchases of beni nazionali, which also
explains why the lion’s share of the sales went to a relatively small minority of
purchasers.⁶⁹
   In both cases, the regime’s main gains were political. The restoration of a
ﬁnancial order and the increased investment in the state debt and in purchases of
beni nazionali strengthened its fragile political base. But the main beneﬁciaries
were the groups of senior administrators, wealthy nobles, and foreign ﬁnanciers
whose fortunes were being launched throughout Europe by the needs of
Napoleon’s satellite rulers. The biggest losers where those who had been most
dependent on what Roederer called the ‘patrimony of the idle’, the religious
houses and corporations whose assets had gone to pay off the debts of the ancien
régime.

   ⁶⁵ See above p. 145.       ⁶⁶ Petroni (1874), ii. 170–5; Filangieri (1947), 179–80.
   ⁶⁷ Filangieri (1947), 179.        ⁶⁸ Ibid.
   ⁶⁹ On investment in the debt, see Ermice (2005), 126–7, 150–60. Five per cent of the total num-
ber of buyers acquired over 60% of the beni nazionali sold in 1807 and 1808. In the later provincial
auctions, however, more land was acquired by an emerging class of middling provincial landowners;
see Villani (1964), pp. 156–7.
