176                                    Napoleonic Naples
one another, denouncing one another, and when the occasion arose seizing their goods.
This long war can rightly be described as something more than a civil war because it gave
rise to permanent evils that made even times of peace cruel. All that anarchy has now
ﬁnally ended, thanks to the law of August 2nd 1806, which has been welcomed not only
by the rural communities but also by the feudatories themselves.⁴⁶
    The press played an important role in promoting the modernizing projects of
the new regime, but this was no longer the free press of 1799, and the Monitore
Napoletano and the Corriere di Napoli in which Cuoco’s article appeared were
closely controlled by the government and speciﬁcally by Saliceti.⁴⁷ The govern-
ment as a result spoke with a single voice, and the grand commis of the empire
constantly insisted that reform was simply a technical matter, a matter of reason
for which the revolution had provided the models.
    Presenting his proposal for reorganizing direct taxation around a single land
tax, Roederer insisted that this would be painless and there would be no losers.
The new tax would simply distribute the ﬁscal burden more fairly, while the aboli-
tion of feudalism would turn uncertain titles into absolute private property rights
and bring vast tracts of uncultivated land into cultivation. But the greatest beneﬁt
of all would be the new spirit of enterprise that would be the principal fruit of
these changes and would transform the economy, bringing new wealth and
prosperity. Meanwhile the government would work to promote that new spirit
primarily through measures to improve education and encourage the dissemination
of practical knowledge.
    The material means needed to achieve this great transformation were already at
hand. All that was needed, Roederer argued, was to suppress the monasteries: ‘In all
these countries that have grown idle under the inﬂuence of a mild climate, the
natural fertility of the land and the modesty of their needs, to suppress the convents
is to use the patrimony of idleness to reconstruct the patrimony of the crown.’⁴⁸
    These panaceas would prove neither easy nor adequate, but when the Grande
Nation spoke the language of the Enlightenment it knew it could count on the
support of the Neapolitan supporters of reform.


                                 FINANCIAL CHAOS

When it came to it, however, the government’s actions were determined by the
ﬁnancial chaos that was both cause and consequence of the collapse of the former
monarchy. The new government had no money and no revenues, and the whole


  ⁴⁶ In Cuoco (1806–15), 255.
  ⁴⁷ Both were edited by Tito Manzi, a Tuscan and trusted conﬁdant of both Joseph Bonaparte and
Saliceti. In 1811 they were amalgamated as the Monitore delle Sicilie. See De Francesco (1997), 94–5,
and Themelly, DBI. On Manzi, see Cortese (1965), 197–222.
  ⁴⁸ Roederer (1854), iv. 19: Roederer to Joseph Bonaparte, 28 June 1808.
