174                                 Napoleonic Naples

   The situation was a little more encouraging when it came to public works and
the Minister acknowledged that the previous monarchy had undertaken an extensive
programme of road-building, primarily for military purposes. The roads were well
built and provided a good base for further development. The Bourbons had also
made a start at draining the extensive swampland in the area around Nola,
but the contractors of the enterprise had gone bankrupt and would need a
subsidy of 50,000 ducats to complete the work.
   Agriculture, industry, and commerce had all been damaged by the war, but they
suffered from more permanent forms of neglect. The ownership of the vast tracts
of land was contested between the crown, the barons, and the università, ‘render-
ing this most beautiful country inanimate and barren . . . . While every form of
industry and manufacture can be found in this realm, nothing has ever been
developed to any point of perfection because nothing is ever done with any degree
of continuity.’ Attempts had been made to improve the quality of woollen, cotton,
and silk products, but little had been accomplished.
   The longest part of Miot’s report was dedicated to education. ‘Despite the bril-
liance of the Neapolitans, the Bourbons had used every means to prevent the
expansion of education.’ The University in Naples had been founded in the twelfth
century and offered a vast range of courses but ‘today it inspires respect only by
virtue of its ancient origin’: its chairs had once been conferred on the basis of open
competition but for some time this had been replaced by a system of interim
appointments or by substitutes appointed by the Prefect. There was no system of
secular education, so that seminaries and convents continued to be the main
providers of education. The education of girls—‘that half of the human race that
is the principal inﬂuence on the other half ’—was neglected in Naples more
than anywhere else in Europe.⁴⁴
   In the style of imperial envoys past and present, Miot’s report was above all an
ideological manifesto. Poverty, ignorance, an excessive number of monks and con-
vents were all the result of bad government, misguided policies, and defective
institutions. The regime’s ﬁrst task, therefore, was to establish the principles of
rational administration and bring Neapolitan institutions in line with French
models. Rational administration would be the premise for a new partnership
between citizens and the state, between public interests and private enterprise that
would bring about the Kingdom’s regeneration and end the culture of ‘idleness
and sloth’. Once done, the natural richness of the land and the natural energies
of the people would be released and the way to prosperity and progress would
be open.
   In this textbook statement of liberal principles, the role of government was
limited but clearly deﬁned. Its task was to remove the obstacles to free enterprise
and private property by abolishing feudalism and by getting rid of the hordes of
monks and nuns and those who lived parasitically off public charities. To combat

 ⁴⁴ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381AP5: Miot’s report on public administration, 4 July 1806.
