172                                  Napoleonic Naples

turn serve as Intendent of the nearby province of L’Aquila and later in the
Terra d’Otranto.³⁸
   As well as bringing the new regime into closer contact with its supporters,
freemasonry also brought many former Neapolitan Jacobins into the new admin-
istration. This again was primarily Saliceti’s doing, as he had done before in Genoa
and Corsica. By choosing men whose careers were jeopardized by their Jacobin
past, he created a network of ofﬁcials over whose careers he had complete control.
Hence Saliceti’s preference for Neapolitans and former Jacobins and his principal
Neapolitan protégés—Pietro Colletta, Vincenzo Cuoco, Matteo Galdi, and
Giuseppe Poerio—all ﬁtted this description: he recruited them all and they all
served at one time or another as Intendents.³⁹
   Not only were these men deeply loyal to their patron, but they were also deeply
committed to the political ideals of the new regime. In addition to performing
often extraordinarily demanding administrative duties, for which they had scant
resources, they saw themselves as missionaries of the new order. In often remote
provincial postings they and their wives took initiatives that went far beyond the
immediate calls of duty, setting up elementary schools, homes for foundlings and
orphans, public charities, and colleges.⁴⁰
   The sense of missionary zeal clearly resonates in the language used by Briot in a
circular announcing the visitations that he was about to make to the Abruzzi
towns in April 1807. He was coming to them, he stated, in the name of His
Majesty and his ministers ‘to bring closer to you the means to improve your lot, to
explain the new administrative order and the new laws’. His purpose was to see at
ﬁrst hand if the new laws had been understood and properly executed, but also to
ask for advice: ‘Let the poor, the wretched and the oppressed come to me, I am
their friend and protector; but let the rich and powerful come to me also, because
I owe everyone the same justice and I am the friend of all those who truly love
their sovereign.’ He ordered that there be no extravagant welcoming ceremonies,
because he did not come to burden the communities with unnecessary expenses:
‘Welcome me like a friend as I myself would welcome you in the Intendent’s
ofﬁces.’⁴¹
   Loyal as they were, however, even the most committed of these ofﬁcials found
the workloads overwhelming. Before he left the Abruzzi, Briot himself had com-
plained bitterly of the impossibility of meeting the tasks assigned to his ofﬁce
without more ofﬁcers and funds. Pietro Colletta and Giuseppe Poerio repeated
the same complaints, but they were also alarmed by the lack of physical means to

   ³⁸ Romualdo de Sterlich had a library of more than 12,000 titles and had corresponded with all
the luminaries of the reform era. Antonio Nolli was in turn closely connected with the group of
reformers in nearby Teramo headed by Melchiorre Delﬁco (who was appointed to the Council of
State in 1806), Giuseppe de Thomasis, and the lawyer Nicola Niccolini. Mastroberti (1998), 148.
   ³⁹ De Martino (1984), 58–79.
   ⁴⁰ On Poerio see Nardella, in De Lorenzo (ed.) (2003), 663–75.
   ⁴¹ BNN: Ms Bancone 8B, 26; Intendenza di Abruzzo Citeriore, 8 April 1807.
