                                  The Promise of Change                                   173

reinforce the rhetorical appeals of the new order. Both reported that all attempts
to raise volunteer militias or to form units of regular mounted gendarmes had
failed repeatedly. The volunteers deserted, sold their horses or guns, or simply
went hunting. Others brought prostitutes into the barracks and turned the place
into a bordello.⁴²


                         THE PROMISE OF CHANGE

These problems were signs that the new regime’s modernizing mission could not
easily be accomplished, but the promise of change nonetheless took pride of place
in its rhetoric. The ﬁrst issue of the government-ﬁnanced Monitore Napoletano set
out the new government’s case as liberators and modernizers, and made the
promise of emancipation from the ancien régime the principal justiﬁcation for
the overthrow of the Bourbon monarchy:
The Nation will in a very short time witness the emergence of a new order of things that
will implant in its midst the virtues of righteousness, watchfulness, justice, generosity, hon-
esty, disinterestedness, and the love of the common good, conjoined with the sincere and
effective desire to make the Nation great and happy in deeds, not just in words.⁴³
   That message was reiterated even more forcibly by Count André Miot de
Melito in his ﬁrst report on the state of the realm delivered to the Council of State
on 4 July 1806. The Kingdom’s deplorable condition was the inevitable con-
sequence of misgovernment. Nothing demonstrated this more eloquently than
the Byzantine chaos of the ancien régime monarchy and the poverty of the
Kingdom’s inhabitants.
   Despite the huge endowments of the charitable foundations, ‘the spectacle of
indigence offered by the Kingdom of Naples might lead one to think that Religion
and Philosophy have been parsimonious towards humanity’. There was no
rational system of poor relief, nor any means for identifying paupers:
The Picture of Poverty that greets one on the streets of Naples is truly terrifying. The cries
of lamentation, the Nakedness, the Wounds and Deformities from which the eye cannot
escape render this Great City utterly disgusting.
The plight of abandoned children was especially distressing. The former govern-
ment made no provision for them,
so that these unfortunate creatures are left to die of cold and hunger or are eaten by
animals. They are entrusted to wet-nurses for a period of ﬁve years, but there is no supervi-
sion. They are destined to become a real danger to the state if their wretched condition
does not cause them to perish at an early age.


                     ⁴² Ibid.       ⁴³ Monitore Napoletano, 1 April 1806.
