                                    The Promise of Change                                      177

ediﬁce of public ﬁnance threatened to collapse. Coin of all sorts had virtually disap-
peared, the banks were effectively bankrupt, and the suspension of interest payments
on the arrendamenti threatened the creditors of the old monarchy with ruin.
   To meet its immediate cash needs the government raised a forced loan in
Naples and on punitive terms (that Roederer hid from the emperor) negotiated an
international loan in Holland.⁴⁹ But restoring ﬁnancial order and rescuing the
creditors of the ancien régime monarchy was as much a political as a ﬁnancial
necessity, and one for which France offered uncertain guidelines. The National
Convention’s attempt to ‘republicanise the national debt’ in August 1793 had
resulted in the disaster of the assignats, and the decision to cancel two-thirds of
the debt in 1797 had seriously undermined the credibility of the Directory.⁵⁰
   Reorganization of the public debt had featured high among the measures deliv-
ered for the Italian Republic in the constitution that Napoleon set out at Lyons in
1801, but because the new satellite included a large number of separate states each
with their own separate debts, this was not a model for the Kingdom of Naples
either.⁵¹ On leaving for Naples Joseph Bonaparte had requested Roederer’s pres-
ence in Naples speciﬁcally to tackle the ﬁnancial crisis. Roederer’s experience was
theoretic rather than practical, although he was familiar with the procedures
adopted in France. But in Naples the task was complicated by the lack of clear
ﬁgures and by the multitude of different forms that the ancien régime debts had
taken, of which the arrendamenti and venal ofﬁces were only the largest part.
In his history of the Kingdom’s ﬁnances Ludovico Bianchini later commented
that the ‘disorder and confusion’ of the royal accounts meant that the total size
of the debt could only be approximately calculated, but at the time of the French
invasion it was estimated to be around 105,000,000 ducats.⁵²
   The operation to redeem the old debt and establish a new consolidated debt
began on 24 August 1806 when the government recognized all existing state cred-
itors and decreed that all those with valid titles would receive certiﬁcates (cedole)
corresponding to the full value of their credit. These certiﬁcates could be tran-
scribed directly on the new Gran Libro del Debito Pubblico, which from 1 January
1807 would pay an annual interest of 5 per cent to the holder. Alternatively, the
cedole could be traded or used in part payment to purchase beni nazionali.⁵³
   This was the largest single operation undertaken by the French administration
and resulted in a complete overhaul of the ﬁnances of the ancien régime. By 1815
the Kingdom’s debt had been converted, consolidated, and reduced to less than
1,000,000 ducats, which had been achieved in part through massive sales of
Church lands and the wholesale suppression of religious houses. But the creditors
of the ancien régime had also paid a heavy price, and the most recent study of this

  ⁴⁹ Rambaud (1911), 336.          ⁵⁰ Ermice (2005), 48.          ⁵¹ Ibid. 161, 147.
  ⁵² Which must be set against total annual revenues that by the end of the 1790s were around 18
million ducats—of which some 6 million went directly to the feudatories, leaving 12 million for the
government, of which 3.2 million were devoted to servicing the debt. Bianchini (1839), 404, cited in
Ermice (2005), 31.                                                           ⁵³ Ermice (2005), 46.
