                                 The Promise of Change                                  175

the culture of sloth the government acknowledged, however, special responsibility
for promoting education, which alone could provide the people with the know-
ledge and skills to live independently. Once these conditions were met, the forces
of free enterprise and market incentives would be sufﬁcient to create a virtuous
new cycle of production and prosperity.
   The healing and unifying quality of the new order was also carefully empha-
sized. Roederer explained to the Council of State how a single land tax would
unite the nation and ‘transform a Populace into a People’:
The tax on land will bind the monarchy most closely to the landowners, and the landowners
most closely to the monarchy . . . it lays the foundations of Government in the prosperity of
Agriculture.
  The new land tax would be the most tangible sign that all those who owned
property are equal. By making all subject to a single tax it would ﬁnally
bring to an end the state of unspoken warfare that for so long has set the Monarchy in con-
ﬂict with the Nobility and the People. By stripping the Nobility of an immunity that has
damaged the interests of the Prince, Your Majesty may at a stroke bring peace to the
People, the Nobility and the entire Kingdom . . . so that the populace may ﬁnally become
a people.
   The proportional tax on land, Sire, will make it possible for Your Majesty to make one
strong nation out of the two nations that have hitherto confronted and weakened one
another. These two nations consist of the mighty and the lowly, who in every other
European state are linked by intermediary classes that are so ﬁnely graduated that no-one
can tell precisely the point where the mighty begin, or the middling sort end. This system
of society is the dominant feature of modern civilization: it has brought with it enlighten-
ment and a new sense of decency and honour to even the humblest social orders, and ideas
of decency and honour that have given all men a new sense of dignity and to all States a
new sense of power: in short, a new system of society that has created new nations and
amongst them one single Great Nation’.⁴⁵
   The greatest beneﬁt bestowed by the new order was, course, the abolition of
feudalism and on 16 August 1806 the Corriere di Napoli carried an article
by Vincenzo Cuoco, who had recently returned from Milan, celebrating the law
of 2 August:
For ﬁfty years the kingdom of Naples has been lacerated by a civil war which was waged as
ﬁercely in the tribunals of the Sacro Consiglio and of the Regia Camera [della Sommaria] as
in the ﬁelds of Apulia and the mountains of the Abruzzi. In our tribunals there were no
fewer than thirty thousand suits of litigation between rural communities and their barons
waiting to be heard. There were no fewer than thirty thousand persons in the kingdom
engaged either directly or indirectly in sustaining, fomenting and managing these suits.
The whole nation was divided into two rival parts, and even if the force exercised by
the government prevented them killing one another, it could not stop them from hating


                          ⁴⁵ Ibid., Report by Roederer, 26 July 1806.
