                                  The Promise of Change                                   171

for associating leading ﬁgures from the previous regime with the new order and
for bringing in new men.³³
   Much more important, in practical terms, was the presence of Neapolitans in
key intermediary roles, especially in local administration. This was Saliceti’s
domain and nearly all the key posts in local administration were held by his men.
The government’s senior representative in the newly created provinces was the
Intendent and of those appointed to this new position only three were
Frenchmen: Joseph-Pierre Briot, Joseph Charron, and Simone Collonna de Leca.
Charron was a protégé of the emperor, but Briot and Colonna were not only
Saliceti’s men but part of the Corsican connection as well.³⁴
   Their careers indicate what it took to succeed in the risky world of imperial
administration. Joseph-Pierre Briot would become a major ﬁgure in the adminis-
tration in Naples, but was no admirer of Napoleon. A prominent former Jacobin,
he had escaped deportation to Guyana after opposing the Coup of 18–19
Brumaire only because his patrons included Lucien and Joseph Bonaparte as well
as the imperial minister Chaptal.³⁵ He got the chance to show his submission to
the new regime when he was sent to reorganize public administration in Elba in
1801. Good results in Elba found him a year later assisting André Miot in the task
of ‘civilizing’ Corsica. But he came to Naples with a recommendation not from
Miot, but from his patron Chaptal to Saliceti.³⁶
   The importance of the Corsican connection was emphasized by the presence
of the only other French Intendent, Simone Colonna, who was another of
Saliceti’s Corsican associates. Without exception the French administrators were
also freemasons, a bond that underwrote even the Corsican connection since
Joseph Bonaparte and Saliceti had been initiated in the same Corsican lodge
in 1793.³⁷
   The masonic connection played a central role in the imperial networks of
patronage, preferment, and recruitment, but was also a means for the French
administrators to identify their likely local supporters in newly conquered territories.
This was certainly the case in Naples and when in August 1806 Joseph-Pierre
Briot, for example, was appointed Intendent of Abruzzo Citeriore the leading
families in Chieti who indicated their support for the new regime were all were
freemasons. All had been prominent in the reform movement and had supported
the Republic, and many would serve the new regime in high positions. They
included the leading landowners in the province, Pietro and Romualdo de
Sterlich, and Baron Antonio Nolli, who in 1788 had founded the local Patriotic
Society. Pietro de Sterlich had been a friend of Gaetano Filangieri, and would in

  ³³ Castellano (2004), 96.       ³⁴ De Martino (1984), 123–8.
  ³⁵ Mastroberti (1998), 105–27. Pierre Joseph Briot, a former deputy from the Doubs who had
opposed Bonaparte’s Coup of 18 Brumaire; he was appointed Chief Commissar on Elba in 1803 and
then Intendent ﬁrst of Abruzzo Cit (1 August 1806) and of Calabria Cit (7 July 1807) by Joseph
Bonaparte. Murat made him a Councillor of State.                                  ³⁶ Ibid. 137.
  ³⁷ Ibid. 352.
