                                    The Promise of Change                                       185

   Once a great kingdom, Cuoco argued, the decline of Naples was the con-
sequence of centuries of corruption, barbarism, and the neglect of education,
so that:
the natural fertility of its soils has become a source of indolence, and the natural energies of
its people have become the cause of ferocious and destructive passion . . . . Only education
will enable us to retain our ancient greatness and ancient glory. Nature has bestowed on us
all the capital we need. We do not lack for industries, but we do lack the knowledge to
develop them; yet this, too, education can provide for us.
Concluding with a now familiar theme, he insisted too that education was the only
means to overcome the abyss that divided the nation into two different peoples:
‘The purpose of educating the masses is to make possible communication
between the many and the few.’⁸⁴
   In a separate report, Cuoco had shown that the primary schools to which Zurlo
had referred existed only in Minister of the Interior’s fantasy. However, he recom-
mended that such schools should be established in every comune and that they
should teach writing, elementary mathematics, and morality: ‘Morality is society’s
ﬁrst need.’ Schools should be free, and teachers should be trained in the methods
of Pestalozzi, of whom Cuoco was a great admirer. He also held that schooling
should be provided for both sexes, although addressing their different needs:
‘Women are and always will be our most powerful educators. But to educate
women in the same way as men would be to upset the order of nature, just as to
educate all women in the same way would upset the order of society.’⁸⁵
   Cuoco’s project and his recommendation for the creation of a Directorate of
Public Education was rejected by the Council of State, ostensibly because it
differed too much from the French model but in reality because his patron, the
Archbishop of Taranto, had been replaced as Minister of the Interior by Giuseppe
Zurlo. Zurlo was no friend of Cuoco and he promptly commissioned a new report
drafted by another former Jacobin, Matteo Galdi, and ﬁnally adopted in
December 1811.⁸⁶
   Its implementation was the responsibility of the local authorities, however,
which immediately gave rise to loud protest from the local communities that were
to pay the costs of the schools and their teachers.⁸⁷ Of the new schools that
were opened most were simply classes run by the parish priest. As late as 1828
there were still only twenty-nine schools for boys in Naples, with 1,636 pupils,
and twenty-three schools for girls with 3,000 pupils.⁸⁸ The royalist observers who
at the time of the Restoration in 1815 claimed that the French regime’s great
school reform existed only on paper were probably not far wrong.⁸⁹

   ⁸⁴ ‘Rapporto al Re Murat e progetto di decreto per l’organizzazione della Pubblica Istruzione’, in
Scritti Vari (Cortese and Nicolini, 1924), ii. 3–95.
   ⁸⁵ Cuoco (1809), ii. 3–95. See also Gentile (1909/1964).
   ⁸⁶ On Galdi’s report, see Lupo (1999), 249–99.         ⁸⁷ Cuoco (1809), 410–15.
   ⁸⁸ See Fusco and Nicodemo in Massafra (ed.) (1988), 429–41.           ⁸⁹ See p. 283 below.
