                                         10
      A Kingdom Remodelled? The Provinces
                and the Capital

                       CONFLICTING AGENDAS

The promise of change was premised on the idea that enlightened government
and rational administration would bring about the Kingdom’s long-awaited
regeneration. The logic was clear and even compelling. The abolition of feudalism
would free property of the constraints that had prevented the exploitation of what
were still considered to be the Kingdom’s rich natural resources. Rational govern-
ment would give rise to a new sense of unity and bring into being for the ﬁrst time
a true partnership between public and private interests:
   ‘What is administration properly understood’, asked Vincenzo Cuoco, ‘if not
the art of ensuring that the wealth, the talents, the moral sensibilities of private
citizens can work together for the public good?’¹
   Redressing the historic imbalances between the capital and the provinces that
had been a central theme of the reform writers of the previous decades was a
primary mission of this project. But the difﬁculties facing such an enterprise were
huge, and certainly not made any easier by the severe economic hardships result-
ing from the prolonged interruption of Mediterranean trade. But even in more
favourable circumstances the obstacles would have been great, while the means at
the disposal of the new government were slender. It could barely fund even the
skeletal provincial administration carefully put in place by Saliceti, and local
administration continued to depend on a handful of desperately overworked
Intendents and Sub-intendents. Save only for a few prominent exceptions, the local
notables showed little enthusiasm for being co-opted to perform administrative
tasks they considered to be onerous and which carried no corresponding rights of
consultation.²
   There were deeper contradictions too. Behind the rhetoric, the government
had clear but undisclosed ﬁscal objectives. The provinces were not only to bear the
full of cost of their regeneration, but were in addition to carry a larger share of
the expenses of the state. In 1812 Mosbourg acknowledged that this had indeed

               ¹ Cuoco (1806–15), 227.      ² Scirocco (1987), 102–25.
