182                               Napoleonic Naples

be registered as the basis for the individual assessment of the fondiaria.⁷⁴ When
the provincial councils ﬁnally met in August 1808, they were unanimous in
protesting the arbitrary and unfair ways in which the new tax had been assessed
and distributed. Alarmed, the government revised the procedure to prevent the
councils from protesting in the future, but re-issued the original assessments.


                       ADMINISTERING JUSTICE

As well as calling for a reorganization of central and local government, the aboli-
tion of feudalism in August 1806 required a complete reorganization of the magis-
tracy and the administration of justice. The closure of the ancien régime tribunals
had caused utter confusion, but in this case the French templates were of little use
and the magistrates were in no mood to cooperate. They had been one of the most
powerful corporations of the ancien régime, and with the abolition of the tribunals
they had lost all their former power and privileges. They staunchly opposed all
attempts at reform and like the clergy their unbending hostility to civil divorce
made the introduction of the French Code Civil impossible. Napoleon would not
make concessions, so there was little room for manoeuvre. Joseph Bonaparte
played successfully for time, pleading the danger of a new Santafede if civil divorce
was imposed by force. In the meantime the administration of justice remained
suspended.
   In June 1806 Miot de Melito had warned the Council of State of the urgent need
to reorganize the administration of justice immediately.⁷⁵ The Minister of Justice,
Michelangelo Cianciulli, made a start by sacking the senior judges, all of whom
were committed royalists appointed after the fall of the Republic.⁷⁶ But replacing
the ancien régime tribunals was a much more complex affair and since nothing
could be done without the assistance of the magistrates, nothing was done.
   The situation was also complicated by the fact that the closure of the ancien
régime tribunals meant that their former employees, almost all of them in Naples,
were now without work and a potentially dangerous source of discontent.⁷⁷ To
remedy this the former employees were retained on full or part pay and in
December 1807 the Minister of Justice ordered that they should be given ﬁrst pri-
ority for positions in the new courts and those unable to work because of age
should be given pensions. But shortly after becoming Minister of Justice,
Giuseppe Zurlo still felt it necessary to issue another circular in May 1809 to ‘all
the subaltern ofﬁcers of the former Tribunals and Jurisdictions in Naples that
have been abolished’ to assure them that the king was deeply aware of their
difﬁcult conditions and while seeking a solution had set up a Commission of
           ⁷⁴ BNN: Ms Bancone 8B 25: Decree 12 August 1808.
           ⁷⁵ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381 AP 5 (Doc 2).
           ⁷⁶ BNN: Bancone 8B 28, Decreto 6 March 1806: nomina dei magistrati.
           ⁷⁷ As De Nicola constantly warned in his diaries.
