188                                 Napoleonic Naples

happened and that the entire increase in state revenue since 1808 had come from
the provinces, much of it in forms of deliberately disguised taxation.³ Similar ﬁs-
cal motives lay behind the creation of Zurlo’s Feudal Commission, since the divi-
sion of the former feudal estates and the common lands was designed both to
provide the local communities with a secure tax base and at the same time to
increase the numbers contributing to the new land tax.
   To complicate matters further, the capital also posed problems that could not
safely be ignored. To bring greater equality and wealth to the provinces, the govern-
ment was committed to removing the city’s economic and ﬁscal privileges. But most
of these had been abolished after 1799, and those that remained proved difﬁcult to
remove. Political imperatives also were at war with economic rationale. No less than
their predecessors, the new regime needed a capital that reﬂected both their own
glory and that of the empire, while the sheer size of the city meant that any moves
that seriously prejudiced the livelihood of its citizens would be very dangerous. As it
was, the impact of the war and prolonged commercial recession on the capital had
been exacerbated by the unemployment caused by the abolition of the tribunals
of the ancien régime, by the crisis of the banks and the charitable foundations, and
by the competition from French placemen for white-collar jobs. Faced by these
dangerous realities, the government was soon forced to look for ways to restore
rather than further reduce the capital’s former privileges.


                     THE PROVINCIAL ASSEMBLIES

The law of 8 August 1806 provided for the establishment of local and provincial
assemblies for each of the fourteen mainland provinces.⁴ The provincial assem-
blies consisted of up to twenty members nominated by the Intendents from lists
of landowners in each province, and were to meet once a year for up to twenty
days.⁵ These assemblies had no consultative function, but they were charged with
the task of distributing the land tax quotas set for each province and reporting on
local conditions and needs.
   When they ﬁrst met in August 1808, the government was taken aback by the
freedom with which the assemblies expressed their views. The most frequent sub-
ject of complaint was, not surprisingly, the new tax quotas, and even the Duke of
Canzano, Intendent of one of the most prosperous provinces in the Kingdom,
the Terra di Bari, remarked with exasperation that the allocation for his province
  ³ See Chapter 8.
  ⁴ Subdivided into 50 districts, 494 circondarj, and 1,732 comuni. ASN: Min. di Polizia, 1a F
152(2), Parlamento Nazionale 1820; Rapporto al Parlamento Nazionale sulla situazione del
Ministero degli Interni, 23 October 1820, p. 7.
  ⁵ Each town was administered by a Decurionato, whose members were elected by the principal
property owners and then approved by the Intendent: the model was the French conseils des
départments, arrondissements, cantons et communes of the Constitution of Year VIII. De Martino
(1984), 307.
