184                                  Napoleonic Naples

the courts that would put them into practice had also to be created. That hap-
pened only after Francesco Ricciardi replaced Zurlo as Minister of Justice and
for reasons that had little to do with Murat but a great deal to do with Saliceti
and with Ricciardi.
   Ricciardi, who did have wide support amongst the magistrates, had previously
refused to accept the ofﬁce of Minister of Justice on the grounds of Saliceti’s
systematic interference in judicial affairs.⁸² Once Saliceti was gone, however,
Ricciardi and his fellow jurists saw the opportunity to turn the introduction of the
new Codes and courts to their own advantage and to write a script that would give
the magistracy powerful new roles in the new post-feudal order.


                                     EDUCATION

Amid these pressing administrative and ﬁnancial emergencies, the time and
energy devoted to education are at ﬁrst sight surprising. But that would be to mis-
take both the ideological and practical importance of education in the new
regime’s modernizing project. Not only was education a subject on which the
French and their Neapolitan supporters spoke the same language, but it also posed
pressing administrative issues since the wholesale suppression of the religious
houses had removed the existing source of popular education. Since the govern-
ment had neither the means nor the intention of taking responsibility for the
provision of education, it needed to make a strong moral case for delegating these
responsibilities to local administration.
   In 1806 Miot de Melito seized on the deﬁciencies of every form of education to
denigrate the former monarchy and made popular education one of the priorities
of the new regime. Three years later Zurlo boasted of the progress that had been
made in the ﬁrst years of the new order. Primary schools for boys and girls had
been established in every comune in the Kingdom under the supervision of the
new Intendents, and six new colleges had been opened in Naples and attended
by 160 pupils. Two new schools for girls had also been founded, one in Naples and
the other in Aversa under the patronage of the queen, where useful arts were
taught in addition to religion. Nine new chairs had been established at the
University of Naples.⁸³
   In the same year, 1809, a commission consisting of the Archbishop of
Taranto, Melchiorre Delﬁco, the Bishop of Lettere and Gragnano, Tito Manzi,
and Vincenzo Cuoco presented a ﬁrst proposal for reorganizing public educa-
tion to the Council of State. The report was written by Cuoco and in it he set
out why public education was the premise for the regeneration of the
Neapolitan nation.


           ⁸² Nicolini (1901), p. xliv.     ⁸³ Zurlo (1809), in Lalli (n.d.), 63–4.
