                                   A Kingdom Remodelled?                                      189

bore no relation to either the distribution or the productivity of the land in
individual comunes.⁶
   After the new taxes, the most frequent cause of lament was the devastating
economic and commercial impact of over a decade of warfare that had brought
overseas trade to a standstill. Everywhere the war had exacerbated existing
problems and brought ruin to the wealthiest and the poorest provinces alike.
The mountainous frontier province of L’Aquila had ‘no Sea, no Agriculture, no
Manufactures, no Crafts, and only some small Commerce with the neighbouring
Papal State from which it receives little in return for sweat and labour except
devastating afﬂictions and epidemics’. But as a result of the political upheavals in
the Papal State, the annual value of trade across the border had fallen from a
million to less than 80,000 ducats a year.⁷
   The Provincial Council of Basilicata, which included Potenza, Matera, and
Lagonegro, also stressed ‘the unhappy state in which this Province presently ﬁnds
itself because of the collapse of trade’ and the impossibility of meeting the quotas set
for the new land tax.⁸ This was another mountainous province ‘that generally has
the appearance of a vast expanse of naked scree, with no settlements and no wood-
land and little farm land’. It produced some grain, but not enough to meet local
needs, and a little wine. The population was healthy but scarce. There were some
primary schools, but no teachers and a provincial college was needed to train teach-
ers so that they could instruct the young in ‘morality, Logic, History, Geography,
Latin, Mathematics and some notions of experimental Physics’. There were numer-
ous small Luoghi Pii (charitable foundations) but they lacked adequate funds.⁹
   Conditions in the Province of Capitanata, which included Foggia and much of
the Tavoliere together with the lands formerly subject to the Dogana delle Pecore,
were more varied. In the poorest district of Larino ‘Agriculture is in its infancy,
and since there is no School of Agriculture its most rudimentary principles are
unknown’. The government was called on to reduce taxes, provide credit, and set
up schools of agriculture and animal husbandry, or at least ensure that in each
comune there was someone ‘able to teach a farmer’s catechism and on certain days
in the year teach the inhabitants how to sow corn, plant vines, make wine and oil
and all other matters touching on the science of Agriculture’.¹⁰ But the inhab-
itants of Serracapriola and Chieuti were ‘ricchi’ and as well as good land there was
plentiful livestock.¹¹
   Even in the formerly prosperous commercial province of Apulia, the news was
terrible. ‘There is a shortage of farm labourers and no one to work the land . . . prices
   ⁶ ASN: Min. delle Finanze: f. 2864 (Fondiaria 1808/9); Intendente Terra di Bari to Min. Finanze,
6 December 1808.
   ⁷ Ibid.; Processi Verbali dei Consigli Generali di Provincia: 2nd Abruzzo Ulteriore (L’Aquila).
   ⁸ Ibid.; Consiglio Provinciale di Basilicata (Matera, Potenza, Lagnegro), 25 October 1808.
   ⁹ Ibid.; Consiglio Distrettuale di Lagonegro (Basilicata), 7 October 1808.
  ¹⁰ ASF: Consigli Provinciali e Distrettuali (Busta 1), Processi Verbali, October 1808.
  ¹¹ ASN: Min. delle Finanze: f. 2864 (Fondiaria 1808/9); Consiglio Provinciale di Capitanata:
Busta 1, 27 September 1808.
