190                                  Napoleonic Naples

have collapsed and all internal and external trade is at a standstill.’ The situation
had been exacerbated by brigandage ‘a Hydra that is constantly reborn in this
kingdom’. The brigand’s victims ‘are the poor and the rich alike, the master and
the servant, but the latter, to avoid the brigand’s fury, deserts the plough and ﬂees,
leaving the ﬁelds unattended’. Another formerly prosperous province, the Terra di
Bari, had also been ruined by the collapse of maritime trade. Prices had dropped
to less than half their pre-1806 average, rents had fallen, land was uncultivated,
and because of the fall in prices crops were left to rot in the ﬁelds.¹²
   Many provinces took the opportunity to appeal for assistance. In Capitanata,
the problem was a plague of insects (bruchi) that destroyed wheat, fruit, and veget-
ables and brought ruin to the prosperous city of Cerignola and to the region
around Foggia and Lucera. The Provincial Council appealed for help to encourage
the peasants to plant trees to protect the soil from heavy rains, to introduce horse
breeding, and also for the land tax to be reduced. But the report concluded with
resignation that none of these things would have an effect ‘given the complete
absence of trade’.¹³
   The Provincial Council for Calabria Ultra lamented ‘The unhappy state of
the Province which has been a Theatre of War and has had to be host to an army
come to ﬁght the Enemy and maintain public order’. The council also underlined
‘the sad consequences of Brigandage which has seriously damaged the incomes
of the landowners, resulted in destruction that has impoverished the Province,
brought internal and external trade to a halt, and caused a heavy increase in the
cost of local administration’.¹⁴
   Only in the provinces nearer the capital were conditions somewhat better. In the
Upper Principato, the condition of agriculture was good but there were serious
concerns about the unregulated clearing of woodland and hillsides for farming
because this caused frequent landslides that made the lower lying land unﬁt even
for pasture. There were large numbers of sheep in the province, but the wool woven
locally was coarse. The province also lacked a decent road, and there were no
bridges to cross the rivers Sebeto and Calore at Altavilla and Montemiletto.¹⁵
   Although varied, the economy of the Campania, the province neighbouring
the capital, was far from ﬂourishing. It produced much silk, but it was of poor
quality because of the ‘rough traditional methods’ of throwing and reeling
the yarn. The peasants lacked training and needed to be encouraged to use
Piedmontese organzine spinning machines that would double the value of the
yarn, the best of which was spun by women from Sorrento, Piano di Sorrento, and
Massa Lubrense. The ﬁshing industry was in deep crisis because of the war,
and because the ﬁsh markets in Naples were controlled by ‘usurious merchants’.


  ¹² ASN: Min. delle Finanze: f. 2864 (Fondiaria 1808/9); Consiglio Provinciale di Terra di Bari,
Presidente Duca d’Andria, 6 December 1808.                                              ¹³ Ibid.
  ¹⁴ Ibid.; Consiglio Provinciale Calabria Ulteriore, 17 October 1808.
  ¹⁵ Ibid.; Consiglio Provinciale di Principato Ultra (Montefusco), 8 October 1808.
