                                  The Promise of Change                                  183

Beneﬁcence to relieve the distress of ‘a group of persons whose indigence is before
our eyes every day’.⁷⁸
   Saliceti tried to resolve the problems posed by the suspension of the tribunals
by setting up ad hoc tribunals modelled on the special military tribunals estab-
lished in 1806 to administer civil and criminal law, but the magistrates refused
to serve on them.⁷⁹ In May 1807 the ﬁrst general reform of the ancien régime
tribunals was attempted. The former Sacro Reale Collegio was renamed the High
Court of Cassation (Gran Corte di Cassazione) and divided into two sections, the
ﬁrst of which was responsible for revising laws and making proposals to the gov-
ernment. The same decree established the lesser tribunals of appeal and the new
provincial tribunals, nominated royal procurators to all the courts, and appointed
the justices of the peace, the ﬁrst rung of the judiciary, in the provinces. Again the
magistrates refused to cooperate.
   The complaint raised by the provincial council in Capitanata when it met in
the late summer of 1808 gives an idea of the state of confusion that had spread to
the entire Kingdom:
Justice is in total chaos and confusion. A new Code that has not yet been issued and new
procedures that are unknown to those who must follow them have thrown the administra-
tion of Justice into chaos, and swings without direction between old and new in ways that
prevent any judgment being reached and gives rise to arbitrary decisions that offend
the liberty of the citizen. A solemn instruction to all judges to follow the new Codes of
Criminal, Civil and Procedural law is sorely needed.⁸⁰
   On 20 May 1808 a new ‘organic law’ intended to establish the deﬁnitive
administration of justice in the Kingdom based on the system of tribunals set out
in the French constitution of Year VIII had been introduced. The Council of State
was designated the supreme court of justice, below which the Cassation Court was
the highest court of appeal. The High Court of Accounts (Gran Corte dei Conti)
was responsible for overseeing all public expenditure, and new high criminal
courts (Gran Corti Criminali) were established in Naples and the provinces to
replace the former feudal courts. In January 1809 a new Tribunal of Commerce
replaced the courts of the trade guilds that had been abolished in 1808.⁸¹
   The magistrates would have none of Cianciulli’s proposals, however, and
their outraged protests forced his resignation a year later. He was brieﬂy
replaced in May 1809 by Giuseppe Zurlo, but he had no support either. In the
same year, after a ﬁnal unsuccessful attempt to exclude civil divorce, Murat
bowed to the emperor’s insistence and adopted the French legal codes. This was
only the start, however, since the new legal codes had ﬁrst to be translated and

   ⁷⁸ BNN: Bancone 8B 28, Circolare 10 March 1809.         ⁷⁹ Nicolini (1901), pp. xl–xliii.
   ⁸⁰ ASF: B.1 Consigli provinciali e distrettuali. Processi verbali, Consiglio provinciale di
Capitanata 1809.
   ⁸¹ See Feola, in Massafra (ed.) (1988), 487–506; Abbamonte, in ibid. 506–18, and Greco in
ibid. 533–48.
