                                  A Kingdom Remodelled?                                     193

hunting was imported. The Silo foundry did produce ammunition for muskets,
but attempts to cast cannon had been unsuccessful, as had the attempts at making
steel, while the small quantity of metal blades produced was of extremely poor
quality. Gunpowder was made in the arsenal at Torre Annunziata, however, using
nitre mined in the Kingdom.²¹
   In 1806, M. Riche of Parma was appointed Inspecteur des manufactures and
commissioned to survey every branch of manufacture to enable the government to
decide ‘what was needed to revive and reform each branch’.²² His report stated that
the quality of the products of the royal porcelain factory at Capodimonte was
poor, the methods of production were unsatisfactory and uneconomical, and
the prices too high. A great deal of lace was also made, especially in Naples,
but this was done almost entirely at home by women without any form of organ-
ization. The demand for these products from both the court and the Church was
considerable, but in this case, too, local production was not competitive with
foreign patterns and styles.²³
   The silk industry had been the subject of numerous government interventions
to improve the quality of silk yarn in the ﬁnal years of Bourbon rule,²⁴ and the
director of the Royal Silk Factory explained that the Bourbons had wanted the S.
Leucio factory to be a model to encourage the adoption of the Piedmontese
method for spinning silk throughout the Kingdom. The traditional methods of
throwing and twisting silk ﬁbre relied on ‘reeling done by the hands of peasants
grown rough and calloused by ploughing and digging, which damaged the ﬁbres
and halved their value’. But the new spinning techniques threatened to put domestic
spinners out of work and had provoked much popular opposition.²⁵
   The reports showed that the decline of the silk industry had much older
origins. A century earlier about two-thirds of the population of Catanzaro had
been engaged in the silk industry, but now less than 4,000 ducats were invested in
the industry in the entire province and ‘a large number of men and women remain
without work and rot in idleness and poverty’. The causes were lack of capital and
the failure to improve techniques (especially in dyeing), which had caused quality
to decline. The industry had also proved unable to respond to changing fashions
as cotton replaced silk for summer wear and damask silk cloth was less in demand
for winter clothing and furnishings.²⁶
   Not only raw materials but also skilled and semi-skilled labour were in short
supply. Referring to the warships to be built under the terms of the Treaty of
Bayonne, the Foreign Minister di Gallo pointed out that there were less than 700
or 800 workers familiar with shipbuilding in the whole Kingdom and that all the

  ²¹ Ibid., f. 5067, ‘Prospetto delle manifatture da stabilirsi nel Regno di Napoli’ (no date but
1807). On the Calabrian iron works, see also Rubino (1978).
  ²² Ibid., f. 5066, Min. dell’Interno to M. Riche, 29 August 1806.
  ²³ Ibid., Rapport de l’Inspecteur des manufactures, 29 October 1806, 2 December 1806.
  ²⁴ Ibid., 29 May 1805.           ²⁵ Ibid., Tortora al Re, 23 May 1806.
  ²⁶ Ibid., ‘Memoria del abate Gregorio Araccri sull’industria della seta in Catanzaro’.
