                                    A Kingdom Remodelled?                                          197

was engaged in a major project to drain the extensive marshlands along the
Volturno River and in the region around Fondi:
Amongst the many misadventures that the negligence and ignorance of man has brought
to this most beautiful and fertile part of Italy, the most pitiful are the vast swamps that have
rendered huge areas uninhabitable and prevent any form of farming.⁴²
   Responsibility for directing these projects was delegated to two new agencies, the
General Directorates of Bridges and Roads and Woodlands and Waterways.⁴³ Both
imitated French models and were examples of the interventionist administrative
mentality of the new regime. But both suffered severely inadequate funding.
   Much was promised but little was done, while the provinces protested that the
funds they paid for public works were frequently put to other uses. The Provincial
Council of Capitanata, for example, complained in 1809 that the province had
raised 180,000 ducats in taxes to repair to the road that linked Apulia to Naples and
the bridge at Bovino, but the work had never been started.⁴⁴ Two years later the
same road was still blocked by a landslide, and the bridge at Bovino had still not
been repaired either. In other cases the funds never materialized. In Molise, Joseph
Bonaparte allocated beni nazionali worth 40,000 ducats to fund the building of
a new road to link Campobasso with Naples, which the Provincial Council had
agreed was the province’s greatest need. But the project was never started because
there were no buyers for the beni nazionali in question and the Provincial Council
could not accept the offer of a loan because it had no means to repay it.⁴⁵
   A report drawn up in 1813 by Vincenzo Cuoco showed that little progress had
been made on the land reclamation projects started under the previous monarchy,
and that in many cases the situation had deteriorated. Major reclamation operations
had been started, for example, in the ﬂooded territory known as the Vico di
Pantanto situated on the southern bank of the Volturno River between Cunia and
Castelvolturno that had been under crown administration since before 1806,
and where the Bourbon administrator Martucci had begun a number of drainage
operations. The main problem was that there was no general plan for the area as a
whole, without which, Cuoco argued, time and money were being wasted. In other
cases the rulings of the Feudal Commission had disastrous effects on projects that
had already been started. As an example Cuoco cited the Eboli plain, which in
technical terms was relatively easy to drain, but the whole operation had been jeop-
ardized when the Feudal Commission divided up the properties on which drainage
operations had already begun, so that the swamps were taking over again.⁴⁶
   The relative neglect of the provinces was evident from the fact that the entire bud-
get for provincial public works in 1815 was a mere 55,000 ducats⁴⁷—a reﬂection of

      ⁴² Zurlo, in Lalli (n.d.), 69.
      ⁴³ Direzionale Generale de Ponti e Strade and the Direzione Generale delle Acque e Boschi.
      ⁴⁴ ASF: Processi Verbali, Consiglio Distrettuale di Foggia 1809 (B 1).
      ⁴⁵ Cuoco (1806–15), ii. 202–3.           ⁴⁶ Ibid.
      ⁴⁷ ASN: Min. di Polizia (1a) f.152/2: Rapporto al Parlamento Nazionale 1820, 10.
