                                    A Kingdom Remodelled?                                        195

heavy new administrative costs with which the provinces were being burdened.
There was particulatly deep resentment at the costs for maintaining public order
that had previously been the responsibility of the baronial and royal courts, the
new Provincial Guards, and local gendarmerie set up in each town to replace
the previous baronial sbirri.³²
    Both had been organized by General Rader, who had previously established
similar gendarmeries in Corsica and in the Kingdom of Italy.³³ The Provincial
Legions replaced the temporary Military Commissions set up immediately after
the conquest, and were responsible ‘for maintaining public order and security, for
keeping exact lists of all vagabonds, unemployed persons, disturbers of the peace,
those guilty of riotous behaviour or carrying prohibited weapons, while watching
out for Enemies of the State, those guilty of spreading false rumours and causing
Alarm, and all those suspected of Brigandage who must be arrested’.³⁴
    There was no rush to recruit, however, and in June 1806 General de Gambs
ordered every comune in Abruzzo Citra to draw up a list of ‘volunteers’, adding that
‘His Majesty wishes it known that being enrolled in the Legion will be considered a
necessary condition for all those seeking any civil or military employment.’³⁵ Still
no response, and a month later De Gambs threatened to impose conscription on
all towns that failed to supply the required number of volunteers.³⁶
    The carrying of ﬁrearms was prohibited, and each town was required to main-
tain a prison ‘with windows, iron doors and a gate with three heavy locks’. The
prison guards should be able to read and write, and if there were no former feudal
sbirri to perform this duty, army veterans could be employed. But few towns could
afford this and the instructions were soon countermanded.
    There were frequent complaints, however, that the Provincial Guards and the
gendarmes were the main cause of public disorder, which was tacitly acknow-
ledged in 1812 when the commander of the Gendarmerie Reale delle Due Sicilie
reminded his ofﬁcers that the Gendarmerie existed to protect property and
persons, that authorization from a magistrate was required before searching
houses or private property, and that the civil authorities should be present when
deserters or other delinquents were arrested. Full written reports had to be made
regularly of all arrests and other activities, and it was strictly forbidden for
gendarmes to lend their weapons ‘to friends who want to use them for hunting’.
The general concluded by pointing out that it had been discovered that many
members of the Guard were draft-dodgers, while others ‘were accompanied
by women who are certainly not their legitimate spouses’.³⁷
   ³² Law of 8 October 1806.
   ³³ Regulations stipulated that recruits should have four years service in a Regiment of the Line, be
at least 5 ft. 5 in. in height, be able to read and write, be of ‘good moral standing and have a decent
public reputation’. Pay was 136 ducats a year for an infantryman and 245 ducats for the cavalry, with
higher rates for sergeants and corporals. BNN: Ms. Bancone 8: ‘Gendarmerie Napoletana’, 24 March
1806.                   ³⁴ Ibid., Commissione Temporanea di Alta Polizia, Cerignola, September 1806.
   ³⁵ Ibid., Proclama del Gen di Divisione Daniel de Gambs, 23 June 1806 (Chieti).
   ³⁶ Ibid., 23 July 1806.
   ³⁷ Ibid., Gendarmeria Reale del Regno delle Due Sicilie, 15 May 1812.
