192                               Napoleonic Naples

noted that the vast areas of swampland in the province caused pestilences that
decimated the population and discouraged the poor from marrying. But they also
argued that this encouraged ‘immoral libertinism’, especially amongst young girls
who everywhere were ready to ‘yield to seduction and are easily and quickly taken
by men who will not release them until they agree to forced marriages’.¹⁸


                    TRADE AND MANUFACTURES

Earlier reports on the state of the Kingdom’s manufacturing industries had revealed
a similar situation, but also showed that the most advanced sectors of the economy
had suffered most heavily. The most widespread form of manufacture was textile
production, most of which was done on a domestic basis for local consumption.
But there were a number of centres where more specialized forms of woollen cloth
were produced, including Naples, Arpino, the Isola di Sora, Piedimonte d’Alife,
Ceretto, and Avellino. All had been especially badly damaged by the decline in for-
eign trade, which had removed the only incentive for improvement since ‘through-
out the Kingdom the wealthier classes use exclusively imported cloth, while the
poorer classes made their own so that markets for manufactured cloth were lim-
ited’.¹⁹ The district of Arpino, once ‘an Emporium for its surrounding areas and all
the main cities in the kingdom’, was a genuine example of structural decay and after
ten years of war it had been reduced ‘to a state of total penury: the woollen industry
has collapsed because its products remain unsold, there is no capital, and the work-
ers are unemployed’.²⁰
   Despite the French expectations that the South was a land of untapped
resources, the Kingdom had few other industries. There were tanneries in the cap-
ital and at S. Maria di Capua, as well as at Solofra in the Cilento and in the
Abruzzi, but the quality was described as poor and the methods of production
primitive. Soap was manufactured in Naples and in the Abruzzi, but depended on
imports of soda from abroad and was now at a standstill. There was fairly extensive
production of tobacco, which was dried and pulverized for sale as ‘erba santa’, but
it was not produced for smoking or chewing. Some coloured glass panes were pro-
duced in Naples, but only on a small scale, and to expand, the industry needed
new factories located closer to adequate supplies of timber and charcoal.
   Iron ores were mined in Calabria at Stilo and at Piano d’Ardena near
Montefusco, but the output was small and the quality poor. The main constraint
was the shortage of timber, and to avoid exhausting the meagre supplies of timber
the Stilo foundries moved peripatetically from site to site. Iron was not much used
in agriculture and what was needed for making barrels for muskets and guns for

                ¹⁸ ASF: Consiglio Provinciale d’Otranto, 1808.
                ¹⁹ De Majo, in Lepre (ed.) (1985), 16.
                ²⁰ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II) f. 5068 (18 September 1816).
