198                                   Napoleonic Naples

the overwhelming demands of war expenditures in the ﬁnal phase of Murat’s reign.
The situation was much better in the province of Bari, but with only a few excep-
tions the French rulers invested little in the provinces and signiﬁcantly less than in
the capital, while the investments made were paid for by the provinces.


                             PAYING FOR PROGRESS

The impact of the administrative burdens that were transferred to the provinces
was clearly evident from the changing style of the annual reports of the provincial
and local councils. After 1810 the government no longer solicited general com-
ments, but delegated that responsibility to more narrowly selected Economic
Societies.⁴⁸ The reports of the provincial and local councils instead became mere
lists of expenses that reveal the high costs of emancipation.
    The list of expenses recorded by the Provincial Council for Capitanata in 1811
began with a salary increase for the Intendent, the costs of the Intendent’s annual
visitation of the province, the cost of the households of the Intendent and of the
Sub-intendent, and the cost of the vaccination campaign against smallpox ordered
by the government. The province also contributed over 9,000 ducats to the cost of
maintaining foundlings, whose number had increased ‘either because of the critical
circumstances of the times which compromise honest girls or because of the seduc-
tions that they do not know how to resist’. It had to pay for barracks for the
Gendarmerie Reale (6,858 ducats), for the cost of collecting the statistics required
for the general census ordered by the government, and for the operations to destroy
the eggs of the insects that had devastated the region. The report concluded that the
province did not have the means to meet these expenses.⁴⁹
    Starting in 1810, each comune was required to prepare a provisional budget
(stati discussi), which had to be submitted for approval to the Intendent’s ofﬁce.
The preparation and approval of these budgets were the subject of endless dis-
putes, but the resulting budgets clearly showed how new and additional taxes were
constantly being added.⁵⁰ The sources of income for the comuni were, by contrast,
relatively ﬁxed, consisting of rents for land and buildings belonging to the comune
and consumption taxes. In 1815 these were calculated to amount to a total of
1,500,000 ducats for the entire Kingdom (excluding Naples and Sicily). It was
difﬁcult to contract out the collection of these taxes, and most comuni raised them
through capitation taxes, which were ‘most burdensome for the least prosperous
class of people’.⁵¹

   ⁴⁸ See pp. 244–6.
   ⁴⁹ ASF: Consigli Provinciali e Distrettuali, Processi Verbali (Busta 1); Consiglio Provinciale di
Capitanata, 1811.
   ⁵⁰ These included an annual contribution of 500,000 ducats to the cost of provincial public
works. Then in 1812 the provinces were required to contribute an additional tax of 5% of their total
revenues to pay for the Legioni Provinciali as well as other charges. Ibid. 22, 80.     ⁵¹ Ibid. 21.
