                                  A Kingdom Remodelled?                                        191

Cotton was grown near Castellamare and Torre Annunziata, but its cultivation
had expanded only because there was little demand for other products.
Throughout the province demand for timber for building and for ﬁrewood had
led to extensive clearance of woodland.¹⁶
   As well as providing information on economic matters, the provincial assem-
blies in 1808 were required to report on social conditions, on the state of public
health, roads, and public works, and on public welfare, orphanages, hospitals,
prisons, schools, and colleges. In some cases these questions simply aroused some
surprise. The district council of Larino in Capitanata, for example, commented
that ‘The legislation that we have had until now was a Gothic monument com-
posed of elements that generally contradicted one another.’ There were no secure
prisons in the district and criminals generally went unpunished, nor was there
neither a home for the aged nor a shelter for abandoned children. There were no
schools, of any sort, ‘theatres are unknown’ and government needed to combat
‘the ignorance of their responsibilities and duties that is evident among all classes
of Inhabitants, and especially the bad conduct of the civic administration’. The
local population had no contact with the outside world and ‘are little better
than savages’. Their houses were
badly kept. From outside they bear only the marks of squalor and poverty, while inside
they reveal a lack of cleanliness which is born from ignorance and carelessness. Were this
the case only amongst the humblest Citizens it would be expected, but it is horrifying to
ﬁnd it also in the houses of property owners, of people who should know better. Rubbish
and ﬁlth were the principal cause of disease and epidemics, and bodies were still being
buried inside churches within the town walls. Can there be any worse state of barbarity?¹⁷
   The provincial council of Capitanata complained about the neglect of
foundlings: they were sent to wet-nurse but few survived and those that did
became beggars. It underlined the need for institutions to take care of them until
they were old enough to be placed with a craftsman or farmer to learn a trade. It
also pointed out that there was no primary schooling in the province, but there
were two important colleges. In Foggia, a convent of Theatine Fathers that was
suppressed in 1797 had been taken over by the Scolopians and was attended by
400 young men, but the other college at Lucera was much smaller and very poor.
   The assemblies called for measures to limit environmental damage and build
and repair roads. They complained about poor and non-existent communica-
tions, and above all about population shortage in rural areas. This, it was claimed,
was why vast tracts of land remained uncultivated, which in turn condemned the
rural populations to lives of the most inhuman poverty. But even when natural
causes were admitted, the members of the provincial councils placed the blame
squarely on the poor. The Provincial Council of Terra d’Otranto, for example,


¹⁶ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (I) f. 183 (Consigli Provinciali): Consiglio Provinciale di Napoli, 1808.
¹⁷ ASF: Consigli Provinciali e Distrettuali (Busta 1), Processi Verbali, October 1808.
