194                                  Napoleonic Naples

materials—the oak, iron, nails, lead, leather, canvas, and rope—needed to build a
74-gun ship had to be imported: ‘What use are shipyards without materials, and
what use are shipyards and materials without workers?’²⁷
    The new government continued the earlier Bourbon practice of granting
subsidies and monopolies to encourage industries considered to be of strategic
importance.²⁸ Murat went further and to the outrage of the imperial administration
in Paris in 1809 imitated the emperor’s protectionist policies by imposing duties on
imported foreign manufactured goods. But these measures were not enough and the
Royal Silk Factory at S. Leucio, which employed more than a thousand workers, had
by 1813 accumulated huge stockpiles of unsold silk cloth: the government tried to
dispose of these by lottery, but there were too few buyers.²⁹
    In open violation of imperial regulations, Murat’s government began to adopt a
coherent strategy of import-substitution to protect and develop key industries. The
most important of these was textiles, and a number of Swiss cotton manufacturers
whose native industries had been ruined by the Continental blockade and the
emperor’s Berlin Decrees were persuaded to open factories in the Kingdom. Jacques
Egg of Elikon der Thur near Zurich set up the ﬁrst cotton factory in the ex-convent
of the Carmine in Piedimonte d’Alife in the Terra di Lavoro. Other Swiss cotton
manufacturers did the same in the Salerno region, and similar facilities were offered
to the French clothmakers Charles Lambert and Jules D’Escrivan, who opened a
woollen cloth factory on the Isola di Sora in the northern Terra di Lavoro.³⁰
    The foreign textile manufacturers were provided with buildings and investment
subsidies, and were guaranteed markets through government contracts for military
or naval uniforms. But the results were not encouraging. When the government
held a ‘Solemn Exhibition of the Most Important National Manufactures
in the Kingdom’ in Naples in August 1810, Mosbourg commented to Murat,
‘a very pompous article has been published on the products of our national indus-
tries presented in the Exhibition. Sadly, one has to say that none of these is in any
way remarkable. To hold such an Exhibition every year would be too much.’³¹
    The situation improved in the years that followed, but the principal victim of
the prolonged recession, as the reports of the provincial assemblies in 1808 had
revealed, was agriculture.


                   NEW ADMINISTRATIVE BURDENS

After decrying the economic paralysis caused by the prolonged interruption of
trade, the protests of the provincial assemblies were aimed most loudly at the


      ²⁷ ANP: 31 AP 27; di Gallo to Duca di Bassano, n.d.
      ²⁸ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), f. 5068, Winspeare to Luigi de’ Medici, 17 April 1805.
      ²⁹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), f. 5066, 31 December 1813 (S. Leucio).
      ³⁰ See Davis (1981), 106–29; De Matteo (1984), 3–63; Wenner (1953).
      ³¹ ANP: 31 AP 43: Mosbourg to Murat, 23 August 1813.
