                                   A Kingdom Remodelled?                                      199

  The division of common lands by the Feudal Commission was designed to
address at least some of the ﬁnancial problems facing the rural communities,
but that complex and problematic operation provided few immediate and
even fewer long-term solutions. In the meantime, the ﬁnancial costs of the new
administrative system introduced by the law of 8 August 1806 were passed onto
the provinces, which by 1812 were also contributing over 4,000,000 lire a year
more to the land tax than in 1808, a situation that even the ﬁnance minister
Count Mosbourg considered to be unsustainable and politically dangerous.⁵²


                                     THE CAPITAL

At the time of the Restoration in 1815, the Bourbon minister Donato Tommasi
judged the reorganization of the administration of Naples to be one of the best
innovations made by the French rulers. The changes meant that the government
was ﬁnally fully in control of the city, making it possible for the ﬁrst time to
regulate building, communications, public health, and commercial activities. The
French had introduced new controls over public food markets, as well as street
lighting and the streets were being named and numbered. There were even plans
for a new cemetery to be built in a ‘magniﬁcent enclosed ground that is sufﬁ-
ciently spacious to accommodate all the city’s corpses’, although by 1815 work
had still not started because the project proved to be very costly.⁵³
   The unﬁnished cemetery was in many ways a ﬁtting epitaph to the decade of
French rule in the capital. Although the French rulers set out to reorganize the city
and remove its economic privileges, almost from the start the project ran up against
political and administrative difﬁculties that proved insurmountable. In part these
derived from the disastrous state of the city’s economy, but the problems were com-
pounded by the contradictions embedded in the policies of the new regime.
   When the French entered Naples in February 1806, they found a city that had
suffered the impact not only of invasion and civil war but of a prolonged commer-
cial recession that dated from Ferdinand IV’s entry into the First Coalition in
1793. In 1793–4 and again in 1801 the city was the victim of severe subsistence
crises. After 1799 it had been stripped of its former jurisdictional privileges, its
independent government had been abolished, it had lost its exemption from con-
scription, and more severe measures had been imposed to reduce the ﬂow of
migrants and vagrants from the surrounding rural areas.
   In the decades following the famine of 1763/4, the city’s population had
risen dramatically,⁵⁴ but after 1800 began to decline again and reached a trough

   ⁵² ANP: 31 AP 34, Mosbourg to Murat, 14 November 1812.
   ⁵³ Donato Tommasi, formerly a close friend of Filangieri, was a senior Bourbon administrator
who followed the court to Palermo. In 1814 he drafted an extensive commentary on the adminis-
trative and juridical reforms introduced by the French rulers: ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi.
   ⁵⁴ From 300,000 to about 400,000 by the close of the century.
