                                A Kingdom Remodelled?                                   205

As a result, while the government seized whatever revenues it could lay its hands
on, there was no serious attempt to undermine the corporate structures around
which the charities and the life of the city more generally were organized.


                        1809–10: FEARS OF FAMINE

The French rulers had other reasons for dropping their original projects for
reorganizing the city, which were especially evident when in 1810 the city was
again threatened by famine. The crisis, which came while Murat was preparing the
invasion of Sicily that never took place, came with advanced warning when poor
harvests in the summer of 1809 raised fears about the capital’s food supplies,
just at a moment when Napoleon’s campaign against Austria had brought the
Kingdom’s trade to a complete standstill.
   The threatened subsistence crisis in the capital offered the government the
pretext for permanently abandoning the liberal economic measures that had been
adopted by Joseph Bonaparte. New protectionist measures directed even against
French imports followed, while Joseph’s attempts to liberalize trade between
the capital and the provinces were replaced by new regulations designed to
protect consumers in the metropolis.
   In Naples, the situation became more threatening when an outbreak of typhoid
fever began in the autumn of 1809. As the winter progressed, predictions for the
coming harvest became more dire, and in February 1810 the government
suspended the free movement of grain and began negotiating with the leading
merchants to purchase grain from abroad. The merchants claimed that the risks
were too high and refused. Murat begged the emperor for permission to purchase
grain from American ships, but this was refused. He then offered the merchants
more attractive terms, which they accepted.⁸¹
   The crisis led to the adoption of new regulations for provisioning the capital
that became permanent and were designed to ensure once again that the urban
consumer would be guaranteed the lowest food prices available. Free trade in
cereals was permitted only when the provincial Intendents gave assurance that
prospects for the forthcoming harvest were good; otherwise, grain exports were
prohibited while imports were freely permitted.⁸²
   Once again, the capital and the urban consumer were protected at the expense
of the provincial grain producers, who were denied access to more lucrative export
markets. Free trade was brieﬂy restored after the Restoration, but then abandoned
again in favour of the regulations introduced in 1811, which became a major
source of conﬂict between the Restoration government and the southern

  ⁸¹ AAEP: CC (Naples) 39, 391; ANP: AFiv 1714a, 31 October 1810.
  ⁸² See the detailed description by the French Consul General, Doriol: AAEP: CC (Naples) 39,
390–4, 1811.
