208                                  Napoleonic Naples

headed by the powerful Duke of Cassano to retain effective control of the city.
Saliceti had tried to challenge this by building his own rival networks that included
representatives of the guilds, the confraternities, and inﬂuential community leaders,
the capo-rioni popolari.⁹² But the French ambassador also complained that Saliceti’s
agents were notoriously corrupt: ‘In every known part of the world it is the general
rule that the lower ranks of Police agents are always recruited from the most vile, the
most immoral and the most venal sections of humanity.’⁹³
   Carlo De Nicola conﬁrmed that Saliceti’s police had strong popular roots in the
city, and played on popular hostility to the middle classes. Anyone who refused
to adopt the popular ‘Brutus’ hair-style ‘without powder and cut short’ was at risk
of random arrest and questioning:
The lower sorts who are always the enemies of the patriots wear their hair short for comfort
and certainly can’t afford to get it curled. The gentry and artists prefer to powder their hair
and wear it in a short pigtail as in the olden days, but now they are in danger of being
stopped by the police and having their hair forcibly cut off.⁹⁴



                                   CONCLUSION

Saliceti had understood the importance of tapping into the networks of power that
were the principal forces of cohesion in this teeming metropolis. For political as well
as economic reasons, therefore, although the city’s older corporate bodies lost many
of their assets and resources they not only survived but retained at least a part of their
former power. This was a clear sign of the limits of the modernizing mission of the
new rulers, and the consequences were evident when the Corpo della Città reported
in 1809 that it was unable to set the conscription quotas for the capital because it
had no reliable information on the inhabitants of the capital, where they lived, their
ages, or their occupations. That plea may have been self-serving, but in 1811 a simi-
lar lack of information and administrative machinery made it impossible to include
the capital in the census that had been planned for the whole Kingdom.⁹⁵
   The capital’s complex corporate structures resisted the bureaucratic ambitions
of the French innovations, while the initial determination to change the capital
gave way to measures designed to ensure that the city remained tranquil under
conditions that were becoming increasingly threatening with each passing year.
That in turn undermined the efforts to redress imbalances between the capital
and the provinces, while the attempts to reorganize provincial administration
were also running into increasing difﬁculty. But in both the capital and the
provinces, the government’s difﬁculties were creating opportunities for powerful
interest groups to carve out their own positions in the post-feudal order.

        ⁹² De Nicola, May 1806, 249.         ⁹³ AAEP: CP (Naples), 132, 20 July 1808.
        ⁹⁴ De Nicola, 4 July 1807, 351.       ⁹⁵ Cutolo (1932), 15.
