                                  A Kingdom Remodelled?                                    207

   In Naples, as in every other major Italian city, the independent municipal
tribunals, together with the craft guilds, the lay confraternities, the major convents,
the parishes, and the religious orders, continued to dominate and effectively
govern most aspects of the public and private lives of the city and its inhabitants.⁸⁷
This was normal and of all the Italian cities, only in Habsburg Milan had serious
measures been taken by the end of the eighteenth century to dismantle corporate
controls and institutions.⁸⁸ But that was the model that the French rulers followed
and in August 1806 the government decreed that ‘all exemptions from taxes and
duties’ previously enjoyed by the guilds and corporations of the capital were
abolished, as were the guilds and lay confraternities.
   Forty-ﬁve trade guilds and lay confraternities, each with its own patron church
or chapel, were abolished and their assets transferred to the state. Writing later in
the century, the Marchese Ceva Grimaldi claimed that the abolition of the corpora-
tions had resulted in the massive expropriation of the craftsmen of the capital,
who were left with a single dowry bank (monte di maritaggi) to provide for the
needs of daughters of working people.⁸⁹
   Although stripped of their resources, the guilds and the confraternities contin-
ued to function with the government’s tacit approval.⁹⁰ When the Consuls of the
Wool Guild protested vigorously about the loss of their commercial privileges,
M. Riche, the Inspector General of Manufactures, supported them and claimed
under the new laws they would have to pay 4,000 ducats a year in taxes to bring
raw wool into the city, which would make them uncompetitive with provincial
manufacturers. Given the importance of the woollen industry as a source of
employment in the city, M. Riche urged that the tax exemptions be restored. The
Consuls of the Guilds continued to represent the interests of their members, and
in 1808 M. Riche complained that their refusal to cooperate made it impossible to
obtain information about the state of manufactures in the city.⁹¹
   The fate of the guilds and the lay confraternities illustrates the more general
impact of French rule on the city. Their assets were seized by the government, but
the corporations survived albeit without the means to perform their previous
functions. To have done away with them altogether would have been extremely
difﬁcult, however, since the government did not have the means to create bureau-
cratic alternatives. The guilds and confraternities also proved to be indispensable
allies when it came to governing the city, since they formed an integral part of
the networks of patronage around which municipal politics hinged.
   This was unintentionally acknowledged by the French ambassador, D’Aubusson,
who in July 1808 reported that policing the city depended on mobilizing powerful
factions. He believed that Joseph’s decision to make the Duke of Laurenzana Police
Commissioner had enabled a powerful faction of the old Neapolitan nobility

  ⁸⁷ Astarita (2005).       ⁸⁸ Ibid.; Fallon (1997).     ⁸⁹ Ceva Grimaldi (1845), 57–8.
  ⁹⁰ However, all the documents relating to the guilds and confraternities were destroyed; see
Abbamonte, in Massafra (ed.) (1988), 505–16.            ⁹¹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), f. 5066.
