202                                   Napoleonic Naples


                            CHARIT Y AND WELFARE

The desperate situation of the city’s charitable foundations was a consequence
of increased demand caused by the prolonged economic recession and then by the
suppression of monasteries and convents in the capital. But it was above all the
devastating consequences of the suspension of the arrendamenti and the abolition
of feudal revenues that forced the government to intervene.⁶⁸
   The poverty of the capital was one of the most intractable problems facing
the new rulers, but it was also one from which they sought to make political
capital. The horror that Miot de Melito expressed at the capital’s poverty in his
report on the state of the realm in 1806 was a constant refrain. In his memoirs
Pierre Louis Roederer, for example, commented, ‘In Naples, the streets are full of
the most infamous canaille and people piss everywhere even in the palaces.’⁶⁹
   Similar language recurred in the report of the Provincial Council in 1808:
Every one knows the appearance of the inhabitants of this Metropolis, a mass of evil
looking characters and prostitutes who render the streets ugly while bands of naked and dis-
ease-ridden children without parents or homes importune the citizens with their laments,
live off offal, dead animals and garbage and sleep piled on top of one another in the streets.⁷⁰
   The purpose of this language was to make vagrancy, ﬁlth, and poverty bludgeons
with which to assail the indiscriminate provision of charity. Miot de Melito had been
quick to point to the proliferation of charitable institutions as the main cause of
poverty and unemployment because they encouraged a culture of sloth and idleness.
   Conditions were indeed horrendous. The Albergo dei Poveri, the city’s principal
poorhouse that doubled as a prison for vagrants, was in a state of ‘veritable
desolation’ and had been partly converted into a military barracks. The principal
hospital for the poor, the Ospedale degli Incurabili, was in a ‘terrible state’: it had
been sacked in 1799 and had then lost most of its revenues as a result of the con-
version of the arrendamenti. The principal hospice for abandoned infants, the
Ospedale dell’Annunziata, was in similar decay and the majority of foundlings
lodged there ‘perish from the cold and hunger or get eaten by wild animals’. Those
poor wretches that survived ‘are destined, if their poverty does not cause them to
perish at an early age, to become the most dangerous subjects in the State’.⁷¹
   The French ambassador, D’Aubusson, was especially scandalized by the death
rate amongst the foundlings, which he blamed illogically on the widespread


  ⁶⁸ The Neapolitan religious houses suppressed in 1807 included the monastery of San Martino
and the Calmaldoli houses; in January 1808 the government closed the richest nunneries (Santa
Maria dei Miracoli and San Marcellino) and in May a further 26 convents, including the largest, the
Franciscan convent of the Holy Trinity in via Toledo. Rambaud (1908), 302–4.
  ⁶⁹ Roederer (1854), vi. 73, 103.
  ⁷⁰ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (I), f. 183, Consiglio della Provincia di Napoli, 1808.
  ⁷¹ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte, 381 AP 3, Miot de Melito to Joseph Bonaparte, 4 July 1806.
