206                                   Napoleonic Naples

landowners. But these problems again revealed why more balanced relations
between the capital and the provinces were not easily achieved.


                                    PUBLIC WORKS

For reasons of political expediency and dynastic representation, the capital also con-
tinued to absorb the greater part of the government’s expenditure on public works.
The most ambitious urban development project attempted in these years was the cre-
ation of a new public space in the centre of the city and in front of the royal palace, for
which the convents of S. Spirito and S. Francesco da Paola had been demolished.⁸³
New roads were built to connect the capital with the neighbouring settlements of
Posillipo and Ottajano. A fund of 240,000 ducats was set up for another road that
would link Naples with Calabria, and another 70,000 ducats in 1812 for a road from
Naples to Civitella del Tronto on the frontier with the Papal States in the Abruzzi.
New administrative bodies were created to prepare and oversee these projects, but
lack of funds or regular budgets meant that few were started and none completed.⁸⁴
   Nonetheless Carlo de Nicola was outraged:
The Kingdom is exhausted, the government has turned thirty thousand families into beg-
gars, and yet it still thinks it a good idea to construct a new road that will link the Royal
Palace directly with the park of Capodimonte.⁸⁵
Even though few of the projects initiated by the French rulers had been completed
by the time of the Restoration, Naples remained the principal beneﬁciary of the new
regime’s interest in urban development. In the provinces Bari also underwent extens-
ive rebuilding, but the capital was the main focus of the government’s attention and
the French rulers were no less determined than their predecessors that their capital
should reﬂect both the glory of the empire and their own dynastic ambitions.⁸⁶


                        SEEKING ACCOMMODATION

Just as the government’s attempts to reduce the city’s economic privileges were
quickly abandoned, so too were its efforts to replace earlier corporate bodies and
regulations with new forms of bureaucratic administration. The nobility’s corporate
monopoly over municipal government had been abolished by the Bourbons, and
this was never restored. When they ﬁrst took control of the city the French quickly
abolished the guilds and confraternities as part of a more general attempt to deregu-
late the urban economy.
   ⁸³ Now Piazza Plebiscito: building of the monumental church of S. Francesco da Paola was started
after 1815 to celebrate the Restoration of the Bourbon dynasty.
   ⁸⁴ The Consiglio di Pubblici Lavori and the Consiglio di Edilizio.
   ⁸⁵ De Nicola, 20 September 1808, 374.           ⁸⁶ De Seta (1981), 211–25.
