210                                  Napoleonic Naples

Brigandage’ and that the people strongly supported the Bourbon monarchy
because they feared that the convents would be suppressed.²
   All forms of resistance were simply labelled as brigandage. The royal governor
of Matera, the marchese Rodio, had orders to raise an insurrection to block the
French advance, but for Saliceti’s agents he was ‘the celebrated Calabrian named
Rodio, who in 1799 had won notoriety as a Brigand and for which he was given
the title of marchese and the rank of General by the Court’. His attempts to organ-
ize resistance explained why the ‘seeds of brigandage’ had been sown throughout
the Province of L’Aquila (Abruzzo) before the French entered the Kingdom. His
followers were ‘Capo-Briganti and conspirators’ who had been involved in the
events of 1799 and came ‘for the greater part from the class of malefactors and
from the lowliest Plebs. Like Rodio, they had been rewarded for their misdeeds by
the former monarchy.’
   Rodio’s attempts to raise a royalist militia met with little success, however, and
after various adventures he was captured in April and taken to Naples to be tried
by a military commission. The commission hesitated to pass judgment because he
had been captured wearing the uniform of a royal ofﬁcer, but Saliceti had Masséna
replace those who opposed conviction on the pretext that Rodio had bribed
members of the tribunal: on 27 April Rodio was duly shot as a brigand.³
   Another famous Sanfedist leader, Colonel Michele Pezza, alias Fra Diavolo, had
better claims to be treated as a brigand, although he too had a royal commission
when he was landed with men and supplies at Gaeta. He then stole a horse and
two dozen mules from the village of Lauro where neither the ‘feudal militia’ nor
the local ‘Proprietors and Galantuomini’ tried to oppose him. His chevauchée
proved short-lived, but nonetheless it alarmed Saliceti, who feared it was the sign
for a major rising in the capital, where he suspected that the Duke of Cassano and
the brother of the Cardinal Archbishop were agents of the Court in Sicily.⁴
   The conspiracy never materialized, but the situation became more dangerous
in May when the British captured the islands of Capri and Ponza, where the
Prince of Canosa set up headquarters to direct royalist plots on the nearby main-
land. Numerous armed bands were now operating in the Terra di Lavoro and
neighbouring provinces, but they were small and their followers quickly deserted.
When Gaeta surrendered to Masséna on 18 July, the royalist leaders in the north
lost their principal source of supplies, but their operations soon revived following
the news that Reynier’s army had been defeated by the English in Calabria.
   In September Canosa arranged for Michele Pezza to land again at Gaeta
with some 300 criminals released from the jail on Ponza. Pezza raised a large
following in the San Germano valley, and when he entered the town of Sora


   ² A de G: C(5*) 32 Lettres de Gen. Girardon, Armée de Naples: 6 April 1806, Girardon to Min.
Guerre, Capua.
   ³ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381 AP 4 (doc 4), Correspondance de C Saliceti: Saliceti to
Joseph Bonaparte, 27 April 1806.                                          ⁴ Ibid., 29 April 1806.
