                                     A Kingdom Remodelled?                                         203

practice among the poor of using herbs to induce miscarriages. In this manner, he
claimed, the Neapolitan lazzaroni were cheating the emperor’s armies of some
2,000 potential conscripts a year, an outrage he called on the clergy to campaign
against and on the police to act more severely in cases of suspected infanticide.⁷²
   A decade later conditions were no better. Of the foundlings and orphans that
entered the Ospedale della Annunziata ‘it is painful to record that nine tenths per-
ish’. Attempts were made to establish schools for the foundlings who survived, but
these failed because of ‘the habits of idleness and abuse that they have inherited’.⁷³
   Conditions in the Albergo dei Poveri were as bad. It had been built on what
was formerly a marsh, and the buildings were damp and unhealthy. The inmates
slept ‘in the least healthy part of the building, and there was no fresh water’.
The building had never been completed and had suffered serious damage in 1799,
so that ‘on entering the Capital the visitor is greeted by the sight of a vast monu-
ment that is unﬁnished and apparently abandoned’.⁷⁴
   The situation became even worse when the French government designated it as
the city’s ‘dépôt de mendicité’. The object was to cleanse the capital ‘of those
crooked, deformed and mutilated creatures that plague it, and of the vagabonds
and beggars who make it unsafe’, and over 5,000 inmates of both sexes ended up
being housed there:
this great family is composed of beggars, vagabonds, men notorious for obscene actions,
prostitutes and all the other wretches who give themselves up or are arrested on the public
highways of the capital.⁷⁵
   Instruction in a range of crafts and skills was provided for the young male
paupers, who could train to be ‘tailors, shoemakers, barbers, carpenters, wood-
turners, metal-casters, printers, makers of weapons, weavers and spinners’, but
there was only lace-making for the girls. New Bell and Lancaster school were later
introduced for the younger children, and ﬁfty of the female inmates were sent to
work in Signor Egg’s cotton-spinning factory in Piedmonte d’Alife. Many of the
young boys were sent to the army as drummers and pipers. But the attempts
to provide training for the young and ﬁnd useful work for the paupers failed
either because the funds to buy machines and materials were lacking or, more
generally, because of the ‘force of inertia’.⁷⁶
   To round off the catalogue of human suffering, conditions in the city’s prisons
were described in one government report as ‘a shame to Humanity’.To remedy
these problems that had been seriously aggravated by assault on the revenues
of the charitable foundations, the government looked primarily for administrative

  ⁷² AAEP: CP (Naples) 132, ‘Notes sur le Royaume de Naples’ (1808).
  ⁷³ Ibid., 42; see also ASN: Min. dell’Interno Int (I) f. 183, Consiglio della Provincia di Napoli 1808.
Of the 1,676 foundlings that entered the Annunziata between January and December 1808, 1,311 died.
  ⁷⁴ ASN: Min. di Polizia (1a) f. 152(2), Rapporto al Parlamento Nazionale sulla situazione del
Ministero degli Affari Interni (23 October 1820), 86.                                            ⁷⁵ Ibid.
  ⁷⁶ Ibid.
