204                                 Napoleonic Naples

economies. The smaller foundations were suppressed or amalgamated with larger
surviving institutions, an operation overseen by a Central Welfare Committee
whose members included the Grand Almoner, the Cardinal Archbishop of
Naples, the President of the Corpo della Città, and four wealthy proprietors
‘renowned for their concern for the poor’.⁷⁷ Charitable commissions were set up
in each quartiere of the city, on which leading citizens and wealthy merchants were
required to serve. The Commissions received the miserable sum of 16,000 ducats
a year from the government, and their task was to raise private donations to sup-
port the families of the deserving poor and to organize soup kitchens and other
forms of relief for the poor in times of special hardship.⁷⁸
   Unemployment continued to rise, however, and new taxes had to be intro-
duced to support the charitable institutions. When the city was faced with a major
subsistence crisis in 1810 the government created a further Council of Hospices
and introduced another consumption tax that was expected to raise 100,000
ducats a year. But it did not, and by then the crisis had reached deep into the capil-
lary networks of pawn shops, soup kitchens, hospices, conservatories, hospitals,
madhouses, and poorhouses on which the majority of urban poor depended for
survival. Some were shut down or put to other use. Many of the conservatories
that offered shelter for poor women who were permanently or temporarily single
were amalgamated or suppressed, ‘which caused their numbers to decrease, and
while this has beneﬁted two or three institutions it has ruined the rest, whose
inmates are forced to beg on the streets to survive’.⁷⁹
   The institutions that provided ‘home help’ for the deserving poor were particu-
larly hard hit. The Monte della Misericordia, which had formerly provided alms
and food for poor families in their own homes, was, for example, converted into a
barracks for French troops. These losses were compounded by the plunder of
the assets of the lay confraternities, another traditional source of support for the
independent urban poor.⁸⁰
   The larger institutions weathered the storm, in part because of mergers with
smaller foundations but also because of their important role in the urban eco-
nomy. These institutions were major providers of work and a major source of
demand for victuals, clothing, linen, bedding, beds, furniture, clerical materials,
ﬁrewood, and so forth. Although their ability to provide for the poor was
reduced, they continued to offer employment for the armies of administrators,
lawyers, accountants, estate managers, architects, builders, decorators, plasteres,
gatekeepers, gardeners, porters, cooks, cleaners, laundry-women, and workmen.
   Not only did the charitable foundations play a crucial role in the urban eco-
nomy, but without the support of those who administered the city’s charitable
foundations Naples would almost certainly have been impossible to govern.

 ⁷⁷ Landi (1977), ii. 806–7.          ⁷⁸ Ibid. 51.
 ⁷⁹ ASN: Min. di Polizia (1a) f. 152(2), Rapporto al Parlamento Nazionale sulla situazione del
Ministero degli Affari Interni (23 October 1820).                              ⁸⁰ Ibid. 52–4.
