212                                   Napoleonic Naples

the same route that they have taken to arrive here’. But he did not have the
means to attempt a crossing and his provisioning problems had become acute.⁷
He reported again, however, that the Bourbon monarchy’s attempts to ‘enlist the
leaders of the popular masse that had taken part in that sort of Crusade led by
Cardinal Ruffo’ had completely failed.
   The ﬁrst cases of resistance were isolated and were provoked by military for-
aging. But when a more concerted revolt began after the battle of Maida, Reynier’s
assessment quickly changed. Now he was surrounded on all sides by ‘brigands led
by English ofﬁcers and by former leaders of the Royalist masse. A true war of the
poor against the rich has been waged from the moment that the events of war
caused the reins of government to slacken. These Peasants live and breathe only
Brigandage and assassination. . . . There are no atrocities or crimes that they have
not committed.’⁸
   On 31 July the Calabrian provinces were declared to be in state of war. Masséna
was sent with 15,000 men to reopen the road from Naples to Calabria.⁹ But while
Reynier waited for Masséna’s army to arrive the insurrections gained force and,
to make matters worse, the coastal fort of Amantea fell into royalist hands.


                                         THE SIL A

As in 1799, the epicentre of the royalist insurrections in Calabria was the villages
and townships of the Sila Mountains. Geographically these communities lay on
the principal transit routes through the Sila Mountains that linked the Tyrrhenian
and Ionian coasts, giving them great strategic importance for the royalists. There
was also clear evidence of advanced preparation, and in many villages the retreat-
ing Bourbon army had planted royalists agents with precise instructions on ‘how
to raise and lead the masses and organize them into small rapid commando units
(corpicciuoli volanti), how to disrupt the progress of an enemy army by attacking
its supply trains and drawing its forces into ambushes in deep gorges and danger-
ous passes in the mountains’. Certain individuals had been assigned ranks
and uniforms, and each had been instructed to identify individuals who would be
‘prepared to take up arms’.¹⁰
    The ﬁrst revolts took place in Longobucco, which was recognized as the centre
for the extensive networks of shepherds who worked in the region and whose tight
kinship bonds made them particularly powerful and widely feared:
All the shepherds in this province come from this town. Their babes are raised with the
sheep, weaned exposed to the cold and the open air, and grow up accustomed to live off

  ⁷ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381 AP 4 (doc 4), Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte, 26 March 1806.
  ⁸ Ibid., Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte, 3 August 1806.
  ⁹ Ibid., C(5) 1, Correspondence de Joseph Bonaparte, Joseph Bonaparte to Napoleon, 31 July
1806, 9 August 1806.           ¹⁰ BNP: Fonds Italiens, 1127, Brigantage dans la Calabre Citeriore.
