218                                  Napoleonic Naples

   By now the winter snows were forcing the brigands out of the mountains
towards the coastal forts at Amantea, Belmonte, Fiumefreddo, and Belvedere held
by the royalists. Here, in the words of General MacDonald, ‘a handful of miser-
able wretches are withstanding the most battle-hardened troops in Europe and
have repulsed their attacks with vigour’. But after a lengthy siege, Amantea fell in
February 1807 and the garrison of ‘brigands’ was taken prisoner.²⁴ The remaining
royalist strongholds fell in quick succession and by the end of April Reynier could
report to Joseph that the insurrection in Lower Calabria was over.²⁵
   His conclusion proved premature, however, and unrest in the Calabrian
provinces continued throughout 1807, although the support from Sicily was less
effective than in the previous year. The British had refused to participate in any
further landings after Sir John Stuart’s expedition, while the French occupations
of the Ionian islands after the peace with Russia in July 1807 helped secure the
Adriatic coast. Combined with Napoleon’s alliance with Turkey the British started
to fear for the safety of Sicily, whose defences they began to repair.²⁶
   In January 1808, Saliceti again reported that order had been restored in every
province. But with the spring came fresh disturbances in other provinces, the
main cause being news of the war in Spain and the French occupation of Rome.
Saliceti’s greatest concern was for the frontier districts of the Abruzzi, Apulia,
Basilicata, and the Cilento, but there were also now reports of small bands of brig-
ands in Molise and in Upper Calabria.²⁷ Larger bands of brigands were reported
to be moving undisturbed through Apulia and Capitanata, threatening to destroy
crops and carry off livestock if they were not paid large ransoms. A band of sixty to
seventy men led by Vincenzo Pisani, ‘known as the Monk of Torremaggiore’,
entered the province from northern Apulia and Pisani had the audacity to
demand that the mayor of Uruni provide his men with food and fodder. ‘From the
narrative of these events Your Excellency will understand that these are deeds that
cannot be ignored: The Bands are acting with such boldness that the Government
must intervene at once.’²⁸
   Saliceti was equally concerned to ﬁnd ways of making the paciﬁcation of
the Calabrian provinces permanent, and he acknowledged that more needed to
be done to restore conﬁdence amongst those who had been caught up in the
brigand wars:
the towns of Lower Calabria have been divided into Parties of winners and losers, and this
has caused a great number of Families to go to Messina. In some towns the Emigration has
been so great that there is almost no-one left. Bagnara, for example, is like Pompeii: a ghost

  ²⁴ ANP: 211AP 1, Journal historique des opérations du Siège de l’Amantea, 10 February 1807,
General MacDonald.            ²⁵ A de G: C(5*) 31*: Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte, 21 April 1807.
  ²⁶ Bunbury (1854), 274–313.
  ²⁷ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381 AP 4: Correspondance de C. Saliceti: Saliceti to Joseph
Bonaparte, 13 July 1808.
  ²⁸ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (IIa), f. 5079: Antonio Nelli, Intendente di Capitanata a Miot de
Melito, 18 April–22 May 1807.
