                                        Disorder                                      213
a bare diet of the dry bread they carry with them. The cold climate in which they live
makes them more robust and renders them capable of confronting any endeavour without
fatigue. Longobucco is the sole producer of a type of woollen cloth that is worn by these
people and that in all seasons protects them from the wet and the cold. Accustomed to such
ways of living, they are prepared to accept any undertaking, no matter how dangerous.
   Along with these ‘humble Plebs’, Longobucco had produced many dis-
tinguished men of letters:
But it is nonetheless true that the cultured and wealthy are few in contrast to the uncouth
multitude. What has to be noted is that these people are almost all related to one another
and share the same ideas, so that a single bold spirit can move them as a single body.
They are also skilled in the use of ﬁrearms because they hunt game in the surrounding
woodlands.
   The ﬁrst revolt came on 9 June when ‘twelve uncouth young ﬁeld hands who
owned no land raised the Bourbon standard in the public square’. Their leader was
a young shepherd Antonio Sansoro, better known as Coreme. But the move failed
and the insurgents ﬂed to the mountains until they received news of Reynier’s
defeat at Maida on 2 July, which ‘reawakened the sedition that had been crushed
by the end of June’. Two days after Reynier’s defeat a revolt broke out in Pentone,
one of the casali of Catanzaro, ‘a miserable hamlet of the vilest people who earn
their living making charcoal, which they sell in Catanzaro, also the residence of
many notorious brigand leaders because the town is close to the Sila and in a place
that is not easy for the troops to reach’.¹¹
   As had happened in 1799, the rebellion immediately spread to the other casali
of Cosenza, at which point Coreme and the twelve original rebels from
Longobucco returned from the hills carrying British standards and insisting
that every household do the same. Coreme was the undisputed leader and
declared that he had been given the rank of Captain by the royalist Capo-masse
Panedigrano and was a defender ‘of the Christian Faith and Religion’. He
recruited a band of ﬁfty followers who all adopted the red cockade of the
Bourbons: ‘Behold once more the Santafede!’¹²
   As the insurrections spread those who had organized them became more
visible. They included Seraﬁno Visciglia, the identikit of a feudal ofﬁcial who
was more royalist than his master, who worked on the estates of the Duke of
Corigliano where he was overseer of a factory that processed the valuable crop of
liquorice roots:
For this reason he used to receive from the Duke’s administration advances of large sums of
money to enable him to recruit workers from the casali of Cosenza to work in that Factory,
in all some three hundred individuals. This gave Visciglia great inﬂuence over the masse of
which he was the acknowledged leader; but he was supported by his numerous sons
and relatives, all brazen and lawless people who were all employed in the same factory and

                               ¹¹ Ibid. 1125.      ¹² Ibid.
