                                           Disorder                                          217

Smaller bands were led by ‘the murderer Necco’, who was operating in the area
between Scalea and Diamante.
These enemies of the Social Order, although deeply divided amongst themselves, are
absolutely united in their desire to destroy all the families of the leading Proprietors and to
enrich themselves on the spoils. They show no regard for sex or age. Young children are
slaughtered at their mothers’ breasts, husbands in the arms of their wives, octogenarians
are hacked to pieces, virgins raped and massacred . . . and every time we shoot or hang a
pair of the villains by way of reprisal, the brigands massacre another ten or twenty inno-
cents. . . . The truth is we hold Cosenza, but only a few other towns. . . . The rest of the
province is completely infested with brigands and prey to massacres and arson.
   No taxes had been collected in the province, and half of the 2,000 French
troops in Cosenza were sick with fever in the military hospital, where conditions
were indescribable. Disease was rapidly spreading through the rest of the French
army as well. But the Intendent concluded that the brigands had no interest in
supporting either the old or the new government: ‘their sole ambition is to mas-
sacre the wealthy and enrich themselves with their possessions’.²²
   A report to the Interior Minister, Miot de Melito, written in mid-November,
revealed a different side of the situation, however, and placed the blame squarely
on the fact that the ‘public authorities are totally corrupt’. Since Calabria had
been declared in a state of war, the military could do as it wished and the civil
authorities did the same. There was no control over military requisitioning, the
burden of which fell on the ‘few towns that support the Government’. Everything
the military needed they took ‘in such a way that the Right of Property is
completely ignored. . . . The Military Commanders behave like so many Sultans
who demand, or more accurately exact, huge sums of money . . .’ Because of the
requisitions there was a desperate shortage of animals, and work in the ﬁelds had
almost ceased. The inhabitants of the casali never approached the town for fear of
being robbed.
   The report went on to argue that so-called patriots had at ﬁrst been treated with
contempt because they were demoralized, but now they needed to be watched
carefully. Many were genuine in their support for the government:
but since Private interest is everything in these venal towns, many of them are loyal only for
their own purposes and so that they can use the arm of the military Government to
revenge. . . . Many Individuals who have laid down their arms and taken advantage of the
Amnesty have then been robbed and imprisoned by the Ofﬁcers of the Provincial Guards
either for personal reasons or through thirst for gain, all of which produces serious unrest and
foments the brigandage that everyone seems determined to perpetuate. . . . The confusion
that reigns everywhere is almost impossible to describe, and the only spirit that prevails is that
of extortion and robbery on one hand, discontent and difﬁdence on the other.²³


  ²² ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), 2243, Intendent of Calabria Citeriore to Miot de Melito,
11 October 1806.       ²³ Ibid., Ilarbelli (Segretario della Provincia) to Miot, 16 November 1806.
