                                          Disorder                                  211

he ordered that the goods of all those unwilling to support him be seized. He
had over 400 men with him, among them spies placed by Saliceti who reported
that Pezza’s supplies were coming from the Papal States and that his men ‘were
organised like Regular Troops and like the former masse take the name of Corpo
Volante’.
   Without Gaeta it was difﬁcult for the royalist bands to survive, however, and as
winter approached Pezza was forced to take to the mountains. In October the
Intendent of Lucera reported that he had moved into Molise and was trying to
raise fresh support but ‘The People up to now have not rallied to him. No town or
village is currently under his control.’ Every town had been ordered to prepare its
defences and Campobasso supplied 300 men for the Civil Guard and 150 more
came from Bojano.⁵ Pezza then tried to join the insurrections in Calabria, but he was
captured at Baronessa near Salerno in November and immediately shot. By the end
of the winter the government had regained control of the northern provinces.⁶


                         THE CAL ABRIAN REVOLT

In the meantime the Calabrian provinces had risen in revolt following Sir John
Stuart’s victory at Maida on 2 July 1806. When General Reynier’s troops pursued
the defeated Bourbon army into Calabria in March 1806, the situation had
initially been quiet. Reynier reported on 5 March that the royalists’ appeal for
a levée en masse had fallen on deaf ears: ‘The inhabitants remained peacefully in
their villages as we advanced from Eboli towards Lagonegro. They even seem con-
tent to see my troops.’ Reynier proceeded by way of Cosenza to Monteleone,
where his army met a warm welcome: ‘The inhabitants of the villages all along
our route have come in crowds to watch us pass, which is an excellent sign of the
conﬁdence they have in us.’ The general felt sufﬁciently relaxed to report on
the conditions of the country:
This is a magniﬁcent land, but it has been depopulated by the recent earthquakes and
above all by a detestable system of government. We see many ﬁelds which have been
left uncultivated and allowed to ﬁll with water and become unhealthy. . . . The towns and
villages have been only partially rebuilt and we are surrounded by the most impoverished
and wretched-looking peasants in the midst of one of the most beautiful and fertile
landscapes imaginable.
    On the 20 March his troops entered Reggio, where they were again warmly
greeted by the people and the clergy. Reynier was eager to press across the Straits
because his troops ‘would have preferred a winter campaign in Germany to this
little campaign in Calabria, and they cannot bear the idea of returning home by

                  ⁵ Ibid., Intendente of Lucera to Saliceti, 21 October 1806.
                  ⁶ Ibid., Saliceti to Joseph Bonaparte, 1 November 1806.
