216                                  Napoleonic Naples

Calabrians are governed by two things: vendetta and theft’, but he also claimed
that the principal vendettas went back to 1799, and were directed against those
whom the Bourbons had placed in ofﬁce. These conﬂicts were especially violent in
the casali of Cosenza, where the Bourbons had never dared call for a levée en masse
because ‘It is of no interest to these people whether the present or the former king
rules: who rules is a matter of no importance for them, although the ruler that
allows them freedom to murder and rob will always be their choice.’
   There was great discontent above all because of the heavy taxes paid by the poor,
especially the poll-tax (testatico), which the people had hoped the French would abol-
ish. But English and Sicilian agents were the principal instigators of the insurrection.
They provided supplies for the former leaders of the popular masse, and in this were
aided and abetted by the priests and friars ‘of whom there are very large numbers in
this Province and who were frequently the principal organisers of the revolts’.
   The Intendent recommended that taxes should be waived for three years, but
he also argued that the measures taken so far had beneﬁted only the poorest:
‘the very people who in the recent fatal events in this Province far from suffering
losses have greatly bettered their situation, since they are the ones who have given
themselves over to brigandage and hence to theft and Robberies’. The true victims
were not the poor but ‘the class of landowners who bear the principal burden of
both the old and new taxes’. Amnesties, he argued, did not work. ‘These People
cannot be controlled or ruled with tenderness.’¹⁹
   Reynier also understood that in most cases his men arrived only after the
brigands had already departed a village, ‘leaving only peaceful folks and those who
support us, who are generally the rich: if we rob and burn, we ruin the people
who are our own supporters’.²⁰ In his view the best way to end the disturbances
was to force the landowners to establish permanent Civic Guard units. ‘Wherever
they have felt themselves to be sufﬁciently supported by French troops, they have
served us very well.’ But the landowners feared the people:
This hatred, which was deliberately stirred up by the former government . . . is the prin-
cipal source of the spirit of insurrection and Brigandage which can only be destroyed
by bringing the people under a severe yoke that will force them to submit, so that they may
discover how much they have to gain from the new order of things.
But Reynier also insisted that to destroy brigandage it was necessary ﬁrst to
destroy ‘the vices of the former system of government’ and he urged the govern-
ment to abolish feudalism and set up a new administration as soon as possible.²¹
  Winter approached and control over Lower Calabria was still tenuous. Coreme
had returned to the Sila Mountains, and on the western coast the capo-massa
De Michele had put up posters calling for an ‘independent democratic Republic’.

  ¹⁹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), 2243 (Calabria Citra), Intendent Palumbo to Min. dell’Interno,
22 September 1806.
  ²⁰ A de G: C(5*) 31*, Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte, Cassano, 9 August 1806.
  ²¹ Ibid., Reynier to Joseph Bonaparte, 19 October 1806.
