214                                  Napoleonic Naples
provided him with a band of loyal junior ofﬁcers. All the others were employed in the
numerous industries that existed on the feudal estates of the Duke of Corigliano, number-
ing no less than ﬁve or six hundred men and women who all shared Visceglia’s views. They
caused it to be rumoured (because this had no truth) that the Duke was greatly attached to
the former Dynasty and was one of the principal promoters of the return of the Bourbon
family.¹³
   Visciglia did not make his move until the insurrections spread from
Longobucco to the neighbouring towns of S. Giovanni in Fiore and Bocchigliero
where the leader was ‘Filippo Barberio, who belonged to one of the wealthiest
families in that place’. When other wealthy families tried to stop the revolt, one of
Visciglia’s associates Tommaso Rizzuti—a leader of the royalist revolt in
Bochigliero in 1799 ‘who had tried then to destroy the leading families of that
town’—appealed for help to Coreme, who brought his men from Longobucco.
When they reached Bochigliero, Coreme’s shepherds burned down the houses of
the ‘patriots’, whom they ﬁrst shot and decapitated before looting their property,
although ‘their women were allowed to enter the convent of Santa Chiara, but
with only one dress and the rest of their property was conﬁscated’.¹⁴
   The disturbances next spread to Acri, where there had been no violence in 1799
‘because of the true harmony that existed amongst the persons of intelligence
and their followers’. But after Maida, the priest Antonino Rosa Cozza had set
himself up as a royalist leader with the support of his brother and contacted
royalist sympathizers in other towns. In this case, their target was the neighbour-
ing Greek orthodox communities, whose animals they immediately seized. Paying
other bands to stay away from the district, Cozza’s followers took control over
the outlying villages, which they accused of being Jacobin sympathizers and
demanded ransoms.
   By now the bands were looting and ransoming villages at will. The activities of
Cozza’s men attracted the attention of other more powerful bands, and on 10
August the brigand known as Francatrippa entered the town with seventy-ﬁve
armed men. He demanded a gift of 8,000 ducats and ordered that the houses
belonging to the Capalbo family, ‘with whom he had a long-standing vendetta’, be
burned down. Francatrippa’s supporters were said to come mainly from the outlying
villages and hamlets and ‘with this encouragement the most infamous section of the
people came to worship Francatrippa and called for a general sack of the town’.¹⁵
   Similar events took place in other towns. On 13 August, the bandit
Panedigrano occupied Bisignano and demanded cash ransoms from all the sur-
rounding towns. Two days later Francatrippa returned to Acri, where his men
murdered the members of the Fusari, Capalbo, and Padula families before moving
on to S. Soﬁa where the Greek Orthodox bishop D. Francesco Bugliari was
brutally murdered, together with his brother and four other leading citizens.¹⁶

       ¹³ BNP: Fonds Italiens, 1127.          ¹⁴ Ibid.
       ¹⁵ Ibid.: Memoria sopra le fatali evvenimenti del comune di Acri.   ¹⁶ Ibid.
