                                            Disorder                                              219
town (una solitudine fabbricata). The number of Families that have emigrated amount to
no fewer than six hundred. Since they own much land, I was asked . . . whether they should
be sequestered. But my answer was NO! I am convinced that the greater part of these
Emigrants harbour no hostile intent, and whole families rarely emigrate unless driven to
do so through fear.²⁹



                                   CONSCRIPTION

Murat’s decision to double the conscription quotas in 1809 was not a principal
cause of brigandage, but it certainly created many new recruits for the brigand
bands. Except in the frontier provinces, there had previously been no conscription
in the Kingdom until 1802 when the Bourbons attempted a more general draft,
but without success. Despite intense pressure from the emperor, Joseph
Bonaparte had deferred introducing the more extensive French model of con-
scription because he knew that he did not have the means to enforce it.
   Experience showed that conscription could be successfully enforced only with
the support of local elites, and once that was achieved conscription became a rela-
tively routine, albeit deeply resented, operation.³⁰ This was the case in Lombardy
and in Tuscany, but where the French could not count on the active cooperation
of local elites conscription proved almost impossible to enforce. The most extreme
case was the Papal State, where attempts to impose conscription in Rome in April
1810 caused rioting in the streets. About a third of those liable to be drafted ﬂed,
and the Castel S. Angelo was mobbed by the mothers and sweethearts of the con-
scripts demanding their release. General de Tournon brushed aside their protests
with the comment that ‘it was often a soldier’s duty to make pretty girls and loving
mammas weep’, but as soon as they were escorted out of the city almost all of the
conscripts escaped and joined the bands of brigands proliferating in central Italy.
   Despite the military commissions and the regular executions of ‘refractories’ by
ﬁring squad in the Piazza del Popolo, resistance to conscription in Rome was a
principal cause of the brigandage that spread throughout the former papal
provinces in 1810 and 1811.³¹ ‘We keep arresting them and shooting them, but
the real brigands always get away.’³² But as law and order in central Italy collapsed,
brigand bands moved with increasing freedom across the northern frontiers of the
Kingdom of Naples and raided deep into Apulia, Capitanata, and Basilicata.
   In Naples, Joseph Bonaparte ﬁrst introduced a form of voluntary conscription
in 1807. The conscripts were to be chosen by lottery, and exemptions were
available to those willing to pay. But this did not work and in 1808 the quotas
were extended for the ﬁrst time to the capital and the Calabrian provinces.³³
    ²⁹ ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte 381 AP 4: Correspondance de C. Saliceti: 13 July 1808.
    ³⁰ See especially Antonielli (1983) and Filippini (1980a, b). On France see Forrest (1987).
    ³¹ Madelin (1906), 303–14, 455.            ³² Ibid. 466.
    ³³ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1126 (January 1808).
