                                        Disorder                                      215

   Five citizens from Acri managed to reach Cosenza and beg Reynier and
Masséna for help. They dispatched a small column that liberated Acri early in
September and drove the brigands into the Sila Mountains, but the French
commander was unable to control his own men who in their turn sacked Acri
again and on their return sold large quantities of the silk they had seized from the
brigands in Bisignano.
   Meanwhile, Coreme made his summer headquarters at Longobucco:
There he appointed Captains and showed preference in giving promotions to those he
most trusted, which is to say his less fortunate brothers and cousins and his most faithful
friends.
He took the rank of General and ‘exercised a vast jurisdiction: indeed what might
be called an imperium mero e misto which extended throughout the neighbouring
villages. These were ruled by his Captains.’ Coreme was the source of all authority:
‘He governed all things, gave dispensations for marriages and divorces, conferred
ecclesiastical beneﬁces and ﬁlled vacant parishes. Behold a shepherd raised to
be king!’
   When in August Coreme’s men joined the assault on Acri they were surprised
by Reynier’s troops, but Coreme and his principal followers managed to escape to
Sicily: ‘so that only the innocent were left to be punished’.¹⁷
   The allies still held Amantea, on the coast, but by September the operations of
the brigand bands were more limited and the landowners were complying
with Reynier’s instructions to establish Civic Guards. Many of the smaller bands
were still at large and there were ‘frequent kidnappings, damage to property
and ambushes. The brigands had prevented the harvest from being brought in,
and now interrupted trafﬁc, burned down barns and sometimes grain and dried
goods, cut down fruit-bearing trees, destroyed vines, slaughtered cattle and other
livestock not only to have something to eat but to damage and destroy. They also
carried off many women to use at their pleasure, and then murdered them so that
they could not reveal their hiding places.’
   In the meantime the authorities had deployed a range of measures to destroy
the bands. General Pignatelli and Colonel Manhès ‘gave orders that no-one
should take with them into the ﬁelds or pastures where the ﬂocks were grazed
more food than was needed for a single day’ in an attempt to starve the brigands
out. Reprisals were taken against the relatives of wanted brigands, while amnesties
were offered to brigands who gave themselves up voluntarily. Those who surren-
dered were in theory not to be punished but ‘since it could not be tolerated that
they should be permitted to live within the felicity of a peaceful society, they were
quickly got rid of in different ways’.¹⁸
   Senior ofﬁcials were also speculating on the underlying causes of the disorders.
For the Intendent of Upper Calabria the answer was that ‘the Hearts of the

                                  ¹⁷ Ibid.       ¹⁸ Ibid.
