220                                 Napoleonic Naples

The system still proved workable only in the frontier provinces where the older
levée en masse was familiar. But it was not applied in the Terra di Lavoro or in
Basilicata and virtually no attempt was made to enforce it in Calabria or in Naples.
Even so, Sir John Stuart informed Lord Castelreagh that conscription was the
main cause of ‘the frequent risings in the Calabrian provinces that are causing
growing alarm amongst the French authorities’.³⁴
   The Kingdom’s conscription quotas were met by sending convicts or captured
brigands to the military depots.³⁵ Then against the background of the campaign
against Austria and eager to ingratiate himself with the emperor, Murat doubled
the conscription quota in March 1809. In every province internment camps for
draft-evaders (Depots de Refractaires) were set up, but the civil and the military
authorities reported that the rates of desertion were enormous.³⁶ In the Calabrian
provinces conscription simply provoked a mass exodus of men of military age,
many of whom ﬂed to Sicily:
in Sicigliano, Aprigliano, S.Giovanni in Fiore the population has demonstrated its refusal
to submit to the law so that not one young man of military age is to be seen in any of these
towns.³⁷
   To meet the emperor’s unrelenting demands more criminals and captured brig-
ands were drafted and marched north. Most escaped in transit and went to the
hills to join other bands of brigands, while many that made the journey were sent
back as unﬁt to serve in the Grande Armée.


                                ILLICIT PROFITS

One reason for the persistence of brigandage was of course that it was very prof-
itable. The brigands’ principal business was demanding cash ransoms, pillaging,
and looting, of which they were not necessarily the principal beneﬁciaries.
But brigandage also gave rise to many ancillary industries, not least the system
of amnesties that sustained simple protection rackets of which the brigands—but
not only the brigands—were the principal targets. Copied or forged certiﬁcates of
amnesty were freely bought and sold, and large proﬁts were made. Anyone
accused of being a brigand or associating with brigands stood to lose not only his
or her life, but the property and possessions of their families as well. Genuine
brigands could easily obtain fake amnesty certiﬁcates, while completely innocent
people could be the target of a fake denunciation. The best guarantee was a
powerful patron, which put patronage at a premium.


³⁴ PRO: WO 1, 306 (Sicily 1808) General Sir John Stuart to Castlereagh, Messina, 25 May 1808.
³⁵ Cortese (1926), 320.
³⁶ Le Brethon vii. 48; Murat to Reynier, 1 March 1809; Caldora (1960), 407.
³⁷ A de G: C(5*) 42; Rapports au Roi, Naples, 17 April 1810.
