                                           Disorder                                          227

ﬁnally received the ‘the happy news of the death of the notorious Beinincasa’ at the
hands of Ianelli’s men.⁵⁷
   Manhès claimed to have killed or executed 900 brigands in Calabria during the
winter of 1810–11.⁵⁸ The report drawn up by the Reale Gendarmeria a year later
stated that between November 1806 and March 1811, ‘the day on which this
province was ﬁnally freed of these monsters’, 5,421 bandits had surrendered or
been captured, killed, or executed in the province of Lower Calabria alone. The
largest numbers of brigands and their supporters were from the districts of
Monteleone, Catanzaro, Reggio, and Gerace.⁵⁹
   In January 1811, Manhès’s special powers were extended to the sprawling
province of Basilicata.⁶⁰ As they had done in Calabria, Manhès and his ofﬁcers
identiﬁed individual brigand leaders and then used bribes and brought pressure
on their protectors to bring about their betrayal and capture. Amnesties and par-
dons were offered freely to ordinary deserters and draft evaders who surrendered
voluntarily.
   As summer approached Manhès also recruited the assistance of the bands of
reapers who travelled in large convoys as they moved from province to province to
work on the harvest. The emergency regulations that banned all movement in the
countryside threatened the livelihood of these migrant labourers, but in return for
being allowed to go about their normal business they provided the authorities
with valuable information on the movements of the brigands. On many occasions
the caravans of migrant reapers attacked and captured or killed bandits to col-
lect the ransom money. Their victims included ‘the ferocious Big Glass Eye’, who
was hacked to pieces by the scythes of a band of reapers near Ascoli, and Cesare
Rosello of Pescopagano, who was killed in June by reapers near the village of
Calitri.⁶¹
   As in Calabria, Manhès was merciless with anyone who provided help for the
brigands. In May, he hanged four peasants suspected of taking food to the bandit
Taccone: ‘This example of severity was necessary to cause fear among those
who might be tempted to copy them.’ He was no less effective in targeting the
wealthier protectors of the brigands and the strategy worked as it had in Calabria.
   By early summer, the principal brigand leaders in Basilicata were in his hands.
Those captured rather than killed were sent to the Military Commission in
Matera, where their trials became the occasion for public display. To celebrate the
capture of the bandit Quagliarello, in June Manhès ordered that the other cap-
tured bandits were to be taken to Matera where they were to be hanged one a day


  ⁵⁷ BNN: Bancone 8 B 17 Copia delle lettere originali del Sig. Tenente Generale Manhès; 19
December 1810; 24 December 1810; 4 February 1811; 17 February 1811; 21 February 1811; 17
March 1811.                      ⁵⁸ A de G: C(5*) 43, Rapports journaliers au Roi, 7 January 1811.
  ⁵⁹ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1125. Brigands killed and captured in Calabria Ultra (June 1812).
  ⁶⁰ Basilicata stretched from Capitanata and Apulia in the east and north to the Lower Principato
and Upper Calabria in the west and south.           ⁶¹ A de G: C(5*) 33, Basilicata, 14 May 1811.
