226                                     Napoleonic Naples

logical extreme and anticipating more modern counter-insurgency tactics made
the rural communities hostages for the actions of the brigands.
   The campaign against the brigands that followed was accompanied by levels of
brutality that made contemporaries recoil in horror. As winter approached,
Manhès starved the brigands into abandoning their mountain hideouts. Writing
much later, Pietro Colletta described how Manhès
waited for the harvest to end and for the leaves to drop, then in each comune he published
a list of bandits and made the villages responsible for catching them.
   The Calabrian provinces were placed under curfew,⁵³ the churches were closed,
and the priests were removed so that no one could take communion, be baptized,
married, or buried until the brigands were caught.⁵⁴ On threat of summary
execution, no peasant or labourer was to take food into the ﬁelds or leave animals
unattended. Secret communications even between husband and wife were
prohibited on pain of death, shepherds were forbidden to move with their ﬂocks
without permission, agricultural work in the ﬁelds outside the villages was
suspended, and soldiers were billeted in every town, village, and hamlet until the
bandits surrendered.⁵⁵
   The aim was to starve the brigands into submission, and it succeeded. As winter
approached:
the brigands were forced to live off acorns and wild berries, and had to retreat to remote
caves to survive one more day. But the skies, as if weary to witness all this mischief, played
their part in bringing about their destruction and hurled down so much snow that even the
most hardened of these assassins gave up all hope. Every day brought news of new arrests,
killings and surrenders.⁵⁶
   Manhès also mounted a carefully prepared propaganda war, deliberately build-
ing up the notoriety of the brigand leaders he most wanted to capture. He con-
stantly reminded his assistant, Colonel Ianelli, of the need to concentrate his
resources on capturing and killing the capo-brigante Benincasa: ‘Benincasa must
fall under your guns, show me what you can do!’ In February 1811 Benincasa was
still eluding Ianelli, and Manhès sent reinforcements. Barely a fortnight later the
General congratulated Ianelli for killing another wanted brigand, Parafante, and
capturing twenty-ﬁve of his followers, and from Cosenza he ordered Ianelli to
send him the heads of the slaughtered brigands, as well as Parafante’s ‘women’ who
had been captured and were subsequently hanged in Cosenza. But he repeated,
‘Benincasa in our hands, that will be the crowning glory!’ Then on 17 March he


   ⁵³ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1124, Note essenziali sulle vite dei più famosi capi briganti delle Calabrie:
travail fait par l’Adjutant Générale Ianelli.
   ⁵⁴ Notizia storica sul Conte Carlo Antonio Manhès (1846), 66.
   ⁵⁵ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 342. In 1810 Colletta was serving as Intendent in Monteleone
under Manhès’s direct command.
   ⁵⁶ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1127, Memoria sopra li fatali avvenimenti del comune di Acri, p. 32.
