                                           Disorder                                         229

forced Taccone’s lover, Rosa di Stefano, to enter a convent on the grounds that
Taccone was already married.⁶⁶
    Taccone was captured alive in June 1811, and there was great alarm when
Manhès travelled to Potenza to interrogate him before he went to the gallows
because it was widely feared that he would reveal his network of protectors.⁶⁷
Reporting the killing of the brigand Giuseppe Russo of Montepane, ‘a tyrant with
no soul’; who was held responsible for more than a hundred murders in the area
around Catanzaro, in February 1811, Manhès noted that Russo had been found
while hiding in the house of a wealthy landowner: ‘this infamous protector of so
cruel a man escaped but we are pursuing him and have demolished his house’.⁶⁸
    In December 1810 he told Ianelli that he was unable to join in the pursuit of
the bandit Benincasa because he had to pay an important visit to a certain ‘Signor
Barracco’.⁶⁹ This was Don Alfonso Barracco, a wealthy landowner who was one
of the largest purchasers of beni nazionali in Lower Calabria and would emerge
from the French period as the epitome of the new latifundist with suitable noble
titles to match.⁷⁰
    Barracco had purchased huge tracts of land in the Sila forest where he had
extensive interests in sheep grazing. His property had been attacked in 1806, but
he later received substantial compensation for supporting the French. In 1809
the Intendent Briot had accused Barracco of trading pardons and amnesties with
known brigands, and he informed Manhès that Barracco was almost certainly the
leading protector of the brigands operating in the region.⁷¹
    Hence the General decided to visit Signor Barracco on his estates in December
1810. During the meeting, the General informed Don Alfonso that he was
suspected of being an enemy of the state and that without immediate proof of his
loyalty his previous good services would count for nothing. Two events followed
that may, or may not, have been connected. The remaining bandits in the Sila
region were captured and killed by Manhès’s men within the next two months,
while Barracco (in return?) received a military safe-conduct from Manhès in 1811
and a further cash compensation of 200,000 ducats—a very large sum—from the
government. As a token of his esteem, Don Alfonso presented General Manhès
with two white stallions bred on his estates.⁷²
    Manhès’s willingness to identify and challenge the brigands’ supporters made
him widely feared, but also made him powerful enemies and it is hardly surprising
that he became a target of defamation. The tactics he used were part of the
armoury of counter-insurgency methods employed by the military that had been
reﬁned during the campaigns against the Breton chouans and were not essentially
different from those used by other commanders in Italy.

 ⁶⁶ Ibid. 1124.
 ⁶⁷ A de G: C(5*) 33 Manhès: Rapports généraux au Roi, Calabria Citra, 25 May 1811.
 ⁶⁸ Ibid., C(5*) 43: Rapports journaliers au Roi (1811): Manhès to Murat, 15 February 1811.
 ⁶⁹ BNN: Bancone 8 B: Copia lettere del Signor Tenente General Manhès, 19 December 1810.
 ⁷⁰ On the Baracco family, see Petrusewicz (1978), 339–44.
 ⁷¹ Ibid. See also Caldora (1960), 424.        ⁷² Caldora (1960), 424; Petrusewicz (1978), 344.
