                                              Disorder                                            223

Tommaso ‘and other miscreants’. When his son was captured, Quartucci surren-
dered and was shot. The same fate befell Andrea Cucchiarella of Fregene L’Abate,
who ‘until 1807 lived by honest labour’ but then raised an armed band. In
October 1810 he and his followers gave themselves up but they too were shot,
because ‘they had not surrendered in the proper manner’.
   Some of the brigands came from a little further up the social order. Francesco
Curcio, known as Orlandino, owned a herd of cattle (massaro di bovi). Vincenzo
Luca, known as Zampogna, was a well-to-do farmer who took to the hills of
the Marchesato after killing his father in a brawl. He became infamous for his
robberies and violence; his trademark was to rape the daughters of the landowners
he held to ransom.⁴⁴
   Other descriptions seem to have been more fanciful, as in the case of Giuseppe
Rotella, who was ambushed and killed in October 1809. Known simply as ‘The
Hangman’ (Il Boja), Rotella’s ‘custom was to cut off the nose and ears of his
victims and give them to his dogs to eat’. His base was the town of Firotello: ‘and
even today nearly all of his fellow villagers have an ear or nose missing’.


                               WEBS OF COMPLICIT Y

These descriptions make it clear that the war against the brigands was also an
exercise in propaganda. Like the contemporary term ‘terrorist’, ‘brigandage’ and
‘banditry’ were interchangeable labels whose purpose was to place those deemed
responsible for criminal actions beyond the protection of the law. This had been
the case since medieval times, and a ‘bandit’ was a person deemed guilty by public
acclaim, who was then ‘banned’ and hence placed ‘outside’ the protection of
the law. Brigandage and banditry were terms that linguistically obscured the
boundaries of the legitimate and the illegitimate, and it was no accident that they
should have acquired a new notoriety at a time when the state was seeking to
acquire new powers. If in many different parts of Europe in the eighteenth
century brigandage became a problem, it was not because it was new or even
more visible but because the demarcations between public and private power
were changing.
   In its origins, brigandage was archetypally a frontier phenomenon, something
that occurred primarily on the boundaries of rival jurisdictions. But as rulers
looked to extend the power of the state, all forms of public disorder became pre-
texts for the state to intervene in places that had formerly been subject to private
jurisdiction. It is in that context that brigandage in southern Italy takes its wider
signiﬁcance as both a social and a political phenomenon.⁴⁵


   ⁴⁴ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1124. Note essenziali sulle vite dei più famosi capi briganti delle Calabrie:
travail fait par l’Adjutant Générale Fanelli.                         ⁴⁵ See also Davis (1989), 71–90.
