                                          Disorder                                        221

   While brigandage could take the form of challenging existing networks of
power, brigands were more likely to be part of those networks. The mountains and
the upland pastures were where the brigands ruled, but these were also where
powerful landowners grazed their ﬂocks and maintained their own armed guards
to protect their livestock and the pasture. The bands that survived the longest were
likely to be those with the most powerful patrons, who could also protect them in
other ways. The trade in fake amnesties was only one example, and while many
of those involved were corrupt ofﬁcials powerful patrons were also prominent
players. In 1809 Pierre Joseph Briot, the Intendent of Lower Calabria, accused
one of the wealthiest landowners in the province, Alfonso Baracco, of making
large proﬁts from supplying amnesties to wanted criminals and notorious bandits.
   The brigands’ need for protection enabled the powerful to take their cut from
the lucrative trafﬁc in stolen goods and livestock, and in particular to share in the
rich proﬁts offered by the trade in smuggled British colonial goods and manufac-
tures. The proximity of Sicily and Malta made southern Italy the closest and
easiest point of entry for banned British goods in southern Europe, and thanks to
the emperor’s efforts to enforce the Continental blockade the value of this illicit
trade continued to rise. Not only many Calabrian landowners, but also senior
French civil and military ofﬁcials were deeply and proﬁtably involved. In 1810 the
Intendent Briot accused the senior French commander in Calabria, General
Cavaignac, of being the principal protector of the contraband trade in the
province.³⁸ Cavaignac responded by levelling the same accusation against Briot,
but there is clear evidence of the involvement of other French ofﬁcers at the most
senior level down to the end of Murat’s Kingdom.³⁹
   These were not small enterprises. The inventory of British manufactured and
colonial goods entering Sicily and Malta after 1806 was roughly equivalent to the
legitimate British trade that had formerly entered Italy through the ports of
Naples, Livorno, and Genoa. Much of that inventory now found its way across
the Straits of Messina. From there, the goods were moved throughout the
Kingdom, then across the frontier into the Papal States and from there to the
Kingdom of Italy.⁴⁰ When the British recaptured the Ionian islands in 1810,
the Adriatic provinces became a second front for the contraband trade and
British goods from Malta to Corfu quickly found their way onto the unguarded
beaches of the Gargano peninsula.⁴¹
   Since southern Italy had been invaded in 1806 mainly in order to extend the
blockade on British trade, it was more than ironical that many of those French
ofﬁcers who been had sent to rot in a far-ﬂung outpost of empire should instead
grow rich by subverting a central pillar of the imperial project.


  ³⁸ Heuron (1960), 125–37.
  ³⁹ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1125 (add.), Rapports au Roi, 18 October 1809.
  ⁴⁰ Heuron (1960), 125–37; D’Angelo (1988), 47–115; idem (1990), 125–37; Melita (1999),
113–72.                          ⁴¹ A de G: C(5*) 33; Rapports au Roi, Capitanata, 17 May 1811.
