228                                  Napoleonic Naples

throughout the period of the fair. He also organized a great festa in Potenza during
which dowry portions were distributed to ‘four girls from poor families’.⁶²
    For the single district of Lagonegro, the ofﬁcial ﬁgures recorded 366 brigands
killed, captured, or condemned to death between June and October 1811 alone,
including one woman, Olivia Laurenzana: ‘This woman dressed like a man and
fully armed followed her lover the Brigand leader known as Francesco Vacca di
Guardarella’, who had committed endless crimes and was killed by the Civic
Guard.⁶³ In June 1811 Manhès reported that the provinces were now tranquil.
But this proved to be only a temporary lull, and the following year the disorders
revived and continued until after Murat’s reign.
    Manhès liked to present himself as the ‘champion of the poor, your true protector
and defender’,⁶⁴ but his tactics were effective mainly because he was prepared
to expose the powerful ﬁgures behind the brigands. In the spring of 1811, for
example, he threatened to arrest the leading landowners in the Silan town of Acri
unless the brigand leader Francesco Fridizza was found. It was then revealed that
the wives of Fridizza and his lieutenant were living openly in nearby Longobucco.
They were arrested and when questioned the women revealed the hiding places
of their men. Fridizza surrendered and was killed, then his body and those of
the other slain brigands were ‘exposed in irons in the public square until the ﬂesh
was consumed’.⁶⁵
    One of Manhès’s principal targets in Basilicata in the spring of 1811 was the
capo-brigante known as Taccone. Taccone’s base was the town of Laurenzana
where he had many supporters, including the guardiano of the Palazzo Baronale
and the agent of the Duke of Belgioioso. Another accomplice was ‘Signor Don
Domenico Asselda, a wealthy galantuomo and the commander of the Legion in
that town. Asselda was a friend of Taccone, who had done him many services, for
which reason he had never persecuted him and indeed they were often seen
together.’ Two of Taccone’s fellow brigands, Sacrola and Pecori, were friends of the
commander of the Legionari in the town of Sicigliano, who supplied them with
lists of landowners who willingly agreed to pay to avoid damage to their property.
    Although he was one of the most wanted brigands in Basilicata, Taccone’s wife
lived openly in Laurenzana, where Taccone also attended the baptism of their
infant son. His accomplice, Domenico Asselda was responsible for murdering the
mayor of the neighbouring town of Abriola, who had imprisoned a brother of one
of the bandits. Taccone and his men moved to Calabria, where they raised money
from many towns and burned down those that refused to pay, but they received
supplies from many landowners. As well as sending ammunition, Domenico
Asselda recruited men to join the Taccone’s band and paid them 5 carlini a day.
Asselda also agreed to have the arch-priest of Abriola murdered because he had

      ⁶² A de G: C(5*) 33, Basilicata, 5 June 1811.
      ⁶³ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1125, Répression, vol. ii.
      ⁶⁴ Notizia storica sul Conte Carlo Antonio Manhès (1846), 72.
      ⁶⁵ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1127, Memoria sopra li fatali avvenimenti nel comune di Acri.
