230                                  Napoleonic Naples

   Nonetheless, Manhès was repeatedly singled out for his barbarity. De Nicola
noted in April 1811 that he had heard it said in Naples that in the region around
Potenza alone, Manhès had executed 600 brigands in the space of barely two
months.⁷³ In July, the envoy of the Kingdom of Italy in Naples, Tassoni d’Estense,
also referred to Manhès with revulsion:
I must confess that my heart and pen ﬂee from describing the excesses of cruelty that he has
used and which outdo the worst crimes committed by the Brigands . . . . He has violated
young girls, has allowed his soldiers to enter the jails to have their vile way with women
unjustly condemned to death, has caused fathers to kill their own sons, in short he has shed
rivers of blood in which that of the guilty has been mixed with the innocent.⁷⁴
   The episode that most fully epitomized the brutality of Manhès’s repression
was later recounted by Colletta, who claimed that Manhès’s men had executed
eleven young girls from the village of Stilo after it was discovered that they were
carrying loaves of bread in a basket as they went to the ﬁelds to glean corn.⁷⁵
   Whether or not these stories are true, they indicate that Manhès had made
powerful enemies in his pursuit of the brigands’ protectors. There were many
reasons why he was politically exposed. His patron, Saliceti, had died in 1809,
while his closeness to Murat and his rapid promotion made the other senior
French generals jealous, especially Cavaignac whose own murky operations were
in danger of being exposed by Murat’s unduly energetic aide-de-camp. It was no
coincidence, however, that the campaign against Manhès reached its height in
summer of 1811 at the moment when the crisis between Naples and Paris came to
a head and the pro-French and mainly French party at Court led by the queen
took power. As one of the very few French ofﬁcers who remained loyal to the king,
Manhès was an obvious target.


                                   CONCLUSION

Behind these cruel and seemingly pointless chronicles of random violence and
barbarity can be glimpsed the impact of Napoleon’s enterprise on the civilian popu-
lations of Europe. The horrors of war that Goya captured in Spain were repeated
on a Continental canvas, and it was the misfortune of the rural communities of
southern Italy that the war came to them in at least two different forms. They were
caught between the contending forces: the emperor’s enemies in Sicily were con-
stantly engaged in provoking and inciting disorder, while the ever-growing ﬂows
of contraband placed further strains on the fragile sinews of authority. In Calabria
these external disasters were imposed on a region where social tensions were


                 ⁷³ De Nicola, 28 April 1811, 559.
                 ⁷⁴ Cited in Cutolo (1937), Tassoni Estensi, 15 July 1811, 410.
                 ⁷⁵ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 342.
