222                                  Napoleonic Naples


                               BRIGAND PROFILES

The brigands had faces; however, the ways in which these were carefully recorded
by authorities raise many questions about those doing the recording. Most often
the descriptions simply retailed set stereotypes, depicting the bandits as inhuman
enemies of the modernizing mission of the new order, a subhuman race of atav-
istic barbarians and monsters that threatened the essence of civilization. This was
clearly the intention of the ofﬁcial who in 1812 concluded a report on the bandits
captured and executed in Calabria by the gendarmerie since 1810 by stating that
their crimes were too heinous to record, but then did so in graphic detail:
Men ﬂayed alive, mutilated, killed by beating with sticks or stones, torn apart by mastiffs,
burned alive and their members eaten, made to die slowly while being turned by knives, as
their ﬂesh is stripped from their bodies and the blood from their wounds drunk in bowls:
hung upside down from the branches of trees while slivers of cane are forced under their
nails and made to suffocate with smoke from ﬁres lit under the trees . . . these were their
daily amusements.⁴²
   The thumbnail sketches found in these military reports nonetheless reveal
many who resembled Eric Hobsbawm’s ‘social bandits’:⁴³ poor men—but also
women—who became involved in a quarrel with a neighbour over property,
animals, or women, committed a crime and took to the hills where they joined or
formed their own band of followers and then lived off raiding and ransoming
landowners and towns in territories that could stretch from Calabria to Apulia,
the Abruzzi, and over the frontiers onto the plains of Lazio.
   Pietro Perugino of Pantelandotto, known as Auriello, for example, ‘lived in
utter poverty until 1807’ when he killed a neighbour and took to the hills. He
formed a small but violent band, which did not stray far from his native village but
continued to operate until he was captured and killed by the Legionari in 1811. At
the age of 14, the future brigand Giacomo Randelli was already ‘guilty of many
crimes’. He joined the army in 1798, was jailed for crimes of violence in 1799,
then escaped in 1806, and became a brigand but was captured and killed.
   Giovan-Battista Mancino from Castelpoto was a miller who became leader of a
band in 1806, but then surrendered and was amnestied. Carmine Carrattelli from
Solotia, know as the ‘Carter’, was a carpenter ‘but was always a trouble-maker’. He
escaped while serving a ﬁfteen-year jail sentence in 1799, was recaptured, and
escaped again in 1806 when he became a brigand until he too was captured
and executed in 1811. Achille Santoro, from the village of Liuni, was a black-
smith who formed a band with two fellow villagers. He surrendered during
an amnesty in 1807 and killed his former associates, but was shot while trying to
escape. Francesco Quartucci was another blacksmith whose band included his son
  ⁴² BNP: Fonds italiens, 1124. Report on brigands killed and captured in Calabria Ultra between
November 1806 and 31 March 1811 (8 June 1812).                        ⁴³ See Hobsbawm (1959).
