224                                 Napoleonic Naples

    In this respect, too, the French military occupation in 1806 can be seen as a
continuation by other and more forcible means of earlier Bourbon initiatives.
Both looked to widen the boundaries of the power of the state by reducing the
formal and informal private jurisdictions that had previously existed. This was a
very delicate process, not least because those localized systems of power had
already been undermined by the forces beginning to reshape the agrarian fabric
of the South.
    Calabria was not unique in any of these respects, and brigandage was never
solely a Calabrian phenomenon. But in the Calabrian provinces all these elements
were also present in extreme form. The region was distant from the centres of
administrative power, and also on the frontier of empire and hence directly
exposed to the disruptions caused by the war, the presence of a foreign force of
occupation, and a massive trade in contraband goods.
    As in many other parts of the Kingdom, the attempts by the French to assert the
authority of the state in Calabria came at a moment when local demarcations of
power were also shifting. The complex webs of interests that were inseparable
from the transhumant economies of this mountainous region made change espe-
cially complex and contentious but did not preclude challenges to the established
order. For those who wanted to assert their place in the new order, the adminis-
trative innovations of the new regime, and particularly the abolition of feudalism
and the division of the common lands, offered opportunities that could not easily
be overlooked. Response and reactions were, as a result, contradictory and at least
outwardly confused.
    As in the previous century, the conﬂicts focused around competition for scarce
resources—pasture, woodland, and water—with consequences that had already
been clearly set out in Giuseppe Zurlo’s earlier investigation into the causes of
lawlessness in the Sila forests in the 1790s. But as that report pointed out, the
poor were foot soldiers in wars being waged by powerful landowners intent on
asserting and protecting their rights over common pasture and public woodland.
Brigandage was both a means for pursuing local conﬂicts and a cover for those
responsible.⁴⁶
    Gradually the French ofﬁcials became aware of the pervasive webs of complicity
that enveloped the violence. General Cavaignac repeatedly complained that the
deep factional conﬂicts in the Calabrian towns ‘paralyse any attempt to move
against the Brigands’.⁴⁷ He also reported that in the district around Monteleone
all the most dangerous bandits were protected by powerful landowners:
in general the same individuals support all the brigand leaders and their followers, which is
why military force is only a secondary means for destroying the bandits who are protected
by the leading citizens who also have the means to help them evade with ease our attempts
to catch them.

             ⁴⁶ See Bianchini (1838), viii. 418–19.
             ⁴⁷ BNP: Fonds italiens, 1125 (add.), Rapports au Roi, 13 August 1809.
