238                                  Napoleonic Naples

   The same message was repeated in Zurlo’s Report on the State of the Realm in
1811. The Feudal Commission and the division of the demani had ﬁnally brought
to an end:
centuries-long litigation which almost from the time of the foundation of the monarchy
has fuelled the spirit of rivalry between the rural populations and the barons. As a result of
the two operations carried out by the Feudal Commission the property of the former
feudatories has been guaranteed; the rights they exercised on the common demani have
been separated from those of the local communities and the different forms of servitù and
other abusive rights exercised on public and private land have been suppressed.²⁴
   Both Winspeare and Zurlo had got it wrong, however. The Feudal
Commission began operating just as Manhès had been sent to repress the massive
resurgence of brigandage in Calabria that then spread to other provinces. Far from
strengthening support for the regime, the actions of the commissioners outraged
the nobles who claimed that they had been despoiled of property owned for
centuries. Those complaints led to Zurlo’s dismissal, which necessarily also under-
mined the successful implementation of the reforms.
   Even those closest to Zurlo acknowledged that the government did not have
the practical means to enforce the Commission’s rulings. Early in 1811 Angelo
Masci,²⁵ the Intendent of Lower Calabria, reported that powerful landowners had
easily subverted the rulings of the Feudal Commission when these threatened
their interests:
The torpor and inaction that Your Excellency has had cause to remark on in this
province . . . does not derive from ignorance but from the most horrible intrigues. The
Barons, the landowners and the owners of the biggest herds of sheep have all joined forces
to subvert the excellent measures taken to bring about the division of the common lands,
and the means that they have used to this end are all the more damaging because they have
also succeeded in deceiving the people so that they too agree in opposing them.²⁶
   Four months later Masci returned to the same subject:
The people in this province are so deeply accustomed to subservience that if the public
authorities are not constantly vigilant in checking the overbearing behaviour of the power-
ful there is no-one who has the courage to raise his head to assert the rights which the
Law confers on him. It is therefore extremely probable that notwithstanding the rulings
[of the Feudal Commission] previously referred to, if the authorities in each locality do
not constantly remain alert to ensure that they are observed, the former abuses will imme-
diately return.²⁷


  ²⁴ The Neapolitan Commission, he argued, had faithfully followed the French laws of 25 August
1792, which had also been applied by imperial decree to Piedmont, Genoa, Tuscany, Parma, and
Rome; Zurlo, in Lalli (ed.) (n.d.), 78.
  ²⁵ Masci had been one of the Economic Visitors in 1801–3, and was one of Zurlo’s conﬁdants.
  ²⁶ ASN: Carte Winspeare, Affari Demaniali f. 74: Masci to Zurlo, 2 February 1811.
  ²⁷ Ibid., Masci to Zurlo, 13 June 1811.
