                                      A Kingdom Divided                                          237

the local communities in proportion to the rights formerly exercised. Then on
24 February 1809 Murat reactivated the Feudal Commission to implement these
decrees, empowering it to settle all disputes relating to former feudal rights, and to
apportion former feudal estates between the owners and those claiming use-
rights. Those decisions would be made and carried out by a Commission for
Reallocation (Commissione dei Repartitori), which would divide the lands
allocated to the local communities amongst the inhabitants in the form of quit-
rent small holdings.¹⁹
   In October 1809 the membership of the Commission was again revised and its
ﬁve commissioners then set off to travel the length and breadth of the Kingdom to
hear and settle outstanding litigation and oversee the division of both the former
feudal estates and the common lands.²⁰ There were to be no appeals against their
judgments and the entire operation was to be completed within a year. This was
actually achieved and the Feudal Commission was indeed disbanded in August
1810, although the division of the common lands was extended to December
1811, after which its functions were taken over by the ordinary courts and the
regional Intendents’ councils.²¹
   Murat’s government moved energetically to gain maximum publicity for an
operation hailed as the ultimate demonstration of the beneﬁts that imperial rule
had brought to southern Italy. Davide Winspeare was commissioned to write a
History of the Abuses of Feudalism, the ﬁrst and only volume of which was pub-
lished by the government in 1811. This was a self-seeking work that larded a
defence of the Feudal Commission with an anecdotal history of feudalism selected
at random from the litanies of feudal abuses made familiar by the reform writers of
the previous century, including such Gothic horrors as the jus prima noctis.²² But
Winspeare’s main concern was to point out that this operation was not directed
against the landowners, and indeed had their full support. The lay feudatories had
long since converted feudal rents and personal services to money rents. Feudalism
had survived, Winspeare argued, only because of the Church which was the prin-
cipal owner of feudal property in the Kingdom and was deaf to modern principles.
This rather clumsy piece of propaganda closed by praising the altruism shown by
the Neapolitan feudatories who had fully supported the law of August 1806
because they, like the government, considered feudalism an anachronism:
The present day owners of feudal estates are quite different from their predecessors in their
culture and behaviour. Inspired by a new sense of public duty, they can no longer tolerate
these hateful feudal rights, although they remain determined to preserve and protect all
their revenues. As a result, they often condemn those very rights which in practice they
continue to exact.²³

   ¹⁹ Trifone (1909), 181–98; La Volpe (1930), ii. 125.
   ²⁰ Davide Winspeare was President with ﬁve commissioners: Paolo Nicola Giampaolo, Giuseppe
de Thomasis, Giuseppe Poerio, Girolamo Dumas, and Biase Zurlo.                 ²¹ Trifone (1909), 318.
   ²² A feudatory’s claim to sleep with his vassals’ brides on their wedding night.
   ²³ Winspeare (1811), 86–9.
