234                                   Napoleonic Naples

intermediary with both the imperial administration in Paris and the Bourbon
court in Palermo.⁹
   Of Murat’s inner group of advisers only Agar, who had always enjoyed the
queen’s conﬁdence, remained.¹⁰ The most prominent victim of the crisis, how-
ever, was the former Bourbon minister, Giuseppe Zurlo, Murat’s Neapolitan
Minister of the Interior. Arrogant and aloof, Zurlo was hated by both the French
and the Neapolitans, but the immediate reason for his fall was the Feudal
Commission, which both Agar and the queen believed Zurlo had turned into
an instrument of personal vendetta to ruin the old nobility that had seriously
jeopardized the regime’s security and reputation.


                         THE FEUDAL COMMISSION

Caroline Bonaparte’s intervention had Agar’s support and reﬂected a broader
concern that Murat had allowed Zurlo to alienate the great landowners who were
considered the new regime’s most powerful allies. Between February and August
1806 Joseph Bonaparte had assured his brother that ‘The seigneurs and the
wealthy landowners [who] were the enemies of the former Court and are friends
of the new order . . . for that reason I should avoid causing them offence by
making too many changes with respect to either property or the persons in my
employ.’¹¹
   As in the other Napoleonic states, the new regime’s initiatives were gauged
speciﬁcally to win the support of the landowners, who were among the principal
beneﬁciaries of the partial rescue of the creditors of the ancien régime and of
the sales of the beni nazionali. For the same reason, Joseph Bonaparte had been
unwilling to seize the lands of those who had followed the Bourbons to Palermo,
while the law of 2 August abolishing feudalism bent over backwards not to harm
the interests of the landed classes.¹²
   As in the rest of the empire, the law deprived the ex-feudatories of their political
powers, ﬁscal privileges, and some feudal revenues but left them with almost
everything else. All rights or monopolies not feudal in origin were converted to
private property or rents. Rivers and waterways became public property, but not
the ‘mills, mill wheels, olive presses, tanning works, paper-making shops, mineral
and dye-works, workshops for beating copper and similar constructions’ that sim-
ply became the private property of the former barons. Similarly ‘all rents or taxes
and other payments for the use of land whether in cash or in kind remain as they

   ⁹ See Croce, ‘Il marchese Caraccciolo’ (di Gallo’s uncle), in Uomini e cose della vecchia Italia
(1956), 82–111.
  ¹⁰ Jean Antoine Agar, Conte de Mosbourg (1771–1844); Tassoni thought he was out of his depth,
relied uncritically on French models, and had little knowledge or experience of matters ﬁnancial or
commercial; Cutolo (1937), 401.          ¹¹ ANP: AFiv 1714c; 22 February, 31 July, 8 August 1806.
  ¹² Villani (1964), 44–7; Ermice (2005), 126–9.
