                                   A Kingdom Divided                                      235

are, and are to be paid as due and to be considered private property’. One of the
most controversial sections of the new law stipulated that:
[T]he demani that formed part of the abolished feudal estates will remain the property of
their former owners. The local population will retain their common use rights on these
same estates and all other rights that they are entitled to until such time as the demani shall
be the subject of a new law that will lay down the terms for their division. . . . In the mean-
time, it is expressly forbidden that any changes or innovations be made.¹³
   However, the law of August 1806 demonstrated that it was one thing to abolish
feudalism where it no longer existed, but something quite different in Naples
where it was a pervasive and deeply contentious reality. The most critical weakness
of the new law was that it failed to take account of the questionable legality of
most of what was claimed by feudal title. This made the legitimacy of all property
rights—feudal or otherwise—uncertain and contentious, and was the issue that
had bedevilled every earlier attempt at reform. Had the law of August 1806 been
implemented it would have converted feudal property and rights into private
property and rents without recognizing the claims of the local communities.
Effectively, the disputes between the local communities and neighbouring lay and
ecclesiastical feudatories that for half a century had brought conﬂict and tension
to the rural South would have been settled exclusively in favour of the latter.
   It soon became clear that the new law was likely to provoke serious unrest,
because of both the expectations raised and what was actually promised. The
government was faced with the questions that had confronted all previous
attempts at reform and had overwhelmed the courts of the ancien régime: they had
to ﬁnd the means to distinguish feudal from non-feudal rents, rights, and property,
and to determine the legitimacy of all these highly contentious titles and claims.
   Unsure how to proceed but alarmed by the growing unrest, in January 1807 the
government suspended those sections of the law relating to the compensation of
feudal exactions and the division of the demani. But the way forward was unclear.
The ancien régime tribunals had been abolished, but the new legal codes had not
yet been introduced. In November 1807 the government therefore created a
Feudal Commission to review the contentious sections of the law of August 1806,
but when Joseph left for Spain in 1808 no progress had been made.¹⁴
   By the time of Murat’s arrival the issue could not safely be deferred much
longer, while the meetings of the provincial assemblies in the summer of 1808
revealed additional ﬁscal imperatives for settling outstanding disputes over rights
on both former feudal estates and the common lands. The disastrous state of local
ﬁnances that became evident when the provincial assemblies met demonstrated
that the reorganization of local administration could not progress without a more
general reorganization of local ﬁnances, which in turn could not be done without

  ¹³ Law on feudalism, 2 August 1806.
  ¹⁴ Its members were Davide Winspeare, Luigi Dragonetti, Giuseppe Raffaeli, Domenico
Franchini, and Vincenzo Cuoco.
