240                                   Napoleonic Naples

    The division of the commons would, he warned, inevitably give rise to innu-
merable new lawsuits and even where small farms had been established they were
unlikely to survive. The new tenant farmers were burdened by the entry taxes, by
the cost of equipment and seed, and also by the land tax to which they were
obliged to contribute in addition to local taxes. As their debts accumulated, they
were rarely able to survive the ﬁrst bad harvest or fall in prices, at which time
their land was easily absorbed by the wealthier landowners.³⁰
    Cuoco’s predictions proved right on both counts. Without a very broad and
general plan the work of the Feudal Commission could never have been com-
pleted. But the very short time in which it was required to issue its rulings resulted
in judgments that were arbitrary and inconsistent that gave rise to protest and
litigation that in some cases remained unresolved until over a century later.³¹
In the meantime, without access to credit, tax concessions, or loans to buy
equipment and crops few of the small farms that came into being as a result of the
division of the commons and the former feudal estates lasted for long, and most
were quickly incorporated into the properties of the wealthier landowners. As
Cuoco and others also warned, the division of the common lands and the ending
of older regulations also dramatically accelerated woodland clearances and exacer-
bated the damage to the fragile infrastructures of the southern economies in ways
that had already caused alarm amongst the economists of the previous century.³²


               MAGISTRATES AND THE RULE OF L AW

Vincenzo Cuoco was not the only supporter of the regime who denounced the
operations of the Feudal Commission. The Minister of Justice, Francesco
Ricciardi, also detested Zurlo and denounced the Feudal Commission as an insti-
tution which he described as a throwback to the absolutist tribunals of the ancien
régime and a ﬂagrant violation of the rule of law on which the new regime claimed
to be premised. But Ricciardi’s denunciation of the juridical premises of the
Feudal Commission—and also of the special powers conferred on Manhès—also
revealed the ways in which the magistrates were beginning to establish new
public roles.
   As we have seen, when Joseph Bonaparte left for Spain in 1808 the reorganiza-
tion of the administration of justice was completely stalled.³³ But the situation
changed rapidly in the years that followed and by 1811 the magistrates had
emerged as one of the most powerful professional groups in the new state. This
was the result of initiatives taken by the magistrates themselves, however, who


 ³⁰ Giuseppe Palmieri had given the same warning in the 1790s; Tocci (1971), 68–9.
 ³¹ Trifone (1909), 490.
 ³² See D’Elia (ed.) (1993), 3–80, 150–66, and Palmieri (ed.) (1993), pp. xviii–xxiv, 5–33, 71–7.
 ³³ See Chapter 9, p. 182–4.
