236                                  Napoleonic Naples

resolving the controversies over ownership of the common lands of the local
communities and their use-rights on former feudal estates.
   Giuseppe Zurlo now proposed that Joseph Bonaparte’s Feudal Commission be
given a new brief to enable it to carry out both the deﬁnitive division of the former
feudal estates and also the division of the former common lands. For Murat the
political advantages of the project were clear. At very little cost it would enable
the government to claim that it had realized its most ambitious modernizing
promise, while the reform could also be expected to bring signiﬁcant but less
strongly advertised increases in tax yields for both local government and the state.
   In many respects Zurlo also seemed ideally well qualiﬁed to carry the operation
through. He had been the architect of the Bourbon decree of 1792 ordering the
division of the common lands, while his former absolutist training well equipped
him as a Napoleonic administrator.¹⁵ He had complete conﬁdence both in abso-
lutist measures and in a reform project that many critics believed to be too abstract
to accommodate the widely varying circumstances of the South and in any case
probably impossible to implement.¹⁶
   These were not criticisms to which Zurlo paid much attention, although to the
irritation of the French party at court he did openly acknowledge the defects of
Joseph Bonaparte’s law on feudalism:
although a centuries-old experience had exposed the true nature of the evils of feudalism,
[the law of 2 August] not only failed to deﬁne what it was abolishing and what it was
preserving, but . . . left all these rights subject to exactly the same state of litigation and
dispute that had existed before the law was introduced.¹⁷
In the past the state had been weak and unable to prevent powerful landowners
from usurping lands that rightfully belonged to the local communities: ‘the village
commons were in the hands of the barons. . . . Most of the land held in feudal title
was leased on the most onerous terms . . . all forms of industry were reserved exclu-
sively to the barons and it was this that brought devastation to our agriculture.’¹⁸
    Zurlo claimed that although Joseph had recognized the problem, he feared
that any attempt to rewrite this fundamental law would be dangerous. The new
government was prepared to act more decisively, however, and in this sense the
Feudal Commission also played a part in the attempt to present Murat as a
more effective and active ruler.
    The premise for the new operation was the decrees of 6 December 1808 that
made it legal to enclose all private property, which was freed from former rights of
open pasture and other collective and customary use-rights. That decree struck at
the use-rights on which the economies of the rural communities throughout the
South depended, and was followed by a second decree ordering the division of
all former feudal and public common lands between the former feudatories and
  ¹⁵ On the edict of 1792 see Corona (1995), 105–19; see also ANP: Fonds Joseph Bonaparte
381AP2; Council of State, Report of the Demani, June 1806.     ¹⁶ See Aliberti (1987), 35–6.
  ¹⁷ Zurlo, in Lalli (ed.) (n.d.), 38.    ¹⁸ Ibid. 59.
