                                     Disorder                                   231

already inﬂamed, and where powerful landowners were able to turn the prevailing
lawlessness to their own advantage.
   Brigandage was not, as some contemporaries claimed, the last gasp of feudalism—
an attempt by the former feudal landowners to preserve the independence that
had formerly been enforced by their retainers and their feudal mastrodatti. Many
of the brigands had formerly served the feudatories as armed retainers, but their
masters were as likely to be private landowners, new families like the Barracco
and the Quintieri who were amassing vast estates in these troubled times and
who saw the opportunities to impose their own order irrespective of the rules of
either the feudal past or the bureaucratic present.⁷⁶ The disorders were inseparable
from the emergence of new elites, who were staking out their property claims and
at the same time renegotiating their place in the new order. When Manhès tried to
call their game, the reactions revealed the reach of the interests he had threatened
but not destroyed.
   All these things made the scale of disorder in Calabria particularly intense, but
not unique. The northern frontier provinces were similarly exposed to incursions
from brigand bands from the Papal States that penetrated deep into Capitanata
and Apulia with impunity. Once the British regained control of the Ionian islands,
the Adriatic provinces were similarly at risk. But the scale of banditry in provinces
like Basilicata and the Principato Ultra, which were not close to the frontiers, also
shows that conﬂicts rooted in the transformation of the agrarian order were being
felt in most parts of the South, just as the campaigns against the brigands revealed
that the face of authority was everywhere insecure.
   The webs of complicity that gradually became visible behind the faces of the
common brigands showed how more powerful ﬁgures were taking the opportunities
presented by the prevailing disorders to stake out their own interests and secure
their own claims. As a result the vast new estates were acquired by means that were
facilitated rather than impeded by the prevailing conditions of disorder.

                              ⁷⁶ Montroni (1996), 31–3.
