                                                 12
                             A Kingdom Divided

                          THE POLITICS OF DIVISION

The emperor’s wars posed major obstacles to administrative reorganization in
southern Italy, while the prolonged interruption of trade severely damaged the
Kingdom’s fragile economies. But these difﬁculties were also aggravated by
Murat’s insecurity within the imperial enterprise. The confrontation with
Napoleon in the summer of 1811 proved to be especially damaging, and although
unlike Louis Bonaparte Murat survived, the encounter left his position in
both the politics of empire and the emperor’s own dynastic plans uncertain.¹
   The constant tensions with Paris undermined Murat’s attempts to give his
regime a more secure political base, and his very public humiliation by the
emperor in the summer of 1811 enabled the pro-French faction led by the queen
to take control of the government. All those close to Murat—Giuseppe Zurlo and
Antonio Maghella—lost their jobs while others like Manhès came under ﬁerce
attack. As Murat’s position weakened, the incentives for turning to his Neapolitan
supporters to create an independent political base increased, but this in turn
provided the Neapolitan elites with important opportunities to reshape the polit-
ical agenda to ﬁt their own interests.²
   Murat’s confrontation with the emperor revealed deeper divisions within his
own government that dated from his arrival in Naples. Saliceti had played a
critical role in containing those divisions, but after his death in 1809 things
quickly fell apart. Murat’s main concern was to prevent Caroline Bonaparte from
exercising independent power, which with the exception of Agar made him wary
of the Frenchmen who had her conﬁdence.³ But this proved far from easy and his
choice of Antonio Maghella to succeed Saliceti as Minister of Police in 1809 was
particularly maladroit. A protégé of the former minister with whom he had then
publicly quarrelled, Maghella was widely suspected of poisoning his former master
and Murat was soon forced to transfer most of his powers to his trusted follower

  ¹ On the chronic political uncertainty of the imperial enterprise see, e.g., Schroeder (1994), 394.
  ² On the concept and realities of Napoleonic ‘state-building’ see especially Breuilly in Rowe (ed.)
(2003), 121–52.
  ³ Saliceti’s recall to Paris in 1809 was allegedly the result of his attempts to strengthen the power of
Caroline Murat at the king’s expense. See Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 331–2.
