                                      A Kingdom Divided                                 239

   From the Terra d’Otranto, the Intendent Domenico Acclavio wrote in almost
identical terms about the failure of the ordinary courts to enforce the decrees of
the Commission:
I have lacked neither energy nor zeal in preventing similar abuses, but if the ordinary
Courts continue to allow these laws to be neglected I seriously doubt that all my vigilance
will be sufﬁcient to prevent the accumulation of precedents in the Province that will enable
feudalism to be reborn from its ashes. The vast number of small landowners are totally
without the means to enter into litigation and hence may easily fall again under the former
yoke.²⁸
   Acclavio’s predictions proved accurate and in most parts of southern Italy the
rural poor lost either immediately or within a short space of time the access to
the common lands on which the livelihood of the rural communities depended.
Instead of ending the expropriation of the lands and assets of the local communities
as was intended, the reform if anything accelerated the speed at which they were
coming under private control, a process that would be the major cause of social
unrest in the rural South in the decades that followed.
   The reason, Vincenzo Cuoco argued, was that the criteria on which the rulings
of the Feudal Commission were based were deeply ﬂawed. Cuoco was no friend of
Zurlo, and in his report as Intendent of the province of Molise in 1812 he
denounced the devastating impact of the Commission’s rulings:
The common lands belonging to the local communities that were already cultivated made
up a about a third of the agricultural land in the Kingdom. Those who worked them were
not Barons, nor were they over-mighty: they were drawn from that rank of citizens who
have the most to offer the State because they are the most industrious. As the emperors
Valentiniano, Teodoso and Arcadio well understood, these are the citizens who are best
able to bring together private interest and the public good. But to these same people,
who number a full quarter of the population of this Kingdom, we now say: Leave the lands
that you have hitherto legitimately owned and cultivated and that are still steeped in the
sweat of your fathers.
   The expectation that the common lands would be ‘converted into private
property and emancipated from feudal exactions or collective use-rights in return
for a simple quit-rent, thereby protecting both agriculture and industry’ had
proved to be ‘vain dreams’:
The land has passed from the hands of those who cultivated it to those who lack the means
to cultivate it. The land has changed hands, but the capital needed to cultivate the land has
not. So what will happen? The result will be disaster, because it is a disaster to own land
that cannot be cultivated when the owner must at the same time pay both rents to the local
community and taxes to the State. . . . The obligation to pay is inescapable; the ability to
plough and sow the land is uncertain; hence the land becomes a source of anguish.²⁹


    ²⁸ Ibid., f. 81, Acclavio to Zurlo, 4 February 1811.   ²⁹ Cuoco (1806–15), 199–200.
