                                      A Kingdom Divided                                         233

Hector Daure, the Minister of War. The result was that Daure and Maghella
became mortal enemies, and at the height of the crisis with Paris in June 1811
it was Maghella who informed Murat that both Daure and General Vanguyon
were the queen’s lovers.⁴
   Maghella’s attempt to discredit the queen led to his downfall, but Murat’s
efforts to exclude Caroline Bonaparte from power also failed. The emperor’s
favourite sister had strongly resented the purely ceremonial role assigned to her,
and had made it known that she wanted to be a ruler in her own right like
her sister Elisa Baciocchi, the Grand Duchess of Tuscany.⁵ In this she had her
brother’s support and the crisis with Paris in 1811 enabled Caroline Bonaparte
not only to emerge as the undisputed leader of the pro-French faction at Court
but also to mediate between Murat and the emperor and hence establish her
own independent role in the government in Naples. She was now Murat’s equal
and henceforth in his absence would rule as regent.
   Murat survived, but the French party led by the queen was now in control. This
increased the power of General Cavaignac, the Director General of Domains, whom
Tassoni Estense described as the embodiment of the corruption and proﬁteering
that now became the most distinctive feature of the French administration. But all
the leading ministers, ofﬁcers, and ofﬁcials, Neapolitans included, had received
rich bounties, mainly in beni nazionali either as gifts or sold at prices far below
market values.⁶
   Only three senior Neapolitans administrators survived the crisis, among
them the Prince of Serra Gerace, the director of the Cassa di Ammortizzazione del
Debito Pubblico, and an able ﬁnancier who, as well as his wife, had made great
personal fortunes.⁷ Francesco Antonio Ricciardi, the Minister of Justice and a
forthright critic of Giuseppe Zurlo, also survived,⁸ as did the Neapolitan
Talleyrand, the marchese di Gallo, who retained his role as Foreign Minister.
Di Gallo had also amassed a large fortune, and although he was not a major force
in domestic affairs, Tassoni claimed that he was the government’s indispensable

   ⁴ The main source for the political divisions in Murat’s court was Giulio Tassoni Estense, who
served as the diplomatic representative of the Kingdom of Italy at the Neapolitan Court from 1809 to
December 1811, when Napoleon ordered his expulsion for participating in a duel fought between the
Russian chargé d’affaires and a French diplomat following a dispute at a New Year’s Eve party. Ibid.
407; also Weil (1912).                  ⁵ Notizia storica sul Conte Carlo Antonio Manhès (1846), 121.
   ⁶ Cavaignac never presented proper accounts and ‘had enriched himself exorbitantly and his
rapacity is proverbial’. Cutolo (1937), 401.
   ⁷ Tassoni claimed that Serra Gerace had made huge personal proﬁts and was one of the largest pur-
chasers of beni nazionali. He also claimed that Serra Gerace’s wife had received licences to export
goods from her vast estates in Calabria in direct violation of the Continental blockade, a charge
repeated in the Tommasi papers (see Chapter 14). For the lists of investors in the public debt see
Ermice (2005), 150–60 and 173–260, where the Serra Gerace family appears with the Tocco,
Muscettola, Spinelli, and Zunica as the largest private shareholders in the public debt, along with
many foreign investors and speculators.
   ⁸ Tassoni described Francesco Antonio Ricciardi, Conte dei Calmaldoli (1758–1842), as arrogant
and concerned only ‘to leave his family with a big patrimony’ but claimed that no one could accuse
him of venality; Cutolo (1937), 401.
