242                                   Napoleonic Naples

those who were improperly qualiﬁed were dismissed. Every magistrate was subject
to close and routine surveillance, and all were required to submit regular reports
detailing conditions in the provinces and localities where they were in service and
to report on the behaviour of all civil ofﬁcials.
   Once the autonomy of his ministry was secure, Ricciardi began reorganizing
the courts. He was strongly opposed to every form of special court outside his
jurisdiction, including the military tribunals established in 1809. For that reason
he vehemently opposed the special powers conferred on Manhès in 1810 and
he challenged military intervention in judicial affairs wherever this occurred.
But above all he denounced Zurlo’s Feudal Commission as an atavistic return to
the absolutist juntas of the previous century, which violated both the integrity
of the administration of justice and the rule of law.³⁷
   These initiatives met with enthusiastic support from many of those like Giuseppe
Poerio and Vincenzo Cuoco who had formerly been close to Saliceti and who
supported the aims of the new regime but not its methods.³⁸ But in the process of
reorganization the magistrates also acquired a distinctive sense of their own corpor-
ate identity, accompanied by a very explicit sense of national identity as well.
   The French legal codes were not simply translated, for example, but adopted
and appropriated. This was not difﬁcult since they were written in the language
and principles of the Enlightenment with which the Neapolitan lawyers who had
come of age in the years of Bourbon reformism, the debates on feudalism, and the
revolution and the Republic of 1799 were deeply familiar.³⁹ But they also now
received a strong nationalist imprint, as was illustrated in the inaugural address
delivered by Nicola Nicolini when he was appointed Royal Procurator General at
the Criminal Court at S. Maria Capua Vetere in 1809.
   Nicolini claimed that the new codes of criminal law and criminal procedure
that had been imported from France were entirely Neapolitan in inspiration.
All their essential principles had been anticipated in the reforms championed in
Naples in the eighteenth century by Gaetano Filangieri, Charles III, Tanucci, and
Ferdinand IV. The new norms of procedure in criminal cases were identical to the
royal decrees of 1735 and 1738 regarding the interrogation of accused persons.
Tanucci had established new rules of conduct for all lawyers and magistrates, and
the use of torture had been abolished in 1789. For Nicolini, the law of 1774 that
required judges to give written justiﬁcation of their sentences was the basis for the
reform of criminal and civil law procedures that culminated in the law of 1808.
The ground has, therefore, been well prepared and the road has been made ready by the
studies of our most distinguished native jurists, so that our minds have for many years been


  ³⁷ Nicolini (1901), p. xlii; see also Zurlo (1809), 53.
  ³⁸ Castellano (2004), 87–99. On Poerio, see ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi, B5, where
Poerio was described as Saliceti’s protégé, ‘the most eloquent speaker in the Council of State and a
dangerous man to have as an opponent’.
  ³⁹ See Rao (1984), Ajello (1976), and Cammissa in Massafra (ed.) (1988), 519–24.
