244                                  Napoleonic Naples

the high ofﬁces of state and claimed to be both the guardians of the law and the
overseers of all those who stood in authority. The creation of new provincial
tribunals and the new ofﬁce of Justice of Peace increased career opportunities,
while there were openings for commercial lawyers both in Naples and in the
provinces.
   By no means were all the magistrates new men, however. Of the 137 new mag-
istrates appointed between 1808 and 1815, nearly 50 per cent had begun their
careers in the service of the former monarchy.⁴⁷ But the men of law had been
transformed into a professional corps with a strong sense of its own identity and
interests, while the numbers of students who studied law at the University in
Naples was an indication of the growing importance of the profession in the post-
feudal state. It was also an illustration, however, of the chronic imbalance between
supply and demand for professional employment that would play a major part in
undermining the Restoration autocracies in Italy as in the rest of Europe.


                        CO-OPTING THE NOTABLES

The magistrates navigated the transition from the ancien régime with considerable
skill to carve out powerful new positions in the post-feudal order, but the govern-
ment’s efforts to integrate the elites more actively into the new regime met with
more mixed results. In every province there were prominent families that rallied
openly to the new regime, but broader responses amongst the landowners were
disappointing. Above all they showed little desire to shoulder the heavy adminis-
trative burdens delegated to the provincial and local assemblies, and even less to
serve in the provincial militias.⁴⁸
   The government had been taken aback by the freedom of the criticisms voiced
in the provincial assemblies in 1808, and in order to narrow participation estab-
lished what were called Economic Societies. Unlike the provincial assemblies that
reported to the Ministry of the Interior though the Intendents, the Economic
Societies reported instead to a committee of experts and agronomists nominated
by the king from the members of the Istituto Reale d’Incorragiamento in Naples,
a body that had no executive or advisory powers.⁴⁹
   The new associations were dominated by technical experts and senior govern-
ment administrators. When the Reale Società Economica di Capitanata ﬁrst met
in Foggia in July 1810, for example, its president, Giuseppe Rosati, was described
as ‘A Naturalist of outstanding merit, as his many publications will attest’. The
other twelve members included ‘a former monk who taught in the religious


  ⁴⁷ See Castellano (2004), 244.
  ⁴⁸ Scirocco (1978), 102–25; De Lorenzo (2201), 289–314.
  ⁴⁹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno (II), f. 5068, 6 February 1810, 6 October 1810; see also De Lorenzo
(1998).
