                                   A Kingdom Divided                                      245

schools, and is a professor of physics and mathematics in the college at Foggia,
a very able man’. There was also ‘a wealthy and zealous landowner who knows a
great deal about farming’ and another ‘enlightened landowner’. Senior govern-
ment administrators served as corresponding members, including the Duke della
Torre, the former Administrator of the Tavoliere, and ‘a man learned in physics
who is a member of the Accademia di Arcadi and of the Accademia dei Georgoﬁli in
Florence’;⁵⁰ the Administrator of the local depot of gunpowder and saltpetre
(‘well trained in chemistry’) and also M. Briot, ‘who currently resides at Cosenza
where he is the Intendent of Lower Calabria, but owns property in France and
combines great theoretical knowledge with proven administrative skills’.⁵¹
   Capitanata’s Economic Society revealed the narrow cross section of government
ofﬁcials and notables that constituted the political foundation of the new regime.
The tasks delegated to the Economic Societies carefully focused on highly tech-
nical debate of long-term and general issues. The Economic Association for Apulia,
for example, in 1810 wrote a detailed survey of the three principal branches of
agriculture in the province, and on other occasions reports were frequently deleg-
ated to a single expert.⁵² While all these reports contained a wealth of important
information and recommendations, their only audience was the committee set
up by the Reale Istituto d’Incoraggiamento in Naples, which had no powers other
than to listen.
   The census conducted at considerable expense in 1811 met a similar fate, and
served mainly to reveal that the regime lacked the means to complete such a
survey. The language and repetition evident in the returns indicate that in most
cases they were compiled by a single ofﬁcial working in the Intendent’s ofﬁce
and on the basis of what information is unclear since few of the local councils
completed their inquiries. As in France, these returns are of interest mainly for
what they reveal of the values and preconceptions of the administrators. Like
the reports of the provincial assemblies in 1808, a dominant concern was rural
underpopulation, which was invariably cited as the principal cause of the back-
wardness of agriculture; as in 1808 this was a pretext for moralizing and often
highly prurient denunciations of the immorality of the rural poor. Low fertility
rates were blamed on promiscuity, intemperance, and masturbation. Infant
mortality was a result of primitive birthing practices, ignorance, and neglect.
Even disease was an afﬂiction that the poor brought on themselves through lack
of education, lack of concern for simple hygiene and cleanliness, slovenly habits,
poorly built and badly maintained housing, ignorance, and indifference.⁵³ These
reports illustrate values shared more widely among the propertied and educated
classes, but they were written by lonely ofﬁcials in understaffed and ill-equipped

  ⁵⁰ The ﬁrst agricultural association in Italy founded in 1753 by Ubaldino Montelatici.
  ⁵¹ ASF: Reale Società Economiche, F.1, Foggia, July 1810.
  ⁵² Ibid. See also Cuoco (1806–15), 188–90.
  ⁵³ For the French provincial census returns, which were very similar in their ideological and
anthropological assumptions, see esp. Bourguet (1976), 802–23.
