                                      A Kingdom Divided                                          247

precipitated the crisis with the emperor, and Napoleon’s humiliating response
severely undermined attempts further to establish a signiﬁcant political base
among the public employees. But this was never completely abandoned and
when Murat defected to the allies in 1814 he immediately reintroduced the law
requiring all public ofﬁcials to have or to acquire Neapolitan nationality.⁵⁶


                    THE POWER OF REPRESENTATION

Despite the weakness of the new regime’s political base, like its absolutist
predecessors it placed great store on the powers of representation. It looked to
impress the masses with displays of regalian splendour and paternalist muniﬁ-
cence, while adopting more cultured proﬁles to woo the propertied and educated
classes. Both Joseph Bonaparte and Joachim Murat patronized the arts and the sci-
ences, with special emphasis on useful scientiﬁc knowledge. In Naples a botanical
garden was opened, somewhat incongruously in the grounds of the Albergo dei
Poveri, as well as the astronomical observatory at Capodimonte, and in 1813 the
city’s ﬁrst zoo. The excavations at Pompeii and Herculaneum, the archaeological
museum, and the city’s music conservatories were also meticulously reorganized
along French lines.⁵⁷
   Caroline Bonaparte played the role of art patron with enthusiasm. She founded
a new musical academy and brought Davide’s brilliant young pupil, Jean-
Auguste-Dominique Ingres, to Naples.⁵⁸ The emperor’s most popular Italian
artist, Antonio Canova, also received numerous commissions that included an
equestrian statue of Joachim Murat.⁵⁹ The San Carlo opera house once again
became an important setting for the royal display, which acquired a new and more
daring dimension when Murat persuaded the famous Milanese impresario
Domenico Barbaja to take over the contract for the theatre. As he had done in
Milan, Barbaja opened gaming rooms and ballrooms in the theatre to help subsid-
ize rapidly escalating production costs.⁶⁰ Reactions were divided and many were
scandalized, but the new San Carlo served to underline the modernity of the new
regime and its willingness to enter the marketplace. The theatre also continued
to offer the most visible and frequent venue in which the royal family appeared
surrounded by the Court, the high ofﬁcers of state, the nobility, the prelates and
clergy, uniformed army ofﬁcers, and public ofﬁcials and their families: the new
post-feudal order in microcosm.⁶¹

   ⁵⁶ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 432–5.          ⁵⁷ Torinni (1994), 44–9.
   ⁵⁸ Jean-August-Dominique Ingres (1780–1867). See Tinterow and Conisbee (1999) and Vigne
(1997), 39–82.
   ⁵⁹ This did not arrive until after the fall of Murat’s government and the face had to be changed to
ﬁt the likeness of Ferdinand IV; on Canova and the empire, see Valente (1965), 329–30 and also
Johns (1998), 93–120.                                      ⁶⁰ Rosselli (1984), 95–8; Davis (2005), 579.
   ⁶¹ Sorba (2001).
