246                                 Napoleonic Naples

ofﬁces that reveal the bureaucratic fantasies but not the administrative realities
of the new order.


                              PUBLIC EMPLOYEES

Public employees were, nonetheless, an occupation group amongst which the new
regime looked to develop strong political ties. However, the most immediate
impact of the legislation introduced after 1806 was to put the employees of the
ancien régime tribunals and the feudal administrations out of work. It was
expected that this unemployment would be temporary and would soon be offset
by the new careers and opportunities for preferment that would result from
the reorganization of public administration.
   Once the former royal and feudal employees had been reabsorbed, however, the
net gains were quite small. Those employed in the new courts were primarily
the former employees of the ancien régime tribunals. The same occurred in the
new provincial and local administrations, which were staffed primarily by
former feudal ofﬁcers, just as the militias and gendarmeries were recruited from
the former feudal sbirri.⁵⁴
   When in 1811 Tassoni Estense referred to Giuseppe Zurlo as the spokesman of
the ceto medio, he meant speciﬁcally the public administrators whom he described
as ‘a very strong party that is deeply attached to the present government and its
ministers’. But he went on to admit that the number of public employees and
administrators was too small to constitute a viable political base for the new
monarchy. There were major political complications, too, above all the competing
claims and preference enjoyed by French nationals. Tassoni Estense claimed that
‘some sixteen thousand French employees’ were reported to have been given jobs,
but added that he had no idea whether the ﬁgure was accurate ‘since the truth in
these matters is shrouded in partiality and polemic’. The ﬁgure is certainly wildly
exaggerated, as was the smaller number quoted by Murat in February 1811 when
he warned Napoleon of the political dangers posed by the horde of French place-
men in the Kingdom:
I cannot hide from Your Majesty that although I have nearly ten thousand men in my
service, they are all Frenchmen, Romans, Tuscans or from other parts of Italy, while the
Neapolitans are without jobs, they are dying of hunger and need the bread that is being
eaten by the foreigners. Sire, Charles III had to contend with a major revolt in Naples for
the same reason and I must fear the same outcome.⁵⁵
  Despite the inﬂated numbers, Murat saw sufﬁcient political capital in winning
the support of the Neapolitans to take the decision in June 1811 to require all
Frenchmen to obtain Neapolitan nationality or leave the Kingdom. That move

       ⁵⁴ See, for example, BNP: Fonds Italiens 1126, Rapports au Roi (September 1808).
       ⁵⁵ ANP: 31 AP6: 18 January 1811.
