250                                  Napoleonic Naples

   From the start, the French rulers were obsessed by the notoriety of the
Santafede, and Miot de Melito later argued that fear of another counter-revolution
had been the main reason that his proposals for suppressing the monasteries and
convents had been the most contentious issue at the ﬁrst meetings of the Council
of Ministers in 1806. In fact the feared Santafedist reaction never materialized,
but in both the capital and the provinces the closures of the religious houses
were deeply unpopular, especially when they affected the mendicant orders,
and even Napoleon had been shocked by what he considered to be the unneces-
sary scale of the closures.⁶⁸ They also caused the Kingdom to be ﬂooded with
dispossessed monks, nuns, and friars who, according to Tassoni Estense, in
1811 were still ‘numerous, discontented, utterly without resources and for
some time also without means, since for some months their pensions have not
been paid’.⁶⁹
   Although the secular clergy were not greatly moved by the fate of their regular
brothers and sisters, they also were a source of major problems for the new regime.
Not least of these was the Pope’s decision in 1806 to invoke the papacy’s claims to
feudal sovereignty over the Kingdom and the refusal to acknowledge Joseph
Bonaparte as the legitimate ruler. Pius VII’s action infuriated the emperor and
contributed to the decision to occupy Rome two years later. In the Kingdom it
caused a very awkward political crisis, since many bishops refused to swear the
oath of loyalty to the new king, including the Cardinal Archbishop of Naples.⁷⁰
Far from resolving the problem, the French annexation of Rome in 1809 and
the imprisonment of Pope Pius VII gave rise to new anxieties in Naples, and in
March 1810 the Council of State discussed the urgent need for a new concordat
with the papacy.
   The case for a new concordat was put exclusively in terms of public order and
the fear of a recurrence of 1799:
The brutal and atrocious events of that year had a fatal effect because those most guilty
were not punished, and instead the most evil deeds were rewarded, applauded and
honoured as virtues. . . . Many ministers of the altar were converted into armed brigands,
while their most worthy brothers were exposed to the gravest dangers when, animated
by the spirit of peace, they tried to calm the people by whom they were hunted down,
imprisoned, viliﬁed and mistreated.
   The spirit of ferocity had survived and was still bringing new disorders to the
Kingdom: ‘If we delay further in repairing this damage their insubordination will
get worse and become a true Pandora’s box so that the People will once more
return to a state of barbarity.’

   ⁶⁸ Rambaud (1908), 302.          ⁶⁹ Tassoni, in Cutolo (1937), 392.
   ⁷⁰ See Rambaud (1908), 294–307: The Archbishop of Naples, Cardinal Ruffo of Scilla, was the
brother of Fabrizio Ruffo of Bagnara—the former supported the French in 1799 but refused the oath
to Joseph Bonaparte in 1806; his brother led the counter-revolution in 1799, but took the oath to
Joseph in 1806.
