248                                 Napoleonic Naples

   The new rulers also maintained the populist traditions of the past, staging
public galas and banquets for the Neapolitan poor, which were paid for not by the
government, but by its wealthy supporters. In December 1810, for example, a lav-
ish gala and banquet was organized as a beneﬁt for the families of sailors and ﬁsh-
ermen who had been killed during the Sicilian expedition. The feast was paid for
by the leading merchants of the city, and the families of the ﬁshermen were offered
‘a bowl of macaroni with ragù and a quarter piece of kid’, followed by a ball in the
piazza and free entry for all to the San Carlo theatre. The high spot of the evening
was the lottery, from which ﬁfty dowries of twenty-ﬁve ducats each were distrib-
uted to the orphans of the drowned sailors.
   The increasingly morose diarist Carlo De Nicola recorded that the response
was sullen: as soon as the food was displayed the people seized it and took it away,
along with the table linen and anything else they could carry off. No one returned
for the dancing or the theatre.⁶² The government organized many similar events
to distract attention from high food prices, and De Nicola gloomily recorded in
February 1811 that two major balls were held each week organized at huge per-
sonal expense by government ministers. Prince Pignatelli was believed to have
paid 14,000 ducats for a single public reception at his palace.
   ‘This is an insult to a Nation that is overwhelmed with taxes and impoverished,
and it is a terrible sight to see one man drunk and another dying of hunger on the
same street.’ On 24 February the government held ‘a popular festa at the expense
of the city, but at the king’s request’, for which the entire square facing the royal
palace was turned into a model village with fountains running with wine and bags
of ﬂour piled into great towers and then distributed to the poor.⁶³
   Tassoni Estense believed that the new political order had little popular support,
however. Murat, he claimed, was personally popular because of his swashbuckling
style and also because there were fewer executions than under Joseph Bonaparte.
His government had also resumed the payment of pensions to veterans, widows,
and orphans that Joseph had suspended. But beneath it all he was convinced that
the people as a whole were still attached to the former monarchy, and it was only
the memory of the terrible events of 1799 and the terror they inspired among the
propertied classes that discouraged open opposition to the French government.⁶⁴


                     THE MASONIC CONNECTION

Following the example set by the absolutist rulers in the late eighteenth century,
Murat’s regime in Naples—like its counterparts throughout the empire—looked
on freemasonry as a means for strengthening bonds with the propertied and
educated classes. When the French reached Naples in 1806 they quickly reopened

          ⁶² De Nicola, 10 December 1810.             ⁶³ Ibid., 9 February 1811, 547.
          ⁶⁴ Ibid. Also Tassoni to Testi, 25 July 1809, in Cutolo (1937), 391.
