                                     A Kingdom Divided                                       243
educated in ways to prepare them to receive the new legislation. These do not come to us as
the beginning of a new civilization, but enable us to move forward with the civilization we
already enjoy, ﬁnally rid of the difﬁculties posed by the presence of too many contradictory
laws that were confused by the unclear guidance of obscure authorities.
The real innovation was that the new procedures and laws were now ‘set forth in
the light of day by simple, coherent and fecund principles, made certain by reli-
able forms of interpretation, and in addition made intelligible and popular thanks
to the adoption of the universal language of Italian’.⁴⁰
   This was an exceptionally clear statement of the new sense of identity and
indeed autonomy that the magistrates had acquired as a result of the crisis of the
ancien régime monarchy. As Murat’s relations with Paris deteriorated, the lawyers’
autonomy grew as did their control over the administration of justice. New meas-
ures were introduced to formalize entry into the profession, to regulate university
courses, and to establish a general register of attorneys.⁴¹ At the same time
Ricciardi and a close group of supporters set out new guidelines for magistrates
and made numerous revisions of the French codes to bring them into line with
Neapolitan custom and procedure.⁴²
   In some cases new laws were circumvented, the most obvious being partible
inheritance, and as in most of the rest of Europe Neapolitans simply drew up their
wills in ways that indirectly retained the system of primogeniture.⁴³ In others
this was not possible and the consequences were far-reaching, especially the
abolition of feudal entails that after the Restoration was considered throughout
Italy to be the single greatest blow to the wealth of the old nobility.⁴⁴
   In Naples, as in the rest of Italy, civil divorce remained a major sticking point. It
was opposed not only by the clergy and the magistrates, but also more generally by
the propertied classes who were concerned by the implications for inheritance and
marriage strategies.⁴⁵ Although divorce ﬁnally did become law, it was ignored. By
1815 only three petitions had been ﬁled in Naples: the ﬁrst divorce was granted on
17 June 1810, and the second and last were granted in 1814. In the provinces
there were more petitions but no divorces were granted. In June 1815 the
abolition of civil divorces was the ﬁrst legislative act of the restored monarchy.⁴⁶
   The reorganization of the state offered the Neapolitan jurists the opportunity
to acquire powerful new public positions. Their power was no longer that of the
former togati, but the jurists and judges of the new administrative monarchy
were much more numerous than their eighteenth-century forebears. They ﬁlled

   ⁴⁰ Nicolini (1850), 13.         ⁴¹ Castellano (2004), 201–3.
   ⁴² Nicolini (1901), p. xlvii. The commission for revising the French codes included Giuseppe
Poerio, Davide Winspeare, Nicola Nicolini, Michele Agresti, Tito Manzi, Giustino Fortunato, and
Nicola Libetta.
   ⁴³ For example, by allowing women a lifetime interest in an inherited estate but excluding them
from a share in the assets.                                               ⁴⁴ Davis (1988), 114–15.
   ⁴⁵ On marriage strategies see esp. Macry (1988), 153–8.
   ⁴⁶ Croce (1942); see also Volpe, in Di Leo (1995), 153–8, and Parente (1990).
