                                    A Kingdom Divided                                       249

the lodges that had been shut down more than a decade before, and closed the
popular royalist associations that had ﬂourished in the meantime.
   As we have seen, the masonic networks in Naples and the provinces enabled the
new regime to quickly identify potential allies and supporters and freemasonry
played an important but scarcely acknowledged role in the establishment of the
new regime. As Murat’s relations with Paris deteriorated, however, his government
showed even greater interest in strengthening and expanding both the numbers
and the membership of the lodges.
   These efforts reached a high point right at the height of the confrontation
between Paris and Naples in June 1811 when the royal family presided over a
major public gathering in Naples of masons from all over the Kingdom. More
than 200 masons attended the ceremony, after which food was distributed to the
poor and Daure, the War Minister, claimed that the rally had been ‘remarkable for
the unequivocal signs of good relations and perfect harmony between Neapolitans
and Frenchmen were exhibited’.⁶⁵
   A report prepared later for the Bourbon government claimed that by then masonic
associations were ‘very numerous in every part of the kingdom’. Their members came
from ‘every social class, except for the humblest members of the Nation, but the
nobility and public employees took part in large numbers, and all their proceedings
were closely followed by the Police. The king was the Grand Master, his Ministers
the Grand Ofﬁcers while all the Leaders of the provincial lodges were landowners
and public ofﬁcials. Rather than something to be feared as a state within the State, the
lodges were closely amalgamated to and controlled by the Government.’⁶⁶
   That observation proved unduly optimistic, however, and as political opposi-
tion to Murat’s government grew the masonic lodges provided the constitutional
movement with a means to organize and disseminate its programme. When
Murat’s government in 1812 moved to outlaw its political opponents, the
masonic lodges became the model for the secret societies that took up the demand
for political reform and constitutional government.


                                    THE CHURCH

The Church was the institution that from the very beginning the new regime had
feared most, yet despite repeated attempts to establish a dialogue the alliance with
sections of the clergy that had been realized in 1799 was never renewed. At the
time of the French conquest, the clergy constituted the largest occupation and
corporate group in the Kingdom, where it was estimated that they numbered
around 100,000, of which about half were regulars.⁶⁷
  ⁶⁵ A de G: C(5*) 33: Correspondance et Police, 22 June 1811.
  ⁶⁶ ASN: Archivi Privati; Archivio Tommasi B V: Memorandum 6, ‘La Polizia Generale del Regno’.
  ⁶⁷ There were 21 archbishops, 110 bishops, and 53 abbots in the Kingdom (not including Sicily);
Rambaud (1908), 296.
