                                      A Kingdom Divided                                          241

after Murat’s arrival dropped their earlier resistance and began not only to cooperate
but also to acquire new public roles and power.
   The shift in attitude coincided with Ricciardi’s appointment as Minister of
Justice in 1809 and Murat’s decision, under further and now inﬂexible pressure
from Paris, to introduce the Code Napoléon. But Murat’s decision to give way to
the emperor’s demands in itself meant little, since as in the other imperial territ-
ories the French legal codes had ﬁrst to be translated while the new tribunals that
were to apply the new laws had yet to be created. Murat probably expected
that the whole awkward process would be swamped in legalistic technicalities
and the pettyfogging that followed, as was the case in much of the rest of Europe.³⁴
   In Naples something quite different happened. When Murat appointed
Ricciardi to head the commission set up to oversee the introduction of the French
law codes in 1809, the Neapolitan men of law quickly came to understand that
the new codes and the reorganization of the administration of justice provided an
important opportunity to reclaim powerful positions in public life.³⁵ The Code
Civil and the new administration of justice did not enable the togati of the ancien
régime to reinvent themselves. It was a feature of the new legal codes and especially
the French laws of legal procedure that magistrates now became representatives
of the state with often no more than token guarantees of tenure. But under
Ricciardi’s leadership the magistrates and judges carved out important new public
roles in the post-feudal state.³⁶
   Ricciardi was strongly committed to establishing the autonomy of the magis-
tracy, and he also clearly understood that the new legal codes and tribunals
offered the magistrates a powerful role in the new state. He began by vigorously
asserting the autonomy of the new courts and he acted decisively to ensure that
the magistrates were under the exclusive control of his Ministry. The new controls
that the state exercised over judges under Napoleonic law gave the minister the
means to impose tight corporate discipline on the magistrates, and to insist that
they were answerable only to his Ministry. At the same time, Ricciardi vigorously
promoted the Justice Ministry’s unique function as the principal guardian of
the law, which in practice meant the right to monitor all other branches of gov-
ernment to ensure that they did not exceed their jurisdictions.
   Ricciardi had refused to accept ofﬁce while Saliceti was alive, speciﬁcally on
the grounds that the former Minister of Police had systematically violated juris-
dictional boundaries. As Minister of Justice he set about dismantling the police
state created by Saliceti, starting with the dismissal of the magistrates appointed
by the former Minister of Police. A commission was set up to investigate those
who had been appointed simply because they had been anti-royalist in 1799 and


   ³⁴ On Germany see, e.g., Farhmeir in Rowe (ed.) (2003), 107–20.
   ³⁵ Nicolini (1901), p. xl; in addition to the civil code, the French criminal law code and the codes
of civil and criminal procedures had also to be translated and adopted.
   ³⁶ See especially Castellano (2004), 7–17.
