254                                 Napoleonic Naples

physicians and chemists to veterinary surgeons and engineers, and it was hardly
surprisingly that the military became the preferred career for the sons of the
post-feudal landowners. But, as in the rest of Europe, the gap between expectations
and openings was enormous.
   By 1815 Murat’s army had grown once more, on paper at least, to 17,000 men
and ofﬁcers. But it soon became clear that the emperor’s wrath was not the only
danger that Murat ran into in attempting to create a dynastic army. As relations
with Paris deteriorated, Murat looked to create closer ties with his generals, all of
whom held commissions in the Grande Armée, but these were valid only while on
active service in the imperial campaigns outside the Kingdom.⁸⁸ Murat offered
these men an alternative and better career, and they provided Murat with the
means to rebuild his army after 1811. The generals supported Murat’s own
dynastic ambitions, but not without conditions and both freemasonry and support
for the constitutional movement gained strength in Murat’s army. By 1814
Joachim Murat had joined the long list of soldier-kings at risk of becoming
prisoners of their generals, a danger that derived in part from Murat’s own
dynastic ambitions but which also reﬂected the deeper political inadequacies of
the narrowly autocratic formula established in the wake of the collapse of the
ancien régime monarchy.


                                   CONCLUSION

This did not make the South different, however, and in its essential contours
the Kingdom of Naples was in most respects similar to the other imperial satellite
Kingdoms. The new regime was premised on a bureaucratic model of the state,
in which the military and public employees were to be additional elements of
political cohesion in a system that depended on the support of the great landowners
and remained uncompromisingly autocratic.
   The obstacles that undermined Murat’s attempts to build political alliances
derived most obviously from the Kingdom’s colonial subordination and the
uncertainty of his own place in imperial politics. But these were not the only ones.
The new bureaucratic institutions were too weak to function effectively as an
alternative source of political patronage. By 1815 the total judicial hierarchy,
including the humble justices of the peace, consisted of no more than 800 to 900
judges and magistrates. The entire body of central administrators was made up of
ﬁfteen provincial Intendents, thirty-eight Sub-intendents, and eight ministers of
state with twenty-four employees apiece. On paper the army employed 17,000
men, but only a small number were ofﬁcers or had permanent commissions.⁸⁹

  ⁸⁸ Andrea Pignatelli di Cerchiara, Vincenzo Pignatelli di Strongoli, Francesco Pignatelli,
Florestano and Guglielmo Pepe, Luigi Blanch, Pietro Colletta, Michele Carrascosa; see Cortese
(1926), 312.                                                       ⁸⁹ Castellano (2004), 244.
