                                  A Kingdom Divided                                   251

   The government had, therefore, to take energetic measures to establish proper
education for every class of citizen, but for that to happen the Church needed
serious reforms:
morality is the foundation of all education . . . But what morality can there be without
sanctions? And what sanctions can substitute for the force of Religion? If morality is
reduced simply to be taught as a scientiﬁc discipline, what will happen to the most numer-
ous Class of the People? No matter how many schools, grammar schools and colleges
Your Majesty may build, these will never bring instruction to the most numerous classes of
the Nation.
   The remedy was to repair the damage done to the Church. This must start from
the many cathedrals in the Kingdom that were without bishops. ‘Abandoned for
years to temporary vicars, they have been taken over by vagabonds and useless
Priests: there is no discipline and without this the Body of the Church is like a man
whose nerves have been cut.’ Even where there was an incumbent, many of the bish-
ops were aged. The need for clergy was greater than ever. ‘It is true that amongst the
secular clergy there are still today many learned and virtuous priests who are worthy
of their positions, but the majority of them are of more than mature age and if steps
are not taken soon they will have lost the energy to do good.’
   The Kingdom’s legislation, courts, and military had been reorganized along the
lines of ‘the ﬁrst Empire in the World’, and it was time to follow the example of
Napoleon’s Concordat with Pius VII ‘that had brought peace once again to France’.⁷¹
   Acting on that advice, the government proposed reducing the number of bish-
oprics, the reorganization of seminaries and the suppression of small dioceses which
attract only ‘unsuitable teachers’. Bishops and archbishops would be nominated by
the king, and the Supreme Pontiff’s canonical authority would be delegated to the
Archbishop of Naples. The bishops would undertake a complete reform of all
the parishes in their diocese to make them ‘ﬁt to meet the needs of the People’, which
would be done under the supervision and control of the Government.⁷²
   The papal authorities in Paris never replied and the reforms were never imple-
mented. Nonetheless, the concerns expressed gave an unusually candid assess-
ment of the weakness of the regime’s popular support and the disastrous condition
of the clergy.


                                     THE ARMY

The army was the single largest source of public employment in the Kingdom, and
was the institution to which Murat in particular looked to create an independent base
for his dynastic Kingdom. But in practice this proved both difﬁcult and dangerous.

  ⁷¹ ASN: Min. degli Affari Esteri, f. 5691—memorandum attached to letter re Concordat from
Di Gallo to Duca di Campochiaro, 30 March 1810.                   ⁷² Rambaud (1908), 296.
