                               A Kingdom Divided                              255

    Underlying the weakness of the new bureaucratic structures was, of course, also
the material difﬁculty of maintaining these structures at a moment of dire eco-
nomic crisis and in contexts of overwhelming poverty. Not surprisingly when the
revolutions came to the South in 1820 the most widespread complaints focused
on the ﬁscal burdens that were the most tangible legacies of administrative
change. But this was a vicious circle since despite increased tax burdens the
revenues were not sufﬁcient to make the new bureaucracies either efﬁcient or
effective.
    For similar reasons the regime raised expectations of professional employment
that could not be realized, and when it came to the army this was especially
dangerous. It was no small irony of the Napoleonic episode in the South that
Murat’s strongest political supporters were also the foremost in demanding
constitutional government and an end to subordination to the Grande Nation and
its emperor. But if Murat’s generals who supported the demand for a constitution
in 1814 were the regime’s most powerful opponents, behind them could be heard
the voices of the propertied classes and the local notables more generally who saw
in constitutional government the best way to protect the needs and interests of
the provinces against the pretensions of a rigidly autocratic and bureaucratic
government.
    Naples was by no means the only case where these developments proved highly
contradictory. Everywhere in Italy French autocracy and bureaucratic centraliza-
tion met with resistance from the elites, but only in the South did that take the
form of demands for constitutional government. In part that was a consequence
of the weakness and isolation of Murat’s regime within the empire, which gave
the opposition in his own Kingdom greater freedom to organize and articulate its
demands. But the constitutional project also gave expression to forms of political
mobilization that as yet had no parallels elsewhere in Italy.
