260                            Restoration and Revolution

threat of attack by the English. While the emperor threatened and bullied, the
allies offered rewards and guarantees. The most fundamental problem, Fouché
insisted, was that the Kingdom of Naples was exhausted and needed peace. If he
took up the cause of the empire, Murat risked facing a revolt: ‘Peace is what is
needed here and it is what everyone wants.’
   Fouché also commented on the growth of Italian nationalism and the hostility
he had found towards France everywhere in Italy:
Here, as everywhere in Italy now, the word independence has acquired a magic force. It is a
banner around which many different interests converge, of course, but all people want some
form of local government. Everyone here complains that they have to go to Paris for every
petty request. The government in Paris is distant and represents heavy costs for which there
are no visible compensations. Conscription, taxes, vexations, privations, and sacriﬁces,
that—say the Romans—is what being governed by France means for us.³
  It was Murat’s turn on 16 December to explain why he had refused to obey the
emperor’s order to take his army north to the Po.
Italy is seething with agitation, the events in Spain and Germany have ﬁlled every head
with ideas of independence, an Italian League, the Reuniﬁcation of Italy and freedom from
the foreign yoke—these are the words that have mobilised nearly everyone . . . the most
numerous classes have everything to gain from disorder and want revolution, while
the propertied classes hope by all means to avoid this. The latter want to preserve the
monarchy, but the others are using secret societies like the Carbonari to propagate repub-
lican ideas, and the English urge them on with promises of money and support.
   Murat pointed out that his was the only army left in Italy and everyone
looked to him for a lead. In these circumstances, to rally to the empire would be to
sacriﬁce ‘not only my troops, but the very existence of my Kingdom’. Public
opinion was ﬂatly opposed, and so he must try to ﬁnd ways of overcoming that
opposition: ‘I must ﬂatter them . . . I will make vague references to independence
and territorial expansion.’ But all Italy wanted was peace.
   Then Murat made his bargaining pitch. He could not hide his dismay that the
emperor had spoken in favour of allowing the English to retain Sicily and of
the Austrians’ intention to ‘re-establish the Pope and the little princes in Italy.
What will be the outcome of such an organisation, or rather disorganization? That
Austria will be free to intervene when it chooses, in which case France will have to
oppose it and Italy will continue to be a battle ﬁeld between the two empires?’
   Murat closed with the reminder that while they were campaigning together in
Germany he had personally conﬁded in the emperor that the best political solu-
tion would be to divide Italy into two kingdoms, one in the North and the other
in the South whose frontiers would be the Po River. The English, he claimed, were
prepared to support this, and he could not ﬁght in the emperor’s cause for less.⁴

            ³ Fouché to Napoleon, 27 December 1813; cited in Weil (1902), iii. 296.
            ⁴ ANP: 31 AP 6: Murat to Napoleon, 16 December 1813.
