                                            13
                                 Losing Naples

           ‘ON TOP OF THE VOLCANOES’: NAPOLEON
                    AND MURAT, 1814–15

The ﬁnal chapter in the saga of Napoleonic Naples began in January 1814 when
Joachim Murat defected to the allies. A year later he again rallied to Napoleon
after the ﬂight from Elba, but in May that venture ended deﬁnitively in military
defeat on the battleﬁeld at Tolentino. The ﬁnale came ﬁve months later when on
the morning of 13 October 1815 Murat was executed by a ﬁring squad against the
perimeter wall of a small hill-top fortress at Pizzo on the Calabrian coast.
   After Napoleon’s victories at Lützen and Bautzen in May 1813, Murat rejoined
the emperor’s armies in Germany where, apart from a brief return to Naples in
August, he remained until October. There was a partial reconciliation, but
Napoleon still refused the peace terms offered by Austria and after the emperor was
defeated at Leipzig in October Murat reopened negotiations with the allies.
Napoleon tried to have him arrested, but on 4 November Murat returned to
Naples and on 11 November opened the Neapolitan ports to allied shipping. Two
days later he informed the emperor that the situation in his Kingdom had changed
completely during his absence. Revolutionary placards were circulating in Calabria
and a revolt was imminent: ‘Sire, we are not only close to the volcanoes, but right
on top of them.’¹
   Napoleon then sent his former Minister of Police, Joseph Fouché, to persuade
Murat to honour his obligations to the empire.² Fouché reached Naples in
December 1813 and reported that Murat was likely to join the offensive that the
Austrian General Nugent was about to launch against Prince Eugène in northern
Italy. But he clearly stated his belief that the emperor’s actions had forced Murat
into the allied camp. The emperor had repeatedly and publicly humiliated his
brother-in-law, deprived him of his military command in his own Kingdom, and
forced him to send troops to Germany even when his own Kingdom was under

  ¹ ANP: 31 AP 6: Murat to Napoleon, 13 November 1813.
  ² Joseph Fouché (1759–1820), a protégé of Barras who became Napoleon’s chief of police and in
1808 was made Duke of Otranto. Disgraced and dismissed in 1810, he was appointed Governor of
the Illyrian Provinces three years later, and then acted as mediator with Prince Metternich. See
Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 406–7.
