                                         Losing Naples                                        265


                            THE SECRET SOCIETIES

Even before Murat’s defeat, opposition to his government in Naples had
increased. When Murat was in Germany in October 1813, Mosbourg had written
to inform him that the situation in the Kingdom was alarming. Armed robbers
who had attempted to steal the cash deposits of the city of Naples had tried to give
their conspiracy ‘the appearance of a revolutionary project linked to the Society
of Charcoal-burners that your Majesty has long since banned, but which we
have continued to tolerate’. The plot proved to have wide ramiﬁcations. One of
the leaders, Capobianco, ﬂed to join a band of brigands in Calabria, where he was
captured by Manhès and executed in Cosenza. The queen had issued an edict
banning the Carbonarist lodges and the military commissions were investigating
other suspects.
    The history of the secret societies has been deliberately buried in layers of
mystery and myth-making, but it seems reasonably certain that they were off-
shoots from the masonic lodges that Murat’s government had promoted until
1813.²⁹ Their earlier origins are more open to speculation. One interpretation
claimed that the Carbonarist³⁰ lodges started in the Swiss Tugendbund, where
they had recruited Neapolitan exiles after 1799 and French ofﬁcers opposed
to the Bonapartist regime in France. They observed strict secrecy and were sup-
posedly imported into Naples in 1806 by a Swiss regiment in Masséna’s army
stationed at Capua.³¹
    Others claimed that the Carbonarist societies had been founded by anti-
Bonapartist ofﬁcers after the battle of Jena, and had been brought to southern
Italy by the ubiquitous Mr Broadbent, who was described as ‘an English Quaker
who came to Sicily to trade with the Americans’.³²
    Whatever the origin, the ﬁrst Carbonarist lodge established in Naples in 1810
was organized on the model of the existing masonic lodges and followed the Scottish
rite.³³ The ﬁrst provincial Carbonarist lodge was founded in Basilicata in 1811 and
its aim was ‘to bring Light to the ignorant and make men better able to understand
and exercise their Rights’. Lodges spread from there to other parts of Basilicata,
Abruzzo, and Calabria, and there was also competition from societies of other polit-
ical persuasions and origins, with names like ‘Veri Amici, Filantropi, Amici della
Felicità dell’Uomo, but the Carbonari had the widest following’.³⁴

   ²⁹ Johnson (1904), ii. 29–34; see also Roberts (1974), 289–307.
   ³⁰ The name comes from the corporation of charcoal burners (Charboniers) in the Swiss Jura.
   ³¹ Caldora (1960), 620; Godechot (1976), 266–9; Johnson (1904), ii. 29–34.
   ³² The same Mr Broadbent (described variously as English and American) negotiated sales of
American wheat with Murat’s government. See d’Angelo (1990), 112.
   ³³ ASN: Archivio Tommasi, B XI, Memorandum segreto di Domenico Bocchini sulle origini della
setta dei’Carbonari.
   ³⁴ BSPN: Ms. Varia XXII a.6: Saggio storico delle società denominate Carboneria, Vera Amicizia e
Colonia, istituite nel Regno di Napoli sotto il governo dell’occupazione militare.
