270                             Restoration and Revolution

   In July, the Sicilian Parliament proposed ﬁfteen fundamental articles (known as
the ‘Bases’) modelled on the British constitution. The new constitution separated
Sicily from Naples and established the separation of powers between king
and Parliament, with the latter retaining the sole power to raise taxes and legislate.
The Parliament was to meet annually. All feudal dues, jurisdictions, and privileges
were abolished, although abolished feudal monopolies and other dues were
subject to compensation.⁵⁷
   Like the king of Spain, Ferdinand IV soon found ways to subvert the constitution,
which he abolished before returning to Naples in 1815. But in the meantime the new
constitutional regime in Sicily heightened expectations that a Bourbon Restoration
would bring constitutional monarchy to the mainland. However, the nationalist
and liberal tones of the Spanish constitution made it more popular amongst the
Neapolitan advocates of reform, and it was the one most widely endorsed by the
secret societies on the mainland. In Sicily, by contrast, the British constitution had
a wide following, because it guaranteed Sicily’s autonomy from Naples.


                                  LOSING NAPLES

When Murat’s army marched north in January 1814 to join the allies in Central
Italy, few troops were left to maintain order in the Kingdom. Attempts to reorgan-
ize the provincial militias in the previous year had failed, and the Minister of
Police authorized the Intendents to offer pardons to brigand leaders willing to
serve in the anti-brigand militias.⁵⁸ But in January as Murat’s army marched
north, hundreds of deserters swarmed back towards Naples. In February, General
Manhès, who had been left in command of the capital, attempted to close the
Neapolitan frontiers and set up military commissions to pursue brigands, desert-
ers, and escaped conscripts.
   Before leaving, Murat had issued a circular to explain that he had put himself at
the head of his troops ‘not in the service of foreign interests but to obtain the salva-
tion of the Kingdom’. All public functionaries were instructed to assist the king in
his bid to ensure the independence and tranquillity of the Kingdom.⁵⁹
   Murat’s decision to join the allies in 1814 was widely supported by the
Neapolitan elites, especially by his generals who saw the alliance as the only means
of escaping subordination to France. But it was also an opportunity to press
demands for a constitution. On three occasions during the campaign of 1814 (at
Reggio Emilia, at Borgo San Donnino, and at Ancona) Generals Michele
Filangieri, Michele Carrascosa, Pietro Colletta, and Florestano Pepe formally
requested that the king grant a constitution. Murat’s refusal on each occasion cost
him the support of his only remaining political allies.⁶⁰

 ⁵⁷ Rosselli (1956), 60.        ⁵⁸ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 421.
 ⁵⁹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno, f. 213—22 January 1814.             ⁶⁰ Weil (1909–10), v. 49–50, 524.
