                                       Losing Naples                                     263
persuasion is, if the war had gone on much longer in France, we should have had the most
disastrous complication in Italy . . . . He seems bent upon throwing all Italy loose. This
might be well against France, but against Austria and the King of Sardinia, with all the new
Constitutions which now menace the world with fresh convulsions, it is most absurd.¹⁸
   Castlereagh’s comments accurately reﬂect the principles guiding the resettlement
of Europe after Napoleon’s defeat, and they were repeated in similar terms by the
French foreign minister. In December Talleyrand informed Castlereagh that the
Bourbon king Ferdinand IV had the only legitimate claim to the Kingdom of
Naples, which if denied would fatally compromise the principle of legitimate
monarchy.¹⁹
The great and ﬁnal objective to which Europe is moving, and the only one that France can
support, is to bring the Revolution to an end and establish a lasting peace. The ‘principle of
Monarchy’ must triumph totally over the ‘principles of the Revolution’. For that reason the
legitimist dynasties must be restored, the king of Saxony in Saxony, the king of Naples in
Naples.²⁰
   There was no space left for the dynastic ambitions of Joachim Murat, and in
January 1815 Prince Metternich formally complained that the presence of
Neapolitan troops in Central Italy went ‘beyond what is needed’. But Murat still
refused to withdraw, even though the Neapolitans were by now faced by popular
revolts throughout central Italy and Tuscany. Then came the news that in
February Napoleon had escaped from Elba and had reached Lyons, which led
Murat to gamble on Napoleon’s success. On 17 March he left Naples to rejoin
the Neapolitan forces in Central Italy, taking with him his foreign minister, the
Marquis di Gallo, Giuseppe Zurlo, the Minister of the Interior, and his ﬁnance
minister Count Mosbourg; however, Mosbourg told the king that the Treasury
had no means to support his campaign and asked to resign.²¹
   Murat’s chief of staff was the French General Millet de Villeneuf, and the three
divisions of his army were commanded by Generals Carrascosa, Ambrisio, and
Lecchi, with three other recently formed divisions commanded by Generals
Livron, Pignatelli, and Prince Pignatelli Cerchiara. From Rimini Murat issued an
appeal (dated retrospectively to 30 March) that called for a national Italian rising
against the Austrian invaders:
The hour has come when destiny will be accomplished. Even Providence itself calls
you to liberty. Let a single cry be heard from the Alps to Sicily, the cry of Italian
Independence.²²
  Murat’s appeal had little effect. On 11 April he warned Caroline that the
English considered his declaration against Austria to be a breach of the armistice
and that they were preparing to attack Naples. Shortly afterwards he wrote

  ¹⁸ Castlereagh to Liverpool, 5 May 1814: quoted in Rosselli (1956), 142.
  ¹⁹ BSPN: Ms. XXI B5, Talleyrand to Castlereagh, 15 December 1814.
  ²⁰ Ibid., 26 December 1814.         ²¹ ANP: 31 AP 43: Mosbourg to Murat, March 1815.
  ²² Ibid., Decret de Rimini, 30 March 1815.
