262                            Restoration and Revolution

   The political situation in Italy changed again following Napoleon’s abdication
on 6 April 1814. Louis XVIII returned to France, Victor Emmanuel I to
Piedmont, Grand Duke Ferdinand III to Tuscany, and Pope Pius VII was rein-
stated in Rome. On 16 April Prince Eugène sued for an armistice and the
Austrians occupied Lombardy.¹²
   Murat still held the papal Marche, but the allies now had little use for him, and
he was not even mentioned in the Peace signed in Paris on 30 May 1814.¹³ The
Treaty between Naples and Vienna guaranteed the Kingdom of Naples to Murat
and his heirs, but the British governor of Sicily, Lord William Bentinck, had
speciﬁcally refused to guarantee that Murat would retain Naples and for that rea-
son had agreed only to an armistice.¹⁴ In March Bentinck led an expedition to
Tuscany and tensions were heightened when he refused to allow the Neapolitans
to enter Livorno but then appealed to the Italians to follow the example of the
Spanish and rise up against the French oppressor.¹⁵
   For Bentinck Murat was ‘the most treacherous of all the Gauls’ and his
suspicions were not misplaced. Murat had been careful to keep his own lines of
communication with Napoleon open, despite the latter’s fury on hearing of his
brother-in-law’s treachery:
You are a brave soldier on the battle ﬁeld, but off it you have no courage and no integrity.
I hope that you are not one of those who think that the lion is dead and that you can piss on
him. That would be a serious mistake. The king’s title has completely turned your head—
but if you want to keep it, behave yourself and stay loyal.¹⁶
Murat reassured Napoleon by claiming that he was playing a double game, that
his alliance with the Austrians and British was a feint to gain time, and that his
army ‘will never ﬁght against France’.¹⁷
   Murat did well to keep his options open, because when the allies ﬁnally met in
Vienna in November 1814 to discuss the Peace his position looked hopeless.
The decision to restore the Bourbon rulers in France and Spain had destroyed his
hopes of retaining Naples, while his continuing refusal to evacuate papal territory
despite the Pope’s return to Rome outraged the allies who held him responsible for
the collapse of law and order in Central Italy.
   The British government had been irritated in equal measure by both Murat and
Bentinck, and their appeals to Italian nationalism in particular had infuriated
Lord Castlereagh:
how intolerably prone he [Bentinck] is to Whig Revolutions everywhere. I am conﬁdent
his mismanagement at least doubled all the natural dangers of Murat’s rascality; and my

  ¹² Grab (2003), 202.        ¹³ Johnson (1904), i. 256–327.
  ¹⁴ BSPN: Ms. XXI B5: Min. Plenipotente du Roi de Naples (Duca di Campochiaro) à Castelreagh,
29 December 1814; Comte Metternich à Comte Mier, 28 October 1813. The armistice was signed
on 3 February 1814.
  ¹⁵ Rosselli (1956), 133–41; See also ANP: 31 AP 43, Mosbourg to Murat, 20 March, 8 and 23
August 1814.                          ¹⁶ BSPN: Ms. XXI B5: Napoleon to Murat, February 1814.
  ¹⁷ Ibid.
