268                               Restoration and Revolution

and his ministers were responsible to it. Municipal ofﬁces were made elective, and
annually renewable.⁴⁴
   When the Spanish king, Fernando VII, returned to Spain after Wellington’s
victory at Vittoria (21 June 1813), the Cortes had abolished all forms of seigneur-
ial jurisdiction and ﬁscal exemptions and recommended the abolition of the
Inquisition. The anger this provoked among the reactionary forces within the
Church and the military enabled the king to bring the short season of constitu-
tional government in Spain to an end in May 1814 when both the constitution
and the Cortes were proclaimed illegal.⁴⁵
   Nonetheless, the Spanish constitution attracted wide attention and news of
it was relayed to Naples by the many Neapolitan ofﬁcers who had served in the
emperor’s campaigns on the peninsula. The text was known only at second-hand
and by hearsay, but it quickly won broad support within Murat’s army, the
masonic lodges, and the secret societies in Naples.
   The other constitutional model was even closer at hand. This was the constitu-
tion that in 1812 the British authorities in Sicily forced on the exiled Bourbon
ruler Ferdinand IV. Since 1806 Sicily had been under the protection of British
forces, and by 1812 relations between the British and the Bourbon rulers had
deteriorated to breaking point. Demands for a constitution had come mainly
from a section of the Sicilian aristocracy, however, and were closely bound up with
the struggles between the Bourbon monarchy and the Sicilian nobility that went
back to the eighteenth century.⁴⁶
   The central issue was still the privileges and independence of the Sicilian
aristocracy, whose institutional foundation was the Sicilian Parliament.⁴⁷ The
defenders of aristocratic privilege had defeated the monarchy in the 1780s, but
the conﬂict had left a residue of political bitterness and division that revived
immediately when in 1799 the Bourbon rulers and their court arrived in Palermo
under the protection of the British navy. They were accompanied by hordes
of Neapolitan refugees, ofﬁcials, place-seekers, and ministers, all of whom the
Sicilian treasury was called on to support as well as to raise taxes to ﬁnance
the reconquest of the mainland.⁴⁸
   When the Bourbon monarchy returned in similar circumstances in 1806, the
struggles resumed, but with a new twist. In 1799 Maria Carolina had looked to Sir
William Hamilton, Lady Hamilton, and Lord Nelson as her saviours, but in 1806
she blamed the English for abandoning the mainland and for the loss of half her
Kingdom. The British government, for its part, was infuriated by the attitude of
the Court in Palermo, and refused to commit itself to the restoration of the
Bourbon monarchy in Naples. Maria Carolina in turn became convinced that the
British planned to occupy Sicily and make it an English colony.⁴⁹
   ⁴⁴ Herr, in Woloch (1996), 88.          ⁴⁵ Ibid. 91–2.       ⁴⁶ See Chapter 3 above.
   ⁴⁷ Giarizzo (1985).
   ⁴⁸ See esp. John Rosselli’s (1956) study of Lord William Bentinck in Sicily. For British politics in
Sicily after 1806, see Romeo (1950), 140–2.                                   ⁴⁹ Rosselli (1956), 10.
