264                             Restoration and Revolution

complaining that the Italians had failed to support him, that he was short of arms
and money, that he was alone and hopelessly outnumbered against the Austrian
forces. He had no alternative but to retreat under the pretence of changing
positions.²³
   Murat’s forces took Modena, but an offensive against Ferrara failed and popular
opposition forced the Neapolitans to abandon Bologna and fall back on Ancona.
The army was demoralized and for Murat’s generals the enterprise was doomed.
‘The war was considered to be lost even before it started’, Luigi Blanch later
recalled. The long series of campaigns in Spain, Germany, Russia, and the Tyrol
and then in Italy had decimated the Neapolitan ofﬁcer corps. The army had been
brutalized by the campaigns against the brigands in Calabria, and corruption was
widespread.²⁴ Most serious of all, the army was disintegrating. The Observateur
Autrichien commented on the extraordinarily high rates of desertion from even its
most seasoned units: ‘Desertion from these units is unparalleled, even though
they include some brigades of Royal Guards. The artillery train is small and
mediocre.’²⁵
   The end came when Murat’s forces were routed by the Austrians near Tolentino
on 3 May. Revolts against both the French and the Neapolitans spread through
central Italy, and were especially violent in Livorno where the mob attacked the
Jewish ghetto ‘to vent their fury on those unfortunates, accusing them of being
pro-French and supporters of the Neapolitans’.²⁶
   Bentinck declared war on Naples and on 13 May Caroline Bonaparte surren-
dered the Neapolitan ﬂeet. On 20 May representatives of King Ferdinand IV
signed the Treaty of Casalanza with the Austrians, which restored the Bourbons to
the throne of Naples. Two days later Caroline Bonaparte, her children, and their
possessions were transported under safe conduct to Trieste on a British warship.
Murat spent two weeks in hiding before boarding a French ship at Baia that
carried him to France.²⁷
   In Marseilles he immediately became a target of the White Terror for his part in
the execution of the Duke of Enghien. He ﬂed to Corsica and from there set sail
with a small group of followers in October to raise a revolt against the Bourbons
and regain his Kingdom. He and his followers were blown off course and beached
near Pizzo in Calabria, where they were immediately captured. Acting on instruc-
tions received by the new system of semaphore telegraphy from Naples, on the
morning of 13 October the commander of the Pizzo garrison presided over
Murat’s execution by ﬁring squad, bringing the episode napoléonniene in southern
Italy to a ﬁnal end.²⁸

  ²³ ANP: 31 AP 43: Murat to Caroline Bonaparte, 1815.
  ²⁴ Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945), i. 308.       ²⁵ BSPN: Observateur Autrichien, 27 April 1815.
  ²⁶ Ibid., 7 May 1815.
  ²⁷ The detailed account of Murat’s escape is in Weil (1915), v. 178–202. In Austria Caroline
Bonaparte adopted the title of Duchess of Lipona (an anagram of Napoli).
  ²⁸ Bianchini (1839), vii. 534.
