                                         Losing Naples                                  267

the worst elements of society, the Carbonari were the best’.⁴¹ The ﬁrst insurrection
associated with the Carbonari took place in Calabria in September 1813, a clear
sign that the political solutions that Joseph Bonaparte and Joachim Murat had
attempted to establish in the Kingdom were beginning to unravel as demand grew
for Murat to concede a constitution.


   CONSTITUTIONAL MODELS: SPAIN AND SICILY, 1812

The demand for constitutional government derived most directly from the Treaty
of Bayonne, which stated that a National Parliament would be established in the
Kingdom. Similar parliaments were proposed for France and for the Kingdom of
Italy, but for Miot de Melito they were all ‘an example of the emperor’s growing
preference for reviving feudal institutions and of the aversion, about which
he made no secret, for anything that might offer the citizen liberty or political
independence’.
   The clause in the Treaty that promised the establishment of a parliament had
supposedly been drafted by Joseph Bonaparte, but the imperial chancellery is its
more likely place of origin. The parliament was to consist of a single Chamber
divided into ﬁve ‘orders’: the clergy, nobility, landowners, ‘savants’, and mer-
chants. Members of each section were nominated by the ruler, and while each
order was numerically equal, their votes were not. Members of the ﬁrst three
sections had ﬁxed tenure, but not the other two. Miot de Melito considered that
this was an accurate ‘indication of the political principles the emperor had adopted
and was if anything even worse than its Italian and French counterparts’.⁴²
   Murat never honoured the requirement to establish a parliament, but by 1812
there were two alternative models of constitutional government, one from Spain
and one from Sicily. The emperor also had devised a parliament for Spain at
Bayonne, but this had been rejected, and in March 1812 an Extraordinary
General Cortes convened near Cadiz under the protection of the British navy
promulgated a constitution that caught the attention of Napoleon’s opponents in
Europe as well as liberal revolutionaries in Latin America.
   The Constitution of Cadiz was an anti-Napoleonic document that was both lib-
eral and nationalist: it proclaimed the sovereignty of the Spanish Nation and made
a clear association between ‘Nation’ and ‘Liberty’.⁴³ It guaranteed the freedom of
the press, the freedom from arbitrary arrest, and the right of property. It established
the basis for ‘moderate monarchy’ through the creation of a unicameral Cortes
elected by indirect male suffrage (only servants; the insane and criminals were
excluded from voting). For deputies, there were minimum property requirements,
but the king could not veto bills passed by the Cortes more than three times,

         ⁴¹ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 396.    ⁴² Miot de Melito (1888), iii. 339.
         ⁴³ Herr, in Woloch (1996), 86–7.
