                                        Losing Naples                                      261

   Although biographers have tried to recruit him as an Italian nationalist, Murat’s
correspondence reveals a self-seeking opportunist who was bargaining with
both the allies and the emperor for the best deal. His somewhat unrealistic hope
was that the collapse of French rule in northern Italy would enable him to realize
the Bourbon dream of a southern kingdom stretching northwards through central
Italy and to the Po River.⁵
   The emperor never replied and when the Austrian offensive against Prince
Eugène began in December 1813, the political and military situation in Italy
was transformed. The strength of Prince Eugène’s army and of the Austrians’
was relatively equal, leaving a clear opportunity for Murat.⁶ On 3 January 1814
the king of Naples wrote to tell Napoleon that ‘the most painful day of my life’ had
arrived. He had received no reply from Paris, but had been offered terms by
Austria and an armistice by the English. Naples was crying out for peace. He could
not take the side of the empire and found himself with no alternative but ‘to enter
into relations that are in appearance contrary to your interests’.⁷
   Murat was being economical with the truth and this was part of a more fully
formed project. In December 1813 he had warned the Grand Duchess of Tuscany,
Elisa Bacciochi, that a Neapolitan force would occupy the Tuscan fortresses,
asking for her cooperation and warning her not to acknowledge further orders
from Prince Eugène.⁸ Elisa Bacciochi wrote to Napoleon for advice:
The Tuscans do not like the Neapolitans, but I cannot permit that they take up arms
against them. The ideas of independence had spread so widely in Italy in the last
two months and hopes of change are so high . . . that much as the Tuscans may hate to be
subject to the Neapolitans they will submit so long as they ﬁnish up being ruled by a prince
of their own.⁹
   On 11 January 1814 Murat signed a treaty with the Austrians, and three weeks
later entered Bologna at the head of a Neapolitan army.¹⁰ Popular revolts had been
staged in the papal territories to justify the Neapolitan occupation, and the
Neapolitan commanders now openly adopted the rhetoric of Italian nationalism.
In February, Giuseppe (now Baron) Poerio proclaimed in Bologna that the King
of the Two Siclies was the provisional ruler of the Roman States, Tuscany, and
the ‘Southern Italic Departments’ under the terms of the treaty with the allies. The
provisional government guaranteed the protection of all ‘Ministers of Religion, all
public buildings, all persons and private property’. It also proclaimed freedom of
trade, promised that there would be no new taxes, and concluded with a call to
action: ‘Political Independence, the ﬁrst right of all Nations, is yours to seize.’¹¹

   ⁵ See Valente (1965), 331–79, and Tulard (1983), 185–202.          ⁶ Bianchini (1839), 531–2.
   ⁷ ANP: 31 AP 6: Murat to Napoleon, 3 January 1814.
   ⁸ Weil (1902), iii. 250: Murat to Elisa Bacciochi, 15 December 1813.
   ⁹ Ibid., Elisa Bacciocchi to Napoleon, 5 January 1814.       ¹⁰ Ibid. 442.
  ¹¹ BSPN: XXI B5 ‘Proclama del Barone Poerio ai popoli de’Dipartimenti Italici Meridionali’,
9 February 1914.
