                                      Losing Naples                                     269

   In fact, William Drummond, the British envoy at Palermo in 1806, did seriously
consider ‘measures that would have made Sicily a province of Great Britain’.⁵⁰ But
the Foreign Ofﬁce would have none of that, and once the Peace of Tilsit consoli-
dated France’s control of the Italian peninsula, the British government showed little
further interest in Sicily or Italy. Drummond’s successor, Lord Amherst, attempted
to negotiate with the Neapolitan Court without success, while the two successive
British military commanders⁵¹ were convinced that the queen was having treason-
able conversations with Murat’s government with the aim of trading Sicily for
Naples. Their suspicions were increased by Napoleon’s marriage to Marie Louise of
Austria in 1810 and when the Bourbon Court refused to contribute to the defence
of Messina against Murat’s threatened invasion that year, Amherst too was con-
vinced that ‘jealousy of the designs of Great Britain predominates in the Queen’s
mind over the hatred she may entertain for Bonaparte’.⁵²
   The political crisis began in January 1810 when the Sicilian Parliament refused
to grant taxes for the defence of the realm and the opposition called for the dismissal
of the king’s Neapolitan ministers and their replacement by Sicilians. Although
these demands were supported by the king’s son-in-law, Louis Philippe, Duke of
Orléans,⁵³ the Court refused to consider them. To break the dead-lock, the
Sicilian reform party turned to Lord Amherst, but he had had enough and
resigned in July, followed in October by Sir John Stuart.⁵⁴
   These resignations brought the seriousness of the situation in Sicily home
to the Foreign Ofﬁce, and the Marquis of Wellesley nominated a senior British
administrator and former Governor of Madras, Lord William Bentinck, to
represent the British government in Naples. The new governor was given clear
instructions. He was to inform their Sicilian Majesties that their misgovernment
was the principal cause of the unrest on the island that threatened to jeopardize
the safety of British soldiers. If their Sicilian Majesties wished to continue this
misrule, Britain could not commit itself to working to ensure their restoration to
Naples after the fall of the French usurper.
   Bentinck was strongly inﬂuenced by the writings of G. F. Leckie, a fervent
advocate of Britain’s imperial mission, and he was convinced of the need to
confront Bonapartist tyranny with the virtues of constitutional government. He
ﬁrmly believed that once a constitutional government was established in Sicily,
the island would become an ideological base from which the allies could appeal
to the Italians to rise up against their French oppressors.⁵⁵
   When Bentinck arrived in Sicily in the summer of 1811 he assumed dictatorial
powers, demanded that the queen leave Palermo and that the king delegate his
powers to the Hereditary Prince Francis.⁵⁶ On 16 January 1812 British troops
were transferred from Messina to Palermo, forcing the reluctant king to appoint
his son Francis Vicar General.
 ⁵⁰ Ibid.       ⁵¹ Sir John Moore and, from 1808 to 1811, Sir John Stuart.     ⁵² Ibid. 12.
 ⁵³ The future king Louis Philippe of France.     ⁵⁴ Rosselli (1956), 16–17.
 ⁵⁵ Ibid. 20–1.       ⁵⁶ Ibid. 27–9.
