266                              Restoration and Revolution
The Carbonari are a Sect that has split off from the Freemasons and taken another name. It
is more simple, has fewer ranks, is less expensive to join, less exclusive and accepts people
from the lowest social orders and tolerates all religions although in Naples it is almost
exclusively Catholic . . . it has many followers in the Kingdom.³⁵
   By 1815 the Carbonarist lodges were estimated to have no fewer than 30,000
members, but this was pure guesswork. The Bourbon minister Donato Tommasi
believed that both the police commissioner Saliceti and his successor Maghella had
deliberately fostered these societies in which they planted informers to keep an eye
on public opinion. Maghella was certainly a strong supporter of Freemasonry,³⁶
and Tommasi believed that Daure’s successor as Minister of Police, the Duke of
Campochiaro, had also seen the lodges as a valuable means for keeping an eye on
opponents of the regime. For this reason he had given the Carbonari semi-ofﬁcial
recognition and from their members had selected for key positions ‘persons who
are strongly committed to maintaining public order . . . and in this way the govern-
ment believes it can keep an eye on the discontented’.
   Tommasi’s interpretation would square with the fact that the ﬁrst Carbonarist
lodge in Calabria was almost certainly founded in 1813 by the Intendent Pierre-
Joseph Briot, a member of the Council of State, but also an opponent of
Bonapartism with longstanding Jacobin and Masonic credentials.³⁷
   In May 1813 Murat’s government changed course and the Carbonarist lodges
were outlawed, but repression only increased their number and political frag-
mentation.³⁸ Some of their members now rallied to the government and re-entered
the ofﬁcial masonic lodges, but others opted for clandestinity and adopted the
programme of constitutional reform. While many still looked to Murat to achieve
constitutional reform, others turned to the Bourbon monarchy that in 1812 had
granted a constitution in Sicily. In anticipation of a Bourbon Restoration older
ultra-Catholic royalists secret societies were also being re-established, the most
important being the Trinitarj, which the Carbonari referred to as the Calderai.
Support came from the ever-active Principino of Canosa, who was still directing
the Bourbon espionage operations on the mainland.³⁹
   At ﬁrst the government tried to maintain the distinctions between membership
of the masonic lodges and the secret societies by banning the second but not
the ﬁrst. But this proved impossible, and in October 1813 the Intendents were
instructed to ban meetings of any form of secret society. Public employees
were prohibited from joining secret societies or attending their meetings, and were
obliged to inform the authorities if they had knowledge of any such gatherings.⁴⁰
   Pietro Colletta commented that measures taken against the secret societies were
similar to those employed against the brigands: ‘but while the brigands included

  ³⁵ ASN: Archivio Tommasi, B. 5, Memorandum sulla Polizia Generale.
  ³⁶ A de G: C(5*) 42, Rapports au Roi: Min. Police to M. D’Azzia, Commissaire de Police,
Cosenza, 28 May 1810.                                      ³⁷ On Briot, see Chapter 9, p. 171 n. 35.
  ³⁸ A de G: C(5*) 42.        ³⁹ ASN: Archivio Tommasi, B XI, Memorandum segreto.
  ⁴⁰ ASN: Min. dell’Interno, f. 213: Circolare agli Intendenti, 2 October 1813.
