276                            Restoration and Revolution


                           AMBIGUOUS LEGACIES

Nowhere in Italy was the Restoration greeted with higher expectations than in
Naples. When Murat’s regime collapsed there were high hopes that the Bourbons
would extend the Sicilian constitution to the mainland, but as soon as King
Ferdinand left Palermo he abolished the Sicilian constitution and in Naples
appointed the reactionary Principino of Canosa as Minister of Police. Metternich,
Caroline Bonaparte’s former lover and now the Austrian Chancellor, had antici-
pated these moves, however, and Canosa was forced to resign.
   There was therefore no repetition of the purges of 1799, and the restoration
of the Bourbon monarchy in 1815 made no attempt to reinstate the ancien régime
in the South. In part this was Austria’s doing and the Treaty of Casalanza by
which the European powers restored Ferdinand IV to his throne obliged the
Neapolitan government to issue a general amnesty for those who had held ofﬁce
during what was now termed ‘the recent sad military occupation’ and to conﬁrm
the commissions of all who had served in Murat’s army.¹ On 19 July the govern-
ment’s ofﬁcial bulletin, the Giornale delle Delle Due Sicilie, announced that the
state was to be reorganized on the basis of ‘criteria very different from those of
the monstrous system consecrated to the principles of the French Revolution’.²
However, except for the law on civil divorce, the juridical and administrative
changes introduced by the French rulers were preserved. Commissions were set up
to investigate the principal innovations of the French period—speciﬁcally the
rulings of the Feudal Commission, the sales of beni nazionali, the new central and
provincial administration, and the new legal codes. The legge organica of 12
December conﬁrmed the structures of central and provincial administration
and in January 1817 the central administration was reorganized around eight
ministries of state.³
   The only major change was the abolition of the French Council of State, which
was stripped of its judicial powers and became simply an extension of the council
of ministers.⁴ The French system of provincial and local administration was
retained with minor adjustments, the Intendencies and Sub-intendencies were
preserved, as were the Provincial and District Councils. As before, they exercised
no consultative rights and all appointments, including membership of the muni-
cipal councils, were by nomination by the government. No attempts were made,
however, to oust those appointed during the French period.⁵
   Ninety possessioner houses and four nunneries were reopened, but the new
government did not try to restore the suppressed monasteries. It did move quickly

  ¹ Romeo (1963), 511–14; Scirocco (1986), 647–50. On Canosa see Postigliola, in DBI, xviii.
458–9.                                                                    ² Addeo (1984), 836.
  ³ Laws of 4 January and 10 June; Scirocco (1986), 647.
  ⁴ Ibid. See also Feola, in Massafra (ed.) (1988), 487–92, 494–9.
  ⁵ Laws of 6 January, 10 June, 1 May, 12 December 1816; Scirocco (1986), 647–50.
