                                      Losing Naples                                     271

   The generals’ demands revealed the dangers of making the army an instrument
of dynastic politics. But by now the constitutional movement had spread more
widely, and when the government was faced by the ﬁrst serious threat of insurrec-
tion in March 1814, the army showed its sympathy with the rebels.
   In December 1813, the Sub-intendent of Sulmona claimed to have discovered
a conspiracy for a royalist rising in the village of Pacentro, whose leader, a shoe-
maker named Cercone, was captured and guillotined in L’Aquila on 3 December.
The priest who ofﬁciated at his execution warned the people ‘to live good and
upright lives, to observe the law and their lawful rulers and to heed the example of
Cercone’. But in January anonymous posters appeared in Sulmona announcing
the imminent arrival of Ferdinand IV with an army.⁶¹
   In March, a more serious uprising started near Teramo. The ﬁrst protesters
declared for ‘Ferdinand IV, the Constitutional King’, but revolts in the neigh-
bouring villages of Penne and Città San Angelo took explicitly republican tones.
The government was convinced that the revolts had been organized by the
Carbonarist societies and on 4 April Zurlo issued a decree condemning the
Carbonari as enemies of the state.⁶²
   General Florestano Pepe was ordered to return from Central Italy to put down
the revolt in Abruzzo. But as Pepe approached Teramo he was met by a delegation
of the insurgents who had the support of inﬂuential notables in the Teramo
region. There was also a strong Carbonarist connection. At this point Florestano
Pepe declared his own sympathies with the insurgents: in his report to Murat he
stated that ‘the great landowners generally wish to ensure that things are resolved
for the best: they have agreed to lay down their arms and they will do everything in
their power to ensure that the Carbonarists and their followers will do the same’.⁶³
   Two envoys sent by the queen had in the meantime reached Teramo: the coun-
cillor of State, Baron Antonio Nolli, and Cavaliere Delﬁco. Both were major
landowners in the Abruzzi and prominent members of the administration. They
allowed General Pepe, whose sympathies with the insurgents were now more or
less public, to withdraw, came to terms with the local notables, and then had the
French general Montigny invoke the emergency measures to ﬁnd some scapegoats
amongst the lesser insurgents.⁶⁴
   Florestano Pepe’s sympathies for the Carbonarists and the demands for a con-
stitution were widely supported in the army, and in May Murat returned to
Naples to investigate the situation. The political climate in the capital was tense.
In April, De Nicola recorded, ‘Things go badly here: every day there is some new
alarm and the people give signs of an excitement that rouses fear.’ The following
day he noted reports of popular demonstrations in support of the Bourbons, while

   ⁶¹ BSPN: 30 Corr, XIVB. 2 (Documenti 1799–1815) Testimonianza di R. Battaglino, contadino,
al Sig. A. Siciliano, Sotto Intendente di Sulmona, 28 January 1814.
   ⁶² Zurlo was reinstated as Minister of the Interior when Murat joined the allies.
   ⁶³ Pepe (1896), i. 149.
   ⁶⁴ Ibid. See also Colletta (Cortese, 1957), ii. 421–3 (especially Cortese’s notes).
