274                              Restoration and Revolution

Austrians. Signals would be given by rounds of cannon ﬁre. At the ﬁrst round
‘all the so-called lazzaroni must get off the streets. At the second, all citizens
required to maintain order must report for duty. At the third no one may circulate
in the city and the guards have orders to shoot anyone who does.’⁷⁸
    A squadron of English frigates entered the Bay of Naples on 12 May and threat-
ened to shell the city unless it surrendered within forty-eight hours. On the 17th
news arrived of Murat’s capitulation to Bentinck and groups of unemployed
sailors staged a hostile demonstration outside the house of the Interior Minister,
Zurlo. The mayor, Michele Fliangieri, arranged for 500 selected Austrian troops
to reinforce the Internal Security Guard and when it became known on the
20th that Murat had ﬂed, the political prisoners were released from the jails.
The common prisoners, who had been without food for three days, rioted but
the police quickly surrounded the jails with artillery, ﬁred on the demonstrators,
and seized the ringleaders who were summarily executed.
    After destroying their papers, Maghella and Zurlo were permitted to leave the
city under safe conduct. Early in the morning of 21 May Austrian troops entered
the city: ‘It is two o’clock in the morning and the only sound is of patrols of
cavalry and the Civic Guards. It must be said that we are very much obliged to
the Guard and to the many distinguished gentlemen, heads of families, public
servants, and tradesmen who have worked day and night. While we sleep soundly
they watch over our security.’⁷⁹
    Later that day, Ferdinand IV entered the city escorted by the Internal Security
Guard. The Austrians imposed tight discipline on their troops, but De Nicola soon
noted that ‘the Civic Guard has greatly abused the People and indulged in ven-
dettas’. Most of those in the civic guard were ‘committed Patriots who took out their
fury on the People whom they kill, wound and beat without any reason causing
much discontent’. But the supporters of the monarchy were also angered that the
employees of the previous government were to keep their jobs. ‘The supporters of
the Bourbons are angry because they feel they have been ignored and slighted.’⁸⁰
    The transition of power took place less dramatically in the provinces, but again
without major upheaval. On 29 April Manhès ordered the propertied classes in
each province to form companies of armed and mounted men in every capoluogo
to reinforce the provincial and civic guards and help maintain order. A month
later, on 24 May, the Intendents were ordered to announce the restoration of ‘Our
August Sovereign, Ferdinand IV’. All public ofﬁcials were ordered to return to
their posts and the local authorities were instructed to take whatever measures
were required to maintain public order. ‘His Majesty places his absolute trust in
the zeal and ﬁrmness of the Internal Security Guards, the Provincial Legions and
all honest Citizens.’⁸¹

      ⁷⁸ De Nicola (1899–1905), ii. 9, 10 May 1815, 813.          ⁷⁹ Ibid., 20 May 1815, 830.
      ⁸⁰ Ibid., iii. 21, 22, 24, 29 May 1815, 2–11.
      ⁸¹ ASN: Min. dell’Interno Appendice I, f. 213: Circolare, 24 May 1815.
