                                           Restoration                                          277

to mend relations with Rome, however, and the concordat reached with the
papacy in 1818 was negotiated personally by Luigi de’ Medici and Francesco
Ricciardi. Although widely seen by liberals as a betrayal of the monarchy’s
anti-curial policies of the previous century, the Concordat of 1818 followed terms
very similar to those unsuccessfully proposed by Murat’s government. The central
concern was to strengthen the discipline exercised by the bishops. In 1818, 43 of
the Kingdom’s 131 bishoprics were vacant, and over the next ﬁfteen years ﬁfty of
the smaller diocese were abolished. New measures were taken to strengthen the
authority of the bishops and to improve the quality and behaviour of the clergy.⁶
The Concordat of 1818 enabled the Restoration government to succeed where
Murat’s government had failed in making the secular clergy into an arm of the
bureaucratic state, but liberals were especially angered that the clergy regained
a dominant hold over primary and secondary schooling, and effective control over
the university and censorship.⁷
   Nonetheless, the institutional and political reforms made during the period of
French rule were retained more fully in the South in 1815 than in any of the other
Italian states, consolidating a form of government described by contemporaries as
an ‘administrative monarchy’. Not only were the innovations of the French
period retained on the mainland, but they were now extended to Sicily as well.
On 11 December 1816, the formerly independent crowns of Naples and Sicily
were uniﬁed and Palermo became simply the residence of a Royal Lieutenant
General. In the words of Luigi Blanch, Sicily was now ‘a posthumous conquest of
Napoleon’.⁸
   In all the Restoration states the continuities with the Napoleonic past were con-
siderable, but in almost every other Italian state the French model of a centralized
bureaucratic state met with ﬁrm opposition. The legitimist apologists of the
Restoration were advocates of absolutism, but also of a corporatist vision of
society in which religion and paternalist values were seen as the key defences
against the ideas and innovations believed to have been the principal cause
of the Revolution and disasters that had followed. For the champions of the
legitimist rulers the rapid collapse of Napoleon’s empire was in itself a clear
demonstration of the weakness of a political system based solely on bureaucracy
and the army.
   The Napoleonic model of centralized bureaucratic autocracy was now
denounced not only by legitimist conservatives like Joseph de Maistre, but also
liberals like Jean Charles Léonard Simonde de Sismondi, who saw the Napoleonic
state as an instrument of tyranny that threatened to deprive civil society of all
affective autonomy.⁹ These debates reﬂected the different ways in which the

  ⁶ See Rocchina, in Di Leo (1995), 162.
  ⁷ On Restoration censorship in Naples, see Davis, in Goldstein (ed.) (2000), 81–124.
  ⁸ Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945), ii. 14–15; see also Rosselli (1956), 153. It was Blanch who coined
the term ‘administrative monarchy’.
  ⁹ On Sismondi, see Lyttelton, in Teich and Porter (eds.) (1993), 63–105, and Pazzagli (2003).
