                                       Losing Naples                                       273

   Blanch suggested three reasons for this. First, the propertied classes were
determined to prevent any recurrence of popular violence. Second were the secret
societies: ‘The sect of the Carbonari placed the people in close communication
with the upper classes and as a result removed that hatred and war to the death
that in 1799 had been waged against any who were not of the people.’⁷² Finally,
both the Austrians and the Bourbons deliberately avoided anything that might
foment civil war or civil disorder. Even the Court of Palermo ‘had avoided exciting
passions and had not employed men associated with the horrors of the past’.
Blanch also thought that Napoleon’s seemingly miraculous recovery after the
escape from Elba served to restrain any desire for vendetta or vengeance for fear
that the emperor might again return to Italy to punish any ‘momentary excess’.⁷³
   Blanch’s emphasis on the measures taken to maintain order were supported by
De Nicola’s account of events in the capital. When Murat left Naples on 17 March
1815 to join the army, he had appointed Manhès as military command, with
Maghella responsible for maintaining public order: ‘The Police are very active’,
De Nicola noted: the civic guard was mobilized and the soldiers began to mount
regular patrols.⁷⁴
   On 17 April the civic guard reserves were called up and public employees who
failed to appear for duty were threatened with immediate dismissal. Long lists of
political suspects were compiled by Manhès and Maghella, and included many
‘noblemen and gentlemen’. News was circulated of the enthusiastic reactions to
Murat’s appeals for ‘Italian Independence’ in the North, but De Nicola claimed
that ‘the word that circulated in the city is that Joachim had not found the support
he hoped for and that the Italians understood full well that under the banner of
Italian Independence they would become provinces of the Kingdom of Naples.’⁷⁵
   On 20 April the government raised another forced loan from the wealthier cit-
izens, followed on the 27th by a new wave of arrests. On 1 May the city was full of
contradictory rumours and alarms. The following day the Interior Minister
Giuseppe Zurlo returned from Murat’s headquarters and was believed to have
brought with him a constitution. De Nicola recorded on 4 May that ‘The Internal
Security Guards patrol day and night. . . . Twenty or thirty thousand men serve in
the guard.’ The Intendent of the city, Michele Filangieri, announced publicly that
when the Austrian advance guard reached Capua he would personally hand over the
keys of the city, ‘not wishing that the city should be exposed to military violence’.⁷⁶
   Rumours circulated the next day that a Council of War had refused to allow the
queen to take refuge in the fortress of Gaeta ‘because this might have caused a
Revolution’.⁷⁷ On 9 May General MacDonald marched the remaining French
troops from Naples to Gaeta, and on the following day the commanders of
the Internal Security Guard established procedures for surrendering the city to the

      ⁷² Ibid.        ⁷³ Ibid.         ⁷⁴ De Nicola (1899–1905), ii. 17 March 1815, 784.
      ⁷⁵ Ibid., 12, 15, 16 April, 800.       ⁷⁶ Ibid., 1, 2, 3, 4 May 1815, 809–10.
      ⁷⁷ Ibid., 4 May 1815, 811.
