280                             Restoration and Revolution

the principal enemy of progress. Like Zurlo and Ricciardi in Naples, both
Tommasi and de’ Medici believed that enlightened autocracy offered the safest
and most rational form of progressive government. Although they considered the
French regime on the mainland to be little better than a military dictatorship,
they still found it far preferable to what the English had tried to impose on Sicily.
   Both men saw the Restoration as an opportunity to create a new alliance
between throne and altar, but they were agreed that this must be done without
alienating those who had rallied to the French regime. It was no accident that
among the documents collected in Palermo by Tommasi was an original copy of
the ‘Kings Orders given from the Road of Naples’ to Cardinal Ruffo in July 1799,
which had authorized the White Terror. This was precisely the precedent to be
avoided, and both men agreed that the political divisions that had lacerated the
nation between 1799 and 1806 had fatally weakened the monarchy and were
the reason ‘why the Government that succeeded that of His Majesty King
Ferdinand won the applause of the Neapolitan Nation’.¹²
   The two Bourbon ministers accepted the underlying soundness of the changes
made by the French rulers, and indeed the central refrain in the memoranda
prepared in Palermo, and later repeated in the politics of the Restoration, was that
the French innovations had simply realized the reforms that had originally been
proposed by the Bourbon rulers in the previous century. This was a formula
that enabled the Bourbon ministers to accept the new administrative system in
principle, while rejecting the ways and the means by which these changes had
been implemented by the French.
   For example, while it was acknowledged that the new Interior Ministry was
sound in principle, it was also claimed that it typiﬁed the failure of the French rulers
to carry through their reforms. The Ministry was above all an example of:
the mania to create everything in a single moment and on a scale that is quite dispropor-
tionate to existing resources, with the result that great quantities of money have been
consumed, yet everything remains chronically short of funds so that very few objectives
have been achieved. Decrees that have never been enforced and things that have been
demolished but never rebuilt are rightly the targets of public criticism. . . . The publication
of a new decree and the announcement of a new project served primarily to ﬁll the page of
some report that would appear in France to boast of the improvements made in this State,
in contrast to the views of the Nation that cried out against the money wasted to ﬂatter the
self-image of the Court and its vainglorious ruler.
   Allowing for the strong ideological stances taken in these reports, they did
nonetheless pinpoint key weaknesses in the administrative innovations on the
mainland. The reports prepared in Palermo conﬁrmed, for example, that jurisdic-
tional boundaries between the new central ministries of state remained uncertain


  ¹² ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi B IV, ‘Istruzioni del Re per il Suo Luogotenente e
Capitano Generale al Cardinale Ruffo, date dalla Rada di Napoli’, 24 July 1799.
