                                      Restoration                                  279

many also recognized, was that those same local autonomies were also opportunities
for resurrecting the monopolist power formerly exercised by the feudatories.
   In many respects, the South was confronted by problems that would come to face
other parts of Italy only much later. The crisis of older forms of paternalism and def-
erence in the rural South was not unique, but when compared with much of central
and northern Italy those processes had been precocious and peculiarly disruptive.
But while this had created incentives for developing new forms of bureaucratic
power earlier than in other Italian states, this was not easily achieved. The poverty of
the southern economies made the bureaucratic project difﬁcult to achieve, while
moves to tighten bureaucratic centralization provoked powerful local resistance.
When in 1816 the Congress of Vienna decided to unify the formerly independent
crowns of Naples and Sicily, those tensions were further heightened.
   None of these developments were unique to the South, however, and in all the
Italian states the Congress of Vienna took the opportunity to amalgamate, annex,
and integrate formerly independent states, territories, and towns. The aim was to
strengthen the Italian principalities, but the process of incorporation and admin-
istrative centralization was everywhere the most serious cause of political unrest
in the Italian Restoration regimes. Without constant external support, these inter-
nal tensions proved difﬁcult to contain, and the problems were exacerbated
when the defence of local autonomies found a broader and more compelling
platform in the nationalist projects that gained force in the 1840s.


                REFLECTING ON THE REVOLUTION

The terms of the Restoration settlement in Naples in 1815 were dictated by
Vienna, but they also closely followed the recommendations of two men who
would play a central role in the politics of the Restoration government, Luigi de’
Medici and Donato Tommasi. After the Restoration they served respectively
as Ministers of Finance and Justice, but from much earlier they had already been
following and studying the change taking place on the mainland from Palermo.
When Napoleon’s Continental project began to fall apart, they had carefully
begun to plot the course that the Restoration should take.
   De’ Medici and Tommasi had both begun their careers in the ﬁnal decades of
enlightened absolutism, both were disciples of Gaetano Filangieri, and both had
been directly involved in the ﬁnal Bourbon reform initiatives after 1801. Their
politics and outlook were very similar to those of Giuseppe Zurlo, and like Zurlo
they had followed the Court to Palermo in 1806. Unlike Zurlo they had remained
in Sicily, where they had been caught in the bitter struggles among the queen, the
British, and the Sicilian barons.
   De’ Medici and Tommasi were both deeply hostile to the constitutional experi-
ment in Sicily and like the eighteenth-century reformers they considered the
Sicilian Parliament to be a bastion of the reactionary feudal nobility that was
