278                             Restoration and Revolution

Italian elites had responded to and adapted French models. Even in the most
reactionary states, there was no attempt to reverse the closure of the monasteries or
the land sales, or the new organization of public ﬁnances. But except in the Duchy
of Parma, which the Congress of Vienna granted to the former empress Marie
Louise of Austria, the ideological reaction against French rule was uncompromis-
ing, as were the purges of all those who had held ofﬁce or given support to the
Napoleonic administrations.
   The Habsburg territories reverted to Habsburg administrative practice and
custom, and the other Italian rulers followed suit. In Piedmont, the House of
Savoy abolished all legislation that had been introduced since 1770, an attempt to
restore the ancien régime not imitated even in papal Rome.¹⁰ But it was not only in
the states that were most fully committed to the ideological propositions of the
Restoration that the reactions against French rule went deep. Indeed, one of
the most explicit political debates took place in Tuscany where the restored
Grand Duke acknowledged that the sovereign’s power was rooted in a hierarchal
ordering of society best safeguarded by the principles of religion and paternalism.
In practice that meant recognizing the right of the Church and the landowners to
govern at a local level, albeit under the surveillance of the Grand Duke. It is hardly
surprising, therefore, that Sismondi’s celebration of the medieval Tuscan city
states as models of local autonomy and a historical alternative to Napoleonic
centralism and tyranny should have been avidly read and applauded in the
Grand Duchy.¹¹
   Reactions in the South were different, and here there was much broader
support in principle for the new ‘administrative monarchy’. The reason was that
the leading ideologists of the Restoration acknowledged that in the South the
paternalist foundations on which the Tuscan, the Piedmontese, and the Habsburg
rulers looked to rebuild the post-feudal state no longer existed. In the South
the state had, therefore, a larger role to play in reshaping society, a view also
shared by the reformers who continued to look on the state as the critical agent of
change in the South. However, the trust that they had formerly placed in the
enlightened prince had by now been undermined by the experience of the revolu-
tionary years and of Napoleonic autocracy and imperialism. The advocates of
reform still looked to the state as the necessary agent of change, but they also saw in
the constitutional project the means to impose checks and balances that would
modify the rigidly centralizing assumptions on which the reforms of the late
eighteenth century and of the Napoleonic period were premised. By extending
greater political autonomy at the provincial and local level, the constitutional pro-
ject looked to restore the political role of the post-feudal notables. But the danger, as


  ¹⁰ For Lombardy, see Meriggi (1963) and Rath (1967); for the Papal State, Reinerman
(1979/1989) and Hughes (1994); for Rome, Boutry, in Ciucci (ed.) (2000).
  ¹¹ See especially Soldani’s preface to Kroll (2005), pp. xiii–xxv, and the chapters by Contini,
Coppini, Greco, Porciani, in Fasano Guarini, Petralia, and Pezzino (eds.) (2004).
