284                             Restoration and Revolution

people who know more about alchemy than chemistry now produce medicines
for the sick’ and the regulations on who could practice medicine had been relaxed
‘to the point that even an out of work notary could set up as a physician’.¹⁶


                        THE FEUDAL COMMISSION

The Feudal Commission was the principal target on which the commentators
in Palermo focused their scorn. They acknowledged and welcomed without
reservation the abolition of feudalism, which was again described as the realization
of the most fundamental reform pursued by the previous Bourbon monarchy. But
the Feudal Commission itself was held up as an example of the arbitrary and
despotic nature of French rule:
The Minister of the Interior and the Procurator General Winspeare, on the pretext of
revolutionary ideas embellished by philanthropic references to the beneﬁts of a general and
equal distribution of land, have committed one of the greatest injustices. The abuses of
feudal privilege were an offence to the Sovereign and to public law, but the seizure of land
in an attempt to carry through an Agrarian Law has been the most unjust, the most
anti-monarchical, and the most damaging action to the interests of the State.
  The operation was carried out by corrupt judges who in a single day issued 270
judgements without appeal and without due process in response to a simple
appeal by the mayor or the representative of a comune. In this fashion 270 people
were deprived of property they had owned for centuries.
The nobility has been ruined, and how many of the great landowners have been left with-
out brood-mares or ewes from which to breed? What forests, what pastures have been left
to sustain the pastoral economy after the division of the common lands carried out by the
Minister of the Interior? To destroy the big estates so that every citizen may have a part in
the belief that this will cause industry to increase is a chimera in which only someone who
does not know the Neapolitans could indulge.
   If there is no-one to pay the farm workers, if there is no-one to make loans, all industry
will perish, there will be no-one left to pay the taxes, and if there is no vast Army to absorb
the resources of the State and feed at least part of those left without work, the number of
criminals will grow as will the scale of public poverty.
It would have been much better to have undertaken major land reclamation
projects ‘that would help clothe the naked instead of a remedy that simply strips
naked those that are already clothed’.¹⁷
   Despite their heavy ideological charge, these criticisms were similar to those
levelled against the operations of the Feudal Commission in Naples by Francesco
Ricciardi and Vincenzo Cuoco.

       ¹⁶ ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi, Memorandum VIII: Ministero dell’Interno.
       ¹⁷ Ibid., Memorandum V: L’Amminstrazione Civile.
