                                     Restoration                                  289

For that reason, Britain was willing for Austria to act as gendarme of the Italian
states, even though in British eyes Austria’s hostility to liberalism and its commit-
ment to legitimist autocracy at home and abroad was a major cause of Italy’s
political unrests. But despite the growing sympathy on the part of English public
opinion for the cause of Italian independence, down to 1859 British governments
remained unswerving in their support for the political status quo in Italy.³⁰
   When it came to Naples and the Bourbon monarchy, British attitudes were par-
ticularly mixed. The ten years of joint rule in Sicily had left few happy memories,
while at the same time strengthening British convictions that poverty and
discontent in Italy in general, and in the South in particular, were the inevitable
consequences of despotism and misrule. On that subject successive British
governments continued to make their feelings known, although to avoid compro-
mising relations between London and Vienna they made do with lecturing the
Neapolitan rulers and the Pope on how to run their states.
   British support for the Bourbon restoration in Naples had come at a high price,
however. During the Napoleonic wars, Britain’s trade with southern Italy had
grown mainly thanks to the trafﬁc in British contraband goods stocked in Sicily
and Malta. A number of British commercial ventures had ﬂourished in Sicily,
including the enterprise of James Woodhouse and Benjamin Ingham, two
Englishmen who had begun exporting dessert wines from Marsala before the
Revolution. These became very popular ﬁrst with the British navy and then after
the war were in high demand in British drawing rooms. From this proﬁtable busi-
ness, Woodhouse and Ingham branched out into other ﬁelds, including the export
trade in citrus fruits and in sulphur, for which industrial demand was increasing.³¹
   Britain’s compensation came, therefore, in the form of commercial privileges
and there was no clearer demonstration of the Bourbon Kingdom’s continuing
colonial status after the Restoration than the humiliating commercial privileges
demanded by its allies. The treaties signed in September 1816 conceded 10 per cent
on all customs duties on goods loaded on and off any British, French, or Spanish
vessel. Since Neapolitan ships did not enjoy the same privilege, the Kingdom’s
commercial interests were ruthlessly subordinated to those of its principal
commercial partners. By the 1830s most of the Kingdom’s foreign trade, exports
as well as imports, was carried on foreign and mainly on British merchant
vessels.³² These commercial privileges were the ones that both Joseph Bonaparte
and Joachim Murat had refused to grant even to Napoleon. As Vincenzo Cuoco
and others had warned two decades earlier, in the rapidly evolving new world of
international economic competition, southern Italy’s political and diplomatic
insecurity made it especially vulnerable to the risk of colonial subordination to its
powerful foreign commercial partners, especially Great Britain.³³
  ³⁰ Mack Smith (1954/1985), 31–6.
  ³¹ Trevelyan (1973); D’Angelo (1988, 1990). On British merchants in Naples, see also
Dawes (1991).                                               ³² Pontieri (1965), 318–36.
  ³³ Cuoco (Villani, ed., 1980), 58–9.
