                                        Restoration                                       285


                         THE QUESTION OF COST

Not surprisingly there were also many signiﬁcant silences in the reports drawn up
in Palermo. There was no mention, for example, of the reorganization of public
ﬁnances, of the conversion of the debts of the ancien régime monarchy, or of
the consolidation of a new National Debt that had fundamentally changed the
structure of public ﬁnances. Nor was there any reference to the reorganization
of direct taxation following the introduction of the fondiaria. Nor was much
said about the small but important initiatives taken by Murat’s government to
build up native industries and reduce dependence on imports in key sectors like
textiles.
   These silences were in part due to the fact that there was no disagreement over
the utility of these innovations, while it was also agreed that the new system of
administration had immeasurably strengthened the government’s control over the
provinces and local government. There was praise for the new municipal govern-
ment in Naples and for the new provincial administrations, especially for the
Provincial Councils, ‘where the Intendent takes executive decisions subject to
conﬁrmation by the Council of State’ on all local affairs and on all questions relat-
ing to the ﬁscal obligations of individuals, towns, and local administrations.¹⁸
   The reports did draw attention, however, to the heavy costs of these new forms of
bureaucratic administration, and questioned how these could be sustained given
the Kingdom’s slender economic resources. Despite heavy increases in taxation, the
Kingdom’s ﬁscal revenues were insufﬁcient to support the new administrative
structures, let alone the many other new projects that the French rulers had
proposed. No one doubted the need for investments in road-building and land
reclamation projects, it was argued, but no one had shown how such endeavours
could be funded from existing resources. As a result, the French had left in their train
a long series of projects either never started or else soon abandoned.
   In this the Bourbon ministers were not wide of the mark, and the project of
administrative reorganization begun by the French rulers in many critical respects
outran the resources of the southern economy. Nor is this surprising, since even in
much wealthier regions like Lombardy the costs of the new forms of central and
local administration were the main reason for the heavy tax increases that made
French rule very unpopular in the closing years of the empire.¹⁹ In the South, the
depressed state of the economy made the additional ﬁscal burdens imposed to
support the new bureaucracies even more difﬁcult to sustain, while the problems
were seriously aggravated by the tendency to pass additional tax burdens on to the
provinces. These new costs would be of the principal targets of protest during
the revolutions of 1820–1 in Sicily and on the mainland.²⁰

       ¹⁸ Ibid.        ¹⁹ Zaghi (1991), 519—see also Antonielli (1983) and Grab (1997).
       ²⁰ Spagnoletti (1985), 953–1019.
