282                          Restoration and Revolution

their furnishings and books to deck out royal palaces and the new Royal Library in
Naples. But they went on to argue that ‘even if there were the means to restore
everything to what it had once been, after nine years, it is no longer clear whether
this would be a good or a bad thing’. Many young monks would resist attempts to
make them return to the cloister, and those who now received public stipends
considered that they had beneﬁted from the changes. They were also a valuable
supply of teachers for schools, colleges, and seminaries, and of administrators for
charities and hospitals.
   The heaviest losses, it was claimed, were felt less by individuals than by families
‘who used to dedicate one of their members to this State and can no longer make
use of this resource’. That loss was partially compensated by the increase in the
size of the army, but the report also took the opportunity to raise a more general
concern on that score: the army was an expense that the government could not
sustain and so must somehow seek to reduce without creating discontent.
   The wider moral impact of the suppression of the monasteries was a matter
of greater concern, however, and especially for Naples ‘where the need for the
inﬂuence of religion is especially necessary, since it is essential to have a means to
check the imaginations of a people who become volcanic and dangerous when left
to their own devices’. The suppression of the monasteries had seriously reduced
the provision of education and instruction for the poor. The new schools created
by the French were ‘inactive, lacking teachers and without funds’. As a result
primary education was completely neglected. The founding of new colleges ‘only
affects the higher forms of learning’ since they would not increase the supply
of new teachers for the poor. Nor could the teacher shortage be resolved by the
secular clergy since they had other functions. Only the ‘idle life of the cloister
ﬁtted people for this form of public teaching which brought learning to the poor.
There had always been a monk willing to teach the alphabet, some grammar
and the Catechism, but the secular clergy have no time for this. . . . What poor
Father who works for a living and what Neapolitan mother has the skills? As a
result Your Majesty has many subjects and citizens who are ignorant of why they
exist and of what they owe to their Creator, to Society and to their Sovereign.’
   The writers of the memorandum also warned that it would be dangerous and
inadvisable to attempt to restore the property of the religious orders, arguing that
it was preferable that the clergy be paid by the state since this reduced the power
and inﬂuence of the Court of Rome. But new measures were needed to improve
the behaviour of the regular clergy, who too often caused scandal and were a threat
to public order.
   When it came to the secular clergy, the observers in Palermo shared the con-
cerns that had led Murat’s government to seek a new concordat. Many bishoprics,
canonries, and abbacies had suffered heavily from the loss of feudal revenues and
the division of the feudal demani. Although many bishops now received stipends
from the government, some as much as 1,400 ducats a year, most of the bishoprics
in the Kingdom remained vacant. Parish priests had been assigned good stipends
