                                       Restoration                                       281

and that they had often been given powers they had no means to enforce. The
Interior Ministry, for example, was also responsible for the promotion of trade,
but since the Kingdom had no colonies its trade consisted almost entirely in the
export of agricultural products. What agriculture needed ﬁrst and foremost was
roads, but ‘in nine years not one new road has been built and those that exist are
still in a terrible state’. The new Administration of Bridges and Roads was hailed as
the institutional solution adopted by the whole of Europe, yet had so far produced
little: ‘Roads are needed and will be built, but for that we do not need to maintain
this extensive General Staff of costly and useless employees.’
    Changes in the administration of justice were judged more positively and it was
acknowledged that this had created a clearly organized hierarchy that worked
from the lowest rung, the local Justice of the Peace, upwards through the provin-
cial courts, the four Appeal Courts, and ﬁnally reaching the Cassation Court in
Naples. The lower and higher criminal courts that had been created in each
province were also cited approvingly, as was the ofﬁce of the Procurators Royal
who acted on the crown’s behalf in criminal and civil cases, and were responsible
for ensuring that the courts followed proper procedure and interpreted the law
correctly.¹³ The new provincial tribunals were also praised for making access to
the courts easier for citizens, while increasing the opportunities for young lawyers
and judges to receive training and experience.¹⁴
    The standardization of the Kingdom’s legal codes was also welcomed, although
the report insisted that the new laws needed a ﬁrmer Neapolitan imprint: ‘The
Revolution that has brought so many evils, has also brought us this advantage’,
but ‘opportune reforms’ were needed so that once ‘refashioned by the paternal
care of His Majesty the King’ the new codes could properly be described not as
Napoleonic but as Neapolitan.


                           CHURCH AND CLERGY

The conditions of the Church and the clergy were a matter of special concern.
But although the alliance between throne and altar was to be the foundation of
the Restoration order, the approach was essentially pragmatic and there was no
suggestion that the changes made by the French should be undone. In part this
was because the observers in Palermo shared the hostility of the eighteenth-century
reformers toward the regular clergy and papal jurisdiction in the Kingdom. They
noted that with the exception of the mendicant orders, virtually all the religious
houses had been suppressed, save only the monasteries of Monte Cassino and
Cava dei Tirreni, which had been allowed to survive because of the important
libraries and documents they possessed. Other monasteries had been stripped of

 ¹³ The reference was to the ofﬁce of the Public Minister.
 ¹⁴ ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi, Memorandum VII: Sul Ministero di Culto e Giustizia.
