290                               Restoration and Revolution

   The crisis at the close of the eighteenth century had irreversibly compromised
the autonomy to which the eighteenth-century rulers of Naples had aspired. In
1815 the Restoration freed the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies from colonial subor-
dination to Napoleonic France only to make it a political satellite of the Habsburg
Empire and part of Britain’s new informal commercial empire. But in this respect
too the Bourbon Kingdom in the South again differed little from the other Italian
states, and down to 1848 even the two Italian princes who enjoyed the greatest
degrees of diplomatic autonomy—the House of Savoy and the Pope—both chose
to make Austria their protector.
   There were also important differences. Unlike the Bourbon Kingdom in the
South, the diplomatic and territorial integrity of both the papacy and the House
of Savoy was guaranteed by the European Powers. After 1815, as before, it was
a premise of European diplomacy that the Piedmontese territories formed a
necessary buffer between France and Austria, which meant that in 1848 and
1849, and again in 1859 the Piedmontese monarchy could go to war with Austria
in the knowledge that military defeat would not jeopardize the existence of the
Piedmontese state. Similarly, for so long as the papacy had powerful international
supporters the survival of the Pope’s temporal powers in Central Italy were guar-
anteed, no matter what the strength of local opposition. This was why after 1860
Rome would remain outside the new Italian Kingdom, until the defeat of the
emperor Louis Napoleon in September 1870 by the Prussians at the battle of
Sedan removed the Pope’s last international protector.³⁴ The rulers of the
Bourbon Kingdom of the Two Sicilies enjoyed no comparable diplomatic
security, however. Apart from the alliance with Austria the monarchy had few
friends but many powerful adversaries, a situation that would cause the Bourbon
government in the South to follow strategies that were signiﬁcantly different from
those of their fellow Italian rulers.


                  THE ECONOMICS OF RESTORATION

The political and diplomatic challenges facing the restored monarchy in 1815
were compounded by the economic and ﬁnancial problems facing the Kingdom.
From the ﬁrst days of the Restoration the government was faced by a crippling
ﬁnancial crisis, while the commercial recession that had dragged on since the start
of the revolutionary wars not only continued, but in some respects deepened.
   As well as the massive costs of Murat’s ﬁnal campaigns and the undisclosed but
lavish personal bribes the Bourbons paid to Prince Metternich and Talleyrand to
secure their throne, the Neapolitan rulers had to repay the costs of Austrian mili-
tary occupation in 1815, a large cash indemnity to Prince Eugène, and the cost of

  ³⁴ According to Bismarck Italy’s Uniﬁcation was the result of three S’s: the battles of San Martino,
Sadowa, and Sedan.
