286                                Restoration and Revolution


                  PUBLIC ORDER AND PRIVATE ORDER

The reports prepared for Tommasi and de’ Medici in Palermo revealed a sensitive
understanding of the material difﬁculty of sustaining a modern bureaucratic state
in an impoverished Kingdom. But they also acknowledged the difﬁculties that
the seemingly irreversible breakdown of informal systems of power in many parts
of the South posed for the construction of a post-feudal order. Factionalism,
political and party rivalries, and public order in general were, therefore, a major
source of concern, but while it was recognized that the French had strengthened
the apparatus of policing it was also acknowledged that this could not offer
effective solutions.
   Before the Revolution, it was argued, the Governor of the Vicaria tribunal
and prison in Naples had exercised all the powers needed to keep the peace and
punish wrongdoers.²¹ But in a modern state, what the French called Alta
Polizia—essentially the policing of ideas—had become a necessity.
Because of the infection caused by new principles, because men of letters began to challenge
errors and prejudices only to replace them with inappropriate philosophies that gave rise to
strange fruits in a Nation that still lacks education, and because the trade with foreigners
that is necessary for the nation’s prosperity also became a source of highly dangerous
contagion, new forms of policing that are vigilant, impartial but truly patriotic have become
necessary and indispensable.
   The threat to the modern state no longer came from common criminals, but
from individuals with political motives, which left the government with no
alternative but to police ideas and behaviour. In a modern state, therefore, the
police were indispensable ‘to protect the State from rebellion, to maintain order
and to encourage a spirit of reconciliation in Society’.
   But how to do this without exacerbating political divisions? The choice of a
Chief of Police was obviously of critical importance, and it was recommended that
only persons from a distinguished family with property should be chosen for such
a position, since such individuals were less ‘likely to be associated with Parties’.
The example to be avoided at all costs was that of Antoine Christophe Saliceti,
whose time as Minister of Police had been ‘a terrible epoch in the history of the
kingdom. Despotism, terror, immorality, unlimited ambition and a Chaos of
Horrors formed the code by which he lived.’
   The pervasiveness of factional and party divisions in the South indicated deeper
problems, however, that called for other measures. In political terms, these divi-
sions made it advisable to continue the politics of ralliement and amalgame
adopted by the French rulers. The last of Murat’s police chiefs, the Duke of
Campochiaro, had included both former Jacobins and former Sanfedists in his

      ²¹ On the Vicaria and policing in Naples at the end of the ancien régime see Alessi (1993).
