288                              Restoration and Revolution

When it came to Italy, the overriding concern of the Vienna settlement was to
prevent any revival of French territorial ambitions on the peninsula. For that
reason, the European powers entrusted the Italian states to the protection of the
Habsburg monarchy, and although Austria ruled directly only in the newly
formed Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia, from the formidable redoubts of the
Quadrilateral fortresses in the central Po valley its armies could be dispatched
speedily to any part of the peninsula. Military might, moreover, was reinforced by
networks of kinship that made every Italian ruler either a cousin or a client of
the Austrian imperial family. For the ﬁrst time in modern history, the Italian states
were dominated by a single foreign power, a situation that left the Italian rulers
little room for political or diplomatic manoeuvre.²⁶
    In the South, the terms of the Restoration reﬂected the Bourbon dynasty’s
greatly reduced importance in European politics. Despite lip-service to the princi-
ples of dynastic legitimacy, Ferdinand IV had been restored to the throne of
Naples in 1815 only because it suited the political interests of the allies, who
only a year before had been prepared to consider the claims of Joachim Murat.
In Naples, the terms of the Treaty of Casalanza were considered to be so humiliating
that the Neapolitan envoy, the Duke of Serracapriola, had refused to sign them.
The Bourbons ﬁnally lost the territorial claims that had inspired Murat’s
adventures in central Italy in 1814 and 1815 and were conﬁned to the boundaries
set by the ‘Holy See and the salt sea’.²⁷ The Tuscan Presidi were lost without com-
pensation, the Papacy’s claim to suzerainty over the Kingdom was not challenged,
and the Neapolitan claims to the territories of Pontecorvo and Benevento were
not acknowledged.²⁸
    Austria’s support for the dynasty’s restoration came at a high price. Following
Napoleon’s example, the Austrians stationed an army of occupation in the
Kingdom, which remained there until 1818 at the Neapolitan government’s
expense. In addition, Naples was required to pay the full costs of Austria’s military
operations in 1814 and 1815.²⁹ But the English had demanded their quittance
too. Finally in possession of a secure base in Malta, Britain was now the undis-
puted naval power in the Mediterranean, whose strategic importance for commu-
nication with its colonial empire in India and the Orient became a permanent
concern of successive British governments. Britain’s aim was to prevent any
political unrest in Italy that other powers, namely France, might try to exploit.

   ²⁶ France managed to regain a foothold when it sent an army to defend the Pope against an insur-
rection in 1831 and occupied Ancona. However, the situation changed completely when in 1849 the
French Republic sent another army to destroy the Roman Republic and restore Pope Pius IX: this
army remained in Rome until 1870 and enabled the emperor Louis Napoleon to become a major
player in the politics of Italian uniﬁcation.
   ²⁷ The Holy See being the Papal State; see Astarita (2005).
   ²⁸ Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945), ii. 14–15. See also Romeo (1963), 65–96; Cingari (1966);
Scirocco (1986).
   ²⁹ Between 1815 and 1825 the debt rose to 100 million ducats, ﬁve times the Kingdom’s annual
revenues. See Ostuni (1992), 329–32.
