                                        Restoration                                      283

by the state, but these were rarely paid. A thorough reorganization of the secular
hierarchies was urgently needed to make the authority of the bishops more
effective and—by implication—to make the secular clergy a more effective and
disciplined branch of public administration.¹⁵


                       WELFARE AND EDUCATION

The reports were especially scathing when it came to the shortcomings of the
French government’s initiatives to promote welfare and education. Endless
decrees, it was claimed, had been issued establishing primary and secondary
schools, colleges, grammar schools, universities, libraries, and printing works, but
all were in a state of total confusion and abandon. The University was in disorder,
and was avoided by both students and professors. There were no great advocates
practising in Naples, nor physicians, mathematicians, classical scholars, or literary
ﬁgures of renown. Manufacturing had received some encouragement, but
remained in its infancy and needed help to grow stronger.
   They also underlined the irreparable damage done to the charitable institutions
that had been one of the Kingdom’s greatest resources.
There is a decree prohibiting begging, yet the streets of the capital are full of the most
public displays of suffering and have become a Kingdom of unfortunate creatures whose
plight must wrench the heart-strings of any sensitive person.
The inmates of the hospices often went without food, yet despite the French
reforms the number of those employed by the charitable foundations was
excessive and they were grossly overpaid: ‘the principal beneﬁciaries of the
charities are still those who run them’.
   The astronomical observatory and the botanical gardens were cited as examples
of useful innovations, likewise the standardization of weights and measures using
the metric system, although it was to be deplored that this had been accompanied
by barbarously Italianized French names. It was agreed too that the French rulers
had also introduced sound new regulations on public hygiene and town planning.
The siting of food and livestock markets was now subject to public control, and
towns were required to build cemeteries outside inhabited urban spaces, to ensure
that night-soil and refuse were regularly disposed off, and to issue permissions for
all public and private construction. But the means to oversee and enforce these
regulations were wanting.
   Too often ancien régime regulatory bodies had been abolished without being
replaced. The Protomedicato that had, for example, formerly regulated medical
practitioners and apothecaries had been abolished, but since it was not replaced by
any new body ‘the unlicensed trade in drugs means that a handful of unscrupulous

 ¹⁵ ASN: Archivi Privati, Carte Tommasi, Memorandum VII: Sul Ministero di Culto e Giustizia.
