                                        Restoration                                       287

administration, for example, and had relaxed the formerly rigid ‘surveillance of
political opinions’ in an attempt to overcome the factionalism encouraged by his
predecessors.²² That approach had worked best in the provinces, it was argued,
where the Intendents were generally honest and loyal and were less affected by
political ambitions than their French counterparts in the capital. The Intendents
provided regular reports on the state of public opinion, which were carefully cross-
referenced with reports from ‘honest men from the same Province’. With the
change of regime it would be necessary to ensure that there was no ‘falling off in
either principle or practice’.²³
   A benign and watchful state could give the lead, but the roots of factionalism lay in
the fractured structures of local power, of which the most alarming symptom was the
ubiquity of the secret societies. For the observers in Palermo this posed a simple but
critical question: were the secret societies a means for overcoming the crisis of the
paternalist order in the South, or were they simply the instruments of factionalism
and division? The writers of the reports were unable to answer that question, but they
concluded with a warning that the diffusion of the secret societies was now so great
that any attempt to destroy them would be very dangerous.²⁴
   These reports show that contemporaries had a clear understanding of the
broader changes taking place. The monarchy’s principal advisers welcomed
the end of the feudal order and saw the Restoration as the opportunity to build
a new post-feudal order and a new political consensus. But on what terms?
Monarchies in the Bonaparte style are military dictatorships, made up of the Sovereign and
the Plebs with no intermediaries. They lead either to despotism or revolution. The return of
his Majesty King Ferdinand IV to the throne of Naples will reﬂect the ideas of this century.
It will not establish a new form of military government, but rather a paternal government
that is the fruit not of maxims but of experience and founded in a true understanding of the
character of the Nation that He governs. But there is only one true intermediary between
the ruler and the Nation: ‘There is no Monarchy without Nobility, and there is no Nobility
without hereditary Property, which is the indispensable foundation of the whole Ediﬁce.’²⁵
  That meant repairing the organic and paternalist social bonds that had been
shattered by the Revolution and by Napoleonic bureaucracy. But in the political
and economic circumstances of the Restoration, it was far from clear how such a
project could be realized.


                   NAPLES, VIENNA, AND LONDON

Not least of the difﬁculties facing the restored Italian rulers in 1815 was the
subordinate and dependent role assigned them by the European peacemakers.

  ²² Maghella and Daure.
  ²³ ASN: Archivi Privati: Carte Tommasi, Memorandum VI, ‘Sulla Polizia generale del Regno’.
  ²⁴ Ibid.      ²⁵ Ibid.
