                                          Restoration                                        291

maintaining the Austrian army, which remained in the Kingdom for two years (at
a cost of 4,200,000 ducats). To pay for these ‘extraordinary expenditures’,
between 1815 and 1820 the government had to ﬁnd some 23,000,000 ducats in
excess of its annual revenues.³⁵
   The high price of the Kingdom’s fragile independence came on top of the heavy
ﬁnancial and ﬁscal strains imposed by the empire and Murat’s wars. The Finance
Minister, Luigi de’ Medici, made deep cuts in government spending that were
damaging especially for those whose fortunes had risen under Murat. Public
employees were dismissed, others were placed on part or supplementary time,
salaries were cut and paid in heavy arrears. Reductions in the army budget and in
commissions were another major cause of discontent, as was the government’s
decision to disband many of the technical agencies created by Murat, including
the Directorate of Ponti e Strade and the Scuola di’Ingegneria. Heavy cuts in the
budget for public works were a further blow to the depressed provincial
economies and resulted in often irreparable damage once more to numerous land
reclamation projects that had been started or restarted.
   The government’s ﬁnancial problems were severely aggravated by the commer-
cial recession that followed the war. Throughout Europe prices fell, and just as
Vincenzo Cuoco and Luigi Blanch had predicted the cause was the grain from
Egypt, the Morea, and the Black Sea that for the ﬁrst time began to reach
European markets. Not for the last time, the Mediterranean economies were the
principal victims of these early examples of globalization. In this case the impact
was made more severe by Luigi de’ Medici’s decision to remove restrictions on the
import of foreign grain, which caused prices to fall even more heavily. To
make matters worse, there was an outbreak of what was believed to be the plague
on the mainland in 1816, while a year later the poorest harvests in living memory
brought more disease and starvation. The government lacked the means to inter-
vene, but although conditions in the provinces became even more precarious,
de’ Medici nonetheless followed Mosbourg’s strategy and continued to load them
with additional ﬁscal burdens.


                    THE POLITICS OF RESTORATION

Austria’s determination in 1815 to prevent Ferdinand of Naples repeating the
political errors of 1799 did not imply sympathy with political change. Quite the
opposite. Austria was vehemently opposed to the Sicilian constitution of 1812
and under the terms of a secret Treaty of Friendship between Vienna and Naples
signed on 12 June 1815 the king of Naples agreed not to make any changes that
were not ‘compatible with the political institutions of the Habsburg monarchy’.

  ³⁵ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), iii. 18–21 (see Cortese’s notes); Scirocco (1986), 647–52. See also
Ostuni (1992), 64–9 and Bianchini (1839), 536.
