298                           Restoration and Revolution

   The constitution’s principal aim, however, was to ‘imprint a national identity on
the people’ and turn then into active citizens. For that reason, great emphasis was
placed on creating autonomous and democratic local and provincial government. For
his own province, Macchiaroli proposed the creation of a self-governing federal
‘Republic of Eastern Lucania’ that would include the existing provinces of Principato
Citeriore and Basicilata. These self-governing provincial federations, or ‘Supreme
Magistracies’, were to be based on directly elected municipal assemblies that would in
turn collectively constitute the nation that would take the form of a constitutional
monarchy. Machiaroli also ﬁrmly insisted on the sanctity of private property.⁷
   Alarmed by reports of seditious meetings, in 1818 the government sent
General Nunziante to Salerno to make a show of force. Arrests were made, fol-
lowed by some unsuccessful revolts. But none found wider support until 1820,
when Minichini persuaded two young subalterns named Michele Morelli and
Giuseppe Salvati, whose cavalry regiment was stationed in Nola, to lead what was
in effect a mutiny.⁸
   The protest in Nola triggered a sympathetic response in other regiments,
reﬂecting deep discontent among the junior ofﬁcers in particular. The reasons for
this were partly de’ Medici’s economies, which had damaged promotion prospects
especially for younger ofﬁcers. But there was a deeper underswell of these griev-
ances that originated from the ways in which Murat’s army had been integrated
with the royalist army after 1815.
   Under the terms of the Treaty of Casalanza (which had been negotiated on
Murat’s behalf by Generals Colletta and Carrascosa), the king had sworn to main-
tain the commissions and ranks of all those serving in Murat’s army. In practice,
however, the Muratist ofﬁcers were marginalized. As Luigi Blanch put it,
‘Ferdinand’s army had gown old on the streets of Palermo’, while the ofﬁcers
appointed by Murat were generally young. For those who had not already risen to
high rank like the Pepe brothers, Pietro Colletta, Luigi Blanch, and Michele
Carrascosa, career prospects after 1815 were dismal. The ofﬁcer corps was oversized
and the royalists received preference, with the result that the junior ofﬁcers who
had looked for promotion and glory under Joachim Murat now found their careers
blocked by the geriatric staff that the king had brought back from Palermo.⁹
   The Carbonarist lodges found many recruits among these discontented ofﬁcers
who now looked to Murat’s former generals for a lead. In 1814 and 1815 Michele
Carrascosa, the brothers Guglielmo and Florestano Pepe, and Pietro Colletta had
taken the lead in demanding that Murat grant a constitution. Once they
had accepted commissions in the royal army in 1815, however, their enthusiasm
for constitutions seems to have diminished notably. Nonetheless, they were the
leaders to whom the junior ofﬁcers now turned and they could not easily remain
uninvolved.

            ⁷ See Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), pp. xxvi–xxix.   ⁸ Ibid.
            ⁹ Saverese (1941), 72.
