                                           Restoration                                         293

and the feudal and village demani passed directly to the ex-feudal landowners and
the galantuomini without compensation to the rural communities. Although by the
time of the revolutions in 1820 the process had barely begun, by challenging numer-
ous jealously preserved privileges uniﬁcation had created a groundswell of powerful
discontents that quickly involved Sicily in the political events that began when the
monarchy conceded a constitution in Naples on 7 July 1820.³⁹
   Despite the apparently peaceful transition of power in 1815, serious problems
had also developed in the mainland provinces. Brigandage not only revived, but
began to assume unprecedented proportions. In part this was a direct conse-
quence of the breakdown of order in central Italy, where the French withdrawal
had been followed by Murat’s invasion and occupation of papal territories in
1814. The restoration of Pope Pius VII in May 1814 had made little difference,
while Murat’s military operations in 1815 left a further residue of popular revolts,
deserters, and armed bands who moved freely across the frontiers into the north-
ern provinces of Terra di Lavoro, the Abruzzo, and Molise, even raiding deep into
Basilicata, Capitanata, and Apulia. Although no longer promoted by the English
or the royalists, brigandage was still also endemic in the Calabrian provinces,
where smuggling continued to provide abundant work for the brigands.⁴⁰
   The situation was aggravated by the government’s decision in 1815 to disband
Murat’s Provincial Legions, which it mistrusted, and to abolish the military
commissions on the grounds that those whom the French had called bandits were
in reality Bourbon loyalists. That proved to be completely false, and within a year
the military commissions and the Provincial Militias were reinstated. But the
landowners refused to serve and instead sent substitutes so that the anti-brigand
militias consisted mainly of amnestied bandits and other delinquents who proved
more energetic in pursuing their own criminal activities than bandits.⁴¹
   Once again the military authorities published lists of wanted outlaws, sold
amnesties, and recruited bandits who surrendered voluntarily to hunt those who
did not. As in the past, however, these measures fuelled rather than checked the
lawlessness, which by 1817 had reached particularly alarming proportions in
Capitanata and Apulia. The scale of the disorders can be glimpsed from the corre-
spondence of the Neapolitan ambassador in St Petersburg, the Duke of Serracapriola,
who in 1817 appointed a new administrator to run his estate in Capitanata. The
new agent made the journey from Naples but when he reached the Duke’s property
in Chieuti he discovered that the estates had for some time been taken over by the
kinsmen of a former administrator. In fear for his life, the Duke’s new agent turned
on his heel and hurried back to the safety of the capital.⁴²


  ³⁹ Romeo (1950), 148–54, 163–9. See also Romano (1952), Renda (1968), and De Francesco
(1992).              ⁴⁰ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), iii. 108–17; Blanch (Croce, ed., 1945), ii. 190–5.
  ⁴¹ Lucarelli (1942), 50–64.
  ⁴² ASN: AP Maresca di Serracapriola B 131, 132, 137. There has been a long history of disputes,
between the feudatories and the ‘naturali’ of Chieuti.
