                                        15
                                 Revolution

                  1820: AN UNUSUAL REVOLUTION

The revolutions in Naples and Sicily in 1820–1 were the most direct and explicit
response to the changes that had taken place in southern Italy during the years of
Napoleonic rule, which after the Restoration had been exported to Sicily as well.
They must rank, however, amongst the more unusual political happenings in
nineteenth-century Europe. The revolutions took place almost without blood-
shed and in less than a week a revolt that started as a protest in an army barracks in
Nola in July 1820 led to the concession of a constitution and inspired a separate
revolution in Sicily.
   On the mainland, the revolution took place with little upheaval or violence.
Supporters divided into rival conservative, moderate, and radical camps, but
never quite came to blows, and the popular violence and peasant jacqueries that
had come to be thought of as standard accompaniments of political upheaval in
southern Italy were strikingly absent. The situation was different in Sicily, but
mainly because the revolution there had different objectives, speciﬁcally the Act of
Union of 1816. When Palermo refused to acknowledge the constitutional govern-
ment in Naples, it set a collision course not only with Naples but also with the
other major Sicilian towns that refused to follow its lead.
   Nonetheless, the nine months of constitutional government from July 1820 to
March 1821 were the ﬁrst moment of freedom of speech in southern Italy since the
time of the Republic of 1799. In Sicily, the debates focused primarily on the island’s
autonomy and the political terms of the Restoration. On the mainland, however,
the revolution was an opportunity for a searching review of the political and admin-
istrative changes that had been introduced during the years of French domination
and preserved after the Restoration. These debates revealed how the political events
of the previous decades had given rise to new forms of political awareness in many
different parts of the South. In this the secret societies had played an important role.
The masses by and large remained silent, but membership of the secret societies
nonetheless reached well beyond narrow conﬁnes of the patrician elites. Like the
masonic lodges before them, the secret societies were responsible not only for
spreading awareness of the constitutional programme but also for actively planning
the revolutions and maintaining control once they had occurred.
