                                         Revolution                                        297


                                 THE CARBONARI

Mr A’Court was misinformed in every particular. The government had been
warned of the imminent danger of a revolution for some time. For at least
two years it was feared that the Carbonari were trying to organize a revolution,
which they were, and the revolt that began in Nola in July 1820 was one of the
few nineteenth-century political revolutions that had been planned in some
detail.
    In 1816 the government had tried to ban the Carbonarist lodges, but the royal-
ist general Vito Nunziante reported that there were more than 50,000 Carbonari
in Calabria alone and advised against a frontal assault. The estimate was a wild
exaggeration, but two former Muratist generals, Guglielmo Pepe and Pietro
Colletta, gave exactly the same advice two years later when they were sent to reor-
ganize the militias in Capitanata and Basilicata. They too warned against any
frontal attack, recommending instead the tactics of inﬁltration employed by
Murat’s government.⁴ De’ Medici agreed and even the king reputedly exclaimed
that ‘Everyone else seems to be in the Carbonari, so I should join too!’⁵
    The lead in planning the revolution was taken by two men, Rosario Macchiaroli,
a surgeon who also worked in the ofﬁce of the provincial Intendent in Salerno,
and Pietro Serra. Former Jacobins, both were members of the Carbonarist lodge in
Salerno. In 1817 they convened a secret meeting of Carbonarist leaders from dif-
ferent provinces in the suitably cloak-and-dagger venue of the ruins of Pompeii,
where Macchiaroli and Serra proposed that they adopt a single national pro-
gramme. According to Luigi Minichini, a Carbonarist priest who would later play
a leading part in the early phases of the revolution, a Carbonarist Diet was then
held in Salerno in January 1818 where Macchiaroli’s programme was endorsed by
the representatives of lodges from all over the Kingdom. The representatives
agreed to take the Spanish constitution of 1812 as the basis for the Carbonarist
constitution and to coordinate revolts that would occur simultaneously in
Salerno, Naples, Foggia, and Bari.⁶
    Beyond its general principles, familiarity with the Spanish constitution of 1812
was hazy and relied heavily on the ways in which its contents were conveyed by
Serra and above all Macchiaroli. The general belief in any case was that it would be
both democratic and federalist within the general frame of a constitutional
monarchy, would guarantee universal suffrage, place the army and the magistracy
under the control of elected assemblies, guarantee freedom of speech and religion,
and emancipate women from their exclusion from civil life and education,
although without giving them the vote.

  ⁴ See esp. Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), pp. ix–xv; Colletta (Cortese, 1957), iii. 124–40;
Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945).                                            ⁵ Moscati (1971), 36.
  ⁶ See Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), pp. xiv, 60.
