292                               Restoration and Revolution

This was the pretext for abolishing the Sicilian constitution, and ensured that the
expectations of constitutional government would not be realized. If this provided
the supporters of the revolutions of 1820 on the mainland and in Sicily with their
principal demands, the Treaty of 1815 also provided Austria with the pretext
for military intervention to overthrow the constitution granted by Ferdinand
IV—after 1816 Ferdinand I of the new Kingdom of the Two Sicilies—in July
1820 and which his son had taken a solemn vow to uphold.³⁶
   There was little space for public debate in Restoration Naples, although the
restored dynasty followed the models of representation set by their French prede-
cessors. As it had been in the decade of French rule, the San Carlo opera house in
Naples played a critical role in deﬁning the national and modern attributes of
the monarchy and was the site where the royal family was most frequently seen
in a carefully choreographed setting. Domenico Barbaja’s services were retained
and the San Carlo theatre was the most modern and lavish in Italy, the scene
of Rossini’s early triumphs and another reﬂection of both the glory and the
modernity of the new monarchy. When the opera house was burned down in
1816, Stendhal recognized that the decision to rebuild it immediately was guided
by political not artistic considerations and in his view did more than anything else
to consolidate the monarchy’s popularity.³⁷
   The indefatigable diarist Carlo de Nicola repeatedly noted how warmly the
restored monarchy was welcomed in the popular districts of the capital, although
the cycles of bread and circuses maintained by the French rulers were never
restored to their former lavishness. Outside the capital things were different. In
Palermo, for example, the decayed state of the San Carlino theatre contrasted with
the glories of the San Carlo in Naples and became an important symbol of the
city’s loss of status following the Act of Union in 1816.³⁸
   The union of the two crowns had been a direct response to the humiliations
suffered by the monarchy during the long exile in Palermo, but had been imposed
by Austria and endorsed by the European powers. The resentments over the loss of
autonomy gave rise in Sicily to the most serious political challenges to the restored
monarchy and marked the latest, although not yet the ﬁnal chapter in the strug-
gles with the Sicilian grandees. But the Act of Union also revived older divisions
within Sicily and at least initially was widely supported by those opposed to the
reactionary autonomist pretensions of the nobility and to the dominant role in
Sicilian politics that Palermo sought to retain. Messina and Catania in particular
looked to gain greater independence from the union with Naples and to challenge
their subordination to Palermo.
   Although the Act of Union abolished feudalism in Sicily, no Feudal Commission
was created to adjudicate contested rights and in most cases the former feudal estates

   ³⁶ Scirocco (1990), 9–105; idem (1986), 643–82.
   ³⁷ Stendhal, Rome, Naples et Florence, cited in Di Lernia (1988), 160; on the social and political
role of the theatre in Restoration Italy see Sorba (2001), 93–154.        ³⁸ Davis (2005), 578–80.
