300                               Restoration and Revolution

   Amongst its many claims to originality, ‘the revolution travelled by post, or
rather by telegraph’. Indeed, in his enthusiasm to use the new system of sema-
phore telegraphy Colonel De Concilii unwittingly spread news of what had
occurred in Avellino to the capital and the Apulian provinces.¹⁴ As support for the
revolt spread, General Carrascosa began to fear that his own troops were about to
join the insurgents and began to play for time, ‘sticking as resolutely to his pen as
his sword stuck to its scabbard’.¹⁵
   Generals Campane and Nunziante were sent from Naples to reinforce
Carrascosa, but when they received news on 3 July that Foggia, the chief town in
Capitanata, had declared for the constitution and that the revolution was spreading
rapidly in neighbouring provinces they turned round and headed back to Naples.
This was the cue for Salerno to declare for the constitution, and its lead was then
followed by the principal towns in Terra di Lavoro, Basilicata, and Calabria.¹⁶
   On 5 July noisy demonstrations were held in the capital, led by armed citizens
supported by Carbonarist ofﬁcers and NCOs from the Royal Regiment of
Dragoons and the Royal Naples Battalion. The decisive turn came when
Guglielmo Pepe, who had risen to the rank of Field Marshal, left Naples at night
and joined the rebels in Avellino. The insurrection spread to other regiments and
on 6 July the king announced that a constitution would be introduced within
eight days. Then on the pretext of ill-health, he delegated full powers to his son,
Francis, Duke of Calabria.¹⁷
   In Naples, the decision to defer the constitution aroused fears of treachery. The
Carbonari suspected the Court’s motives, and many believed that General Pepe
had joined the rebels to prevent rather than promote a revolution. As rumours
spread, the city rang with ‘the shouts of the Internal Security Guard that were
matched by those of the students who, inﬂamed by love of their country and by
the sacred rights of the citizen, marched through the streets and in loud voices
demanded the Constitution of Spain’.¹⁸
   On 6 July a provisional governing junta was set up that included Generals
Carrascosa and Colletta, Giuseppe Zurlo, and Francesco Ricciardi. But these
appointments only heightened fears that a counter-revolution was being pre-
pared, and the situation risked getting out of control. On 7 July the Duke of
Calabria (now the prince regent) proclaimed the concession of a constitution that
would be ‘the same as the one adopted by His Majesty the King of Spain in 1812
and sanctioned by His Catholic Majesty in March of this year, except for those
modiﬁcations which the Nation’s representatives when constitutionally convened
may deem it appropriate to propose to adapt it to the particular circumstances of
this Kingdom’.¹⁹

  ¹⁴ Colletta (1848), 12. It is also claimed that Murat’s execution in October 1815 was the ﬁrst to be
authorized by semaphore telegraphy.
  ¹⁵ Cited in Johnson (1904), ii. 81–2; see ‘Michele Carrascosa’, in DBI (V. Sperber).
  ¹⁶ Colletta (1848), 10–12.            ¹⁷ Ibid. 13.        ¹⁸ Ibid. 14.
  ¹⁹ Cited in Corciulo (2000), 39–49.
