294                            Restoration and Revolution

   In an attempt to restore order in Apulia, in 1817 the government commissioned
an Irish general, Richard Church, to do what Manhès had done for Murat. When
Church arrived in Bari, he reported that the province was in state of civil war, and
he warned the government that the brigands were in close communication with the
Carbonarist lodges. In December, he occupied Lecce, rounded up all suspect
Carbonari, and set up military tribunals to try and execute all suspected brigands.⁴³
But the measures were not successful, and the government instead tried making
deals with brigand leaders. They included a secret pact with one of the most notori-
ous bands operating in Apulia led by Gaetano Meomartino (known as Vardarelli)
and Ciro Annichiarico, who secretly agreed to accept government pay for turning
in their opponents. But the military used the agreement as a lure to ambush and kill
the leaders in Foggia,⁴⁴ an event recorded by the English traveller Henry Keppel
Craven who arrived just in time to witness the shootout.⁴⁵
   When the Austrian army ﬁnally withdrew in 1817 the situation became even
worse, and in the following year the reintroduction of conscription provided the
bands with a fresh supply of recruits. But while these disorders reﬂected the des-
perate state of economic conditions, they were also inseparable from the conﬂicts
that surrounded the divisions of the former common lands and feudal estates
throughout the Kingdom. In many cases, the issues left unresolved by the Feudal
Commission and the French reforms were settled by force. Nor was it a coinci-
dence that brigandage intensiﬁed in Sicily as well precisely at the moment when
feudalism was abolished on the island.⁴⁶
   As had been the case during the years of French rule, brigandage offered powerful
landowners with opportunities to rebuild local networks of power and autonomy.
Like the French before them, the Bourbon government now looked to the secret
societies as means to combat these networks. But although Luigi Blanch had argued
that the secret societies had acted as a critical force for order during the Restoration,
in the years that followed they became the principal vehicles for promoting and dis-
seminating the constitutional programme in southern Italy and in Sicily.⁴⁷ Even
their enemies, who deliberately exaggerated their power and inﬂuence, paid the
compliment of imitating them. During his brief tenure in the Ministry of Police at
the start of the Restoration, the Prince of Canosa had busily promoted numerous
royalist secret societies and he was a staunch advocate of popular royalist militias.
   Fearing that his measures would lead to civil war, the Austrians insisted that
Canosa be removed. As brigandage escalated and as the secret societies grew in num-
ber both in the mainland provinces and in Sicily, the South became a theatre for dis-
order on a scale not seen since 1799. But when the revolutions began in June 1820,
on the mainland at least they took place under conditions of remarkable tranquillity.


      ⁴³ Lucarelli (1942), 124: Palumbo (1911), 265.       ⁴⁴ Themelly (1979), 62 n. 42.
      ⁴⁵ Keppel Craven (1824), 111–15.
      ⁴⁶ Fiume, in Davis and Ginsborg (ed.) (1991/2002), 70–91.
      ⁴⁷ Blanch, in Croce (ed.) (1945), ii. 190–5.
