296                            Restoration and Revolution

   After the event, the royalists would mock the absurdity of the political debates
that took place in the South in 1820, and a new generation of democrats would
follow Mazzini in dismissing the secret societies as a Gothic anachronism. Yet the
debates in 1820 articulated a clear understanding of the political issues posed by
the attempts to build a post-feudal order in the South, while also revealing power-
ful new national and local identities. These debates had no parallel elsewhere in
Italy. The debates in the National Parliament and in the provincial Deputations
focused on the political and administrative models on which the post-feudal
monarchy in the South had been constructed. They exposed how the French
bureaucratic models exceeded the Kingdom’s narrow economic resources and
showed why the project of reorganizing the southern state could not be achieved
without the cooperation of the elites. They also demonstrated how the crisis of the
old agrarian order had complicated the transition to more bureaucratized forms of
power, creating opportunities for new political monopolies to replace or replicate
those formerly exercised by powerful feudatories. But the increase in centralized
state power had also given rise to forms of ‘arbitrary government’ that were a fre-
quent target of protest in 1820, as was the domination of local government by
powerful factions. Although the remodelling of the southern monarchy had not
resolved the political problems posed by the crisis of the old order in the South, it
had nonetheless inspired forms of political awareness that in other parts of Italy
would develop only later.


                              TAKEN BY SURPRISE

When the revolution came in July 1820, the senior diplomatic representatives in
Naples were taken by surprise. The Austrian minister, Prince Jablonski, claimed
that a revolution seemed more likely to occur on the moon than in Naples.¹ Prince
Metternich, who had been lavishly entertained in Naples in the previous year dur-
ing an ofﬁcial visit by the Austrian Emperor, Francis I, expressed surprise and con-
tempt in equal measure:
A people that is still half barbarous, ignorant, superstitious without limit, ardent and pas-
sionate like Africans, that knows neither how to read nor to write and whose ﬁnal word is
the stiletto, offers a ﬁne example for the application of constitutional principles!
The outcome, he predicted, would be ‘torrents of blood’.² The British ambassador
William A’Court was astonished that a kingdom ‘in the highest degree ﬂourishing
and happy, under the mildest of governments and by no means offended by the
weight of taxation, [should] crumble before a handful of insurgents that half a bat-
talion of good soldiers would have crushed in an instant’.³

       ¹ Cited in Acton (1956), 675.       ² Metternich, cited in Addeo (1989), 357–8.
       ³ Acton (1956), 675. See Curato (1958), i. 250–1.
