                                           Revolution                                         299

   How exactly Murat’s former generals planned to respond is not clear, but it
seems likely that Generals Pietro Colletta and Guglielmo Pepe had begun prepar-
ing for a revolution they believed to be inevitable but not necessarily desirable. In
the two areas where the two generals were given the task of reorganizing the
provincial militias in 1818, respectively the Salernitano and Basilicata, and Irpinia
and Capitanata, there were also high numbers of Carbonarist lodges. From what
happened in 1820 it seems that Colletta and Pepe deliberately put men closely
connected to the Carbonari in command of the militias, making them in effect an
embryonic National Guard.¹⁰ The epicentres of revolts that started the revolution
in July 1820 were precisely the towns where Colletta and Pepe had been active two
years earlier—Salerno, Nola, Avellino, and Foggia.¹¹
   It seems likely that Pepe and Colletta believed that the Carbonari could be
recruited to control a revolt that was unavoidable. But not all the Muratist gen-
erals reacted in the same way. Michele Carrascosa and Luigi Blanch had both been
enthusiastic constitutionalists before 1815, but saw no future in a revolution that
had little internal coherence and no external support. That was also the view of
the former Muratist ministers Giuseppe Zurlo and Francesco Ricciardi, who had
agreed to serve in the Provisional Constitutional Government in July 1820 only
with the greatest reluctance.¹²


                                THE REVOLUTIONS

When Lieutenant Morelli launched his appeal for a constitution at Nola on 2 July
his protest was immediately taken up by the Carbonarist lodges in the area around
Avellino. The military commander of Avellino, Colonel De Concilii, also joined
the protestors, which threw the government in Naples into a state of indecision.
After long debate General Carrascosa was ordered to march to Avellino to negoti-
ate with the insurgents and bring the insurrection to an end.
   Pietro Colletta later claimed that Morelli’s advance ‘was not a march but a
triumph’. Morelli had been joined by 200 Carbonari raised by the priest Luigi
Minichini, and when on 3 July he advanced towards Avellino the Royal Samnite
Regiment stationed in the city joined the mutiny. By the time he entered
Avellino, Morelli had more than a thousand armed men. Nonetheless, he acted
throughout with scrupulous legality, placed himself under the orders of Colonel
De Concilii, and issued certiﬁcates to the mayors of the towns through which his
followers passed to guarantee their good behaviour and pay for any damage they
caused.¹³


   ¹⁰ Themelly, in Minichini (ed.) (1979), p. xxxi.
   ¹¹ On Colletta, see Scirocco, DBI, xxvii. 27–34; on Pepe see Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979),
p. xiv.                                                   ¹² Colletta (Cortese, 1957), iii. 147–51.
   ¹³ Colletta (1848), 6.
