308                             Restoration and Revolution

provinces where male foundlings were held until they reached the age of seven,
when they were sent to the army, ‘which relieves the provinces of the responsibility
for providing the same number of conscripts, to the great beneﬁt of agriculture’.
Yet despite the intervention of the government, most provinces still had no homes
for abandoned children, and the legislation forbidding burials in churches and
requiring that cemeteries be built outside the inhabited areas had been ignored.
   Zurlo also admitted that expenditure on public works had imposed heavy bur-
dens on local ﬁnances, although he claimed that these were offset by the new roads
in the Terra di Bari that would increase trade and prosperity. As he had done many
times during the French period, Zurlo recited the government’s achievements,
with the curious conclusion that the theatre was the surest indicator of the capital’s
ﬂourishing commercial and cultural condition:
Theatres are both the indication of, and the means to achieve progress (incivilmento), and
not as once use to be thought merely a source of innocent entertainment for the idle and
the curious. In any great city theatres are a moral and a political necessity that distracts the
multitude from more dangerous meetings, and in Naples they have for some time made
the metropolis celebrated and have played an important role in attracting the valued pres-
ence of foreign visitors.³⁸



                            PROVINCIAL PROTESTS

Zurlo’s conﬁdence in the system that he had played a major part in creating was
not reﬂected in the petitions submitted to the Parliament from the Provincial
Deputations. These set out the discontents of every section of provincial society,
and taken together presented a remarkably full and critical commentary on the
impact of the changes introduced during the years of French rule.
   The most frequent protest, of course, was against the land tax, but hardly less
frequent were protests at the disproportionate increases in provincial and local
taxes. The petitions depicted the familiar story of the chaos of local administra-
tion, the inability of most communities to meet the costs of local administration,
the devastating effect of brigandage and public disorder, the damage caused by the
military and the militias, and—not least—the continuing rivalries over adminis-
trative status and privileges.
   These concerns were clearly set out by the Deputation for the Terra d’Otranto.
It acknowledged that the old system of municipal government elected by open
parliaments needed reform, but bitterly attacked the system that had replaced it:
‘civic freedom has been replaced by ministerial supervision which like the iron law
of the Roman patria potestà will of necessity degenerate into tyranny; our towns

  ³⁸ ASN: Min Polizia Io Ripartimento, Busta 152 (2): G. Zurlo, ‘Rapporto al Parlamento
Nazionale sulla Situazione del Minstero degli Affari Interni’, 23 October 1820.
