306                               Restoration and Revolution

(only a few were described as ‘small’ or ‘very small’ landowners), lawyers, priests,
or doctors.³⁰
   The often outlandish contemporary estimates notwithstanding, membership
of the lodges seems to have been relatively small, which probably explains their
ability to retain control over events. When peasants in the Val di Lucania in the
Cilento tried to occupy contested demani in December, for example, the local
Carbonarist lodges voluntarily closed and invited the militias to restore order. In
other towns, collective and peaceful symbolic occupations were staged in the pres-
ence of the local authorities to protest the privatization of former demani or
refusals to permit the exercise of use-rights generally believed to be illegal.³¹


                  THE NEW ORDER UNDER SCRUTINY

The elections for the National Parliament were based on male suffrage and were
held in August in every town and village on the mainland and in Sicily. Despite
the South’s notorious reputation for political violence, the elections took place
with little disorder.
   The number of delegates was small in relation to the population, and the social
and professional backgrounds of those elected to the National Parliament were
certainly much narrower than those of the Carbonarist lodges. The seventy-two
delegates elected for the mainland constituencies were all provincial notables.³²
The absence of the aristocracy reﬂected a clear reluctance to be associated openly
with a constitutional government that few considered likely to last.³³
   The Parliament met on 1 October and ﬁrst had to deal with the defection of
Palermo, then review and revise the Spanish constitution in line with Neapolitan
custom and conditions. It then called on the two senior representatives of Murat’s
government who were now members of the provisional government—Giuseppe
Zurlo and Francesco Ricciardi—to assess the changes in public administration that
had been introduced during the decade of French rule.
   Ricciardi addressed the Parliament on 16 October and staunchly defended the
soundness of the new administration of justice and the legal codes. He conceded
that there were some minor problems, in particular that there were too many cir-
cuits without a judge and many judges were too old to be effective or else did not
understand the new codes or procedures. He also admitted that there was a severe
shortage of qualiﬁed individuals to act as Justices of the Peace, and that since
the workload was enormous and the pay miserable all too often people unsuited to

   ³⁰ ASF: f. 2495; Elenco delle Vendite de’ Carbonari in Foggia (1821).
   ³¹ Lepre (1968), 143–65.
   ³² Scirocco (1986), 661. According to Fontanarosa (1910), 32, they included 1 cardinal, 9 priests,
24 landowners, 8 ‘professors of science’, 11 magistrates, 2 government employees, 9 doctors, 5 sol-
diers, and 3 merchants. Only 6 were noblemen, although 5 of the 24 Sicilian delegates were nobles.
   ³³ There was a much higher percentage of nobles among the Sicilian representatives.
