                                       Revolution                                    303

the soldiers, the gendarmeria and the Carbonarists paraded fully armed in the
Piazza della Porta Reale and unfurled the tricolour ﬂag to the sound of tamburri.
The priest Jacuzi made a short speech that was greeted with wild applause ‘and
everyone repeated his ﬁnal words: Viva la Costituzione! Viva il Re!’ This was fol-
lowed by a Carbonarist rally, during which an appeal was made to all the ‘members
of the secret societies’ in the province to take up arms and make their way to Foggia.
   The next day, a delegation was sent to the Intendent who was found in his ofﬁce
‘much perplexed as to his fate’. He explained that as an ofﬁcer of the crown he
could not be associated with any party. Nonetheless, he was persuaded to don a
tricolour sash and show himself to the people from the balcony, and he was then
forced to go to the house of the priest Jacuzio ‘where he was met by a picket of
armed Carbonari and other leaders of the revolt’.
   On 5 July groups of armed Carbonari arrived from San Severo and San
Nicandro, accompanied by the provincial Sub-intendent, Don Gaetano Rodinò,
who had ‘plotted the downfall of the Intendent’. The still-confused Intendent had
taken refuge in the house of Marchese Don Tommaso Antonio Celentano, but
Rodinò sent his ‘thugs’ who ‘abused and threatened’ him and he was spared injury
only by the determined intervention of his servants.
   Rodinò had in the meantime taken over the Intendent’s residence, from where
the Supreme Magistracy of the United Provinces of Daunia was proclaimed, under
the presidency of Don Francesco Paolo Casiti of Lucera, of Rodinò himself, and of
Colonel Russo. They began printing the decrees and laws and organized the
administrative duties formerly performed by the Intendent into four ministries.
Once that was accomplished, the military detachments and the provincial militia
set out for Naples.
   Everything, it seems, had been carefully prepared in advance. The two key ﬁg-
ures in the insurrection in Foggia, Russo and Rodinó, had been appointed by
Colletta in 1818. The declaration of the Supreme Magistracy of Daunia echoed the
Republic of Eastern Lucania proclaimed in Salerno by Machiaroli, and both were
models of the autonomous federal self-government advocated by the Carbonari.
   According to the Bourbon ofﬁcial who later drew up the report, however: ‘the
absolute legislative and executive powers that the Supreme Magistracy had indepen-
dently abrogated for itself gave rise to general disgust’. A delegation was sent to Naples
to protest the abuse of power by Rodinò’s followers and the prince regent ordered
Russo to return to Foggia with the power of interim Intendent to suppress the
Magistracy and take control of the administration. But the Magistracy remained in
existence and continued to have some inﬂuence. Russo subsequently returned to
Naples where he was elected as Foggia’s representative in the National Parliament and
was replaced in Foggia by the Duke of Montejasi. The anonymous royalist report
concluded: ‘No other event of note occurred in the Province during the period of the
Constitution . . . except for the expulsion of the Missionary Fathers of Deliceto.’²⁵

                                         ²⁵ Ibid.
