                                           Revolution                                         307

the function took it on.³⁴ In response to complaints from the provinces, Ricciardi
also admitted in a later session that the powers of the circuit judges were too wide,
that their number needed to be increased, and that more provincial civil appeal
courts were needed.³⁵
   On 23 October it was Zurlo’s turn to report on the Ministry of the Interior. This
was mainly an exercise in self-congratulation and an unbending defence of the
reforms that he had been responsible for introducing during the years of French
rule. He again insisted that these reforms were no more than the continuation of
the innovations begun earlier by the Bourbon rulers, which would have resulted in
a ‘complete reform in line with the true interests of the Nation had the French
Revolution not interrupted the direction in which we were already headed’.
   However, the reforms were introduced by the French on exactly the same
terms, with immediate and dramatic effects: ‘As a result of this Reform the
Kingdom has changed its appearance in every respect. Public opinion has taken
shape, a common interest has been reborn, everyone seeks to promote the general
good, and all take an interest in the activities and progress of the Government.’
   Zurlo admitted that the burden of expenses and taxes faced by the local admin-
istrations should be reduced, and calculated that the total taxes raised from the
local communities had increased. He admitted that the increase had been paid
disproportionately by the poorest and that local government was still plagued by
mismanagement and dishonesty. But otherwise he saw no case for changing an
administrative system that had transformed a ‘kingdom into a Nation’.³⁶
   He was prepared to concede that the French had made some errors, however.
They had been mistaken in stripping the Kingdom’s charitable institutions, hos-
pitals, orphanages, and conservatories of their assets, although he ﬁrmly rejected
the idea that poverty could be solved through alms: ‘It is more useful to create
means for employing the poor than to encourage inertia and the disinclination to
work.’ What was needed was better management of the charities’ remaining
assets, although he acknowledged that the register of the revenues of the opere pie
that had been started in 1813 was still incomplete.³⁷
   He also noted approvingly the government’s actions to reduce the number of
beggars and vagabonds. He had ﬁrst proposed creating Depositi di Mendicità in
1802, although they were not operational in Naples until 1817. In the six months
that followed, 1,294 beggars had been arrested, and 4,046 more between May
1818 and August 1819. Over a thousand beggars were being held in the Royal
Hospice for the Poor in Naples, and similar provision was being made in the

   ³⁴ ASN: Min Polizia Ia Ripartimento, f. 152 (1) Rapporto al Parliamento Nazionale sulla riforma
della Magistratura, 16 October 1820.
   ³⁵ Ibid., f. 94: Rapporto e progetto di legge sul riordinamento del potere guidiziario November
1820.                         ³⁶ Ibid., from 1,472,819 ducats in 1815, to 1,760,789 ducats in 1818.
   ³⁷ The accounts of opere pie that had been examined by 1819 indicated that there were 7,224 of
these institutions in the mainland provinces, whose collective annual revenues amounted to
1,081,435 ducats; see pp. 196, 202–5.
