                                         Revolution                                    305

had there had never been any suggestion that the army could or should take
power. Nor indeed had the July protestors seen themselves as rebels. Their slogan
was ‘Viva Dio, Re, Costituzione—Long Live God, the King and the Constitution’
and Luigi Minichini, who had organized the revolt and was the link between the
soldiers and the Carbonari, emphasized the legality of their cause and its respect
for the established order by carefully giving pride of place to the efﬁgy of
St Theobald, whom the Carbonari had adopted as their patron.²⁸
   Its supporters also knew that the government was working to rally those regi-
ments that had not supported the constitution, and that once the monarchy was
conﬁdent that the army would obey the least sign of public disorder or violence
would be sufﬁcient pretext for intervention. For that reason in both Foggia and
Naples the constitution’s supporters went to great lengths to avoid any form of
public disorder. In Naples, the prince regent’s announcement on 9 July that the
members of the provisional constitutional government would include Zurlo,
Ricciardi, and Tommasi—all of whom were now deeply unpopular—caused great
outcry in the capital, and the houses of the new ministers were threatened by hos-
tile crowds. However, the Carbonari had already established a General Assembly
in opposition to the provisional government, which now intervened to restore
order in the city.
   The same occurred when the National Parliament was inaugurated on 1
October. The General Assembly of the Carbonari declared itself to be the true
voice of the constitutional movement, but although it closely monitored the activ-
ities of the Parliament—above all through the extremely lively periodical press
and broadsheets that proliferated following the abolition of censorship and the
declaration of the freedom of the press—the General Assembly continued to
assume responsibility for maintaining order in the capital.²⁹
   Luigi Blanch later claimed that as in 1815, the Carbonarist lodges enabled
the local elites to control a broad cross section of provincial society. The claim is
difﬁcult to prove or disprove, since the clandestine nature of the lodges means that
information about their membership is vague. In many places artisans and trades-
men were certainly well represented, but contemporary estimates also greatly
exaggerated the size of membership. In Foggia, the group that initially took con-
trol of the town was quite small in number and the report drawn up later by the
Bourbon police admitted that initially there had probably been no more than ﬁfty
Carbonari in the town. Except for the ‘Great Masters of the Order’ little was
known about them, although by the end of the revolution their number was
presumed to have risen to ‘a thousand or ﬁfteen hundred by common belief ’.
However, a list compiled by the police two years later, which included not only
the Carbonari but all those suspected of ‘sympathy with liberalism or the secret
societies’, included only seventy-four names, nearly all of whom were landowners

             ²⁸ Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), 177.
             ²⁹ Colletta (Cortese, 1957), iii. 196–201 (especially Cortese’s notes).
