                                           Revolution                                          309

are trapped between the voracious impertinence of their administrators and the
oppression of those in power’.³⁹
   In response, the Parliament moved to reduce the land tax quotas and to transfer
many of the costs charged to local administrations back to the Treasury. On 16
February 1821 it voted to establish elected provincial and local government, a
measure immediately vetoed by the provisional government.


                                       IDENTITIES

National and regional identity also assumed great importance in the debates in the
National Parliament. A committee was set up to recommend a suitable name for
the new constitutional Kingdom, on the grounds that:
The lack of a name that accurately conveys what the different Peoples who inhabit the
kingdom have in common is of little matter in a form of Government in which a single ﬁg-
ure rules, but when a Nation regains its rights and wants everyone to feel part of it, then it
is important to ﬁnd a name that is both inclusive and distinctive.
   The ‘Kingdom of the Two Sicilies’ and its more recent form, the ‘United
Kingdom of the Two Sicilies’, were rejected out of hand as political and geograph-
ical misnomers. If the Kingdom of Sicily made sense, the Kingdom of Naples
made none: was France the Kingdom of Paris? Since the Kingdom covered more
than two-thirds of ‘the entire land area of Italy’ a more appropriate title would be
‘The Kingdom of Italy’. But since such a name would cause ‘diplomatic disputes’,
the committee instead proposed the ‘Kingdom of Southern Italy’.
   It also recommended that the names of the provinces be changed since most of
them had originally been imposed by the Romans when they had conquered the
South, were colonial in origin, and had ‘assumed that everything revolved around
and was subordinate to Naples’. To reﬂect their true identities the provinces
should wherever possible return to their pre-Roman names: for example, Sannium
instead of Molise; Daunia instead of Capitanata; Lucania in place of Basilicata.
Where pre-Roman names did not exist, the names should be topographical.⁴⁰
   National identity also ﬁgured prominently in the report that Luigi Blanch
made to the Parliament after he had been sent to investigate the political situation
in the other Italian states in the summer of 1820. In his report Blanch repeatedly
emphasized the cohesiveness of the South as a nation and the lack of unity in the
other Italian states.
   He claimed that the Papal States were in a state of turmoil and paralyzed by
internal divisions because the restored papal government faced ﬁerce opposition
in all the territories that had formerly been part of Napoleon’s Kingdom of

  ³⁹ Ibid., Min Polizia I Ripartimento, f. 71: Rapporto della Deputazione Provinciale di Terra
d’Otranto, 10 November 1820.               ⁴⁰ Atti del Parlamento dell Due Sicilie 1820–1, ii. 62–4.
