304                            Restoration and Revolution


                       AN ORDERLY REVOLUTION

Pietro Colletta wrote later in exile that the concession of the constitution on 7 July
meant that ‘a revolution that began without a conspiracy and without a plan and
had no single leader was completed in ﬁve days. In those ﬁve days not a single
crime was committed: the lives, property and the rights of all citizens were reli-
giously respected, and the established authorities all remained at their posts.’²⁶
Despite a degree of exaggeration, it was true that the political events of July and
August were remarkably orderly on the mainland. This was partly because of the
king’s decision to grant the constitution almost immediately after the protest at
Nola, for which there was little alternative once Guglielmo Pepe’s decision to join
the rebels faced the government with the threat of a general mutiny. But the
solemn public oaths to uphold the constitution taken by the prince regent had
conferred full legitimacy on the constitutional regime established almost without
a revolution. Even an ofﬁcial like the Intendent of Capitanata who was ‘perplexed
as to his fate’ now had no alternative but to support the constitutional municipal-
ities that apparently had the full approval of the monarchy.
   The government’s decision to adopt the radical Spanish constitution of 1812 is
less easy to explain. It was in some respects a remarkably democratic although
extremely complex and confused document whose content was not known in
detail in Naples.²⁷ However, the key provisions were for an elected National
Parliament and elected local and provincial governments, in both cases giving
votes to all males over the age of 21 whether or not they were literate.
   From the monarchy’s point of view the constitution had the imprimatur of a
Bourbon monarch, the king of Spain, and was certainly preferable to the detested
constitution that the English had established in Sicily in 1812, although this was
the one the Sicilian separatists adopted. Although democratic in its elective
processes, the Spanish constitution did not threaten the unity of the monarchy.
   The king was in any case playing for time, since the terms of the secret Treaty
of Friendship of June 1815 obliged Austria to intervene if the constitutional
regime remained in force. Not only was the constitution not recognized by
any of the major powers, but England and France even placed a ﬂeet at the
disposal of the king should he need it. Having publicly and freely sworn allegiance
to the constitution, however, neither the king nor the prince regent could easily
overthrow it without clear justiﬁcation. What they needed, therefore, was a
pretext.
   This was also well understood by the constitution’s supporters, who repre-
sented a broad cross section of the propertied and educated classes. The revolt had
begun in the army, but had never taken the form of a military pronunciamento nor


           ²⁶ Colletta (1848), 14.     ²⁷ Venturi (1952), 203–22; Spini (1960).
