302                              Restoration and Revolution

constitution and the city’s commitment to a single parliament. Five days later
Minichini was greeted by a similar public gathering in Catania, where more than
3,000 citizens were estimated to have greeted him. Here too the authorities
denounced Palermo and declared their loyalty to the constitution and the
National Parliament.²²
   When the National Parliament in Naples ﬁnally met in October, it rejected the
terms offered by Pepe and sent General Pietro Colletta to renegotiate. Like Pepe,
Colletta tried to avoid a confrontation and agreed that Sicily should have a sep-
arate parliament. These terms were again rejected by the National Parliament in
Naples, and after Colletta’s withdrawal in January 1821 an open rift between
Naples and Palermo seemed unavoidable.


               THE REVOLUTION ON THE MAINL AND

On the mainland, the revolt spread quickly but proved more cohesive and less dis-
orderly. News of the protests in Nola and Avelllino arrived in Foggia not by the
new system of semaphore telegraphy but with the mail coach from Naples a day
later on 3 July. When it was known that General Pepe had joined the ‘military
revolution’, the commander of the Royal Regiment of Cavalry in Foggia, Colonel
Giovanni Russo, declared his own support.²³ He set up a volunteer Public
Security Guard to maintain order, which—according to an account drawn up
after the Bourbon restoration in September 1821—was the signal for the leading
Carbonarists of Foggia to take control.
   As well as Colonel Russo, they included Colonel marchese de Rosa and the
priest Don Francesco Paolo Iacuzio, described in the later Bourbon police docu-
ment as ‘President of the Tribe of Sectarians of the District of Foggia, together
with his cousin Carmelo Jacuzio, the military surgeon Don Vincenzo del Musico,
Don Paolo Vitale, Don Luigi Pavone and others’. They had all been ‘especially
energetic in preparing materials for the Revolution, such as proclamations, tri-
colour banners and the like’. They ordered the printer Pasquale Russo to prepare
their proclamations. He in turn asked the Intendent for advice: ‘but in the fog of
events this ofﬁcial knew not what advice to give, except to close the print works
and hide the type-face, but the Printer thought it better to yield to the Danger and
do what he had been asked’.²⁴
   People were pouring into Foggia from the surrounding towns and settlements.
On 4 July, Colonel Russo left to join the insurgents in Avellino, after ﬁrst establish-
ing an armed militia of patrioti under the command of Major Pisa. That evening


  ²² Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), 318.
  ²³ Pepe’s defection was on 5 July, so the report was inaccurate.
  ²⁴ ASF: Intendenza, Governo, Prefettura: Atti di Polizia (Part 1): f. 2495—Inchiesta sugli evveni-
menti successi nella provincia nel luglio 1820.
