                                    Revolution                                 301

   On 9 July, a Sunday, thousands of armed Carbonari from the neighbouring
towns and provinces poured into Naples. After marching through the streets, the
Carbonari were addressed by the prince regent who, like the rest of his family, was
dressed in the colours of the constitution to which he now solemnly swore alle-
giance. The procession was followed by a rally in the Campo di Marte, but in the
days that followed General Pepe took measures to ensure that the Carbonarists
dispersed and returned to their homes.²⁰


                                     SICILY

When the news of events on the mainland reached Palermo on 6 July the ruling
classes were uncertain how to react. Some radicals and democrats favoured the
Spanish constitution adopted in Naples, but the more conservative forces lined up
in support of the Sicilian constitution of 1812 since this would have restored the
island’s autonomy and Palermo’s privileged status as capital. On 11 July, however,
Messina followed Naples in declaring for the Spanish constitution and was fol-
lowed by Catania, Siracusa, Modica in eastern Sicily, and by Caltanisetta,
Agrigento, and Trapani in the West.
   Palermo was isolated, but popular agitation intensiﬁed and came to a crescendo
during the feast of Santa Rosalia on 15 July. The Bourbon Lieutenant Governor,
General Naselli, tried to restore order but two days later was forced to abandon the
city. A supposedly popular government dominated by a group of conservative aristo-
crats headed by the Archbishop of Palermo, Cardinal Gravina, set up a new muni-
cipal junta which declared the constitution of 1812 and Sicily’s independence from
Naples. It also began to prepare military measures against the Sicilian towns that
supported the provisional government in Naples and the Spanish constitution.²¹
   In August the provisional government in Naples sent General Florestano Pepe
with an army to Palermo, but Pepe refused to use force and early in October
recommended that Sicily have a separate constitution and a separate parliament.
But Palermo’s separatist programme met with strong opposition in many other
Sicilian towns and in September the government sent the leader of the revolt at
Nola, Luigi Minichini, to rally support for the constitution and the National
Parliament. He was hailed as ‘the Liberator of the Fatherland’, and in both
Messina and Catania mass public rallies were held in his honour and to celebrate
the opening of the National Parliament in Naples.
   When news reached Messina on 10 October that Florestano Pepe had
‘capitulated’ to Palermo, there was a tremendous outcry. The leaders of the city
government told Minichini that the terms agreed with Palermo would bring ruin
to their city. The civil and religious authorities proclaimed their support for the

                    ²⁰ Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), 275.
                    ²¹ Renda (1968); Romeo (1950); Romano (1952).
