310                                Restoration and Revolution

Italy: the Marche, the Duchy of Urbino and the Legations. The Duchies of
Modena and Parma and the Tuscan Grand Duchy he dismissed as mere Austrian
satellites, and he claimed that the Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia held together
only because of the presence an Austrian army of 60,000 men. He acknowledged
that Piedmont was ‘the only Italian State that has an independent government and
a well organized army’, but it lacked internal unity because it was composed of
Genovese, Sardinians, and Savoyards, all of whom wanted to be what they had
formerly been: ‘the Genoese want their Republic, the people of Savoy want to be
French and the Sardinians want to be left with their old laws.’⁴¹
   Luigi Blanch’s insistence on the relative cultural homogeneity of the southern
Kingdom revealed other important cultural legacies of the political upheavals
in the South in the previous decades. A rediscovered sense of southern national
identity could be traced back to the writers of the previous century, and in 1820
this was not seen to be incompatible either with the equally strong sense of
Sicilian separateness or with the demands of the provinces for greater autonomy.
Indeed, the strong federalist tone of the Carbonarist programme explicitly
assumed that the two could be reconciled. Whether that was practical is beside the
point since the downfall of the revolution was already being plotted from outside
and for quite different reasons.


                        THE REVOLUTION BETRAYED

Even at the time, the nine months of constitutional government and in Naples
and Sicily between July 1820 and March 1821 had an aura of the unreal that was
ﬁrst broken as the threat of conﬂict between Naples and Palermo grew. For one
group within the provisional government, this offered the opportunity for a pre-
emptive strike against the constitution to avert the threat of another Austrian
invasion that many considered inevitable.
   The principal advocates of this strategy were Giuseppe Zurlo and Michele
Carrascosa, who began sounding out the regiments traditionally loyal to the king.
But they were opposed by Guglielmo Pepe and Giuseppe Poerio, both of whom
feared that an attack on the Parliament would precipitate civil war.⁴² That view
was shared by Pasquale Borrelli, the Director of the Commission for Public Safety,
who feared that a coup against the Parliament would give the ultra-royalists the
pretext they were waiting for to incite another Sanfedist counter-revolution.⁴³
Others argued that the best hope was for a negotiated settlement brokered by
Britain and France. This had been the true purpose of Luigi Blanch’s diplomatic
mission which took him to Rome, Turin, Switzerland, Baden, Württemberg, and


⁴¹ Ibid., iii, Rapporto a S.E. Il Ministro degli Affari Esteri, 17–21.   ⁴² Savarese (1941), 91–2.
⁴³ On Borrelli see Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), 292.
