320                                         Conclusion

   As had been clearly revealed in the protests in 1820, the weakness of the
new bureaucracies left them vulnerable at a local level to inﬁltration and domina-
tion by powerful individuals or factions. That danger had been foreseen by
the eighteenth-century reformers, and was one of the reasons they had seen the
enlightened absolutist ruler as the ideal instrument of reform. By 1820 conﬁdence
in the ruler had been weakened: hence the insistence that constitutional govern-
ment was the solution. Now the answer seemed to lie in a federalist reorganization
of the state that would guarantee greater regional autonomy. This was an alternative
way of addressing the problems posed by the prevalence of factionalism and the
monopolistic exercise of power at a local level, which were features of the post-
feudal order in the South, but not necessarily an effective alternative.⁴
   The transition from the ancien régime to the post-feudal order in the South had
proved particularly difﬁcult and painful, but it must be emphasized that the most
fundamental problems facing southern society were the consequence of change
and not its absence. Similar challenges faced all European states and societies in
these years, and if the impact of change in the South was especially traumatic the
reason was that an agrarian order that in much of the rest of Italy would remain
intact until after Italy’s Uniﬁcation had been deeply compromised almost a cen-
tury earlier. It was not until the 1850s, for example, that the conservative
Lombard Catholic Stefano Jacini adopted a distinction ﬁrst made in France to
bemoan the dangers posed for the survival of the face-to-face paternalist rural
order—the ‘real Italy’—that he believed still survived in much of northern Italy
by the expansion of an impersonal and distant bureaucratic state—the ‘legal
Italy’.⁵ In parts of the Veneto the state would remain remote and almost unknown
until well into the twentieth century.⁶
   In the South, the state had sought to acquire greater power in the localities from
much earlier, but with ambiguous and contradictory results. These were evident in
1820–1, and became even more so in the decades that followed. After the revolu-
tions the Bourbon rulers set their faces ﬁrmly against any form of political dialogue,
and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies followed the reactionary models set by the
other Italian rulers. For reasons of economy as well as ideology, the bureaucratic
project was put on hold and the provincial voices that had played an increasingly
important political role since the end of the eighteenth century were again silenced.
The project of bureaucratic centralization was maintained, but became increas-
ingly dependent on narrow groups of professional administrators and nobles whose
loyalty to the dynasty was beyond reproach.

   ⁴ On factionalism, see especially Pezzino (1992) and Fiume (1984) and in Davis and Ginsborg
(eds.) (1991), 70–91.
   ⁵ Jacini (1857). In an important recent study of local government in Sicily after Uniﬁcation Lucy
Riall argues that the South had experienced a different process of state formation (Riall (1997), 228).
But although problematic the process of state formation in the South was essentially the same as in
other parts of Italy, the difference being that the changes came earlier. See also Sabetti (1984), 3–18.
   ⁶ See, e.g., Lanaro (1984) and Fumian (1990).
