316                               Restoration and Revolution

   The most severe purges were reserved for the army, however. All those who had
supported the constitution or been members of the Carbonari were dismissed or
imprisoned. Every ofﬁcer was required to give a full account of his political activities
since 1793, and nearly all of those appointed during the French occupation were
dismissed. Fourteen infantry and ﬁve cavalry regiments were disbanded and
replaced by three new infantry regiments composed entirely of foreigners.
Conscription was abolished, to general acclaim, and three regiments of Swiss volun-
teers were recruited to act as the Royal Guard and to garrison the city of Naples.⁵⁶
   Despite the orderliness of the revolution, its collapse threw every branch of
central and provincial administration into confusion. While the Austrian troops
effectively repressed brigandage and disorder on the mainland, Sicily was in open
revolt. To defuse one of the most persistent demands of the revolution,
Metternich had forced the king at Laybach to introduce a dual consultative body
known as the Consulta—one for the mainland and one for Sicily. But once
Ferdinand was back in control of the Kingdom these commitments were ignored
and the Consulta existed only on paper.
   The restored government could not ignore the disastrous state of the Kingdom’s
ﬁnances, however. De’ Medici’s careful work of ﬁnancial stabilization had been
shattered, and after the Austrian invasion the ﬁnancial situation became disastrous.
To meet its current account deﬁcits and to repay the costs of the Austrian occupa-
tion and of maintaining the Austrian army that remained in the Kingdom, Vienna
helped the Neapolitan government raise loans from the Rothschild Bank, which
in turn acquired a large share of the Kingdom’s public debt. But that was only a
stop-gap. No one in the government set up by Ferdinand I in 1821 had the expert-
ise or ability to address the ﬁnancial situation that deepened as the market value of
the government’s paper collapsed. In response to appeals from Vienna, in
December 1822 Luigi de’ Medici was recalled from exile.⁵⁷
   Until his death in 1830, de’ Medici remained in control of the Kingdom’s
ﬁnances and its commercial policies. Ferdinand I died in 1825 after a reign that
with interruptions had lasted ﬁfty-eight years. He was succeeded by his son, the
former Duke of Calabria who took the title of Francis I. Despite his ﬂirtation with
the constitution in 1820, Francis I continued the repressive and reactionary pol-
icies of the last years of his father’s reign until his death in 1830. The Austrian
army withdrew in 1827, but an attempted uprising in the Cilento resulted in new
measures of repression. Only with the accession of Ferdinand II in 1830 did
the political climate of the Kingdom begin to change, and for the ﬁrst time
some of the exiles of 1821 were permitted to return. But hopes that the new
king would take up the cause of constitutional government and reform were to be
disappointed.



         ⁵⁶ Pieri (1962), 58–9.        ⁵⁷ Ostuni (1992), 329–32; Cingari (1966), 144.
