312                            Restoration and Revolution

   The Parliament had worked ‘to make our systems more free, to make local
administration less arbitrary and to establish a National Guard capable of guaran-
teeing our Independence. We have tried to relieve you of the heavy ﬁscal burdens
you are asked to bear, to promote trade, agriculture and industry and to ﬁnd ways
of providing public education that has a practical not an illusory foundation in
line with the requirements of true wisdom and true philosophy.’
   The Parliament had approved the Spanish constitution, removing only the
‘dangerous provision’ that in Spain permitted female succession to the throne. The
constitution had established trial by jury, religious toleration, and freedom of the
press. Every comune was to have an elected local magistrate. Provincial administra-
tion was reorganized: the Intendents’ Councils were abolished and their powers
transferred to elected Provincial Deputations, while every comune was run by an
elected government. Delegates were to receive stipends to avoid the Provincial
Deputation being dominated by ‘the wealthiest citizens of the province and those
who live in the provincial capitals’.
   The Parliament had relieved municipal administrations of ‘many expenses that
were not related to local administration and which were calculated to amount to
800,000 ducats a year’. These expenses were the consequence of ‘arbitrary minis-
terial power’ that had caused the local communities to carry the burden of the cost
of maintaining local circuit judges, the upkeep of prisons, prisoners, and warders,
the upkeep of troops stationed in each province, and of the Austrian army down
to 1817, as well as stipends for the parish priest and his assistant. The Treasury
would now pay all of these costs, while additional obligations to supply and billet
the army were abolished.
   The Parliament had also renewed the struggle against feudalism, which it
claimed was dead only in theory: ‘It would take an army of administrators, as well
as a complete moral and political revolution of the people, to destroy the Hydra of
the barons.’ The Parliament had introduced new laws to abolish entails that had
survived despite previous legislation. It had abolished feudalism in Sicily, as well as
the tithes collected by the Church, and had also banned ‘gambling which threatens
to ruin our citizens and the innocent and inexpert manners of our youth’.⁴⁸
   The declaration on 2 March was supposed to rally support to the rapidly disinte-
grating revolution. The appeals that ‘the courageous ofﬁcers of the companies of
the National Militias disbanded after the Restoration’ reform their battalions to
defend the Nation from the advancing foreign invader were hardly realistic, how-
ever, and the National Guard to which it referred had not yet been created. Nor did
the proposals to reduce the land tax, the ﬁnancial burdens on local communities,
and the tithes paid to the Church take any account of the desperate state of public
ﬁnances. By September 1820, Luigi de’ Medici’s carefully balanced budget had
been hopelessly compromised and every government department faced huge

   ⁴⁸ ASN: Min. Polizia Iº Ripartimento: Il Parlamento Nazionale ai Popoli del Regno delle Due
Sicilie, a Napoli, 2 March 1821.
