                                         Revolution                                         311

Paris to test the reactions of other Italian and European governments, but he had
found no foreign support for the constitutional government in either Naples or
Spain.⁴⁴
   In early October Metternich cut short these speculations when he summoned
the representatives of the European powers to Troppau to discuss the situation in
Naples and Spain. On 19 November the governments of Russia, Prussia, and
Austria issued a joint Protocol authorizing Austria to intervene, if necessary by
force, to restore order in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Metternich then invited
King Ferdinand of Naples to attend a conference to be held in January at Laybach
(Lubjana) to seek a negotiated settlement.⁴⁵
   This was a trap to which the king of Naples was a willing accomplice. If the
king did not attend, Austria had a pretext for invading the Kingdom to ‘liberate’
him: if he did, Austria could still claim legitimate cause for invading the Kingdom
to restore the king to the title and powers conferred on him by the Congress
of Vienna.
   On 7 December the prince regent published a letter in Naples in which
the king announced his decision to attend the conference in Laybach in order to
make ‘necessary and wise adjustments to the constitution’. This news caused the
Carbonari to mobilize a massive demonstration in Naples and the piazze of
the capital rang with cries of ‘the Spanish Constitution or Death’. Zurlo and
Carrascosa believed that the time had now come for a coup, which Carrascosa
enthusiastically described as ‘another 9 Thermidor to destroy the anarchists’.⁴⁶
On 8 December, Zurlo presented to Parliament the king’s request to leave the
Kingdom, and two days of heated debates followed. But plans for a coup were
abandoned when Carrascosa reported that the army still could not be relied upon.
The moderates Poerio and Borelli then proposed that the Parliament permit the
king to travel to Laybach ‘to defend the Constitution’ and after a ﬁerce debate this
ﬁctional hope was carried and Ferdinand left for Trieste on a British warship.⁴⁷
   The trap was now sprung. On 4 February, Marshal Frimont crossed the Po at
the head of an Austrian army corps whose mission was to restore order in the
Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. On 13 February the Neapolitan Parliament met and
amid great enthusiasm declared war against Austria to free the king who was a
‘prisoner of the Sovereigns’.


                                  THE L AST CALL

As the Austrian army drew closer, the Parliament published a last deﬁant state-
ment on 2 March. It was addressed simply to ‘The People of the Two Sicilies’ and
set out what had been accomplished since October.

   ⁴⁴ See the entry on Luigi Blanch in DBI (x. 771–6) by Cortese.
   ⁴⁵ Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), p. li.      ⁴⁶ Ibid.        ⁴⁷ Savarese (1941), 93–6.
