314                            Restoration and Revolution

   Divisions amongst the military commanders made planned response to the
Austrian advance impossible. Guglielmo Pepe, the senior commander, favoured
an offensive, but it was widely suspected that his real aim was simply to draw the
radical elements of the Carbonari away from Naples to reduce the risk of civil war.
Meanwhile Carrascosa, supported by Blanch, favoured a defensive strategy, and
refused to move his troops, leaving Pepe without reserves or supplies. The
Carbonari refused to accept orders and many regiments suddenly rediscovered
their loyalty to the crown. Pepe, Colletta, and Carrascosa all reported massive
desertions, indiscipline, and mutinies and Luigi Blanch described the situation as
one of ‘mass desertion’.⁵¹
   On 7 March, without the government’s authorization or knowledge, Pepe
attacked the Austrians near Rieti and his army fell apart. The Austrians crossed the
frontier in the Abruzzi Mountains and when the king called on the Neapolitan
army to lay down its arms and welcome the Austrian ally the garrison at Capua
raised the royal standard and on 23 March yet another Austrian army entered
Naples.
   This was King Ferdinand’s third restoration, all three achieved thanks to for-
eign military assistance: in 1799, from the British navy with Russian and Turkish
ground forces; in 1815 and 1821 from the Austrians, with naval assistance from
Great Britain. The Austrian army would again stay on at the Kingdom’s expense,
this time until 1827.
   If the revolution of 1820 had been the epilogue to the decade of French rule
and innovation, the restoration of 1821 was the opportunity for the political
purges and vendettas that had been avoided in 1815. This time there was no pre-
tence of compromise and the king, who remained in Florence, made his views
clear: ‘The only expedient is a severe military government for at least a year that
will use terror and overwhelming force, and I would happily order this and forgo
returning to my Kingdom where my life is constantly in danger.’⁵²
   The aged Marchese Circelli headed a provisional government and in May Prince
Canosa resumed the Police Ministry. Only those of less exalted social standing like
Lieutenants Morelli and Salvati paid with their lives. Guglielmo Pepe and Luigi
Minichini both wisely sailed for Barcelona before the Austrians reached Naples.
Pietro Colletta, Giuseppe Poerio, Luigi Blanch, and Michele Carrascosa were
amongst those exiled, and the last was condemned to death in absentia in 1823.
They continued their feuds in exile. Carrascosa and Pepe fought a duel in London
in 1823, but the weapons were more often pens rather than sabres, and it was
primarily in their memoirs, histories, and biographies that the survivors of 1820–1
refought the battles of the French decade and revolutions.
   For accepting ofﬁce under the constitution (even though this had had the
full endorsement of the crown) de’ Medici, Ricciardi, and Tommasi were also
exiled, while systematic purges of all those who had supported the constitutional

          ⁵¹ Minichini (Themelly, ed.) (1979), p. lvii.   ⁵² Cingari (1966), 22.
