318                                   Conclusion

The revolutions of 1820 and 1821 have generally been seen as part of the
sequence of southern ‘failures’ that conﬁrmed the impossibility of achieving
change in the South.¹ But that is to wrench these events out of context and to
ascribe to them goals they did not have. Indeed, it is not really clear whether ‘revolu-
tion’ is the appropriate term for what happened in 1820–1. The main protagon-
ists went out of their way to insist on the legitimacy of their protests and to
maintain order, while the monarchy’s speedy concession of the constitution made
everything that followed legitimate except for the king’s violation of the sacred
oath to uphold the constitution. Nor did internal events have anything to do with
the outcomes because the fate of the short-lived constitutional experiment was
a foregone conclusion and the Austrian invasion in March 1821 simply another
reminder of the degree to which Italian politics in the early nineteenth century
were shaped by external forces.
   The revolutions of 1820–1 were also the epilogue to the years of French rule,
and if the political protests heard as much in the provinces as in the capitals were
directed against the terms of the Restoration of 1815 their main targets were the
innovations dating from the Napoleonic decade. In Sicily, where those changes
derived from the more recent Act of Union of 1816, the debates were complicated
by the emergence of a powerful separatist movement that brought Palermo into
conﬂict not only with Naples, but also with many of the other Sicilian towns and
cities. In Sicily this resulted in a great deal of violence, but on the mainland the
debates took place in a surprisingly orderly environment and demonstrated how
far removed the historical experience of the South was from the later imagery of
the ‘passive revolution’.
   The nine months of constitutional government were the ﬁrst moments of free-
dom of speech in the South since the Republic of 1799, and they offered the
opportunity for a searching critique of the legacies of Napoleonic rule that had
been preserved and extended after the Restoration. The debates and the different
political projects proposed revealed how the upheavals of the previous decades
had given rise to forms of political awareness that as yet had no parallels elsewhere
in Italy. By contrast, the insurrections that took place a year later in Piedmont
found little support outside the army, while the conspiracy discovered by the
Austrians in Milan in 1821 was also a narrow patrician affair. In the South,
the protests had a much wider reach and they brought more sharply into
focus the centralizing logic that had driven the attempts to refashion the southern
state from the absolutist reforms of the ancien régime monarchy to the Republic of
1799, the French occupation between 1806 and 1815, and ﬁnally the legitimist
Restoration of 1815.
   The debates that took place on the mainland and in Sicily in 1820 exposed the
contradictions that surrounded the attempts to create a bureaucratic state in
the South. In part, the obstacles were political, and the revolutions revealed how

                                ¹ See Croce (1967), 220.
