                                      Conclusion                                     319

the attempts to shift the balance of power away from the peripheries toward the
centre had given rise to an awareness of local and regional identities that was new
and was accompanied by political demands incompatible with autocracy. The
prevailing demands in 1820 were not for a return to the ancien régime, and feudal-
ism was repeatedly identiﬁed with the monopolistic exercise of power at a local
level. Indeed, the new political institutions were criticized above all for not going
far enough in destroying the vestiges of feudalism, while broader political parti-
cipation at a local level was repeatedly invoked as the best means to ensure that
local government did not fall into the hands of powerful individuals or factions.²
   The revolutions also underscored the material obstacles to the establishment of
an effective bureaucratic state in the South, and by 1820 it was evident that the
costs of sustaining even the rudimentary new forms of bureaucratic administration
exceeded the Kingdom’s slender human and material resources. But this was not
unusual; indeed it was a problem that faced much wealthier states too, and even in
Italy’s most prosperous regions the new administrative bureaucracies imposed ﬁscal
burdens that were not easily sustained. In Lombardy, for example, heavy increases
in local taxation were one of the main causes of popular unrest and protest in the
closing years of French rule. The high cost of maintaining many of the administrat-
ive innovations made during the years of French rule was as important as ideolo-
gical prejudice in encouraging the Restoration rulers throughout Italy to reduce the
levels of bureaucratic administration and the numbers of administrators. But
because they seriously reduced opportunities for public employment, those
economies would prove a major cause of political disaffection among the career
hungry and underemployed Italian professional and middle classes.³
   The situation in the South was different, but again only by degree. The political
debates of 1820 illustrated how the innovations of the previous decades had left
southern Italy caught uneasily between an older agrarian order that had been seri-
ously destabilized and newer forms of bureaucratic power that were in large part
still to be created. The crisis of the ancien régime monarchy and the administrative
reforms of the French decade had embarked the South on a path of political devel-
opment that was both precocious and precarious. In most of the states of northern
and central Italy, government bureaucracies were developing slowly and in part-
nership with relatively resilient forms of agrarian paternalism. In the South, by
contrast, the parallel but closely interconnected crisis of the ancien régime mon-
archy and the agrarian order had made the transition to a bureaucratic organization
of the state much more problematic and dangerous. The crisis of the old agrarian
order had also given rise to social conﬂicts not easily contained, making the bal-
ance between the centralizing efforts of the state and the centrifugal reactions of
the provinces even more uncertain.

 ² Cf. Giarrizzo (1983), 21–33.
 ³ See Lyttelton (ed. Davis, 1979) 104–34. For Lombardy see Antonelli (1997), 193–219, and
Meriggi (1983, 1987). For Tuscany, see Kroll (2005).
