                                         Revolution                                        315

government or had been members of the Carbonarist lodges now began. All
public employees and teachers came under scrutiny, and most of the students at
the University in Naples were rusticated. An extensive purge of the magistracy
resulted in the dismissal of judges and law ofﬁcers of every grade, both in the cap-
ital and in the provinces. All those suspected of supporting the revolution were
banned from practising their professions and kept under police surveillance,
which put many more lawyers out of work. The clergy came under no less close
scrutiny, and when the bishops were ordered to investigate the conduct of those in
their diocese they seized the invitation with relish. The parish churches through-
out the Kingdom were reorganized along lines suggested by the Bishop of
Pozzuoli, and in general the power of the bishops was greatly increased. A number
of bishops also appealed to the government to recall the Jesuits.⁵³
   To the applause of the clergy, censorship was reintroduced. Canosa’s police
seized and destroyed the papers of the National Parliament, and a royal decree of 7
May made the possession of ‘emblems, papers, books or other devices belonging
to the Secret Societies’ an offence punishable by exile for ten years or more. The
same decree banned all ‘the poisonous texts that had dealt with matters that are
contrary to religion, morality and the principles of governance’. A decree of 2 June
1821 obliged printers to submit copies of all printed material to the Junta of
Examination, which had been established to compile an index of all books to be
destroyed. Every library was to supply the police with a copy of its catalogues.
A decree of 4 December 1821 required that all printed matter be submitted to the
police for authorization, including theatre tickets and invitations to private gath-
erings. Any printed document of more than ten pages was to be submitted to the
Junta for Public Education, which was empowered to raid private houses, hand
over any prohibited books to be burned by the public hangman, and imprison
anyone found in possession of such material.⁵⁴
   The Minister of Police acknowledged with gratitude that the reforms of the
French rulers had made it possible for the government to enforce censorship more
effectively than in the previous century, and he warned against the misguided
sense of ‘indulgence’ that had caused Italy’s recent disasters:
It was because of that indulgence that the fanaticism of innovation was spread by books.
These were the source of the poison that was present in the guise of reform, regeneration,
progress and freedom. It was in this way that the spirit of revolution brought desolation to
our people, undid morality and destroyed religion. Everyone knows that there never has
been, nor ever will be, any open attempt to subvert a legitimate government by force,
unless this has been prepared carefully over time . . . an aim that has always been, and
always will be, the purpose of books and printed writings, as to which there can be no
shadow of a doubt since we all have before us the tearful memories of what has befallen us
in the recent past.⁵⁵

  ⁵³ Rocchina (De Leo, 1995), 161–5.                 ⁵⁴ Addeo (1984), 185.
  ⁵⁵ ASN: Ministero di Polizia, Min. Interno Iº Ripartimemto, Diversi 1824–5: f. 2912. Revisione
dei libri, opuscoli, fogli volanti e periodici di attribuzione alla polizia.
