                                       Revolution                                    313

deﬁcits. By March of the following year the situation was even worse, not least
because the nine months of the constitutional government had been a prolonged
tax holiday.
   Many of the measures adopted by the Parliament had made mortal enemies.
The Cardinal Archbishop of Naples led the attack on religious toleration and free-
dom of the press, both of which were guaranteed by the constitution. If these free-
doms were to come about, the Cardinal warned, ‘There will be nothing to restrain
the insolent Libertine. Married women will no longer be respected, honest virgins
will no longer blush with shame, the innocent child will lose all sense of modesty
and everything will be in disarray and combustion. A pestilent plague of infamous
books worthy of the city of Pentapolis will contaminate the public squares and
private houses of our beloved Naples and infect every mind and every heart
throughout the Kingdom.’⁴⁹
   In fact, virtually all of the Parliament’s liberal measures had been vetoed by the pro-
visional government. Giuseppe Zurlo made no secret of his contempt for constitu-
tions and parliaments which, like de’ Medici and Tommasi, he considered to be a
throwback to the corporate bodies of the ancien régime that had blocked the reform
initiatives of an enlightened prince. Parliaments, he believed, served only to breed
‘parties’, faction, self-interest, and disunity. The monarchy was the only guarantee of
the unity of the nation, and for that reason Zurlo remained opposed to any decentral-
ization of the French administrative reforms and opposed every attempt to introduce
elected provincial and municipal assemblies. Francesco Ricciardi was even more
contemptuous of the constitution, which he considered to be ‘madness’.⁵⁰


                       THE THIRD RESTORATION

When it came to repulsing the invasion, the Parliament’s rallying cries were of lit-
tle avail and the revolution that had never happened now simply disintegrated.
Initially there had been great patriotic enthusiasm for the war, and in Naples the
theatres staged patriotic plays, while patriotic hymns and songs were heard
throughout the city. Even the son of the prince regent volunteered to enlist to
defend the constitution and for days the capital was full of popular patriotic
demonstrations and parades.
   These demonstrations did not translate into action, however. Some of the
Carbonari advocated a national uprising against the foreign invader, but even
the fearless Luigi Minichini acknowledged that such a rebellion was impractical.
The army was paralysed by divisions between supporters of the constitution
and the monarchy, between moderates and radicals, and the inﬂuence of the
Carbonari amongst many of the ofﬁcers and NCOs was causing the chains of
command to break down everywhere.

                   ⁴⁹ Addeo (1989), 174.       ⁵⁰ Savarese (1941), 91–2.
