322                                   Conclusion

    As in the rest of Italy, the divisions of the former feudal estates and the sales of
Church and crown lands in the South had resulted in a redistribution of land prim-
arily among those who already owned property. Many of the old feudal families
suffered heavy losses, in some cases because of the loss of signiﬁcant incomes from
feudal levies, but above all because of the abolition of feudal entails and primogen-
iture that resulted in the rapid dispersion of noble patrimonies. This was the main
cause of the breakup of many older noble estates, although in some parts of the
Kingdom this was offset by the formation of vast new estates known as latifundia.¹¹
    Latifundia had existed in southern Italy—and in other parts of Italy as well—
from much earlier. As the name indicates, the institution was Roman in origin
although it had been an important instrument of Spanish colonial settlement in the
New World and in southern Italy. However, latifundist estates also existed in
central Italy—notably in Lazio and the arid plain around Rome—and in different
form in the Veneto as well.¹² But the latifondo was particularly well suited to the
natural conditions that prevailed in many parts of central and southern Italy,
where the vast size of these estates made possible economies of scale that helped to
offset the limits posed by poor soils, inadequate rainfall, and slight and fragile
natural resources.
    The land sales of the French period and the difﬁculties facing many of the old
feudal families provided the opportunities for the creation of new latifundist
properties in the early nineteenth century, and it was not by chance these developed
especially in areas where the purchase of the government’s new administrative
apparatus was most weak. On the mainland, they were especially prominent
in Calabria, where a number of new families—the Barracco, the Campagna, and
the Quintieri—pushed their way into the agrarian hierarchy, buying land from
the crown, but above all by acquiring the debts of the great feudatories.¹³
    The new estates were not simply a continuation of earlier feudalism, and their
economic management was often geared to exploiting new commercial opportun-
ities while at the same time offering protection against the unpredictable swings of
the market—the single greatest problem facing producers in marginal economies
subject to the unpredictable yet potentially devastating swings in external demand.
Yet the underlying logic of these enterprises was monopolistic: over huge areas the
essential means of production—land, labour, livestock, water, pasture, and credit—
came under the monopolist control of the latifondo and its masters, giving these
estates the character of a state within a state. The power of the landowners was
absolute and when challenged was imposed by force. But that was rarely necessary
because the system depended less on coercion than on the monopolies exercised by
the great landowners and their agents who controlled not only the land but above


  ¹¹ Montroni (1996), pp. vii–ix, 31–4.
  ¹² On the Veneto, see Lanaro (1984) and Fumian (1984).
  ¹³ Montroni (1996), 37–4; Petrusewicz (1996), 33–59. On the Quintieri see Rienzo (2004),
20–5.
