                                               Conclusion                                              323

all the resources needed to work the land, and especially credit. It was this that made
the economic, social, and cultural lives of the communities who lived and worked
on the great estates dependent in every respect on the owners of the estates.¹⁴
    Such relations of dependence were not unusual in nineteenth-century Italy and
indeed throughout Europe debt was most commonly what tied the post-feudal rural
poor to the land and the interests of the landowners.¹⁵ But there were clear signs that
in the South the landowners were adopting new measures to reimpose hierarchies of
rural dependence that had been threatened by the crisis of the old agrarian order.
    Before 1860 new latifundia were located primarily in those regions of the main-
land where brigandage had previously proved most difﬁcult to eradicate. But as
early as the 1830s Bourbon ofﬁcials noted similar developments in western Sicily.
Here, too, the abolition of feudalism had provided powerful Sicilian landowners
with opportunities to engross and privatize lands that had previously been subject
to collective use. From the reports of Bourbon ofﬁcials, it is also possible to ident-
ify what would only later come to be known as maﬁa, a system of power relations
in which estate bailiffs and their armed retainers acted as powerful intermediaries
who oversaw the management of the estates and their labour force on behalf of
generally absentee landowners. They were responsible for enforcing monopolies
over scant resources—water and pasture in particular—but they also engaged in a
range of illicit commercial activities, especially the trade in rustled livestock and
meat, while maintaining order on the estates and enforcing local codes of discip-
line and deference.¹⁶
    Neither maﬁa nor the reconstruction of the latifundist estates on the mainland
were legacies from the feudal past. Both are better understood as responses to the
challenges posed by change and the incursion of unpredictable and uncertain
market forces in the fragile agrarian economies of the South. One consequence
was to accentuate the differences within the South. In Sicily the slowly expanding
commercial economies of Messina and Catania in eastern Sicily and even of the
citrus growing Conca d’Oro near Palermo contrasted with the maﬁa-dominated
estates of the arid interior. On the mainland, the relatively closed Calabrian
latifundia contrasted with the more open commercial world of Bari and the
Adriatic ports.¹⁷


   ¹⁴ The reporter for the 1882 parliamentary inquiry on the state of agriculture who visited the
Quintieri estates in Calabria commented, ‘The fable of Midas who turned to gold everything he
touched, that telling allusion to the torments of avarice and the power of saving, is still a reality here in
distant Calabria due to the absence of any awareness of the needs and costs of more reﬁned forms of
civilization.’ Virtually every landowner in the province, he noted, was indebted to the Quintieri fam-
ily; see Atti della Giunta per l’Inchiesta Agraria (1882) vol. ix, p. xvi, cited in Davis (1979), 75. For
similar but also contrasting descriptions of the 19th-century latifondo, cf. Lupo (1990), and
Petrusewicz (1996).                                              ¹⁵ See, e.g., Malatesta (1988), 111–25.
   ¹⁶ See the report by the Bourbon Procurator General, Pietro Cala-Ulloa, in 1838, in Pontieri
(1965), 239–77, cited in Fiume (1984) and Davis (1988), 84–7.
   ¹⁷ Benigno (1982, 2001); Cancila (1991); D’Angelo (1988); Salvemini (1995); Massafra (1981,
1995).
