328                                     Conclusion

the downfall of the Neapolitan Bourbons in 1860 when Sicily made its third and
ﬁnally successful bid for autonomy were peculiar to the South. During the revolu-
tions of 1848 similar demands for regional or municipal autonomy had been
the principal cause of political unrest in all the Italian states. In Piedmont, the
Genoese revolt against Turin was put down in 1849 no less bloodily than the
Bourbon assaults on Messina and Palermo. Almost identical struggles were played
out in the Veneto when the cities of the Venetian Terraferma took the opportunity
to break free from subordination to Venice, in Tuscany when Livorno made its bid
for freedom from Florence, and in the Papal States where virtually every city
rebelled against Rome.²⁶
   The tensions between the capital and the provinces and between Sicily and the
mainland that in 1860 overwhelmed the Bourbon Kingdom of the Two Sicilies
were only one example, therefore, of internal tensions that faced every Italian ruler
and contributed in no small part to the collapse of the pre-Uniﬁcation Italian
states. In each case, moves toward greater centralization and the incorporation of
previously independent states, cities, and territories were the principal causes of
political unrest. Resentments at lost regional and municipal autonomy had domi-
nated the course of the revolutions in 1848–9, and Italy’s political Uniﬁcation
would succeed at least in part because it proved better able to accommodate these
deeply felt local and municipal identities.
   Nor can it be assumed that social and economic conditions in the South were
signiﬁcantly worse than in the rest of Italy at the time of Uniﬁcation. Down to the
end of the century poverty was the common condition of most Italians and at
the time of Uniﬁcation there was little to choose between the poorest regions
in the South and those of the North and Centre.²⁷ There were also a number of
relatively advanced commercial regions in the South, even though these did not
beneﬁt to the same degree from the commercial boom of the 1850s that brought
important changes to the more developed commercial centres in the North—
especially in Piedmont and Lombardy. But in 1860 the economic differences
between the North and the South were still much less than they would be forty years
later, and before the new Italian state dismantled the protective barriers that had
enabled the southern textile, engineering, and shipbuilding industries to develop.
The numbers engaged in ‘industry’—although the term is very misleading—were
actually higher in the South than anywhere else in Italy in 1860.²⁸
   There were also important structural differences, although these would not
become evident until later. Even in those parts of the South where commercial
agriculture was most developed—the Terra di Bari, the regions closest to the


   ²⁶ On the Veneto in English see Ginsborg (1979) and more recently Laven (2002). For Tuscany
see especially Lo Romer (1987) and Kroll (2005). On Rome see Carnavale and Caracciolo (1978).
   ²⁷ Bolton King and Thomas Okey in their survey of Italy in 1902 believed that the country’s
poverty was its most distinctive feature amongst the western European industrialized states.
   ²⁸ De Rosa (2004), 3–19.
