                                       Conclusion                                     325

economic strategy when in 1823 the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies adopted one of
the highest protectionist regimes in Europe.
   The tariffs targeted imported manufactured goods, looking to import substitu-
tion as a means to promote the development of national industries, especially tex-
tiles, shipbuilding, and engineering. The strategy was a continuation by other
means of less coherent policies followed by the eighteenth-century Bourbons, and
above all of Murat’s earlier efforts to reduce colonial subordination to France.
Indeed, most of the numerous community of foreign merchants and textile mas-
ters that had settled in the Kingdom had ﬁrst arrived during the years of French
rule and at Murat’s invitation.²⁰
   As those earlier initiatives had made clear, the threats of commercial and colo-
nial dependence were the most serious challenges to the Kingdom’s autonomy.
De’ Medici now combined these earlier experiments at import substitution with
a more ambitious attempt to reverse the Kingdom’s commercial and political
subordination. The key aim was to expand the merchant ﬂeet, but this was linked
with measures designed to equip the Kingdom with a modern navy and a reorgan-
ized army. The naval shipyards in Naples would build the ﬁrst steamships in
Italy, and were also designed to produce modern artillery for the army as well as
Italy’s ﬁrst railway. Dynastic loyalty became the test for all those who sought
commissions in the army, while regiments of foreign mercenaries were recruited
to provide greater internal security and protect the monarchy against a repetition
of the mutinies of 1820.
   By the early 1830s Naples as a result had the largest industrial base of all the
pre-Uniﬁcation Italian states. The largest shipyards and engineering works in Italy
were in Naples, while numerous cotton and wool textile factories had been estab-
lished in the Apennine foothills where water-power was abundant.²¹ Two decades
before their counterparts in Piedmont–Savoy the Bourbon rulers in the South had
embarked on a programme of economic development and military reorganiza-
tion. But the strategy proved impossible to sustain. It brought the Kingdom into
conﬂict ﬁrst with its most powerful commercial partner, Great Britain, and then
with the most powerful economic interests in the Kingdom, the landowners.
   Both reactions revealed the obstacles facing the survival of small dynastic states
in an age of growing international economic competition and political rivalry.
The policies adopted by the Bourbon rulers in Naples met with a fate very similar
to that visited on the Egyptian ruler Mehemet Ali in the same period, and for sim-
ilar reasons. The Bourbon government’s protectionist measures immediately
became the target of punitive reprisals against the Kingdom’s prime exports, in
particular olive oil, by the British and resulted in a prolonged commercial war that
dragged on until June 1840 when the two countries nearly came to war.

 ²⁰ Cingari (1966), 140–76; Davis (1981); Dawes (1991), 226–37.
 ²¹ On the Neapolitan shipbuilding industry, see De Rosa (1968); on the textile industry De
Matteo (1984) and Davis (1981), 108–32.
