                                          Conclusion                                         327

help. The monarchy did not repeat the mistakes of 1820, in large part because in
1848 both the army and the Swiss guards remained loyal to the monarchy. As a
result, the insurrections in the southern provinces were quickly put down, as were
the revolutions in Sicily.
   In 1849 the royalist counter-revolution prevailed in southern Italy, as it did in
every other Italian state with the single exception of Piedmont. But the most ser-
ious outcome of the revolutions of 1848–9 was that the monarchy’s success in
crushing the revolutions earned Ferdinand II the epithet of ‘King Bomba’ in the
European liberal press. William Gladstone’s ringing denunciation of the Bourbon
dynasty as the ‘negation of God set up as a system of government’ on account of
the mistreatment of the liberals held as political prisoners after the revolutions
made that reputation stick and made the Neapolitan Bourbons the pariahs of lib-
eral Europe.²⁴
   When in 1854 the war in the Crimea revealed how deeply the revolutions of
1848 had weakened the Habsburg monarchy, the Bourbon monarchy in the
South became even more dangerously isolated. The Neapolitan government could
hardly have misjudged things more badly, however, when it made overtures for an
alliance with St Petersburg, a move that was bound to make Britain even more
hostile. It was not by chance that in May 1860 Garibaldi’s volunteers chose to land
at Marsala, a port dominated by British merchants that was also protected by two
British men-o’-war.²⁵
   After 1849, the political conditions in the southern Kingdom were as bleak and
reactionary as in any of the other Italian states, except in Piedmont, the only
Italian state in which constitutional government had survived. Had the
Neapolitan Bourbons followed the lead of the House of Savoy and played the
nationalist card things might have turned out differently. But the question has
only to be asked to reveal why this was never an option. The most compelling
obstacle was the dynasty’s continuing dependence on the protection of Austria
and the support of the Pope. But even had foresight made that gamble worth tak-
ing, any concessions to liberal demands would have reopened the issues of
regional and Sicilian autonomy that had dominated the agenda of the revolutions
in the South in 1848.
   There was no obvious exit strategy from the endgame facing the Neapolitan
Bourbons after 1850. But with the exception of Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont,
the other Italian rulers found themselves in similar situations which is why none
of them survived. Not even the centrifugal forces that were the immediate cause of

  ²⁴ See Moe (2002), 131–9. However, it is less widely known that Gladstone’s intervention was by
no means unpartisan. In 1839 he had been the spokesman in the House of Commons for the British
merchants interested in the Sicilian sulphur trade, whereas earlier he had written a more positive
account of Bourbon rule in Naples!—see Foot (ed.) Gladstone Diaries, ii (October–November 1838),
484–502.
  ²⁵ Mack Smith (1954/1985), 23–36; Martucci (1999), 165–8. On relations with Russia, see
Giura (1967).
