324                                     Conclusion

    In fact, there were many points of contact between these two apparently con-
trasting worlds. Since the most advanced sectors of southern agriculture were
those most heavily engaged in export activities, they were also the most heavily
exposed to the unpredictable swings of international markets. As a result wise
investors sought safer and more protected opportunities, and the continuing pref-
erences for investment in land, in loans secured by mortgages on land, or in con-
tracts for public works were clear indications of the high risks involved in other
commercial activities.¹⁸
    The poverty of internal markets made the most advanced sectors of the south-
ern economies dependent on export markets whose uncertainty was the main
obstacle to economic growth. These problems faced all the Italian economies,
which were reduced to marginal and subordinate roles in a new world of unprece-
dentedly competitive markets. But the impact on the fragile economies of the
South was especially disruptive and gave rise to conditions of chronic uncertainty
and insecurity.
    Insecurity would become an increasingly central feature of the lives of many
southerners, and it was also reﬂected in the Kingdom’s dynastic and diplomatic
vulnerability. The central aim of Bourbon dynastic strategies in the eighteenth
century had been to give substance to the Kingdom’s theoretic autonomy. Murat
shared similar illusions, but in the crisis that followed the revolution in France those
dreams of autonomy had been lost for ever. The Kingdom ﬁrst became a satellite of
its British ally and then a colony partitioned between Britain and France.
    After 1815, the Bourbon monarchy’s claims to autonomy were no more than a
mask while the events of 1820 would brutally reveal its internal and external
weaknesses. The situation that faced the Bourbon rulers after their third
Restoration by a foreign army in the space of twenty-two years was desperate, and
the obligation to meet both the military costs of the Restoration and the mainten-
ance of an Austrian army of invasion for an indeterminate period threatened
ﬁnancial collapse. To avert this, the Rothschild Bank in 1821 at the request of
the Austrian government agreed to open its ﬁrst Italian agency in Naples, and
with de’ Medici’s assistance proceeded to take over the Neapolitan debt, which
was ﬂoated on the European security markets.¹⁹
    Financial disaster was averted, and de’ Medici knew that opening the public
debt to foreign investors gave the monarchy a degree of security. But this also
meant that interest payments on the debt drew capital away from the Kingdom,
while the concession of management of the Kingdom’s debt to a leading interna-
tional bank was a dangerous further step toward economic dependency. To
break out of the threatened poverty trap, Luigi de’ Medici embarked on a high-risk


   ¹⁸ Davis (1981), 296–340. Lupo (1990) shows how the expansion of the Sicilian latifondo was
linked to persistent market uncertainties. See also Sabetti (1984), 93–4. Macry (1997), Marmo
(1994), Caglioti (1994) also stress the constant precariousness of Neapolitan society.
   ¹⁹ Cingari (1966), 140–76; Ostuni (1993), 329–32.
