326                                  Conclusion

   The immediate cause was the decision by the Neapolitan government to grant a
monopoly over the export of sulphur from Sicily to a French company in 1839.
The ‘Affair of the Sicilian Brimstones’ caused a furore in England, since the com-
mercial treaty with Naples in 1816 had given British shipping a virtual monopoly
over the Kingdom’s carrying trade. On the pretext that British commercial inter-
ests had been unfairly damaged, in June 1840 Lord Palmerston dispatched a
squadron of British gunboats to the Bay of Naples. Under threat of bombardment
the Neapolitan government was forced to climb down, agreeing under duress to
pay heavy indemnities for losses suffered by British merchants that later turned
out to be ﬁctitious, and also to abandon its protectionist tariffs.²²
   This was the fourth time in just over a century that the British navy had threat-
ened to bombard Naples and although the ‘Affair of the Sicilian Brimstones’ has
hardly earned a footnote in the history of the imperialism of free trade and British
gunboat diplomacy it starkly revealed the obstacles to the survival of an independ-
ent dynastic state in southern Italy. The situation was further complicated by the
fact that de’ Medici’s bid to develop a modern industrial sector and promote a
national shipbuilding industry had aroused ﬁerce opposition from the southern
landowners as well. The government’s protectionist measures had caused the price
of imported goods to rise, cut southern agricultural producers off from access to
foreign markets, and made the Kingdom’s most valuable agricultural exports the
principal target of British reprisals. The landowners’ discontents also focused
on the government’s decision to maintain control on grain exports introduced
by the French rulers in 1810, which permitted exports only after the needs of the
domestic market had been met. These measures were designed to prevent popular
unrest by ensuring plentiful supplies of cheap bread, but they were especially
damaging for those engaged in the export trades. The landowners’ discontents did
not take overtly political form, but they did give rise to growing demands for the
government to adopt more liberal economic measures and contributed to a more
general disaffection with Bourbon rule.²³
   The difﬁculty of maintaining some degree of dynastic independence in a
rapidly changing world faced the Bourbons rulers in the South with challenges
that were not unique, and similar problems faced all the other Italian rulers
although in most cases these were disguised by Austrian protection. But this was
not why the Kingdom collapsed in 1860, and when the Bourbons lost their
throne it was because Austria’s defeat in 1859 sealed the fate of all the Italian
rulers, except for the Pope and the House of Savoy.
   This is not to deny that powerful political tensions had developed within the
Bourbon Kingdom, but these did not differ signiﬁcantly from those facing the
other Italian rulers. Indeed, after the outbreak of the revolutions in 1848
Ferdinand II of Naples was the ﬁrst Italian ruler to restore order without outside


                         ²² Davis (1982), 5–24.    ²³ Ibid.
