                                         Conclusion                                        321

   As in the other Italian states, the reactionary turn in the South after 1821 nar-
rowed the monarchy’s political base, and left the Church and the army to take up
the slack. Even the rulers’ closest advisers were well aware of the dangers this posed,
and in the climate of growing apprehension before the revolutions of 1848 the
king’s principal adviser, the marchese Ceva Grimaldi, warned Ferdinand II that:
Luigi de’ Medici described our government very well when he called it a monarchy ‘à la
Napoléon’. . . . Without any effective support from the Aristocracy or the Church, its
only real foundation is in the Army and the Public Ofﬁcials. But public employees are gen-
erally happy to watch revolutions take place from the window, so long as someone goes on
paying their wages.⁷
   That description could have been applied to every other Italian state in the
same period, but the reassertion of reactionary absolutism after 1821 had trig-
gered a particularly vicious cycle in the South. When loyalty to the regime became
the sole criterion for public service, corruption grew as did new forms of mono-
polistic controls over public administration. In the absence of alternative forms of
economic activity, the resources of local government became the focus for ﬁerce
struggles between competing local factions.⁸ These tendencies had all been pre-
sent earlier but they now became more intense, as did social tensions. In part these
were the result of the depressed state of the economy, which showed no sign of
recovery until the 1830s. But they were also rooted more speciﬁcally in popular
resentment at the ways in which the abolition of feudalism, the division of the
common lands, and the disappearance of customary use-rights had deprived the
rural communities of their scarce but only assets.
   Similar tensions were evident in other parts of Italy in the same period.
Everywhere the steady advance of new forms of farming, together with new meas-
ures designed to reduce promiscuous grazing and collective land use, threatened
the economies of the rural poor.⁹ The situation in the South was therefore only a
variant, albeit often a more extreme one, on patterns of development at work on a
wider scale on the Italian peninsula and in other parts of Europe. As elsewhere, the
Bourbon monarchy’s attempts to mediate between the conﬂicting forces of
the market and the threats these posed to the security of rural communities
proved ineffective. As in the previous century, the government’s interventions
were more likely to inﬂame than resolve local conﬂicts, in ways that did little for
the poor but angered the landowners. There was little space for compromise, and
these disputes served mainly to expose the government’s inability to impose its
will against powerful local interests.¹⁰

   ⁷ ASN: Archivio Borbone f. 607, Parte II inc 823: C. Ceva Grimaldi a Ferdinando II, 10 August
1843.
   ⁸ Pezzino (1992), 9–23; Davis (1981), 296–329. On corruption and the state in Latin America
see also Macfarlane, in Little and Posada-Carbó (eds.) (1996), 40–63.
   ⁹ See Grossi (1981), 121–71.
  ¹⁰ See especially Cassese, in Cestaro and Laveglia (eds.) (1970), 191–266.
