330                                        Conclusion

economic fabric and existing social hierarchies of many parts of the South into
confusion, creating conditions not only of conﬂict but also of uncertainty and
insecurity. If these changes created new opportunities, the prevailing conditions
of insecurity also encouraged the development of forms of monopolist exploita-
tion that would become the most pathological features of the Southern Problem.
   It was no coincidence that these developments should have become increasingly
visible in the years that followed the great agricultural crisis of the 1880s, whose
devastating impact on the fragile economies of Spain, Greece, the Balkans, and
southern Italy has frequently been underestimated.³² The mass emigrations of the
following decade revealed the deep structural impact of the crisis, which struck
the most proﬁtable and advanced sectors of the southern economies most heavily,
creating new incentives to monopolize the scant resources that remained.³³
   The crisis of the 1880s exposed the underlying fragility of the southern
economies and the responses that followed were typical of impoverished economies
in times of insecurity and uncertainty. A direct consequence was the extension of
monopolist powers from the economy to politics in ways charted by observers from
Gaetano Salvemini to Antonio Gramsci. But this was not the story of a death fore-
told, not was it the consequence of some supposed deﬁcit of social capital.³⁴ The
vulnerabilities of the South had been evident from much earlier, and the short
period of Napoleonic rule at the beginning of the century had dramatically
revealed why change tended to be both abrupt and disruptive. The Napoleonic
decade had also exposed the South’s vulnerability to political and economic subor-
dination, even though against every intention of empire the Neapolitans in those
years had acquired important autonomies. But in the changed political and eco-
nomic conditions after Uniﬁcation the South would become the prisoner of its
insecurities, such that when the oldest and largest of the Italy’s pre-Uniﬁcation
states ceased to be a kingdom it became a problem: the Southern Problem.

   ³² See Morilla Critz, Olmstead, Rhode (1999), 316–25. The devastating impact of international
competition in markets where Mediterranean producers were previously well represented merits
comparison with the earlier post-Napoleonic recession caused by the arrival of Egyptian and Russian
grain on European markets.
   ³³ For an important analysis of the links between insecurity and the rise of maﬁa in the 20th cen-
tury, for example see Gambetta (1993), 75–98.                   ³⁴ The term is from Putnam (1993).
