                                          Conclusion                                           329

capital and around Reggio Calabria on the mainland, Messina, Catania, Palermo’s
Conca d’Ora, Marsala, Trapani, and a number of other western Sicilian ports—
the resources and infrastructures that would turn the lower Po valley into the
principal motor of Italy’s economic growth in the years after Uniﬁcation were
lacking. The South had no cash crop comparable to the silk of Lombardy and
Piedmont—Italy’s ‘white coal’—that would remain its principal export commod-
ity down to the Great War and the main source of the commercial wealth and
capital investment in both agriculture and industry in the North.²⁹ The fact that
the southern Kingdom’s foreign trade was the lowest of all the Italian states in per
capita terms at the time of Uniﬁcation was another indicator of underlying eco-
nomic weakness, although the ﬁgures are to some extent distorted by the fact that
this was most populous of the Italian states.³⁰ A more telling sign came perhaps
from the decision of the Rothschild Bank in the 1850s to close down its ofﬁces in
Naples, on the grounds that apart from government stock the Kingdom no longer
offered attractive commercial or industrial investment opportunities.³¹
   The reasons for the Kingdom’s collapse in 1860 were military, diplomatic, and
political, therefore, although after the event this came to be seen as the con-
sequence of backwardness and of decades, even centuries of misrule, oppression,
and corruption. That was an oversimpliﬁcation that nonetheless fed the parallel
myth that economic liberalism was the best remedy for the ills of the South. But
this was to disregard the lessons that had been painfully learned at the beginning
of the century. Both the laissez-faire principles that had guided the enlightened
reformers of the eighteenth century and the conﬁdent belief of the French rulers
that rational governance was all that was needed to unlock the natural wealth of
the South had proved inadequate solutions to the problems posed by rapid change
in the Mezzogiorno. These problems had little to do with immobility, but every-
thing to do with the extreme fragility of the Kingdom’s economic foundations
when exposed to new forces of change.
   The Bourbon monarchy had neither the vision nor the means to address these
problems and its own desperate attempts to survive added new contradictions
and conﬂicts. But once the Kingdom ceased to exist, the myths of an immobile and
unchanging South were invoked to justify panaceas that had already been tried and
found wanting. When these failed again, the blame was laid on the backwardness
of the South. It would be more accurate to say, however, that the South embodied
in extreme form conditions common to most of Italy—poverty, low levels of con-
sumption, a marginal and subordinate position on international markets.
   It was by no means only in the South that the new state failed to address those
problems, but in the South the consequences of that failure would prove especially
damaging. As in many of Europe’s peripheral regions, the challenges posed by
the new era of industrialization and international commercial markets threw the

  ²⁹ Cafagna (1994), 17–49.          ³⁰ Graziani (1960), 1–89.
  ³¹ ‘Les opérations semblent y avoir étés suspendues pendant longtemps’: Gilles (1965), ii. 49.
