Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/countylieutenancOOfortiala 


THE    COUNTY    LIEUTENANCIES 
AND   THE   ARMY 

1803-1814 


:0^^ 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Limited 

LONDON . BOMBAY • CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 

NEW   YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO 
ATLANTA  •  SAN    FRANCISCO 

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA,  Ltd. 

TORONTO 


"jL^oOo 


.  he  County  Lieutenancies 
and  the  Army 


1803-1814 


BY 


The  Hon.  J.  W.  FORTESCUE 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LIMITED 

ST.  MARTIN'S  STREET,  LONDON 

1909 


(^ 


I J  A 

yCl  LIBRARY  ■'"■"■n 

6?  ^  ^  IJNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
cr/  SANTA  BARBARA 


PREFACE 

The  present  volume  may  be  described  as  an  "  overflow  " 
from  the  History  of  the  British  Army.  It  owes  Its 
existence  principally  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  War, 
who,  recognising  the  importance  of  the  subject  at  the 
present  time,  kindly  granted  the  writer  a  small  subsidy 
to  insure  him  against  loss  through  its  publication.  But 
for  this  help,  for  which  I  desire  to  express  my  grateful 
thanks,  the  matter  here  printed  must  have  been  packed 
into  some  twenty  or  thirty  pages  only.  As  things  stand, 
the  twenty  or  thirty  pages  have  been  expanded  into  ten 
times  that  number ;  and  if,  as  I  fear,  the  ordinary  reader 
finds  them  impossible  to  read,  I  can  only  assure  him 
that  I  have  found  them  maddening  to  write. 

The  subject  of  the  recruiting  of  the  Army  during  the 
Great  War  has,  so  far,  been  left  in  complete  obscurity  ; 
nor,  in  my  belief,  could  it  be  fully  cleared  up  without 
examination  of  the  papers  (if  they  still  exist)  of  every 
Lord-Lieutenant  and  of  a  great  many  Deputy-Lieu- 
tenants, of  masses  of  municipal  archives,  and  of  tons  of 
provincial  newspapers.  Such  a  task  would  occupy  the 
best  part  of  any  one  man's  lifetime  ;  and  I  need  not  say 
that  I  have  not  attempted  it.  I  have,  however,  done  my 
best  to  exhaust  the  official  records  which  bear  upon  the 


vi  PREFACE 

question  ;  and  these  in  themselves  are  neither  few  nor 
unimportant.  The  most  instructive  of  them  is  the  series 
preserved  at  the  Record  Office  under  the  title  of  Home 
Office^  Internal  Defence^  which  consists  of  three  hundred 
and  twenty-six  bulky  volumes  and  bundles  of  manuscript 
correspondence  received  by  the  Secretary  of  State  from 
the  Lords-Lieutenant.  Of  these  the  first  two  hundred 
and  fifty  embrace  the  period  1803-18 14,  and  being 
arranged  by  counties  and  in  order  of  date,  are  convenient 
and  intelligible.  The  remaining  seventy-six  are  imper- 
fect and  in  a  state  of  chaos,  covering  all  dates  (exclusive 
of  the  years  above  named)  from  1793  to  181 4,  with 
loose  papers  of  several  subsequent  years  even  to  1826. 
For  this  disorder  not  the  Record  Office  must  be  held 
responsible,  for  it  has  no  sufficient  staff  to  rearrange 
such  papers,  but  former  clerks  at  the  Home  Office,  to 
whom  it  is  an  abiding  reproach. 

The  letters  from  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Lords- 
Lieutenant  and  other  local  authorities,  military  and 
civil,  are  comprised  in  a  series  of  entry  books,  under  the 
heads  of  Circulars,  Militia,  Local  Militia,  and  Volunteers. 
Many  of  them  have  been  very  imperfectly  kept, 
particularly  the  Circulars  ;  and  it  has  been  frequently 
necessary  for  me  to  divine  the  contents  of  the  Secre- 
tary of  State's  letters  from  the  answers  returned  to 
them  by  his  correspondents. 

The  archives  of  the  Home  Office,  however,  are  con- 
cerned only  with  what  are  termed  the  Auxiliary  Forces. 
The  records  of  the  Horse  Guards  and  War  Office  for 
the  same  period  are  unfortunately  by  no  means  so 
full.     In  the  first  place,    the  Duke  of  York's  papers 


PREFACE  vii 

seem  to  have  vanished  beyond  recall,  which  is  a  grievous 
loss.  In  the  second,  the  letters  and  orders  concerning 
recruiting  are  not  to  be  found,  unless  by  chance  tran- 
scribed in  the  two  series  of  entry  books  known  as  the 
Secretary  at  War's  Common  Letter  Books  and  the 
Commander-in-Chief's  Letter  Books.  The  Duke  of 
York,  however,  caused  to  be  compiled  and  printed  for 
his  Office  brief  accounts  of  the  various  recruiting  Acts, 
and  of  their  working  and  results,  together  with  comments 
and  returns.  Though  these  accounts,  which  are  entitled 
Military  Transactions  of  the  British  Empire^  do  not 
extend  beyond  the  year  1 809,  when  he  was  driven  from 
office,  they  are  of  the  greatest  value  and  fill  up  many 
gaps  which  are  left  open  by  the  lack  of  original  manu- 
script material.  It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  the 
compilation  of  these  Military  Transactions  should  have 
been  allowed  to  cease  by  the  Duke's  successor.  Sir  David 
Dundas. 

Upon  the  whole,  I  reckon  that  the  manuscript 
authorities,  which  I  have  perused  for  the  compilation  of 
the  present  brief  narrative,  include  about  100,000 
documents  of  one  kind  and  another  bearing  upon  my 
subject.  One  very  voluminous  and  most  important 
return,  of  which  no  copy  exists  at  the  Record  Office,  I 
was  so  fortunate  as  to  find  at  Windsor  Castle  ;  and  I 
have  to  express  my  humble  thanks  to  His  Majesty  the 
King  for  his  gracious  permission  to  make  use  of  it. 

Of  printed  authorities  the  most  important  are  the 
Journals  of  the  House  of  Commons,  which  contain  some 
most  useful  and  interesting  returns,  and  Hansard's 
Parliamentary  Debates^  together  with  the  Acts  of  Parlia- 


viii  PREFACE 

ment  passed  in  the  period  1803-18 14.  Acts,  Debates, 
and  Journals  alike  are,  in  great  measure,  unintelligible 
without  the  gigantic  commentary  supplied  by  the 
two  hundred  and  fifty  manuscript  volumes  already 
referred  to. 

I  must  return  my  warmest  thanks,  as  usual,  to  Mr. 
Hubert  Hall  for  invaluable  help  afforded  during  my 
researches  at  the  Public  Record  Office. 

♦  J.  W.  F. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER    I 

Weakness  of  British  Standing  Army 
Three  methods  of  improvising  an  army 
The  Militia  Act  of  1757     . 
Pitt's  encouragement  of  crimping,  1 793-1 800 
Mistaken  military  policy  of  Pitt's  Government 
The  Provisional  Cavalry 
Enlistment  of  Militia  in  the  Line 
Reduction  of  forces  after  Treaty  of  Amiens 
Unreadiness  of  Napoleon  for  war 
Addington's  defensive  policy  condemned 
Effective  strength  of  the  Army  in  1803 
British  gains  in  the  West  Indies  , 
Defensive  policy  attacked  in  the  Commons 


PAGE 

I 


3 
3 

4 
5 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 

10 

II 


CHAPTER    II 

Volunteer  system  under  Pitt  :  Addington's  Volunteer  Act     .       1 2 
Volunteer  allowances  :  Irish  Volunteer  Act  .         .         •        "  3 

The  Militia  Act  of  1802 14 

Machinery  for  the  ballot     .         .         .  .  .  .         •        1 5 

Exemptions  from  the  Militia  ballot       .         .         .         .         .16 

Personal  and  parochial  substitutes         .         .         .         .         .17 

Analysis  of  the  Act 18 

Position  of  non-commissioned  officers  in  the  Militia       .         .       19 
Fines  upon  counties  failing  to  produce  their  quota         .         .       20 

ix 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Old  and  New  Organisation  of  Scottish  Militia       .         .         .21 
Irish  Militia  Act,  1802        .......       22 

Various  Acts  relating  to  the  Militia,  1803     ....       23 

Circular  inviting  further  offers  of  Volunteers         ...       24 
The  First  Defence  Act,  an  abstract      .         .         .         .         •       ^5 

Seafaring  men  removed  from  Militia  to  Navy        ...       26 
Abstract  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  Acts  .         .         .27,  28,  29,  30 
Difference  between  Militiamen  and  Army  of  Reserve  men    .       30 
Abstract  of  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act       .         .         .         .  S^j  32 

Act  for  More  Speedy  Completion  of  Militia  •  •  •  33 
Levy  en  Masse  Amendment  Act  ......       33 

Abstract  of  the  Billeting  Act 34 

The  Lords-Lieutenant,  their  character  and  capacity       .         .       35 
Their  difficulties  and  burdens       .....  36,  37 

The  Deputy-Lieutenants     .......       38 

Methods  of  ballot  procedure         ......       39 

General  prevalence  of  substitution        .....       40 

Parish  substitutes         ........       41 

Insurance  societies  and  their  methods  .....       42 

Extraordinary  case  of  insurance  at  Blackburn         ...       43 
Subscription  clubs  countenanced  by  the  authorities        .  .       44 

Impossibility  of  making  the  Militia  a  local  force   .  .  45,  46 

Frequent  desertion  of  substitutes  .....       47 

Hatred  of  the  Militia  in  Scotland         ....  48,  49 

The  Militia  despised  in  England  .....       49 

Flogging  necessary  in  the  Militia  .  .         .         .         .50 

Inequity  of  Militia  system  .         .  .         .         .         '5* 

Deputy-Lieutenants  not  exempt  from  the  ballot    ...        52 
Physical  infirmity  alone  no  exemption  .         .  .         .         -53 

The  Supplementary  Militia  called  out  ....       54 

Rapid  increase  in  cost  of  substitutes      .         .  .         .         -55 

Varying  conditions  for  Militia  and  Army  of  Reserve      .  56,  57 

Further  rush  for  substitutes,  and  increase  in  their  cost  .  .  58 
Volunteer  allowances  and  regulations,  March  1803  .  .  59 
Colonel  Vyse's  recommendations  as  to  Volunteers  .  .  60 
Abstract  of  the  "June  Allowances"  to  Volunteers         .  61,  62 


CONTENTS 


XI 


PAGE 

Government  attempt  to  limit  the  number  of  Volunteers         .       63 

The  "August  Allowances" 64 

Exemption  of  Volunteers  under  the  Billeting  Act  a  mistake  .       65 
Eagerness  of  the  nation  to  volunteer     .         ....       66 

Further  efforts  of  Government  to  limit  Volunteers         .         .       67 
Mr,  Yorke  accepts  all  offers  of  Volunteers    ....       68 

Dismay  of  Lieutenancies  at  exemption  of  Volunteers     .  .       69 

Cost  of  substitutes  in  various  localities  ....       70 

General  unpopularity  of  Army  of  Reserve     .  .  .  -71 

Utter  Failure  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  .         ....       72 

Numbers  and  strength  of  the  Army  of  Reserve,  1803-4  •       73 

Deficiency  in  Militia  .......  73,  74 

Recruiting  for  the  Regular  Army  ruined        ....       74 

Scheme  of  Districts  for  Home  Defence         ....       75 

Summary  of  the   Government's  actions  with  regard  to  the 

Volunteers .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  75j  76 

Confusion  in  Lieutenancies  ......       77 

Troubles  of  the  Lieutenants  over  Volunteers  ...  78 
Confusion    among  Volunteers    owing   to    different    codes   of 

regulations  ........   79,  80,  81 


Difficulties  as  to  a  permanent  staff  for  Volunteer  corps . 
Government  concessions  as  to  staff  and  pay  for  Volunteers 
Failure  of  the  Government  to  supply  arms  to  Volunteers 
Complaints  from  Lieutenancies  of  lack  of  arms 
Local  jealousies  over  the  question  of  arms     . 
Lack  of  arms  and  the  question  of  exemption 
Refusal  of  Volunteers  to  accept  pikes  . 
Patriotic  Volunteers  who  disclaimed  exemption 
Volunteer  quotas  readily  supplied  by  Scottish  counties 
English  counties  and  their  Volunteer  quotas 
Reasons  for  lack  of  Volunteers  in  certain  counties 
Composition  of  Volunteer  corps  under  great  magnates 
Composition  of  such  corps  in  the  towns 
Examples  of  the  rules  of  Volunteer  Associations   . 
The  Volunteers  on  permanent  duty  in  1803 
Cases  of  indiscipline  among  Volunteers  in  1803     . 


82 

83 
84 
85,  86 

87 
88 
89 
90 

90,  91 
92 

93,94 

95 
96 

97 
98 

99 


xu 


CONTENTS 


Legal  controversy  as  to  the  right  of  Volunteers  to  resign 

The  controversy  decided      ..... 

Case  of  insubordination  in  the  St.  Pancras  Volunteers 

Indiscipline  in  other  London  corps 

Insubordination  in  the  Evesham  Volunteers 

Another  case  of  indiscipline  at  Bath     . 

Similar  cases  in  Gloucestershire  and  Cambridge 

Similar  cases  in  other  parts  of  the  country    . 

The  case  of  the  Sidmouth  Volunteers  . 

Volunteers  and  the  use  of  the  lash 

Hardships  of  labouring  men  who  became  Volunteers 

Officers  of  the  Regular  Army  who  served  as  Volunteers 

Difficulty  of  obtaining  Volunteer  officers 

Dearth  of  officers  in  Scotland       .... 

Volunteer  extravagance  and  variety  in  clothing,  etc. 

Weakness  of  State's  control  over  Volunteers 

Mistaken  training  of  Volunteers  .... 

A  few  scattered  corps  of  real  merit  among  Volunteers 

The  Volunteer  system  under  Pitt  and  Addington  a  failure 


.       TOO 

.      lOI 

lOZ 

103,  104 

.     105 

.     106 

107 

108,  109 
.     no 

no,  III 
.  Ill 
.     112 

.     "3 

.     114 

•  "5 
.     116 

•  "7 
.     118 

IIQ 


CHAPTER    III 

Establishment    of    the    Army    and    its    effective  strength, 

December  1803  .         .         .         .         .         .  .  .120 

Volunteer  Consolidation  Bill  introduced        .         .  .  .121 

Fox  on  the  Volunteers'  right  of  resignation  .         .  .  .121 

Question  of  election  of  Volunteer  officers      .         .  .  .122 

Question  of  fines  upon  Volunteers        .         .         .  .  .123 

Further  debates  on  the  Volunteer  Consolidation  Bill      .  .124. 

Craufurd  condemns  the  Volunteer  system     .         .  .  .125 

Yorke's  three  proposals        .         .         .         .         .  .  .126 

Further  expedient  of  raising  men  for  rank     .         .  .  .126 

Pitt's  criticisms  and  plans    .         .          .          .         .  .  .127 

Pitt  takes  office 128 

Pitt's  scheme  for  establishing  a  Permanent  Reserve  .  129,  130 

Parish  officers  to  supply  the  recruits     .         .         .  .  .130 


CONTENTS 


xui 


Parliamentary  criticism  of  Pitt's  Bill     . 

Abstract  of  the  Additional  Force  Act    . 

Abstract  of  the  Volunteer  Consolidation  Act 

Reforms  among  the  Volunteers    . 

Mobilisation  of  Volunteers . 

Pecuniary  concessions  to  the  Volunteers 

The  marching-guinea  .... 

Permanent  duty  improves  the  Volunteers 

Their  Discipline  still  imperfect    . 

Powerlessness  of  Military  officers  over  Volunteers 

Failure  of  Pitt's  Additional  Force  Act  . 

Reasons  assigned  by  the  Lieutenancies 

The  Act  attacked  in  both  Houses  of  Parliament 

Actual  decrease  in  the  Regular  Array  . 

Urgent  need  for  an  offensive  force 

Pitt  resorts  to  Militia  to  recruit  the  Army     . 

Abstract  of  the  Militia  Enlistment  Act 

Cost  of  recruits  from  the  Militia 

The  expedition  to  the  Mediterranean,  1805  . 

The  expeditions  to  the  Cape  and  Buenos  Ayres 

Failure  of  Napoleon's  plans  for  his  flotilla     . 

Napoleon's  march  to  Ulm  .... 

Formation  of  the  King's  German  Legion 

British  expedition  to  the  Weser  . 

Pitt's  efforts  to  make  his  Act  effective . 

Reasons  for  failure  of  the  Act 

Death  of  Pitt.     Lord  Grcnville  becomes  Prime  Minister 

Austerlitz  and  the  Treaty  of  Pressburg 

Effective  strength  and  state  of  the  Army  in  1806 

State  and  distribution  of  the  Army  in  1 806  . 

Windham  propounds  his  ideal  for  the  Army 

Windham's  proposals  for  rewards  and  short  service 

Opinions  of  Army  officers  as  to  short  service 

Pitt's  Additional  Force  Act  repealed 

Windham's  speech  on  the  benefits  of  short  service 

Regulations  as  to  short  service  and  pensions 


132. 


H3» 


146, 


I54» 


161 


'31 

33 
35 
36 
36 

'37 
38 

39 

[40 

[41 

[42 

[42 

[44 

[44 

'45 

145 

'47 

'47 

[48 

[49 

50 

50 

51 

52 

53 

:55 

56 

56 

57 
158 

159 

[60 

:62 
[63 
.64 
165 


XIV 


CONTENTS 


Act  to  enable  Irish  Militiamen  to  enter  the  Line  .         .      165,  166 
Windham  suspends  the  ballot  for  the  Militia         .         .         .166 
Windham's  reforms  among  the  Volunteers    .         .         .         .167 

Windham's  proposals  for  national  training     .         .         .         .168 

Parliamentary  criticism  of  the  Training  Bill  .         .         .169 

Abstract  of  the  National  Training  Act  .         .         .      170,171 

Windham  abolishes  the  June  Allowances  to  Volunteers  ,      172 

Difficulties  in  the  enforcement  of  the  Training  Act        .         -173 
Change  of  Ministry  :  Windham  replaced  by  Castlereagh        .      173 
Failure  of  the  expedition  against  Buenos  Ayres     .         .         .174 
Defeat  of  Prussia  at  Jena,  1806    ......     174 

Initial  success  claimed  for  short  service         .         .         .         •      *75 
Scheme  of  Army  reforms  recommended  by  the  Commander- 
in-Chief      176 

State  of  the  Army  when  Castlereagh  took  office    .  .         .177 

Temporary  revival  of  the  Volunteers  by  Castlereagh  .  .  178 
Bad  news  from  India,  Egypt,  and  Northern  Europe  .  .179 
Weakness  and  costliness  of  the  second  battalions   .  .         .      1 80 

The  Treaty  of  Tilsit 180 

The  expedition  against  Denmark  ,         .         .         .         .181 

Castlereagh's  drastic  proposals       .         .  .         .         .         .181 

Parliamentary  debate  on  Castlereagh's  scheme        .         .         .182 
Abstract    of  the   Acts    for   permitting  enlistment  from  the 

Militia  and  for  replenishing  the  Irish  Militia  .      182,  183 

Abstract  of  the  Act   for  replenishing  the  Militia  of  Great 

Britain         .  .  .  .  .  .         .184 

Unfair  treatment  of  Militia  by  recruiting  parties  .  .  .185 
Good  spirit  of  the  Militia  in  furnishing  recruits     .         .         .186 

Difficulties  in  replenishing  the  Militia 187 

Questions  as  to  exemption  of  Volunteers       .  .         .       187-188 

Difficulties  as  to  the  standard  of  height  .         .         .         .189 

Evils  of  ill-digested  legislation 190 

All  classes  engage  in  crimping      ......     191 

Spread  of  insurance  societies  for  the  ballot  of  1 807        .       192-194 
Case  of  a  Scottish  insurance  society      .....      19+ 

Traffic  in  substitutes  all  over  England 195 


CONTENTS  XV 


PAGE 


Results  of  the  ballot  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .196 

Principals,  substitutes,  and  bounties      .         .         .         .         .197 

Strength  of  the  Volunteers  ;  their  use  as  guards  for  French 

prisoners      .         .         .         .  .         .         .         .198 

Degradation  of  the  Volunteer  spirit      .....     199 

Cases  of  Volunteer  insubordination       ....      199,200 

Success  of  the  expedition  to  Copenhagen     ....     201 

CHAPTER    IV 

Table  showing  progress  of  the  Forces  .....  202 
Failure  of  Windham's  reforms  .....  202,  203 
Castlereagh's  speech  on  the  short-service  system    .  .  .      203 

Castlereagh's  proposals  for  Volunteers,  Militia,  and  trained 

men    .........     204,  205 

Two  principles  the  basis  for  his  system  of  national  training   .     205 
His  proposals  for  the  formation  of  a  Sedentary  Militia  .         .     206 
His  scheme  for  the  Regular  Militia       .....     207 

And  for  the  Regular  Army  .......     208 

Castlereagh's  speech  on  introducing  the  Local  Militia  Act    209,  210 
Lord  Selkirk's  scheme  for  national  training  .         .         .         .211 

Abstract  of  the  Local  Militia  Acts        .         .         .         .       21 1-2 14 

Abolition  of  substitution  and  other  merits  in  the  Act     .         -215 
Pressure  put  on  the  Volunteers    .         .         .         .         .         -215 

Transfer  of  Volunteers  to  Local  Militia        .         .         .         .217 

Case  of  the  Somerset  House  Volunteers        .         .         .         .218 

British  expeditions  to  Sweden  and  Portugal .         .         .         .219 

Effective  strength  of  the  Army,  June  1808    .         .      '    .         .     220 
The  Convention  of  Cintra,  and  the  action  of  Corufia     .         .     220 
English  enthusiasm  for  the  Spanish  insurrection    .         .         .221 
Castlereagh's  proposals  for  Militia  Enlistment  Bill,  1809     221,  222 
Discussion  in  the  Commons  over  the  new  proposals       .       222-223 
Abstract  of  Acts  for  transferring  Militiamen  to  the  Line         .     223 
Calvert's  plan  for  improvement  of  the  Military  Forces         224-225 
Effective  strength  of  the  Army,  May  1 809    .         .         .         .226 

Abstract  of  the  Act  for  replenishing  the  Militia  of  Great 

Britain         ........       226-227 


XVI 


CONTENTS 


Abstract  of  the  Act  for  replenishing  the  Irish  Militia     .         .     228 
Development  of  the  Local  Militia         .....     228 

Abstract  of  the  Local  Militia  Amendment  Act      .  .  .     229 

Clothing  allowance  to  Volunteer  Infantry  abolished       .         .230 
The  Local  Militia  as  recruiting-ground  for  the  Army    .         .     230 
Riots  in  the  Local  Militia  over  the  marching-guinea      .         .231 
Serious  mutiny  in  the  Local  Militia  at  Taunton    .         .         .     232 
Foreign  expeditions  in  1809  ......     233 

Change  of  Ministry  :  Palmerston  succeeds  Castlereagh  .         .     234 
Casualties  in  the  Regular  Army  for  1809       ....     235 

Ill-success  of  voluntary  recruiting  for  the  Militia  .  .         .235 

Troubles  in  Scotland  over  the  Militia  ballot  of  18 10  236,  237,  238 
Difficulties  in  the  English  counties  over  the  ballot  of  18 10  .  239 
Confusion    among   Lieutenancies   owing  to  multiplicity  of 

Militia  Acts 

Abstract  of  second  Local  Militia  Amendment  Act 

Evasion  of  service  in  the  Local  Militia 

Difficulties  with  deserters  from  the  Local  Militia  . 

Case  of  insubordination  in  Scottish  Local  Militia  . 

Hostility  of  the  people  towards  the  Local  Militia  . 

Local  Militia  riot  at  Bath    ..... 

Local  Militia  riot  at  Aberystwith 

Other  cases  of  mutiny  in  the  Local  Militia  . 

Offensive  operations  of  1 8 10        .... 

Effective  strength  of  the  Army  in  1 8 10 

Palmerston's  proposals  for  enlisting  Militiamen  in  the  Line 

Abstract  of  the  Acts  embodying  those  proposals     . 

Abstract  of  the  Act  permitting  interchange  of  British  and 

Irish  Militias       ...... 

Ballot  difficulties  and  cost  of  substitutes  in  Scotland 

High  price  of  substitutes  in  England  also 

Good  spirit  of  the  Militia  towards  service  in  Ireland 

Improvement  in  the  Local  Militia 

Casualties  and  recruiting  in  18 11 

Establishment  of  the  Forces,  1 8 1 2 

Abstract  of  the  Local  Militia  Consolidation  Act    . 


240 

.    241 

,  242 

.  242 

243 

• 

243 

• 

244 

. 

245 

246 

.    247, 

248 

• 

249 

• 

249 

• 

250 

ne  250 

.251 

.   252, 

253 

h  and 

• 

254 

. 

*55 

• 

256 

• 

257 

.   258, 

259 

.   259, 

260 

. 

260 

.   261, 

264 

CONTENTS 


xvii 


Unsatisfactory  compromise  in  this  Act .         .         .         .         . 
Simultaneous  expiration  of  the  terms  of  Local  Militiamen's 


265 


service  ..... 
Permission  for  them  to  extend  their  service 
Friction  between  the  two  Militias 
Foreign  affairs  in  18 1 2 
Casualties  and  recruiting  in  181 2 
Establishment  of  the  Forces,  181 3 
Final  dissolution  of  Volunteer  Infantry 
Encouragement  shown  to  the  Yeomanry 
Abstract  of  an  Act  to  amend  the  Militia  laws 
Special  enlistment  of  men  for  service  in  North  America 
Failure  of  voluntary  enlistment  for  the  Regular  Militia 
Friction  between  the  two  Militias 
Depletion  of  Regular  Militia 
Events  in  Europe,  181 3 
Strength  of  the  Forces 
Act  permitting  Militia  to  serve  abroad 
Further  military  legislation 
Failure  of  Provisional  Battalions  . 
Disinclination  of  Militia  for  foreign  service 
Formation  of  three  Provisional  Battalions 
Strength  of  the  Army,  1814 


265,  266 
.  266 
.  267 
.     268 

268,  269 
.  269 
.  269 
.     270 

270,  271 

.     271 

272 

•  273 
.     274 

274»  275 

.     275 

276,  277 

•  -^11 
.     278 

•  279 

.     280 

.     281 


CHAPTER 

Summary :  Addington's  policy 

Pitt's  reforms 

Windham's  reforms 

Castlereagh's  reforms  . 

Calvert's  proposals 

Difficulty  of  the  recruiting  question 

Formation  of  second  battalions 

Enlistment  of  boys 

Convicts  in  the  Army 

Lessons  of  the  war 


282,  283 

283,  284 
.  284 
.  285 
.  286 
.  287 

287,  288 

.  288 

.  289 

290 


TABLE    OF    APPENDICES 

PAGE 

I.  Returns  of  Casualties  and  Recruits  for  Regular  Army  .     291 
II.  Effective  Strength  of  the  Army,  1804-181 3  .         .     293 

III.  Effective  Strength  of  Volunteers,  1803-1808        .         .     294 

IV.  Memoranda  on  the  Recruiting  of  the  Army          .         -295 
V.  The  Additional  Force  Act 299 

VI.  Windham's  Measures  ......     302 

VII.  State  of  the  Army,  1804-1809 303 

VIII.  Foreign  and  Provincial  Corps  in  British  Fay,  1809       .     307 
IX.  Return  of  the  Artillery,  1 803- 1 809     ....     308 

X.  Return  of  the  Militia  Recruits,  1 809-1 81 3  .         .     309 

XI.  Dates  of  Addition  of  2nd  Battalions  to  Regiments  of 

Line    .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .310 

XII.  Strength  of  the  Forces  at  Disposal  of  District  Com- 
manders in  Great  Britain,  1804      .         .         .         .312 

INDEX 313 


XVlll 


ABBREVIATIONS   USED    IN   THE   CITATION 
OF   AUTHORITIES 

A.G.  Adjutant-General. 

C.C.L.B.  Commander-in-Chief's  Letter.  Books. 

C.G.M.  Clerk  of  the  General  Meeting  (of  a  Lieutenancy). 

C.J.  Commons  Journals. 

C.S.M.  Clerk  of  Subdivision  Meeting  (of  a  Lieutenancy). 

D.L.  Deputy-Lieutenant. 

H.D.  Hansard's  Parliamentary  Debates. 

H.O.  Home  Office  (one  division  of  the  Military  Records  at 

the  Record  Office). 

LD.  Internal  Defence.     (See  Preface.) 

I.F.O.  Inspecting  Field-Officer. 

L.L.  Lord-Lieutenant. 

L.M.  Local  Militia. 

L.M.E.B.  Local  Militia  Entry  Books. 

M.E.B.  Military  Entry  Books. 

Mila.  E.B.  Militia  Entry  Books. 

O.C.  Officer  Commanding. 

S.C.L.B.  Secretary  at  War's  Common  Letter  Books. 

S.S.  Secretary  of  State. 

S.W.  Secretary  at  War. 

V.L.  Vice-Lieutenant. 

W.O.  War  Office. 

xix 


CHAPTER   I 


The  military  system  of  England  from  the  close  of 
the  Middle  Ages  to  the  nineteenth  century  was  practi- 
cally, though  with  superficial  differences,  the  same.  To 
every  place  which  required  a  garrison,  whether  at 
home  or  abroad,  a  small  permanent  force  was  indis- 
solubly  attached,  and  for  purposes  of  war  an  army  was 
improvised. 

The  institution  and  increase  of  the  Standing  Army 
affected  this  system  far  less  than  might  be  supposed. 
For  if  the  Army  grew,  so  also  did  the  population  of 
the  British  Isles,  to  say  nothing  of  British  possessions 
abroad  ;  and  the  regular  forces  were  the  only  police 
of  the  slightest  efficiency  either  at  home  or  beyond 
sea.  Owing  to  the  jealousy  of  the  House  of  Commons, 
these  forces  were  never  numerous  enough  for  their 
work  ;  and,  owing  to  the  general  hostility  of  the  nation 
towards  the  service,  even  the  meagre  establishment 
voted  for  the  various  corps  was  rarely  maintained  at 
its  proper  strength.  Hence,  if  troops  were  required  for 
an  expedition  over  sea,  it  was  necessary  to  draft  three 
or  four  battalions  into  one,  and  to  recreate,  or,  in  plain 
words,  to  improvise  new  battalions  to  take  the  place 
of  those  that  had  been  drained  to  the  dregs. 

The  improvisation  of  an  army  during  the  eighteenth 
century  was  generally  effected  in  three  ways  :  by  ordi- 
nary recruiting,  by  raising  new  corps,  and  by  raising 
men  for  rank. 


2  THE  OLD  SYSTEM  chap. 

Ordinary  recruiting  was  a  regimental  matter,  which 
kept  two  or  three  officers  and  a  small  party  of  men 
constantly  absent  from  regimental  duty.  It  was  usually 
stimulated  at  the  outbreak  of  a  war  by  adding  two 
troops  or  companies  to  every  regiment  or  battalion, 
which  gave  a  step  without  purchase  to  a  limited  number 
of  officers.^ 

The  raising  of  new  regiments  is  a  thing  that  explains 
itself.  Practically  it  offered  commissions  to  any  enter- 
prising gentleman  or  gentlemen  who,  by  hook  or  crook, 
could  get  together  a  body  of  men  ;  and  in  its  essence 
it  differed  very  little  from  raising  men  for  rank,  which 
signified  the  grant  of  a  step  of  promotion  to  all  officers 
and  of  a  commission  to  all  civilians  who  would  collect 
a  given  number  of  recruits.  An  increased  bounty, 
of  course,  necessarily  accompanied  the  whole  of  these 
arrangements  ;  and  though,  in  certain  instances,  men  of 
rank  and  station  could  raise  whole  regiments  of  excel- 
lent soldiers,  yet  the  backbone  of  an  improvised  army 
was  the  crimp. 

The  replacing  of  casualties  suffered  on  active  service, 
that  is  to  say  the  maintenance  as  distinguished  from 
the  formation  of  an  army,  was  left  wholly  to  ordinary 
recruiting  ;  and  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  in  a  long 
war  this  meagre  resource  invariably  failed.  Increased 
bounties  led  always  to  increased  desertion  ;  and  even 
in  Queen  Anne's  time  it  was  necessary  to  enlist  men 
for  short  service,  instead  of,  as  usual,  for  life,  and  to 
make  a  levy  of  so  many  men  from  every  parish  in  the 
country.  As  time  went  on,  the  difficulty  of  keeping 
corps  in  the  field  up  to  strength  constantly  increased. 
In  Marlborough's  day  every  regiment  sent  its  recruiting 
parties  home  as  soon  as  the  Army  went  into  winter 
quarters  ;  but  when  winter  quarters  ceased  to  be,  and 
campaigns  were  no  longer  bounded  by  the  seasons,  the 
problem  became  almost  insoluble.  Towards  the  end 
of  the  Seven  Years'  War  new  levies  were  raised  as  fast 
as  men  could  be  found  to  undertake  them,  but  the 

^  This  mode  of  augmentation  lasted  till  the  Crimean  War. 


I  MILITIA  ACT  OF  1757  3 

recruits  furnished  thereby  to  the  Army  in  Germany 
were  of  miserable  quality.  In  fact,  greatly  though  the 
sudden  peace  of  1763  was  blamed,  it  came  none  too 
soon  for  the  British  Army. 

That  war,  however,  brought  with  it  one  great  and 
solid  advance  in  our  military  system,  namely,  the 
Militia  Act  of  1757.  This  measure  provided  for 
passing  the  entire  manhood  of  the  country  through 
the  Militia  by  ballot,  in  terms  of  three  years  ;  but  it 
was  never  properly  executed,  and  hence  lost  very  much 
of  its  value.  The  ballot  itself  was  never  enforced^ 
until  the  American  trouble  became  serious  in  1775, 
and  then,  since  substitution  was  allowed,  the  traffic 
in  substitutes  interfered  gravely  with  recruiting  for  the 
Regular  Army.  The  price  of  a  substitute  rose  to  ten 
guineas  before  the  close  of  the  war,  which  meant  that 
recruits  for  the  Line  could  not  be  obtained  for  less  than 
eleven  or  twelve  guineas.  This  was  the  first  serious 
symptom  of  a  very  grave  mischief. 

From  1784  until  1792  Pitt  allowed  the  military 
forces  of  the  country  to  sink  to  the  lowest  degree  of 
weakness  and  inefficiency;  and  in  1793  he  found  himself 
obliged  to  improvise  not  merely  an  army,  but,  owing  to 
the  multiplicity  of  his  enterprises,  a  very  large  army. 
He  fell  back  on  the  old  resources  of  raising  men  for 
rank  and  calling  into  existence  new  levies,  allowing  the 
system  to  be  carried  to  such  excess  that  the ;  Army  did 
not  recover  from  the  evil  for  many  years.  Never  did 
the  crimps  reap  such  a  harvest  as  in  1794  and  1795  ; 
and  never  was  a  more  cruel  wrong  done  to  the  Army 
than  when  boys  fresh  from  school,  in  virtue  of  so  many 
hundred  wretched  weaklings  produced  by  a  crimp,  took 
command  of  battalions,  and  even  of  brigades,  over  the 
heads  of  good  officers  of  twenty  and  thirty  years' 
service.  In  1793  the  bounty  offered  to  men  enlisting 
into  the  Line  was  ten  guineas  ;  within  eighteen  months 
the  Government  was  contracting  with  certain  scoundrels 
for  the  delivery  of  men  at  twenty  guineas  a  head,  and, 
X   H.D.  Speech  ofW.  Windham,  21st  Feb.  1805. 


4  PITT'S  BLUNDERS,  1 793-1 796         chap. 

long  before  that,  the  market  price  of  recruits  had  risen 
to  thirty  guineas. 

One  cause  of  the  extreme  clearness  of  recruits  was 
dread  of  service  in  the  West  Indies,  where  Pitt  had 
decided  to  make  his  principal  military  effort.  Nor  was 
this  repugnance  unreasonable,  for  West  Indian  duty 
in  those  days  was  practically  synonymous  with  death. 
But,  apart  from  this,  the  Government,  by  its  own 
military  policy,  had  done  its  utmost  to  hinder  recruiting 
for  the  Line.  The  Militia  was,  very  properly,  at  once 
embodied  and  made  up  to  strength  as  soon  as  the 
danger  of  war  became  serious  ;  but  substitutes  were 
allowed,  and  these  substitutes  were  precisely  the  men 
who,  but  for  the  heavy  bounty  which  they  could  gain 
from  serving  comfortably  at  home,  would  gladly  have 
enlisted  in  the  Army.  Furthermore,  by  enrolling  many 
scores  of  thousands  of  Volunteers  as  independent  units, 
dissociating  them,  contrary  to  all  precedent,  from 
the  Militia,  and  exempting  them  from  the  ballot, 
Ministers  diminished  seriously  the  number  of  men  who 
were  liable  to  be  drawn  for  the  Militia,  threw  the 
obligation  upon  a  smaller  class  of  the  population,  and, 
as  a  natural  consequence,  increased  the  demand  for 
substitutes.  Then  again,  they  had  raised  several  thou- 
sand Fencible  regiments,  both  horse  and  foot.  These, 
being  engaged  for  home  service  alone,  differed  from 
Militia  only  in  that  they  were  not  chosen  by  the  ballot, 
and,  consequently,  they  absorbed  thousands  of  men 
who  would  otherwise  have  taken  service  with  the 
Regulars.  Meanwhile  the  mortality  among  the  troops 
in  the  West  Indies  was  appalling  ;  and  yet,  for  military 
reasons,  it  was  urgently  necessary  to  obtain  more  men 
by  some  means  for  both  Navy  and  Army.  An  Act  was 
therefore  passed  for  levying  men  from  every  parish 
in  the  United  Kingdom,  after  the  precedent  of  Queen 
Anne.  The  measure  was  a  total  failure  so  far  as  the 
Army  was  concerned,  and  in  the  Navy  it  was  generally 
considered,  from  the  bad  character  of  the  men  produced, 
to  have  been  a  chief  cause  of  the  Mutiny  of  1797. 


I  THE  ARMY  FED  BY  MILITIA  5 

By  1796,  therefore,  the  Government  was  at  its  wits' 
end,  and  in  that  year  there  was  serious  danger  of  in- 
vasion. In  spite  of  all  its  Fencibles  and  Volunteers,  it 
did  not  feel  safe,  and  so  fell,  during  the  next  two 
years,  to  raising  more  Fencibles,  a  Supplementary 
Militia,  more  Volunteers,  and,  last  of  all,  a  force  called 
the  Provisional  Cavalry,  which  was  supposed  to  include 
all  mounted  men  not  already  gathered  into  the  Fencible 
and  Yeomanry  Cavalry.  The  Provisional  Cavalry  was 
a  crying  failure.  "  It  passed,"  in  Windham's  words, 
'*  over  the  country  like  a  blight.  It  was  a  pleasant 
*'  conceit  to  make  every  man  ride  another's  horse,  till 
"at  length  when  the  men  and  horses  were  all  brought 
"  together,  no  man  knew  how  to  mount,  and  so  they  all 
"  separated."  So  short-lived  was  this  force,  that  the  fore- 
going caustic  sentence  is  almost  all  that  is  discoverable 
concerning  it ;  but  it  is  very  evident  that  the  class 
which  the  Government  desired  to  enlist  in  it  contrived 
to  evade  service  by  procuring  substitutes,  though  paying 
dearly  for  them.  The  Supplementary  Militia  was 
more  successful.  Ministers  had  the  good  sense  not  to 
grant  any  exemption  to  the  Volunteers  until  the  ballot 
had  been  held.  But  even  so,  between  these  various 
calls  for  men,  bounties,  or,  more  accurately  speaking, 
the  cost  of  recruits  and  substitutes,  rose  in  1798  to 
sixty,  seventy,  and  even  eighty  guineas.^ 

It  was  very  plain  that  such  a  state  of  things  could 
not  continue;  wherefore,  in  1798  Ministers  passed 
an  Act  to  enable  ten  thousand  Militiamen  to  enlist  in 
the  Army  for  a  bounty  of  ten  pounds.  The  Lords- 
Lieutenant  set  their  faces  against  it,  not  wishing  to  see 
their  men  shipped  off  to  the  West  Indies  ;  and  the 
measure  was  a  failure.  But,  fortunately,  the  demand 
for  men  in  the  West  Indies  ceased  about  this  time,  and 
the  Government  was  able  to  reintroduce  the  Act  in 
1799,  with  the  additional  provision  that  the  service  of 
the  enlisted  Militiamen  should  be  confined  to  Europe. 
Then  the  ten  thousand,  most  of  whom  had  already 
*  H.D.  New  Series,  iii.  599. 


6  TREATY  OF  AMIENS  chap. 

received  large  sums  as  substitutes,  swarmed  joyfully  to 
the  colours,  and  having  received  their  bounty,  by  some 
extraordinary  folly,  in  advance,  reeled  round  them  in 
a  state  of  crapulous  insubordination  for  some  days  until 
the  money  was  spent.  After  that,  they  proved  to  be 
good  men,  decidedly  superior,  by  Sir  Ralph  Aber- 
cromby's  testimony,  to  the  ordinary  class  of  recruit. 
Many  of  them  volunteered  for  service  in  Egypt,  though 
their  engagement  did  not  bind  them  to  do  so  ;  and  in 
fact  the  Army  depended  chiefly  on  Militiamen  for  its 
recruits  until  the  signature  of  the  preliminaries  of  peace 
in  October  1801. 

II 

The  Treaty  of  Amiens  was  admittedly  only  an 
experiment,  and  an  experiment  so  doubtful  that  it  could 
deserve  no  higher  title  than  a  suspension  of  arms.  In 
such  circumstances  it  was  impossible  for  Addington  to 
reduce  the  military  force  to  a  peace  establishment,  and  the 
lowest  number  of  regular  troops  for  which  he  dared  to 
estimate  was  1 32,000.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Fencibles, 
both  horse  and  foot,  were  totally  disbanded,  which 
diminished  the  force  for  home  defence  by  at  least 
20,000  men.  It  had  been  hoped  that  most  of  these 
men,  who  from  long  divorce  from  any  but  military 
employment  were  practically  soldiers,  would  have  en- 
listed in  the  Line ;  but  they  did  not.  The  nation  seemed, 
not  unnaturally,  to  be  sick  of  warlike  exercises,  and 
recruits  were  by  no  means  plentiful.  True  prudence 
and  forethought  would  have  dictated  special  efforts 
to  make  up  the  Regular  Army  to  its  full  establishment, 
for  if  war  was  to  come  again,  the  surest  method  of 
defence  was  certainly  to  take  the  offensive.  Such  a 
policy,  however,  would  have  been  construed  as  lack 
of  faith  on  Addington's  part  towards  his  own  experi- 
ment, though  it  was  less  for  this  reason  than  from  sheer 
want  of  foresight  and  ignorance  of  war  that  the  Ministry 
turned  all  its  energies,  as  shall  presently  be  seen,  towards 
purely  defensive  preparations. 


I  RENEWAL  OF  THE  WAR  7 

An  attitude  of  passive  and  inert  defence  is  very  1803. 
rarely  sound,  and  was  never  more  false  than  in  1803. 
It  has  generally  been  assumed  that,  in  the  circumstances, 
it  was  impossible  for  England  to  think  of  taking  the 
offensive.  Yet  this  is  at  least  open  to  question.  The 
enemy  to  be  encountered  was  indeed  most  formidable  ; 
but  before  rushing  to  the  conclusion  that  the  initiative 
must  necessarily  have  been  yielded  up  to  him,  some 
account  at  least  should  be  taken  of  his  position. 

Napoleon  was  not  prepared  for  war.  He  was 
entangled  in  costly  and  most  difficult  operations  at 
St.  Domingo  when  hostilities  began  ;  and  the  inter- 
vention of  the  British  fleet  turned  them  into  utter 
disaster.  Of  forty-eight  ships  of  war  which  he  had 
sent  off  to  the  West  Indies,  only  seven  ever  returned 
to  Europe  ^  except  as  British  prizes  ;  while  the  soldiers 
captured  by  the  British  amounted  to  over  seven  thousand, 
quite  apart  from  thirty  to  forty  thousand  men  who  had 
already  perished  of  yellow  fever  or  deserted  to  the 
enemy.  The  British  fleet,  owing  to  the  mistaken 
economies  of  St.  Vincent,  was  by  no  means  so  efficient 
as  it  should  have  been,  but  the  French  fleet  was  so 
contemptible  in  numbers  and  unreadiness  as  to  be 
hardly  worth  mentioning.  It  may  be  asserted  without 
hesitation  that  the  British  Government  could,  so  far 
as  the  safety  of  the  sea  was  concerned,  have  sent  any 
force  that  it  pleased  to  any  point  that  it  pleased  ;  and 
thirty  thousand,  or  even  twenty  thousand,  men  de- 
spatched to  Sicily  or  to  Naples  in  the  summer  of  1 803 
must  almost  certainly  have  broken  up  the  camp  at 
Boulogne.  Napoleon  had  violated  Neapolitan  terri- 
tory by  occupying  Brindisi,  Tarento,  and  Otranto  with 
a  small  force.  The  appearance  of  a  formidable  British 
expedition  would  have  compelled  him  to  reinforce  it 
and  the  whole  of  his  Italian  garrisons  very  heavily  ; 
for  he  could  hardly  have  withdrawn  this  detachment 
without  endangering  his  reputation  in  France,  or,  indeed, 

*  They  could  not  even  return  to  France,  but  were  obliged  to  take 
refuge  in  Spanish  ports. 


8  ADDINGTON'S  FALSE  POLICY        chap. 

1803.  without  seeing  the  force  harassed  to  destruction  on 
its  retreat.  Calabria  and  Apulia  were  ripe  for  revolt 
against  him,  and  the  rest  of  Italy  was  by  no  means  so 
quiet  that  he  could  afford  to  leave  it  weakly  occupied 
when  there  was  a  chance  of  a  reverse  to  his  arms.  The 
British  force  could  have  been  doubled  or  trebled  as  the 
augmentation  of  the  Army  progressed,  and  Napoleon 
would  thus  have  been  forced  to  fight  us  amid  a  hostile 
population,  at  the  end  of  a  long  line  of  communications, 
in  a  country  which  favoured  the  action  of  our  fleet 
even  more  than  Spain. 

It  may  be  urged  that  a  policy  so  audacious  was  too 
much  to  expect  of  British  Ministers  in  the  presence  of 
such  a  man  as  Napoleon  ;  and  such  an  objection  must 
not  be  lightly  dismissed.  Addington  was  such  a  proverb 
for  mediocrity  that,  though  he  was  popular  among  the 
country  gentlemen,  the  nation  felt  little  confidence  in 
him  ;  and  if  he  had  attempted  such  a  stroke  as  is  out- 
lined in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  he  might  well  have 
brought  a  storm  about  his  ears  and  have  been  compelled 
to  cancel  any  offensive  expedition,  even  if  he  had 
designed  it.  But  this  is  not  the  main  point.  The  real 
question  at  issue  is  whether  in  the  particular  circum- 
stances he  should  have  devoted  his  principal  effort  to 
reinforcing  the  Army,  which  could  serve  abroad,  or  to 
creating  a  huge  defensive  force,  which  could  only  serve 
at  home.  Obviously,  regular  troops,  which  from  their 
nature  are  superior  to  half-trained  levies  as  well  for 
internal  defence  as  for  foreign  attack,  were  preferable  if 
they  could  be  raised  in  sufficient  numbers  and  at  reason- 
able expense.  Indeed,  though  the  fact  is  occasionally 
obscured,  the  Regular  Army  is,  and  always  has  been,  the 
only  land  force  that  we  can  depend  upon  for  any 
description  of  war.  All  inquiries,  therefore,  into  our 
military  preparations  at  any  period  must  be  conducted, 
primarily  and  above  all,  to  ascertain  how  they  affected, 
for  good  or  evil,  the  strength,  numbers,  and  efficiency  of 
the  Regular  Army. 

War  was  declared,  as  has  been  told,  on  the  1 6th  of 


I  STRENGTH  OF  THE  ARMY  9 

May  1803.  Exact  returns  of  the  effective  strength  of  1803. 
the  Regular  Army  on  the  ist  of  June  are  fortunately 
to  hand,^  and  it  will  be  profitable  to  begin  by 
abstracting  them  here.  It  must  be  premised  that  the 
Regular  Army  consisted  at  that  time  of  three  regiments 
of  Household  Cavalry ;  seven  regiments  of  Dragoon 
Guards  ;  twenty-five  regiments  of  Dragoons  ;  seven 
battalions  of  Foot  Guards  ;  ninety-six  regiments  of  the 
Line,  all  of  one  battalion  apiece,  except  the  First  Royals, 
which  had  two  battalions,  and  the  Sixtieth,  which  had  six ; 
seven  Garrison  Battalions  ;  a  small  independent  corps 
at  Goree  ;  another  of  five  hundred  men  in  New  South 
Wales  ;  seven  foreign  corps  (about  3500  of  all  ranks) 
of  infantry  ;  the  Royal  Waggon  Train,  numbering  just 
over  two  hundred  men  ;  and  the  Staff  Corps,  or  War 
Office  Engineers,  which  had  been  called  into  being  during 
the  last  war  because  the  established  Engineers  under  the 
Office  of  Ordnance  acknowledged  no  master  but  their 
own  Master-General,  and  made  difficulties  about  obeying 
the  orders  of  the  Comniander-in-Chief.  The  above 
were  all  white  troops,  and  it  will  be  convenient  to  reckon 
them  all  together,  for  the  men  of  the  Sixtieth  were  for 
the  most  part  as  truly  foreign  as  De  Roll's  or  De  Watte- 
ville's.  Besides  these  there  were  four  thousand  native 
troops  in  Ceylon,  all  of  them  useless  and  some  of  them 
dangerous,  and  six  West  Indian  regiments,  which  for 
West  Indian  service  were  excellent  and  invaluable  troops.^ 
The  effective  strength  of  the  whole  (deducting  the 
Ceylonese)  was  14,734  cavalry  and  79,508  infantry, 
effective  rank  and  file^  that  is  to  say,  corporals  and  privates 
only.  Adding  one-eighth  for  drummers,  sergeants,  and 
officers,  we  obtain,  in  round  numbers,  a  total  of  1 5,600 
cavalry,  and   89,500  infantry,  or  as  nearly  as  may  be 

1  Military  Transactions  of  British  Empire^  1803-1807.  Printed 
for  the  Commander-in-Chief's  office. 

2  The  return  shows  nine  West  India  regiments,  but  not  one  of 
them  was  600  strong  ;  and  they  were  in  process  of  reduction  into 
six.  They  were,  and  of  course  still  are,  composed  of  negroes  of 
African  origin,  and  frequently  of  African  birth. 


lo         DISTRIBUTION  OF  ARMY,  1803     chap. 

1803.  104,000  men.  To  this  figure  must  be  added  further  the 
two  regiments  of  Life  Guards,  700  of  all  ranks,  which  for 
some  reason  were  omitted  from  the  return,  and  the 
Artillery,  which  may  be  taken  at  between  9000  and 
10,000  of  all  ranks. ^  The  effective  strength  of  the 
British  Army,  therefore,  on  the  ist  of  June  1803  may 
be  set  down  with  tolerable  correctness  at  1 14,000  of  all 
ranks.  The  establishment  fixed  by  the  estimates  of  1 802 
was  132,000  men  of  all  ranks,  exclusive  of  the  foreign 
corps.  Hence  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war  the  Army  was 
over  twenty  thousand  men,  or  nearly  one-sixth,  short  of 
its  proper  strength. 

Of  the  effective  rank  and  file  9046  cavalry  and 
22,814  infantry  were  in  Great  Britain,  3215  cavalry  and 
16,556  infantry  in  Ireland.  The  remainder  were  abroad 
or  on  passage.  It  so  happened  that  the  force  in  the  West 
Indies  was  very  large,  for  the  garrisons  of  the  French 
islands,  which  had  been  captured  in  the  late  war  and  given 
back  at  the  peace,  had  not  yet  returned  home.  The 
Government  at  once  employed  them  in  recovering  some 
of  the  restored  islands  and  settlements.  St.  Lucia, 
Tobago,  Demerara,  Essequibo,  Berbice,  and  Surinam 
were  taken  before  the  end  of  the  year  with  little  diffi- 
culty or  bloodshed;  and,  since  many  of  the  Dutch 
prisoners  from  the  four  places  last  named  took  service 
with  the  British,  the  net  loss  of  men  was  trifling — 
possibly,  indeed,  was  turned  for  a  few  weeks  into  gain. 
But  the  whole  of  these  new  acquisitions  required  garri- 
sons, and  most  of  them  were  extremely  unhealthy,  so 
that  Addington's  single  offensive  movement  necessarily 
involved  an  increased  drain  upon  the  Regular  Army,  and 
that  for  a  station  which  was  loathed  and  dreaded  as  the 
grave  of  some  twenty  or  thirty  thousand  men  during 
the  last  war. 

However,  Pitt's  policy  of  "  filching  sugar  islands  " 
was  undoubtedly  popular  with  the  mercantile  classes ; 

^  Its  establishment  was  10,296,  and,  like  the  Guards  and  the 
Cavalry  at  that  time,  the  Artillery  had  no  difficulty  in  obtaining 
recruits. 


I  NEGLECT  OF  THE  ARMY,  1803  u 

and  Addington  may  be  pardoned  if,  with  the  great  man's  1803. 
shadow  always  across  his  path,  he  fell  into  the  same  evil 
ways.  But  when,  in  these  circumstances,  Mr.  Yorke  intro- 
duced the  Army  Estimates  on  the  6th  of  June  1803,  not 
a  few  members  of  the  Commons  were  staggered  to  find 
that  he  proposed,  and  plumed  himself  on  proposing,  no 
further  increase  in  the  Regular  Establishment  than  from 
1 3 2, 000  to  138,000  men.  On  the  other  hand,  he  pointed 
with  pride  to  the  figures  of  nearly  84,000  men  which  he 
assigned  to  the  Militia.  This  complacency  brought 
upon  him  a  furious  attack  from  Windham,  who  asked 
how  men  could  be  expected  to  enlist  in  the  Regulars  for 
life,  with  liability  to  serve  in  any  part  of  the  globe,  when 
they  could  receive  far  larger  bounties  to  serve  for  a  few 
years  comfortably  at  home.  "  How,"  he  added,  "  with- 
out a  Regular  Army  can  there  be  a  possibility  of  any 
but  a  passive  and  defensive  policy,  which  must  be  alike 
ruinous  and  dishonourable  ?  "  Pitt  echoed  Windham's 
criticism,  the  meaning  of  which  will  presently  be  made 
clear,  and  joined  in  his  condemnation  of  a  purely  defen- 
sive attitude  ;  but  Addington  disarmed  opposition  by 
asserting  that,  though  he  had  indeed  dealt  with  defensive 
measures  first,  owing  to  the  vast  preparations  of  the 
enemy,  yet  the  country  would  doubtless  aiford  means 
for  offensive  operations  as  soon  as  a  favourable  oppor- 
tunity should  arise.  Beyond  question  Addington  spoke 
in  good  faith,  probably  with  a  thought  for  a  certain 
Army  of  Reserve  Bill  which  was  already  in  preparation  ; 
but  he  was  completely  at  fault  over  the  possibility  of 
turning  his  defensive  measures  to  offensive  account.  To 
estimate  the  causes  and  consequences  of  his  error,  it  is 
now  necessary  to  see  what  those  defensive  measures 
were. 


CHAPTER    II 

I 

1802.  Upon  the  peace  of  Amiens,  Addington  made  it  his  first 
business  to  pass  an  Act  ^  to  enable  Yeomanry  and  Volun- 
teer corps  to  continue  their  service  if  they  were  willing 
to  do  so  ;  for  the  various  Acts  passed  by  Pitt's 
Administration  had  provided  for  the  maintenance  of 
Volunteers  only  until  the  close  of  the  war.  The  whole 
organisation  and  system  of  Volunteers  under  Pitt  had 
been  vicious  and  false.  The  corps  made  their  own  con- 
ditions of  service,  were  supported  by  private  subscrip- 
tions, and  were  directed  by  committees  of  subscribers 
who  were  not  necessarily  holders  of  commissions.  These 
committees  addressed  the  Secretary  of  State  directly, 
and  it  was  an  open  question  whether  they  or  the  officers 
were  the  true  commanders  of  the  corps.^  But  no  effort 
was  made  by  Addington  to  reduce  chaos  to  order,  nor 
in  any  way  to  correct  what  was  amiss.  Sections  2,  3, 
and  4  of  the  English  Act  provided  that  Volunteers  and 
Yeomanry  should  be  exempt  from  the  Militia  Ballot^ 
on  attending  five  days'  exercise  every  year,  forfeiting 
that  privilege  if  discharged  fi-om  their  corps.  For  the 
rest.  Volunteers  were  relieved,  under  section  7,  from  the 
duty  on  hair-powder,  and  Yeomanry  from  the  duty  on 

^  42  Geo.  III.  cap.  66  for  Great  Britain  ;  cap.  68  for  Ireland. 

2  The  documents  concerning  the  Volunteers  of  1794  to  1801  are 
so  scanty  and  imperfect  that  it  is  impossible  to  speak  of  them  except 
in  general  terms.  So  much  as  I  have  written  above  is,  however, 
certain. 

^  It  must  be  noted  that  as  there  was  practically  no  ballot  in 
Ireland,  there  was  no  exemption. 

12 


CHAP.  II         VOLUNTEER  ACTS,  1802  13 

one  horse,  in  addition.  Corps  which,  when  called  on,  1802. 
consented  voluntarily  to  march  out  of  their  counties  to 
repel  invasion  or  to  suppress  riots  were,  under  section 
10,  entitled  to  receive  the  same  pay  as  regular  troops, 
and  were  subjected  to  military  discipline,  with  the  pro- 
viso that  they  could  be  tried  only  by  courts-martial 
composed  of  officers  of  Yeomen  or  Volunteers.  Under 
section  1 1  officers  and  men  disabled  on  active  service 
were  entitled  to  half-pay  or  to  a  Chelsea  pension  respec- 
tively ;  and  therewith  the  enactment  was  complete.  Not 
a  word  was  said  as  to  the  preservation  of  discipline 
during  the  days  of  exercise  ;  not  a  word  to  prevent  the 
multiplication  of  small  corps,  a  thing  which  had  been 
the  curse  of  the  Volunteers  from  1794  to  1801  ;  finally, 
not  a  word  as  to  pay  and  allowances,  except  in  case 
of  invasion. 

The  Act  having  been  passed,  the  Secretary  of  State 
for  War,  on  the  2nd  of  July,  sent  round  a  circular  to 
the  Lords-Lieutenant  inviting  offers  of  service,  and 
tendering  the  following  allowances :  ;^2  a  year  to 
every  Volunteer  for  his  clothing  and  appointments ; 
^60  a  year  for  every  troop  of  Yeomanry  which  counted 
not  fewer  than  forty  rank  and  file. 

A  fair  number  both  of  cavalry  and  infantry  accepted 
these  terms,  more  often  as  isolated  troops  and  companies 
than  as  regiments  or  battalions  ;  but  a  great  many 
refused  further  service,  not  seeing  any  occasion  for  such 
patriotic  display  in  time  of  peace. 

The  Irish  Volunteers  Act  differed  not  a  little  from 
the  British.  Therein  it  was  enacted  that  the  men  should 
receive  clothing,  arms,  and  pay  from  Government  while 
out  on  exercise,  which  exercise  was  not  to  exceed  two 
days  in  each  month.  Permanent  pay  also  was  allowed 
to  one  sergeant  in  each  troop  ;  and  the  provisions  seemed 
to  point  to  real  desire  for  efficiency,  until  the  third  section 
stated  expressly,  with  startling  abruptness,  that  neither 
enrolment  nor  the  receipt  of  pay  or  allowances  should 
subject  either  Volunteers  or  Yeomen  to  military  duty  or 
discipline. 


14  MILITIA  ACT  OF  1802  chap. 

1802.  The  next  measure  of  Addington's  Government  was 

a  new  Militia  Act,^  whereby  several  previous  Militia 
Acts  were  repealed,  and  the  purport  of  them,  with  some 
amendments,  re-enacted.  The  population  of  the  United 
Kingdom  at  this  time  was,  roughly  speaking,  14,500,000, 
namely,  England,  9,000,000 ;  Scotland,  1,500,000;  Ire- 
land, 4,000,000.  The  Act  (together  with  its  affiliated 
Acts^)  provided  for  raising  altogether  51,489  men, 
between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty-five,  in  Great 
Britain,  according  to  a  regular  quota  for  every  county, 
and  for  giving  the  King's  authority  to  augment  that 
number  by  one-half  on  calling  Parliament  together 
within  fourteen  days.  This  augmentation  was  known 
as  the  Supplementary  Militia,  the  original  51,489  being 
distinguished  as  the  Old  Militia — technical  terms  which 
should  be  borne  in  mind. 

All  Militiamen  were  to  be  chosen  by  ballot,  and  by 
no  other  means  whatever,  and  were  positively  forbidden, 
under  penalties  (sec.  4),  to  enlist  in  the  Regular  Army. 
The  regular  period  of  training  was  fixed  at  twenty-one 
days  annually  (sec.  88). 

The  machinery  for  the  levy  was  as  follows  : — For 
the  purposes  of  the  Militia  each  county  as  a  whole  was 
governed  by  "  General  Meetings  of  the  Lieutenancy," 
that  is  to  say,  by  a  Council  of  the  Lord-Lieutenant  and 
of  his  Deputies.  The  Lord-Lieutenant  himself  was 
appointed  by  the  Sovereign  ;  the  Deputies,  of  whom  a 
qualification  in  respect  of  property  was  required,  were 
appointed  by  the  Lord-Lieutenant,  subject  to  the 
Sovereign's  approbation.  In  the  absence  of  the  Lord- 
Lieutenant,  the  Sovereign  could  give  three  deputies  a 
commission  to  act  in  his  stead.  With  the  Council  of 
the  Lieutenancy  was  a  Secretary,  known  as  the  Clerk  of 
the  General  Meeting,  who  was  appointed  by  the  Lord- 
Lieutenant  and  removable  by  him  (sec.  18). 

Each  county  was  further  parcelled  out  into  sub- 

1  42  Geo.  III.  cap.  90. 

2  The  Affiliated  Acts  mean  those  for  the  City  of  London,  the 
Cinque  Ports,  and  the  Stannaries,  which  were  dealt  with  separately. 


II  METHOD  OF  BALLOTTING  15 

divisions,  under  the  control  of  two  or  more  Deputy-  '  1802. 
Lieutenants,  who  held  subdivision  meetings  under  the 
orders  of  the  General  Meeting,  and  had  likewise  a 
Secretary  known  as  the  Subdivision  Clerk.  Upon  the 
approach  of  a  ballot  the  General  Meeting  gave  orders 
to  the  constables  of  the  hundreds  (or  other  adminis- 
trative divisions  of  the  county)  to  draw  up  lists  of  all 
men  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty-five,  with  a 
statement  of  their  claims,  if  any,  to  exemption.  This 
order  was  passed  on  to  the  parish  constables  for  execution 
in  each  parish;  and  the  lists  when  completed  were 
affixed  to  the  door  of  the  church,  so  that  every  man 
could  see  them  and  have  the  opportunity  of  appealing 
to  the  next  subdivision-meeting,  in  case  his  claims  to 
exemption  should  have  been  omitted.  The  decision  of 
the  subdivision-meeting  upon  such  appeals  was  final,  and 
the  lists  as  amended  by  it  were  then  transmitted  by  the 
Clerk  of  the  General  Meeting  to  the  Privy  Council, 
which  was  charged  with  the  duty  of  fixing  and,  from 
time  to  time,  revising  the  quota  of  men  to  be  found  by 
each  county. 

The  numbers  of  his  county's  quota  having  been 
reported  to  the  Lord-Lieutenant,  a  General  Meeting 
decided  upon  the  number  to  be  produced  by  each  sub- 
division; and  the  subdivision-meetings  in  their  turn 
distributed  these  numbers  among  the  various  parishes. 
The  men  liable  to  service  were  drafted  into  five  classes 
(sec.  54)  :  (i)  Men  under  thirty  and  childless  ;  (2)  men 
over  thirty  and  childless  ;  (3)  all  men  having  no  children 
living  under  fourteen  years  of  age  ;  (4)  all  men  having 
but  one  child  under  fourteen ;  (5)  all  other  men 
whatsoever.  Notice  was  then  given  in  each  subdivision 
that  all  men  liable  to  be  drawn  should  attend  at  a  certain 
place  on  a  certain  day  within  three  weeks  of  the  sub- 
division-meeting; and  on  that  day  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
again  met  and  held  the  ballot. 

If  a  part  only  of  the  Militia  was  to  be  embodied, 
and  if  the  number  of  men  to  be  called  out  was  equal  to 
the  number  of  the  first,  or  first  and  second,  or  other 


i6  EXEMPTIONS  FROM  BALLOT,  1802    chap. 

1802.  succeeding  classes  in  their  order,  then  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  might  take  those  classes  complete,  without 
ballot,  and  use  the  ballot  only  for  the  remainder 
(sec.  134). 

The  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  required  to  discharge, 
without  further  claim,  all  ballotted  men  under  the  height 
of  five  feet  four  inches,  and  all  men  physically  unfit, 
provided  that  they  were  not  possessed  of  property  to  the 
value  of  ;^  100.  Exemption  was  granted  (sec.  43)  to 
peers  ;  to  all  officers  on  full  or  half  pay  in  the  Army, 
Navy,  and  Marines  ;  to  all  non-commissioned  officers 
and  men  serving  in  any  of  the  King's  other  forces  ;  to 
any  officer  who  was  serving  or  who  had  served  for  four 
years  in  the  Militia ;  to  resident  members  of  the 
universities,  clergymen,  duly  registered  teachers,  con- 
stables and  other  peace-officers,  articled  clerks,  appren- 
tices, seafaring  men  and  men  employed  in  the  royal 
arsenals,  dockyards,  or  factories  ;  to  men  free  of  the 
Company  of  Watermen  of  the  Thames  ;  and  finally,  to 
any  poor  man  (which  was  construed  under  sec.  53  to  mean 
a  man  possessing  less  than  the  value  of  j^ioo)  who  had 
more  than  one  child  born  in  lawful  wedlock.^  Besides 
these,  the  Volunteers  could  claim  their  exemption  under 
the  Volunteer  Act. 

Ballotted  men,  or,  as  they  were  frequently  called, 
lot-men,  if  they  accepted  personal  service,  were  sworn 
in  to  serve  as  privates  for  a  term  of  five  years  (sec.  41), 
after  which  time  they  were  exempt  until  their  turn 
came  in  rotation  to  be  ballotted  again.  They  were 
known  technically  as  principals^  to  distinguish  them  from 
substitutes^  the  persons  who  must  next  engage  our  atten- 
tion, for  there  were  various  means  provided  by  the  Act 
for  commutation  of  personal  service.     In  the  first  place, 

^  A  nice  point  was  raised  as  to  the  exemption  of  a  man  whose 
second  legitimate  child  was  born  after  he  had  been  ballotted,  but 
before  he  had  been  enrolled.  It  was  decided  that  in  this  case  he 
was  exempt ;  but  that  if  the  child  was  born  after  he  had  been  enrolled, 
then  he  was  not  exempt  (JV.  O.  Mi/a.  Books,  S.  W.  to  Tho. 
Wright,  26th  Jan.  1803).  How  far  this  decision  may  have  affected 
the  domestic  arrangements  of  poor  families  we  are  not  told. 


II  PAROCHIAL  SUBSTITUTES  17 

any  man  chosen  or  ballotted  was  empowered  (sec.  41)  1802. 
to  produce  a  man  "  of  the  same  county,  riding,  or  place, 
or  from  some  adjoining  county  or  place,  able  and  fit  for 
service,"  and  having  not  more  than  one  child  born  in 
lawful  wedlock,  to  serve  in  his  stead.  Such  men  were 
called  personal  substitutes,  and  were  sworn  in  to  serve 
for  five  years,  or,  if  the  Militia  were  embodied  within 
that  period,  then  for  such  further  time  as  it  might 
remain  embodied ;  or,  in  fewer  words,  till  the  close  of 
the  war. 

Again,  the  churchwardens  or  overseers  of  any  parish 
might,  by  consent  of  the  inhabitants,  produce  voluntary 
candidates  for  the  Militia  to  the  subdivision-meeting,  to  be 
accepted  in  lieu  of  men  chosen  by  ballot,  and  might  levy 
a  parochial  rate  to  pay  them  a  bounty  not  exceeding  ^6 
apiece  (sec.  42).^  Such  men  were  known  and  named 
in  the  Act,  by  an  extremely  unfortunate  confusion  of 
speech,  as  volunteers.  They  were  really  parochial  sub- 
stitutes, and  for  the  sake  of  clearness  I  shall  call  them 
throughout  by  the  name  of  parochial  substitutes.  These 
likewise  were  enrolled  for  five  years,  or  until  the  Militia 
should  be  disembodied  ;  and  under  sec.  43  previous 
service  as  a  substitute,  whether  parochial  or  personal,  did 
not  entitle  a  man  to  immunity  from  the  ballot.  No 
ballotted  man  nor  substitute  of  any  description  whatever 
could  be  enrolled  for  service  unless  first  approved  by 
a  surgeon  (sec.  52). 

Again  (sec.  136),  any  man  on  the  list  of  ballottable 
men  might  offer  himself  to  serve  in  lieu  of  a  ballotted 
man,  and  might  be  accepted  by  the  Deputy-Lieutenants, 
provided  that  he  were  not  over  thirty-five  years  of  age 
and  had  no  children  living  under  fourteen  years  of  age. 
The  service  of  such  men  was  subject  to  the  same  con- 
ditions as  if  they  had  been  actually  ballotted. 

Yet  again  (sec.  45),  any  ballotted  man  could  pur- 
chase exemption  for  five  years  by  payment  of  a  fine  of 
;^io  ;  or,  to  put  the  matter  in  different  words,  could 

^  From  this  rate  men  who  were  serving  in  the  Militia,  in  person 
or  by  substitute,  were  excused. 

C 


1 8    MILITIA  ACT,  1802,  SUMMARISED    chap. 

1802.  commute  his  term  of  five  years'  service  for  that  sum  of 
money.  But  this  privilege  was  not  extended  to  Quakers, 
who  were  required  either  to  serve  or  to  find  a  substitute ; 
and  if  any  Quaker  failed  to  do  so,  two  or  more  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  were  empowered  to  hire  a  substitute  for  him 
and  to  levy  distress  upon  his  goods  for  payment  of  the 
same  (sees.  45, 50).  The  fines  thus  collected  were  applied 
by  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  to  the  purchase  of  sub- 
stitutes for  those  persons  who  had  paid  them  ;  and 
any  surplus  remaining  thereafter  was  handed  over 
to  the  commanding  officer  of  the  County  Militia 
Regiment  to  be  included  in  the  regimental  stock-purse 
(sec.  66). 

For  the  relief  of  the  poorer  inhabitants  there  was  a 
provision  that  any  man  worth  less  than  ^^500  who 
might  be  ballotted  should,  whether  he  elected  to  serve 
in  person  or  by  substitute,  receive  from  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  a  sum  equal  to  half  the  current  price  of  a 
substitute  at  the  time,  the  money  being  raised  by  a 
parochial  rate  (sec.  122). 

The  general  and  designed  result  of  the  foregoing 
enactments,  though  it  may  not  appear  on  the  face  of 
the  Act,  was  as  follows  : — All  men  between  the  ages  of 
eighteen  and  forty-five  were  liable  to  serve  in  person  or 
by  substitute,  or  to  pay  a  fine,  unless  they  combined  the 
disabilities  of  being  physically  unfit  (including  a  shorter 
stature  than  five  feet  four  inches)  and  of  possessing  less 
than  the  value  of  ;^  100  in  property.  A  man  might  be 
blind,  deaf,  dumb,  handless  and  legless.  He  was  none 
the  less  liable  to  serve  by  substitute  or  to  pay  a  fine,  so 
long  as  he  were  of  the  right  age  and  worth  more  than 
^100  ;  and  this  is  the  explanation  of  the  relief  granted 
by  sec.  122,  quoted  in  the  preceding  paragraph.  The 
provisions  respecting  the  numbers  and  age  of  children 
in  the  cases  of  principals  and  substitutes  were  due  to  the 
fact  that  the  wives  and  families  of  Militiamen  were 
entitled  to  parochial  support  while  the  men  themselves 
were  serving  in  the  ranks.  Hence  the  criticism  of  this 
Act,  by  a  well-known  commentator  on  the  Army,  that 


II      POSITION  OF  MILITIA  SERGEANTS      19 

as  a  tax  it  was  local  and  personal,  instead  of  general  and       1802. 
imperial,   and,   as   such,   necessarily  levied   with   great 
inequality.^ 

The  only  form  of  evasion  against  which  the  Act 
pretended  to  guard  was  that  of  persons  who  fraudulently 
bound  themselves  apprentices  to  qualify  themselves  for 
exemption.  Such  persons  could  be  compelled  to  serve, 
if  detected,  and  the  masters  to  whom  they  bound  them- 
selves were  liable  to  a  fine  of  ^^lo  (sec.  49). 

To  provide  against  malingering,  it  was  enacted  that 
though  men  who  became  physically  unfit  might  be  dis- 
charged, yet  such  discharge  must  be  confirmed  by  two 
Deputy-Lieutenants  (sec.  55).  Vacancies  by  death  or 
discharge  were  filled  up  by  a  fresh  ballot  from  the  sub- 
division, and  presumably  (though  it  was  not  laid  down  by 
the  Act)  within  the  parish  from  which  the  dead  or 
discharged  man  had  been  originally  drawn  (sec.  56). 

Vacancies  through  the  promotion  of  privates  to  be 
non-commissioned  officers  were,  however,  not  filled  up 
by  ballot,  the  parish  being  conceived  to  have  fulfilled  its 
duty  by  producing  a  non-commissioned  officer  (sec.  57). 
The  point  is  worth  noting,  for  the  position  of  non-com- 
missioned officers  and  drummers  of  Militia  was  peculiar. 
They  were  sworn  in  to  serve  until  legally  discharged  by 
their  colonel,  that  is  to  say,  practically  for  life,  though 
after  twenty  years'  service  in  the  Militia  they  were 
qualified  for  a  Chelsea  pension  (sec.  86).  If  reduced 
to  the  ranks  by  a  court-martial,  non-commissioned 
officers  and  drummers  were  liable  to  serve  as  privates 
for  fifteen  months  at  ordinary  times  ;  but  if  the  Militia 
was  embodied  they  were  not  entitled  to  discharge  until 
its  disembodiment  (sec.  105).  In  the  event  of  the 
death  or  discharge  of  any  one  of  them,  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  for  the  subdivision  from  which  they  were 
drawn  might  apply  to  Quarter  Sessions  for  the  average 
price  of  a  substitute  in  the  parish  concerned,  and  so 
provide  a  man  to  take  his  place  (sec.  58). 

^  Clode,  i.  289,     But  Clode's  analysis  and  comprehension  of  the 
Militia  Acts  are  extremely  imperfect. 


20  DEFICIENCIES  IN  COUNTY  QUOTAS  chap. 

1802.  Privates  whose  time  was  within   four   months    of 

expiring  could  give  notice  if  they  were  willing  to 
prolong  their  service,  stating  the  bounty  for  which  they 
asked.  If  accepted,  they  were  treated  as  parochial  sub- 
stitutes, and  their  bounties  were  raised  by  a  parochial 
rate  (sees.  1 23,  1 24).  A  guinea  was  also  allowed  to  them 
for  renewal  of  their  necessaries  at  the  close  of  their  five 
years,  part  of  which  was  expended  by  their  captain  for 
their  benefit,  and  the  rest — by  custom  one  moiety — 
handed  over  to  them.  This  was  known  as  renewal 
money.  The  like  sum  was  paid  also  to  substitutes  at 
the  end  of  their  first  five  years'  service,  and  also  at  the 
end  of  every  three  years  over  and  above  the  original 
five  years  (sec.  126).  Substitutes  who  deserted  or 
absented  themselves  from  duty  could  be  sentenced  by 
court-martial  to  serve  in  the  Militia  for  a  limited  period, 
or  in  the  Regular  Army  for  life  (sec.  127).  Militiamen 
generally,  who  absented  themselves  or  deserted,  were 
liable  to  a  fine  of  £20  upon  conviction  before  a  Justice 
of  the  Peace,  or  six  months'  imprisonment  in  default 
(sec.  99). 

If  any  county  failed  to  produce  its  quota  of  men 
within  six  months  after  the  passing  of  the  Act,  or  within 
three  months  of  notice  given  by  the  officer  commanding 
the  Militia  regiments  of  the  county,  it  was  liable  to  a 
fine  of  £10  annually  for  every  man  deficient.  For  the 
payment  of  this  sum  Quarter  Sessions  were  required  to 
make  an  assessment  upon  parishes  at  large  or  upon  the 
particular  parishes  that  were  responsible  for  the  defici- 
encies. The  money  thus  raised  was  retained  in  the 
hands  of  the  County  Treasurers  for  three  months, 
during  which  time  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  per- 
mitted to  agree  with  men  to  enlist  voluntarily  in  the 
Militia  for  a  bounty  not  exceeding  ^10.  The  balance 
of  the  money  was  then  paid  to  the  Receiver-General  of 
the  county,  and  by  him  to  the  Imperial  Exchequer  ;  and 
after  the  Receiver-General's  receipt  for  the  same  the 
county  was  acquitted  of  its  default  for  that  year  (sees. 
158-166).     If   any  county  failed    to    raise    the    fines 


II  THE  SCOTTISH  MILITIA,   1802  21 

thus  imposed,  the  Solicitor  to  the  Treasury  was  required       '802. 
to  put  the  law  into  force  against  it  (sec.  169). 

Thus,  outside  the  cost  of  pay  and  equipment,  the 
Imperial  Treasury  was  not  concerned  with  the  Militia 
save  by  the  acceptance,  in  the  last  resort,  of  money  in 
lieu  of  men. 

A  second  Act  (42  Geo.  III.  cap.  91)  applied  the  same 
principle  mutatis  mutandis  to  Scotland,  at  the  same  time 
increasing  its  quota  of  Militia  from  6000  to  nearly  8000 
men.  Its  ten  regiments,  which  had  been  raised  in  1797 
for  the  duration  of  the  last  war  only,  were  grouped  anew 
and  reorganised  into  fifteen  battalions.^ 

1  Old  Organisation  of  the  Scottish  Militia: — 

1st  or  Argyll  i.e.  Argyll,  Dumbarton,  Bute,  Inverness. 

2nd  or  Ross-shire      i.e.  Ross,  Elgin,  Nairn,  Cromarty,  Sutherland, 

Caithness. 
3rd  or  Lanark  i.e.  Lanark. 

4th  or  Dumfries        i.e.  Dumfries,    Selkirk,   Peebles,    Roxburgh, 

Kirkcudbright,  Wigtown. 
5th  or  Fife  i.e.  Fife,  Stirling,  Kinross,  Clackmannan. 

6th  or  Aberdeen       i.e.  Aberdeen,  Banff. 
7th  or  Ayr  i.e.  Ayr,  Renfrew. 

8th  or  Forfar  i.e.  Forfar,  Kincardine. 

9th  or  Perth  i.e.  Perth. 

I  oth  or  Edinburgh    />.  Edinburgh,     Linlithgow,      Haddington, 

Berwick. 

New  Organisation  of  the  Scottish  Militia  : — 
No.  Regiment.  Colonel. 

1.  Aberdeen.  Lord  Aboyne. 

2.  Ayr.  Lord  Montgomerie. 

3.  Fife.  Lord  Crauford. 

4.  Lanark.  Marquis  of  Douglass. 

5.  Perth.  DukeofAthol. 

6.  Renfrew.  Earl  of  Glasgow. 

7.  Argyll  and  Bute.  John  Campbell. 

8.  Berwick,  Haddington,      Linlithgow,  )  g^^j  ^^  ^^^^^ 

Peebles.  J 

9.  Ross,  Caithness,  Sutherland,  Cromarty.     Lord  Seaforth. 

10.  Dumfries,  Roxburgh,  Selkirk.  Earl  of  Dalkeith. 

11.  Edinburgh  City  and  Co.  Duke  of  Buccleuch. 

12.  Forfar,  Kincardine.  M.  Douglass. 


22  THE  IRISH  MILITIA,  1802         chap. 

1802.  Both  Acts  received  the  Royal  assent  on  the  26th 
of  June  1802. 

Subsidiary  to  these  was  an  Act  to  regulate  the  Militia 
of  the  Stannaries  (42  Geo.  III.  cap.  72),  wherein  the 
general  procedure  was  the  same,  but  the  fine  for  com- 
mutation of  five  years'  service  was  ^15  instead  of  ^10. 

The  Militia  of  Ireland  was  not  dealt  with  until  the 
following  session,  in  December  1802,  when  an  Act  (43 
Geo.  III.  cap.  2)  was  passed  '*  for  the  more  speedy  and 
effectual  enrolment  of  the  Militia  of  Ireland."  The 
preamble  set  forth  that  "  the  mode  of  ballot  hath  not 
been  generally  adopted  in  Ireland,  and  that  it  might 
therefore  be  attended  with  inconvenience  to  proceed 
by  that  mode  only  "  ;  the  "  inconvenience  "  being  an 
euphemism  for  desperate  riots.  The  Lord-Lieutenant 
was  therefore  empowered  to  recruit  men  by  voluntary 
enlistment  for  the  Militia  during  the  space  of  four 
months,  offering  a  bounty  of  two  guineas  a  man.  The 
men  so  raised  were  sworn  to  serve  upon  the  same 
terms  as  the  substitutes  in  England,  that  is  to  say,  for 
five  years,  or  if  the  Militia  were  embodied  within  those 
five  years,  then  until  disembodiment.  ^^40,000  was 
set  apart  for  the  payment  of  bounties,  whence  it  may 
be  inferred  that  the  Government  desired  to  raise  about 
20,000  recruits,  though  the  ordinary  strength  of  the 
Irish  Militia  was  15,000  men.  It  is  important  to  note 
that  the  Irish  Act,  unlike  the  British  Act,  contained 
no  authority  to  raise  Supplementary  Militia. 

II 

1803.  Before  the  New  Year  had  come,   the  prospects  of 
prolonging  the  truce  of  Amiens  became  very  doubtful  ; 

New  Organisation  of  the  Scottish  Militia  : — 
No.  Regiment.  Colonel, 

13.  Inverness,  Banff,  Elgin,  Nairn.  Sir  F.  Grant. 

14.  Kirkcudbright,  Wigtown.  Sir  J.  Dal.  Hay. 

15.  Stirling,  Dunbar,  Clackmannan,  Kinross.  Dukeof  Montrose. 


II       MILITIA  AMENDMENT  ACTS,   1803      23 

and  as  the  spring  advanced  the  near  approach  of  war  1803. 
was  more  and  more  apparent.  On  the  nth  of  March 
1803 — the  very  day,  curiously  enough,  upon  which 
Napoleon  issued  his  first  orders  for  the  formation  of  a 
flotilla — the  Government  directed  the  Militia  to  be 
embodied;  and  thenceforward  measure  followed  measure 
with  astonishing  rapidity  upon  the  Statute-book. 

The  first  was  an  Act  of  one  section  (43  Geo.  III. 
cap.  19  ;  24th  March  1803),  prolonging  the  annual 
training  of  the  Militia  from  twenty-one  to  twenty- 
eight  days.  The  next  was  an  Act  (43  Geo.  III.  cap. 
33  ;  7th  April  1803)  for  doubling  the  bounty  for  Irish 
Militiamen,  a  sure  proof  that  the  men  were  not  coming 
forward  in  sufficient  numbers.  Then  came  an  Act  to 
relax  the  qualifications  of  property  required  of  Militia 
officers  in  Great  Britain  until  the  25th  of  March  1804, 
sufficient  officers  of  the  wealth  demanded  by  the  Act  of 
1802  being  impossible  to  obtain. 

It  was  none  too  soon,  for  war  was  declared  on  the 
1 6th  of  May,  and  on  the  28  th  the  Lords-Lieutenant 
were  directed  to  enrol  the  Supplementary  Militia,  that 
is  to  say,  the  additional  number,  amounting  to  one-half 
of  the  established  Militia,  authorised  by  the  Act  of 
1 802.  On  the  previous  day,  the  27th  of  May,  an  Act  had 
been  passed  to  provide  for  the  usual  parochial  relief 
of  families  of  Embodied  Militiamen  (43  Geo.  III.  caps. 
47,  89)  ;  and  this  was  followed  three  weeks  later  by  an 
Act  for  the  more  speedy  completion  of  the  Militia  (43 
Geo.  III.  cap.  50,  nth  June  1803).  This  last  provided 
that  within  ten  days  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  should 
meet  and  fill  up  all  vacancies  in  the  Militia  without 
inquiry  as  to  their  cause  ;  that  Commandants  of  Regi- 
ments should  from  time  to  time  notify  to  the  Clerks 
of  General  Meetings  the  number  of  men  wanting  to 
their  full  establishment ;  and  that  the  Deputy-Lieuten- 
ants should  meet  and  supply  all  deficiencies  within  seven 
days  after  receiving  notice  from  the  Clerk  (sec.  i). 
Further,  the  fine  of  ^10  for  every  man  deficient  in 
the  quota  of  each  county  was  ordained  to  be  repeated 


24  INCREASE  OF  FINES,  1803  chap. 

1803.  cumulatively  every  quarter  until  the  deficiency  should 
be  made  good  (sec.  4).  A  new  oath  was  also  required 
of  a  Militiaman  to  the  effect,  among  other  matters,  that 
he  had  no  rupture,  nor  ever  was  troubled  with  fits,  and 
was  no  ways  disabled  by  lameness  or  otherwise  (sec.  9 
and  Schedule  B).  The  fine  for  commutation  of  five  years 
service  was  also  raised,  from  the  28th  of  May  onward, 
from  ^10  to  ^15  (sec.  10).  Lastly,  at  the  very  end 
came  a  section  threatening  high  constables  and  con- 
stables, as  well  as  adjutants  or  non-commissioned  officers, 
with  a  fine  of  ^^50  if  they  should  insure,  or  in  any  way 
be  concerned  in  insuring,  any  persons  for  the  provision 
of  substitutes — a  very  significant  matter  which  shall  be 
duly  explained  in  its  place. 

So  much  for  the  Militia ;  it  is  now  necessary  to  turn 
for  a  moment  to  the  Volunteers.  On  the  3  ist  of  March 
the  Government  issued  circulars  inviting  the  services 
of  more  Volunteers  under  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802, 
setting  forth  the  pay  and  allowances  which  they  were 
prepared  to  grant  to  them  as  well  as  the  number  of 
days'  training  required  of  them,  and  promising  exemption 
from  the  Militia  ballot  to  those  who  fulfilled  these 
conditions.  This,  as  shall  be  told  later,  caused 
some  increase  in  the  number  of  Volunteers  ;  and  the 
Government  followed  this  up  by  producing  an  Act  to 
provide  more  effectually  for  the  defence  and  security  of 
the  realm  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  55,  nth  June  1803),  a 
measure  which  I  shall  call  by  the  name  of  the  First 
Defence  Act. 

Hereby  the  Lords-Lieutenant  of  the  United  Kingdom 
were  required  to  procure  returns  of  all  able-bodied  men 
between  the  ages  of  fifteen  and  sixty,  distinguishing 
those  who  were  already  serving  in  the  Yeomanry  or 
Volunteers,  those  who  were  willing  to  serve  in  defence 
of  the  country  (stating  their  terms),  those  who  were 
willing  to  serve  gratuitously  or  for  hire  as  waggoners, 
pioneers,  and  the  like,  and  those  who  from  age,  infirmity, 
or  extreme  youth  were  incapable  of  service.  The  Lieu- 
tenants were  further  ordered  to  furnish  particulars  as  to 


II  THE  FIRST  DEFENCE  ACT  25 

vehicles,  horses,  boats,  cattle,  food,  and  forage,  so  as  to  1803. 
enable  them  to  be  removed  or  utilised  in  case  of 
invasion  (sec.  i).  The  King  was  empowered  to  com- 
mand the  Lords-Lieutenant  to  appoint  officers,  approved 
by  him,  to  train  men  who  were  willing  to  be  armed 
(sec.  2).  General  Meetings  and  subdivision-meetings 
could  be  held,  as  under  the  Militia  laws,  to  enforce  the 
Act  (sees.  3-6).  The  King  was  empowered  to  order 
the  destruction  of  buildings  and  the  destruction  or 
removal  of  waggons,  cattle,  etc.,  in  case  of  emergency 
(sec.  7).  Persons  enrolled  in  Volunteer  corps  after 
the  passing  of  the  Act  were  not  to  be  called  out  except 
according  to  their  offers  of  service,  nor  except  in  case  of 
invasion  or  imminent  danger  of  invasion  (sec.  8).  The 
King  was  authorised  to  treat  for  the  purchase  of  land 
necessary  for  military  purposes  ;  and,  in  case  of  urgent 
need,  machinery  was  provided  for  compelling  its  sale 
(sec.  10).  Provision  was  also  made  for  compensation 
to  the  owners  of  property  destroyed  in  case  of  invasion 
or  threat  of  invasion  (sec.  1 1). 

This  Act  was  apparently  designed  to  encourage  men 
to  enrol  themselves  in  the  Volunteers  ;  but  it  was,  on 
the  face  of  it,  a  half-hearted  measure,  and  it  is  difficult 
to  see  why  the  Lieutenants  should  have  been  put  to  the 
trouble  of  ascertaining  whether  men  were  willing  to  serve 
in  defence  of  their  country,  when  the  King  had  the 
undoubted  right  to  call  on  them  to  serve  whether  willing 
or  unwilling.  However,  the  Act  was  circulated  in  the 
counties  on  24th  June  for  what  it  might  be  worth. 

Then  came  a  new  complication.  Sailors  were  wanted 
for  the  Navy,  and  a  good  many  seafaring  men  had  been 
enrolled  in  the  Militia,  probably  as  substitutes,  being 
tempted  either  by  the  bounty  or  by  this  opportunity  of 
escaping  impressment.  An  Act  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  62)^ 
was  passed  on  the  24th  of  June  authorising  all  such  men  to 
be  discharged  from  the  Militia  into  the  fleet,  provided 
that  not  more  than  one-tenth  of  the  full  number  of 

^  A  similar  Act  for  Ireland  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  76)  was  passed  on 
4th  July  1803. 


26  FURTHER  MILITIA  ACTS  chap. 

1803.  privates  In  any  regiment  were  so  discharged  at  any  one 
time.  The  men  on  being  taken  into  the  Navy  were  to 
receive  the  usual  bounty  granted  to  seamen,  and  were 
bound  to  serve  till  the  end  of  the  war  and  until  three 
months  after  the  ratification  of  a  definitive  treaty  of 
peace.  Their  late  colonels  were  authorised  to  fill  their 
places  by  the  enlistment  of  voluntary  recruits,^  by  beat 
of  drum  or  otherwise,  and  were  to  receive  ten  guineas 
a  man  for  the  purpose,  which  sum  was  to  be  ultimately 
charged  to  the  account  of  the  Navy.  Thus  to  the  three 
different  descriptions  of  recruits  already  supplied  to  the 
Militia  under  the  Militia  Act,  viz.  lotmen,  personal 
substitutes,  and  parochial  substitutes,  there  was  added  a 
fourth — voluntary  enlisters  for  an  increased  bounty. 
Moreover,  as  the  Militiamen  transferred  to  the  Navy 
were  not  required  to  disgorge  the  bounty  which  they 
had  received  upon  entering  the  Militia,  the  country  was 
put  to  the  expense  of  paying  twice  over  for  their  services. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  seamen  and  seafaring  men 
were  exempted  from  the  Militia  ballot  under  section  43 
of  the  Militia  Act  of  1802  ;  but  there  was  no  provision 
to  prevent  them  from  being  enrolled  either  as  principals 
or  as  substitutes. 

Yet  another  little  Act  was  rendered  necessary  by 
the  fact  that,  though  the  Militia  Act  of  1802  duly 
provided  for  raising  the  Supplementary  Militia,  it  had 
omitted  the  means  of  supplying  the  increased  numbers 
with  a  due  proportion  of  officers.  This  defect  was 
accordingly  made  good  by  an  Act  for  Augmenting  the 
Number  of  Field  Officers  and  other  Officers  of  Militia 
within  Great  Britain  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  71,  8th  July 
1803. 

Ill 

Meanwhile  the  Government  had  decided,  or  thought 
that  it  had  decided,  upon  a  definite  plan  for  Volunteers. 
The  Secretary  of  State  accordingly  informed  the  Lords- 

^  They  are  called  volunteers  under  the  Act,  but  I  have  avoided 
the  word  to  save  confusion. 


II  ARMY  OF  RESERVE  ACT  27 

Lieutenant  of  the  fact  in  a  circular  of  the  20th  of  June,  1803. 
intimating  at  the  same  time  that  no  Volunteers  accepted 
after  the  i6th  of  June  should  be  exempt  from  the  ballot 
for  a  new  force,  which  was  about  to  be  called  into  exist- 
ence. On  that  same  day,  the  20th  of  June,  Mr.  Yorke 
introduced  the  measures  for  the  creation  of  this  new 
force.  These,  though  entitled  the  Additional  Force 
Acts,  became  better  known  as  the  Army  of  Reserve 
Acts  (England,  43  Geo.  III.  cap.  82  ;  Scotland, 
cap.  83  ;  Ireland,  cap.  85  ;  6th  July  1803).  The  Acts 
ordained  that  there  should  be  raised  by  ballot,  under 
the  Militia  laws,  34,000  men  for  England,  6000  for 
Scotland,  and  10,000  for  Ireland.-'  Exemption,  over 
and  above  the  exemptions  granted  by  the  Militia  Acts 
of  1802,  was  given  to  poor  men  who  had  more  than 
one  child  born  in  lawful  wedlock  under  ten  years  of 
age,  or  who  were  infirm  ;  and  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
were  further  empowered  to  discharge  any  ballotted  man 
who  was  unfit  for  service  through  infirmity  or  otherwise, 
if  his  worldly  possessions  did  not  amount  to  the  value 
of  ^100  (sees.  6,  13).^  Exemption  was  also  granted  to 
any  who  had  served  personally  or  by  substitute  in  the 
Militia  (unless  their  turn  to  be  ballotted  should  in  rota- 
tion have  come  round  again),  and  to  all  Volunteers  and 
Yeomanry  who  had  been  enrolled  and  had  entered  their 
names  on  the  muster-roll  before  the  22nd  of  June  1803  ; 
provided  that,  in  the  case  of  country  corps,  their  offer 
of  service  extended,  in  event  of  invasion,  to  the  whole 
of  their  military  district,  or  in  the  case  of  London, 
Bristol,  Exeter,  Liverpool,  Chester,  Manchester,  Hull, 
Norwich,  Leeds,  York,  Sheffield  and  Birmingham, 
Edinburgh  and  Glasgow,  to  the  defence  of  these  cities 
and  their  respective  vicinities.  Men  who  had  served  in 
the  Army,  or  as  substitutes,  personal  or  parochial,^  in 

1  Besides  these,  the  City  of  London,  which  by  charter  was  exempt 
from  furnishing  men  for  military  service,  volunteered  to  raise  800 
men  for  the  Army  of  Reserve,  and  was  empowered  to  do  so  by  43 
Geo.  III.  cap.  loi  ;  27th  July  1803. 

2  The  references  are  to  the  English  Act. 

^  The  words  of  the  Act  are  "  substitutes  or  volunteers,"  as  usual 


2  8  ARMY  OF  RESERVE  ACT  chap. 

1803.  the  Militia,  and  had  been  discharged  therefrom,  were 
expressly  excepted  from  this  exemption  (sec.  8). 

The  standard  of  height  for  the  Army  of  Reserve 
was  five  feet  two  inches  only,  if  the  man  were  "  other- 
wise able-bodied  and  fit  for  service  "  (sec.  9)  ;  and  it 
was  enacted  that  notice  to  a  ballotted  man's  wife,  family, 
or  servant  was  to  be  sufficient  to  subject  him  to  the 
penalties  of  desertion  if  he  did  not  present  himself 
within  fourteen  days  of  such  notice. 

Service  could  be  commuted  in  two  ways  :  (i)  by 
producing  a  substitute  of  the  same  or  some  adjoining 
county,  the  limitation  placed  by  the  Militia  Act  upon 
the  number  of  a  substitute's  children  being  removed 
(sec.  14)  ;  (2)  by  payment  of  a  fine  of  ;^20,  which, 
however,  did  not  purchase  immunity  from  the  ballot 
for  more  than  one  year.  Ballotted  men  who  neglected 
to  pay  this  fine  or  to  find  a  substitute  could  be  compelled 
to  serve  (sec.  15).  Of  each  fine  of  ;^20  one-half  was 
paid  to  the  overseers  to  provide  a  parochial  sub- 
stitute (sec.  17),  and  the  remainder  to  the  Paymaster- 
General  of  the  Army  ;  and,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Militia, 
parishes  were  empowered  to  evade  a  ballot,  in  whole  or 
in  part,  by  producing  "  volunteers,"  that  is  to  say, 
parochial  substitutes,  and  paying  them  the  "  average 
price  of  a  substitute  "  out  of  the  parochial  rates.  If  the 
number  of  parochial  substitutes  presented  before  the 
ballot  by  any  subdivision  amounted  to  two-thirds  of  its 
quota,  the  ballot  could  be  suspended  for  six  days,  and 
these  days  of  grace  could  be  still  further  prolonged  by 
the  Royal  consent,  to  give  time  for  the  production  of 
the  remaining  third  (sec.  22).  It  was  also  ordained 
that  half  the  current  price  of  a  substitute,  according  to 
the  estimate  of  the  Deputy-Lieutenants,  should  be  paid 
to  every  man  who  served  in  person  or  by  substitute, 

without  defining  what  description  of  Volunteer  is  intended,  though 
(as  the  reader  may  have  remarked)  the  word  Volunteer  has  already, 
in  the  Acts  already  cited,  been  used  in  three  different  senses.  I 
take  the  purport  of  the  Act,  however,  to  have  been  that  no  service 
in  the  Militia,  except  in  person  or  by  (not  as)  a  substitute,  was  to 
grant  exemption. 


II  ARMY  OF  RESERVE  ACT  29 

provided  that  his  worldly  estate  was  less  than  ^^500  in  1803. 
value  (sees.  23,  25).  Moreover,  every  principal  upon 
accepting  service,  was  to  receive  two  guineas  bounty,  and 
every  substitute  one  guinea,  from  the  general  funds  of 
the  county,  the  money  being  paid  to  the  captains  of  the 
companies  and  accounted  for  by  them  to  the  men  (sees. 
25,  26).  It  may  be  reckoned  that  each  man  received 
one-half  of  this  sum  after  deduction  of  half  a  guinea  for 
necessaries. 

All  men  enrolled  under  the  Act  were  sworn  to 
serve  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  Channel  Islands  only, 
principals  for  five  years,  substitutes  for  five  years  or 
until  six  months  after  a  definitive  peace.  All  enrolled 
men,  whether  principals  or  substitutes,  were  further 
required  to  swear  that  they  were  not  ruptured  nor 
subject  to  fits,  nor  otherwise  physically  disabled,  and 
that  they  were  not  apprentices,  seamen,  members  of  the 
Army,  Navy,  Marines,  or  Militia  (sec.  19).  After  enrol- 
ment they  could  either  be  formed  into  new  corps  or 
embodied  in  old  regiments,  though  never  outside  the 
United  Kingdom  and  Channel  Islands,  and  they  were 
to  be  subject  to  the  Mutiny  Act  (sec.  29).  Vacancies 
through  death  or  discharge  were  to  be  filled  up,  as  in 
the  Militia,  by  ballot  (sec.  31)  ;  and  the  wives  and 
families  of  Army  Reserve  men  were  entitled  to  parochial 
support  in  the  same  way  as  Militiamen  (sec.  33).  They 
were  allowed  to  enlist  into  the  Regular  Army  if  they 
wished  ;  and  in  this  case  the  parishes  were  not  compelled 
to  fill  the  vacancies  thus  made  (sec.  33).  Colonels  of 
regiments  were  required  to  furnish  lists  of  vacancies  to 
the  Quarter  Sessions  of  each  county  on  the  29th  of 
September  1803  ;  and  for  every  man  deficient  of  the 
quota  a  fine  of  j^20  was  to  be  imposed,  a  further  fine 
of  the  same  sum  being  added  cumulatively  every  quarter 
until  the  deficiency  should  be  made  good  (sec.  35).  It 
was  specially  added  that  the  raising  of  men  under  this 
Act  was  to  be  no  excuse  for  not  levying  men  as  usual 
for  the  embodied  Militia. 

The  Scottish  Act  was  the  same   mutatis  mutandis. 


30  ARMY  OF  RESERVE  ACT  chap. 

1803.  except  that  the  fines  for  commutation  of  service  were 
to  be  made  over  entirely  to  the  parish  authorities  for 
the  provision  of  substitutes,  any  remaining  surplus 
being  remitted  to  the  Paymaster -General  of  the 
Army. 

The  Irish  Act  enacted  that  the  ballot  should  be 
employed  to  raise  the  Army  of  Reserve  (sec.  11),  but 
if  five  members  of  any  General  Meeting  were  of  opinion 
that  the  men  could  be  more  expeditiously  raised  by  beat 
of  drum,  the  Lord-Lieutenant  might  authorise  them  to 
dispense  with  the  ballot  (sec.  38).  If  within  five  weeks 
of  authorisation  the  county  raised  two-thirds  of  its 
quota  by  voluntary  enlistment,  the  Lord-Lieutenant 
could  grant  it  three  weeks'  grace  to  raise  the  remainder. 
If  without  such  authority  from  the  Lord-Lieutenant 
the  full  quota  was  not  raised  in  six  weeks,  or  if  the  three 
weeks  of  grace  proved  to  be  unavailing,  then  appeal 
must  be  made  to  the  ballot. 

Judging  from  the  surface  of  this  Act,  the  Govern- 
ment's intention  was  to  raise  by  ballot  50,000  additional 
Militiamen.  The  points  wherein  members  of  the  Army 
of  Reserve  mainly  difi^ered  from  Militiamen  were 
that  they  could  be  draft:ed  into  second  battalions  of  the 
Regular  Regiments  at  home  ;  that  they  could  enlist 
from  these  for  general  service  in  the  Regular  Army ; 
that  they  need  not  be  more  than  five  feet  two  inches 
in  height ;  and  that  substitutes  could  be  men  with 
any  number  of  children. 

This  measure  had  not  been  law  for  a  fortnight 
when,  on  the  i8th  of  July,  the  Government  brought 
in  yet  another  bill  to  amend  the  Defence  Act  of  the 
nth  of  June,  "and  to  enable  His  Majesty  more 
speedily  and  eff^ectually  to  exercise  his  ancient  and 
undoubted  prerogative  in  requiring  the  military  service 
of  his  liege  subjects  in  case  of  invasion  of  the  realm." 
This  bill  passed  on  the  27th  of  July,  and  was  known  as 
the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  96),  the 
execution  of  which  was  as  usual  thrown  upon  the  Lords- 
Lieutenant  and  their  Deputies,  under  the  machinery  of 


II  LEVY  EN  MASSE  ACT  31 

the  Militia  Laws.  They  were  required  first  to  obtain  1803. 
lists  of  all  men  between  the  ages  of  seventeen  and  fifty- 
five  (sec.  3),  and  to  sort  them  into  four  classes  :  viz.  ( i ) 
unmarried  men  under  thirty,  with  no  child  living  under 
ten  years  of  age  ;  (2)  unmarried  men  between  thirty 
and  fifty,  with  no  child  as  aforesaid  ;  (3)  married  men 
from  seventeen  to  thirty,  with  not  more  than  two 
children  living  under  ten  years  of  age  ;  (4)  all  other 
persons  (sec.  4).  Exemption  was  granted  to  the  Judges 
of  the  Courts  of  Law,  to  persons  too  infirm  for  service, 
clergymen,  schoolmasters,  Quakers,  officers  and  men  actu- 
ally serving  in  the  Army,  Navy,  Marines,  Militia,  and 
Volunteers,  Lords-Lieutenant,  Deputy-Lieutenants,  and 
peace  officers  (sec.  12).  But  ministers,  churchwardens, 
and  parochial  officers  at  large  were  all  required  to  help 
in  making  out  the  lists  (sec.  13).  This  done,  the  King 
could  direct  any  parishes  to  be  provided  with  arms, 
which  arms  were  to  be  stored  in  the  church  or  other 
convenient  place  under  the  care  of  the  churchwardens, 
acting  under  the  directions  of  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
(sec.  25).  The  King  could  order  the  three  first  classes 
to  be  trained  in  the  use  of  arms  for  two  hours  at  least 
on  every  Sunday  (or  other  convenient  day)  in  the  week, 
for  the  entire  period  between  the  25  th  of  March  and 
the  25  th  of  December,  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  being 
held  responsible  for  such  training  (sec.  27).  In  case  of 
emergency  the  King  could  further  require  them  to  be 
trained,  before  Christmas  1803,  on  successive  days 
during  three  or  more  weeks  as  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
might  arrange,  the  total  number  of  successive  days  not 
to  fall  below  fourteen  or  rise  above  twenty  (sec.  28). 
The  Deputy  -  Lieutenants  could  further  appoint  a 
captain,  two  lieutenants,  and  an  ensign  to  every  120 
men  (subject  to  removal  by  the  King),  and  the 
captains  could  appoint  non-commissioned  officers  (sec. 
30).  The  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  also  empowered 
to  hire  out-pensioners  to  train  their  men,  and  to  pay 
them  not  more  than  half-  a  -  crown  a  day  out  of  the 
parochial   rates  (sec.   32)  ;    but  a  constable  was  also 


32  LEVY  EN  MASSE  ACT  chap. 

1803.  required  to  be  present,  under  pain  of  ten  shillings  fine. 
The  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  to  appoint  days  of  exer- 
cise, and  residents  within  four  miles  of  the  place  of 
muster  were  subject  to  a  fine  of  five  shillings  in  the 
case  of  the  rich,  and  one  shilling  in  the  case  of  the  poor, 
if  they  failed  to  attend  ;  the  above  fines  being  raised 
respectively  to  forty  shillings  and  five  shillings  for  non- 
attendance  on  three  successive  days.  If  the  classes 
should  be  called  up  for  extraordinary  training  under 
sec.  28,  the  labouring  men  were  to  be  entitled  to 
pay  of  one  shilling  for  each  attendance  (sec.  37).  Any 
man  misconducting  himself  during  exercise  could  be 
haled  before  a  Deputy- Lieutenant  or  Justice  of  the 
Peace,  and  fined  five  shillings  or,  in  default,  imprisoned 
for  a  week  (sec.  44).  In  case  of  invasion,  or  imminent 
danger  of  invasion,  the  King  ^  was  to  direct  the  whole  or 
part  of  the  men  enrolled  under  the  Act,  either  to  be 
embodied  and  placed  in  existing  regiments  of  Regulars, 
Militia,  and  Fencibles,  or  to  be  formed  into  new  corps. 
When  thus  embodied  the  levies  were  liable  to  march  to 
any  part  of  Great  Britain  and  were  subject  to  the 
Mutiny  Act  (sec.  44).  The  King  was  also  empowered 
to  give  provisional  orders  for  embodiment  previous  to 
invasion  (sec.  48)  ;  but  no  man  serving  under  the  Act 
could,  under  any  pretence  whatever,  be  compelled  to 
serve  outside  Great  Britain.  The  Lieutenants  were 
further  required  to  fix  places  of  assembly  and  to 
arrange  signals  for  drawing  out  the  men  ;  and  such 
persons  as  disobeyed  the  order  or  signal  to  assemble 
were  to  be  deemed  deserters  (sec.  50).  If  any  man 
presented  himself  on  horseback,  armed  and  equipped  at 
his  own  expense,  he  was  to  be  attached  to  some  corps  of 
cavalry,  and  not  compelled  to  serve  with  the  infantry. 

If  only  a  part  of  the  classes  was  to  be  embodied, 
the  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  to  choose  the  required 
number  by  ballot  (sec.  52)  ;  but  in  places  where 
Volunteer  corps  were  formed,  or  where  a  number  of 

^  The  words  are  "  His  Majesty  shall  order  and  direct."     (The 
italics  are  mine.) 


II  LEVY  EN  MASSE  ACT  33 

men  of  any  age  between  seventeen  and  fifty,  equal  to  1803. 
three-fourths  of  the  first  class,  engaged  themselves  to 
serve  as  Volunteers,  and  to  march  to  any  part  of  Great 
Britain,  the  King  was  empowered  to  suspend  the  train- 
ing prescribed  by  the  Act.  For  the  rest,  two  guineas 
were  to  be  paid  to  every  man  when  called  out  to  repel 
invasion,  in  order  to  provide  him  with  necessaries,  and 
one  guinea  to  enable  him  to  return  home  after  expul- 
sion of  the  enemy  (sees.  59,  60).  Their  wives  and 
families  were  also  entitled  to  parochial  relief  during 
their  absence,  as  under  the  provisions  of  the  Militia 
Act  (sec.  61).  Meanwhile  it  was  expressly  provided 
that  this  Act  should  not  exempt  men  from  the  ballot 
for  the  Militia  or  the  Army  of  Reserve  (sec.  62). 

On  the  same  day  (27th  July)  there  was  passed 
another  Act  for  the  more  speedy  completion  of  the 
Militia  and  the  Army  of  Reserve  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  lOo), 
making  men  who  refused  to  be  examined  for  their  fit- 
ness for  the  Militia  liable  to  compulsory  service,  if 
found  physically  able,  and  lowering  the  standard  of 
substitutes  for  the  Militia  to  the  height  of  five  feet  two 
inches.  Both  provisions  showed  clearly  enough  that 
men  were  difficult  to  obtain. 

Then,  though  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  was  the 
second  of  its  kind,  it  had  hardly  been  passed  before  it 
was  found  to  need  amendment.  No  provision  had 
been  made  for  exonerating  persons  who  changed  their 
parish,  or  who  went  abroad,  from  the  penalties  imposed 
by  the  Act.  The  King  had  been  empowered  to 
remove  officers  appointed  by  the  Lords-Lieutenant, 
but  no  power  had  been  given  to  the  Lords-Lieutenant 
to  supply  the  vacancy  by  a  fresh  appointment.  The 
number  of  non-commissioned  officers  allowed  under 
the  Act  was  insufficient,  and,  finally,  section  32  forbade 
the  Deputy-Lieutenants  to  hire  any  sergeant-instructors 
except  out-pensioners  of  Chelsea.  All  these  matters 
were  set  right  by  the  Levy  en  Masse  Amendment  Act 
(43  Geo.  III.  cap.  120;  nth  Aug.  1803).  One  im- 
portant alteration  was  also  added,  namely,  that  if  the 

D 


34  THE  BILLETING  ACT  chap. 

1803.  number  of  Volunteers  in  any  county  were  satisfactory 
to  the  King,  he  could  suspend  the  operation  of  the 
Levy  en  Masse  Act,  even  though  they  did  not  amount 
to  the  prescribed  tale  of  three-fourths  of  the  first  class 
(sec.  i). 

On  the  same  day,  however,  the  nth  of  August, 
yet  another  Act  was  passed,  which  was  fraught  with 
consequences  far  more  serious.  This  bore  the  innocent 
appellation  of  an  Act  to  authorise  the  billeting  of 
Yeomanry  and  Volunteers  when  assembled  for  training, 
and  was  known  as  the  Billeting  Act  (43  Geo.  III.  cap. 
121).  The  measure  certainly  contained  provisions  to 
justify  its  title  ;  but  it  contained  also  much  more.  For  it 
ordained  the  qualification  of  an  effective  Yeoman  to 
be  twelve  days'  exercise,  and  of  an  effective  Infantry 
Volunteer  to  be  twenty-four  days'  exercise  in  the  year  ; 
and  it  exempted  all  such  effective  men  from  the  ballot 
not  only  under  the  Army  Reserve  Act,  but  under  any 
future  Act  to  raise  an  Additional  Force  (sees,  i  and  2). 
The  measure  contained  also  two  important  provisions  of 
another  kind.  Section  9  subjected  the  Yeomanry  and 
Volunteers  to  the  Mutiny  Act,  when  called  out  to  repel 
invasion ;  while  section  1 1  removed  them  from  the 
control  of  the  Lords  -  Lieutenant  in  the  same  emer- 
gency, and  placed  them  under  the  Generals  command- 
ing districts.  Section  13  vested  funds  subscribed  for 
Volunteer  and  Yeomanry  corps,  as  well  as  arms 
and  stores  purchased  therewith,  in  the  officers  com- 
manding those  corps  ;  and  section  14  made  it  lawful 
for  such  Volunteers  as  refused  to  pay  sums  required 
from  them  under  the  rules  of  their  corps  to  be  haled 
before  a  Justice  of  the  Peace,  who  had  power  to  cause 
the  same,  together  with  a  fine  of  double  the  amount,  to 
be  levied  by  distress,  if  necessary,  and  to  be  paid  to  the 
general  stock  of  the  corps. 

The  meaning  of  these  two  last  provisions  shall  in 
its  place  be  more  fully  explained.  For  the  present  it  is 
enough  to  draw  the  reader's  attention  to  them,  and  to 
point  out  that  section    14  gave  the  only  power  that 


II  THE  LORDS-LIEUTENANT  35 

existed,  so  far,  for  enforcing  discipline  among  Volun-       1803. 
teers  until  called  out  to  repel  invasion. 

Yet  another  Act  of  the  same  date  (43  Geo.  III. 
England,  cap.  123  ;  Scotland,  cap.  124;  nth  Aug. 
1803)  rectified  a  mistake  in  section  5  of  the  Army  of 
Reserve  Acts,  and  exempted  men  who  were  serving 
personally  or  by  substitute  in  the  Militia  from  being 
ballotted  for  the  Army  of  Reserve,  unless  their  turn  to 
be  ballotted  had  come  back  in  rotation,  and  conversely 
delivered  those  who  were  serving  personally  or  by  sub- 
stitute in  the  Army  of  Reserve  from  the  ballot  for  the 
Militia. 

With  this  enactment  the  session  closed ;  and  the 
wearisome  statement  of  the  Acts  of  Parliament  being 
for  the  present  complete,  we  must  look  next  to  the  men 
who  were  required  to  enforce  them. 

IV 

The  execution  of  the  Militia  Act  and  its  affiliated 
Acts  was  committed,  as  we  have  seen,  to  the  Lords- 
Lieutenant  of  Counties.  Necessarily,  therefore,  much 
depended  upon  their  goodwill,  their  zeal,  and  their 
capacity.  Speaking  generally,  it  may  be  said  that  they 
performed  their  duties  with  admirable  intelligence, 
energy,  and  tact.  There  were,  of  course,  men  of  all 
descriptions  among  them.  A  few  like  Lord  Eglinton, 
Lord  Townsend,  the  Duke  of  Northumberland,  and 
the  Duke  of  Richmond  were  military  officers  of  wide 
experience,  considerable  technical  knowledge,  and 
original  ideas  ;  but  the  majority  were  simply  sensible, 
industrious,  and  capable  country  gentlemen,  whose  rank 
and  character  gave  them  deserved  influence  among  their 
peers,  and  whose  weight  was  sufficient  to  bear  down 
anything  like  captious  criticism  or  opposition  among 
their  subordinates.  A  certain  number  were  of  course 
fussy,  self-important,  and  inclined  to  multiply  hard 
questions  and  to  lengthen  out  correspondence  ;  but 
these  were  not  many  nor,  for  all  their  defects,  the  least 


36        LIEUTENANTS'  DIFFICULTIES       chap. 

1803.  patriotic  or  efficient.  Three  only  in  the  whole  of  the 
United  Kingdom  seem  to  have  been  thoroughly  unfit 
for  their  place  ;  and  of  these  one  was  a  sensitive  mag- 
nate of  slender  intellect,  who  delighted  in  raising 
difficulties,  the  second  was  disabled  by  age  and  infirmity, 
and  the  third  was  accused  of  giving  commissions  in  the 
Volunteers  to  uncertificated  bankrupts  in  order  to  annoy 
a  brother  landlord  who  was  politically  opposed  to  him.^ 
In  Scotland,  where  Lords-Lieutenant  and  Militia  were 
new  things,  the  jealousies  of  county  against  county 
often  found  expression  through  their  administrative 
chiefs,  but  this  fault  really  lay  rather  in  the  body  of 
the  Scottish  people  than  in  the  individuals  directly 
concerned. 

Probably  the  greatest  trouble  of  the  Lords-Lieu- 
tenant all  over  Great  Britain  lay  with  brother  magnates 
of  as  high  position  as  themselves  who,  though  to  the 
last  degree  loyal,  patriotic,  and  generous,  often  wanted 
to  conduct  matters  according  to  their  own  ideas,  to 
erect  the  corps  which  they  had  raised,  and  which  no 
one  but  themselves  could  have  raised,  into  independent 
units,  and  to  employ  them  only  upon  such  service  as 
they  themselves  considered  appropriate.  Such  men 
required  to  be  handled  with  much  delicacy  and  tact. 
If  their  political  opinions  differed  from  those  of  the 
Lieutenant,  they  scented  a  job  in  every  order  and  every 
appointment ;  and  it  was  only  by  timely  concessions 
and  judicious  flattery  that  they  were  kept  in  compara- 
tive subordination  and  good-humour.  One  of  their 
worst  failings  was  their  preference  for  addressing  the 
Secretary  of  State  direct,  instead  of  through  the  Lord- 
Lieutenant,  a  fault  which  it  was  not  always  easy  for 
the  latter,  if  he  happened  to  be  a  personal  friend,  to 
correct  or  reprove. 

The  work  thrown  upon  the  Lords-Lieutenant  was 
in  many  cases  extremely  heavy.  Devon,  Lancashire, 
Hampshire,  and  the  West   Riding  of  Yorkshire  were 

*  I.D.  vol.  ii.  Berks,  passim  ;  vol.  xxxiv.  Worcestershire^ 
passim  j  vol.  xii.  Edinburgh,  C.  Hope  to  S.S.  25th  Aug.  1803. 


II       INDUSTRY  OF  THE  LIEUTENANTS     37 

the  counties  in  which,  owing  to  density  of  population,  1803. 
or  extent  of  territory,  or  difficulty  of  communication, 
or  to  all  three  combined,  the  demands  upon  them  were 
greatest ;  but  in  none  of  the  maritime  counties  were 
their  duties  light.  Curiously  enough,  nearly  all  of  them 
— even  such  great  men  as  the  Duke  of  Portland  and 
Lord  Fitzwilliam — wrote  the  whole  of  their  numerous 
letters  with  their  own  hands.  A  very  few  always 
employed  a  clerk,  either  because  they  were  crippled  by 
gout  or,  in  at  least  one  case,  because  the  Lieutenant's 
own  handwriting  was  illegible.  The  Lieutenant  of 
Devon  frequently  used  his  wife  as  his  amanuensis,  and 
it  is  probable  that  others  did  the  same. 

Apart  from  their  correspondence,  the  Lords-Lieu- 
tenant of  necessity  were  constantly  making  journeys  to 
their  provincial  capitals,  to  other  centres  of  population, 
and  to  the  most  important  of  their  neighbours  and 
friends,  either  to  consult  them  or  to  reconcile  differ- 
ences and  put  an  end  to  quarrels.  In  many  counties, 
where  the  roads  followed  the  old  tracks  chosen  to  suit 
the  peculiar  requirements  of  pack-horses,  riding  was 
practically  the  only  means  of  travelling  from  place  to 
place  ;  and  it  must  have  been  no  uncommon  thing  for 
the  Lieutenants  to  be  in  the  saddle  at  dawn  in  order 
to  ride  thirty  or  forty  miles  to  a  county  meeting  and 
return  before  dark.^  The  postal  arrangements  were 
very  primitive,  and  the  Post  Office,  strangled  in  red- 
tape,  was  often  a  hindrance  rather  than  an  aid  to  the 
practical  transmission  of  correspondence.  It  will  hardly 
be  believed  that  as  late  as  November  1803  Lieutenants 
and  Deputy -Lieutenants  were  called  upon  to  pay 
postage-fees  for  letters  delivered  on  the  business  of 
the  State.  Complaints  to  the  Secretary  of  State  brought 
no  relief,  until  a  Deputy-Lieutenant  of  Sussex  wrote  to 

1  A  generation  has  arisen  which  has  no  idea  of  the  part  that 
riding  played  formerly  in  the  life  of  a  country  gentleman.  The 
present  writer,  as  a  boy,  was  brought  up,  according  to  the  old 
traditions,  to  order  out  a  pony  and  ride  for  distances  so  short  that 
it  would  have  saved  time  to  walk  ;  but  to  make  the  shortest  journey 
on  foot  was  unheard  of. 


38     WORKING  OF  THE  MILITIA  ACT    chap. 

1803.  his  chief  that  he  had  recently  paid  seven  shillings  for 
two  packets,  and  that  he  would  receive  in  future  no 
letters  on  the  public  service  that  did  not  arrive  free  of 
charge.^ 

Of  the  Deputy-Lieutenants,  who  formed  altogether 
a  very  large  body,  it  is  less  easy  to  speak.  •  Some  of 
their  failings  will  appear  in  the  ensuing  narrative  of 
the  administration  of  the  various  Acts  under  the  Militia 
Laws;  but  in  England  it  seems  that  the  majority  did 
their  work  with  intelligence,  loyalty,  and  goodwill. 
In  some  of  the  wilder  parts  of  the  country  they  had 
long  distances  to  travel ;  stupid  and  inefficient  parochial 
officers  to  instruct ;  ignorant,  prejudiced,  and  occasion- 
ally lawless  peasants  to  soothe,  convince,  reconcile  or 
overpower.  The  work  must  have  made  great  demands 
upon  their  time,  their  patience,  and  even  their  physical 
endurance,  yet  as  a  rule  they  seem  not  to  have  shrunk 
from  it,  though  their  sympathy  with  their  people  was 
often  greater  than  their  respect  for  the  law. 


1802-3.  Let  us  now  pass  from  the  letter  of  the  laws,  and 

from  those  who  executed  them,  to  the  actual  history 
and  effect  of  their  working  in  the  years  under  review. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Militia  and  Volunteer 
Acts  of  1 802  were  passed  in  time  of  peace.  The  first 
ballot  of  the  Militia  under  the  new  law  was  likewise 
held  in  time  of  peace,  in  the  course  of  the  winter  of 
1802,  when  the  defects  of  the  measure  very  soon 
became  apparent.  The  purport  of  the  Act  was  to 
make  a  levy  of  men  in  just  proportion  to  its  population 
from  every  parish  in  the  three  Kingdoms.  The  very 
essence  of  the  force  in  theory  was  that  the  contingent 
of  each  county  should  be  drawn  from  that  county,  or 
at  least  from  the  border  of  a  neighbouring  county. 
Whether  the  men  were   principals  or   substitutes,  and 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  nth  Dec.  1803  ;  Lord 
Gage  to  L.L.  Sussex,  i8th  Dec.  1803. 


II  THE  BALLOT  IN  PRACTICE  39 

whether  as  substitutes  they  were  personal  or  parochial,  1802-3 
there  were  special  clauses  designed  to  safeguard  the 
local  character  of  the  Militia  ;  and  though,  in  the  case 
of  substitutes  provided  by  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  from 
the  proceeds  of  exemption-fines,  there  were  no  special 
words  to  enact  that  these  men  should  be  drawn  from 
the  district  or  county,  yet  the  whole  spirit  of  the  Act 
intimated  that  this  was  its  intention. 

It  must  be  said  at  once  that,  even  before  war  broke 
out,  the  bare  allowance  of  the  principle  of  substitution 
sufficed  to  nullify  these  particular  provisions  of  the 
Militia  Act  completely.  This  was  due  to  two  principal 
causes  ;  first,  to  the  want  of  uniformity  in  the  method 
of  conducting  the  ballot,  and,  secondly,  to  the  practice 
of  insurance. 

The  ballot  has  been  for  so  long  obsolete  that  the 
traditions  concerning  it  have  utterly  perished  ;  and  it  is 
now  exceedingly  difficult  to  discover  anything  about  it. 
The  one  thing  that  appears  certain  is  that  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  of  every  subdivision  were  at  liberty,  so  far 
as  the  Act  was  concerned,  to  arrange  matters  as  they 
found  most  convenient,  and  that  they  availed  themselves 
of  that  liberty  with  edifying  readiness.  It  is,  indeed, 
probable  that  there  were  almost  as  many  methods  as 
counties. 

It  should  seem,  however,  that  the  commonest  pro- 
cedure was  as  follows.  First  the  lots  were  drawn,^  and 
the  men  upon  whom  they  fell  furnished  their  substitutes 
or  paid  the  fine  which  entitled  them  to  five  years' 
exemption.  A  second  ballot  was  then  held,  in  which 
the  names  of  the  men  who  had  been  chosen  by  the  first 
ballot  were  omitted  ;  and  the  victims  of  the  second 
ballot,  upon  enrolling  themselves  or[finding  a  substitute, 
received  the  proceeds  of  the  fines  paid  by  the  men  of 
the  first  ballot.^     The  method  was  curious,  and  though 

1  The  approved  method  was  to  write  the  names  of  ballottable 
men  on  slips  of  paper,  place  the  slips,  folded,  in  a  bag  or  box,  and 
draw  them  out  one  by  one  in  public. 

2  IF.O.  Mila.  Book,  S.W.  to  C.G.M.  Yorks,  26th  July  1803. 


40  THE  BALLOT  IN  PRACTICE       chap. 

1802-3.  it  was  apparently  recognised  and  approved  for  a  time 
at  headquarters,^  it  is  easy  to  see  that  it  was  unfair  to 
poor  men  and  tended  of  itself  to  raise  the  price  of 
substitutes.  Thus  if  a  really  poor  man  were  drawn  by 
the  first  ballot,  he  had  practically  no  choice  but  to 
accept  six  guineas  and  serve.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  escaped  the  first  ballot,  he  could  be  sure  of  at  least 
ten  pounds  on  being  drawn  for  the  second  ;  and  if,  on 
the  second  ballot,  additional  men  paid  the  fine,  and  it 
was  necessary  to  proceed  to  a  third  ballot  upon  the 
same  principle,  the  men  then  drawn  might  well  receive 
^15  or  ^20.2 

But  throughout  the  whole  of  the  vast  correspond- 
ence upon  the  subject  the  most  remarkable  point  is, 
that  no  one,  from  the  parish  overseer  to  the  Secretary 
of  State,  ever  expected  a  principal  to  accept  service  in 
the  Militia.  It  was  assumed  in  every  quarter  that 
substitutes  would  be  provided  practically  in  every  case  ; 
and,  in  fact,  in  1803-5,  ^^^  ballot  was  simply  an 
instrument  for  compelling  the  parishes  to  organise  at 
their  own  expense  recruiting  depots  for  the  Militia. 
The  means  contrived  to  attain  this  end  were  various. 
The  Act  itself  prescribed  one  by  allowing  parishes  to 
produce  their  quota  of  so-called  volunteers  in  anticipa- 
tion of  the  ballot.  In  Carnarvonshire'  the  practice 
was  as  follows.  The  Deputy-Lieutenants  grouped  the 
parishes  together  by  twos  and  threes  "  to  make  the 
choice  of  men  as  equal  as  possible "  ;  and  the  ballot 
was  duly  held.     But  before  the  ballot  it  was  customary 

^  But  Mr.  Bragge,  when  Secretary  at  War,  opined  that  the 
practice  was  illegal,  unless  the  fines  paid  for  exemption  were  in- 
sufficient for  the  purchase  of  substitutes.  Sec.  at  War  to  S.D.C. 
Essex,  2nd  Sept.  1803.  It  is  most  improbable  that  the  practice 
was  discontinued  in  spite  of  this  opinion. 

2  But  these  sums  must  not  be  accepted  as  exact,  for  the  price 
of  substitutes  of  course  varied  according  to  the  demand ;  and 
though  j^6  was  by  law  the  extreme  fee  to  be  granted  to  the 
parochial  substitutes  known  as  volunteers,  yet  section  122  of  the 
Militia  Act,  as  has  been  seen,  gave  ballotted  men,  worth  less  than 
j^50o,  half  the  current  price  of  a  substitute. 

3  I.D.  vol.  vi.  C.G.M.  Carnarvon,  to  S.S.  29th  Jan.  1803. 


II  THE  BALLOT  IN  PRACTICE  41 

for  the  men  liable  to  service  to  collect  money  (from  1802-3. 
what  source  is  not  specified)  to  pay  the  fine  in  lieu  of 
personal  service.  Instead,  however,  of  paying  this 
money  to  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  as  a  fine,  pursuant  to 
the  directions  of  the  Act,  they  handed  it  to  the  parish 
overseers,  who  agreed  with  them  to  find  their  substi- 
tutes. The  advantage  of  the  plan  was  this.  The  mere 
payment  of, the  fine  to  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  would 
have  brought  exemption  to  a  man  for  five  years  only, 
whereas  the  provision  of  a  substitute  gave  him  per- 
manent immunity  from  the  ballot.  If  the  price  of  a 
substitute  exceeded  the  means  in  the  hands  of  the 
overseers,  the  overplus  was  paid  by  the  parish  on  which 
the  lot  happened  to  fall,  on  the  understanding  that  the 
other  parishes  should  in  due  time  contribute  their  share. 
The  other  parishes,  however,  sometimes  declined  to  pay 
their  contribution  when  called  upon  ;  and  owing  to  this 
accident  the  history  of  this  particular  method  of  apply- 
ing the  ballot  has  been  preserved.  For  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants,  dismayed  at  finding  the  peculiar  machinery 
of  their  county  thrown  out  of  gear,  and  doubtless 
stimulated  by  the  cries  of  the  parish  which  had  so 
imprudently  trusted  to  the  good  faith  of  its  fellows, 
actually  appealed  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  know  if 
they  had  any  legal  remedy  against  the  parishes  which 
had  declined  to  pay  the  money  expected  of  them. 

The  whole  transaction  was,  on  the  face  of  it,  of  an 
extremely  doubtful  character,  for  the  overseers  under 
the  Act  were  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  the 
Militia  lists  ;  yet  none  of  the  county  authorities  saw 
any  harm  in  converting  them  into  contractors  for  the 
supply  of  recruits.  It  is  hardly  to  be  imagined  that 
the  overseers  failed  to  make  money  out  of  the  business, 
so  that  in  point  of  fact  they  were  neither  more  nor  less 
than  official  crimps.  Section  15  of  43  Geo.  III.  cap. 
50,  was  of  course  designed  to  check  this  evil,  but  it 
could  be  so  easily  evaded  that  it  can  hardly  be  treated 
with  serious  consideration. 

More  commonly,  however,  precisely  the  same  end 


42  INSURANCE  SOCIETIES  chap. 

1802-3.  ^^^  attained  by  different  means,  namely  insurance.  In 
Scotland  the  practice  was  "  carried  to  a  great  height "  ; 
but  the  Militia  was  so  new  a  thing  in  North  Britain 
that  the  country  had  not  learned  the  higher  application 
of  insurance.  The  policy  of  a  Scottish  society  insured 
men  only  for  the  price  of  the  exemption  fine.  The 
English  institutions  provided  their  clients  with  a 
substitute  or  the  price  of  a  substitute.  In  their  incep- 
tion these  insurance  societies  arose  in  the  most  natural 
manner  possible.  In  any  given  parish  or  town  there 
was  a  given  number  of  men  liable  to  be  ballotted,  of 
whom  in  normal  times  only  a  small  fraction — probably 
less  than  one- tenth — was  required  at  one  time  for 
service.  So  many  of  these  as  could  afford  a  small 
outlay  met  together  and  agreed  to  subscribe  so  much 
apiece  to  purchase  substitutes  for  such  of  their  number 
as  might  be  drawn  for  service.  This  was  the  simplest 
form  of  insurance  ;  and  hence  in  the  Parliamentary 
debates  the  words  subscription  society  and  insurance 
society  are  used  synonymously.  In  many  cases  the 
parochial  authorities  took  the  lead  in  the  management 
of  these  societies,  made  the  necessary  calculations, 
collected  the  subscriptions,  transacted  the  whole  of  the 
necessary  business,  and  doubtless  remunerated  them- 
selves, with  the  full  consent  of  their  subscribers,  with  a 
small  commission  for  their  pains.  In  Lichfield  we  learn 
that  at  ordinary  times  the  subscription  for  substitutes 
was  no  more  than  five  shillings,^  though  for  reasons 
presently  to  be  shown,  it  rose  to  four  times  that  amount 
before  the  end  of  1803. 

In  Blackburn,  later  on  in  the  same  year,  a  still 
more  curious  instance  came  to  light  which,  though  it 
deals  with  a  later  phase  of  affairs,  enables  us  to  study 
the  question  of  insurance  in  closer  detail.  After  the 
ballot-list  had  been  published,  but  before  the  ballot  had 
taken  place,  a  subscription  was  set  on  foot  in  the  town 
which  was  open  to  all  whose  name  appeared  on  that 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxix.  Magistrates  of  Lichfield  to  L.L.  19th  Nov. 
1803. 


II  INSURANCE  SOCIETIES  43 

list.  The  men  to  be  supplied  numbered  36  ;  the  1803. 
subscribers  amounted  to  512.  A  contribution  of  ^^i 
a  head  was  reckoned  to  be  sufficient  to  enable  the 
subscribers  to  hire  parochial  substitutes  for  the  bene- 
ficiaries of  the  society  at  large,  and  to  pay  bounties  to 
men  who  provided  substitutes  for  themselves.  The 
sum  of  ;^i89  :  los.  was  thus  paid  out  on  account  of 
ten  of  the  subscribers,  in  bounties  varying  from  j^i6  to 
£20.  As  these  amounts  were  equal  to  the  full  current 
price  of  substitutes,  and  any  additional  expenditure  on 
the  part  of  the  ballotted  men  was  therefore  voluntary 
and  unnecessary,  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  considered 
that  any  surplus,  remaining  after  repayment  to  them  of 
their  subscription  of  ^i  and  of  any  little  additional 
expenses,  should  go  to  the  general  fund  for  the  benefit 
of  all  the  subscribers.  The  ten  men,  however,  thought 
differently.  Under  section  122  of  the  Militia  Act 
of  1802  ballotted  men,  worth  less  than  ^^500,  were 
entitled  to  receive  half  the  current  price  of  a  parochial 
substitute  ;  and  this  they  claimed  as  their  right.  The 
Deputy-Lieutenants  flatly  refused  to  pay  it.  The  men 
had  found  their  substitutes  at  a  trifling  cost,  they  had 
also  gained  exemption  from  the  parish  rate  levied  for 
the  payment  of  bounties,  and  the  Deputies  were  furious 
at  the  idea  of  their  making  also  ^7  or  ^^8  out  of  the 
transaction.  It  was  contrary  to  all  precedent  in  Lich- 
field, where  the  rule  was  that  men  who  served  person- 
ally should  alone  receive  back  their  subscription  and 
half  the  current  price  of  a  substitute.  Thereupon  the 
ten  men  concerned  carried  their  appeal  to  the  Secretary 
of  State,  and  demanded  their  half  bounty  as  a  right. 
The  matter  was  referred  to  the  law  officers,  who  were 
fain  to  confess  that  the  law  was  on  the  side  of  the 
claimants,  and  that  the  money  must  be  paid.^  The 
Secretary  of  State  gave  orders  accordingly,  and  the 
Deputy-Lieutenants  were  left  to  take  such  satisfaction 
as  they  might  from  these  very  ingenious  men. 

1  I.D.  vol.  cliv..  Twelve  Liverpool  men  to  S.S.  4th  March  ; 
Mr.  W.  Carr  to  C.G.M.  Lanes,  28th  Jan.  1804. 


44  INSURANCE  SOCIETIES  chap. 

1803.  The  above  is  the  only  instance  which  I  have  dis- 

interred of  men  actually  making  money  out  of  the 
evasion  of  service  in  the  Militia  ;  but  it  is  in  other 
ways  instructive,  since  it  shows  that  a  subscription  club 
was  the  ordinary  method  of  raising  parochial  substitutes, 
and  that  it  was  not  only  countenanced  but  actually 
administered  by  the  Deputy -Lieutenants,  the  very 
persons  who  were  responsible  for  the  execution  of  the 
Act.  There  can  be  little  doubt  but  that  the  same 
practice  obtained,  with  superficial  differences,  in  the 
majority  of  the  parishes  in  Great  Britain.  The  people 
made  a  law  for  themselves  for  the  conduct  of  the 
ballot ;  and  when  that  law  was  transgressed,  they  did 
not  hesitate  to  invoke  the  aid  of  the  Secretary  of  State 
to  enforce  it.  It  seems  never  to  have  occurred  to  them 
that  their  local  customs,  erected  as  it  were  behind  the 
back  of  the  law,  could  have  less  force  than  the  law 
itself.  Nor  indeed  apparently  did  the  Secretary  of  State 
attempt  to  override  local  custom,  unless  his  authority 
was  called  in  actually  to  defy  the  law.  Any  attempt  to 
do  so  would  probably  have  made  the  ballot  impossible. 
But  the  petty  local  insurance  clubs  and  societies 
were  a  small  matter  compared  with  the  much  more 
important  institutions  which  already  existed  in  1802,  and 
which  were  destined  to  extend  their  operations  enormously 
as  ballot  succeeded  ballot  in  the  years  that  followed. 
Their  agents  were  ubiquitous  and  vigilant.  Even  in 
1802  three  men  who  were  travelling  north  with  the 
certainty  of  being  appointed  sergeants  of  Militia,  were 
intercepted  on  their  way  by  the  emissaries  of  an  insurance 
society  and  tempted  by  large  bounties  to  end  their 
journey  and  to  enlist  as  substitutes  and  privates.^  The 
great  centre  of  insurance  was,  of  course,  London ;  and 
there  were  bitter  complaints  from  all  counties  around 
the  metropolis  that  its  societies  offered  their  policy- 
holders either  the  amount  of  the  fine  for  exemption  or 
a  substitute  who  invariably  deserted."   These  institutions 

1   W.O.  Mi/a.Books,Sec.  at  War  to  Lord  Galloway,  19th  Jan.  1803. 
-  I.D.  vol.  cvi.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  23rd  Oct.  1807. 


II  MILITIA  CEASES  TO  BE  LOCAL         45 

extended  their  branches  as  far  as  Warwick,  probably  1803. 
indeed  further,  and  it  seems  that  they  made  enormous 
profits.^  Sometimes  the  insurance  society  consisted  of  a 
single  enterprising  individual,  who  openly  advertised  his 
readiness  to  provide  substitutes  at  a  figure  which  seemed 
extravagantly  low  but  beyond  question  brought  him  a 
very  handsome  income.  A  Mr.  Pearce  of  Hackney 
thus  filled  the  ranks  of  the  Tower  Hamlets  Militia  for 
twelve  years,  until  in  1 808  the  parish  officers,  finding 
that  they  received  no  share  of  his  gains,  decided  to  reject 
every  man  that  he  offered,  and  so  ruined  his  business. 
Pearce  was,  of  course,  hardly,  if  at  all,  other  than  a 
crimp ;  yet,  amazing  as  it  may  seem,  his  friends  appealed 
to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  support  him  against  the 
parish  officers.^ 

Thus  it  has  been  made  sufficiently  plain  that  all  the 
energy  and  intelligence  of  the  nation,  not  wholly  with- 
out countenance  by  the  Legislature,  was  directed  from 
the  very  first  to  evasion  of  personal  service  in  the 
Militia.  The  result  was  to  stultify  all  legislative  pro- 
vision for  making  the  Militia  a  strictly  local  force.  In 
the  first  place,  the  Act,  as  has  been  seen,  did  not  enact 
that  the  parochial  substitutes,  to  be  provided  by  the 
Deputy-Lieutenants  out  of  the  fines  for  exemption, 
should  be  of  the  same  or  the  adjoining  county.  In  the 
second  place,  the  main  object  of  the  Deputy-Lieutenants, 
who  were  but  human,  was  to  produce  the  men  required 
of  them  and  to  free  themselves  from  the  heavy,  irksome, 
and  often  distressing  duty  imposed  upon  them  by  the 
Act.  Men  did  not  travel  far  afield  in  those  days,  and 
the  squires,  great  and  small,  knowing  all  that  was  to 
be  known  about  every  family  in  their  parishes,  could 
appreciate  how  hardly  the  ballot  would  bear  upon  this 
man  or  that.  Moreover,  the  ballottable  men  were  often 
their  own  workmen,  whom,  for  their  own  sakes,  they 
would  naturally  be  unwilling  to  lose.  Hence  it  is  hardly 
matter  of  surprise  if,  after  harrowing  interviews  with 

1   I.D.  vol.  cli.  C.G.M.  Warwick,  to  S.S.  23rd  Jan.  1808. 
2  Ibid.  vol.  cH.  J.  Bugby  to  S.S.  i8th  Feb.  1808. 


46     MILITIA  CEASES  TO  BE  LOCAL        chap. 

1803.  tearful  mothers,  wives,  and  daughters,  they  should  have 
listened  to  plausible  persons  who  offered  to  provide 
any  number  of  substitutes  at  a  moderate  charge,  without 
ascertaining  too  particularly  whether  the  said  substitutes 
really  came  from  the  same  or  an  adjoining  county.  It 
was  always  easy  for  a  crimp  or  an  insurance  agent  to  say 
that  they  were  from  the  county  town,  and  very  difficult 
to  prove  that  they  were  not.  The  wording  of  the  Act 
also  permitted  much  laxity  of  interpretation,  for  it  did 
not  provide  that  substitutes  should  be  men  on  the  ballot- 
lists  of  the  same  or  an  adjoining  county,  which  they 
certainly  ought  to  have  been  if  they  were  to  be  properly 
qualified.  The  desire,  then,  for  a  quiet  life  and  for  the 
sight  of  happy  faces  about  them  did  much  to  make 
Deputy-Lieutenants  disregard  the  enactments  for  making 
the  Militia  a  local  force. 

In  the  large  towns  a  different  set  of  causes  produced 
precisely  the  same  effect.  About  London  the  five 
Militia  battalions  of  Middlesex  and  Surrey,  after  many 
ballots  and  many  disappointments,  abandoned  in  despair 
the  task  of  raising  men  upon  the  spot  and  sought  them 
elsewhere.  Any  number  of  men  were  forthcoming  in 
London  itself,  but  they  disappeared  with  amazing  speed 
as  soon  as  their  bounty  was  in  their  pockets.  The 
Lord-Lieutenant  did  his  best  to  meet  this  evil  by 
marching  the  men  out  of  the  county  as  soon  as  they 
were  enrolled,  so  as  to  make  desertion  more  difficult ; 
and  he  actually  suspended  the  ballot  until  he  could 
obtain  permission  to  do  so.  But  even  so,  his  success 
was  small.^  In  September  1803,  after  eight  or  nine 
months  of  effort,  the  West  Middlesex  and  Westminster 
battalions  had  not  yet  made  up  the  numbers  of  their 
original  establishment,  and  had  not  raised  a  man  of  their 
Supplementary  Militia.^  The  East  Middlesex  battalion 
was  stronger,  but  this  was  because  the  commanding 
officer  had  early  sent  recruiting  parties  to  Norwich  to 

1  I.D.    vol.  xxiii.  L.L.  Middlesex,  to   S.S.  6th  and   9th  July 
1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  xxiii.  L.L.  Middlesex,  to  S.S.  15th  Sept.  1803. 


II     MIDDLESEX  AND  SURREY  MILITIA      47 

collect  men.  The  Westminster  battalion  followed  his  1803. 
example  by  sending  a  party  to  Birmingham,  nominally 
to  arrest  deserters,  but  really  to  enlist  recruits.  The 
practice  was  plainly  illegal,  and  the  Secretary  at  War 
repeatedly  pointed  out  that  it  was  so  ;  but  Colonel 
Wood  of  the  East  Middlesex  let  the  letters  from  the 
War  Office  pass  unheeded  and  went  his  own  way, 
knowing  that  if  he  were  to  conform  to  the  law  he  would 
have  not  a  man  in  his  battalion.-'  Moreover,  as  the 
Secretary  at  War  was  fain  to  confess,  there  was  no 
penalty  provided  in  any  Act  to  check  this  particular 
breach  of  the  law,  which  meant  that  there  was  no  pro- 
tection for  any  district  against  any  other  district  which 
chose  to  steal  its  men.  It  is  an  actual  fact  that  in  the 
ranks  of  the  Middlesex  Militia,  whose  quota  (including 
the  Supplementary  Militia)  was  over  4500  men,  there 
was  but  one  principal  to  be  found  ;  and  when  his  time 
of  service  expired  in  1808,  the  Lord-Lieutenant  begged 
to  be  allowed  to  keep  him  as  a  curiosity.^ 

On  the  south  side  of  the  Thames  the  case  was  pre- 
cisely the  same.  Substitutes  were  presented  as  fast  as 
they  were  called  for,  only  to  disappear  beyond  hope  of 
recall  within  forty-eight  hours.  At  the  beginning  of 
April  1803,  after  endless  ballotting,  the  southward  dis- 
trict of  Surrey  had  produced  only  22  men  out  of  its  quota 
of  288  ;  and  the  Clerk  of  the  General  Meeting  declared 
the  task  of  raising  the  rest  to  be  hopeless  unless  the 
substitutes  could  be  at  once  carried  off  to  headquarters, 
dressed,  powdered,  and  furnished  with  queues,  so  as  to 
make  them  easily  recognisable.^  It  is  not  recorded  that 
the  difficulty  was  overcome  in  the  same  way  as  in 
Middlesex,  but  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  so  ;  and  with 
all  London  open  to  them  for  substitutes,  it  is  impossible 

^  W.O.  Mila.  Entry  Books,  Sec.  at  War  to  T.  Kerrison,  Esq., 
1st  June,  to  O.C.,  E.  Middlesex  Mila.  15th  June,  3rd  Oct.  1803  ; 
6th  Jan.,  22nd  June  1804  ;  14th  Feb.  1805  ;  to  O.C.,  Westminster 
Mila.  28th  June  1803;  to  O.C,  E.  Middlesex  Mila.  nth  Feb. 
1808. 

2  I.D.  vol.  cxlii.  L.L.  Middlesex,  to  S.S.  24th  March  1808. 

8  Ibid.  vol.  xxxi.  C.G.M.  Surrey,  to  L.L.  4th  April  1803. 


48       MILITIA  HATED  IN  SCOTLAND     chap. 

1803.      to  suppose  that  the  Surrey  Militia  can  have  included 
many  Surrey  men. 

VI 

The  reader  will  naturally  ask  whether  the  reluctance 
to  serve  in  the  Militia  was  so  general  as  the  foregoing 
narrative  would  lead  one  to  suppose.  The  answer  is 
certainly  in  the  affirmative  ;  and  the  prime  reasons 
undoubtedly  were  that,  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the 
elder  Pitt's  original  Act,  personal  service  was  not  insisted 
upon  and  the  Militia  was  not  made  a  truly  national 
force.  There  was,  however,  far  less  reluctance  in 
England  than  in  Scotland,  where  the  Militia  had  been 
unknown  until  1797.  From  almost  every  county  in 
Scotland,  even  before  the  war  broke  out,  came  the  same 
tale  of  difficulty  in  obtaining  not  only  men  but  officers, 
and  of  perfunctory  conduct,  or  worse,  on  the  part  of 
Deputy-Lieutenants.  In  Aberdeen  ballotted  men  invari- 
ably paid  the  fine  for  exemption,  and  no  gentleman 
would  accept  even  a  captain's  commission  when  offered 
to  him.^  In  Banff,  again,  only  one  duly  qualified 
gentleman  could  be  persuaded  to  become  a  captain.^  In 
Haddington  there  was  the  like  dearth  of  officers,  and  in 
Peebles  the  like  unwillingness  of  men.^  In  Bute  there 
were  only  five  men  in  the  Militia  who  had  not  been 
drawn  from  other  counties,  and  not  one  single  ballotted 
man  had  been  enrolled.*  From  Ross  came  the  report 
that  the  Highlanders  would  have  nothing  to  do  with 
the  Militia  ;  that  the  most  mountainous  district  had  not 
produced  a  man  ;  that  the  Militia  laws  were  ill  under- 
stood by  magistrates  and  Deputy-Lieutenants,  and  that, 
being  an  innovation,  they  were  detested  by  the  High- 
landers as   an   intolerable   grievance.^      In   Stirling  the 

1  I.D.  vol.  i.  L.L.  to  S.S.  15th  Jan.,  22nd  July  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  iii.  L.L.  to  S.S.  4th  April  1803. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  iv.  L.L.  Haddington,  to  S.S.  16th  March  ;  C.G.M. 
Peebles,  to  S.S.  19th  June  1803. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  xxxvii.  L.L.  Argyll  and  Bute,  5th  Sept.  1804. 
5   Ibid.  vol.  vi.  V.L.  Ross,  to  S.S.  1803. 


II         MILITIA  DESPISED  IN  ENGLAND       49 

Lieutenancy  had  done  its  work  so  ill  that  in  several  1803. 
cases  the  same  man  had  been  enrolled  and  had  received 
bounty  for  several  different  subdivisions.^  In  Selkirk 
the  Lord-Lieutenant  despaired  of  providing  his  quota 
of  tvi^elve  men  for  the  Supplementary  Militia,  though 
he  could  count  upon  payment  of  the  fines.^  Forfar 
could  show  but  one  principal  to  every  six  substitutes, 
and  to  every  five  men  that  paid  the  fine  for  exemption.^ 
From  Kirkcudbright  the  Lord-Lieutenant  reported  that 
almost  the  whole  of  the  Militia  would  be  substitutes, 
and  that  the  insurance  societies  had  been  largely 
patronised  in  the  towns.*  In  Perth  it  was  a  case  of  few 
enrolments  and  many  fines.^  In  fact,  the  service  was  not 
only  unpopular  but  suspected  ;  for  it  was  bound  up 
with  an  oath  and  a  red  coat,  and  it  was  hard  to  make  the 
cautious  Scots  believe  that  this  combination  did  not 
signify  compulsory  military  service  for  life. 

In  England,  though  there  were  a  few  places  in  which 
the  same  superstition  existed,  there  was  generally  no 
dread  of  unfair  treatment  of  Militiamen  ;  and  yet  the 
Service  was  disliked,  and  not  only  disliked,  but  not 
unfrequently  despised.  This  was  due,  no  doubt,  to  the 
practice,  consecrated  by  Pitt,  of  permitting  men  to  serve 
their  country  as  Volunteers,  or,  in  other  words,  of  allow- 
ing the  mass  of  the  citizens  to  substitute  undisciplined 
for  disciplined  service.  The  Militia,  during  embodiment, 
was  subjected  to  the  same  penal  code  as  the  Army,  not 
excluding  the  lash.  Had  personal  service  been  enforced, 
the  character  ^  of  the  men  would  have  been  so  superior 
that  the  cat-o*-nine-tails  would  have  fallen  almost  into 
disuse  except  in  rare  cases,  when,  in  the  judgment  of  that 
day,  it  was  the  only  possible  penalty.     For  it  must  be 

1  I.D.  vol.  viii.  L.L.  Stirling,  to  S.S.  3rd  June  1803. 

2  Ibid.    vol.  xi.  L.L.  Selkirk,  to  S.S.  15th  June,  3rd  July  1803. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  xiv.  L.L.  Forfar,  to  S.S.  4th  July  1803. 

4  Ibid.  vol.  xvii.  L.L.  to  S.S.  23rd  Jan.  1803. 

5  Ibid.  vol.  xxvii.  L.L.  to  S.S.  24th  June  1803. 

^  It  will  be  remembered  that  Abercromby  pronounced  the 
Militiamen  under  his  command  in  1799  to  be  of  a  superior  class  to 
the  ordinary  recruits. 

£ 


so    APATHY  OF  THE  MIDDLE  CLASS   chap. 

1803.  remembered  that  flogging  formed  as  essential  a  part  of 
civil  as  of  military  punishment  at  that  period.  The 
officers  of  the  Militia,  especially  in  the  higher  ranks, 
bore  some  of  the  greatest  names  in  England  ;  and  even 
if  occasionally  petty  squires  and  their  sons  were  disposed 
to  be  tyrannical,  there  were  probably  always  men  of 
higher  social  position  in  the  same  battalion  to  keep  them 
in  restraint.  But  when  the  ranks  of  the  Militia  were 
filled  with  men  who,  if  they  had  not  become  substitutes, 
would  have  enlisted  in  the  Army,  the  case  was  completely 
changed.  The  lash  was  absolutely  necessary  for  the 
enforcement  of  discipline;  and  flogging,  though  unknown 
in  some  battalions,  was  certainly  not  unknown  in  others. 
The  waged  class  in  those  days,  it  must  also  be  remem- 
bered, was  far  more  lawless,  violent,  and  reckless  than 
in  these,  and,  unless  subjected  to  some  born  leader  of 
men,  did  not  understand  gentle  measures. 

But,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  the  prevailing  prejudice 
and  contempt  towards  the  Militia,  which  is  as  strong 
to-day  as  it  was  then,  was  only  a  part  of  the  general 
dislike  and  distrust  which  Englishmen  had  for  generations 
been  trained  to  cherish  against  a  Standing  Army.  Before 
the  elder  Pitt  took  the  Militia  in  hand  in  1757,  the 
force  was  popular  but  utterly  useless.  When  it  was 
founded  upon  an  effective  basis  its  popularity  rapidly 
waned  ;  and  when,  after  long  years  of  disuse,  the  ballot 
was  applied  to  it,  it  became  hateful.  The  truth  is  that 
the  ballot  hit  the  class  which  has  always  been  most 
averse  from  military  service,  and  loves  nothing  of  war 
except  its  trappings,  because  it  may  possibly  gain  money 
by  them.  It  was  this  class  that,  by  its  superiority  of 
education  and  its  greater  power  and  facility  of  self- 
protection,  formed  subscription  societies  and  insurance 
companies,  and  made  the  largest  fortunes  by  crimping. 
Its  members,  which  could  have  best  afl?brded  to  pay 
dearly  for  substitutes,  obtained  the  first  call  upon  them 
and  bought  them  at  the  cheapest  rate.  Even  failing  a 
substitute,  the  purchase  of  five  years'  exemption  for  ^^  10, 
which  was  prohibitive  to  a  labouring  man,  was  well 


II  INEQUITY  OF  THE  BURDEN  51 

within  their  means.     Had  the  fine  been  ;Cioo  instead       1803. 
of  ;^io,  the  distribution  of  the  burden  would  have  been 
infinitely  more  equitable. 

Yet  another  cause  which  brought  the  Militia  into 
general  dislike  was  the  principle  of  paying  for  a 
national  object  out  of  strictly  local  taxation.  To  take 
the  simplest  instance  of  its  injustice,  a  battalion  of  Militia 
stationed  in  an  unhealthy  quarter,  or  detailed  for  duty 
in  exposed  situations,  necessarily  suffered  greater  losses 
from  sickness  and  death  than  others  in  more  favourable 
circumstances.  Yet  the  burden  of  making  good  the 
casualties  was  thrown  upon  the  unfortunate  county,  and 
in  that  county  upon  the  unfortunate  parishes,  which  had 
provided  the  dead  or  disabled  men.  And  closely  bound 
up  with  the  inequality  of  this  taxation  was  the  extreme 
crudity  of  the  system  of  exemptions.  To  give  but 
one  example,  any  man  who  had  served  for  four  years 
as  an  officer  in  the  Militia  was  exempt.  But  a  man  who 
had  served  for  twenty  years  in  the  Regular  Army  and 
had,  it  might  be,  sold  his  commission  and  retired  to  the 
country  broken  down  by  wounds  or  disease  after  active 
service  in  pestilent  climates,  was  still  liable  to  enter  the 
ranks,  pay  a  fine,  or  purchase  a  substitute,  provided  that 
he  was,  as  he  very  well  might  be,  under  forty-five  years  of 
age.  There  was  no  point  upon  which  the  Secretary  of 
State  insisted  more  strongly  than  that  neither  officers 
nor  men  who  had  served  in  the  Regular  Army  were, 
or  ever  had  been,  exempt  from  the  Militia  ballot 
solely  on  that  account.^  It  is  easy  to  conceive  of  cases 
in  which  this  decision  was  perfectly  just ;  but  it  is  not 
less  easy  to  see  that  it  might  be  both  unfair  and  oppres- 
sive. Moreover,  it  was  false  policy  to  put  a  soldier, 
who  might  have  given  the  best  years  of  his  life  to  his 
country's  service,  on  the  same  level  with  petty  attorneys 
and  tradesmen,  who  had  never  worked  for  any  interest 
except  their  own,  and  never  intended  to  do  so.     It  was 

1  W.O.  Mila.  Books,  Mr.  Lewis  to  Col.  Matthew,  28th  Oct. ; 
S.W.  to  Captain  Hardwicke,  13th  June  ;  to  F.  Davies,  28th  June 
J803. 


52      UNFAIRNESS  OF  EXEMPTIONS        chap. 

1803.  a  weak  point  throughout  the  Act  that  it  conferred  no 
advantages  for  previous  good  service  to  the  State. 
There  was  a  case  in  which  the  last  remaining  son  of  a 
poor  old  couple  in  Northamptonshire  was  ballotted. 
They  had  given  two  sons  to  the  Guards,  and  had  lost 
them  both  on  active  service,  and  they  had  at  the 
moment  three  more  sons  serving  in  the  Militia.  Yet 
it  was  only  by  appeal  of  the  Lord-Lieutenant  to  the 
Secretary  of  State  that  any  consideration  could  be 
obtained  for  them  ;  and  meanwhile  they  were  unavoid- 
ably kept  for  many  days  in  miserable  suspense.* 

Another  most  amazing  fact  is  that  though  parish 
officers,  being  concerned  with  the  ballot,  were  exempt 
from  it,  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  not.  The  question 
was  actually  raised  through  the  ballotting  of  a  Deputy- 
Lieutenant  by  his  brethren,  and  the  matter  was  referred 
to  the  Secretary  of  State.  His  answer  was  that  he 
would  make  inquiry  as  to  the  general  practice  in  the 
kingdom  ;  to  which  the  Lord-Lieutenant  rejoined  that 
the  practice  varied,  and  that  the  Law-Officers  of  the 
Crown  ought  to  settle  the  question  once  for  all  without 
loss  of  time.  The  Law-Officers  opined  that  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  were  not  exempt  from  the  Militia  ballot. 
To  this  the  Deputy-Lieutenant  concerned  made  answer 
that  in  that  case  he  would  resign.  If,  he  said,  there 
were  no  exemption  at  all,  he  would  not  complain,  but 
if  peers  were  exempted,  why  not  Deputy-Lieutenants  } 
Officers  of  Militia  were  required  and  bound  to  obey  the 
orders  of  the  Deputy-Lieutenants ;  and  any  three  Deputy- 
Lieutenants,  commissioned  to  act  as  the  Lord-Lieu- 
tenant, could  review  the  Militia.  How  could  ballotted 
privates  give  commands  to  their  own  officers  ?  The 
Secretary  of  State  wisely  made  no  attempt  to  meet 
these  unanswerable  arguments,  but  replied  in  true 
official  style,  that  the  Government  would  not  submit 
to  Parliament  any  bill  to  exempt  Deputy-Lieutenants 
from  the  ballot  ;  and  there  the  matter  ended.     There 

1  I.D.  vol.  XXV.  Mr.  de  C.  Brooke  to  L.L.  Northants,  28th 
Sept.  1804. 


II  UNFAIRNESS  OF  EXEMPTIONS  ^2 

can  be  little  doubt  as  to  who  was  in  the  right  of  the       1803. 
question.^ 

It  was  unfair,  again,  that  such  a  misfortune  as 
physical  infirmity  should  in  no  case  have  given  relief 
from  the  Militia  ballot  unless  a  man  were  worth  less 
than  ;^ioo.  Of  course,  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  could 
always  reject  a  man  for  the  Militia  if  he  were  below 
five  feet  four  inches  in  height ;  and  no  doubt  this  rule 
was  frequently  stretched  in  the  interests  of  humanity  to 
give  deliverance  in  many  hard  cases.  But  it  is  to  be 
noted  that  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  not  bound  to 
reject  men  who  fell  below  that  stature  ;  and  that  the 
deficiency  of  inchesof  itself  gave  no  immunity  from  the 
ballot  and  its  consequences,^  By  the  letter  of  the  law, 
therefore,  a  hunchback  from  three  to  four  feet  in  height, 
under  forty-five  years  of  age,  and  worth  ;^ioi,  was 
liable  to  pay  a  fine  of  j^io  for  five  years'  exemption, 
provide  a  substitute,  or  serve  in  person  ;  and  the  fine 
could  be  extorted  from  him  by  distraint  upon  his 
goods. ^  It  is  noticeable  too,  in  reference  to  the  posi- 
tion of  the  sick  and  infirm  under  the  Militia  Act,  that 
not  a  word  was  said  as  to  the  exemption  of  practis- 
ing doctors,  an  omission  which  was  resented  in  those 
days,  and  would  be  still  more  resented  in  these,  from  the 
hardship  which  it  meted  out  both  to  members  of  a 
singularly  self-denying  profession  and  to  their  unfor- 
tunate patients. 

VII 

Enough  has  been  said  to  show,  without  further 
analysis  of  the  list  of  exemptions,  that  apart  fi-om  all 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxvii.  L.L.  Leicestershire,  to  S.S.  9th  Nov.  ;  S.S. 
to  L.L.  15th  Nov.,  18th  Dec;  Mr.  Burnaby  to  S.S.  28th  Dec. 
1809  ;  S.S.  to  Mr.  Burnaby,  29th  Jan.  18 10. 

2  W.O.  Mila.  Books,  S.W.  to  F.  Davies,  28th  June  1803. 

3  Ibid.  S.W.  to  R.  Else,  26th  July  181 1.  "The  Law  officers 
have  decided  that  a  man  worth  more  than  £,\oo,  ballotted  and 
willing  to  serve,  but  physically  unfit,  is  obliged  to  find  a  substitute, 
under  sections  45  and  52  of  42  Geo.  IIL  cap.  90." 


54      THE  RUSH  FOR  SUBSTITUTES        chap. 

1803.  prejudice  against  the  Militia,  and  from  all  ignoble 
shirking  of  national  duty,  there  was  sound  reason  why 
many  should  find  the  Act  of  1802  both  unfair  and 
oppressive.  There  was,  therefore,  much  real  justifica- 
tion for  subscription  societies,  insurance  companies,  and 
all  the  other  apparatus  of  evasion ;  and  the  result  was 
that  the  poor,  upon  whom  the  law  was  not  intended  to 
bear  with  peculiar  hardness,  suffered  from  it  beyond  all 
others.  There  was  a  general  demand  for  substitutes  to 
make  up  the  original  establishment  of  the  Militia  under 
conditions  of  peace,  and  prices  soon  began  to  rise.  In 
Hampshire  there  was  a  rush  to  obtain  temporary 
employment  in  the  dockyards  in  order  to  gain  im- 
munity from  the  ballot.^  In  the  East  Riding  of 
Yorkshire  the  Lord-Lieutenant  declared  that  unless  the 
entire  area  of  Yorkshire  was  thrown  open  to  him  for 
substitutes,  he  would  be  unable  to  fill  the  ranks  of 
the  county  regiment.  Men  could  not  be  bought  even 
in  March  1803  for  the  amount  of  the  ^10  fine,  nor  at 
"  scarce  any  price."  ^  Details  of  the  price  of  substi- 
tutes at  the  outbreak  of  the  war  are  unfortunately  rare, 
for  the  Lieutenancies  were  still  in  full  struggle  with 
their  first  difficulties  when  the  proclamation  of  the  28th 
of  May  threw  upon  them  the  duty  of  raising  the  Sup- 
plementary in  addition  to  the  Old  or  Established 
Militia.  By  that  day  there  had  been  raised  of  the 
Old  Militia  34,302  men  out  of  a  quota  of  43,539  in 
England;  5965  out  of  8000  in  Scotland;  12,369 
out  of  15,000  in  Ireland.  Thus  after  fully  six  months 
of  incessant  ballotting  and  general  exertion  there  were 
still  13,903  men  wanting  out  of  a  total  establishment 
of  66f^29y  making  a  total  deficiency  of  fully  twenty 
per  cent ;  and  now  there  was  demanded  in  Great 
Britain  a  further  contingent  of  rather  more  than  25,000 
men.    Moreover,  on  the  1 5  th  of  June,  almost  before  the 

1  I.D.  vol.  xvi.  L.L.  Hants,   to  S.S.  7th  Jan.  1803. 

2  liiJ.  vol.  xxxvi.  L.L.  Yorks  E.R.  to  S.S.  9th  March  ;  O.C., 
E.  York  Mila.  to  S.S.  13th  March;  Resolution  of  the  Lieutcy. 
Yorks  E.R.  26th  March. 


II        RISE  IN  PRICE  OF  SUBSTITUTES         SS 

Lords-Lieutenant  had  had  time  to  set  the  necessary  1803. 
machinery  in  motion,  the  Act  for  completing  the 
Militia  (43  Geo.  III.  cap.  50)  became  law,  which 
raised  the  fine  for  exemption  to  ^^15,  and  inflicted  on 
the  counties  a  cumulative  penalty  of  ^10  quarterly  for 
every  man  deficient  of  their  quota. 

This  augmentation  naturally  increased  the  demands 
for  substitutes  ;  for  the  provision  of  a  substitute,  it 
must  be  remembered,  entitled  a  ballotted  man  to  exemp- 
tion for  life,  whereas  a  fine  gave  him  immunity  only  for 
a  term  of  years.  Naturally  the  price  of  the  article  rose 
rapidly  in  the  market,  with  all  other  prices  that  were 
dependent  on  it.  In  Anglesey  in  May  1 803  substitutes 
cost  from  ^^12  to  ^^13.  In  Denbigh  not  one  could  be 
bought  in  June  for  less  than  ^20.  In  Berkshire  during 
the  same  month  they  received  from  ^^15  :  15s.  to 
j^2 1  :  los  ,  and  were  difficult  to  obtain  even  at  that  price.^ 
In  Middlesex  the  Lord-Lieutenant,  by  throwing  all  his 
Supplementary  Militia  into  one  of  his  three  battalions, 
was  able  to  complete  that  one  to  its  ordinary  establish- 
ment, and  was  obliged  to  leave  the  remaining  two  far 
below  theirs.2  In  fact,  the  Supplementary  Militia  in 
the  metropolis  was  merely  a  name,  for  the  Old  Militia 
was  still  far  below  its  strength.  In  Scotland  the  raising 
of  additional  Militiamen  was  almost  as  great  a  farce  as 
in  London. 3      In  Essex,  and  possibly  in  other  counties, 

1  I.D.  vol.  i.  L.L.  Anglesey,  to  S.S.  21st  May;  vol.  ii. 
L.L.  Berks,  to  S.S.  2  3rcl  June  ;  vol.  ix.  L.L.  Denbigh,  to  S.S. 
31st  July  1803. 

2  /^/V.  vol.  xxii.  L.L.  Middlesex,  to  S.S.  15th  Sept.  1803. 

3  I  subjoin  a  return,  probably  more  favourable  than  the 
ordinary,  of  the  progress  of  the  ballot  in  Forfar.  It  shows  how 
many  men  had  to  be  ballotted  to  produce  a  small  quota.  Unfortu- 
nately such  returns  are  all  too  rare  in  the  correspondence. 

Men  ballotted  for  Supplementary  Militia  on  13th  June,  88 

Of  which  enrolled.  Principals,  3  ;  Substitutes,  33  .         •     36 

Paid  the  j^  1 5  penalty  .         .  .         .  .  .         '17 

Unfit  or  exempt,  for  which  others  were  ballotted    .         .         -33 
Failed  to  attend    .........       2 

Total 88 


S6  ARMY  OF  RESERVE  BALLOT       chap. 

'803,  a  new  method  of  evasion  was  discovered.  Some 
ingenious  person  on  studying  the  Act  found  out  that 
if  he  refused  to  swear  that  he  was  not  ruptured,  nor 
subject  to  fits,  nor  physically  disabled,  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  had  no  power  to  enrol  him  even  if  they 
knew  his  objection  to  be  false.  Instantly  the  epileptic 
and  the  afflicted  with  hernia  were  multiplied  manifold  in 
Essex,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  could  only  make  a 
memorandum  to  omit  this  clause  from  future  enact- 
ments.^ 

Such  new  enactments,  as  we  have  seen,  were  not 
long  in  coming.  Before  the  Lieutenancies  had  well 
digested  the  proclamation  for  the  Supplementary  Militia 
and  the  Militia  Completion  Act,  they  were  required  to 
swallow  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act,  bidding  them  levy 
before  Michaelmas  yet  another  forty  thousand  men  by 
ballot  in  Great  Britain,  on  pain  of  a  cumulative 
quarterly  fine  of  £20  for  every  man  deficient.  This 
brought  up  the  total  of  men  to  be  raised  in  Great 
Britain  within  less  than  twelve  months  to  117,000. 
Moreover,  by  comparison  of  the  Acts  of  Parliament  it 
will  be  seen  that  the  Lieutenants  had  practically  to 
collect  this  number  under  three  different  sets  of  condi- 
tions. Men  ballotted  for  the  Militia  before  the  28th  of 
May  (the  date  of  summons  to  the  Supplementary 
Militia)  were  exempt  for  five  years  on  payment  of 
^10  ;  men  ballotted  after  that  date  could  not  gain  the 

Fina/  Ballot 

Total    enrolled  for  County  of    Forfar,  Principals,  12  ;    Sub- 
stitutes, 76 88 

Unfit  or  exempt,  for  whom  others  were  ballotted   •         .         .88 

Paid  the  j^  1 5  penalty 60 

Allowed  time  to  find  Substitutes    .         .         .         .         .         .        2 

Failed  to  appear  (warrants  issued)  .         .         .         .         .18 

Total 256 

(7.2).  vol.  xiv.  Forfar,  4th  July  1803). 

^  l.D.  vol.  xiii.  Essex,  Mr.  Bosanquet  to  L.L.  3rd  July  1803. 
But  the  clause,  or  rather  the  oath,  as  to  rupture  and  fits  was 
never  abrogated. 


) 


II  CONFUSION  CAUSED  BY  IT  57 

same  exemption  for  less  than  ;^I5  ;  men  drawn  for  1803. 
the  Army  of  Reserve  could  purchase  only  one  year's 
exemption  from  that  particular  ballot  by  payment  of 
j^20.  Again,  the  payment  of  fines  for  exemption  from 
the  Militia  gave  no  immunity  from  the  Army  of 
Reserve,  though  service  in  person  or  by  substitute  in 
either  force  gave  exemption  from  service  in  the  other. 
Also,  the  exemption  fines  of  the  Militia  were  given 
complete  to  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  for  the  purchase  of 
substitutes  ;  but  those  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  were,  in 
England,  divided  between  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  and 
the  Paymaster-General.  Next,  the  standard  for  the 
Militia  was  five  feet  four  inches  until  the  27  th  of  July, 
when  the  Act  43  Geo.  III.  cap.  100,  lowered  the 
height  required  for  substitutes  to  five  feet  two  inches, 
leaving  that  for  principals  untouched ;  while  the 
standard  for  the  Army  of  Reserve  was  five  feet  two  inches 
for  all.  Lastly,  Volunteers  enrolled  before  the  22nd  of 
June  alone  were  exempted  as  such  from  the  Army  of 
Reserve  ;  a  simple  matter  which  is  repeated  here  because 
it  presently  became  complicated  to  the  last  degree. 

The  unhappy  Lieutenancies  bent  themselves  once 
more  to  the  eternal  round  of  ballots  amid  ever-increasing 
difficulties,  for  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act  was  loathed 
as  alike  oppressive  and  unfair.  Men  who  had  paid  ^^lo 
or  ^^15,  sometimes  indeed  both  sums  in  succession,  in 
purchasing  exemption  from  the  Militia,  complained  that 
the  Government  should  have  warned  them  that  this 
penalty  would  not  avail  them  against  the  Army  of 
Reserve,  so  that  they  might  have  spent  their  money  on 
a  substitute.  "  The  people,"  wrote  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond fi-om  Goodwood,  ".  .  .  have  become  suspicious  of 
the  magistrates.  They  cannot  understand  how  a  new  Act 
can  violate  the  engagement  of  the  old.  A  ballot  is  a 
ballot  with  them,  and  when  they  have  bought  exemp- 
tion from  one,  they  cannot  understand  how  they  are 
liable  to  another.  I  warned  Addington  of  this,  and 
hoped  Parliament  would  make  some  remedy."  ^  It  was 
^  I.D.  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S,  23rd  Aug.  1803. 


58  NEW  SCRAMBLE  FOR  SUBSTITUTES  chap. 

1803.  useless  for  men  to  chafe.  The  question  was  raised  more 
than  once,  but  the  Secretary  of  State  was  inexorable — 
fines  paid  in  composition  for  service  in  the  Mihtia  were 
not  valid  as  against  the  Army  of  Reserve  ;  nor  fines 
paid  for  the  Army  of  Reserve  against  the  Militia.^ 

If  there  had  been  a  rush  for  substitutes  before, 
there  was  now  a  headlong  scramble.  Their  price,  in 
spite  of  the  relaxation  of  the  rules  concerning  them, 
flew  up  by  leaps  and  bounds  to  an  extravagant 
height.  The  Secretary  of  State  himself  recognised 
that  it  was  hard  to  expect  the  ranks  to  be  filled 
while  recruits  were  so  dear,  but  he  made  no  sign  of 
relaxing  the  fines  upon  the  parishes  for  men  deficient. 
As  to  the  Deputy-Lieutenants,  they  were  driven  in 
desperation  to  hoard  the  exemption -fines  which  were 
paid  to  them  against  the  happy  day  when  recruits  should 
be  cheaper,  or  when  a  lucky  windfall  should  deliver  into 
their  hands  poachers  or  other  criminals  who  would  be 
glad  to  serve  in  order  to  escape  the  gaol.^  They 
suffered  a  sad  shock  when  the  Law-Officers  of  the  Crown 
pronounced  in  July  that,  though  the  payment  of  a  fine 
exonerated  an  individual  from  serving  in  person  or  by 
substitute  in  the  Militia  or  Reserve,  it  did  not  exonerate 
the  parish  from  fulfilling  the  vacancy.^  Since  the  price 
of  a  substitute  exceeded  twice  the  amount  of  the  fine, 
this  decision  practically  required  them,  to  put  matters 
crudely,  to  make  one  sovereign  purchase  as  much  as  two. 
But  even  so  their  cup  was  not  yet  full,  for  over  and 
above  three  separate  levies  and  the  voluminous  returns 
required  by  the  first  Defence  Act,  there  fell  upon 
them  in  August  the  heaviest  blow  of  all,  namely,  the 
wholesale  and  unexpected  exemption  fi-om  the  ballot 
of  some  hundreds  of  thousands  of  Volunteers. 

1  fF.O.  Mi/a.  Books,  S.S.  to  Sir  A.  Duckenfield,  1st  July;  to 
W.  Walcot,  20th  July  1803  ;  I.D.  vol.  i.  L.L.  Beds,  to  S.S.  2nd 
July  1803. 

2  Hi  J.  S.W.  to  Messrs.  Edwards  and  Hughes,  1 1  th  July ;  to 
Sir  H.  Hanley,  22nd  July  1803. 

3  Il>id.  S.W.  to  High-SherifF  of  Cardigan,  1st  Aug.  1803. 


11  THE  VOLUNTEERS  59 

VIII 

So  far  the  subject  of  the  Volunteers  has  been  but  ^803. 
lightly  touched  ;  and  it  is  now  necessary  to  enter  into  it 
more  deeply.  They  were  reconstituted,  it  will  be 
remembered,  under  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802,  which 
granted  to  them  and  to  the  Yeomanry  (who  at  that  time 
were  ranked  as  Volunteers)  exemption  from  the  Militia 
ballot  in  consideration  of  their  attendance  at  five  days' 
exercise  in  the  year.  Their  allowances  were  also  fixed 
at  j^2  a  man  to  every  Volunteer  for  his  clothing  and 
appointments,  and  ;^6o  a  year  for  every  troop  of 
Yeomanry  which  numbered  at  least  forty  rank  and  file. 
As  the  prospects  of  continued  peace  became  more  dubious, 
the  Government,  on  the  31st  of  March  1803,  invited 
offers  from  additional  Volunteers,  and  gave  an  outline 
of  the  plan  on  which  it  intended  to  act,  adding  that 
"  it  must  be  considered  with  reference  to  a  permanent 
system  rather  than  to  a  situation  of  emergency,"  and 
that  the  extent  of  its  application  must  be  determined  by 
circumstances.  Finally,  it  directed  that  all  offers  of 
service  should  be  communicated  to  the  Secretary  of  State, 
in  order  that  a  selection  might  be  made.  As  to  the  pro- 
posed regulations  (which  were  presently  to  be  slightly 
modified)  it  will  suffice  to  say  at  present  that  they  pro- 
vided for  paying  the  men  for  two  days'  exercise  in  every 
week  from  Lady  Day  to  Michaelmas,  and  granted  them 
exemption  from  the  Militia  ballot  during  their  term  of 
service.  But  the  point  that  calls  for  notice  is  that  a 
Government  which  talked  about  erecting  a  permanent 
system,  and  added  in  the  same  breath  that  "  the  extent 
of  its  application  must  be  determined  by  circumstances," 
could  not  be  considered  to  be  clear  as  to  its  own 
intentions. 

The  new  regulations  remained  under  consideration 
for  two  months,  in  the  course  of  which  they  were  sub- 
mitted to  Colonel  Vyse,  an  officer  who  had  gained 
considerable  experience  of  Volunteers  in  Scotland 
during  the  late  war.      His  advice  may  be  summed  up 


6o  COLONEL  VYSE'S  ADVICE         chap. 

1803.  as  follows:  —  (i)  Do  not  be  too  hard  in  grudging 
pay  to  officers  ;  they  throw  it  into  a  general  fund  to 
make  good  deficient  allowances.  (2)  Make  every 
corps  swear  to  serve  in  any  part  of  Great  Britain  in  case 
of  invasion  ;  and  (3)  to  obey  the  orders  of  the  King  and 
of  the  Generals  appointed  by  him.  (4)  Form  regular 
regiments  in  the  great  towns  only  ;  ^  encourage  inde- 
pendent companies  in  the  coast  towns  only,  and  possibly 
a  few  in  the  north,  but  not  so  as  to  incur  the  heavy  and 
useless  expense  of  the  last  war.  Seventy-five  corps, 
with  12,560  men,  will  be  ample  for  Scotland  ;  in  the 
last  war  you  had  228  corps  with  30,000  men.  You 
might  add  a  few  more  men  on  the  coast,  but  always  as 
parts  of  battalions.  (5)  The  great  defect  of  our  last 
Volunteers  was  the  confused  and  unmilitary  conditions 
under  which  they  were  formed.  Establish  one  system 
for  all  for  clothing,  interior  economy  and  discipline,  and 
we  shall  hear  no  more  of  committees,  quarrels,  and  insub- 
ordination. (6)  Men  should  be  required  to  give  so 
many  days'  notice  of  resignation.  (7)  The  Govern- 
ment should  have  arms  ready  to  give  to  every  accepted 
corps. 

This  was  excellent  and  sound  advice.  Against  the 
second  article  the  Secretary  of  State  wrote  the  words, 
"  I  prefer  to  trust  to  the  spirit  of  the  corps";  and  against 
the  third,  "  Very  proper,  but  quaere ^  It  will  presently 
be  seen  that  the  Government  gave  much  the  same  degree 
of  attention  to  the  whole  of  Vyse's  recommendations. 

Meanwhile  the  offers  of  Volunteers  increased  ;  and 
in  June  the  Government  at  last  produced  and  circulated 
their  definite  plan  for  the  Volunteers.^ 

^  Three  regiments  in  Edinburgh  ;  two  in  Glasgow  ;  one  each  in 
Perth,  Dundee,  and  Aberdeen. 

2  I  cannot  give  the  date  of  the  circular,  for  I  cannot  find  a  sign  of 
it  in  the  Entry  Books  ;  but  the  new  plan  seems  to  have  been  cir- 
culated to  the  Scottish  Lords- Lieutenant  on  20th  June.  Other  impor- 
tant letters  were  also  unentered  ;  and  I  have  been  obliged  to  gather 
their  purport  from  the  answers  sent  to  them.  Nay,  so  careless  were 
the  clerks,  that  the  "  June  Allowances  "  themselves,  the  centre  of 
thousands  of  letters  and  the  subject  of  innumerable  speeches,  would 


II  THE  JUNE  ALLOWANCES  6i 

This  plan  or  code  of  regulations  was  known  by  the       1803. 
name  of  the  '*  June  Allowances,"  a  name  which  the  reader 
must  be  careful  to  bear  in  mind  ;  for  he  will  shortly  be 
confronted  with  another  code  under  the  name  of  the 
"  August  Allowances."     Its  purport  was  as  follows  : — 

( 1 )  Every  man  must  take  the  oath  of  allegiance. 

(2)  Every  corps  that  claims  pay  must  engage  to 
serve  in  any  part  of  its  Military  District. 

(3)  Battalions  of  ten  companies,  or  of  250  to  500 
men,  will  be  allowed  to  have  an  Adjutant  and  a  Sergeant- 
Major  on  permanent  pay. 

(4)  Companies  are  not  to  be  of  fewer  than  50  men, 
or  of  more  than  100.  Four  officers  will  be  allowed  to 
companies  containing  80  or  more  men. 

(5)  Sergeants  on  daily  pay  and  drummers  on  con- 
stant pay  are  to  be  subject  to  military  law. 

(6)  In  each  company  one  officer,  not  above  the  rank 
of  Captain,  will  be  allowed  to  draw  pay.  If  he  is  taken 
from  the  half-pay  and  has  served  eighteen  months  in  the 
Regulars,  Embodied  Militia,  or  Fencibles,  he  will  receive 
the  constant  pay  of  his  rank  as  a  Volunteer.  One  such 
officer,  not  on  half-pay,  who  has  served  two  years  in  the 
Regulars,  Embodied  Militia,  or  Fencibles,  may  receive 
constant  half-pay  of  his  rank  as  a  Volunteer.  Other 
officers  are  to  receive  pay  for  each  day's  exercise,  as 
do  the  men.  No  officer  is  to  receive  pay  for  two 
commissions. 

(7)  The  former  services  of  the  officers  on  constant 
pay  must  be  stated  in  the  pay-list. 

(8)  When  Volunteers  are  not  called  out,  constant 
pay  will  be  allowed  for  one  sergeant  and  one  drummer 
in  each  company  at  the  same  rate  as  in  the  disembodied 
Militia.    The  rest  of  the  non-commissioned  officers  and 

have  been  undiscoverable  had  not  a  Lieutenant  fortunately  sent  his 
own  copy  back  to  the  Home  Office  to  emphasise  his  views  as  to  their 
meaning.  Indeed,  if  a  paper  were  printed  at  that  time,  the  chances 
are  that  not  a  copy  of  it  is  to  be  found.  The  clerks  appear  to  have 
kept  loose  copies  for  their  own  use,  but  only  occasionally  to  have 
stuck  one  into  the  Entry  Book  for  record.  This  is  all  of  a  piece 
with  the  general  slovenliness  of  their  conduct  of  business. 


62  THE  JUNE  ALLOWANCES         chap. 

1803.  men  are  to  receive  pay  at  the  same  rate  as  the  disem- 
bodied Militia  for  two  days  in  every  week  from  the 
25th  of  February  to  the  24th  of  October,  and  for  one 
day  a  week  from  the  25th  of  October  to  the  24th  of 
February,  making  in  all  eighty-five  days'  pay  for  effec- 
tives under  arms  on  each  day. 

(9)  Corps  called  out  to  suppress  riots  will  receive 
pay  as  disembodied  Militia  ;  ^  if  called  out  to  repel 
invasion  they  will  receive  the  same  pay  as  the  Regular 
Army. 

(10)  Clothing  for  infantry  is  to  be  red  ;  for  artillery 
blue  ;  for  rifles,  green  with  black  belts. 

Clothing  Allowances 


For  each  Sergeant 

'     IZ     3     9" 

„        Corporal 

I    12     0 

Once  in 

„        Drummer    . 

•       236 

three  years 

„        Private 

I    10     0 

For  permanent  non-commissioned  officers  the  like 
allowance  will  be  made  annually. 

Allowance  for  Contingencies 

£2^  per  annum  for  every  company  of  fifty  men. 
^5  for  every  ten  men  over. 

(12)  Field  officers  and  Adjutants  will  be  excused  the 
horse  tax  for  one  horse. 

The  proposed  regulations  of  March  had  added  that 
all  officers  and  men  would  be  exempt  from  the  Militia 
Ballot  during  their  period  of  service  ;  but  this  was  a 
matter  already  regulated  by  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802. 
The  June  Allowances,  in  fact,  were  purely  a  financial 
matter,  which  incidentally  tempted  Volunteers  to  undergo 
training  for  eighty-five  days  in  the  year.  For  their  pur- 
pose they  were  liberal ;  and,  attracted  by  them  and 
stimulated  by  the  First  Defence  Act,  the  Volunteers 
began  to  come  forward  very  rapidly.     It  seems,  how- 

^  Sergeants,  is.  6d.  ;  Corporals,  is.  2d.  ;  Privates,  is.  a  day. 


II    LIMITATION  OF  THE  VOLUNTEERS      63 

ever,  that  early  in  the  day  Ministers  became  alarmed  as  1803. 
to  the  effect  of  the  exemptions  of  Volunteers  upon  the 
ballot  ;  and  that  early  in  June  they  circulated  an  inti- 
mation that  no  further  oifers  of  Volunteers  would  be 
accepted  until  the  ballots  for  the  Supplementary  Militia 
were  ended.-'  Certain  it  is  that,  in  spite  of  the  Govern- 
ment's invitation  to  Volunteers  to  come  forward,  few 
corps  were  accepted  in  June  and  July,^  and  that  there 
were  loud  complaints  that  the  Government  was  damping 
the  ardour  of  the  people.  However,  the  Levy  en  Masse 
Act  was  passed  on  the  27th  of  July,  and  circulated  on 
the  30th,  with  a  letter  which  sought  with  indifferent 
success  to  make  matters  clear. 

"Under  section  29  (such  was  the  purport  of  the 
Secretary  of  State's  circular)  provision  is  made  for  the 
training  of  a  certain  number  of  men  in  the  first  instance, 
to  avoid  the  delay  if  all  training  be  deferred  until  the 
returns  of  the  classes  required  by  the  Act  are  made. 
This  proportion  should  be  not  less  than  six  times  the 
number  of  Militia  named  by  the  Militia  Act  of  1802,^ 
exclusive  of  the  Supplementary  Militia  quota.  It  is 
the  decided  opinion  of  Ministers  that  in  all  places  where 
Volunteer  corps  can  be  formed,  upon  such  conditions 
as  the  King  shall  approve,  it  would  be  advisable  to  give 
every  encouragement  for  that  purpose  ;  such  an  arrange- 
ment being  calculated  to  concentrate  the  force,  in  order 
to  promote  the  convenience  of  the  public,  and  to  render 
it  unnecessary  to  have  recourse  to  the  compulsory 
clauses  of  the  Act.  I  need  not  point  out  the  difficulty 
of  issuing   arms  for  the   extensive   training   required 

^  I  can  nowhere  find  this  Circular,  but  I  deduce  its  existence 
and  its  date  from  a  letter  of  L.L.BanfF,  to  S.S.  25th  June,  I.D.  vol.iii. 

2  I  judge  this  from  statements  in  the  Commons'  debates  and  from 
the  Entry  Book,  which  contains  the  letters  as  to  the  offers  of  Volun- 
teers at  this  period  {H.O.M.E.B.  vol.  ciii.)  but  it  is  impossible  to 
say  whether  these  entries  are  complete. 

'  That  number  was,  for  Great  Britain,  51,489;  therefore  the 
number  of  men  to  be  trained  in  the  first  instance  under  the  Levy 
en  Masse  Act  would  be  308,934,  distributed  according  to  the 
quota  of  Militia  in  each  county. 


64  THE  AUGUST  ALLOWANCES        chap. 

1803.  under  the  Act.  I  recommend  an  appeal  to  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  country  to  procure  a  return  of  the  arms  in 
their  possession  in  order  that  they  may  for  a  time  be 
appHed  to  the  service  of  the  country,  and  to  take 
measures  for  distributing  them.  Twenty-five  firelocks 
is  considered  enough  for  the  training  of  one  hundred 
men.  The  information  given  by  these  returns  will  aid 
the  Government  much  in  arranging  for  the  distribution 
of  arms. 

"  The  object  of  the  Act  is  to  obtain  such  a  force,  in 
addition  to  that  which  has  been  already  provided,  as 
may  enable  any  attack  on  the  country  to  be  frustrated, 
and  by  combining  economy  and  vigour  to  continue  the 
contest  as  long  as  may  be  necessary  for  the  honour  and 
security  of  the  empire.  This  communication  is  made 
under  the  impression  of  the  inexpediency  of  establishing 
a  voluntary  force  to  the  extent  now  proposed  upon  the 
allowances  already  transmitted  to  you  [/.<?.  the  June 
Allowances],  and  I  am  persuaded  that  in  the  offers  of 
service  made  to  you  greater  proofs  will  be  afforded  of 
the  liberality  and  public  spirit  which  have  been  so  justly 
excited  by  the  inordinate  ambition  and  avowed  inten- 
tions of  the  enemy." 

This  last  sentence  hinted  unmistakably  that  the 
June  Allowances  were  to  be  discontinued  for  future 
corps  of  Volunteers  ;  and  a  new  circular  of  the  3rd  of 
August  set  all  doubts  at  rest.  "Although  in  many 
instances  the  persons  forming  new  corps  have  offered 
to  put  the  Government  to  no  expense,  yet  it  could  not 
be  expected,  no  matter  how  great  the  public  spirit  of 
individuals,  that  such  an  arrangement  should  become 
general."  And  therewith  were  promulgated  the  new 
allowances,  known  thenceforth  as  the  August  Allow- 
ances, for  the  Volunteers  accepted  after  the  22  nd  of  June. 

They  were  as  follows  : — 

In  the  case  of  Infantry  ;^  i  a  man  was  to  be  granted 
for  clothing  once  in  three  years,  and  a  shilling  a  day 
per  man  was  to  be  given  for  twenty  days'  exercise  in 
the  year. 


II  EFFECT  OF  BILLETING  ACT  6s 

In  the  case  of  cavalry  ;^I20  a  year,  payable  half-       1803. 
yearly,  was  to  be  allowed  for  every  troop.^ 

This  arrangement,  it  was  added,  was  to  be  final, 
unless  it  could  be  so  altered  as  to  produce  no  increase 
of  expense  to  the  public.  Notice,  therefore,  must  be 
given  to  corps  which  had  tendered  their  services  but 
had  not  been  accepted,  in  order  that  they  might  re- 
consider the  matter  before  renewing  their  offer  under 
altered  conditions. 

Here,  then,  was  another  vast  burden  of  work,  both 
difficult  and  complicated,  laid  upon  the  Lieutenancies, 
a  full  examination  of  which  shall  presently  follow.  But 
within  a  little  more  than  a  week  the  Billeting  Act  was 
passed  which,  it  will  be  remembered,  exempted  all 
Yeomen  who  attended  twelve  days'  exercise,  and  all 
Volunteers  who  attended  twenty-four  days'  exercise  in 
the  year  from  the  ballot  for  the  Army  of  Reserve  and 
for  any  other  Additional  Force  that  might  be  raised  in 
the  future.  How  Ministers  contrived  to  commit  this 
extraordinary  blunder  is  a  mystery.  It  is  certain  from 
sec.  8  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act,  and  indeed  from 
their  own  admissions,  that  they  had  no  intention  of 
granting  this  exemption  ;  and  for  some  time  they  would 
not  confess  that  they  had  granted  it.  But  indeed  they 
were  so  ignorant  of  the  effect  of  their  own  enactments 
that  the  Secretary  at  War  actually  thought  that  no 
Volunteers,  saving  those  whose  offer  of  service  had  been 
accepted  before  the  22nd  of  June  1803,  were  exempt 
from  service  in  the  Militia.^  According  to  one 
Member  of  Parliament,  the  clause  which  did  the 
mischief  was  smuggled  through  the  Commons  after 
most  of  the  country  members  had  left  London  in  order 
to  drill  their  Yeomanry  and  Militia  at  home.^  But  the 
insertion  of  the  fatal  words,  however  surreptitious,  can 
hardly   have   been   unknown  to   Ministers.     It  seems 

^  This  item  does  not  appear  in  the  circular  of  3rd  August,  but 
in  a  later  circular  of  28th  Sept.  1803. 

2  /r.O.  Mi/a.  Books,  S.W.  to  C.G.M.  Argyll,  30th  July  1803 
^  Sir  W.  Yonge's  speech,  14th  Dec.  1803,  H.D.  Commons. 

F 


66  READINESS  TO  VOLUNTEER        chap. 

1803.  probable  that  they  really  aimed  at  increasing  the 
number  of  days  prescribed  by  the  Volunteer  Act  of 
1802  to  qualify  Volunteers  for  exemption  from  the 
Mi/ilia,  znd  that  by  some  mistake  or  conspiracy  the 
term  Army  of  Reserve  was  inserted  in  its  place.  Be 
that  as  it  may,  the  thing  was  done,  and  the  country  had 
to  take  the  consequences. 

Meanwhile,  quite  apart  from  this  particular  question 
of  exemption,  it  may  be  said  that  the  entire  nation  had 
sprung  to  arms,  and  was  anxious  to  form  itself  into 
Volunteer  corps.  Though,  on  the  one  hand,  Volunteer- 
ing brought  with  it  immunity  from  the  Militia  ballot, 
and,  on  the  other,  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  threatened  to 
drill  every  able-bodied  man  whether  he  liked  it  or  not, 
there  was  much  sound  patriotic  feeling  in  the  movement. 
The  people  were  zealous  to  defend  their  country,  and 
though  they  decidedly  preferred  to  do  so  in  the  way 
which  they  thought  best,  chiefly  because  it  was  easiest, 
yet  they  asked  above  all  for  guidance.  The  Secretary 
of  State  had  called  for  more  Volunteers  in  March,  and 
his  appeal  had  met  with  a  willing  response.  The 
Lieutenants,  seeing  that  the  Government  had  committed 
itself  to  the  policy  of  Volunteers,  backed  it  with  loyal 
energy  and  good-will,  albeit  there  were  not  wanting 
men  among  them  who,  in  their  hearts,  considered  that 
policy  fallacious.  Even  after  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act 
had  been  passed,  they  abated  none  of  their  energy, 
since  Ministers  evidently  wished  the  people  to  come 
forward  of  themselves  without  compulsion.  But  the 
Government,  despite  of  loud  murmurs,  had  checked 
the  patriotic  movement  by  delaying  the  acceptance  of 
offers  during  the  best  part  of  two  months,  and  seemed 
about  to  pin  its  faith  to  the  ballot  ;  and  hence  when 
it  backed  once  more,  like  an  unstable  wind,  to  the 
voluntary  principle,  there  was  a  sigh  of  relief  and  a 
rush  to  be  enrolled.  But  then  came  another  disappoint- 
ment. The  Government  limited  the  number  of  Volun- 
teers, as  has  been  seen,  by  its  circular  of  the  30th  of 
July.     Many  willing  men  who  aspired  to  shoulder  a 


II     LIMITATION  OF  THE  VOLUNTEERS      67 

musket  were  excluded  ;  so  also  were  a  certain  number       1803. 
more  who  had  apprehended  the  meaning  of  the  Billet- 
ing Act ;  and  there  was  a  fresh  cry  of  discontent. 

By  the  1 8  th  of  August  the  War  Office  was  so  heavily 
inundated  with  offers  of  voluntary  service  that  the 
Secretary  of  State  on  that  day  issued  a  circular  to  the 
Lieutenants  suspending  the  compulsory  training  of 
the  classes  under  the  provisions  of  the  53rd  section 
of  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  but  insisting  none  the  less 
upon  the  enrolment  of  men  in  the  districts  and  parishes 
and  the  furnishing  of  the  returns  required  by  the  Act. 
Also  he  made  another  effort,  by  a  new  circular  to  the 
Lieutenants,  to  keep  the  numbers  of  the  Volunteers 
within  bounds.  "  The  inconveniences  which  must  un- 
avoidably attend  the  carrying  of  the  Volunteer  system  to 
an  unlimited  extent  has  determined  the  King  at  present 
not  to  authorise  the  formation  of  any  additional  Volun- 
teer corps  to  be  raised  in  any  county  where  the  number 
of  effectives  in  their  corps  (including  the  Yeomanry) 
shall  exceed  the  amount  of  six  times  the  Militia,  ex- 
clusive of  the  Supplementary  quota.  In  providing  that 
number  you  will  use  your  judgment  in  selecting  such 
as  shall  be  best  suited  to  local  considerations  ;  but  if 
the  effective  numbers  of  the  corps  recommended  by 
you  have  arrived  at  the  figure  laid  down  above,  you 
will  postpone  the  communication  of  any  further  offers 
of  service  until  the  King  determines  to  increase  the 
Volunteer  corps  in  your  county." 

Evidently  Ministers  were  terrified  at  the  monster 
which  it  had  called  into  being  ;  and  they  were  not 
encouraged  by  the  fresh  outburst  of  murmurs  which 
greeted  this  new  attempt  to  keep  it  within  reasonable 
limits.  At  this  crisis  the  direction  of  the  Volunteers, 
which,  contrary  to  all  precedent,  had  been  so  far  con- 
ducted by  Lord  Hobart,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  War, 
was  transferred  to  its  old  place,  the  Home  Office,  under 
Mr.  Charles  Yorke.  That  unhappy  man,  confronted 
with  mountains  of  unanswered  letters  containing  offers 
of  Volunteer  corps,  took  perhaps  the  only  course  that 


68  VOLUNTEER  SYSTEM  ANOMALIES  chap. 

1803.      was  open  to  him,  and  issued  another  circular  of  31st 
August  to  settle  matters  once  for  all. 

*'  All  the  offers  are  accepted,"  he  said,  "  provided 
that  they  do  not  militate  against  the  regulations  of  the 
Defence  Act  and  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  or  against  the 
general  rules  adopted  or  to  be  adopted.  The  limit  of 
six  times  the  Militia  must  be  preserved,  but  Volunteers 
exceeding  that  proportion  may  be  attached  to  established 
corps,  though  without  any  allowance  for  pay,  arms,  or 
clothing,  and  without  claim  to  exemption  from  any 
ballot.  Further,  all  corps  accepted  since  the  passing  of 
the  two  Acts  above  named  must  be  formed  with  refer- 
ence to  the  general  Militia  system,  that  is  to  say,  com- 
panies of  infantry  must  be  at  least  sixty,  and  troops  of 
cavalry  at  least  forty  men  strong  ;  and  no  infantry  of 
fewer  than  three  companies,  or  cavalry  of  fewer  than 
two  troops,  will  be  reckoned  a  corps." 

Thus  the  question  was  at  last  decided,  so  far  as 
rules  could  decide  it ;  and  the  country  was  finally 
committed  to  the  maintenance  of  a  huge  amorphous 
mass  of  undisciplined  men,  subject  to  two  different 
Acts  of  Parliament,  two  different  sets  of  regulations, 
and  two  different  spheres  of  service,  namely  the 
Military  District  and  Great  Britain  at  large  ;  the  whole 
of  them  immune  from  the  Militia  ballot  under  one  set 
of  conditions  prescribed  by  the  Militia  Act  of  1802, 
and  from  the  Army  of  Reserve  under  a  second  set 
ordained  by  the  Billeting  Act  of  1803. 

Meanwhile  for  some  weeks  there  was  great  un- 
certainty as  to  the  true  state  of  the  law  respecting 
exemptions.  It  is  demonstrable  that  many  men  knew 
the  purport  of  the  Billeting  Act  long  before  the  Lieu- 
tenants ;  and  Yorke  was  bombarded  with  queries  as  to 
its  legal  bearing  upon  the  question,-^  for  in  all  quarters 
the  Magistrates  held  different  opinions,  and  framed 
their  conduct  of  the  ballot  accordingly.  Ministers, 
alive  by  this  time  to  the  effect  of  the  Billeting  Act,  and 

1  E.g.   I.D.  vol.  i.    L.L.  Beds,   to    S.S.   13th    Sept.;    vol.  iv. 
Brecon,  C.  Morgan  to  S.S.  24th  Oct. 


II        NUMBERS  OF  THE  VOLUNTEERS      69 

greatly  dismayed  by  it,  referred  its  interpretation  in  1803. 
despair  to  the  Attorney-General,  who  could  not  but 
pronounce  that  Volunteers  who  fulfilled  the  require- 
ments of  that  Act  were  indeed  exempt  from  the  ballot 
for  the  Army  of  Reserve.  There  was  nothing  for  them 
but  to  give  in,  to  circulate  this  unwelcome  construc- 
tion^ of  their  own  Act  and  submit  to  the  consequences. 
It  may  be  added  that  this  decision  was  by  no  means 
received  with  deference  in  all  quarters.  The  Lieu- 
tenant of  Roxburgh  announced  boldly  that  he  differed 
from  the  Law-Officers;  and  many  magistrates  of  the 
West  Riding  of  Yorkshire  equally  declared  themselves 
unconvinced.  They  could  not  believe  that  the  old 
Volunteers,  who  had  come  forward  from  patriotic 
motives,  were  to  be  put  on  the  same  footing  with  the 
new,  who,  as  the  Lieutenant  put  it,  were  only  Volun- 
teers under  compulsion.^  In  counties  where  there  had 
hitherto  been  hesitation  on  the  part  of  Volunteers  to 
present  themselves,  there  was  now  great  eagerness  to 
form  corps,  for  the  sake  of  the  exemption  ;  and  thus 
the  Government  found  its  scheme  for  the  Volunteers 
legally  defined  in  a  form  which  was  exactly  contrary 
to  its  own  intentions. 

IX 

The  result  of  the  withdrawal  of  some  hundreds  or 
thousands  of  men  from  the  ballot  was  immediate.  By 
December  1803  the  effective  Volunteers  of  all  ranks 
in  Great  Britain  were  returned  at  380,000,  which,  added 
to  70,000  in  Ireland,  made  a  round  total  of  450,000. 

1  The  circular  appears  to  have  been  dated  the  7th  of  October, 
but  the  Lieutenant  of  Roxburgh  was  evidently  aware  of  it  several 
days  earlier,  so  possibly  it  may  have  been  circulated  on  an  earlier 
date.  The  circular  of  7th  October  purports  to  enclose  two  im- 
portant decisions  of  the  Law-Officers ;  but  the  Entry  Clerks,  with 
their  usual  intelligence,  give  no  clue  to  the  nature  and  date  of 
the  enclosures. 

2  I.D.  vol.  xi.  L.L.  Roxburgh,  to  S.S.  28th  Sept.  1803; 
vol.  XXXV.  L.L.  Yorks  W.R.  to  S.S.  2nd  Oct.  1803. 


70  PRICE  OF  SUBSTITUTES  RISES     chap. 

1803.  The  price  of  substitutes  rose  higher  and  higher,  and  their 
quality  sank  lower  and  lower  as  the  autumn  of  1 803  gave 
place  to  the  winter,  and  to  the  spring  of  1 804.  Never- 
theless, the  figure  varied  greatly  in  different  localities.  In 
Aberdeen  the  cost  of  a  substitute  was  ^^20  ;  in  Argyll 
and  Bute  it  was  ^24  ;  in  Berwick  men  were  hardly  to 
be  obtained  on  any  terms.  In  Buckinghamshire  sub- 
stitutes commanded  from  ^^30  to  ^^40  ;  in  Dorset,  £i^\ 
in  Middlesex,  ;^3o  to  ^^60  ;  in  Northumberland  some- 
thing over  £27  i  ^^  Sussex,  £so.  Cases  were  also 
known  where  the  figure  had  reached  £'jOy  ;C8o>  ^^^ 
;^ioo.^  Yet  with  all  this  the  levy  did  not  prosper. 
The  Army  of  Reserve  grew  more  and  more  unpopular, 
insomuch  that  even  in  Scotland  the  Militia,  which  all  the 
while  was  of  course  competing  with  it  for  men,  was 
welcomed  as  a  refuge  from  it.^  To  obtain  recruits  at 
all  in  North  Britain  it  was  necessary  to  violate  the  law  * 
and  to  pay  them  the  entire  bounty  due  to  them,  instead  of 
withholding  one-half  until  they  should  have  joined  their 
battalions.*  In  Staffbrdshire  the  people,  who  had  come 
forward  generally  with  enthusiasm  as  Volunteers,  sus- 
pected the  limitation  of  their  numbers  to  be  due  to  a 
desire  to  complete  the  Army  of  Reserve,  and  declared 
"  that  they  would  sooner  die  on  the  spot  than  submit 
to  it."  ^  Nor  was  the  Army  of  Reserve  distasteful  only 
to  the  people  at  large  ;  it  was  also  intensely  disliked  by 
the  Lieutenancies.  The  principal  reason  for  this  was 
the  friction  to  which  it  gave  rise  with  the  military  authori- 
ties ;    for  not  unfrequently  substitutes  who  had  been 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxxvii.  V.L.  Argyll  and  Bute,  to  S.S.  5th  Sept. 
1804;  vol.  xxxix.  V.L.  Berwick,  to  S.S.  lith  Feb.  1804;  vol. 
xl.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  26th  Dec.  1803  ;  vol.  xlvi.  C.G.M. 
Dorset,  to  S.S.  28th  Feb.  1804  ;  vol.  xxii.  Vestry  Clerks  of  Spital- 
fields  to  S.S.  13th  Oct.  1803  ;  vol.  xxiii,  {adjin^  undated,  1804  ;  vol. 
XXV.  C.G.M.  Northumberland,  to  S.S.  25th  Sept.  1803  ;  vol.  xxxii. 
L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  9th  Sept.  1803.     Military  Transactions,  i.  61. 

2  I.D.  vol.  xxxviii.  L.L.  Nairn,  to  S.S.  9th  Feb.  1804. 
^  42  George  III.  cap.  91,  section  58. 

*  I.D.  vol.  xl.  Mr.  Donald  M'Leod  (Ross)  to  S.S.  28th  Feb. 
1804. 

^  Ibid.  vol.  xxix.  L.L.  Staffs,  to  S.S.  12th  Sept.  1803. 


II  LIEUTENANCIES  AND  ARMY  71 

passed  by  the  medical  authorities  of  the  county  1803. 
were  rejected  by  the  doctors  of  the  Army.^  But 
the  most  fruitful  source  of  dispute  lay  in  the  dis- 
crepancies between  the  county  returns  of  the  men 
who  had  been  produced  and  the  regimental  returns  of 
the  men  who  had  been  received.  It  had  been  wisely 
arranged  by  the  Government  to  draft  the  Army  of 
Reserve  into  fifty  battalions,  numbered  as  the  second 
battalions  of  as  many  regiments  of  the  Line  ;  and 
England,  for  the  purposes  of  the  Act,  was  divided  into 
sixteen  districts,  to  each  of  which  sufficient  officers  were 
furnished  to  form  young,  sickly,  or  worn-out  recruits 
into  distinct  Reserve  battalions.  Between  these  two 
separate  sets  of  regular  officers  the  Lieutenancies  some- 
times suffered  severely.  In  innumerable  cases  counties 
were  summoned  to  make  good  deficiencies  in  their 
quota  upon  the  showing  of  the  Inspector-General  of  the 
Reserve,  and  made  answer  by  indignantly  producing 
their  own  figures,  and  showing  that  no  deficiency 
existed. 

Again,  Ministers  had  never  made  any  secret  of 
the  fact  that  they  hoped  by  means  of  bounties  to  pass 
most  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  as  Volunteers  into  the 
Line  ;  and  very  soon  rumours  were  current  that  the 
officers  were  putting  the  largest  clothes  upon  the  smallest 
men,  giving  them  misfitting  shoes,  and  applying  other 
such  methods  of  petty  tyranny  in  order  to  force  them 
to  take  service  at  once  with  the  Regulars.^ 

This,  of  course,  did  not  promote  good-will  between 
the  two  parties,  and  sometimes  an  unfortunate  mistake 
made  the  relations  between  them  very  bitter.  In  Bute 
the  local  battalion  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  reported  one 
man  to  be  wanting,  and  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  held  a 
ballot  to  fill  the  vacancy.  The  lot  fell  upon  a  thrifity 
and  industrious  shepherd  who  had  contrived  to  buy  and 
breed  a  few  sheep  of  his  own.  In  despair  he  sold  all 
that  he  had,  bought  a  substitute  for  £26 ^  and  was  left 

1  E.g.  I.D.  vol.  xixvii.  L.L.  Ayr,  to  S.S.  26th  March  1804. 
^  I.D.  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  26th  Sept.  1803. 


72     FAILURE  OF  THE  RESERVE  ACT    chap. 

1803.  a  ruined  and  broken-hearted  man.  Shortly  afterwards 
it  was  discovered  that  the  returns  of  the  battalions  were 
wrong,  and  that  he  ought  not  to  have  been  ballotted  at 
all.  The  Deputy-Lieutenant  wrote  an  indignant  report 
of  the  occurrence  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  but  the 
mischief  was  done,  and  there  was  no  undoing  it.^ 

The  difference  between  the  accounts  of  the  Inspector- 
General  and  the  counties  was  generally  explicable  by 
desertion,  aggravated  not  unfrequently  by  the  omission 
or  the  inability  of  military  officers  to  send  a  sufficient 
escort  to  bring  the  recruits  in.  For,  as  the  bounties 
rose,  so  fraudulent  enlistment  and  desertion  increased, 
until  at  last,  by  the  actual  admission  of  Mr.  Secretary 
Yorke,'^  the  recruits  gained  for  the  Army  of  Reserve 
during  the  first  three  months  of  1 804  barely  outbalanced 
the  loss  by  deserters.  Meanwhile  crimping  had  been  so 
general  as  to  engage  the  energies  of  an  appreciable 
portion  of  the  population.  Even  Adjutants  of  Militia 
turned  their  attention  to  it  occasionally,  and  doubtless 
made  a  handsome  profit.^  Deputy-Lieutenants,  more- 
over, in  despair  passed  men  both  for  the  Militia  and  the 
Reserve  who  were  quite  unfit  for  service  in  either  ;  *  but 
even  so  they  could  not  prevent  the  accumulation  of 
enormous  fines  upon  the  parishes  in  their  districts. 
Before  long  they  abandoned  the  attempt  altogether, 
and  Addington  himself  was  fain  to  confess  that  aft:er 
November  1803  the  inconveniences  of  the  Act  exceeded 
its  advantages.  In  April  1804,  to  adopt  the  official 
language  used  by  the  Horse  Guards,  the  Act  died  a 
natural  death,  men  having  ceased  to  come  in,  and  the 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxxvii.  Minute  of  D.L.  of  Bute,  30th  July  1804, 
in  L.L.  to  S.S.  26th  Oct.  1804. 

2  H.  D.  Yorke's  speech,  28th  March  1804. 

'  I.D.  vol.  xxiv.  O.C.  Montgomery  Militia  to  A.G.  17th 
May  1803. 

*  General  Simcoe  reported  that  he  was  training  the  Volunteer 
Artillery  of  the  Stannaries  to  work  the  great  guns  at  Plymouth. 
"  They  are  of  sufficient  stature  for  the  duty,  which  the  Militia 
attached  to  the  Artillery  strikingly  are  not  "  {I.D.  vol.  xxviii.  Simcoe 
to  Warden  of  Stannaries,  26th  Nov.  1803). 


II        FAILURE  OF  THE  RESERVE  ACT       73 

fines  having  reached  a  sum  so  absurdly  great  as  to  be      1803. 
impossible  of  enforcement. 

By  the  end  of  1803,  the  term  appointed  for  the 
enlistment  of  the  49,880  men  required  by  the  Act,  there 
had  been  raised  in  all  40,897  men.  Of  these,  4278,  or 
over  one-tenth,  had  deserted,  1301  had  been  rejected  or 
discharged  for  various  reasons,  and  286  had  died,  leaving 
a  total  of  35,032  nominally  effective,  and  a  deficiency 
of  14,748,  or  fully  30  per  cent.  The  35,032  again 
were  reduced  to  little  more  than  30,000  by  the  elimina- 
tion of  boys  who  could  not  be  fit  for  service  for  two  or 
three  years.  By  the  ist  of  May  1804,  when  the  Act 
was  acknowledged  to  be  dead,  the  Army  of  Reserve 
had  produced  a  nominal  total  of  45,492  men,  of  whom 
2 1 1 6  had  been  discharged  as  unfit  or  for  other  causes, 
589  had  died,  and  5561,  nearly  one-ninth,  had  deserted 
or  were  claimed  as  deserters  by  other  corps,  leaving 
37,136  nominally  effective.  Of  these,  however,  7000 
were  young  and  undersized,  and  had  to  be  drafted  into 
garrison-battalions  until  they  could  grow  up.  Thus 
while  paying  for  45,000  men,  the  country  gained  the 
immediate  services  of  little  more  than  30,000.  Further 
analysis  of  the  figures,  fortunately  rendered  possible 
by  contemporary  returns,  reveals  another  very  remark- 
able fact.  Of  the  entire  number  of  men  raised,  only 
2873  were  principals,  whereas  the  substitutes  numbered 
41,198  ;  so  that  practically  hardly  one  man  in  fourteen 
accepted  personal  service.^  The  Army  of  Reserve, 
therefore,  can  only  be  described  as  a  deplorable  failure. 

For  the  Militia,  unfortunately,  there  are  no  such 
figures  to  hand  ;  but  beyond  all  question  if  they  could 
be  produced  they  would  show  much  the  same  result.  It 
is  at  least  certain  that  in  June  1 804  the  deficiency  in  the 
Militia  of  England  alone  amounted  to  6476  men,  and 
in  that  of  Ireland  (which  had  no  Supplementary  Militia) 

^  These  figures  are  drawn  from  Military  Transactions  of  the 
British  Empire,  180J-1807,  a  volume  compiled  by  the  Military  Secre- 
tary for  the  Commander-in-Chief,  apparently  for  official  circulation 
only,  pp.  63-68. 


74     RECRUITING  FOR  ARMY  KILLED    chap. 

1803.  to  829.  It  is  therefore  safe  to  assume  that  the  deficiency 
for  the  three  kingdoms  must  have  reached  a  total  of 
fully  8000  ;  but  this  was  relatively  much  smaller  than 
in  the  Army  of  Reserve,  the  proportion  of  men  lacking 
being  only  one-twelfth  as  compared  with  one-fourth. 
Nevertheless  the  position  was  very  far  from  satisfactory. 
As  to  the  Regular  Army,  its  powers  of  recruiting 
were  simply  killed  by  the  competition  of  the  Militia  and 
the  Army  of  Reserve.  During  the  last  six  months  of 
1803  there  were  360  recruiting  parties  out,  offering  a 
bounty  of  ^^7  :  12  :  6  to  men  who  as  substitutes  could 
gain  at  any  time  from  £iq>  tO;^50.  They  succeeded 
in  raising  3481  recruits,  of  whom  291  deserted,  leaving 
a  net  total  of  3 1 90.  It  is  true  that  several  thousand  of 
the  Army  of  Reserve  in  due  time  enlisted  in  the  Regulars 
for  an  additional  bounty  of  eight  to  ten  guineas,^  which, 
added  to  that  which  they  had  already  received  as  sub- 
stitutes, made  them  probably  the  most  expensive  recruits 
that  ever  were  obtained.^  Had  Addington  sought  first 
to  fill  the  ranks  of  the  Regular  Army  before  increasing 
the  Militia  or  forming  the  Reserve,  he  might  have 
secured  exactly  the  same  men  for  one  half  of  the  price. 
The  sum  of  the  whole  of  his  elaborate  measures, 
therefore,  amounted  to  this — that  he  starved  the  Army 
to  make  a  large  body  of  Militia  and  Reserve,  and  starved 
the  Militia  and  Reserve  in  order  to  raise  a  vast  crowd  of 
Volunteers. 

X 

It  is  now  time  to  examine  the  composition  and  value 
of  those  Volunteers,  again  reminding  the  reader  that 
with  them  is  included  the  Yeomanry,  which  originally 
bore  the  designation  of  Volunteer  Cavalry.  The  Govern- 
ment's action  towards  the  Volunteers,  so  far  as  we  have 
followed  it,  may  be  summarised  as  follows  : — In  1802 
they  called  them  into  existence  upon  their  own  terms 

1  Eight  guineas  at  once  and  two  guineas  more  (subject  to  deduc- 
tions for  necessaries)  upon  joining  the  first  battalion.  C.C.L.6. 
25th  Feb.  1804.  2  See  Appendix. 


II 


THE  VOLUNTEERS 


75 


of  service,  and  granted  them  exemption  from  the  Militia 
ballot  in  return  for  five  days'  exercise  annually,  together 
with  certain  allowances. 

On  the  31st  of  March  1803  they  called  for  more 
Volunteers,  and  proposed  to  give  them  what  were  after- 
wards known  as  the  June  Allowances. 

Having  called  for  them,  they  became  nervous  lest 
the  exemption  of  a  number  of  Volunteers  should  interfere 
with  the  various  ballots,  and  left  many  of  their  offers 
of  service  unanswered. 

On  the  nth  of  June  they  passed  the  First  Defence 
Act  for  general  training  of  the  people,  and  exempted 
the  Volunteers  from  its  operation. 

A  few  days  later  they  issued  the  June  Allowances, 
which  offered  pay  to  the  men  for  eighty-five  days' 
exercise  in  the  year,  and  required  of  them  an  agreement 
to  serve  within  their  Military  District,  in  return  for  which 
pay  was  granted  to  a  limited  number  of  officers  and  to 
a  permanent  staff.  A  list  of  the  said  Military  Districts 
was  issued  at  the  same  time.^ 


1803. 


^  Scheme  of  Districts  for  Home  Defence  ordered  by  the 
Duke  of  York 


District.  Contents. 

Southern.  Kent,  Surrey,  Sussex  (ex- 
clusive of  London). 

Eastern.  Norfolk,   Suffolk,   Cambs, 

Hants,  Essex. 

London.  (Including  Surrey  within 

the  bills  of  mortality). 

South- West.    Hants,  Wilts,  Dorset. 

Western.  Devon,  Cornwall,  Somer- 

set (exclusive  of  Bristol, 
Bath,  Troubridge,  Ux- 
bridge,  or  other  places 
garrisoned  from  Bristol). 

N.  Western,  Cheshire,  Salop,  Lanes, 
N.  Wales. 

Northern.  Northumberland,  Cumber- 
land, Westmoreland, 
Durham. 

Yorkshire.       Yorkshire,  Lines. 


G.O.C. 
Gen.  Sir  D.  Dundas. 

Lt.-Gen.  Sir  J.  Craig. 

Lt.-Gen.  Gwyn. 

Lt.-Gen.  Gardiner. 
Lt.-Gen.  Simcoe. 


Lt.-Gen.  Prince  William. 
Lt.-Gen.Sir  H.Dalrymple. 

Lt.-Gen.  Lord  Mulgrave. 


76  THE  VOLUNTEERS  chap. 

1803.  While  circulating  these  allowances  the  Secretary  of  State 
announced  that  corps  accepted  after  the  i6th  of  June 
would  not  be  exempt  from  the  ballot  for  the  Army  of 
Reserve.^ 

Ministers  then  again  became  nervous  as  to  the 
expense  of  raising  Volunteers  upon  the  June  Allowances, 
and  delayed  the  acceptance  of  offers  of  service. 

They  then  passed  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  on  the 
27th  of  July  for  the  compulsory  training  of  all  able- 
bodied  men,  with  a  clause  to  suspend  the  operation  of 
the  measure  if  a  sufficient  proportion  of  Volunteers 
should  be  produced  for  each  county,  which  Volunteers 
should  be  bound  to  serve  in  any  part  of  Great  Britain. 
A  circular  of  the  30th  of  July  directed  that  immediate 
training  should  be  given  to  a  number  of  men  equal  at 
least  to  six  times  the  quota  of  the  Ordinary  Militia. 

Next,  on  the  3rd  of  August,  were  produced  the  new 
regulations  known  as  the  August  Allowances,  making 
the  third  set  of  such  regulations  issued  within  twelve 
months,  for  the  government  of  the  new  Volunteers  to 
be  created  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act. 

Then  on  the  1 1  th  of  August  they  passed  two 
Acts,  the  one  to  cancel  the  rigid  rule  as  to  the  pro- 
portion of  Volunteers  to  be  raised  under  the  Levy  en 
Masse  Act ;  the  other  to  grant  Volunteers  exemption 
from  the  ballot  for  the  Army  of  Reserve,  on  condition 
that  the  infantry  underwent  twenty-four  days'  and  the 
Cavalry  twelve  days'  training  within  the  year. 

Finally,  on  the  31st  of  August  Ministers  accepted  the 


I.  of  Wight.                          ...  Maj.-Gen.  Hewett. 

Severn.              Glos.,  Worcester,    Here-  Lt.-Gen.    the    Duke   of 

ford,      Monmouth,      S.  Cumberland. 

Wales. 

Home.              Middlesex,   Herts,   Berks.  Lt.-Gen.  Lord  Cathcart. 

North  Inland.  Derby,  Notts,  Staffs,  Leic,  Lt.-Gen.  Gardiner. 

Warwick,  Rutland, 

South  Inland.  Beds.,      Oxon,        Bucks,  Lt.-Gen.  Gvvynn. 

Northants. 


^  W.O.  6/193.     Circular  of  20th  June  1803. 


II     DIFFICULTIES  OF  LIEUTENANCIES      77 

offers  of  all  Volunteer  corps,  only  stipulating  that  any       1803. 
men  over  and  above  the  quota  of   six  times  the  old 
Militia  should  be  supernumeraries  and  not  entitled  to 
exemption  of  any  kind. 

It  is  hardly  surprising  that  the  Lord-Lieutenants 
should  have  been  puzzled  by  the  amazing  confusion  of 
these  successive  measures.  "  I  wish,"  wrote  the  Lieu- 
tenant of  Devon,^  plaintively  on  the  29th  of  August, 
•*  that  the  Acts  of  Parliament  and  instructions  framed 
upon  them  were  clearer.  The  general  idea  is  that 
Volunteers  to  any  extent  are  to  be  accepted,  and  there 
is  disappointment  owing  to  the  corps  being  refused. 
Refusals  also  spread  a  false  notion  that  the  danger  is 
abated."  And  this  is  but  one  example  out  of  many. 
Much  trouble  also  was  caused  by  the  carelessness  of  the 
Home  Office  in  omitting  to  forward  copies  of  Acts  of 
Parliament  to  the  Lieutenancies,  but  communicating  them 
to  the  newspapers.  **  I  never  heard,"  wrote  the  Vice- 
Lieutenant  of  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire  on  the  2nd 
of  May  1804,  "  of  the  Act  of  27th  July  1803  for  com- 
pleting the  Militia  until  yesterday,  nor  had  another  very 
active  magistrate  of  this  county."  ^  The  Lieutenant  of 
Bedford,  a  peer  of  the  realm,  complained  bitterly  that 
the  Acts  were  not  forwarded  to  him ;  but  he  was  obliged 
to  write  twice  before  he  could  obtain  a  copy  of  the 
Billeting  Act.^  "  Your  last  circular,"  wrote  the  Lieu- 
tenant of  Cornwall,  "  I  read  complete  in  the  Sun  news- 
paper before  I  received  it.  In  the  newspaper  it  was 
dated  the  22  nd  of  September  ;  in  the  official  copy  it 
is  dated  the  28  th."  '^ 

Added  to  the  difficulty  of  ascertaining  the  law  of  the 
land  was  that  of  divining  the  wishes  of  the  Govern- 
ment. Did  Ministers  really  want  Volunteers  or  not  } 
This  was  a  question  which  the  Lieutenancies  found 
it  hard  to  answer,  and  they  found  it  none  the  easier 

1  The  writer's  great-grandfather,   the    mild   patience  of  whose 
protest  he  cannot  but  admire.         ^  I.D,  vol.  Ixvii.  2nd  May  1804. 
3  LD.  vol.  i.  LL.  Beds,  to  S.S.  13th,  30th  Sept.  1803. 
*  Ibid.  vol.  viii.  LL.  Cornwall,  to  S.S.  5th  Oct.  1803. 


78   DIFFICULTIES  OF  LIEUTENANCIES  chap. 

1803,  because  the  direction  of  the  Volunteers,  as  has  been  seen, 
changed  hands  from  the  War  Office  to  the  Home  Office 
in  the  course  of  1803.  A  few  of  the  Lieutenants  were 
opposed  to  the  whole  principle  of  Volunteering,  but 
though  these  did  not  conceal  their  opinions,  only  one  of 
them,  Lord  Essex  in  Herefordshire,  frankly  set  his  face 
against  them  until  the  ballots  should  have  been  held. 
He  was  at  once  taken  to  task  for  neglecting  the 
Volunteers.  He  answered  sharply  enough,  "  Every  one 
will  offer  [to  volunteer]  to  escape  the  ballot.  .  .  .  The 
Militia  are  246  men  short  ;  and  the  subdivison-clerks 
supported  by  the  country  gentlemen  ballot  illegally  by 
throwing  several  parishes  into  one,  so  that  the  parishes 
guilty  of  failing  to  complete  their  quota  shall  not  be 
detected.  I  thought  that  I  was  acting  in  conformity 
with  your  orders  in  discountenancing  Volunteers  until 
the  ballots  were  complete,  but  now  that  I  know  to 
the  contrary  I  will  act  differently.  Most  of  the  Volun- 
teer offers  here  have  originated  with  a  view  to  meet  the 
approach  of  the  next  General  Election  rather  than  the 
enemy.  I  shall  be  glad  to  leave  the  whole  business  to 
the  Vice-Lieutenant."  ^  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  county 
of  Montgomery,  where  Volunteers  were  unknown 
before  the  passing  of  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  the 
Lieutenant  submitted  no  offers  until  he  had  received  all 
that  were  likely  to  be  sent  in.  Whereupon  Mr,  Yorke 
wrote  in  the  margin,  "  Perfectly  right.  I  wish  every  one 
had  done  the  same."  ^  No  doubt  it  would  have  been 
more  convenient  if  all  the  Lieutenants  had  acted  upon 
this  principle  ;  but  Ministers  solely  were  to  blame,  for 
at  the  beginning  they  had  only  asked  vaguely  for  more 
Volunteers,  upon  which  the  Lieutenants  naturally  for- 
warded every  offer  that  was  sent  to  them. 

Another  extraordinary  mistake  on  the  part  of  the 
Government  lay  in  fixing  the  same  quota  for  all  counties, 
whether  inland  or  upon  the  coast.  The  maritime 
counties  naturally  demanded,  and  some  of  them  ulti- 

1  I.D.  vol.  xvi.  L.L.  Hereford,  to  S.S.  12th  Oct.  1803. 
2  Ibid.  vol.  xxiv.  Mr.  Mytton  to  S.S.  5th  Sept.  1803. 


II        THE  THREE  VOLUNTEER  CODES      79 

mately  obtained,  a  larger  allowance  than  the  rest ;  but       1803. 
the  omission  to  discriminate  between  them  led  to  vast 
correspondence  and  to  a  good  deal  of  ill-feeling. 

But  the  most  fruitful  source  of  confusion  undoubtedly 
lay  in  the  existence  of  three  different  codes  for  the 
regulation  of  the  Volunteers,  and  in  the  variety  of  their 
conditions  of  service,  which  not  only  gave  enormous 
trouble  to  all  concerned,  but  in  case  of  invasion  must 
have  caused  great  embarrassment  to  the  Generals  in 
the  field.  Of  the  whole  number  of  342,000  effective 
rank  and  file  (that  is  to  say  corporals  and  privates) 
comprised  in  the  Volunteers  of  Great  Britain,  207,000, 
or,  including  supernumeraries,  211 ,000,  were  more  or 
less  subject  to  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  and  the  August 
Allowances,  and  were  therefore  liable  to  serve  in  any 
part  of  Great  Britain  ;  67,000  were  more  or  less  under 
the  June  Allowances,  and  by  the  positive  act  of  the 
Government  were  liable  to  serve  in  their  Military  Dis- 
trict only  ;  and  63,000  were  more  or  less  self-supporting 
and  subject  to  special  terms  which  might  extend  to 
service  all  over  Great  Britain  or  might  limit  their 
sphere  of  action  to  their  parish  or  a  short  radius  beyond 
it.-^  The  Government  was  naturally  anxious  to  have  as 
few  little  isolated  corps  as  possible,  and  rightly  encour- 
aged the  amalgamation  of  troops  and  companies  into 
regiments  and  battalions.  But  the  inevitable  result  was 
that  within  the  same  corps  were  to  be  found  perhaps 
two  troops  on  the  June  Allowances,  and  five  or  six  on 
the  August  Allowances.  The  latter  were,  of  course,  very 
jealous  of  their  more  favoured  brethren,  and  this 
inevitably  gave  rise  to  friction.  Again,  there  arose  the 
difficulty  as  to  filling  vacancies  in  the  corps  on  the 
June  Allowances.  Were  these  corps  to  be  kept  up 
to  strength  or  not  ?  There  could  be  but  one  answer. 
The  men  who  raised  them  having  undertaken  to  do  so 

^  I  derive  these  figures  from  a  long  MS.  return  in  the  Library  at 
Windsor  Castle,  dated  i6th  Dec.  1803.  I  have  used  the  modifica- 
tion, more  or  less,  because  it  is  often  extremely  difficult  to  understand 
what  were  the  allowances  granted  to  some  of  the  corps. 


8o        CONFUSION  OF  ALLOWANCES      chap. 

1803.  under  certain  conditions,  it  was  impossible  for  the 
Government  to  go  back  upon  them.  Hence  officers 
commanding  corps  under  the  June  Allowances  may  be 
said  to  have  enjoyed  a  peculiar  kind  of  patronage  ;  and 
it  was  not  unknown  for  the  commander  of  a  corps  under 
the  August  Allowances  to  find  that  several  of  his  men, 
without  saying  a  word  to  him,  had  transferred  them- 

^  selves  to  another  regiment  on  the  June  Allowances.    The 

distinction  between  the  two  conditions  was  felt  the 
more  acutely  because  in  many  instances  volunteers  had 
sent  in  their  offers  of  service  in  good  time  to  be 
accepted  before  the  22nd  of  June,  but,  receiving  no 
answer  until  after  that  day,  were  reduced  to  the  level  of 
men  who  had  only  become  Volunteers  under  pressure  of 
the  Levy  en  Masse  Act.  This  trick,  for  it  cannot  be 
dignified  by  a  higher  name,  was  very  much  resented  ; 
and  it  need  hardly  be  added  that  the  burden  of  making 
good  the  shortcomings  of  the  Government  fell  upon  a 
few  patriotic  gentlemen.  One  such,  who  had  raised 
two  companies  in  Gloucestershire,  counting  upon  the 
June  Allowances,  and  had  already  spent  ^^  7  a  man  in 
clothing,  equipping,  and  arming  them,  found  himself 
saddled  with  a  further  expense  of  ^^  1 00  for  the  pur- 
chase of  substitutes  for  some  of  his  men.  The  Duke 
of  Atholl  wrote  that  the  pernicious  results  of  two  con- 
current rates  of  allowance  could  only  be  averted  in 
Perthshire  by  private  subscriptions,  which  would  raise 
the  August  Allowances  to  the  level  of  the  June  Allow- 
ances. He  reckoned  the  cost  to  himself  and  his  col- 
leagues at  j^  1 0,000  annually,  and  added  that  in  many 
instances  landlords  would  have  to  pay  more  than  their 
annual  rental.  *'  Had  the  August  Allowances  been  the 
only  allowances,"  he  wrote,  '*  we  might  have  carried  the 
measure  into  effect,  though  so  small  proportion  of  dis- 
cipline [twenty  days'  exercise]  would  have  formed  little 
better  than  an  armed  rabble  ;  but  to  call  on  them  [the 
recipients  of  August  Allowances]  for  more  extensive 
service  [in  any  part  of  Great  Britain]  when  the  June 
Volunteers  were  called  on  for  service  in  the  district  only, 


II      CONFLICTING  VOLUNTEER  ACTS        8i 

makes  it  impossible."  However,  the  Duke  called  a  1803. 
meeting  to  collect  subscriptions  ;  and  by  the  generosity 
of  himself  and  of  his  brother  landlords  the  full  proportion 
of  Volunteers  for  the  county  was  completed.  None  the 
less  it  was  iniquitous  that  these  gentlemen  should  have 
been  subjected  to  an  extraordinary  tax,  simply  to  make 
good  the  mismanagement  of  the  Government.^ 

Another  miserable  complication  was  that  no  one  knew 
whether  Volunteers  receiving  the  August  Allowances 
were  governed  wholly  by  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  or  in 
part  also  by  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802.  Under  the 
Volunteer  Act  all  claims  for  exemption  from  the  ballot 
had  to  be  furnished  by  the  21st  of  September  in  every 
year,  so  that  the  days  of  exercise  necessary  to  qualify 
for  exemption  had  to  be  accomplished  before  that  day. 
The  magistrates  in  various  parts,  possibly  indeed  in  the 
whole  of  England,  very  naturally  and  sensibly  took  the 
Volunteer  Act  of  1 802  as  their  principal  guide  in  dealing 
with  that  particular  force  ;  and  finding  that  few  of  the 
new  corps  had  performed  the  necessary  number  of  drills, 
promptly  declined  to  allow  them  exemption.  The  case 
was  hard,  because  the  Government  had  so  long  delayed 
the  acceptance  of  Volunteers,  and  the  clerks,  moreover, 
were  so  dilatory  in  giving  them  official  recognition  in  the 
GazettCy  that  many  corps,  with  the  best  of  good  will, 
could  not  possibly  have  fulfilled  the  necessary  days  of 
training.  They  went  out,  however,  as  often  as  they 
could  ;  and  their  commanders  appealed  to  the  Secretary 
of  State  to  be  indulgent.  In  Surrey  the  magistrates, 
perceiving  the  hardships  that  might  be  involved  in  the 
question,  suspended  the  ballot  until  all  doubts  should  be 
resolved  by  the  Law-Officers,  lest  men  who  had  really 
earned  their  exemption  should  be  drawn.  The  Secretary 
of  State's  answer,  however,  was  short — he  could  not 
interfere  with  the  working  of  Acts  of  Parliament — and 
there  arose  new  causes  of  discontent  among  the  Volun- 

^  I.D.  vol.  XV.  Gloucestershire,  Capt.  Bricknell  to  S.S.  27th 
Feb.  1804;  vol.  xxvii.  L.L.  Perth,  to  S.S.  14th,  27th  Aug.,  8th 
Oct.  1803. 

G 


82  DIFFICULTIES  AS  TO  EXEMPTIONS  chap. 

1803.      teers,  and    new    confusion    as    to    the    enactments   by 
which  they  were  governed.^ 

Yet  another  trouble  arose  from  the  action  of  the 
Government  in  combining  the  requirements  of  the  June 
with  the  pay  of  the  August  Allowances.  The  new  Volun- 
teers of  course  needed  adjutants  and  sergeant-majors  as 
much  as  the  old,  but  were  informed  first  that  no  pay  would 
be  allowed  for  a  permanent  staff,  except  in  very  special 
circumstances,  in  corps  raised  after  the  3rd  of  August.2 
This  position  proving  untenable,  Ministers  in  November 
offered  pay  for  an  adjutant  to  every  infantry  corps  of 
500,  and  every  cavalry  corps  of  300  ;  for  a  sergeant- 
major  to  every  infantry  corps  of  200,  and  every  cavalry 
corps  of  120  ;  and  both  adjutant  and  sergeant-major  to 
every  infantry  corps  of  1000  and  every  cavalry  corps 
of  600  effective  rank  and  file,  provided  that  they  agreed 
to  undergo  eighty-five  days'  exercise  in  the  year.  This 
roused  much  indignation  in  the  parties  concerned,  for 
whereas  the  corps  under  the  June  Allowances  received 
pay  for  the  whole  of  the  eighty-five  days,  those  under 
the  August  Allowances  received  pay  for  but  twenty. 
The  theory  seems  to  have  been  that  fifty-two  out  of 
the  eighty-five  drills  were  to  be  held  on  Sundays,  on 
which  day  no  man  received  wages  ;  that  twenty  days' 
payment  made  up  the  fifty-two  to  seventy-two,  and 
that  each  corps  must  make  its  own  shift  to  eke  out  the 
remaining  thirteen  days,  or,  in  other  words,  must  be  in- 
demnified by  the  officers.  The  complaints  against  such 
treatment  were  bitter,  especially  in  Scotland.  "  We 
enlisted  our  Volunteers  for  twenty  days'  drill,"  wrote 
Lord  Dalkeith  ;  "  we  cannot  now  call  on  them  for 
sixty-five  days  more  ;  and  yet  on  that  account  we  must 
lose  our  adjutant."  ^  The  Secretary  of  State  then  fell 
back  on  the  excuse  that  twenty  days*  pay  was  enough 
for  eighty-five  days'   drill  of  only  two  hours  a  day. 

^  I.D.  vol.  iv.  Brecon,  Charles  Morgan  of  Tredegar  to  S.S.  24.1!! 
Oct.  ;  vol.  xviii.  Kent,  Capt.  Powis  to  S.S.  25th  Nov.;  vol.xxxi.  V.L. 
Surrey,  to  S.S.  8th  Dec.  1803.  2  Circular  of  28th  Sept. 

3  J  D  yoi^  y.\   L  L_  Dumfries,  to  S.S.  3rd  Nov.  1803. 


II  CONCESSIONS  TO  VOLUNTEERS        83 

"But  this,"  wrote  Sir  John  Murray,  from  Perthshire,  1803. 
*'  makes  no  allowance  for  time  consumed  in  dressing 
and  coming  to  parade,  in  these  parts  often  six  or  eight 
miles.  Moreover,  two  hours  a  day  is  not  training 
enough  for  recruits.  Men  cannot  be  disciplined  as 
soldiers  in  1 70  hours,  much  less  in  40  hours.  Again, 
it  is  urged  that  the  men  have  the  advantage  of  clothing. 
This  is  no  advantage.  The  men  have  only  the  trouble 
of  cleaning  it,  and  the  Government  pays  not  one-third 
of  the  cost.  .  .  .  The  eighty-five  days'  drill  was 
claimed  in  return  for  the  use  of  an  adjutant,  as  if  it 
were  a  personal  advantage  to  the  Volunteers.  But  the 
Government  will  not  get  the  value  even  of  its  trifling 
twenty  shillings  [twenty  days'  pay  for  one  man]  unless 
it  provides  proper  instructors."^ 

Complaints  such  as  this  could  hardly  be  passed 
over ;  and  the  Government  presently  receded  once  more, 
granting  in  January  both  adjutants  and  sergeant- 
majors  on  easier  terms,  and  adding  in  February  that 
Volunteers  who  attended  inspections  should  receive  pay 
for  the  same,  provided  such  inspections  did  not  recur 
more  frequently  than  once  in  two  months.  Thus,  under 
the  pretext  of  anxiety  for  frequent  musters  of  Volunteers, 
Government  doled  them  out  pay  for  six  additional  days 
in  the  year.^  These  concessions,  having  been  wrung  from 
Ministers  against  their  will,  were,  of  course,  received  with 
a  growl  instead  of  with  thanks  ;  but  this  was  always  the 
fate  of  Addington  and  his  colleagues.  Having  by  sheer 
ignorance  and  carelessness  called  the  Volunteers  into  being 
on  easy  terms,  they  tried  to  impose  harder  conditions  by 
a  side  wind,  and  were  invariably  beaten  in  the  attempt. 

XI 

The  most  serious  trouble  of  all  arose  out  of  the 
lack  of  arms.  Colonel  Vyse,  it  will  be  remembered, 
had  particularly  cautioned   Ministers  against   creating 

^  I.D.  vol.  xxvii.  Sir  John  Murray  to  S.S.  14th  Dec.  1803. 
2  Circular  of  1 5th  Jan.  1804. 


84  DIFFICULTIES  AS  TO  ARMS         chap. 

1803.  corps  which  they  could  not  arm  ;  but  they  boldly 
enrolled  hundreds  of  thousands  of  men  on  the  under- 
standing that  twenty-five  muskets  for  every  hundred  men 
would  be  sufficient  for  purposes  of  instruction,  and  that 
pikes  would  be  cheerfully  accepted  by  the  remaining 
seventy-five.  Never  were  the  authorities  more  pitifully 
deceived.  It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  the  clerks 
in  Downing  Street  were  extremely  casual  as  to  the  gazet- 
ting of  officers  ;  and  as  no  corps  could  receive  arms  until 
gazetted,  this  formed  an  initial  source  of  discontent. 
There  was  one  case  of  twenty-four  companies,  which 
were  offered  in  May,  accepted  in  June,  and  still  waiting 
to  be  gazetted  in  September.^  But  the  majority  of  the 
complaints  upon  this  head  arose  from  actual  failure  in  the 
supply  of  arms.  Such  complaints  are  very  numerous, 
but  the  selection  of  a  certain  number  will  show  how 
serious  would  have  been  the  danger  of  an  invasion,  had 
Napoleon  attempted  it  in  the  autumn  of  1803.  From 
Ayr  it  was  reported  in  November  that  many  of  the 
Volunteer  corps  were  still  incomplete,  want  of  arms 
having  checked  the  spirit  of  the  people.^  The  Lieu- 
tenant of  Berkshire  asked  plaintively  how  he  was  to 
distribute  603  muskets  among  2763  men  ;  and  one  of  his 
commanders  complained  in  October  that  his  men  had  been 
clothed  and  drilled  for  weeks,  but  that  unless  weapons 
were  given  to  them  at  once  they  would  learn  nothing 
about  them  till  next  summer,^  From  Nairn  came  in 
September  a  wail  that  was  distressing.  "  The  situation 
of  the  North  of  Scotland  is  truly  deplorable,  left  with- 
out arms  of  any  description.  .  .  .  All  efforts  to  get  arms 
for  the  Volunteers  so  far  useless.  .  .  .  Not  a  man  in 
arms  (though  many  are  willing)  to  north  of  Aberdeen, 
except  two  companies  at  Elgin.  .  .  .  We  are  all  at  the 
mercy  of  any  petty  privateer."  *    From  Sutherland  a  com- 

1  I.D.  vol.  i.  V.L.  Argyll,  to  S.S.  nth  Sept.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  i.  L.L.  Ayr,  to  S.S.  9th  Nov.  1803. 

^  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  L.L.  Berks,  to  S.S.  19th  Sept.  1803  ;  J.  Weyland 
to  S.S.  24th  Oct.  1803. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  iii.  L.L.  Nairn,  to  S.S.  6th  Sept.  1803. 


II  DIFFICULTIES  AS  TO  ARMS  85 

mander  reported  late  in  October  that  he  had  had  11 20  1 803. 
men  enrolled  in  his  two  battalions  for  some  months  but 
had  no  weapons  for  them.^  In  Dumfries,  at  about  the  same 
time,  only  106  firelocks  had  been  supplied  for  1200 
men.2  The  Lieutenant  of  Buckinghamshire  protested 
at  the  end  of  October  that  so  far  the  county  had  not 
received  a  single  musket  or  pike.^  In  Cornwall  the 
Lieutenant,  after  war  had  been  declared  fifteen  months, 
went  near  to  lose  his  temper.  "No  new  corps,"  he 
wrote,  "  will  ever  be  effective  unless  the  Ordnance 
supply  arms.  I  lately  applied  for  some,  and  was  told 
that  Cornwall  had  a  thousand  more  than  she  was 
entitled  to.  If  you  continue  to  accept  corps,  pray 
order  the  Ordnance  to  arm  them,  or  acceptance  is  a 
farce."  *  From  Denbigh,  towards  Christmas  time,  the 
Lieutenant,  having  with  reason  lost  patience,  wrote 
likewise  with  unusual  warmth  :  '*  I  cannot  get  from 
the  Ordnance  a  single  musket,  nor  a  word  as  to  the 
price  that  they  will  allow  to  those  who  provide  themselves 
with  arms.  Unless  something  is  done  soon,  the  Volun- 
teer corps  will  disperse."  ^  In  Derbyshire  the  lack  of 
arms  was  lamented  as  a  grievous  misfortune,^  In 
Durham  the  Lieutenant  took  a  higher  tone  :  "  If  only 
half  the  Volunteer  force  is  to  be  armed,  and  if  that  half 
is  to  depend  on  the  arms  issued  during  the  last  war,  it 
will  damp  the  spirit  and  energy  of  the  people,  who  are 
already  in  some  degree  hurt  and  disgusted  by  all  the 
changes  in  the  arrangements  for  the  Volunteers."  "  .  .  . 
From  Flint,  in  July  1804,  a  gentleman  who  had  offered 
to  raise  and  clothe  a  corps  if  the  Government  would 
arm  it,  reported  that  he  had  been  obliged  to  exceed  his 
contract  and  purchase  weapons  as  well  as  clothes,  and 
would  therefore  be  obliged  by  the  grant  of  the  usual 

1   I.D.  vol.  vi.  Sutherland,  David  Campbell  to  S.S.  2 1st  Oct.  1803. 
2  Ibid.  vol.  xi.  V.L.  Dumfries,  to  S.S.  22nd  Oct.  1803. 

3  ji,jj^  voi_  v.L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  28th  Oct.  1803. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  xliv.  L.L.  Cornwall,  to  S.S.  25th  Oct.  1804. 

5  Ibid.  vol.  ix.   L.L.  Denbigh,  to  S.S.  24th  Dec.  1803. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  ix.  Joshua  Strutt  to  S.S.  17th  Nov.  1803. 

'  Ibid.  vol.  xii.  L.L.  Durham,  to  S.S.  loth  Sept.  1803. 


86  DIFFICULTIES  AS  TO  ARMS      chap. 

1803.  clothing  allowance.^  The  Mayor  of  Bristol  brought 
forward  a  new  difficulty.  He  had  1400  Volunteers 
who,  in  rotation,  were  finding  a  guard  for  French 
prisoners.  There  being  but  500  stand  of  arms  between 
the  1400,  the  muskets  were  necessarily  passed  from 
hand  to  hand,  which  led  to  disputes  as  to  who  should 
keep  them  clean,  and  to  much  discontent.^  In  Hamp- 
shire, a  county  in  which  every  man  should  have  been 
trained,  several  Volunteers  resigned  from  impatience  at 
being  left  without  arms.^  From  Lancashire  the  Lieu- 
tenant, most  loyal  and  zealous  of  men,  week  after 
week  in  vain  repeated  his  remonstrances  against  the 
Ordnance  for  leaving  his  county  unarmed.*  In 
Northumberland  the  Duke  had  raised  and  clothed 
1300  men  at  his  own  expense,  asking  no  allowance  for 
them  but  only  arms  and  belts ;  yet  the  General 
commanding  the  district  reported  that  the  Volunteers 
were  "  likely  in  point  of  discipline  to  be  no  more  than 
a  name,  as  the  greater  number  were  without  any  arms 
whatever."  ^  FromlPembrokeshire  the  Lieutenant  sent 
word  in  September  that  he  had  written  to  the  Ordnance 
repeatedly,  but  had  failed  to  obtain  half  the  arms  neces- 
sary for  his  Volunteers  :  "  Their  zeal  is  cooling,"  he 
added,  "and  I  firmly  believe  that  in  the  course  of 
a  month  the  greater  part  or  the  whole  will  go  to 
the  right  "about."  ^  In  Staffordshire,  as  Lord  G. 
Leveson  Gower  declared  in  debate,  not  a  firelock  had 
been  received  up  to  the  middle  of  December.^  In 
Shropshire,  by  February  1804,  only  600  arms  had  been 
obtained  out]  of  1 300  due  to  the  county  ;  and  it  was 
only  by  general  patriotic  exertion  that  4000  out  of 
5000  Volunteers  were  provided  with  weapons.^    Lastly, 

1  I.D.  vol.  xiv.  W.  D,  Shipley  to  L.L.  21st  July  1804, 

2  Ibid.  vol.  XV.  Mayor  of  Bristol  to  S.S.  5th  Oct.  1803. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  xvi.  L.L.  Hants,  to  S.S.  4th  Oct.  1803. 

*  /^;V/.  vol.  xix.  L.L.  to  S.S.   loth  Sept.  1803,  and   subsequent 
letters. 

^  Ibid.  vol.  XXV.  Sir  H.  Dalrymple  to  A.G.  21st  Sept.  1803. 
^  Ibid.  vol.  xxvii.  L.L.  Pembroke,  to  S.S.  26th  Sept.  1803. 
"^  H.D.  Commons,   13th  Dec.  1803. 
8  I.D.  vol.  Ixii.  V.L.  Salop,  to  S.S.  22nd  Feb.  1804. 


II  DIFFICULTIES  AS  TO  ARMS  87 

from  Surrey  a  Colonel  of  Volunteers  wrote  that  his  men  1803. 
had  provided  themselves  with  220  muskets  out  of  600, 
and  that  unless  the  remaining  380  were  at  once  found 
by  the  Ordnance,  the  corps  would  be  broken  up  : 
"  The  men,"  he  added,  "  have  drilled  for  three  months 
without  arms,  and  are  tired  of  it."  ^ 

Such  are  samples  of  the  cries  that  assailed  the  War 
Office  and  the  Home  Office  during  the  years  1803  and 
1804  ;  but  these  by  no  means  indicate  the  whole  of 
the  mischief  and  confusion.  Owing  sometimes  to  the 
carelessness  of  Lieutenants,  and  sometimes  to  sheer 
foolishness  at  headquarters,  violent  local  jealousies  were 
aroused  by  the  partial  issue  of  arms.  Staffordshire  was 
much  affronted  at  receiving  no  muskets,  while  Derby- 
shire, Leicestershire,  and  Warwick  were  fully  supplied.'* 
Berkshire  was  rent  asunder  and  the  Lieutenant  much 
incensed  by  the  action  of  the  Ordnance  in  consigning 
190  muskets  direct  to  the  Windsor  Volunteers,  an 
insignificant  corps  of  180  men,  and  that  though  they 
were  only  entitled  to  one  firelock  for  every  four  men, 
and  the  distribution  was  supposed  to  be  left  to  the 
Lieutenant.^  In  Shropshire,  by  a  similar  blunder,  the 
whole  proportion  of  the  county's  arms  was  delivered  to 
the  Shrewsbury  Volunteers,  the  last  corps  which  came 
forward  to  offer  its  services  and,  even  so,  under  600 
strong.  The  Secretary  of  State,  being  adjured  to  make 
these  Shrewsbury  men  disgorge  their  ill-gotten  treasure, 
declined  in  the  name  of  peace  and  quietness  to  inter- 
fere ;  whereupon  the  commander  of  another  corps  of 
1 800  men  peremptorily  demanded  the  muskets  in  order 
to  keep  his  men  in  a  good  humour.  And  so  the  battle 
raged  in  Salop,  with  the  general  result  that  every  one 
was  aggrieved.*     In  Hertfordshire  similar  dissensions 

^  I.D.  vol.  xxxi.  Letter  enclosed  in  L.L.  Surrey,  to   S.S.  loth 
Sept.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  xxix.  L.L.  StafFs,  to  S.S.  26th  Dec.  1803. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  L.L.  Berks,  to  S.S.  20th  Nov.  1803. 

*  Ibid.   vol.  xxviii.  L.L.  Salop,  to  S.S.    31st  Oct.   1803  ;  Mr. 
Kynaston  Powell  to  S.S.  loth  Nov.  1803. 


88  ARMS  AND  EXEMPTIONS         chap. 

1803.  arose  from  the  action  of  the  Lieutenant  himself.  The 
Board  of  Ordnance  sent  590  stand  of  arms,  being  the 
due  number  for  a  quarter  of  the  county's  Volunteers  ; 
but  the  Lieutenant,  who  was  interested  personally  in 
the  First  Regiment,  seized  480  of  them  for  behoof  of  the 
favoured  corps,  and  left  the  rest  to  *'  scramble  as  they 
could  "  for  the  remaining  1 10.^ 

Even  this  did  not  exhaust  the  troubles  that  arose 
from  the  Government's  want  of  foresight  in  the  matter 
of  weapons.  It  was  ordained  by  Act  of  Parliament  that, 
to  gain  their  exemption.  Volunteers  must  appear  at 
exercise  "  properly  armed  and  equipped."  This  of 
course  brought  up  the  question  whether  such  a  regulation 
could  be  enforced  when  the  Government  had  failed  to 
provide  arms.  As  usually  happened,  the  Deputy- Lieu- 
tenants took  different  views  in  different  parts  of  the 
country.  In  Shropshire  they  chose  the  strictly  logical, 
though  very  unfair,  method  of  exempting  the  officers, 
who  of  course  had  provided  themselves  with  swords, 
and  not  exempting  the  men  ;  a  decision  against  which 
the  Colonel  protested  with  justifiable  indignation. 
"  Surely,"  he  wrote,  "  arms  and  clothing  are  not 
necessary,  besides  twenty- four  days'  drill,  to  give 
exemption  ?  "  ^  In  Plymouth  a  Deputy-Lieutenant  like- 
wise tried  to  deny  the  exemption,  but  finding  that  he 
was  rousing  serious  agitation,  and  that  his  colleagues 
in  other  parts  of  the  country  were  divided  in  opinion 
upon  the  subject,  wrote  to  the  Home  Office  to  ask  for 
instructions.^  The  answer  was  given  in  a  Circular  of 
the  23rd  of  November  :  "  It  is  the  opinion  of  the  Law- 
Officers  that  a  commandant  of  Volunteers  cannot  return 
as  effective  men  who  for  want  of  discipline  are  unfit  to 
have  arms  in  their  hands  or  who,  even  from  no  fault  of 
their  own,  have  had  no  opportunity  of  learning  the  use 
of  arms.     Such  men,  therefore,  cannot  be  exempted."* 

^  I.D.  vol.  xvii.  W.  Baker  to  S.S.  24th  Oct.,  loth  Nov.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  xxviii.  Lord  Kenyon  to  S.S,  17th  Oct.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  X.  Jonathan  Elford  to  S.S.  15th  Nov.  1803. 

*  Circular  of  S.S.  to  L.Ls.  of  counties  where  any  officers  are  on 


II  AVERSION  FROM  PIKES  89 

The  whole  question  was  complicated  by  the  fact  1803. 
that  some  officers,  from  natural  and  proper  un- 
willingness to  use  up  the  whole  of  the  twenty  days' 
drill  without  a  day's  instruction  in  the  use  of  arms, 
reserved  a  certain  number  of  drills  against  the  happy 
moment  when  the  long-expected  weapons  should  be 
delivered.  By  so  doing  they  prevented  their  men  from 
earning  their  exemption  in  time  ;  and  up  came  a  fresh 
crop  of  indignant  letters  to  the  Secretary  of  State. ^ 

The  Government  feebly  endeavoured  to  right  itself 
by  averring  that  pikes  to  any  number  would  be  fur- 
nished, if  only  officers  would  apply  for  them.  But  the 
Volunteers  would  not  be  content  with  pikes.  In  Scot- 
land the  people  entertained  not  only  material  but  senti- 
mental objections  to  them  ;  the  weapon  of  rebel  Ireland 
being  in  their  judgment  unfit  for  a  loyal  Scot.**  In 
Flintshire  the  Volunteers  would  hardly  take  pikes  into 
their  hands,  except  on  the  assurance  that  they  would 
be  speedily  exchanged  for  muskets.^  The  Duke  of 
Richmond,  a  soldier  of  experience,  declined  to  receive 
pikes  for  the  Volunteers  of  Sussex,  declaring  them  to 
be  useless  except  in  the  hands  of  perfectly  trained  men 
and  yet  capable  of  being  turned  to  dangerous  account 
by  a  mob.*  In  Berkshire  one  officer  concentrated  his 
objections  to  the  weapon  into  a  single  enthymeme. 
"  The  pikes  issued  by  the  Ordnance  are  eight  feet  long  ; 
the  French  ones  taken  last  week  were  thirteen  feet  long ; 
therefore  an  English  regiment  so  armed  could  not 
attack  and  beat  a  French  one."*  Finally,  in  Somerset 
a  Major  of  Volunteers,  who  disliked  pikes  as  much  as 
did  his  men,  gave  his  company  orders  to  leave  their 
pikes   at   home   when  they  came  to  drill,  and  being 

permanent  duty.     The  hardship  was  redressed,  as  shall  presently 
be  seen,  at  the  first  possible  moment  by  Act  of  Parliament. 

1  I.D.  vol.  V.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  6th  Nov.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  iii.  L.L.  Inverness,  to  S.S.  loth  March  1804  ;   vol, 
viii.  L.L.  Kinross,  to  S.S.  i6th  Sept.  1803. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  xiv.  L.L.  Flint,  to  S.S.  7th  Nov.  1803. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  23rd  Aug.  1803. 
5  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  Sir  I.  Pocock  to  S.S.  i6th  Nov.  1803. 


90  VOLUNTEERS  IN  SCOTLAND      chap. 

1803.  rebuked  by  his  Colonel,  resigned  his  commission.^ 
Such  were  the  consequences  of  neglecting  the  advice, 
deliberately  sought,  of  an  experienced  officer  like 
Colonel  Vyse. 

XII 

Passing  from  these  lengthy,  though  preliminary, 
details  as  to  the  administrative  difficulties  which  were 
thrown  in  the  way  of  the  Volunteers,  let  us  now 
examine  more  closely  their  composition  and  their 
discipline.  And  first  let  us  make  a  brief  survey  of 
Britain,  noting  the  quarters  in  which  the  patriotic  spirit 
was  lively  or  the  reverse. 

It  must  be  premised  that  among  the  Volunteers 
were  certain  corps  in  various  parts  of  the  country  who, 
upon  enrolment,  expressly  disclaimed  their  title  to  any 
exemptions  whatever.  They  numbered  in  all  about 
7000  men,^  of  which  the  city  of  Edinburgh  furnished 
1 162,  the  county  of  Devon  S77,  and  the  city  of 
Westminster  508.  The  remaining  counties  and  cities 
furnished  only  small  contingents  to  this  body  of  really 
self-denying  men,  whose  public  spirit  is  worthy  of 
record. 

Speaking  generally,  Scotland  responded  remarkably 
well  to  the  call  for  Volunteers,  the  unpopularity  of 
the  Militia  making  this  alternative  service  extremely 
welcome.  In  Aberdeen  by  the  beginning  of  September 
12,000  men  had  offered  themselves  against  a  quota  of 
3840 ;  in  Bute  598  men  came  forward  to  fill  366 
places  ;  in  Berwick  there  were  almost  immediately  1350 
offers  to  fill  a  quota  of  930  ;  at  Haddington  the  figures 
were  1500  and  634.  So  too  Kinross  covered  her  quota 
of  Volunteers  three  times  over  within  August  and  Sep- 
tember ;  Dumfries  immediately  offered  more  than  twice 
the  number  required  from  her,  and  Edinburgh,  by  the 
first  week  in  August,  also  had  more  than  double  her 

1   I.D.  vol.  XXX.  L.L.  Somerset,  to  S.S.  13th  Nov.  1803. 
'  The  return  shows  6620,  but  it  is  admitted  to  be  incomplete. 
I.D.  vol.  Ixviii.  Miscellaneous,  31st  March  1804. 


II  VOLUNTEERS  IN  SCOTLAND  91 

quota  on  foot  and  effective.  In  Argyll  more  than  half  1803. 
the  quota  was  already  enrolled  in  June  ;  Banff  supplied 
nearly  its  full  contingent  before  the  introduction  of  the 
Levy  en  Masse  Act ;  Elgin  in  the  same  time  had 
furnished  480  out  of  the  780  assigned  to  her,  and 
Inverness  2540  out  of  3320.  Dumbarton  produced 
two-thirds  of  her  men  in  May  and  June,  and  had  small 
difficulty  in  enrolling  the  rest;  Fife,  Forfar,  and  Kincardine 
could  show  half,  or  more  than  half,  of  their  respective 
quotas  early  in  June.  In  Ayr  voluntary  enrolment  soon 
exceeded  the  demands  of  the  Government ;  though  certain 
parishes  stood  aloof,  and  a  few  positively  refused  any 
service.  Ross  also  found  few  men  before  the  Levy  en 
Masse  Act  compelled  her  to  do  so,  and  in  Stirling 
there  was  less  forwardness  than  usual,  some  difficulty 
being  found  in  raising  the  allotted  number  before 
the  end  of  October.  In  Linlithgow  two-thirds  of 
the  quota  had  been  enrolled  before  the  26th  of  July; 
and  Nairn,  Caithness,  Peebles,  Cromarty,  and  Suther- 
land had  furnished  their  full  contingent  before  the  end 
of  June.  So  it  was  also  in  Selkirk  and  in  Roxburgh, 
even  though  the  Lieutenant  gave  preference  to  the 
men  who  were  less  likely  to  be  drawn  for  the  Army  of 
Reserve.  In  Clackmannan  no  corps  were  accepted  until 
September,  but  on  the  other  hand  the  whole  contingent 
was  self-supporting,  receiving  no  allowance  whatever 
from  Government.  Lanark  added  300  Supernumeraries 
to  the  4473  privates  which  were  due  from  her.  The 
difficulties  in  Perth  have  already  been  mentioned,  but 
they  did  not  prevent  her  from  doing  even  more  than 
her  duty,  half  of  her  Volunteers  having  come  forward 
in  time  to  receive  the  June  Allowances.  Lastly,  Renfrew 
had  over  four  thousand  offers  from  which  to  choose 
her  quota  of  2424.  Altogether  the  record  would  be 
creditable  to  North  Britain,  were  we  not  compelled 
to  bear  in  mind  that  she  was  extremely  backward  in 
producing  any  Militia.^ 

^  Returns  at  Windsor  Castle.     LD.  vol.  i.  L.L.  Aberdeen,  to 
S.S.  8th  Sept.;  L.L.  Argyll  and  Bute,  to  S.S.  17th  Aug. ;  L.L.  Ayr, 


92  VOLUNTEERS  IN  ENGLAND         chap. 

1803.  In    England    there   was   by   no   means   the   same 

uniform  eagerness  to  volunteer,  and  in  some  parts 
there  was  a  positive  reluctance.  Speaking  generally,  it 
may  be  said  that  a  few  counties,  notably  Anglesey, 
Middlesex,  Brecon,  Monmouth,  Bedford,  Devon,  and 
Kent,  came  forward  with  the  same  enthusiasm  as  the 
best  counties  of  Scotland.  Kent,  indeed,  whose  natural 
quota  was  just  under  8000  men,  wished  for  her  own 
safety  to  raise  15,000,  and  actually  raised  10,000.  It 
is,  however,  noteworthy  that  the  Mayor  of  Canterbury 
at  first  refused  to  call  a  meeting  to  form  a  Volunteer 
corps  for  that  city,  one  citizen  averring  that  there  was 
no  occasion  to  arm  the  people,  as  the  Government 
would  send  soldiers  enough.^  The  Cinque  Ports,  under 
the  leadership  of  Pitt,  brought  forward  3500  men. 
Devon,  whose  quota  was  9000,  produced  over  16,000  ; 
and  the  rest  of  the  maritime  counties,  from  considera- 
tions of  their  own  security,  generally  obtained  permission 
to  enrol  additional  men.  Lancashire,  Norfolk,  and 
Somerset,  however,  were  exceptions,  having  failed  to 
make  up  even  the  quota  required  of  them.  Middlesex, 
with  London,  Westminster  and  the  Tower  Hamlets, 
turned  out  about  35,000  men.  For  the  rest,  Derby, 
Hereford,  Nottinghamshire,  Radnor,  Shropshire, 
Worcester,  and  the  East  Riding  of  Yorkshire  hand- 
somely brought  forward  more  than  their  complement. 
Buckinghamshire,  Cambridgeshire,  Northamptonshire, 
Stafford,  Warwick,  Wiltshire,  and  the  West  Riding 
of  York  showed  deficiencies  more  or  less  great ;  and 
the  remainder  produced  their  quota  or  thereabout. 

Of  the  counties  that  failed,  Cambridge  seems  to 
have  been  the  worst,  though  her  deficiency  amounted 
to  only  300  wanting  out  of  2886.  Her  Volunteers 
gave  a  deal  of  trouble;  and  by  September  1804  the 

to  S.S,  9th  Sept.;  vol.  iv.  D.Ls.  Berwick,  to  S.S.  7th  Sept.;  L.L. 
Haddington,  to  S.S.  23rd  Sept.;  vol.  viii.  L.L.  Kinross,  to  S.S.  24th 
Aug.;  vol.  xii.  Edinburgh  returns  of  9th  Aug.;  vol.  xvii.  L.L.  Wig- 
town, to  S.S.  25th  Aug.  1803. 

1  I.D.  vol.  xviii.  L.L.  Kent,  to  S.S.  15th  Aug.  1803. 


II         REASONS  FOR  LUKEWARMNESS         93 

number  lacking  had  increased  from  300  to  800  owing  1803. 
to  the  persistent  refusal  of  the  larger  parishes  to 
produce  a  man.  It  seems  that  the  people  had  grown 
suspicious  over  the  58  th  section  of  the  Levy  en  Masse 
Act,  which  ordained  that  the  men  raised  under  that 
Act  could  be  attached  to  other  regiments,  whether 
of  Militia  or  Regulars,  if  called  out  for  service.  The 
Duke  of  Richmond  found  exactly  the  same  apprehen- 
sion prevalent  in  Sussex,  and  was  so  nervous  as  to  its 
results  that  he  urged  the  Government  to  proclaim  that 
the  King  would  not  enforce  this  particular  section.  In 
another  section,  the  54th,  it  was  expressly  laid  down 
that  Volunteers  should  not  in  any  circumstances  be 
placed  in  corps  of  Regulars  ;  but  Yorke  as  usual  chose 
to  maintain,  for  as  long  as  he  dared,  that  this  applied 
only  to  men  enrolled  under  the  Volunteer  Act  of  1802. 
The  folly  of  leaving  so  important  a  point  for  a  moment 
doubtful  is  obvious  ;  but  such  was  the  way  of  Adding- 
ton's  Ministry.^ 

In  Buckinghamshire  the  failure  in  Volunteers  seems 
to  have  been  due  mainly  to  lack  of  men,  for  the  county 
had  always  done  its  duty  admirably  both  towards 
Militia  and  Regulars,  and  had  before  June  mustered 
1000  Yeomanry.  Moreover,  the  Grenvilles,  who  mainly 
controlled  all  local  business,  were  most  zealous  in 
military  matters.  The  quota  of  Volunteers  required  of 
it  was  3594  ;  and  the  Militia  lists  contained  in  all  but 
9900  names.  Strangely  enough,  however,  many  of  the 
inhabitants  were  troubled  with  ignorant  fears  lest  the 
oath  of  allegiance  required  from  every  Volunteer  should 
bind  them  to  some  unknown  military  service.  Lord 
Grenville  went  in  person  to  argue  with  them  and  to 
reassure  them,  but  they  would  not  be  convinced ; 
wherefore,  lest  such  an  example  should  spread,  he  at 
once  called  up  the  peccant  parishes  to  undergo  com- 
pulsory training  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act.     This 

1  I.D.  vol.  vi.  L.L.  Cambs,  to  S.S.  nth  Sept.;  vol.  xli.  C.G.M. 
Cambs,  to  S.S.  i6th  Sept.  1804 ;  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  23rd 
and  30th  Aug.  1803. 


94      REASONS  FOR  LUKEWARMNESS     chap. 

1803.  suspicion  does  not  appear  to  have  prevailed  elsewhere 
except  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  where  the  people  disliked 
the  combination  of  oath  and  red  coat  as  much  as  in 
Scotland.  "  They  will  be  difficult  to  persuade  of  their 
error,"  wrote  the  Lieutenant-Governor,  "  and  even  if 
persuaded  they  will  be  undisciplined."  The  Manxmen 
may  be  pardoned  for  their  ignorance,  which  was  re- 
ported to  be  excessive ;  but  it  is  extraordinary  that 
their  misgivings  should  have  been  shared  by  men  living 
within  twenty  miles  of  London.^ 

In  Lancashire,  where  the  deficiency  was  less  than 
400  out  of  a  quota  of  14,600,  the  fault  seems  to  have 
been  due  chiefly  to  the  blunderingof  the  Government  in 
the  matter  of  regulations  and  arms,  for  the  people  came 
forward  with  enthusiasm  enough  ;  and  the  same  holds 
good  of  Staffordshire,  where  the  deficiency  amounted 
to  over  700  on  a  quota  of  6800.  In  Warwickshire 
the  Lieutenant  wrote  that  he  could  not  trust  arms  in 
the  hands  of  many  men  who  came  forward  ;  but  to 
show  that  he  was  not  lacking  in  zeal,  he  offered  to 
subscribe  £  10,000  towards  the  cost  of  arming  the  loyal ; 
to  which  generous  offer,  astounding  as  it  may  appear, 
he  received  no  answer.^  In  Wiltshire  and  Northampton 
no  particular  cause  for  lukewarmness  of  patriotism  can 
be  traced.  In  Norfolk  excessive  jealousy  of  the  different 
corps  among  themselves  may  have  accounted  for  the 
fact  that  only  6900  Volunteers  were  forthcoming  instead 
of  7254.  But  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  petty  agencies 
may  have  affected  the  levy  for  good  or  for  evil.  In 
Salop  the  enrolment  of  Volunteers  was  checked  for  a 
time  completely  by  the  action  of  some  Friendly  Societies, 
founded  for  the  support  of  the  sick  and  infirm,  whose 
rules  contained  a  clause  ordaining  the  expulsion  of  any 
member  from  the  moment  when  he  became  a  soldier.^ 

1  I.D.  vol.  V.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  31st  July,  6th  Oct.    1803  ; 
vol.  xxi.  Lt.-Gov.  of  Man  to  S.S.  26th  April  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  xxxiii.  L.L.  Warwick,  to  S.S.  12th,  22nd,  25th  Aug. 
1803. 

3  Ibid,  vol.  xxviii.  Salop,  J.  Kynaston  Powell  to  S.S.  17th  July 
1803. 


II         COMPOSITION  OF  VOLUNTEERS        95 

The  careful  publication  of  this  clause  was  of  course  the  »8o3. 
work  of  mischief-makers  ;  and  one  of  the  Deputy-Lieu- 
tenants drafted  a  short  bill  to  declare  such  rules  of 
such  Societies  to  be  null  and  void.  But  it  would  need 
a  very  long  bill  to  guard  against  all  the  contrivances 
imaginable  by  men  who  wish  to  shirk  their  duty  towards 
their  country. 

I  pass  next  to  the  composition  of  the  Volunteer 
corps.  This  of  course  varied  greatly  according  to 
locality.  When  powerful  magnates,  such  as  the  Duke  of 
Northumberland  or  the  Duke  of  Bedford,  enrolled  their 
tenants  into  one  or  more  corps  and  provided  them  with 
everything  but  arms,  the  procedure  was  simple.  The 
great  man  summoned  his  people,  and  called  upon  all 
who  were  able  and  willing  to  take  service  with  him  for 
the  King,  under  command  of  himself  or  of  one  of  his 
family.  Such  a  lead  was  readily  followed,  feudal 
feeling  and  the  example  of  the  landlord  being  sufficiently 
strong  to  rally  every  able-bodied  man  on  the  estate  to 
the  ranks.  Lesser  magnates  in  like  fashion  formed 
their  tenants  into  troops,  companies,  and  squadrons,  and 
sometimes  (but  by  no  means  always)  amalgamated  them 
under  the  command  of  one  of  themselves  into  regiments 
or  battalions.  From  the  relative  position  of  officers 
and  privates  in  these  corps,  there  was  comparatively 
little  difficulty  in  enforcing  discipline.  In  the  first 
place  the  men  were  often  of  superior  station  and  intelli- 
gence. In  the  second  every  one  of  them  wished  to 
stand  well  with  his  landlord  ;  and  even  if  the  landlord 
refrained  from  using  the  enormous  powers  which  he 
then  enjoyed  over  his  tenant,  yet  expulsion  and  liability 
to  be  ballotted  as  a  Militiaman,  meaning  as  they  did  not 
only  personal  inconvenience  but  social  degradation, 
were  sufficient  deterrents  from  insubordination. 

But  in  cases  where  no  individual's  station  marked  him 
out  from  among  his  fellows  as  the  natural  leader,  and  most 
notably  in  the  towns,  the  proceedings  were  uniformly  as 
follows  : — A  meeting  of  the  citizens  or  parishioners  was 
summoned,  an  individual  was  called  to  the  chair,  and 


96  VOLUNTEER  ASSOCIATIONS        chap. 

1803.  after  a  solemn  preamble  setting  forth  the  ambition  and 
the  vices  of  the  hated  Bonaparte,  a  series  of  resolutions 
was  passed  that  an  Association  for  the  defence  of  the 
locality  should  be  formed,  that  subscriptions  should  be 
invited,  and  that  a  committee  should  be  organised  for 
the  general  direction  of  its  affairs.  Then  followed  the 
rules  of  the  Association,  which  included  the  conditions 
of  service  and  the  regulations  for  internal  economy  and 
discipline.  The  Committee  did  not  necessarily  include 
none  but  officers  of  the  corps.  On  the  contrary,  it 
consisted  commonly  of  the  largest  subscribers  who,  with 
sound  commercial  instinct,  claimed  an  influence  propor- 
tioned to  their  contribution.  It  was  the  great  ambition 
of  every  Association  to  be,  if  possible,  self-supporting, 
to  the  end  that  it  might  be  self-controlled.  In  fact  the 
Associations  were,  or  aspired  to  be,  simply  clubs  formed 
for  purposes  of  defence,  on  the  principles  of  equality 
that  govern  social  clubs  ;  that  is  to  say,  that  the  Com- 
mittee was  elected  ;  that  the  officers  also  were  either 
elected  or  chosen  by  the  Committee;  and  that  the 
general  proceedings  of  the  Committee,  together  with 
any  matters  of  extraordinary  importance,  were  subjected 
to  the  criticism  of  General  Meetings,  ordinary  and 
extraordinary. 

There  were,  of  course,  cases,  notably  among  the 
metropolitan  corps,  where  the  system  worked  well. 
Such  corps  were  composed  of  men,  indeed  of  gentlemen, 
to  whom  self-suppression  for  a  common  object  came  as 
an  instinct,  and  who  thought  it  no  shame,  but  rather  a 
proud  duty,  to  yield  obedience  to  their  fellows.  The 
rules  of  such  corps,  and  indeed  of  many  other  corps 
besides  them,  were  exceedingly  drastic  ;  the  need  for 
vesting  all  power  of  discipline  in  the  commanding  officer 
was  generally  recognised  ;  and  there  was  always  sufficient 
moral  support  in  the  mass  of  the  regiment  to  enable 
him  to  enforce  the  rules  without  hesitation. 

A  few  samples  of  such  rules  will  not  be  out  of  place. 
Among  those  of  the  Monmouthshire  Cavalry,  subject 
to  the  Duke  of  Beaufort,  it  was  enacted  that  no  member 


II      VOLUNTEER  ASSOCIATIONS'  RULES    97 

of  the  troop  should  leave  it  unless  he  produced  a  sub-  1803. 
stitute,  on  pain  of  a  fine  of  twenty  guineas  ;  that  no 
horse  should  measure  less  than  fourteen  hands  two 
inches  ;  and  that  no  horse  once  approved  should  be 
exchanged,  except  for  a  better,  under  penalty  of  a  fine 
of  one  guinea.^  In  the  Isle  of  Ely  Association  it  was 
laid  down  that  the  members  should  be  householders; 
that  officers  should  be  recommended  by  the  Associa- 
tion to  the  Lord-Lieutenant ;  that  the  majority  should 
be  entitled  to  reject  any  proposed  member  ;  and  that 
the  Government  should  supply  arms  only.^  The  regu- 
lations of  the  Gravesend  Rifle  Corps  provided  that 
every  private  and  non-commissioned  officer  should 
subscribe  five  shillings  a  quarter,  and  every  officer  half 
a  guinea  a  quarter,  the  officers  and  non-commissioned 
officers  being  elected  by  ballot  of  the  members.^  In 
Clapham  the  Association  resolved  to  form  two  companies 
of  infantry  and  one  or  more  of  cavalry  ;  the  officers  and 
men  to  serve  without  pay  and  the  whole  to  be  governed 
by  a  military  committee  of  twenty,  elected  by  the  members. 
Zachary  Macaulay  commanded  one  of  the  companies, 
and  doubtless  exercised  it  on  Clapham  Common  under 
the  eyes  of  his  marvellous  little  boy  Tom,  who  at  three 
years  old  was  probably  ready  with  historical  parallels 
for  the  transformation  of  so  staid  a  citizen  into  a  soldier. 
The  Battersea  Association  was  formed  on  much  the 
same  lines,  the  Committee  supplying  uniforms  out  of  a  . 
general  subscription  of  the  parish.^  But  the  variations 
of  rules  and  terms  of  service  could  be  indefinitely 
multiplied,  the  Government  having  taken  no  precau- 
tions before  the  passing  of  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  to 
secure  uniformity. 

But  if  associations  of  enlightened  gentlemen  and 
corps  of  tenants  commanded  by  landlords  were 
comparatively   successful    in    securing   discipline    and 

1  /.Z>.  vol.  iv.  L.L.  Brecon  and  Monmouth,  to  S.S.  2nd  Jan.  1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  vi.  Cambridge,  Owen  Gray  to  S.S.   30th  July  1803. 
8  Ibid.  vol.  xviii.  Kent,  Regulations  dated  24th  July  1803. 

^  Ibid.  vol.  xxxi.  Surrey,  21st  July  and  ist  Aug.  1803. 

H 


98  PERMANENT  DUTY  chap. 

1803.  efficiency,  such  was  not  the  case  when  the  direction 
of  affairs  lay  in  the  hands  of  the  great  middle  class, 
which,  with  all  its  merits  and  all  its  virtues,  seems 
unable  to  crush  down  its  imperious  instinct  to  give 
nothing  without  expecting  something  in  return.  Under 
its  guidance  the  associations  broke  down  in  all  direc- 
tions, and  there  was  not  only  insubordination  but 
occasionally  sheer  chaos. 

To  understand  the  story  thoroughly  it  is  necessary 
briefly  to  mention  a  further  proceeding  of  the  Govern- 
ment towards  the  Volunteers  in  1803,  after  its  decision 
to  accept  the  whole  of  the  corps  that  had  been  offered. 
Its  first  step  was,  in  the  circumstances,  eminently  wise 
and  prudent.  Napoleon's  preparations,  though  as  a 
matter  of  fact  hopelessly  backward  and  misdirected, 
were  reported  to  be  far  advanced  ;  and  there  was  reason 
to  fear  that  the  local  forces  in  the  maritime  counties 
might  at  any  time  during  the  winter  be  called  into  the 
field.  Preference  had  rightly  been  given  to  these 
counties  in  the  distribution  of  arms ;  and  early  in 
October  Ministers  determined  to  invite  such  corps  in 
England  as  were  ready  and  willing  to  come  out  on 
permanent  pay  and  duty  within  their  own  counties  and 
districts.  The  defence  of  Newcastle  in  particular  was 
recommended  for  special  attention,  and  the  Lieutenant 
was  asked  to  ascertain  if  any  of  the  corps  within  reason- 
able distance  of  that  city  were  prepared  to  assemble 
there,  relieving  each  other  successively  either  in  fractions 
or  as  complete  battalions  after  a  fortnight's  duty.  "  The 
King,"  added  the  Circular,  "  can  invite  the  Volunteers  to 
do  so ;  he  cannot  compel  th.Qm  except  in  case  of  invasion,  or 
appearance  of  invasion  on  the  coast."  -^  The  response 
to  the  invitation  was  for  the  most  part  hearty  ;  and  in 
the  winter  of  1803  the  Volunteers  had  a  chance  of 
showing  their  quality. 

The  signs  of  indiscipline  in  that  year  were  relatively 
unimportant,  though  they  brought  into  glaring  relief  the 
defects  of  the  Government's  measures.     Thus,  under  the 

1  Circular  to  L.Ls.  12th  Oct.  1803. 


II        INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS  99 

Levy  en  Masse  Act,  provision  had  been  made  for  fining  1803. 
men  who  neglected  to  attend  their  drills,  but  none  for 
imprisoning  them  in  default  of  payment.  The  result 
was  that  early  in  the  day  a  Volunteer  in  Hampshire 
attended  the  first  day's  drill,  for  which  his  Commanding 
Officer  had  provided  a  dinner,  and  refused  to  come  out 
again.  He  was  fined  to  the  extent  of  thirty-six  shillings, 
but,  having  no  property,snapped  his  fingers  at  the  penalty 
and  remained  master  of  the  situation.^  The  Lieutenant 
of  Gloucestershire  was  confronted  with  exactly  the  same 
difficulty,  and  complained  that  men  with  no  property 
to  distrain  upon  were  uncontrollable.  "A  force,"  he 
said,  *'  which  depends  upon  the  good-humour  of  several 
hundred  illiterate  persons  cannot  last  long."  ^  The 
other  cases  recorded  in  1 803  seem  to  have  arisen  out  of 
the  changes  which  distinguished  the  system  initiated  in 
1802  from  that  which  obtained  between  1794  and  1801. 
In  Devon  during  the  month  of  July  a  battalion  refused  to 
work,  except  in  separate  companies  under  sergeants  of 
their  own  election,  as  in  the  last  war.  They  repented 
very  speedily,  for  the  Lieutenant  disbanded  them  on  the 
spot,  and  swept  every  man  into  the  ballot  for  the  Army 
of  Reserve  ;  but  this  salutary  example  was  of  course 
unknown  except  in  the  immediate  district,  and  insubordi- 
nation was  not  always  so  well-timed  as  to  bring  on  itself 
immediate  punishment.^  In  another  case,  in  Hereford- 
shire, it  was  the  officers  who  showed  a  mutinous  spirit  ; 
a  number  of  subalterns  protesting  very  discourteously  to 
the  Vice-Lieutenant  against  the  action  of  the  Command- 
ing Officer  who  had  recommended  a  stranger  to  be  his 
Major,  instead  of  allowing  promotion  to  go  by  seniority 
within  the  battalion.  The  real  grievance  was  that  the 
Colonel  had  hitherto  consulted  his  officers  before  making 
any  such  appointments,  and  on  this  occasion  had  omitted 
to  do  so.     The  Vice-Lieutenant,  instead  of  ordering  the 

1  I.D.  vol.  viii.  Cornwall  (misplaced  letter),  Lawrence  Reynolds 
toV.L.  Hants,  13th  Nov.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  1.  L.L.  Gloucester,  to  S.S.  15th  Jan.  1804. 
8  Ibid.  vol.  X.  L.L.  Devon,  to  S.S.  i6th  July  1803. 


loo  VOLUNTEERS'  RIGHT  TO  RESIGN  chap. 

1803.  subalterns  to  withdraw  their  letter,  under  pain  of  instant 
dismissal,  forwarded  it  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  who 
likewise  contented  himself  with  rebuking  the  writers 
severely.  Thereupon  twelve  officers  of  the  corps 
resigned  on  the  spot,  and  doubtless  made  the  county  ring 
with  the  fame  of  their  spirited  behaviour.^  In  yet  another 
case  a  sergeant  of  Volunteers  refused  to  collect  the  fines 
imposed  on  privates  by  the  rules  of  the  corps,  abused  his 
officers,  and  even  threatened  them  with  his  pike.  He 
was  brought  up  before  a  Justice  and  fined  five  shillings 
in  pursuance  of  the  Act ;  after  which  he  calmly  sent  in 
his  kit  and  retired  into  private  life.^  "  Discipline  will 
be  injured  if  every  discontented  man  can  thus  discharge 
himself,"  commented  the  writer  of  this  memorandum  ; 
and  his  opinion  was  shared  by  many  other  officers. 

There  was,  indeed,  a  sharp  controversy  as  to  this  same 
right  of  Volunteers  to  quit  the  service  at  their  pleasure 
before  the  conclusion  of  peace,  which,  until  decided,  led 
to  much  trouble.  The  question  was  one  which  had  not 
been  anticipated  by  Ministers,  otherwise  they  would 
undoubtedly  have  settled  it  by  Act  of  Parliament,  and 
settled  it,  moreover,  in  the  negative.  They  referred  it, 
however,  to  the  Law-Officers  of  the  Crown,  Spencer 
Perceval  and  Manners-Sutton,  who  decided  against  the 
right  of  resignation.  "  If,"  said  Perceval  afterwards  in 
the  House  of  Commons,  "  Volunteers  enter  into  an 
engagement,  as  undoubtedly  they  do,  they  ought  not  to 
be  able  to  renounce  it  at  all  times  except  at  the  period  of 
actual  invasion."  ^  This,  on  the  face  of  it,  appeared  to  be 
common  sense  ;  and  the  opinion  was  at  once  circulated  * 
to  the  Lieutenants  without  a  doubt  that  it  would  be 
final.  But  a  champion  of  the  right  of  resignation 
arose  in  the  person  of  Thomas  Erskine,  the  future 
Chancellor,  who  being  at  the  time  Colonel  of  the  Law 

1  I.D.  vol.  1.  V.L.  Hereford,   to    S.S.  28th   Jan.;  Colonel    J.. 
Matthews  to  S.S.  6th  April  1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  xviii.  Kent,  Memo,  of  27th  Dec.  1803. 

3  H.D.  Perceval's  speech,  8th  Feb.  1804. 
*  Circular  of  7th  Oct.  1803. 


II        VOLUNTEERS'  RIGHT  TO  RESIGN     loi 

Association  Volunteers,  or  "  Devil's  Own,"  immediately  1803. 
took  the  field  against  the  Law-Officers,  and  in  a  public 
letter  to  the  newspapers  upheld  precisely  the  opposite 
contention.  This  letter,  with  marvellous  rapidity,  made 
its  way  all  over  England,  and  put  new  heart  into  the 
insubordinate.  In  Devon  it  caused  great  agitation  ; 
and  in  two  different  corps  men  who  under  their  regi- 
mental rules  had  been  summoned  for  absenting  them- 
selves from  exercise,  pleaded  that  they  meant  to  resign. 
In  Yorkshire  likewise  Erskine's  flowery  speeches  and 
letters  were  read  with  avidity,  so  pleased  were  the 
Volunteers  to  find  yet  one  more  opening  for  the  evasion 
of  discipline.^  Meanwhile,  however,  the  Secretary  of 
State's  faith  in  the  Law-Officers  was  beginning  to  totter  ; 
and  he  actually  wrote  to  one  of  the  Devonian  com- 
mandants that  he  had  better  allow  all  men  who  did  not 
choose  to  stay  in  his  corps  to  go  about  their  business, 
"  If  there  are  not  Volunteers  enough,  the  classes  will  be 
called  up,"  he  added,  doubtless  wishing  in  vain  that  he 
had  never  allowed  the  nation  to  be  trained  to  arms  at  all 
except  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act.  But  it  was  too 
late.  The  question  was  presently  brought  before  the 
Court  of  King's  Bench,  which  decided  that  Volunteers 
had  undoubtedly  the  right  in  law  to  resign  whenever 
they  chose,  though  not  to  the  prejudice  of  regimental 
regulations  to  the  contrary. 

In  Norfolk  the  effect  of  this  decision  was  startling. 
Men  sent  in  their  kits  and  arms  from  all  quarters,  without 
taking  the  trouble  to  obtain  a  proper  discharge  ;  and 
the  officers,  to  check  the  evil,  begged  that  the  seceders 
might  be  called  out  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act.^  But 
the  mischief  was  by  no  means  confined  to  displays  of 
this  kind.  Such  a  defeat  of  Government  by  a  popular 
hero  of  Erskine's  type  was  in  principle  extremely  bad 
for  discipline  ;  for  with  all  his  ability  as  an  advocate, 

1  I.D.  vol.  xlv.  Devon,  Lord  Rolle  to  S.S.  24th  Jan.;  Lt.-Gen. 
Simcoe  to  S.S.,  4th  Feb.  1804 ;  vol.  Ixvii.  V.L.  Yorks,  to  S.S.  3rd 
Feb.   1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Iviii.  Norfolk,  P.  L.  Powell  to  S.S.  24th  March  1804. 


102    INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS      chap. 

1803.  he  was  compounded  chiefly  of  vanity  and  egoism.^ 
The  triumph  of  such  a  man  upon  such  a  question  was 
the  worst  possible  example  for  self-governing  corps  ; 
and  in  the  winter  and  spring  of  1803-4  there  was  a 
succession  of  very  discreditable  incidents. 

The  St.  Pancras  Volunteer  Association  was  governed 
by  a  *'  Military  Committee "  with  undefined  powers, 
the  said  Committee  consisting  of  three  officers  and 
twelve  privates,  with  a  private  for  president.  An 
inferior  mechanic  and  a  disreputable  attorney,  by  fre- 
quenting night  clubs  and  public-houses  in  company 
with  the  lowest  class  of  privates,  obtained  election  as 
officers,  and  therewith  demanded  for  the  Committee  the 
control  of  the  subscriptions,  which  by  law  were  vested 
in  the  Commanding  Officer.  The  Attorney-General, 
being  consulted  upon  the  point,  declared  that  beyond 
all  question  the  control  of  the  subscriptions  lay  with  the 
Commanding  Officer,  and  that  the  legality  of  the  Mili- 
tary Committee  was  very  doubtful.  Upon  this,  without 
consulting  the  Colonel,  the  malcontents  summoned  a 
general  meeting  of  the  corps,  and  after  a  scene  of 
scandalous  indeceny  persuaded  forty-five  members  to 
sign  a  protest  denying,  in  the  face  of  the  law,  that  the 
funds  were  vested  in  the  Colonel.  The  case  was 
examined  by  the  Deputy-Lieutenants,  who  recom- 
mended the  expulsion  of  the  offenders,  but  blamed  the 
Colonel  also  for  his  unconciliatory  bearing.  On  receipt  of 
this  report  the  Secretary  of  State  wrote  a  letter  annulling 
the  appointment  of  the  Military  Committee,  and  the 
rules  as  to  election  of  officers  by  the  corps.  This  letter 
the  Colonel  read  on  parade,  and  at  the  close  called  upon 
the  five  ringleaders  to  fall  out.  Several  voices  from  the 
ranks  answered,  *'  One  and  all,  one  and  all,"  and  the 
Colonel,  after  manoeuvring  the  regiment  for  an  hour, 

^  As  a  Colonel  of  Volunteers  he  was  helpless  without  a 
card  to  recall  to  him  his  words  of  command,  and  very  inefficient 
with  one.  But  Lord  Ellenborough,  afterwards  Lord  Chief  Justice, 
even,  with  the  aid  of  chalked  marks  upon  his  boots,  could  never 
remember  to  step  off  with  the  appointed  foot.  Campbell's  Lives  of 
the  Chancellors^  vi.  547. 


II         INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS       103 

left  the  dismissal  of  the  ringleaders  to  the  Adjutant.  1803-4. 
Both  parties  then  appealed  with  much  mutual  recrimi- 
nation to  the  Lord-Lieutenant  and  the  Secretary  of 
State ;  to  which  the  Lieutenant,  being  a  sensible  man, 
replied  by  recommending  that  the  corps  should  be 
disbanded.^ 

The  Royal  Southwark  Volunteers,  commanded  by 
Tierney,  the  politician,  distinguished  itself  in  somewhat 
sinilar  fashion.  The  Colonel  had  rejected  a  sergeant 
chosen  by  the  men  of  one  company  in  favour  of  a 
candidate  selected  by  himself;  and  against  this  the 
company  handed  in  resolutions  of  protest,  as  also  against 
his  appointment  of  an  officer  without  first  consulting 
then.  Tierney  at  once  paraded  the  company  and 
ordered  it  to  deliver  up  its  arms,  which  the  men  did 
without  a  murmur,  being  ignorant  of  the  meaning  of 
subordination  rather  than  insubordinate.^ 

In  another  London  corps,  the  North  Britons,  a 
corporal  refused  to  be  silent  on  parade,  or  to  obey  an 
officer  who  bade  him  hold  his  tongue,  on  the  ground 
that  the  officer  in  question  belonged  to  a  different 
company.  The  corporal  then  addressed  the  following 
letter  to  his  Commanding  Officer : — 

Sir — I  am  desired  by  several  privates  in  my  company  to 
acquaint  you  it  is  their  determination  to  withdraw  themselves 
unless  you  immediately  order  Leake  ^  to  resign.  I  think  he 
ought  to  bless  his  stars  I  did  not  bayonet  him — but,  damn  him, 
I  have  done  with  him — Yours,  etc.  P.  Wood. 

And  the  Commanding  Officer,  instead  of  turning 
Mr.  Wood  out  of  the  corps  and  taking  measures  to 
have  him  drawn  by  the  ballot,  reported  the  case  to  the 
Secretary  of  State  in  utter  helplessness  and  despair.* 

1  I.D.  vol.  Ivi.  Middlesex,  Report  of  5th  Jan.;  CO.  St.  Pancras 
Vol.  to  S.S.  30th  Jan.  ;  L.L.  Middlesex,  to  S.S.  30th  Jan.;  CO.  St. 
Pancras  Vol.  to  R.  Pole-Carew,  19th  March  1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Ivi.  Tierney  to  S.S.  loth  Jan.  1804. 

^  I  take  Leake  to  have  been  the  officer  who  ordered  the 
writer  of  the  letter  to  be  silent. 

*  I.D.  vol.  Ivi.  Lt.-Col.  Alex.  Davison  to  S.S.  Jan.  27th. 


I04      INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS    chap. 

1803-4.  In  Lambeth   there  was  a  Loyal  Lambeth  Corps, 

wherein  the  right  of  electing  officers  was  supposed  to  be 
vested  in  such  members  as  had  clothed  and  equipped 
themselves.  The  original  officers  had  been  nominated 
by  a  Civil  Committee,  whose  members,  no  doubt,  had 
given  liberal  subscriptions  ;  but  the  Commanding  Officer 
presently  appointed  a  Military  Committee,  consisting  of 
officers,  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates,  for  the 
regulation  of  military,  as  distinguished  from  financial, 
affairs.  A  vacancy  for  a  Lieutenant  occurred,  and  the 
Civil  Committee  recommended  several  persons  for  elec- 
tion. The  corps,  ignoring  the  recommendations,  elected 
a  man  not  mentioned  by  the  Civil  Committee,  whose 
name  was  then  submitted,  without  any  details  of  the 
circumstances,  to  the  Lord-Lieutenant.  Five  ensigns, 
feeling  themselves  aggrieved,  thereupon  addressed  a 
remonstrance  to  both  committees  through  the  Com- 
manding Officer,  who,  after  expostulating  with  them  in 
vain,  laid  the  letter  before  the  Military  Committee, 
which  decided  against  them.  The  ensigns  then 
threatened  to  appeal  to  the  parish,  when  the  Command- 
ing Officer  invoked  the  Lieutenant's  authority  to 
prohibit  publication  of  the  appeal ;  and  the  whole  body 
of  the  officers  was  appointed  a  court  to  inquire  into  the 
matter.  Unfortunately,  I  have  been  unable  to  trace  the 
further  career  of  this  interesting  corps.^ 

Later  in  the  same  year  a  company  of  Camberwell 
Volunteers,  with  the  connivance  of  their  officers,  held  a 
mutinous  and  disorderly  meeting,  subversive  of  all 
discipline.  It  was  at  once  disbanded  by  the  Vice- 
Lieutenant,  when  the  men  offered  themselves  to  a 
South wark  corps  and  were  readily  accepted. ^ 

But  such  occurrences  were  by  no  means  confined 
to  London  and  its  vicinity.  Major-General  Jeffery 
Amherst,  after  thirty  years'  service  in  the  Army,  in  an 
evil  moment  for  himself,  yielded  to  patriotic  enthusiasm 
and  took  command,  as  Major,  of  the  Evesham  Volun- 

1  I.D.  vol.  Ixiv.  V.L.  Surrey,  to  S.S.  26th  Jan.  1804. 
2  Ibid.  vol.  Ixiv.  V.L.  Surrey,  to  S.S.  nth  Aug.  1804. 


II  INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS      105 

teers.  Unfortunately  there  was  another  old  soldier  in  1803-4. 
the  corps,  a  very  remarkable  man.  He  had  begun 
life  as  a  private  in  the  cavalry,  had  been  employed  in 
the  recruiting  service,  and  had  made  sufficient  profit 
out  of  it  to  purchase  a  commission,  which  he  had  finally 
laid  down  in  order  to  keep  a  pot-house  at  Evesham. 
Owing  to  his  military  experience  he  was  appointed  an 
officer  in  Amherst's  corps,  and  his  first  quarrel  with  the 
latter  arose  from  the  fact  that  Amherst  forbade  him  to 
parade  his  men  in  front  of  the  pot-house's  door,  thereby 
depriving  him  of  the  profits  of  selling  ale  to  them.  He 
then  insulted  the  Adjutant,  a  veteran  of  fifty-two  years* 
service,  during  exercise,  and  challenged  him  to  a  duel 
while  in  the  execution  of  his  duty.  Upon  this  the 
officers  sent  a  deputation  to  him  to  ask  him  to  resign ; 
but  he  took  one  of  them,  the  son  of  a  shoemaker, 
into  his  councils,  and  the  two  between  them  contrived 
to  excite  a  mutiny  of  the  corps  on  parade.  The  affair 
caused  such  disturbance  and  scandal  that  the  Magistrates 
took  it  up,  and  appealed  to  the  Lieutenant  to  dismiss 
this  precious  pair  ;  whereupon  the  culprits  went  to  the 
Justices  with  tears  in  their  eyes,  and  promised  not  to 
interfere  further  with  the  corps  if  the  matter  were 
allowed  to  drop.  However,  they  made  false  represen- 
tations of  their  conduct  to  the  Home  Office,  and 
managed  to  extract  from  the  Under-Secretary  a 
letter  which  spoke  of  the  "honourable  motives 
which  induced  them  to  resign."  This  they  published 
in  Evesham,  of  course  filling  the  inhabitants  with 
disgust,  and  reducing  poor  Amherst  to  speechless 
indignation.  No  better  example  could  be  found 
than  this  to  show  the  essential  defects  of  the  Volunteer 
system.-^ 

In  Somerset  a  private  of  the  Loyal  Bath  Volunteers 
appeared  on  parade  in  liquor,  and  fell  to  quarrelling 
with  the  officer  of  another  company.  He  was  ordered 
by  the  Colonel  to  apologise  to  the  officer,  and  as  he 

^  I.D.  vol.   Ixvi.  Worcester,  Major-Gen.  Amherst  to  S.S:  5th 
Jan.  1804. 


io6       INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS  chap. 

1803-4.  refused  to  do  so  he  was  dismissed.  Next  day  the 
privates  of  his  company  met,  and  after  duly  debating 
the  conduct  of  the  Commanding  Officer,  passed,  with 
nine  dissentients,  resolutions  that  they  could  not  attend 
another  muster  until  their  comrade  was  reinstated,  and 
that  it  was  ungentlemanlike  for  officers  of  one  company 
to  interfere  with  men  of  another.  These  resolutions 
they  handed  to  their  Captain  to  be  laid  before  the 
Colonel,  together  with  an  expression  of  their  confidence 
in  the  said  Captain.  That  individual,  who,  though  fully 
cognisant  of  what  was  going  forward,  had  not  moved  a 
finger  to  prevent  it,  thereupon  approached  the  Colonel ; 
and  he,  good,  easy  man,  offered  to  refer  the  affair  to  a 
General  Committee  of  the  regiment,  though  he  delayed 
to  do  so  for  some  hours,  in  the  hope  that  matters  would 
right  themselves  spontaneously.  On  the  following  day, 
however,  the  men  who  had  held  the  meeting  printed 
and  published  a  full  account  of  the  proceedings, 
announcing  at  the  close  that  no  alternative  remained  to 
them  but  to  resign.  The  entire  city  of  Bath,  at  that 
time  by  no  means  the  most  orderly  in  the  kingdom, 
was  stirred  to  its  foundations  ;  and  the  Lieutenant,  for 
reasons  best  known  to  himself,  referred  the  matter  to 
the  Secretary  of  State.  That  functionary,  more  in  sorrow 
than  anger,  rebuked  the  original  offender,  who  then 
apologised  to  the  officer.  The  men  who  had  held  the 
meeting  also  apologised ;  and,  in  fact,  there  seems  to  have 
been  a  carnival  of  apology,  without,  however,  any  remark- 
able benefit  to  the  discipline  of  the  Bath  Volunteers.^ 

In  the  East  Riding  of  Yorkshire  the  officers  of  the 
Derwent  Dale  Volunteers  resigned  in  a  body,  their 
grievance  being  that  their  Commanding  Officer  never 
convened  them  for  consultation  upon  any  subject  relat- 
ing to  the  regiment.  So  well  satisfied  were  they  as  to 
the  legitimacy  of  their  complaint  that  they  urged  it 
without  concealment  in  a  letter  to  the  Lord-Lieutenant, 
and  were  somewhat  taken  aback  when  he  disbanded  the 

1  l.D.  Somerset,  vol.  liiii.  Statement  of  21st  Aug.  O.C.  Bath 
Volunteers  to  L.L.  8th  Sept.  1803. 


II  INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS      107 

regiment  "without  regret,  owing  to  their  unmilitary      1803-4. 
behaviour."  ^ 

In  Gloucester  two  companies  of  Volunteers  were 
formed  at  Wotton-under-Edge,  under  the  direction  of 
a  Committee  which  undertook  to  provide,  not  for  its 
finances,  but  for  its  support  and  for  making  the  neces- 
sary regulations.  The  Committee  consisted  of  a  Magis- 
trate, who  was  chairman,  two  clothiers,  a  doctor  (none 
of  them  Volunteers),  and  the  officers  of  the  corps  ;  and 
the  chairman  was  the  person  who  had  recommended 
the  officers  for  appointment  by  the  Lord-Lieutenant. 
One  day  on  parade  a  lieutenant  addressed  some  con- 
temptuous words  to  an  ensign,  who  replied  by  challeng- 
ing him  to  mortal  combat.  The  Committee  took  the 
matter  up,  and  recommended  to  the  Lieutenant  the 
dismissal  of  the  ensign,  who  was  duly  gazetted  out. 
The  non-commissioned  officers  thereupon  drew  up  an 
address  to  the  General  commanding  the  district,  pro- 
testing against  the  ensign's  dismissal  as  highly  arbitrary 
and  contrary  to  the  rules  of  the  corps.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  of  108  signatories  to  this  document,  37  were  unable 
to  write  their  names.  The  case  is  curious  as  an  example 
of  a  Volunteer  corps  appealing  to  a  military  chief  against 
the  action  of  its  own  Committee.  But  in  truth  they 
would  appeal  to  any  one  in  order  to  get  their  own  way.^ 

In  Cambridgeshire  there  was  an  extremely  interest- 
ing corps,  in  which  one  company  fell  at  variance  with 
the  Colonel  because  he  objected  to  their  drinking  in  the 
ranks  when  at  drill.  The  Colonel  appealed  to  the 
officers  of  the  company,  who  declined  to  intervene, 
saying  that  the  practice  was  usual ;  and  one  of  the  men, 
having  finished  his  draught,  stripped  off  his  coat,  rolled 
up  his  sleeves,  and  doubling  his  fists  challenged  his 
Colonel  to  fight  him.  Meanwhile  another  officer  came 
forward  to  remonstrate  with  the  ensign  of  the  erring 

1  I.D.   vol.  xciii.  L.L.    Yorks,  E.R.    to   S.S.  29th   Sept.,   5th 
Oct.  1805. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  1.  L.L.  to  S.S.  3rd  Jan.;  Richard  Nelmes  to  L.L.  6th 
April  1804. 


io8      INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS    chap. 

1803-4.  company,  whereupon  the  ensign  brandished  his  sword  in 
the  intruder's  face,  and  retired  with  twenty  of  his  men  to 
a  cask  of  ale  hard  by,  from  whence,  after  further  refresh- 
ment, they  marched  off  the  ground.  A  court  of  inquiry 
was  held,  when  it  appeared  that  the  ensign  and  five  of 
the  ringleaders  were  drunk  on  this  occasion  ;  indeed, 
one  of  them,  bent  upon  maintaining  his  character,  was 
drunk  when  he  came  before  the  court.  The  chief 
offenders  were  dismissed,  but  to  no  purpose,  for  the 
company  only  repeated  its  misconduct  a  few  weeks 
later,  and  was  then  disbanded.^ 

In  Cheshire  there  was  trouble  with  the  Nantwich 
troop  of  Volunteer  Cavalry,  which  refused  to  go  out 
for  ten  days'  training  or  for  eighty-five  days'  drill  in 
the  year.^  In  Yorkshire  the  Wakefield  Volunteers 
declined  to  obey  an  officer  not  of  their  own  election, 
and  nominated  a  Committee  of  officers  and  privates  to 
give  such  directions  as  the  privates  thought  proper  ; 
but  they  came  to  their  senses  after  the  dismissal  of  their 
leaders,  and  submitted  to  officers  of  the  Lieutenant's 
appointment.^  At  Ripon  there  were  scandals  in  a 
Volunteer  corps  which  occupied  the  pens  of  the  clerks 
at  the  Home  Office  for  months.  Even  in  Scotland 
there  was  one  corps  at  Falkirk  which  joined  issue  with 
the  Lord-Lieutenant  over  the  right  to  elect  its  own 
officers,  and  threatened  to  resign  unless  indulged  with 
its  own  way.  The  Lieutenant  commanded  them  to 
parade  without  arms,  ordered  in  another  corps  with 
muskets  loaded  with  ball  cartridge,  and  resolved  to 
disband  them  on  the  spot  unless  they  repented.  The 
General,  however,  deprecated  any  display  of  force  and 
contrived  to  bring  the  regiment  to  reason  ;  the  entire 
trouble  being  due  to  a  few  turbulent  men  who  were 
disarmed  and  dismissed  on  parade.* 

1  I.D.  vol.  xli.  M.  Brackenbury  to  L.L.  Cambs,  12th  April; 
L.L.  Cambs,  to  S.S.  4th  May  1804. 

2  Uid.  vol.  xlii.  Cheshire,  L.L.  to  S.S.  i8th  Feb.  1804. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  Ixvii.  Yorks  W.R.  V.L.  to  S.S.  19th  Jan.  1804. 
^  Ibid.  vol.  xliii.  L.L.  Stirling,  to  S.S.  2nd  Feb.  1804. 


II         INDISCIPLINE  OF  VOLUNTEERS       109 

The  first  call  upon  Volunteers  for  permanent  duty  1803-4. 
led  also  to  considerable  insubordination,  and  fortunately 
to  one  very  salutary  example.  In  Cambridgeshire  the 
appeal  for  this  service  was  a  failure.  Few  of  the  com- 
manding officers  took  the  trouble  to  answer  at  all ;  only 
four  thought  that  their  men  would  be  willing  to  come 
out,  and  of  the  four  one  doubted  the  success  of  embody- 
ing his  corps  outside  the  limits  of  his  parish.  The 
company  at  Little  SwafFham  could  not  even  refuse  to 
go  on  permanent  duty  without  riotous  and  disorderly 
conduct ;  and  the  West  Wrathing  company  declined 
either  to  drill  at  home  or  to  march  out  to  drill  else- 
where. Both  were  disbanded  ;  and  by  September  1 804 
Cambridge  had  increased  the  number  lacking  to  her 
quota  of  Volunteers  from  300  to  800.^  In  Caermarthen 
one  regiment  mutinied  while  on  permanent  duty,  but 
the  fact  was  not  reported  by  the  Commanding  Officer, 
and  would  not  have  been  known  at  headquarters  had 
not  some  of  the  officers  favoured  the  Secretary  of  State 
with  a  criticism  on  the  judgment  of  a  court  of  inquiry 
upon  some  of  their  fellows.^  In  Dorset  two  companies 
marched  to  Dorchester  for  permanent  duty,  but  declined, 
in  spite  of  remonstrances  and  a  strong  feeling  against 
them,  to  proceed  to  Weymouth.  The  Lieutenant  was 
weak  enough  to  write  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for 
orders,  instead  of  disbanding  them  with  ignominy  in 
their  county  town,  but  in  due  time  they  were  sent 
about  their  business.^ 

In  Devon  the  Sidmouth  Artillery  Volunteers  came 
out  with  others  on  permanent  duty,  and  were  warned 
that  while  so  engaged  they  were  subject  to  the  same 
discipline  as  the  Army.  One  man  appeared  on  parade 
an  hour  late,  asked  his  officer  for  leave  of  absence,  and 
abused  him  violently  on  being  refused.  The  officer 
ordered  some  men  to  take  charge  of  him,  but  they 

1  I.D.  vol,  xH.  C.G.M.  Cambs,  to  S.S.  15th  April,  i6th  Sept.; 
L.L.  to  S.S.  13  th,  23rci  May  1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Ixxi.  Maj.-Gen.  Gascoigne  to  S.S.  23rd  July  1805. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  xlvi.  L.L.  Dorset,  to  S.S.  7th,  12th  May  1804. 


no  A  SALUTARY  EXAMPLE  chap. 

1803-4.  declined,  one  of  them  saying  that  he  knew  the  rules  of 
the  Volunteers  and  that  "he  would  be  damned  if  he  would 
take  the  prisoner  to  the  guard-room."  The  officer 
thereupon  seized  the  first  offender  by  the  collar  and 
dragged  him  off,  fighting  furiously  all  the  way,  while 
the  second  mutineer  harangued  the  populace  and  tried 
to  stir  up  a  riot.  Matters  became  serious  ;  the  local 
magistrates  were  feeble  ;  and  it  was  at  last  necessary  to 
send  for  an  escort  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  to  bring  in 
the  prisoners.  But  now  the  case  was  taken  up  by 
stronger  hands.  The  two  men  were  tried  by  regi- 
mental court-martial  and  sentenced,  the  one  to  150 
lashes,  the  other  to  1 00  lashes,  and  both  to  be  drummed 
out.  The  Commanding  Officer  rightly  and  wisely 
reduced  the  punishment  to  thirty  lashes  and  twenty 
lashes,  but  the  drumming  out  was  performed  with  all 
due  ceremony ;  and  the  effect  was  good.  "  The 
Sidmouth  company,"  wrote  General  Simcoe,  "  consider- 
ing all  circumstances — the  village  politics,  the  tea-table 
interferences,  the  want  of  energy  in  the  magistrates — 
have  behaved  tolerably  well.  Thirteen  resignations 
have  taken  place  (out  of  a  full  strength  of  269)  ;  and 
two  of  these  wished  to  withdraw  their  resignations  but 
were  not  allowed."^ 

It  may  be  asked  whether  it  were  not  an  indignity 
to  resort  to  the  lash  in  the  case  of  the  Volunteers. 
The  answer  is  that,  with  the  exception  of  some  of  the 
corps  from  the  larger  towns,  the  ranks  were  filled 
chiefly  with  ordinary  labouring  men,  that  is  to  say,  with 
the  same  class  as  supplied  the  rank  and  file  of  the 
Army.  There  are  no  statistics  to  show  actually  that 
this  was  so,  but  there  are  casual  allusions  which  prove 
that  it  was  true  of  Buckinghamshire,  Cambridgeshire, 
Cornwall,  Denbigh,  Gloucestershire,  Middlesex,  Norfolk, 
Radnor,  Stafford,  Sussex,  and  Yorkshire  in  England, 
and  of  Lanark  and  Ross  in  Scotland,  so  that  it  would 
be  reasonable  to  conclude  that  it  was  not  otherwise  in 

^  I.D.  vol.  xlv.  Lt.-Gen.  Simcoe   to  S.S.  23rd  March,   12th 
-April ;  L.L.  Devon,  to  S.S.  27th  March  1804. 


II        COMPOSITION  OF  VOLUNTEERS        in 

the  remaining  counties.^    It  was  evidently  not  originally     1803-4. 
contemplated  that  this  class  would  fill  the  ranks  of  the 
Volunteers,    otherwise   the    Government    would    have 
provided  other  punishment  than  fines  for  breaches  of 
discipline.     Under  a  Levy  en   Masse  they  would,  of 
course,    all   have   been   enrolled ;    and   it   was   almost 
certainly  a  mistake  for   Ministers  ever  to  have  placed 
them  in  the  state  of  Volunteers,  especially  under  the 
August  Allowances.     In  the  first  place,  as  has  been  seen, 
they  were  too  poor  to  afford  a  day's  drill  without  pay  ; 
and   yet   if  their   corps  was  to  be  provided  with  an 
efficient  staff,  they  were  required  to  exercise  on  fifty- 
two  Sundays  and  thirty-three  week-days  for  the  wages 
of  £1.     Some   entertained   earnest   and   conscientious 
objections  to  drill  on  Sundays,  which  made  their  trial 
the  severer.    Nor  was  this  their  only  hardship.    Masters 
in  some  cases  refused  to  hire  servants  who  belonged  to 
Volunteer  corps,  or  deducted  part  of  their  wages  when 
they  went  to  drill.     A  case  is  recorded  of  a  Volunteer, 
enrolled  with  his  employer's  knowledge  and  under  no 
special  agreement  as  to  wages  on  that  account,  who  at 
the  end  of  the  year  found  that  twelve  shillings  out  of 
his  annual  wage  of  five  pounds  had  been  stopped  by  his 
master  for  twelve  and  a  half  days'  attendance  at  exercise.^ 
Lastly,  there  was  the  extremely  troublesome  complication 

1  I.D.  vol.  V.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  Oct.  1803  ;  vol.  xli.  Sir  J. 
Mackenzie  (Ross)  to  S.S.  17th  March  1804;  vol.  vi.  L.L.  Cambs, 
to  S.S.  nth  Sept.  1803  ;  vol.  xliv.  F.  Gregor  to  L.L.  Cornwall, 
14th  Jan.  1804  ;  vol.  xliv.  Denbigh,  Rich.  Willding  to  S.S.  2nd  July 
1804  ;  vol.  1.  L.L.  Glos.  to  S.S.  15th  Jan.  1804  ;  vol.  xxiii.  Vestry 
Clerks  of  Spitalfields  to  S.S.  13th  Oct.  1803;  vol.  Iviii.  L.L. 
Norfolk,  to  S.S.  2nd  Oct.  1804;  vol.  Ixi,  enclosed  in  L.L.Radnor, 
to  S.S.  9th  June  1804;  vol.  xxix.  Magistrates  of  Lichfield  to  S.S. 
19th  Nov.  1803;  vol.  xvii.  Lanark,  J.  Geddes  to  S.S.  17th  Dec. 
1803  ;  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  14th  Nov.  1803  ;  vol.  xxxv. 
Yorks  W.R.,  Thomas  Plumer  to  W.O.  12th  Nov.  1803. 

2  I.D.  vol.  xxxv.  Tho.  Plumer  to  W.O.  12th  Nov.  1803  ;  vol. 
xliv.  Denbigh,  Rich.  Willding  to  S.S.  2nd  July  1804.  The  salary 
of  ;^5  a  year  is  called  a  low  wage  by  the  writer.  The  case  occurred 
within  the  Lieutenancy  of  Denbigh  and  Merioneth.  The  employer 
was  evidently  a  farmer,  so  that  probably  the  man  received  boaf-d 
and  lodging  as  well  as  the  £^  a  year. 


112  VOLUNTEER  OFFICERS  chap. 

1803-4,  that  agricultural  labourers  of  a  great  many  counties 
both  in  England  and  in  Scotland  changed  their  master 
annually  at  Michaelmas  or  Martinmas,  shifting  into 
new  parishes  and  consequently  taking  service  in  new 
Volunteer  corps,  or  at  any  rate  in  different  companies  of 
the  same  corps.  As  Parliament  met  in  November  it 
was  necessary  to  prepare  the  returns  of  the  Volunteers 
for  the  estimates  and  for  the  perusal  of  the  House 
immediately  before  this  annual  change  ;  and  hence  the 
returns  were  never  more  than  approximately,  if  even 
approximately,  correct. 

As  regards  the  officers  of  the  Volunteers,  the  reader  will 
have  gained  some  idea  already  from  certain  of  the  instances 
of  indiscipline.  Taken  ^s  a  body  they  were  probably 
not  very  efficient,  though  of  course  there  were  excep- 
tions. It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  many  officers  of 
high  rank  in  the  Army  gave  their  services  willingly  to 
their  local  corps.  The  case  of  General  Amherst  has 
already  been  cited  ;  and  again,  there  were  in  Sussex 
alone  Lieutenant- General  Whyte,  who  had  held  an 
independent  command  over  nearly  ten  thousand  men  on 
active  service,  Lord  Gage,  Colonels  Newton  and  Crosbie, 
and  the  Duke  of  Richmond.  This  advantage,  how- 
ever, was  not  without  its  drawbacks.  The  Government 
early  in  1804  appointed  inspecting  field-officers  from 
the  half-pay  list  to  every  county  for  the  Volunteers, 
and,  as  these  held  the  rank  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  only, 
there  was  some  discontent  among  such  men  as  those 
above  named  at  being  placed  under  the  orders  of  an 
officer  of  inferior  rank.  The  Commander-in-Chief, 
however,  set  his  foot  at  once  and  firmly  upon  any 
complaints  of  this  kind.  "  While  you  are  in  the  Volun- 
teer service,"  he  wrote  to  Colonel  Crosbie,  "  you  cannot 
avail  yourself  of  your  Army  rank,  not  even  if  your 
corps  is  on  permanent  duty  and  serving  with  other 
corps."  ^ 

Occasionally  an  officer  of  the  Regulars  would  give 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  3rd  Oct.  1803  ;  vol.  Ixv. 
Sussex,  D.A.G.  to  Col.  Crosbie,  5th  April  1804. 


II  VOLUNTEER  OFFICERS  113 

enormous  time  and  trouble  gratuitously  to  the  improve-  1803-4. 
ment  of  the  Volunteers  in  the  neighbourhood  of  his 
quarters  ;  ^  but  for  the  most  part  corps  were  dependent 
on  such  few  half-pay  officers  as  they  could  collect  under 
the  regulations,  and  upon  their  adjutants.  Good  adju- 
tants, again,  were  not  very  easy  to  procure,  as  is 
usually  the  case  in  time  of  war  ;  and  the  best  of  whom 
record  remains  was  a  man  of  fifty-two  years'  service. 
He  had  passed  through  the  whole  of  the  American  War 
as  a  private  in  the  loth  Foot,  with  many  wounds ;  he 
had  then  served  as  sergeant-major  for  between  twenty 
and  thirty  years  in  the  same  regiment,  had  finally 
received  a  commission,  and  after  yet  another  ten  years 
as  an  officer,  had  retired,  only  to  emerge,  still  possessing 
the  vigour  and  activity  of  youth,  to  be  the  soul  and 
the  mainstay  of  a  Volunteer  corps.^  Such  men,  how- 
ever, were  rare.  In  many  parts  of  Wales  adjutants 
were  especially  difficult  to  find,  for  unless  they  could 
speak  Welsh  they  were  useless.^  Indeed  officers  of  any 
kind  were  so  scarce  in  some  counties  of  the  Principality 
that  the  Lieutenant  of  Denbigh  declared  it  to  be  im- 
possible to  find  enough  for  the  Volunteers  unless  the 
clergy  received  commissions.  With  this  view  he  sub- 
mitted the  names  of  three  reverend  gentlemen  for  a 
single  gazette,  having  first  received  the  sanction  of  their 
diocesan ;  and  was  greatly  disappointed  when  their 
services  were  not  accepted.  In  Rutland  also  the  Lord- 
Lieutenant  urged  that  a  parson  should  be  posted  Lieu- 
tenant, as  every  single  gentleman  in  the  country  was 
already  absorbed  by  some  corps  or  another.*  But  the 
Secretary  of  State  set  his  face  on  principle  against  the 
drawing  of  a  red  coat  over  a  cassock,  and  the  Church, 
as  far  as  the  Volunteers  were  concerned,  remained 
restricted  to  spiritual  warfare. 

1  J.D.  vol.  V.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  28th  Oct.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Ixvi.  Maj.-Gen.  Amherst  to  S.S.  nth  Feb.  1804. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  Iv.  L.L.  Montgomery,  to  S.S.  8th  March  1804. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  ix.  L.L.  Denbigh,  to  S.S.  20th  Nov.  1803;  vol.  xxvii. 
L.L.  Rutland,  to  S.S.  17th  Oct.  1803. 

I 


114  VOLUNTEER  OFFICERS  chap. 

1803-4.  Iri    Scotland,  too,  there   was    a    dearth    of  officers, 

chiefly  owing  to  lack  of  wealthy  men.  In  Ross  the 
Volunteers  numbered  under  1700  rank  and  file,  but  the 
Commandants  found  it  impossible  to  get  men  to  lead 
them.  A  few  came  forward  at  first  under  the  idea  that 
the  menace  of  invasion  would  at  once  be  realised,  and 
that  the  repulse  of  the  French  would  leave  them  free  to 
go  home  ;  but  prolonged  service  they  could  not  afford, 
so  they  either  resigned,  or  left  their  names  as  a  favour 
on  the  list  and  declined  to  attend  any  drills.  It  was 
not  surprising,  for  many  of  them  depended  on  their 
own  industry  for  a  living.^  In  Banff,  a  county  that  has 
never  lacked  military  enterprise,  the  Lieutenant  begged 
that  the  officers  should  receive  as  many  days'  pay  as 
the  men,  for  there  were  few  who  could  afford  to  buy 
a  uniform  or  serve  without  compensation.^ 

Nor  were  such  difficulties  wholly  unknown  in 
England,  though  they  presented  themselves  in  a 
different  form.  It  was  rare  for  an  officer  openly  to 
solicit  pay  ;  but  one  Commandant  had  the  courage  to 
ask  that  it  should  be  given  during  permanent  duty, 
and  put  forward  very  good  reasons  for  the  request. 
"  Government  allows  twenty  days'  pay  for  the  men," 
he  said,  "  but  we,  the  officers,  make  it  up  to  eighty-four 
days',  besides  the  expense  of  £2  ^  ^^^  ^^^  clothing."' 
There  lay  the  heart  of  the  matter.  The  Government 
might  boast  of  their  economy  in  limiting  the  mass  of 
the  Volunteers  to  the  August  Allowances,  but  as  a 
matter  of  fact  the  whole  of  them  received  the  June 
Allowances  by  the  generosity  of  their  officers  or  of  other 
private  individuals.  Even  so,  from  want  of  money, 
innumerable  corps  collapsed  or  were  stifled  in  their 
birth.  First,  those  that  had  aspired  to  be  self-support- 
ing found  the  burden  heavier  than  they  could  bear,  and 

1  I.D.  vol.  vi.  Donald  M'Leod  (Ross)  to  S.S.  nth  April  ;  O.C. 
1st  Ross  Volunteers  to  Donald  M'Leod,  5th  Sept.  1804. 

2  /^/V.  vol.  iii.  L.L.  Banff,  to  S.S.  15th  April  1803. 

3  Hid.  vol.  xxiv.  Lt.-Col.  Robert  Harvey  (Norwich  Vols.)  to 
S.S.  19th  Dec.  1803. 


11  VOLUNTEERS'  CLOTHING  115 

either  broke  down  entirely  or  begged  for  the  August  1803-4. 
Allowances.  From  that  instant  their  ultimate  dis- 
appearance was  only  a  question  of  time.  Subscriptions 
were  forthcoming  in  the  first  moments  of  excitement  and 
enthusiasm,  but  after  a  short  time  the  excitement  palled 
and  the  enthusiasm  waned.  Moreover,  expenses  tended 
to  increase  rather  than  the  contrary.  The  regulation 
that  all  infantry  should  be  clothed  in  scarlet  naturally 
caused  such  a  demand  for  scarlet  cloth  that  the  price 
rose  appreciably.^  Again,  the  extravagance  of  a  few 
wealthy  corps  set  an  example  of  gorgeous  raiment  for 
the  men,  and  in  particular  for  the  bandsmen,  which 
regimental  emulation  and  masculine  vanity  soon  con- 
spired to  render  infectious.  Many  a  subscription-list 
was  squandered  in  absurdly  expensive  clothes  and  head- 
dresses ;  and  the  exultation  of  the  Volunteers  in  their 
plumes  and  trappings  is,  after  a  century's  interval, 
positively  humiliating  to  contemplate.  Scores  —  I 
believe  that  I  might  say  hundreds  —  of  Volunteer 
officers  all  over  England  and  Scotland  called  in  the 
painter's  aid  to  immortalise  their  "  regimentals "  and 
their  martial  bearing.^  Every  one  of  the  London  corps, 
whether  by  its  own  act  or  by  the  enterprise  of  some 
print-seller,  obtained  commemoration  at  the  hands  of 
some  limner  of  fashion-plates,  and  has  been  visible  in  the 
windows  of  print-shops  ever  since.  The  likeness  even 
of  Pitt  himself,  whose  scorn  of  frippery  was  hardly 
exceeded  by  his  deep  love  of  his  country,  was  tendered 
to  the  public  in  the  full  uniform  of  the  Cinque  Ports 
Volunteers,  mounted  on  a  prancing  charger  and  flourish- 
ing a  sword  ;  while  for  pendant  there  was  off^ered  a 
similar  presentation  of  the  vain  and  ridiculous  Erskine. 

All  this  was  very  well  for  a  few  months — in  London 
and  a  few  more  rich  towns  for  even  longer — but  then 

1  I.D.  vol.  ix.  L.L.  Denbigh,  to  S.S.  i6th  Aug.  1803. 

2  I  speak  as  a  collector,  for  several  years  past,  of  engraved 
portraits  of  distinguished  officers  of  the  Army.  To  such  a  collector 
the  portraits  of  the  illustrious  obscure,  many  of  them  of  great  merit 
AS  works  of  art,  are  little  short  of  a  curse. 


ii6        FAILURE  OF  SUBSCRIPTIONS         chap. 

1803-4.  the  subscriptions  were  exhausted,  and  the  civil  sub- 
scribers, having  done  their  duty  as  they  thought  by 
their  first  contributions,  buttoned  up  their  pockets  and 
would  give  no  more.  Further,  the  more  zealous  the 
Volunteers,  the  more  rapidly  of  course  was  their  raiment 
worn  out.  ".Eighty-five  days'  drill  and  twenty-one 
days'  permanent  duty  have  reduced  the  clothing  allowed 
to  my  corps  by  Government  to  rags,"  wrote  an  officer 
of  a  Welsh  corps  ;  "  the  Captains  will  subscribe  their 
contingent  money,  if  the  Government  will  help."^  But 
if  the  Government  helped  one  corps,  it  must  help  all  ; 
and  the  answer  to  the  above  application  could  only  be 
in  the  negative.  Thence  followed  as  a  natural  conse- 
quence the  humouring  by  their  superiors  of  rich  officers, 
so  as  to  keep  them  in  their  corps  at  any  cost,  and  of 
poorer  officers  in  consideration  of  the  sacrifices  that  they 
had  made  ;  while  a  general  tenderness  on  the  part  of 
the  Government  towards  indiscipline  at  large  in  the 
Volunteers  evoked  from  Windham  in  the  House  of 
Commons  the  statement  that  the  Cabinet  was  afraid 
of  them.  And  this  was  perfectly  true.  How  could 
Ministers  not  be  afraid  of  a  vast  body  of  men, 
many  of  them  voters,  whom  they  had  practically  invited 
to  serve  their  country  in  the  way  which  they  thought 
best  and  easiest  for  themselves,  and  at  the  expense 
of  the  most  patriotic  individuals  among  them?  The 
entire  force  naturally  claimed  the  indulgence  that  was 
due  only  to  the  unselfish  minority  among  them.  The 
subscribers  as  naturally  demanded  some  share  in  the 
control  of  the  levies  which  they  had  helped  to  raise  and 
equip  ;  and  the  State's  rightful  hold  upon  the  Volun- 
teers in  the  matter  of  discipline  was  lost. 

Nor  was  anything  gained  economically.  The 
expense  of  the  Volunteers  to  the  country,  as  it  ap- 
peared on  the  estimates  and  returns,  might  seem 
relatively  small ;  but  this  was  only  because  the  balance 
was   defrayed   by   private  subscription.      Windham   in 

1  I.D.  vol.  ilix.  Glamorgan,  Rowley  Lascelles  to  S.S.  9th  July 
1804. 


II  FALSE  SYSTEM  OF  TRAINING        117 

1806  reckoned  that  the  Volunteers  had  cost  in  three  1803-4. 
and  a  half  years  five  millions  from  the  public  purse, 
and  at  least  as  much  more  from  individual  contributions. 
This  entire  sum  of  ten  millions  of  course  came  out  of 
the  pockets  of  the  nation,  and  impoverished  it  by  that 
amount,  whether  it  was  gathered  in  the  form  of  taxation 
or  of  a  patriotic  gift.  The  burden  of  expense  was 
unwisely  and  inequitably  laid  upon  the  willing  who 
made  shift  to  bear  it ;  but  no  part  of  the  outlay  was 
thereby  saved.  The  only  difference  was  that  the  country, 
by  leaving  its  defence  in  great  measure  to  private 
enterprise,  renounced  even  such  proportion  of  control 
as  was  due  to  it  in  return  for  a  grant  of  public  funds. 

Incidentally  this  relaxation  of  the  Government's  hold 
upon  the  Volunteers  led  also  to  a  false  system  of  train- 
ing. Being  left  to  themselves,  these  amateur  soldiers,  of 
course,  aped  their  professional  brethren  ;  and  hours  were 
zealously  devoted  to  the  classical  eighteen  manoeuvres 
of  David  Dundas  and  the  stiff  formality  of  the 
Prussian  system.  All  this  was  utterly  useless.  General 
Money,  a  retired  officer  who  had  fought  in  command 
of  troops  of  Revolutionary  France  in  1792  and  had 
written  one  of  the  best  books  extant  upon  the  work  of 
Light  Infantry,  trained  and  armed  three  companies  of 
Volunteers  as  sharpshooters.  This,  it  must  be  remarked, 
must  have  cost  him  an  appreciable  sum,  for  the  Govern- 
ment while  countenancing  by  its  regulations  the  forma- 
tion of  Rifle  corps,  would  issue  no  rifles,  nor  grant 
more  than  the  contract  price  of  muskets  for  corps  that 
provided  rifles  for  themselves.^  "  You  cannot  make 
men  equal  to  regular  troops  in  twenty-four  days'  drill," 
wrote  Money,  "  but  you  can  make  them  good  sharp- 
shooters in  ten  days  ;  whereas  long,  tedious  drills  weary 
the  peasantry."^  The  plea  fell  upon  deaf  ears.  In 
Parliament,  as  shall  presently  be  seen,  a  soldier  who 
later  won  immortality  in  the  command  of  the  Light 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxxiv.  Yorks  N.R.,  Lt.-Col.  Morritt  to  S.S.   14th 
Oct.  1803. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Iviii.  Money  to  L.L.  Norfolk,  12th  Aug.  1804. 


iiS 


MEHTS  O^  IfTXJQNXBneS 


i    Sotfe 


oTHs 


oftlKVi 


ce  aiO" 


rje  resc 


t  k  ID 
oTtke 

of 


jscji  cnfcar  ar 


Mi 


mt  :x2siies5  cf  ri- 


se 


'-So- 


Ijctt  sir.  Vtrggg* 


IIS 


TVa     li-m't  ■> 


n 


THE  SYSTEM  A  FAILURE 


119 


Act.  I  assure  yoo  dut  hociB  I  report  the 
every  considenblc  man  in  the  CDunty."^  There 
no  other  coniptiinT  of  this  kind  of  the  Levy  czi  Nlasse 
Act;  and  it  is  prubaUe  that,  if  pot  to  tlie  test.  Lord 
Fitzwilfiam  and  his  deputies  wooid  have  been  as  zedoos 
in  cnforoi^  it  as  tnar  —^'gM'"*"*-  m  ocfaer  coonticsL. 
Bat  the  really  amaying  thing  is  tliat  after  nine  years 
of  war,  mxn  I793  ^  1802,  after  many  tlwrjlfed 
invaaons  of  Ei^jand  and  one  actnal  invasion  of  bdand, 
tne  wisdoni  of  Ministers  and  or  PKnamcnf  skomd  nave 
been  onaMe  to  produce  an  Act  winch  mnid  be  accepted 
heartily  fay  the  whole  ujuniiy  to  guvcin  the  traioiBg 
of  its  popohtioD  for  defences  The  task,  it  most  he 
abondandy  conlcsBed,  was  no  easy  one;  hoc  after 
review  or  the  profrftnngs  or  Addington  s  Minis!  tf  it 
hardly  be  said,  I  think,  that  they  ^hnwr  in  the 
tion  ofEo^andfer  war.  Stfflitmaitbe 
that  Adffii^gton  was  preceded  fay  rkt,  and 
more  or  less  aider  his  protectiaa  ;  and  that  it  wasHtt 
and  no  other  wfaoi,  nndrr  some  iwhjp^ 
onginated  the  whole  or  die  VohinlBCi 
started  it  wniiiiclf  and  liictiicvjlily  hi 
diiwtinii. 


of     rt*^-^- 


JJP.  voL  xixT.  UL.  Tacz3  WJL  so  SS.  15:^  Aa^  licj 


CHAPTER    III 


1803.  With  all  their  imperfections  on  their  heads — with  a 
Regular  Army  starving  for  want  of  recruits,  a  Reserve 
already  damned  as  an  expensive  failure,  a  Militia  swollen 
to  large  numbers  on  paper,  but  with  ranks  unfilled  and 
impossible  to  fill,  and  an  enormous  Volunteer  force, 
unregulated,  undisciplined,  unorganised,  but  irrepres- 
sible— Addington  and  his  colleagues  met  Parliament  on 
the  22nd  of  November  1 803.  On  the  2nd  of  December 
the  Army  Estimates  were  introduced,  showing  an 
establishment  of  141,000  Regular  troops  (including  the 
Army  of  Reserve)  and  110,000  embodied  Militia  at 
home,  and  61,000  Regular  troops  in  the  Colonies  and 
India.  The  number  actually  effective  at  home  was 
69,000  Regulars,  26,000  Army  of  Reserve,  and  80,000 
Militia,  Artillery  not  included.  There  was  a  brief  pre- 
liminary debate  on  the  12th  of  December,  wherein  Pitt 
declared  that  according  to  the  original  intention,  mean- 
ing, no  doubt,  according  to  his  original  plan,  the  Army 
of  Reserve  was  to  have  been  raised  by  each  county  in 
strict  proportion  to  its  population,  and  no  substitutes 
were  to  have  been  received  except  from  the  county 
concerned  or  from  those  immediately  adjacent  to  it. 
Possibly  his  design  was  to  insinuate  that  under  his  own 
management  the  Act  would  have  been  differently 
administered.  Possibly,  too,  it  might  have  been  ;  but 
the  results  would  have  been  much  the  same.     The  true 

1804.  defect  in  the  Act  lay  in  the  admission  of  substitutes  at 
all ;  and  it  was  futile  for  Pitt  to  argue  that  his  bantling 

120 


CHAP.  Ill   VOLUNTEER  EXEMPTION  ACT   121 

had  been  maltreated,  when  it  had  been   conceived  in       '8°4- 
fallacy,  brought  forth  in  weakness,  and  was  foredoomed 
by  constitutional  debility  to  an  early  grave. 

But  the  great  battle  of  the  session,  as  may  be 
imagined,  was  fought  over  the  Volunteers.  In  order  to 
extricate  Ministers  from  the  thousand  difficulties  in 
which  haste,  feebleness,  and  carelessness  had  involved 
them,  Yorke,  on  the  13th  of  December,  introduced, 
in  the  first  place,  a  Volunteer  Exemption  Bill,  a  simple 
measure  which  was  designed  to  set  all  doubts  upon 
exemption  at  rest,  and  to  enable  Commanding  Officers 
to  certify  that  men  had  undergone  training  without 
arms  in  cases  where  no  arms  had  been  issued.  This 
was  passed  on  the  20th  of  December  1 803  (44  Geo.  III. 
cap.  18)  ;  and  Yorke  shortly  afterwards  presented  a 
more  important  Bill  to  consolidate  all  existing  Acts 
concerning  the  Volunteers.  This  was,  in  fact,  an  effort 
to  correct  the  many  blunders  of  the  past  session,  and 
as  such  was  likely  to  enjoy  a  stormy  career. 

As  a  first  step  it  was  proposed  that  the  number  of 
days'  exercise  required  to  exempt  Volunteers  from  the 
Militia  ballot  should  be  raised  from  five  to  twenty-four, 
so  as  to  place  exemption  from  the  Militia  and  the  Army 
of  Reserve  upon  the  same  footing.  This  was  at  once 
opposed  as  a  breach  of  faith,  and  Addington  was  fain 
to  plead  that  the  ntw  regulation  would  not  come  into 
force  until  May,  so  that  Volunteers  who  disliked  it 
would  have  plenty  of  time  to  resign. 

An  attempt  was  also  made  to  override  by  enact- 
ment the  decision  of  the  Court  of  King's  Bench  as  to 
the  right  of  Volunteers  to  resign,  when  Perceval,  as  has 
been  seen,  upheld  his  own  contention  against  that  right, 
while  Erskine  vindicated  the  judgment  of  the  court. 
Fox  summed  up  the  action  of  Ministers  on  the  question 
in  a  single  sentence.  '*  First,"  he  said,  "  it  was  intended 
that  the  Volunteers  might  resign  ;  then  the  Attorney- 
General  said  that  they  couM  not  resign  ;  then  the  Court 
of  King's  Bench  said  that  they  could  resign  ;  and  now 
Ministers  bring  in  a  Bill  to  say  that  they  can  resign, 


122  CONSOLIDATION  BILL  chap. 

1804.  and  insert  a  provision  which  renders  it  impossible  for 
many  to  resign."  ^  Against  Fox  and  Erskine  united 
the  Ministry  could  make  litde  fight,  and  the  clause 
containing  the  obnoxious  provision  was  withdrawn. 

The  third  and  most  important  novelty  introduced 
into  the  Bill  was  a  declaration  that  Volunteers  should 
no  longer  be  allowed  to  elect  their  own  officers  ;  and 
this  proposition  was  warmly  combated.  Whitbread, 
a  shrewd,  sensible  man  and  Colonel  of  a  Volunteer 
battalion  at  Bedford,  defended  the  practice  of  electing 
officers,  provided  that  their  names  were  submitted  to  the 
King  through  the  Lieutenant  for  approval.  "  Had  I 
offered  my  services  as  private  in  my  Volunteers,"  he 
said,  "  I  own  that  I  should  be  very  unwilling  to  serve 
under  any  officer  appointed  by  the  Crown  to  command 
me  without  my  own  consent."  Sheridan  warned 
Ministers  against  interference  with  the  right  as  a 
breach  of  faith,  and  Fox  adjured  the  Volunteers  not 
to  allow  themselves  to  be  bullied.^  The  question  was 
compromised  by  making  all  future  rules  of  corps 
subject  to  disallowance  by  the  King.  From  this  point 
to  the  general  question  of  discipline  the  transition  was 
easy  ;  and  since  most  of  the  members  were  officers  of 
Volunteer  corps,  there  were  few  who  had  not  stories  to 
tell  or  suggestions  to  put  forward.  Yorke  considered 
that  discipline  was  sufficiently  safeguarded  by  giving 
Commanding  Officers  power  to  discharge  men,  and  so 
to  make  them  liable  to  the  ballot,  and  by  using  the 
machinery  of  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  to  call  up  dis- 
orderly or  irregular  men  for  training.^  Pitt,  full  of  his 
experience  as  Colonel  of  the  Cinque  Ports  Volunteers, 
actually  moved  to  omit  as  unnecessary  the  clause  em- 
powering commandants  to  discharge  men  ;  but  Yorke, 
who  knew  the  ways  of  Volunteer  Committees  better 
than  Pitt,  insisted  upon  it,  because  the  regulations  or 
many  corps  forbade  the  dismissal  of  any  man  without 

1  H.D.  Commons,  19th  March  1804. 

2  Ibid.  8th  Feb.,  27th  Feb.  1804. 

3  Ibid.  8th  Feb.  1804. 


Ill  CONSOLIDATION  BILL  123 

consent  of  the  majority  of  the  members.^  On  the  other  1804. 
hand,  it  was  argued  that  it  was  dangerous  to  give  a 
commandant  authority  to  subject  a  man  to  the  ballot 
and  to  the  probable  expense  of  finding  a  substitute, 
without  any  appeal ;  but  none  the  less  the  clause  was 
carried  as  it  stood. 

The  question  of  fines  for  irregular  attendance 
or  misconduct  was  also  brought  forward  ;  but  the 
Attorney-General  was  shy,  as  he  said,  of  proceeding  too 
far  with  a  compulsory  system  for  the  Volunteers  ;  and, 
though  Pitt  took  a  different  view,  a  great  many  mem- 
bers seem  to  have  held  with  Perceval.  One  member, 
Mr.  Giles,  had  from  the  first  maintained  that  Volun- 
teers might  discipline  themselves,  but  that  Parliament 
had  no  right  to  impose  discipline.^  Yorke  condemned 
the  enforcement  of  attendance  and  discipline  by  fines 
and  imprisonment  as  "  inconsistent  with  the  Volunteer 
system;  "  ^  and  Whitbread  said  roundly  that  any  attempt 
to  enforce  fines  with  severity  would  cause  many  Volun- 
teers to  run  away.* 

In  truth,  the  more  the  question  of  the  Volunteers 
was  debated,  the  more  obvious  it  became  that,  whether 
their  military  value  were  great  or  small,  they  were  ex- 
tremely expensive  and  utterly  unmanageable.  No  one 
knew  how  to  draft  a  Bill  which  could  control  them  ; 
and  if  any  one  knew  how  to  draft  it,  no  one  knew  how 
to  carry  it.  Addington  and  his  colleagues  shuffled  and 
shifted  their  ground  upon  every  point  with  pitiable 
weakness,  trying  always  to  obtain  some  mastery  of 
the  huge  creature  that  they  had  called  into  existence  ; 
but  invariably  they  failed,  and  were  always  not  un- 
deservedly chastised  by  biting  comments  from  Fox  and 
Windham.  By  the  19th  of  March  1804  the  Bill  had 
been  committed  and  recommitted  four  times  ;  twenty- 
four  new  clauses  had  been  added  ;  nearly  all  the 
original  clauses  had  been  altered  and  amended  ;  and  yet 
it  was  as  far  from  passing  as  ever. 

1  H.D.  Commons,  6th  March  1804.      2  /^/^_  13th  Dec.  1803. 
8  Ibid.  2nd  March  1804.  *  Ibid.  19th  March  1804. 


124  CONSOLIDATION  BILL  chap. 

1 804.  There  were  suspicions  in  more  than  one  quarter  that 

the  whole  principle  of  Volunteers  was  wrong  ;  and  even 
Pitt,  in  course  of  the  debates,  betrayed  some  misgiving 
as  to  their  usefulness.  He  admitted  that  the  Volunteer 
system  had  been  pushed  to  a  far  wider  extent  than  had 
been  at  first  foreseen,  and  that  he  looked  with  great 
concern  upon  its  imperfections  ;  but  he  vowed  none  the 
less  that  he  believed  in  it.^  He  admitted  further  that 
there  should  be  permanence  and  consistency  in  a  defen- 
sive force,  which  should  render  it  equal  not  only  to  the 
present  but  to  all  future  dangers  ;  and  added  that  in  his 
opinion  the  principles  upon  which  the  Volunteer  system 
had  been  founded  were  perfectly  right.  "  But,"  he 
continued,  "  it  is  impossible  to  trust  continually  to  the 
operation  of  the  Volunteer  spirit.  When  the  danger  is 
past  they  may  doubt  the  necessity  of  future  exertions. 
It  then  becomes  the  duty  of  Parliament  to  do  that  for 
the  country  which  spontaneous  zeal  cannot  do.  .  .  . 
If  the  Volunteer  system  fails,  we  can  fall  back  on  the 
National  Defence  Act."  2 

It  is  difficult  to  see  why,  when  a  permanent  defen- 
sive force  was  wanted,  Pitt  should  have  approved  the 
expenditure  of  enormous  sums  in  creating  one  which 
was  avowedly  built  upon  ephemeral  sentiment.  "  Zeal 
is  in  its  nature  a  very  transitory  feeling,"  said  Wind- 
ham, "  and  a  permanent  Volunteer  system  is  almost  a 
contradiction  in  terms."  Whitbread  put  the  case  more 
strongly  still.  The  Volunteers,  as  he  truly  said,  were 
in  daily  danger  of  being  dissolved.  The  dismissal  of  a 
corps  was  the  only  remedy  for  a  difference  between  it 
and  the  Government.  Moreover,  every  corps  that  he 
knew  of  was  more  or  less  in  debt ;  and  the  calls  for  a 
second  subscription  would  only  collect  from  the  liberal 
that  which  should  be  exacted  from  all.  "  We  have 
gone  to  enormous  expense  in  drawing  men  from  the 
Militia  to  the  Regulars  [from  1799  to  1801]  ;  we  have 
gone   to    enormous   expense   in   raising   an   Army  of 

^  H.D.  Commons,  27th  Feb.  2  /^/^^  29th  Feb.  1804. 


Ill  CRAUFURD'S  CRITICISMS  125 

Reserve,  and   finally  we  fall  back    on    the  Volunteer       '804. 
system,  which  is  the  most  expensive  of  all."  ^ 

But  by  far  the  most  clear-sighted  man  in  either 
House  was  the  soldier,  Robert  Craufurd.  Being  im- 
bued with  the  foolish  notion  that  it  was  his  business  to 
treat  his  audience  to  all  the  paraphernalia  of  exordium, 
peroration,  and  so  forth,  he  spoke  at  enormous  length, 
and  hence  received  little  attention.  From  the  first  he 
declared  that  the  Volunteer  system  was  a  mistake  from 
beginning  to  end,  wrong  in  its  constitution,  in  the 
defrayal  of  its  cost,  in  its  committees  of  management,  in 
its  training,  in  the  use  to  be  made  of  it,  even  in  its  cloth- 
ing. The  system  of  private  contribution  was  wrong. 
The  country  ought  to  bear  the  entire  expense  of  the 
Volunteers,  and  would  thus  do  away  with  the  necessity  for 
committees  which  were  constantly  coming  into  collision 
with  Government.  The  training  was  wrong.  The 
Prussian  system  of  drill  was  ill-adapted  for  fighting  in 
England,  and  would  be  a  mistake  for  the  whole  Army  if 
the  troops  were  to  be  employed  in  England  only.  The 
whole  of  the  first  class  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act 
ought  to  be  called  up,  dressed  in  an  uniform  coat,  and 
trained  principally  to  marksmanship  and  to  withdraw  at 
the  word  of  command  from  shelter.  The  clothing  was 
wrong.  It  was  an  error  to  dress  Volunteers  in  red,  for, 
if  they  retired,  the  Regular  troops  might  think  that  their 
comrades  of  the  Line  had  been  defeated,  and  would  be 
disheartened,  whereas  the  enemy  would  be  encouraged. 
It  was  wrong  also  to  cheapen  military  titles.  Lastly, 
it  was  a  fatal  defect  that  among  the  Volunteers  it 
was  impossible  to  enforce  discipline.  "  If  you  try  to 
enact  regulations,  you  are  told,  not  that  they  are  unjust 
or  just,  but  that  they  are  not  agreeable  to  the  Volun- 
teers.    So  delicate  a  machine  is  unfit  for  war."  ^ 

The  unhappy  Volunteer  Consolidation  Bill  dragged 
on  its  weary  way  through  both  Houses  until  the  middle 
of  April  without  making  any  great  progress  ;  but  mean- 

1  H.D.  Commons,  8th  Feb.  1804. 
2   iiifj^  27th  Feb.,  22nd  March  1804. 


126  GOVERNMENT'S  NEW  PROPOSALS  chap. 

1804.  while  the  repeated  remonstrances  of  Craufurd,  Windham, 
and  others  against  the  neglect  of  the  Regular  Army  and 
the  want  of  an  offensive  force  had  borne  fruit,  and  on 
the  29th  of  March  Yorke  unfolded  a  fresh  bundle  of 
proposals.  The  Army  of  Reserve  Act,  as  he  was  fain 
to  confess,  had  ceased  to  produce  any  recruits.  He 
proposed  therefore,  first,  to  suspend  it  for  a  year,  and  to 
limit  the  bounty  in  such  counties  as  had  not  yet  pro- 
vided their  quota  to  ten  guineas  ;  secondly,  to  bring 
10,000  Militia  over  from  Ireland  in  order  to  set  free 
as  many  Regular  troops  ;  thirdly,  to  make  good  the 
loss  to  Ireland  by  augmenting  the  Irish  Militia  from 
1 5,000  to  28,000  men.  Castlereagh,  who  supported  the 
measure,  added  that  this  would  be  the  cheapest  way  of 
accomplishing  what  was  needed,  since  Irish  Militiamen 
could  be  obtained  for  a  bounty  of  four  guineas,  whereas 
the  price  of  substitutes  in  England  ranged  from  forty  to 
fifty  guineas.-^  The  Bills  were  accordingly  brought  in, 
the  one  to  enable  10,000  Irish  Militia  to  volunteer  for 
service  in  England  ;  a  second  for  raising  the  additional 
Militiamen  by  beat  of  drum  and  without  local  expense 
to  the  counties,  the  bounty  of  four  guineas  being  fixed 
by  the  Treasury  ;  and,  lastly,  a  bill  to  suspend  the  Army 
of  Reserve  Act. 

Even  so  the  Government's  resources  were  not  quite 
exhausted.  They  now  proposed  to  increase  the  "  dis- 
posable "  force  of  the  country,  that  is  to  say,  the  force 
that  could  be  spared  to  strike  outside  England,  from 
10,000  to  25,000  men.  This  they  hoped  to  do  by 
levying  new  regiments  on  the  old  system  of  raising  men 
for  rank  ;  but  no  officer  was  to  gain  more  than  one 
•  step  ;  the  step  was  not  to  be  granted  at  all  unless  the 
men  were  produced  within  six  months  ;  and  the  pre- 
scribed bounty  was  not  to  be  exceeded  under  penalty  of 
a  court-martial.  This  experiment,  it  must  be  added, 
was  tried,  and  resulted  in  the  raising  of  second 
battalions  to  the  78th  and  79th  Highlanders,  and  of 
four  new  battalions  in  Ireland,  three  of  which  became 
1  H.D.  29th  March  1804. 


Ill  PITT'S  ALTERNATIVE  POLICY       127 

new  regiments  of  the  Line;^  but  a  contract  given  to       1804. 
two  officers  to   raise    5000    men    for   levy  money   of 
thirteen  guineas  a  head  was  a  complete  failure.^ 

During  the  early  months  of  1804  the  incompetence 
of  Addington  and  his  colleagues  became  so  apparent 
that  on  the  23rd  of  April,  in  a  general  debate  on  the 
defence  of  the  country,  Pitt  turned  upon  them  with  the 
strongest  censure.  "  No  one  measure  for  public  defence 
can  they  truly  be  said  to  have  originated,"  he  declared, 
"  whereas  several  they  have  enfeebled  and  retarded."  On 
the  25th,  in  Committee  on  the  Army  of  Reserve 
Suspension  Bill,  Pitt  reviewed  the  entire  policy  of  the 
Government,  and  explained  that  which  he  proposed 
to  substitute  for  it.  The  formation  of  new  Regular 
regiments  he  condemned  as  impossible  ;  but  he  advo- 
cated in  their  place  the  reduction  of  the  Militia  in 
England  from  70,000  to  48,000  men,  the  augmentation 
of  the  Army  of  Reserve  by  ballot  to  60,000  or  70,000 
men,  and  its  maintenance  at  that  figure  so  that  there 
might  be  drawn  from  it  annually  14,000  to  15,000  men 
for  the  Regular  Army.  To  render  the  ballot  effective 
and  to  disarm  subscription  -  clubs  he  proposed  that 
ballotted  men  should  be  able  to  purchase  exemption  for  a 
moderate  fixed  sum,  and  if  they  served  in  person,  should 
receive  that  sum  as  bounty  ;  that  substitutes  should  be 
found  by  the  parish  and  not  by  the  individual  and  taken 
from  the  hundred  and  not  from  the  market  towns  ;  that 
the  bounty  should  be  limited  and  that  the  magistrates 
should  see  that  the  limit  was  not  exceeded  ;  and  that,  if 
the  substitutes  could  not  be  found  in  the  hundred,  the 
bounty-money  should  be  handed  to  the  Colonels  of 
the  county-regiments  to  obtain  a  recruit  for  that  amount 
and  no  more.  He  reckoned  that  thus  the  Army  of 
Reserve   would    offer   always   the   larger  bounty,  and 

^  The  remaining  battalion  was  drafted  into  the  87th  Foot.  C.y. 
vol.  Ixi.  p.  630. 

2  S.C.L.B.  30th  April  1804.  The  officer  was  a  certain  Colonel 
French,  who  was  mixed  up  in  the  scandals  of  Mrs,  Clarke.  He  pro- 
duced only  154  men  by  31st  Jan.  1805. 


128         PITT'S  NEW  GOVERNMENT         chap. 

1804.  by  drawing  its  recruits  from  the  locality  would  leave 
the  market  towns  open  without  competition  to  the 
Regulars.^ 

Such  initiative  in  suggestion,  added  to  so  much 
careful  and  explicit  detail,  showed  pretty  clearly  that  Pitt 
expected  very  shortly  to  take  the  reins  of  Government 
into  his  own  hands.  The  scheme,  however,  did  not 
pass  without  criticism.  Yorke  declared  that  it  was 
hopeless  to  think  of  drawing  substitutes  only  from  the 
same  hundred  as  the  ballotted  men,  and  impracticable  to 
expect  to  put  down  subscription-clubs  ;  while  Fox, 
an  acknowledged  authority  on  such  matters,  averred 
that  "  he  had  never  heard  of  an  Act  which  laid  down 
that  five  men  must  not  subscribe  ^5  apiece  to  provide 
a  substitute  for  the  one  among  them  that  might  be 
ballotted,  but  must  toss  up  which  of  them  must  pay 
^25."^  But  the  House  was  more  eager  to  condemn 
Yorke's  measures  than  to  consider  those  of  Pitt,  and  the 
majority  in  Addington's  favour  was  so  small  that  on  the 
following  day  he  resigned  office. 

Owing  to  difficulties  which  need  not  detain  us 
here,  fully  three  weeks  passed  before  Pitt  was  able  to 
form  a  new  Administration,  wherein  Lord  Camden  held 
the  office  of  Secretary  for  War  and  the  Colonies. 
Hence  Pitt  was  unable  until  the  5  th  of  June  to  bring 
forward  the  Bill  which  embodied  his  new  and  mature 
scheme  for  raising  men.  The  objects  which  he  set 
before  himself  were  good  and  statesmanlike,  namely, 
first,  to  put  an  end  to  the  competition  for  recruits 
between  the  Regular  Army,  the  Militia,  and  the  other 
forces  engaged  for  home-service  only  ;  secondly,  to 
abolish  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  establishing  a  Per- 
manent Additional  Force  as  a  standing  foundation  for  the 
recruiting  of  the  Army.  As  a  first  step  he  proposed  to 
repeal  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act  and  reduce  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Militia  to  its  original  figure  of  40,000 
men  for  England  and  8000  for  Scotland.  He  then 
proposed  to  merge  the  quota  of  the  Army  of  Reserve 
1  H.D.  Pitt,  25th  April  1804.  2  j^j^^  25th  April  1804. 


Ill  PITT'S  NEW  SCHEME  129 

and  of  the  Supplementary  Militia  into  one,  making  a  1804. 
total  force  of  79,000  men.^  As  fast  as  this  number  was 
diminished  by  the  enlistment  of  its  members  into  the 
Regular  Army,  the  counties  were  to  be  called  upon 
to  fill  the  vacancies,  with  the  proviso  that  in  no  one  year 
should  the  number  of  men  to  be  so  raised  exceed  one- 
sixth  of  the  entire  force.  In  plain  words,  he  proposed 
to  devise  machinery  for  establishing  a  Permanent 
Reserve  of  79,000  men  for  the  Army,  and  for  making 
good  any  drains  upon  it  to  the  extent,  at  most,  of  13,000 
men  annually,  over  and  above  any  recruits  that  might  be 
obtained  for  regiments  by  ordinary  and  voluntary  enlist- 
ment. As  an  encouragement  to  the  counties  to  favour 
this  measure  he  proposed,  if  the  men  were  produced,  to 
remit  all  fines  incurred  by  them  for  deficiencies  under 
the  Army  of  Reserve  Act. 

Had  the  Army  of  Reserve  and  the  Supplementary 
Militia  stood  at  their  full  strength  at  this  time,  there 
would  have  been  no  occasion  to  put  the  new  Bill  into 
force  until  casualties  had  occurred  ;  but,  as  has  been 
told,  both  were  seriously  below  their  establishment,  and 
to  increase  them  to  the  appointed  figure  it  was  necessary 
to  raise  at  once  little  short  of  20,000  men.^  In  addition 
to  this  it  was  necessary  that  at  least  1 1 ,000  men 
should  be  levied  annually  to  replace  those  who  should 
have  volunteered  from  the  Army  of  Reserve  into  the 
Regular  Army,  the  first  instalment  falling  due  on 
1st  October  1805.  Altogether,  therefore,  the  scheme 
required  3 1 ,000  men  to  be  supplied  within  the  succeed- 
ing fifteen  months. 

How  was  this  number  to  be  obtained  .''  The  ballot 
had  broken  down,  having  produced,  thanks  to  the 
admission  of  substitutes,  an  indifferent  lot  of  men  and  a 
gigantic  rise  in  bounties.     The  first  step,  therefore,  was 

1  Army  of  Reserve  of  United  Kingdom,  49,880  ;  Supplementary 
Militia  of  Great  Britain  (Ireland  had  no  Supplementary  Militia), 
29,071.     Total,  78,951. 

2  Deficiencies  in  the  Army  of  Reserve,  1 2,477  ;  in  the  Militia, 
7305.     Total,  19,782. 

K 


I30  PITT'S  NEW  SCHEME  chap. 

1804  to  reduce  bounties  ;  and  Pitt  hoped  to  achieve  this  end 
by  putting  an  end  to  the  ballot  and  throwing  upon  the 
parochial  officers  the  responsibility  for  producing  the 
quota  of  men  assigned  to  their  parishes.  He  proposed 
to  empower  them  to  give  a  bounty,  which  was  not, 
under  penalties,  to  exceed  three-fourths  of  the  bounty 
offered  to  recruits  for  the  Regular  Army,  and  to  take  an 
appointed  share  of  it  for  their  own  encouragement.  On 
the  other  hand,  they  would  be  forbidden  to  accept  men 
who  resided  more  than  twenty  miles  away  from  the  parish, 
if  in  the  same  county,  or  more  than  ten  miles  distant 
if  in  another  county.  If  they  failed  to  produce  their 
men,  the  parish  was  to  be  fined  ^^20  for  every  man 
deficient  of  the  quota,  and  was  therewith  to  be  quit  of 
all  further  trouble.  Effective  Volunteers  and  Yeomanry 
were  to  be  exempted  from  the  rates  levied  for  payment 
of  these  fines.  The  money  thus  collected  was  to  be  paid 
into  the  general  recruiting  fund  of  the  kingdom  ;  and 
the  Commanding  Officer  of  the  regiment  concerned  was 
then  to  fill  the  vacancy  by  ordinary  recruiting,  paying 
the  same  bounty  as  that  offered  by  the  parish  and  no 
more.  Finally,  the  men  were  to  be  enlisted  for  home 
service  only,  and  for  five  years  or  until  six  months  after 
the  cessation  of  war  ;  and  the  bounties  proposed  were  as 
follows  : — For  the  Regular  Army,  ^^16  :  i6s.;  for  the 
Reserve,  under  the  new  Bill,  £12  :  12s.;  to  the  Re- 
servists upon  enlisting  in  the  Regular  Army,  ^^  10  :  los. 
The  fee  granted  to  the  parish  officers  for  each  recruit 
was  to  be^^i  :  is.  The  men  when  raised  were  to  be 
formed  into  second  battalions  to  the  Regular  Army, 
promotion  of  officers  being  interchangeable  between  the 
two  battalions,  so  that  the  attachment  between  officers 
'  and  men  might  encourage  enlistment  for  general  service. 

Such  was  the  plan  proposed  by  Pitt  in  his  introduc- 
tory speech,  and  such  it  remained  in  substance  when  the 
Bill,  on  the  27th  of  June,  became  an  Act.  Not,  how- 
ever, that  it  passed  uncriticised.  Windham,  while 
approving  the  reduction  of  the  Militia  and  the  abolition 
of  the  ballot,  declared  himself  sceptical  as  to  the  sound- 


Ill  CRITICISM  OF  THE  SCHEME         131 

ness  of  the  scheme,  and  prophesied  that  if  parish  officers  1804. 
produced  any  men  at  all  they  would  buy  them  from  the 
crimps.  Other  members  predicted  that  the  Bill  might 
produce  money  but  would  never  produce  men,  and  that 
the  fines  would  be  equivalent  to  a  double  land-tax  on 
landed  proprietors  ;  for  which  reasons  they  deprecated 
the  disuse  of  the  ballot.  One  member,  Mr.  Elliot,  very 
pertinently  pointed  out  that  to  offer  a  man  £16  :  i6s. 
to  enlist  directly  into  the  Line,  and  ^23  :  2s.  to  enter 
the  Line  through  the  new  force,  was  on  the  face  of  it  an 
absurdity.  But  most  conspicuous  among  the  objectors  was 
Robert  Craufurd,  speaking  as  usual  at  extravagant  length, 
who  opposed  the  measure  without  reserve  or  com- 
promise. The  Bill,  as  he  urged  with  unanswerable  force, 
held  out  no  inducements  to  recruits,  increased  the  com- 
petition between  the  Line  and  the  Militia,  and  was  suffi- 
ciently drastic  to  irritate  the  parishes  though  not  enough 
so  to  produce  men.  He  advocated  compulsory  training 
for  all  men  between  certain  years  of  age,  but  not  as  an 
embodied  force  ;  and  then  there  would  be  an  end  of 
enlisting  men  for  service  at  home  and  bribing  them  to 
serve  abroad.  His  remedies  for  the  Regular  Army  were 
(i)  substitution  of  limited  service  for  service  for  life  ; 
(2)  liberal  provision  for  retired  soldiers  ;  (3)  aboli- 
tion of  military  service  in  the  West  Indies  for  the 
regiments  of  the  Line. 

The  arguments  of  the  opponents  of  the  Bill  were 
thrown  away.  Pitt  thought  that  he  had  made  a  master- 
stroke by  turning  the  parish -officers  into  recruiting 
sergeants,  and  would  listen  to  no  prophecies  of  evil. 
Upon  one  point — that  of  keeping  a  Reserve  to  feed  the 
ranks  of  the  Army,  and  feeding  that  Reserve  by  a  steady 
annual  supply  of  recruits — he  felt  most  rightly  that  his 
views  were  sound  ;  and  in  respect  of  other  opinions  he 
showed  strong  sense  and  an  open  mind  by  declaring  his 
readiness  to  accept  short  service  for  the  Army  if  it 
could  safely  be  introduced.  But  to  contemplate  the 
possible  failure  of  his  scheme  he  utterly  refused. 
Perhaps   with   declining   health,   with    the   knowledge 


132  PITT'S  RECRUITING  ACT  chap. 

1804.  that  the  followers  both  of  Fox  and  Grenville  were 
against  him,  and  the  consciousness  that  they  were 
subjecting  him  to  more  powerful  and  damaging 
criticism  than  he  had  ever  encountered,  he  felt  it 
imperative  to  assert  his  will.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the 
Bill  became  law,  and  by  a  melancholy  fate  was  prac- 
tically the  last  of  the  great  statesman's  important 
legislative  achievements. 

Its  provisions  may  be  summarised  as  follows.  The 
Act  itself  was  known  as  the  Permanent  Additional  Force 
Act  (44  Geo.  III.  England,  cap.  ^6  ;  Scotland,  cap.  66  ; 
Ireland,  cap.  74)  ;  and  the  first  section  provided  for 
raising  58,235  men  in  England  ;  10,666  men  in  Scot- 
land ;  and  10,000  in  Ireland  (sec.  i).  The  men  already 
raised  under  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act  were  to  be 
accepted  towards  the  fulfilment  of  these  quotas.  Returns 
were  to  be  made  in  each  county  of  the  men  deficient  of 
the  full  quota  under  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act,  and  that 
number  was  to  be  forthwith  raised  as  part  of  the  force 
required  under  the  present  Act  (sec.  2).  Ample  facili- 
ties were  given  for  comparison  of  the  returns  of 
deficiencies  presented  by  the  counties  and  by  the  In- 
spector-General of  the  Army  of  Reserve,  and  for  the 
adjustment  of  differences  between  them  (sees.  3-9). 
The  Militia  of  Great  Britain  was  to  be  reduced  to  its 
original  quota  under  the  Militia  Act  of  1802  (sec.  10), 
and,  in  cases  where  the  Militia  exceeded  that  strength, 
no  further  ballot  was  to  be  held  until  this  number  had 
been  reduced  as  aforesaid  (sec.  11).  In  counties  where 
the  Militia  was  below  its  quota,  the  deficiency  was  to 
be  raised  as  part  of  the  Additional  Force  under  the  Act 
(sec.  11),  unless  the  deficiency  fell  short  of  the  quota 
of  1 802  ;  in  which  case  the  numbers  short  of  the  quota 
were  first  to  be  made  good  (sec.  12).  For  the  year 
beginning  on  ist  October  1804,  and  ending  on  ist 
October  1805,  and  for  each  succeeding  year,  a  maximum 
of  9000  men  in  England,  of  1 800  men  in  Scotland,  and 
of  4000  men  in  Ireland  (14,800  in  all)  was  to  be  raised 
to  fill  the  vacancies  of  men  who  had  enlisted  in  the 


Ill  PITT'S  RECRUITING  ACT  133 

Regular  Army  from  the  Additional  Force  (sec.  15).  1804. 
Parish-officers  were  authorised  to  obtain  men,  and 
were  to  be  entitled  to  a  share  of  bounty  for  every  man 
produced  (sec.  20),  provided  such  men  had  resided  for 
thirty  days  in  the  parish  or  in  some  other  parish  not 
more  than  ttn.  miles  distant  from  it  in  the  same  county, 
and  provided  that  the  parish-officers  brought  a  certificate 
of  the  recruit's  residence  to  the  magistrate  on  attesting 
him  ;  the  penalty  for  refusing  to  bring  such  certificate 
being  a  fine  of£  i  to  £^  (sec.  21).  The  levying  of  rates 
and  raising  of  subscriptions  to  induce  persons  to  enlist 
was  forbidden,  and  the  penalty  for  offering  more  than 
the  prescribed  bounty  was  a  fine  of  ^^20  (sec.  22).  The 
bounty  was  not  to  exceed  three-fourths  of  the  bounty 
given  for  the  Regular  Army  ;  it  was  to  be  paid  out  of 
the  Imperial  Treasury  ;  and  it  was  to  be  accepted  in 
lieu  of  all  payments  and  allowances  prescribed  by  the 
Army  of  Reserve  Act  (sec.  24).  Parishes  failing  to 
produce  men  within  one  month  after  notice  given  (in 
the  first  instance,  within  six  weeks  after  the  passing  of 
the  Act)  were  to  be  fined  ^20  for  every  man  deficient, 
after  which  the  Commanding  Officer  of  the  corps  con- 
cerned was  to  be  at  liberty  to  enlist  recruits  to  the 
number  deficient,  for  the  bounty  named  in  section  24 
and  no  more  (sec.  26).  The  men  were  to  be  enlisted 
for  five  years  or  until  six  months  after  the  signing  of 
peace,  and  were  to  swear  that  they  were  not  lame, 
ruptured,  or  subject  to  fits  (sec.  28).  If  a  parish  paid 
its  fine  for  any  man  deficient,  but  managed  to  produce 
a  man  before  a  recruit  had  been  enlisted  by  the  Com- 
manding Officer,  three-fourths  of  the  fine  were  to  be 
remitted  (sec.  33).  Rates  levied  for  payment  for  fines 
were  to  be  separated  from  the  poor  rates.  Effective 
Yeomen  and  Volunteers  and  Militiamen  serving  by 
person  or  substitute  were  exempted  from  such  rates,  if 
the  property  on  which  they  were  assessed  for  poor  rates 
did  not  exceed  the  annual  value  of  j^20. 

The  most  noticeable  point  in  the  Act,  apart  from 
the  dispensation  with  the  ballot,  was  the  shifting  of  the 


134  VOLUNTEER  ACT,  1804  chap. 

1804.  expense  of  bounties  from  the  parochial  funds  to  the 
Imperial  Treasury,  thus  marking  a  temporary  advance 
in  the  more  equitable  distribution  of  the  expense  of 
recruiting  the  Army. 

II 

A  few  weeks  before  this  Act,  Pitt's  administration 
passed  also  the  Volunteer  Consolidation  Act  (44  Geo. 
III.  cap.  54  ;  5th  June  1804),  which  in  its  final  shape 
contained  the  following  provisions.  First,  the  Volun- 
teer Act  of  1802,  the  Billeting  Act  of  1803,  and  the 
Exemption  Act  recently  passed,  were  repealed.  The 
King  was  empowered  to  continue  the  services  of 
accepted  corps  and  accept  the  offers  of  new  corps 
(sec.  i).  Volunteers  entitled  to  exemption  under  the 
repealed  Acts  were  to  have  the  benefit  of  the  n  until  the 
1st  of  July  1 804  (sec.  2).  Effective  Volunteers  were 
also  to  be  exempt  from  the  ballot  for  the  Militia  and 
for  any  additional  force;  though  such  corps  as  had 
disclaimed  exemption  were  to  be  held  to  their  bargain 
(sec.  4)  ;  and  an  effective  member  was  defined  to  be 
one  who  in  the  cavalry  attended  four  days  and  in  the 
infantry  eight  days  of  exercise  every  three  months 
(sec.  5).  Men  belonging  to  corps  to  which  arms  and 
accoutrements  had  not  been  issued  were  equally  entitled 
to  the  exemption  if  they  duly  attended  muster  and 
exercise  (sec.  6).  Men  on  leave  of  absence  were  per- 
mitted to  do  the  whole  of  their  drills  within  four  months 
(sec.  7),  or  in  two  successive  periods  of  four  months 
each  (sec.  8).  It  is  to  be  noted  that  effective  men 
enrolled  in  the  Yeomanry  or  Volunteers  were  by  the 
new  Act  not  exempted  from  the  ballot,  but  from  service 
in  the  Militia  and  Army  of  Reserve,  their  names  being 
kept  on  the  ballot- list  so  that  they  might  be  called  up 
at  once  if  discharged  from  the  Volunteers  (sec.  17)  ; 
and  the  like  exemption  was  guaranteed  to  them  after 
the  signature  of  peace  if  they  continued  to  serve  as 
effective  Volunteers  throughout  the  war  (sec.  18). 
Infantry   corps   voluntarily   assembling   for  permanent 


Ill  VOLUNTEER  ACT,  1804  135 

duty  were  subjected  to  the  Mutiny  Act  and  Articles  of  1804. 
War  (sec.  23)  ;  but  not  corps  of  Yeomanry  cavalry 
(sec.  24).  Officers  of  Yeomanry  and  Volunteers  were 
to  rank  with  those  of  the  Militia  and  Regular  Army 
as  the  youngest  of  their  respective  grades  (sec.  26). 
Commanding  Officers  were  authorised  to  discharge  men 
for  misconduct,  though  not  to  the  prejudice  of  any 
rules,  made  by  the  corps,  which  had  received  the  King's 
approval,  and  subject  always  to  the  King's  pleasure 
(sec.  27).  Commandants  were  further  empowered  to 
disallow  the  day  on  which  a  man  misbehaved  as  a  day 
of  attendance,  or  to  disallow  his  day's  pay,  unless  the 
case  were  otherwise  provided  for  by  the  rules  of  the 
corps  (sec.  28).  They  could  also  order  a  man  into 
custody  for  misbehaviour  for  so  long  as  the  corps  might 
remain  under  arms  on  the  occasion  (sec.  29).  The 
right  of  resignation  was  affirmed  conditionally  upon  a 
man  giving  fourteen  days'  notice,  delivering  up  his 
arms,  and  paying  all  fines  due  from  him  (sees.  30,  31). 
Upon  resignation  a  man  became  liable  to  serve  in  the 
Militia  or  any  Additional  Force  ;  and  the  Commanding 
Officer  was  required  to  certify  his  discharge  to  the  Clerk 
of  the  General  Meeting  of  the  Lieutenancy  (sec.  32). 
Persons  aggrieved  by  the  refusal  of  the  Commanding 
Officer  to  accept  their  resignation  might  appeal  to  two 
Deputy-Lieutenants,  whose  decision  was  to  be  final 
(sec.  33).  The  clause  in  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act 
allowing  2s.  6d.  a  day  to  be  paid  to  persons  employed  to 
instruct  Volunteers  was  repealed  (sec.  34).  On  being 
called  up  for  active  service  two  guineas  were  to  be  paid 
to  the  Captains  for  each  man,  and  when  called  out  for 
permanent  duty,  one  guinea ;  for  which  sums  the 
Captain  was  required  to  account  to  the  men  (sec.  36). 
Another  guinea  was  to  be  allowed  them  on  return  from 
active  service  (sec.  39).  Finally,  no  future  rules  and 
regulations  of  Volunteer  corps  were  to  *be  binding 
unless  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  and  not 
disallowed  by  the  King  (sec.  S^)  '^  ^^^  ^^^  right  was 
reserved  to  the  King  of  annulling  any  rules  which  might 


136    MOBILISATION  OF  VOLUNTEERS   chap. 

1804.      have  been  made  in  the  past  or  should  be  made  in  the 
future  (sec.  57). 

The  passing  of  the  Act  was  of  very  solid  advantage, 
for  it  gave  at  any  rate  some  powers  of  discipline  to 
Commanding  Officers,  and  assured  all  ranks  of  pay 
during  permanent  duty.  The  only  misfortune  was  that 
it  should  have  come  so  late,  when  indiscipline  had 
already  become  deeply  ingrained  in  many  corps.  It 
was  also  shameful  to  enforce  by  enactment  the  dis- 
claimer of  exemption  given  by  the  7000  patriotic  men 
at  the  opening  of  the  war.  They  might  at  least  have 
been  left  at  liberty  to  continue  their  offer  gratuitously. 
But  this  was  practically  the  only  blemish  in  the  Act, 
and  a  few  additional  regulations  tended  to  heighten  the 
improvement  brought  thereby.  The  first  step  in  1 804 
was  to  appoint  and  station  field-officers  to  inspect  the 
Volunteers.^  The  next  was  to  arrange  for  the  mobilisa- 
tion of  the  Volunteers  themselves.  Orders  had  been 
issued  on  the  31st  of  October  1803  for  the  removal  of 
all  cattle  and  so  forth,  or,  as  it  was  called,  for  "  driving 
the  country  "  upon  the  enemy's  approach  or  landing  ; 
but  these  were  contested  by  the  Duke  of  Richmond  in 
Sussex,  who  declared  the  plan  to  be  impracticable  ;  ^ 
and  as  Sir  John  Moore  agreed  with  this  opinion,  it  may 
be  accepted  with  confidence  that  the  Duke  was  right. 
Incidentally,  however,  the  order  had  led  to  thoroughly 
careful  registration  of  horses  and  vehicles ;  and  the  Duke 
of  York  took  advantage  of  this  to  suggest  that  one  light 
cart  for  every  company  should  be  set  apart  and  marked 
for  regimental  transport,^  and  that  waggons  also  should 
be  set  apart,  marked  and  provided  with  seats  for  the 
conveyance  of  men  from  the  remoter  districts  to  London, 
the  expense  being  borne  by  the  Imperial  Treasury.* 
Later  on,  in  August,  an  improved  disposition  of  the 

1  Circular  of  I2th  Jan.  1 804. 

2  I.D.  vol.  xxxii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  3rd  Nov.  1803. 

8  Of  course  the  phrase  "  regimental  transport "  was  unknown  in 
those  days ;  but  I  use  it  for  convenience. 

*  Circular  of  i6th  and  19th  Jan.  and  lOth  Feb.  1804. 


Ill  CONCESSIONS  TO  VOLUNTEERS     137 

Volunteer  Force  was  made  by  the  War  Office,  for  the  1804. 
speedier  concentration  of  the  Volunteers  upon  any 
threatened  point,  and  for  that  purpose  a  muster  of  the 
regimental  waggons  was  ordered.^  But  then  arose  a 
difficulty.  The  farmers  of  the  West  Riding  of  York- 
shire refused  to  produce  their  waggons  for  a  muster  : 
they  were  ready  enough  to  give  them  up  if  wanted,  but 
muster  them  they  would  not.^  Their  reason  is  not 
stated,  but  was  probably  not  unconnected  with  the 
Department  of  Excise  ;  and  though  no  similar  objec- 
tions seem  to  have  been  urged  by  other  counties,  the 
example  was  likely  to  spread  among  folk  so  suspicious 
as  British  farmers. 

Some  further  pecuniary  concessions  had  also  been 
made  to  the  Volunteers.  A  day's  pay,  over  and  above 
the  twenty  days'  pay  allowed  annually  by  the  August 
Allowances,  was  promised  to  every  non-commissioned 
officer  and  private  present  at  an  inspection  of  his  corps 
by  a  General  Officer  or  Inspecting  Field-Officer,  pro- 
vided that  such  inspections  did  not  recur  more 
frequently  than  once  in  two  months.^  A  grant  of  pay 
for  one  sergeant  to  every  company  on  the  August 
Allowances  was  also  conceded,*  as  also  a  further  sum 
for  hiring  or  obtaining  safe  dep6ts  for  arms.  At  about 
the  same  time  were  issued,  in  anticipation  of  the  Volun- 
teer Act  of  1804,  further  regulations  to  encourage  all 
corps,  whether  of  maritime  or  inland  counties,  to  go  on 
permanent  pay  and  duty  for  periods  of  not  more  than 
a  month  or  less  than  ten  days.     But  here,  as  usual, 

1  Circular  of  lith  and  17th  Aug.  1804.  This  Circular  of  llth 
August  is  not  in  the  Circular  Book,  but  may  be  found  in  I.D.  vol. 
Ixviii.  Miscellaneous.  It  was  arranged  to  take  troops  by  post- 
carriage  for  the  last  four  stages  to  London,  the  stations  fixed  upon 
for  the  purpose  being  Guildford,  Andover,  Marlborough,  Bedford, 
Banbury,  Davcntry,  Northampton,  Kettering,  Stilton,  and  Cam- 
bridge. It  was  reckoned  that  the  waggons  would  carry  the  troops 
forty  miles  a  day  for  three  days  ;  and  the  proprietors  were  directed 
to  send  three  days'  forage  with  them. 

2  I.D.  vol.  Ixvii.  L.L.  Yorks  W.R.  to  S.S.  22nd  Aug.  1804. 
5  Circular,  loth  Feb.  1804. 

*  Circular,  19th  March  1804. 


138  THE  MARCHING-GUINEA  chap. 

1804.  Addington  and  his  colleagues  contrived  to  import  con- 
fusion into  their  orders.  In  a  circular  of  the  5th  of  March 
they  promised  an  advance  of  a  guinea,  which  was  known 
as  the  marching-guinea,  to  all  men  who  would  come  out 
on  permanent  pay  and  duty  as  aforesaid.  In  a  second 
circular  of  1 2th  April  they  engaged  to  give  also  ten  days' 
additional  pay  to  all  men  under  the  August  Allowances 
who  within  the  next  two  months  would  do  so  many 
additional  days'  exercise  without  leaving  their  homes  ; 
but  denied  them  the  marching-guinea.  Men  under  the 
June  Allowances,  on  the  other  hand,  were  to  receive  no 
special  pay  when  on  permanent  duty,  as  the  days  taken  up 
thereby  were  to  be  reckoned  among  the  eighty-five  for 
which  they  received  pay  annually  ;  but  they  were  to 
receive  the  marching-guinea.  It  appears,  further,  that 
yet  more  regulations  were  issued,  which  I  have  been 
unable  to  discover,  reducing  the  extreme  term  of  per- 
manent duty  to  three  weeks,  but  still  holding  out  the 
reward  of  the  marching-guinea.  Then  came  a  series  of 
painful  disillusions.  The  Haddington  Volunteers  went 
out  for  permanent  duty  for  fourteen  days,  and  received 
only  fourteen  shillings  instead  of  the  twenty-one  which 
they  had  expected.  Some  of  the  Durham  Volunteers 
went  out  and  received  pay,  but  could  obtain  no  guinea. 
In  Glamorganshire  a  corps  under  the  June  Allowances 
went  out,  claimed  its  guinea,  and  was  refused  because  it 
had  agreed  to  serve  in  its  Military  District  only,  and 
not  in  any  part  of  Great  Britain.  All  of  these  cases 
occurred  before  the  passing  of  the  new  Volunteer  Act 
of  1804,  and  were  partly  due  to  the  old  confusion 
between  June  and  August  Allowances  ;  but  they  did  not 
fail  (and  they  were  by  no  means  solitary  instances)  to 
rouse  bitter  discontent.^ 

The  new  Act,  however,  set  doubts  upon  these 
points  at  rest,  and  in  September  the  Government  gave 
still  further  encouragement  to  the  training  of  Volun- 

1  I.D.  vol.  xxxviii.  Lord  Haddington  to  S.S.  5th  June  1804  ; 
vol.  xlvii.  L.L.  Durham,  to  S.S.  6th  Feb.  1804;  vol.  xlix.  R. 
Lascelles  (Glamorgan)  to  S.S.   1 8th  Jan.  1804. 


Ill      IMPROVEMENT  OF  VOLUNTEERS     139 

teers  by  ofFerIng  ten  days'  pay  to  all  who  would  go  out  1804. 
for  ten  days  of  additional  exercise  during  the  following 
six  months.^  Under  such  stimulus  and  with  the  experi- 
ence of  continuous  service  the  Volunteers  improved 
rapidly  during  1804.  The  number  of  men  who  came 
out  for  permanent  duty  between  the  ist  of  November 
1803  and  the  5th  of  March  1804  was  just  over  80,000 
of  all  ranks  ;  and  as  these  belonged  to  the  maritime 
counties  only,  the  figure  is  creditable  to  them.  In  June 
Pitt  announced  that  the  number  had  been  swelled  to 
between  100,000  and  150,000.^  In  fact,  the  men 
enjoyed  permanent  duty.  The  unmarried  only  were  by 
preference  taken  for  it,  and  their  reunions  were  some- 
times so  festive  that  critics  were  found  who  denounced 
them  as  demoralising  to  the  population.  No  doubt 
permanent  duty  had  its  drawbacks ;  but  no  one  who 
has  witnessed  the  salutary  change  wrought  in  country 
lads  by  even  a  week  of  continuous  training  can  doubt 
that  those  drawbacks  were  far  outweighed  by  the 
advantages. 

Meanwhile  arrangements  had  also  been  made  for 
forming  the  Yeomanry  and  Volunteers  into  brigades, 
the  proportion  being  as  follows  : — 


Eastern  District  .         .  2  brij 

jadesof  cav 

airy 

,  4  brigad 

Southern  District         .   i 

>» 

j> 

3 

South-Western  District  i 

»j 

»» 

4 

South  Inland  District  .   i 

» 

ii 

4 

London       .         .         .1 

»» 

>» 

7 

Home         .         .         .0 

» 

»> 

6 

Further,  every  effort  was  made  to  group  small  isolated 
corps  into  regiments  and  battalions,  not  always  with 
success,  owing  to  the  bitterness  of  local  jealousies. 
Norfolk  and  Suffolk  gave  particular  trouble  in  this 
matter ;  and  indeed  it  was  from  Suffolk  that  there  came 
the  only  protest  against  the  new  system  of  brigades. 
Lord  Rous  declaiming  vigorously  against  the  Suffolk 
Yeomanry    being   brigaded    under   a  regular    officer, 

1  Circular  of  24th  September  1804. 
2  H.D.  1 8th  June  1804. 


I40  DEFECTS  OF  VOLUNTEERS       chap. 

1804.  General  Money,  if  called  out  to  repel  actual  invasion. 
Lord  Rous,  it  may  be  observed,  was  not  himself  an 
officer  of  Yeomanry  at  this  time,  though  he  had  been 
so  during  the  last  war.  Moreover,  though  Suffolk  sup- 
ported thirteen  troops  of  Yeomanry,  these  were  so  jealous 
of  each  other  that  they  were  not  even  regimented. 
Lastly,  Money,  though  a  retired  General  of  considerable 
reputation,  had  given  enormous  pains  to  the  Volun- 
teers, and  actually  commanded  a  regiment  of  Norfolk 
Yeomanry.  However,  the  General  of  the  District,  Sir 
James  Craig,  was  obliged  to  come  forward,  smooth  the 
ruffled  feathers  of  the  incensed  magnate,  and  point  out 
ostentatiously  to  Money,  who  had  been  guilty  of  no 
more  than  announcing  the  organisation  of  the  brigade 
in  orders,  that  his  command  as  a  brigadier  was  strictly 
limited  to  the  event  of  active  service,  and  that  great 
caution  must  be  employed  in  proclaiming  such  facts,  as 
the  Volunteer's  obedience  was  only  voluntary.^ 

Thus,  at  every  turn,  the  old  difficulty  recurred. 
The  Volunteers  had  undoubtedly  improved  greatly 
under  permanent  duty,  but  large  numbers  of  them  were 
still  utterly  useless.  In  Norfolk,  in  May  1804,  the 
Inspector  could  report  only  three  corps  out  of  thirty- 
three  to  be  fit  for  service  ;  and  the  Lord-Lieutenant, 
himself  a  General,  was  obliged  to  confirm  his  judgment.^ 
This  was  a  maritime  county,  which  had  enjoyed  for 
eight  months  the  privilege  of  sending  men  on  per- 
manent duty  ;  and  the  condition  of  the  Volunteers  in 
inland  counties  can  hardly  have  been  as  good.  Moreover, 
such  improvements  as  there  were  had  been  bought  only 
by  enhanced  expenditure,  by  doles  of  pay  for  this, 
allowances  for  that,  bounties  or  marching-guineas  for 
the  other.  And  though  the  men  might  be  steady  on 
parade  and  proficient  at  their  manual  exercise,  their 
officers  remained  always  a  weak  point ;  nor  was  this 
weakness  likely  to  be  strengthened  while  their  jealousies 

^  I.D.  vol.  Ixiv.  Suffolk  Mil.  Sec.  to  Mr,  King  (with  enclosure), 
4th  Aug.  1804. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  Iviii.  L.L.  Norfolk,  to  S.S.  ist  May,  17th  June  1804. 


Ill  DEFECTS  OF  VOLUNTEERS         141 

forbade  them  to  work  together  under  a  competent  1804. 
instructor.  The  tone  of  the  entire  force  was  parochial, 
or  at  best  provincial,  never  national.  Its  commanders 
clamoured  for  non-commissioned  officers  from  the 
King's  Regular  regiments,  for  these  were  their  inferiors, 
or  at  most  their  equals  ;  but  Volunteer  officers  thought 
themselves  hardly  used  when  the  Colonels  of  the  Line 
declared,  very  truly,  that  their  sergeants  and  corporals 
could  not  be  spared  from  their  legitimate  work.  Yet 
they  revolted  from  guidance  by  the  King's  Regular 
officers,  who  knew  nothing  of  their  local  importance 
and  judged  them  simply  by  their  fitness  or  unfitness 
for  their  work.  It  must  be  remembered  also  that  they 
were  wholly  under  the  protection — one  cannot  call  it 
the  control — of  the  Home  Office  ;  the  War  Office  and 
Horse  Guards  having  no  part  in  them.  General 
Tarleton,  commanding  the  Severn  District,  complained 
to  the  Commander-in-Chief  that  he  could  not  get  a 
Yeoman  in  his  district  to  travel  for  him  five  miles  with 
an  official  order.  After  ten  days'  delay  he  received  a 
"  cold,  phlegmatic  answer  "  from  the  Adjutant-General 
that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Volunteers.  The 
reply  was  strictly  true,  nor  could  have  any  other  have 
been  returned.  Had  the  Adjutant-General  infused  any 
warmth  into  his  letter,  he  would  doubtless  have  added 
that  he  thanked  Heaven  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with 
the  Volunteers,  seeing  that  their  obedience  was  volun- 
tary. When  on  permanent  duty,  which  it  must  be 
remembered  was  not  compulsory,  or  called  out  to  repel 
invasion,  the  Volunteers  were  indeed  bound  under 
military  law  to  obey  the  King's  Generals,  but  at  other 
times  they  could  and  did  snap  their  fingers  at  them,  and 
indeed  very  often  at  every  other  authority.  Well 
might  Craufurd  exclaim  that  so  delicate  a  machine  was 
unfit  for  war. 

Ill 

So  the  winter  of  1 804  drew  on,  and  the  Govern- 
ment's  attention  became  fixed  chiefly  on  Pitt's  Per- 


142  FAILURE  OF  PITTS  ACT  chap. 

1804.  manent  Additional  Force  Act.  Passed  on  the  25  th  of 
June,  it  allowed  a  fortnight's  grace  to  the  parish  officers 
to  master  its  contents,  and  one  month  more  for  the 
raising  of  the  allotted  number  of  men,  so  that,  according 
to  the  wording  of  the  law.  Ministers  expected  the  first 
batch  of  20,000  men  to  be  raised  by  the  9th  of  August. 
On  the  23rd  of  August  they  issued  a  circular  to  the 
Lords-Lieutenant  asking  what  measures  they  were 
taking  to  execute  the  Act  and  with  what  success,  repeat- 
ing the  request  on  the  30th  of  August.  Answers  came 
in  slowly,  but  were  uniformly  the  same.  Hardly  a  man 
could  be  obtained  ;  the  area  of  recruiting  was  too  much 
restricted  ;  the  bounties  were  too  low  ;  the  reward  to 
parish  officers  was  too  small.  The  Lieutenant  of  Norfolk 
added  that  recruiting  was  much  hampered  by  the  number 
of  young  labouring  men  serving  in  the  Volunteers.  It 
made  little  difference  what  reasons  were  assigned.  The 
parish  officers,  after  perusal  of  the  Act,  had  made  up 
their  minds  that  it  was  hopeless  to  obtain  recruits  under 
such  conditions,  and  that  the  Government  only  wanted 
fines  in  lieu  of  men  ;  so  they  christened  the  measure 
"TheTwenty  Pound  Act,"  and  resigned  themselves  to  the 
inevitable  payment.  The  Government,  therefore,  issued 
another  circular  on  the  25th  of  September,  pointing 
out  that,  after  all,  only  the  men  deficient  of  the  Army 
of  Reserve  and  Supplementary  Militia  were  required 
for  the  present,  and  that  the  limit  of  time  would  be  ex- 
tended to  the  15  th  of  November,  after  which  the  officers 
of  the  Regular  Army  would  receive  orders  to  raise 
recruits,  and  the  fine  of  £20  upon  the  parishes  would  be 
rigorously  enforced.  This  produced  no  greater  result 
than  an  exceedingly  sharp  answer  from  Inverness  to 
the  effect  that,  from  a  county  where  some  districts  were 
two  hundred  miles  distant  from  the  county  town,  the 
Secretary  of  State  was  expecting  impossibilities.^ 

The  Government  then  sent  round  another  circular, 
of  the   17th   of  October,  conceived  in  terms  of  bland 
insinuation.      Would    it   not    help    the    levy   if    the 
1  I.D.  vol.  xxxviii.  L.L.  Inverness,  to  S.S.  4th  Oct.  1804. 


Ill        DENUNCIATION  OF  PITT'S  ACT       143 

churchwardens  and  overseers  of  every  parish  were  1804. 
informed  that  they  would  receive  a  guinea,  free  of  all 
deductions,  for  every  man  produced,  and  that  for  every 
man  so  found  no  expense  or  burden  would  be  laid  upon 
the  parish,  whereas  for  every  recruit  raised  by  the 
Colonels  of  regiments  a  fine  would  be  imposed  ?  "  It  is 
conceived,"  continued  the  circular,  *'  that  by  such  a 
comparative  statement  it  will  be  made  manifest  to  the 
inhabitants  how  materially  they  will  consult  their  own 
advantage  by  providing  the  men  required  of  them  by 
the  15th  of  November."  Then  at  last  there  was  some 
little  sign  of  movement  in  the  counties  ;  and  it  was  high 
time,  for  by  the  ist  of  November  only  778  recruits  had 
been  raised  out  of  the  19,782  which  were  required,  and 
of  these  95  had  deserted.  The  amelioration  was  not 
such  as  to  prevent  violent  attacks  upon  the  measure 
when  Parliament  met  in  January  1805.  Returns  were  1805. 
called  for,  and  on  the  1 5th  of  February  a  motion  was 
brought  forward  in  the  Lords  for  the  repeal  of  the  Act 
as  a  total  failure.  Lord  Hawkesbury  defended  it, 
alleging  that  practically  it  had  not  come  into  force  until 
November  1804,  and  that  during  the  past  fortnight  it 
had  produced  300  recruits  a  week,  at  which  rate  it  would 
bring  in  1 1 ,000  in  the  year.  Upon  this  very  incon- 
clusive assurance  the  House  rejected  the  motion  for 
repeal ;  but  a  week  later  (21st  February)  the  attack  was 
renewed  in  the  Commons  by  far  more  powerful  advo- 
cates. Windham  led  the  way  with  a  detailed  criticism 
of  all  past  measures  of  recruiting,  and  pointed  out  that 
such  men  as  had  been  raised  had  been  produced  chiefly 
by  crimps  who,  in  spite  of  the  professed  limitation  of 
the  bounty,  received  in  practice  both  the  fines  from  the 
parish  and  the  sums  allotted  to  tempt  recruits,  making 
a  total  of  ;^34  for  every  man.  He  contended  that  the 
Army  could  be  maintained  by  voluntary  enlistment  if 
it  were  made  attractive  enough  ;  and  to  that  end  he 
advocated  short  or  (as  it  was  then  called)  limited  service, 
the  abolition  of  drafting,  special  regulations  of  service  in 
the  West  Indies,  abolition  of  flogging  except  for  certain 


144  STATE  OF  THE  REGULAR  ARMY  chap. 

1805.      specified  crimes,  and  increase  of  the  private  soldier's 
privileges  in  default  of  increase  of  his  pay. 

Canning  was  put  forward  to  answer  Windham, 
which  he  did  with  no  great  effect ;  and  on  the  6th  of 
March  1805  Sheridan  moved  the  repeal  of  the  Act. 
Pitt,  in  its  defence,  declared,  like  Hawkesbury,  that  the 
measure  had  not  begun  to  work  until  the  middle  of 
November,  and  that  it  was  too  early  yet  to  judge  of  its 
failure  or  success.  Whitbread,  however,  pointed  out 
that  the  actual  raising  of  men  had  begun  in  the  first 
week  of  September,  and  Castlereagh,  on  behalf  of  the 
Government,  was  obliged  to  admit  that  this  was  true.^ 
Sheridan's  motion  was  lost  by  a  majority  of  140,  but 
the  situation  was  serious,  and  Pitt  knew  it.  He  had 
already  caused  another  circular ^  to  be  sent  to  the  Lords- 
Lieutenant  with  fresh  explanations  and  threats  for  the 
parish  officers ;  but  the  House  was  anxious  to  look 
into  matters  for  itself,  and  ordered  returns  to  be  made 
of  the  special  rates  levied  for  fines  under  the  Act  and 
of  the  bounties  paid  to  parish  officers.  These  would 
suffice  to  show  that  the  Act  was  a  failure  so  far  as  raising 
recruits  was  concerned ;  and  the  country  was  not 
inclined  to  be  lenient  to  failures. 

The  great  need  of  England  was  a  compact  and  suffi- 
cient force  of  Regular  troops  which  could  be  employed 
over  sea  in  offensive  operations.  The  casualties  from 
deaths,  discharges,  and  desertions  at  home  during  1804, 
and  abroad  during  the  first  nine  months  of  that  year, 
amounted  to  16,400  ;  the  recruits  gained  during  1804 
numbered  but  13,400.^  Lord  Grenville  indeed  stated 
in  the  House  of  Lords  *  that  the  Regular  Infantry, 
which  on  ist  January  1804  had  numbered  105,886,  had 
sunk  by  ist  January  1805  to  105,033,  showing  a  net 
decrease  of  8  5  3  in  a  single  year.  Moreover,  it  was  not 
a  question  whether  Ministers  could  abstain  from  sending 
more  forces  abroad  even  if  they  wished  to  avoid  it.     In 

1  H.D.  6th  March  1805.  2  ig^h  Feb.  1805. 

^  C.J.  Returns  in  Appendix  i  5  to  vol.  Ix. 
4  H.D.  8th  March  1805. 


Ill       MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  ACT,  1805       i45 

the  same  month  of  March  the  French  fleet  had  appeared  1805 
in  the  Caribbean  Sea,  threatening  raids  upon  the  British 
West  Indies  ;  there  was  an  unpleasant  httle  cam- 
paign going  none  too  favourably  in  Ceylon  ;  and  in 
India  the  Mahratta  war,  so  brilliantly  opened  by  Lake 
and  Wellesley,  was  beginning  to  assume  a  disagreeable 
aspect.  Also  there  were  signs  that  Russia,  Prussia, 
and  Austria  would  shortly  incline  to  renew  the  contest 
against  France,  and  it  would  be  necessary  for  England 
to  produce  a  military  force  as  well  as  subsidies. 
Ordinary  recruiting  was  practically  at  a  standstill,  the 
number  of  men  obtained  both  in  1803  and  in  1804 
being  far  less  than  in  1800;  and  that  though  the 
bounty  had  been  swelled  more  than  twofold  between 
1 803  and  1 804.  The  Commander-in-Chief  gave  orders 
for  the  enlistment  of  boys,  since  men  could  not  be 
obtained  ;  but  it  was  perfectly  clear  that  some  other 
method  must  be  found  for  filling  the  ranks  of  the 
Regular  Army.  Pitt,  therefore,  notwithstanding  the 
fair  promise  which  he  professed  to  detect  in  his  Per- 
manent Additional  Force  Act,  was  fain  to  supersede  it, 
for  the  time  at  any  rate,  by  an  old-fashioned  expedient. 

On  the  3  ist  of  March,  therefore,  he  brought  in  a  Bill 
to  enable  the  excess  of  the  British  Militia  over  the  estab- 
lished quota,  or,  in  other  words,  the  Supplementary 
Militia,  to  enlist  in  the  Regular  Army.  There  were, 
he  said,  68,000  Militia  embodied  in  Great  Britain  at  the 
moment.  Of  this  number  he  proposed  to  set  aside 
34,000  as  the  nucleus  of  an  ultimate  quota  of  51,000  ; 
and  to  take  what  he  wanted — 17,000  men  was  the 
number  named  by  him — from  the  remaining  34,000, 
restoring  the  balance  to  the  establishment.  With  a  few 
sarcasms  the  Bill  was  allowed  to  pass,  and  became  law  on 
the  loth  of  April  (45  Geo.  III.  cap.  31). 

Its  main  provisions  were  as  follows.  The  King  was 
empowered  to  appoint  Regular  Regiments  and  divisions 
of  the  Marines  into  which  Militiamen  might  enlist  (sec. 
i),  the  number  of  men  enlisting  being  restricted  in 
every  regiment  of  Militia  to  the  excess  over  the  ordinary 

L 


146    MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  ACT,   1805  chap. 

1805.  quota,  or,  in  other  words,  to  the  actual  strength  of  the 
Supplementary  Militia  in  each  county.  Not  more  than 
one  non-commissioned  officer  for  every  twenty  men  was 
to  be  accepted  (sec.  2).  The  Commanding  Officer  of 
every  Militia  regiment  was  empowered  to  ascertain  how 
many  of  his  men  were  ready  to  enlist,  and  if  their 
number  equalled  four-fifths  of  the  full  quota  permitted 
to  enlist,  then  these  could  be  handed  over  to  the 
Regulars  at  once,  and  no  more  could  be  claimed  (sec. 
3).  (The  object  of  this  last  provision  seems  to  have 
been  to  reward  Colonels  who  stimulated  their  men  to 
enlist,  by  taking  fewer  men  away  from  them.)  Again 
the  Commanding  Officers  of  the  Militia  might  set  apart 
any  number  not  exceeding  one-half  of  the  original  quota 
of  a  regiment,  complete  with  non-commissioned  officers, 
and  forbid  them  to  be  enlisted  (sec.  4).  (This  was 
doubtless  intended  as  a  sop  to  reconcile  the  officers  to  the 
weakening  of  their  battalions.)  Commanding  Officers 
were  also  empowered  to  refuse  to  discharge  any  Militia- 
man upon  due  cause  shown  (sec.  16)  ;  no  drummer, 
musician,  clerk,  or  armourer  could  be  enlisted  without 
their  consent  (sec.  14)  ;  no  men  could  be  enlisted  at  all 
unless  duly  discharged  by  Commanding  Officers  from 
their  regiments  (sec.  10)  ;  and  enlistment  of  men  not 
duly  discharged  was  strictly  forbidden  (sec.  17).  The 
men  enlisted  were  not  to  be  under  5  feet  4  inches  in 
height,  nor  above  thirty-five  years  of  age  (sec.  5).  If 
four-fifths  of  the  allotted  quota  were  not  ready  to  enlist, 
the  Commanding  Officer  was  to  read  out  to  the  battalion 
the  terms  of  enlistment  and  explain  them,  and  on  the 
next  day  call  on  the  men  to  come  forward.  If  more 
than  the  appointed  number  offered  themselves,  they 
were  to  be  reduced  to  the  required  number  by  ballot 
(sec.  6).  If  less  than  the  appointed  number  came 
forward,  the  Commanding  Officer  was  to  open  a  book 
in  which  for  ten  days  men  might  cause  their  names  to  be 
inscribed.  At  the  close  of  the  ten  days  the  terms  were 
to  be  again  explained  and  the  names  of  the  men  enlisted 
forwarded  to  the  Clerk  of  the  General  Meeting.     If  the 


Ill  COST  OF  MILITIA  RECRUITS  147 

number  of  enlistments  still  fell  short  of  the  appointed  1805. 
tale,  the  process  was  repeated  for  another  ten  days,  after 
which  all  further  effort  was  to  be  abandoned  (sec.  7). 
The  recruits  were  allowed  to  choose  their  own  regi- 
ments, were  entitled  to  a  bounty  of  ten  guineas  (sec.  10), 
and  were  not  to  be  drafted  from  their  chosen  corps 
without  their  own  consent  (sec.  20).  Non-commis- 
sioned officers  retained  their  rank  upon  enlisting  into 
the  Line,  though  they  might  be  reduced  to  the  ranks 
for  misconduct  ;  but  no  sergeant  or  corporal  could 
enlist  as  such  into  the  Artillery  (sec.  13). 

Under  this  Act  10,696  Militiamen^  passed  into  the 
Regular  Army  between  the  loth  of  April  and  the  26  th 
of  June,  four-fifths  of  them  into  the  Infantry,  and  about 
one-tenth  (to  the  huge  indignation  of  many  Regular 
officers)  into  the  Marines.  It  is  noticeable  that  neither 
Middlesex  nor  Surrey  contributed  a  man  to  these 
figures  ;  and  that  Kent  with  two  battalions  of  Militia 
supplied  but  eleven  men.  Assuming  that  these  Militia- 
men received,  one  with  another,  ^20  to  serve  as  substi- 
tutes, their  net  cost  to  the  country  in  bounties  before 
they  could  be  finally  bribed  to  enter  the  Regular  Army 
amounted  to  some  ^^  3  30,000.  Had  they  been  enlisted 
directly  in  1803  they  would  have  been  obtained  for  one 
half  of  that  sum.  However,  by  these  means,  and  by 
contributions  from  the  Army  of  Reserve,  the  effective 
strength  of  the  Regular  Army,  infantry  and  cavalry, 
rose  from  152,000  on  the  ist  of  May  to  159,000  on  the 
I  St  of  June  ;  and  in  view  of  the  steady  ripening  of  the 
Coalition  of  Russia,  Austria,  and  Prussia  against  France, 
Pitt  decided  to  take  the  offensive. 


IV 

It  was  characteristic  of  the  man  that  he  could  not 
bring  himself  to  direct  the  whole  of  his  available  force 

1  But  another  return  in  W.  O.  Mi/a,  E.B.,  dated  5th  June,  gives 
the  figure  at  170  sergeants,  236  corporals,  10,755  ™c"-  Total, 
11,161. 


148    MEDITERRANEAN  EXPEDITION     chap. 

1805.  against  any  one  point.  Past  experience  might  have 
warned  him  against  frittering  away  his  troops  in  small 
detachments  ;  but  even  before  he  came  back  to  office  he 
had  foreshadowed  a  division  of  his  forces  between  the 
north  of  Germany  and  the  south  of  Italy  ;  ^  and  to 
these  expeditions  was  now  added  a  third  to  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope. 

The  first  of  these  armaments  was  that  designed  for 
the  Mediterranean,  which  seems  to  have  been  under 
consideration  as  early  as  February,  and  was  actually 
despatched  in  April,  before  the  drafting  of  the  Militia- 
men into  the  Line.  It  consisted  of  rather  fewer  than 
5000  men  under  Sir  James  Craig,  and  was  destined 
primarily  for  the  protection  of  Sicily,  but  secondarily  to 
join  the  Russians  in  operations  for  the  defence  of  Naples, 
to  occupy  Alexandria,  to  defend  Sardinia,  or  even  to 
capture  Minorca.  Napoleon's  comment  upon  it  was 
as  follows  :  "  The  celebrated  secret  expedition  entered 
Lisbon  on  the  7  th  of  May  and  left  it  on  the  loth. 
Whither  is  it  bound  ?  That's  the  problem.  My 
opinion  is  that  the  only  reasonable  thing  it  can  do  is  to 
capture  the  Cape  or  reinforce  Jamaica  or  the  Windward 
Islands.  If  it  is  destined  for  Malta  [its  actual  destina- 
tion in  the  first  instance]  all  the  better.  Nothing  can 
better  prove  the  folly  (jneptie)  of  the  English  Cabinet  ; 
for  these  combined  continental  movements  founded  on 
a  few  thousand  men  are  pygmy  combinations.  If  there- 
fore you  find  that  the  expedition  is  gone  to  Malta,  you 
may  rub  your  hands  (rejouissez  vous),  for  the  English 
will  have  deprived  themselves  of  6000  (sic)  men  and  of 
a  certain  number  of  ships."  ^  This  force  in  the  Medi- 
terranean, it  may  be  added,  did  little  profitable  work 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  war.  The  one  of 
its  achievements  which  is  remembered  is  the  battle  of 

^  Stanhope's  Life  of  Pitt,  iv,  223-224. 

2  Corres.  de  Napoleon,  ^7^7-  Robert  Craufurd's  criticism  in 
the  House  of  Commons  was  precisely  to  the  same  effect — Craig's 
force  was  larger  than  was  wanted  for  defensive  purposes  and  too 
small  to  take  the  offensive. 


Ill  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  CAPE         149 

Maida  in  1806,  a  brilliant  action  which  might  have  been       1805. 
turned  to  great  account  had  not  both  the  General  and 
the  Admiral  concerned  been  shallow  impostors. 

The  expedition  to  the  Cape  had  been  originally 
designed  to  reinforce  the  West  Indies,  in  consequence 
of  Villeneuve's  abortive  raid  on  the  Windward  Islands. 
It  was  not  ready  until  the  end  of  May  ;  and  mean- 
while Nelson's  pursuit  of  the  French  Admiral  made  the 
despatch  of  a  force  to  the  Antilles  unnecessary.  At 
the  end  of  July,  therefore,  its  destination  was  altered  to 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  It  numbered  rather  more 
than  6000  men  under  Sir  David  Baird  ;  and,  reaching 
the  Cape  after  a  very  tedious  passage,  compelled  the 
Dutch  to  yield  up  the  Colony  on  the  i8th  of  January 
1806.  This  object  accomplished,  Baird  was  persuaded 
by  the  Commodore,  Sir  Home  Popham,  to  lend  him  a 
battalion  for  an  absurd  expedition  to  Buenos  Ayres, 
which,  as  shall  presently  be  seen,  entangled  England, 
much  against  the  wishes  of  the  Government,  in  unprofit- 
able operations  in  that  quarter. 

Meanwhile  during  the  spring  and  summer  of  1805 
England  awaited  Napoleon's  attack  with  breathless 
suspense.  Towards  the  end  of  June  confidence  in  the 
security  of  the  British  Isles  seems  to  have  been  pretty 
firmly  established  ;  but  Robert  Craufurd  warned  the 
Commons  that  the  danger  was  not  yet  passed.  The 
enemy,  he  said,  might  draw  off  our  naval  force  to  the 
West  Indies,  and,  hurrying  back  to  Europe,  gain 
temporary  command  of  the  Channel,  capture  the  anchor- 
age of  the  Downs,  and  bring  their  army  over.  Mr. 
Bragge,  the  Secretary  at  War,  answered  this  by  a  smile, 
whereupon  Craufurd  retorted  that  the  plan  had  actually 
been  proposed  by  the  Marquis  de  Bouille  to  Count  de 
Grasse  in  178 1,  before  the  battle  of  the  Saints.  It  is 
curious  that  Craufurd  should  actually  have  divined 
Napoleon's  intentions.^  Once  indeed,  on  the  night 
of  the  15th  of  August,  when  some  burning  rape- 
straw  was  mistaken  for  a  beacon,  a  false  alarm  was 
1  H.D.  Commons,  28th  June  1805. 


I50       NAPOLEON'S  MARCH  TO  ULM     chap. 

1805.  given,  and  all  the  forces  in  Derbyshire  and  the  West 
Riding  of  York  at  once  got  under  arms.  The  behaviour 
of  the  Volunteers  generally  on  this  occasion  was  most 
praiseworthy.  The  Rotherham  infantry  in  particular,  a 
battalion  nearly  six  hundred  strong,  was  at  its  appointed 
rendezvous,  with  all  its  waggons  and  every  man  present, 
within  twelve  hours,  having  made  a  march  of  twenty- 
two  miles.^  But  Napoleon  was  never  really  in  a  condi- 
tion to  execute  his  project.  He  had  started  on  the 
wrong  lines  by  constructing  a  flotilla  of  vessels  which 
were  designed  to  be  both  fighting  ships  and  transports, 
but  answered  the  purpose  of  neither.  The  difficulty  of 
bringing  these  small  craft  to  the  ports  of  the  Channel  in 
the  face  of  the  British  cruisers  was  very  formidable,  and 
even  when  assembled  there  they  could  not,  despite  of 
much  money  spent  on  improving  the  harbours,  put 
to  sea  in  less  than  two  tides.  The  distribution  of  the 
troops  among  these  boats  was  indeed  settled  upon  paper, 
but  except  on  paper  it  was  absurd.  The  great  man's 
orders  to  his  fleets  had  also  been  faulty  ;  and  as  a  matter 
of  fact  he  never  had  more  than  90,000  troops  ready  for 
immediate  embarkation.  Upon  the  failure  of  his  fleets 
to  clear  the  Channel,  therefore,  he  broke  up  his  camp  at 
Boulogne  and  marched  on  the  28  th  of  August  for  the 
Danube,  covering  his  failure  by  a  number  of  letters 
wherein  he  laid  the  blame  for  all  shortcomings  upon 
his  Admirals. 

Shortly  afterwards  Austria  and  Russia  declared  war 
upon  France.  On  the  21st  of  October  Napoleon  gained 
his  first  signal  success  against  the  Austrians  at  Ulm  ; 
and  having  captured  Vienna,  marched  into  Moravia  to 
combat  the  Russians  and  the  remnant  of  the  Austrians 
which  lay  at  Austerlitz.  The  issue  of  the  struggle 
depended  upon  the  part  that  should  be  played  by 
Prussia  ;  and  a  special  embassy  was  sent  from  London 
to  Berlin  urging  King  Frederick  William  to  throw  in 
his  lot  with  the  Allies  and  to  crush  Napoleon  once  for 

1  I.D.  vol.  Ixxv.  Lt.-Col.  Jebb   (Derby)  to  S.S.  4th  Sept.;  vol. 
xcli,  Yorks  W.R.,  B.  Frank  to  S.S.  17th,  19th,  28th  Aug.  1805. 


Ill  THE  KING'S  GERMAN  LEGION       151 

all.  The  King  of  Sweden,  whose  hatred  of  the  Emperor  1805. 
of  the  French  amounted  to  a  mania,  had  assembled  a 
few  troops  in  Pomerania.  Hanover,  though  occupied 
by  French  troops,  had  shown  strong  attachment  to  her 
lawful  sovereign  ;  and  it  was  imagined  that,  even  if 
Prussia  held  aloof,  the  Swedes,  together  with  a  corps  of 
Russians  recently  disembarked  from  the  Baltic,  might, 
with  the  aid  of  yet  another  corps  from  England, 
operate  on  the  north-eastern  frontier  of  Holland,  and 
make  a  powerful  diversion  against  the  French  in 
Moravia. 

The  corps  from  England,  thanks  to  the  blunders 
of  Addington  and  Pitt,  was  not  likely  to  be  a  very 
formidable  one  ;  but  it  chanced  that  at  this  time  the 
Government  had  the  good  fortune  to  meet  with  a 
windfall.  Immediately  upon  the  declaration  of  war 
in  1803  the  French  had  invaded  Hanover  and  com- 
pelled, under  a  convention,  the  disbandment  of  the 
Hanoverian  army.  Burning  with  shame  and  indigna- 
tion, both  officers  and  men  sought  to  pass  over  to  England 
in  order  to  form  themselves  anew  into  regiments  and 
fight  for  their  sovereign.  The  scheme  was  eagerly 
encouraged  by  King  George ;  and  in  August  1 803 
authority  was  given  for  the  formation  of  a  King's 
German  Regiment,  which  by  November  had  expanded 
into  a  King's  German  Legion.  The  corps  grew  apace, 
so  that  by  the  end  of  December  1 804  it  had  grown  to 
two  regiments  of  cavalry,  five  batteries  of  artillery,  and 
six  battalions  of  infantry  ;  and  within  a  year  the  six 
battalions  had  been  increased  to  nine.  And  these  were 
no  mere  mercenaries  like  the  Hessians  whom  England 
had  hired  in  the  eighteenth  century.  They  were  not 
only  excellent  soldiers  under  excellent  officers,  but 
spirited,  patriotic  men,  devotedly  loyal  to  their  King, 
and  thirsting  to  avenge  the  humiliation  thrust  upon 
them  by  a  pusillanimous  commander  in  1 803. 

Thus  it  was  that  Pitt,  besides  his  detachments  to 
the  Mediterranean,  was  actually  able  to  send  a  small 
expedition  to  Germany  in  the  winter  of  1805.     A  first 


152        EXPEDITION  TO  THE  WESER     chap. 

1805.  division  of  11,000  men  sailed  in  November  from  the 
Downs  to  Cuxhaven  under  General  Don,  and  took 
post  on  the  Lower  Weser,  the  Russians  having  already 
stationed  themselves  higher  up  the  river ;  and  in 
December  Lord  Cathcart,  following  with  the  rest  of  the 
force,  found  himself,  by  January  1 806,  in  command  of 
over  26,000  men,  without  counting  nearly  3000,  who 
had  been  wrecked  or  driven  back  by  a  storm.  In  all, 
therefore,  Pitt  had  sent  out  some  30,000  troops,  16,000 
of  them  British,  to  North  Germany,  but  unfortunately  too 
late.  On  the  2nd  of  December  the  battle  of  Austerlitz 
was  fought,  which  put  an  end  to  all  hopes  of  a  diver- 
sion in  favour  of  Moravia.  Prussia,  by  a  fatal  error, 
had  kept  herself  aloof  from  the  struggle  ;  and  the  Tsar, 
by  a  still  more  fatal  error,  after  the  defeat  of  Austerlitz, 
put  his  troops  in  North  Germany  under  the  command 
of  the  King  of  Prussia.  Strong  hints  reached  Cathcart 
from  Berlin  that  he  would  do  well  to  leave  the  country, 
and  in  February  1806  he  re-embarked  his  whole  force 
for  England.  Prussia  must  be  held  mainly  responsible 
for  this  fiasco  ;  and  yet  it  should  be  observed  that  if 
Cathcart's  troops  had  been  sent  to  reinforce  Craig, 
they  would  have  retained  their  power  to  act  with 
effect  whatever  the  issue  of  Austerlitz. 

However,  the  troops  were  at  least  intact ;  and  if 
the  Permanent  Additional  Force  Act  had  fulfilled  Pitt's 
hopes,  there  would  have  been  fair  prospect  of  really 
telling  operations  in  1806.  But  nothing  could 
galvanise  that  unhappy  measure  into  life.  After  a  year 
of  disappointment  Ministers  sent  another  circular,  on 
the  1 6th  of  September,  to  the  Lords-Lieutenant,  request- 
ing full  details  of  their  proceedings  with  regard  to 
the  execution  of  the  Act,  and  offering  a  new  scale  of 
rewards  for  recruits.  The  reward  for  recruiting  parties 
for  the  Regular  Army  was  raised  from  ^^3  :  3s.  to 
;^5  :  I2S.  for  every  approved  recruit.  ^^4  :  4s.  also  was 
offered  for  every  man  enlisted  for  the  Permanent 
Reserve  by  order  of  the  Commanding  Officers  of  Regular 
battalions;   and  ^^4  :  4s.   in  lieu   of  ^^i  :  is.   to   parish 


HI 


PITT'S  RECRUITING  ACT 


^S3 


officers,  of  which  £i  :  is.  was  to  be  paid  to  the  actual 
bringer  of  the  recruit.^  The  object  herein  was  stated 
to  be  that  parish-officers  should  be  able  to  offisr  to  all 
persons  who  enlisted  men  for  them  the  same  sum  as 
was  appointed  by  the  King's  regulations  for  the  Regular 
Army,  namely  ^2:12:6.  The  liberality  and  advantages 
of  this  plan,  as  of  former  plans,  were  dwelt  upon  at  exces- 
sive length,  and  the  terror  of  the  fine  upon  the  parish 
was  exhibited  for  the  tenth  time  in  naked  and  painful 
contrast  to  the  temptations  of  the  bounty.  Nothing, 
however,  could  stir  the  apathy  of  the  parochial  officers ; 
wherefore,  after  a  preliminary  call  for  returns  from  the 

1  Scale  of  Distribution  of  Rewards  for  Recruits 


Bounties  to  the  Recruit. 


On  attesting    . 
On    approval    by 
officer 

On  final  approval 


recruiting"\ 


m  money 

."      " 

in  necessaries 

in  money 

in  necessaries 


For  Recruits 

raised  by 

Militia 

Officers  and 

Regiments. 


£4-     4 


14 


Total  to  recruits  themselves 


;Ci2 


Bounties  to  Recruiting  Parties. 


To  the  recruiting  officer  on  approval  by  the"i 
receiving  officer  or  headquarters  of  regiment  j 

To  the  party  on  final  approval. 

To  the  bringer  of  a  recruit  (whether  of  the"\ 
party  or   not)   on  intermediate  approval      j 

To  the  party  receiving  a  final  approval  . 

To  parish  officers  (who  will  pay  the  bringer  1 
at  their  discretion)  on  intermediate  approval/ 

Total  levy  money 


o   i6 

o  15     6* 

■212     6 


^16  16     o 


For  Recruits 

raised  by 

Parish 

Officers. 


;C4     4  O 

o  12  o 

5   14  o 

2        2  O 


£12     12 


I        I       O 

3     3     o 


£\6  16     o 


I 


*  Not  allowed  for    recruits  raised  at  headquarters  of  regiments,  but 
one  shilling  in  lieu  for  attesting. 

Men  volunteering  for  general  service  on  being  approved  at 

regimental  headquarters  will  receive  bounty  of  .         .    ;^9     9     o 
Bringers  of  such  volunteers  will  receive     .  .         .    ;^i      i     o 


1805. 


154      PITT'S  RECRUITING  ACT  FAILS    chap. 

1805.  peccant  parishes,  Government  proceeded  to  analysis  of 
their  contents.  It  then  appeared  that  of  all  the  men 
obtained  under  the  Act,  three-fifths  had  been  produced 
by  ten  counties,  and  two-fifths  by  eighty-one  remaining 
counties  of  the  United  Kingdom  ;  and,  further,  that 
five-sixths  of  the  whole  had  been  supplied  by  twenty 
counties,  while  among  the  rest,  twenty-five  actually 
had  not  furnished  a  man.^  The  reasons  put  forward  to 
account  for  this  failure  of  the  Act  were  various  ;  though 
all  the  Lieutenants  concurred  in  the  opinion  that  the 
parish-officers,  from  ignorance  and  negligence,  had  made 
but  indifferent  recruiting  agents. 

But  some  few  of  the  Lieutenants  gave  details  which 
were  the  reverse  of  reassuring.  From  Perth  it  was 
reported  that  the  bounty  offered  was  too  low — a  com- 
plaint echoed  by  practically  every  county — that  no 
liberal  provision  was  made  for  the  families  of  the 
Permanent  Additional  Force,  as  had  been  made  for 
the  Militia  and  for  the  Army  of  Reserve,  that  there 
was  want  of  individual  interest  in  the  levy,  and  that 
there  was  a  great  demand  for  labour  by  manufacturers.'-^ 
The  Lieutenant  of  Edinburgh  explained  that,  among 
other  discouragements,  men  had  not  been  allowed  to  select 
their  own  regiments.^  Caithness  pleaded  exhaustion 
owing  to  the  numbers  of  recruits  taken  for  the  new 
battalions  of  the  Seventy-eighth  and  Seventy-ninth.* 
The  Lieutenant  of  Caermarthen  reminded  the  Govern- 
ment that  in  the  American  War  a  battalion  had  been 
raised  in  his  county  and  had  been  sent  to  Goree,  from 
which  not  a  private  returned  home,  and  added  that  in 
Merthyr-Tydvil  there  were  to  be  found  not  only  high 
wages,  but  total  impunity  for  all  deserters,  no  man 
daring  to  execute  the  King's  warrant  therein.^  In  other 
counties,  again,  there  was  conclusive  evidence  of  evasion 

1  Circular  to  Ls.L.  31st  Dec.  1805. 

2  I.D.  vol.  Ixxxvi.  L.L.  Perth,  to  S.S.  19th  Nov.  1805. 

8  Ibid.  vol.  Ixxvi.  L.L.  Edinburgh,  to  S.S.  ist  Oct.  1805. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  Ixxi.  L.L.  Caithness,  to  S.S.  9th  Oct.  1805. 

^  Ibid.  vol.  Ixxi.  L.L.  Caermarthen,  to  S.S.  22nd  Oct.  1 805. 


Ill  PITT'S  RECRUITING  ACT  FAILS     155 

on  the  part  of  the  authorities.  In  Cornwall  the  magis-  1805-6. 
trates  assessed  the  penalties  due  from  the  parishes  for 
failing  to  produce  recruits,  but  professed  themselves 
unable  to  find  any  authority  in  the  Act  for  enforcing 
those  penalties.^  In  Hampshire  the  parish  officers,  after 
calculating  their  probable  losses  by  desertion,  decided  to 
raise  no  men  but  to  pay  their  fines,  as  the  lesser  of  two 
evils.^  In  London  also  the  parish  officers,  finding  that 
they  were  outbidden  by  recruiting  parties  for  the 
Regular  Army,  made  up  their  minds  to  pay  their  fines 
without  more  ado,  hinting  at  the  same  time  that  the 
crimps  were  purposely  starving  the  market.^  It  is, 
however,  clear  that  there  was  no  general  combination 
of  crimps  throughout  the  kingdom,  for  the  county  of 
Anglesey  appears  to  have  ofl^ered  £10  2i  head  for  recruits 
to  one  of  the  fraternity  at  Manchester  ;*  and  indeed 
Robert  Craufurd  said  openly  in  the  House  of  Commons 
that  out  of  4000  men  raised  under  the  Act  by  June 
1805,  2292  had  been  obtained  by  payments  to  crimps.^ 
Altogether  the  reports  were  not  encouraging,  but 
Pitt  would  not  yet  give  up  his  favourite  scheme  ;  and 
on  the  31st  of  December  a  last  circular  was  sent  to  the 
Lords-Lieutenant  announcing  that  intelligent  military 
officers  would  be  sent  round  to  all  the  parishes  to  relieve 
the  Deputy-Lieutenants  of  the  irksome  duty  of  instruct- 
ing the  parochial  authorities  as  to  the  execution  of  the 
Act ;  and  asking  that  a  competent  civilian  might  be 
chosen  in  each  county  to  accompany  and  assist  them. 
Such,  however,  was  the  disgust  inspired  by  the  Act  that 
even  this  innocent  request  was  ill  received  in  some 
quarters.  The  Lieutenant  of  Berkshire  replied  that  no 
man  in  the  county,  whose  assistance  was  worth  having, 
would  give  cordial  help  in  the  matter  ;  and  the  Lieu- 
tenant of  Sussex  observed  curtly  that  as  the  failure  of 

1  I.D.  vol.  xcv.  L.L.  Cornwall,  to  S.S.  27th  Feb.  1806. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  xcviii.  L.L.  Hants,  to  S.S.  4th  Jan,  1 806. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  c.  L.L.  Middlesex,  to  S.S.  ist  Oct.  1806. 

4  Ibid.  vol.  Ixxii.  C.G.M.  Carnarvon,  to  S.S.  6th  Nov.  1805. 
^  H.D.  Commons,  28th  June  1805. 


156  TREATY  OF  PRESSBURG  chap. 

1805-6.  the  Permanent  Additional  Force  Act  in  his  county  was 
due  to  scarcity  of  men,  the  despatch  of  a  military  officer 
would  only  be  a  useless  expense.^ 

This,  however,  was  the  expiring  struggle  of  the 
unfortunate  measure,  which,  none  the  less,  the  authori- 
ties at  the  Horse  Guards  pronounced  to  be  the  most 
valuable  that  had  ever  been  produced.  For  in  the  first 
place  it  connected  the  Army  with  the  country,  and  in 
the  second  permanently  established  second  battalions 
for  all  the  regiments  of  the  Line  that  were  serving 
abroad.^  Then  on  the  23rd  of  January  Pitt  died,  and 
his  administration  gave  place  to  the  "  Ministry  of  all 
the  Talents  "  under  the  presidency  of  Lord  Grenville. 
The  war  department  was  entrusted  to  Windham,  the 
great  advocate  of  short  service  and  the  uncompromising 
enemy  of  the  Volunteers,  who  entered  upon  his  new 
functions  on  the  5th  of  February  1806.  Thus  it  was 
evident  that  great  changes  of  military  policy  would 
certainly  ensue  ;  and  it  will  be  well,  therefore,  to  review 
the  situation  at  the  moment. 


In  the  first  place,  all  immediate  danger  of  invasion 
had  been  banished  by  the  total  defeat  of  the  French  and 
Spanish  fleets  at  Trafalgar  on  the  21st  of  October  1805. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  European  Coalition  had 
been  broken  up.  Austria,  heavily  defeated  at  Ulm 
and  Austerlitz,  withdrew  from  the  struggle  immediately 
after  the  latter  action,  and  on  the  26th  of  December 
agreed  to  the  humiliating  Treaty  of  Pressburg.  The 
Tsar,  though  mightily  discouraged,  was  determined  to 
fight  in  Polish  territory,  having  been  excluded  from 
that  of  Austria  under  an  armistice  preliminary  to  the 
Treaty.  But  as  the  disaster  of  Ulm  had  caused  the 
hasty  withdrawal  of  the  Austrians  from  Upper  Italy, 

1  I.D.  vol.  xciv.  L.L.  Berks,  to  S.S.  8th  Jan.   1806;  vol.  cii. 
L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  3rd  Jan.  1806. 

2  Military  Transactions,  Supplement,  pp.  3-4. 


Ill  STATE  OF  THE  ARMY,  1806  157 

so  that  of  Austerlitz  had  forced  the  Tsar  to  recall  from  1 806. 
Naples  the  small  corps  with  which  Craig  had  hoped  to 
co-operate  ;  and  the  detachment  under  Craig's  orders 
was  obliged  therefore  to  stand  on  the  defensive  in  Sicily. 
All  offensive  movements  in  the  Mediterranean,  on  this 
account,  were  for  the  present  paralysed.  It  depended 
mainly  upon  the  attitude  of  Prussia  whether  an  effective 
field  for  offensive  operations  could  be  found  in  Northern 
Europe,  though  in  point  of  fact  no  better  sphere  could 
have  been  selected  than  that  of  Italy,  which  lay  per- 
fectly open  and  ready. 

The  effective  strength  of  the  Army  on  the  17  th  of 
March  1806  was,  including  artillery,  192,372  ;  of 
which  165,790  were  engaged  for  general  service,  and 
the  rest  for  home  service  only.^  The  cavalry  at  this 
time  consisted,  over  and  above  the  Blues  and  Life 
Guards,  of  thirty-two  regiments  of  Dragoon  Guards 
and  Dragoons,  to  which  must  be  added  five  regiments 
of  the  King's  German  Legion. 

The  infantry  counted  three  regiments  (seven 
battalions)  of  Guards,  one  hundred  numbered  regiments 
of  the  Line,  three  Garrison  Battalions,'^  nine  Veteran 
Battalions,  six  independent  corps  specially  formed  for 
garrisons  in  West  Africa,  New  South  Wales,  and  Canada, 
and  the  Royal  Staff  Corps.  The  above  were  all 
European  troops,  and  to  them  may  be  added  nine  foreign 
battalions,  besides  the  ten  battalions  of  the  King's 
German  Legion. 

There  were,  further,  eight  West  India  Regiments 
and  four  independent  West  Indian  companies. 

The  artillery  numbered   17,927  of  all  ranks,  over 

1  These  figures  are  from  Castlereagh's  speech  of  3rd  April.  I 
use  them  because  they  include  the  artillery  ;  but  they  do  not  tally 
with  the  official  returns  in  Military  Transactions,  and  I  do  not 
think  that  the  omission  of  the  artillery  in  the  latter  accounts  for 
the  difference.  The  returns  show  a  grand  total  of  185,701,  of 
which  167,701  engaged  for  general  service. 

2  These  had  been  made  up  of  the  sixteen  Reserve  battalions, 
consisting  of  boys  and  worn-out  old  men  recruited  for  the  Army  of 
Reserve. 


158        STATE  OF  THE  ARMY,   1806         chap. 

1806.      and  above  five  recendy  created  batteries  of  the  King's 
German  Legion. 

Of  the  cavalry  five  regiments  only  were  abroad,  four 
out  of  the  five  being  in  India.  The  remainder  were  all 
at  home,  the  King's  German  Legion  being  among  them. 

Of  the  Infantry  fifty  British  battalions,  over  and 
above  all  foreign  and  provincial  corps,  were  quartered 
in  the  West  Indies,  in  Canada,  the  Mediterranean,  the 
Cape,  and  Ceylon.  Twenty  more  were  in  India.  Of 
the  foreign  corps  one  battalion  was  in  India,  and  the 
remainder  in  the  Mediterranean.  The  British  troops 
abroad  were,  generally  speaking,  the  best  in  the  Army  ; 
and  their  effective  strength  on  the  17th  of  March  1806 
was  67,033,  or  24,910  short  of  establishment. 

In  the  United  Kingdom  there  were,  besides  the  Guards, 
106  Regular  battalions  and  corps,  from  which,  however, 
must  be  deducted  eleven  Garrison  and  Veteran  Battalions, 
as  well  as  sixty-three  feeble  second  battalions  recently 
formed  out  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  and  the  Permanent 
Additional  Force.  These  last  were  still  very  weak  and 
raw,  and  for  the  most  part  were  not  bound  to  serve 
out  of  the  British  Isles.  In  all,  from  the  beginning  of 
the  war  up  to  March  1806,  23,370  men  had  volunteered 
into  the  Regular  Army  from  the  Army  of  Reserve  and 
the  Permanent  Additional  Force,  and  14,271  from  the 
Militia;  and  during  the  years  1803,  1804,  and  1805, 
23,860  recruits  had  been  raised  by  ordinary  recruiting, 
making  a  total  of  60,000  Regular  troops  of  less  than 
three  years'  service.-'  On  the  other  hand  there  could 
be  set  against  these,  six  mature  and  three  young 
battalions  of  the  King's  German  Legion. 

Altogether  the  Regular  force  at  home,  British  and 
foreign,  numbered  22,501  cavalry,  and  60,241  infantry, 
recruited    for    general    service ;    and    1 8,002     infantry 

^  Returns  in  C.^.  Appendix  12  to  vol.  Ixi.  The  last  return 
(p.  630)  gives  the  number  of  men  raised  for  unlimited  service,  without 
specifying  whether  they  wrere  raised  by  ordinary  recruiting  or  not, 
but  I  gather  from  other  evidence  that  the  list  there  given  refers  to 
ordinary  recruiting  only. 


Ill  WINDHAM'S  REFORMS  159 

recruited  for  service  at  home  only ;  making  in  all  1 806. 
100,744,  or,  including  artillery,  110,000  men.  The 
cavalry  was  8820,  and  the  infantry  of  all  kinds  22,501 
short  of  establishment.  Besides  these  there  were 
75,152  effective  Militia,  or  8000  deficient  of  the  estab- 
lishment, and  350,000  nominally  effective  Volunteers. 
Hence,  if  means  could  be  provided  for  making  good 
the  wastage  of  war,  it  may  be  said  that  England  at  the 
beginning  of  1806  possessed  a  striking  force  of  from 
40,000  to  50,000  men  ;  for  by  withdrawing  some  of 
Craig's  battahons  from  Sicily  and  Malta,  or,  better  still, 
by  adding  40,000  men  from  England  to  them  in 
the  Mediterranean,  not  far  short  of  50,000  men  might 
have  been  put  into  the  field. 

It  was  to  the  problem  of  keeping  the  ranks  of  the 
Army  filled  by  some  permanent  system  that  Windham 
addressed  himself.  Hitherto  he  had  been  merely  a 
bitter  critic  of  the  methods  of  Addington  and  Pitt,  and, 
so  far  as  destructive  criticism  went,  he  had  a  good 
case,  for  both  ballot  and  parochial  recruiting  as  enforced 
by  his  predecessors  had  failed  with  ignominy.  But  he 
had  also  adumbrated  the  principles  which  should  govern 
his  own  action  if  he  should  be  called  upon  to  take 
their  place,  and  upon  his  accession  to  office  he  did  not 
shrink  from  putting  his  ideas  into  force.  "  We  have 
made  it  our  first  object  to  make  an  Army,"  he  said  in 
the  House  of  Commons  on  the  3rd  of  April.  "  Hitherto 
measures  have  been  taken  to  create  not  an  Army  but  a 
substitute  for  an  Army.  .  .  .  An  Army  must  be  made 
by  force  or  by  choice.  Compulsory  service  on  every 
ballotted  man  would  not  be  borne  ;  therefore  force  must 
be  abandoned  for  choice  ;  and  choice  so  far  has  been 
stimulated  by  bounties.  But  bounties  mean  that  the  pay 
and  condition  of  the  soldier  are  not  the  trade-value  of 
his  service  ;  and  our  recruiting  service  can  never  rest 
on  a  proper  basis  until  the  necessity  for  bounties  has 
ceased.  Men  receive  no  premium  for  other  callings  ; 
they  pay  one.  The  Army  therefore  must  be  made  an 
eligible  calling  or  voluntary  enlistment  fails." 


i6o  WINDHAM'S  REFORMS  chap. 

1806.  After    this    preamble    he    discussed    the   means   of 

making  it  an  eligible  calling.  High  pay,  though  the 
only  certain  method  of  ensuring  his  object,  he  rejected 
as  economically  impossible  ;  but  there  remained  encour- 
agements, rewards,  and  short  service.  As  to  encourage- 
ments, the  dignity  of  the  Service  had  been  impaired  by 
the  Volunteers,  but  there  was  still  the  resource  of  a 
generous  provision  for  aged  and  disabled  soldiers.  As 
to  rewards,  he  considered  that  they  had  been  too  much 
neglected  in  favour  of  rigorous  discipline  which  drove 
men  to  desertion  ;  and  to  enforce  this  point  he  reminded 
the  House  that  of  13,000  men  raised  under  Pitt's  Addi- 
tional Force  Act  2800  had  deserted.  Apart  from  this, 
however,  looking  to  the  unpopularity  of  service  in  the 
West  Indies,  he  advocated  an  additional  allowance  to 
men  serving  in  the  Colonies.  But  the  reform  upon 
which  he  relied  above  all  others  was  short  service,  which 
both  he  and  Robert  Craufurd  had  already  frequently 
pressed  upon  the  Government.  To  this  end  he  pro- 
posed that  men  should  be  enlisted  first  for  seven  years, 
such  being  the  usual  term  of  apprenticeship,  and  should 
enjoy  the  usual  privilege  on  discharge  of  exercising  their 
trade  wherever  they  wished.  If  at  the  close  of  his  first 
term  a  man  was  ready  to  re-engage  for  a  second  period 
of  seven  years,  he  was  to  receive  extra  pay  of  sixpence  a 
week  and  be  entitled  after  fourteen  years'  service  to  a 
pension  for  life.  If  he  re-engaged  for  a  third  term  his 
extra  pay  was  to  be  raised  to  one  shilling  a  week,  and  at 
the  end  of  twenty-one  years'  service  he  was  to  be  assured 
of  a  full  Chelsea  pension  of  one  shilling  a  day.  Incident- 
ally Windham  proposed  to  increase  the  whole  of  the 
Chelsea  allowances,  so  that  the  first  class  of  pension 
should  be  worth  a  shilling  a  day,  the  second  ninepence, 
and  the  third  sixpence.  The  grand  difficulty,  namely 
that  of  men  whose  service  expired  abroad  in  time  of  war, 
he  proposed  to  face  boldly  by  enacting  that  Commanding 
Officers  should  be  empowered  to  retain  them  for  six 
months  beyond  their  term  and  for  no  longer,  at  the 
end  of  which  period  they  were  to  be  entitled  to  their 


Ill  SHORT  SERVICE  i6i 

discharge  and  to  a  free  passage  home.  As  to  the  existing  1 806. 
Army,  the  intention  was  to  discharge  no  man  until  he 
had  completed  his  twenty-one  years,  but  to  grant  the 
additional  sixpence  a  week  to  all  who  had  served  more 
than  seven  and  less  than  fourteen  years,  and  the 
additional  shilling  to  all  who  had  served  more  than 
fourteen  and  less  than  twenty-one  years. 

The  scheme  was  a  bold  one,  but  it  came  as  less  of  a 
surprise  than  might  have  been  expected,  for  the  Duke 
of  York  had  circulated  a  sketch  of  it,  with  some  modi- 
fications, in  June  1804,  to  fourteen  General  Officers, 
seven  of  whom  could  be  reckoned  the  most  distin- 
guished men  in  the  Army.  Their  replies  differed  very 
greatly.  General  Hewett,  the  Inspector-General  of 
Recruiting,  strongly  opposed  it,  alleging  the  difficulty 
and  expense  of  supplying  foreign  garrisons  and  prefer- 
ring the  system,  favoured  by  Pitt,  of  establishing  a  Per- 
manent Reserve  of  70,000  men,  of  whom  20,000  might 
be  induced  to  volunteer  annually  into  the  Line. 
General  Fox,  the  brother  of  Charles  James,  on  the  other 
hand,  seconded  the  proposal,  opining  that  desertion 
would  be  less  frequent  and  the  service  less  unpopular  if 
men  returned  to  their  friends  young  and  well,  instead  of 
reappearing  only  as  worn-out  cripples  at  Chelsea  and 
Kilmainham.  He  did  not  fear  any  injury  to  discipline, 
believing  that  the  soldier,  being  better  contented,  would 
be  more  subordinate.  Incidentally  he  mentioned  that 
very  cruel  and  severe  punishments  had  been  disused 
from  about  1775  ^^^^^  about  1798,  when  they  had 
reappeared  and  seemed  likely  to  increase. 

Lord  Harrington  confessed  that  he  had  been  opposed 
to  short  service,  but  had  been  converted  to  it  by  the 
practice  in  the  East  India  Company's  Army  and  the 
French  Army.  Sir  David  Dundas,  upon  the  whole, 
favoured  short  service,  but  would  not  allow  men  to  be 
discharged  in  time  of  war  ;  and  Lord  Cornwallis  took 
much  the  same  view.  General  Whitelocke,  who  had 
enjoyed  considerable  experience  of  recruiting,  was 
decidedly  for  the  change.     Sir  James  Pulteney,  a  quaint 

M 


1 62  SHORT  SERVICE  chap. 

1806.  but  shrewd  old  soldier  of  great  experience,  thought  that 
short  service  would  undoubtedly  be  better  in  time  of 
peace,  but  not  in  the  field.  Lord  Mulgrave  advocated 
short  service  upon  every  account,  and  particularly  for 
the  likelihood  that  it  would  attract  a  better  class  of 
man  ;  and  Lord  Moira,  probably  the  only  man  in  the 
Army  who  was  of  the  calibre  of  Moore  and  Wellesley, 
summed  up  uncompromisingly  in  its  favour.  So  also  did 
Sir  James  Craig,  though  he  did  not  think  that  it  would 
solve  the  problem  of  keeping  the  ranks  full  in  time  of 
war.  Lord  Chatham,  who,  when  he  took  the  trouble, 
could  both  think  and  write,  reviewed  the  proposal 
thoughtfully,  and  decided  against  it  as  likely  to  be  pro- 
hibitive in  regard  to  expense  and  prejudicial  alike  to  esprit 
de  corps  and  to  discipline,  especially  in  the  matter  of  non- 
commissioned officers.  Sir  John  Moore  condemned 
the  proposal  utterly,  anticipating  much  evil  and  no  good 
from  it.  "  If,"  he  said,  "  limited  service  and  enormous 
bounties  could  tempt  men  to  enlist,  would  the  Army  of 
Reserve  and  the  Permanent  Additional  Force  be  incom- 
plete now  }  "  No  change  (such  was  his  conclusion)  in 
terms  of  enlistment  would  obtain  men  who  could  not  be 
got  without  it.  Nevertheless  he  admitted  that  compulsory 
service,  if  enforced,  should  be  limited  as  to  time.  Finally, 
the  veteran  Lord  Grey  thought  that  short  service  might 
answer  as  a  temporary  expedient,  but  was  convinced 
that  it  would  not  produce  as  good  soldiers  as  service  for 
life.^ 

Windham  in  summing  up  these  opinions  said  that 
seven  out  of  the  fourteen  answers  were  in  favour  of  the 
reform,  six  against  it,  and  one  doubtful.  In  the  House 
of  Commons  Colonel  Thomas  Graham,  the  future  Lord 
Lynedoch,  spoke  with  approval  of  it  ;  but  the  most 
striking  testimony  was  adduced  by  Lord  de  Blaquiere, 
who  stated  that  in  1759  ^^  ^^"^  helped  to  raise  the  17th 
Light  Dragoons,  and,  finding  no  law  to  prevent  him,  had 
enlisted  the  men  for  three  years.     In  1762  he  re-enlisted 

^  These  opinions  were  printed  in   Military  Transactions,  Supple- 
ment to  vol.  i. 


Ill  REPEAL  OF  PITT'S  ACT  163 

the  whole  of  them,  except  two,  for  a  bounty  of  two       1806. 
guineas,  and  finally  re-enlisted  them  a  third  time  in 
1775  before  they  went  out  to  America,  where,  as  he  said, 
they  fought  like  lions.^ 

It  was,  however,  necessary  as  part  of  Windham's 
scheme  that  Pitt's  Additional  Force  Act  should  be 
repealed,  and  it  was  over  this  issue  that  the  dead  states- 
man's friends  rallied  to  the  fight.  Castlereagh  declared 
that  the  Act  was  only  just  beginning  to  be  understood, 
that  during  the  first  ten  weeks  it  had  produced  300  men 
a  week,  and  was  furnishing  men  at  the  rate  of  1 6,000  a 
year,  though  not  yet  enforced  in  more  than  half  of  the 
counties.^  Generals  Pulteney  and  Tarleton  also  defended 
it  ;  but  Fox  declared  it  to  be  miserably  bad.  "  Where  I 
live,"  he  said,  "it  has  never  been  acted  on,  within  five  miles 
of  the  Commander-in-Chief.  It  was  absurd  and  imprac- 
ticable, and  therefore  not  executed."  He  added,  with 
not  unfair  sarcasm,  that  it  had  taken  its  own  framers 
eighteen  months  to  understand  it  and  put  it  into  opera- 
tion.^ Wilberforce  adverted  to  its  total  failure  in  the 
North  and  West  Ridings  of  York,  where  not  a  man  had 
been  raised.  A  Mr.  Hawthorne  averred  that  the  men 
had  only  been  obtained  by  crimps  and  through  flagrant 
breaches  of  the  law,  and  that  the  circular  to  the 
Lords-Lieutenant  of  the  31st  of  December  to  all  intent 
sanctioned  both  practices.  Castlereagh  tried  hard  to 
stem  the  torrent  by  adducing  the  case  of  Leicestershire, 
which,  he  maintained,  had  raised  two  hundred  men  at  a 
much  cheaper  rate  than  those  of  the  Army  of  Reserve. 
Mr.  Babington,  himself  from  Leicestershire,  thereupon 
explained  that  these  two  hundred  men  were  undersized 
boys  who  had  been  purchased  from  recruiting  officers  at 
five  guineas  a  head.     In  fact  there  was  no  good  defence 

1  H.D.  Commons,  17th  April  1806. 

2  Perceval  {H.D.  18th  April)  gave  the  following  figures.     The 
Additional  Force  Act  had  produced 

258  men  a  week,  equal  to  13,200  men  a  year,  in  last  15  weeks 
277     „  „  „         14,600      „         „         „      10     „ 

356     «  „  „  18,000      „         „         „        5      „ 

3  H.D.  Commons,  3rd  April  1806. 


1 64      WINDHAM'S  ARMY  REFORMS        chap. 

1806.  to  be  made  out  for  the  unfortunate  Act,  and  its  repeal, 
together  with  that  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  Act,  was 
carried  with  little  real  difficulty.^  The  fines  paid  or 
due  by  parishes  for  men  deficient  of  their  quota  were 
also  refunded,  or  remitted  by  the  repealing  of  the  Act  ; 
and  this  was  a  sensible  measure,  for  they  amounted 
in  all  to  ^1,800,000,^  a  sum  which  could  never  have 
been  collected.  Thus  then  Windham  abjured  all  the 
expedients  hitherto  tried  for  the  recruiting  of  the 
Army,  and  fell  back  upon  voluntary  enlistment  alone, 
backed  by  short  service. 

The  discussion  upon  this  important  subject  found  its 
place  on  the  second  reading  of  the  Mutiny  Act,  but 
there  was  little  worth  noting  in  the  debate.  Windham 
dwelt  upon  three  principal  points  only.  The  first  was 
positive,  namely,  the  benefit  to  the  Army  of  attracting, 
as  he  trusted,  a  better  class  of  recruit.  The  second  and 
third  were  negative.  He  maintained  that  the  loss  of 
men  discharged  would  not  be  serious  ;  and  that,  judging 
by  the  experience  of  the  East  India  Company's  Army,  it 
would  not  be  a  formidable  inconvenience.  Finally,  the 
first  term  of  service  was  fixed  at  seven  years  for  the 
infantry,  ten  years  for  the  cavalry,  and  twelve  for  the 
artillery,  provided  that  the  King  should  for  so  long 
require  the  recruits'  services  ;  to  which  Commanding 
Officers  on  any  foreign  station  could  add  six  months 
and  no  more,  at  their  discretion,  and  the  King  could 
add  three  years  by  proclamation  ;  the  latter  period, 
however,  to  determine  in  any  case  within  six  months 
of  the  signature  of  a  definite  treaty  of  peace.  Further, 
men  of  less  than  eighteen  years  of  age  were  not  to 
begin  to  reckon  their  term  of  service  until  they  were 
eighteen  (46  Geo.  III.  c.  66^  Schedules  A,  B). 

The  final  regulations  in  amplification  of  the  Act  were 
not  issued  until  7th  October  1806,  when  the  terms  were 
fixed  as  follows  : — 

Infantry   could    engage  and    re-engage    for    three 

1  46  Geo.  III.  c.  51,  23rd  May  1806. 
2  Military  Transactions,  Supplement,  p.  11. 


Ill  WINDHAM'S  ARMY  REFORMS        165 

distinct  periods,  each  of  seven  years  ;  cavalry  for  three  1 806. 
distinct  periods  of  ten  years,  seven  years,  and  seven 
years ;  artillery  for  three  periods  of  twelve  years,  five 
years,  and  five  years.  No  man  could  re-enlist  until 
within  twelve  months  of  the  end  of  his  first  period 
of  service,  or  until  within  two  years  of  the  expiration 
of  his  second  period.  No  man  could  re-enlist  into 
another  regiment  until  completely  discharged  from  the 
first.  The  period  of  service  could  be  extended  for  six 
months  by  the  Commanding  Officer  of  any  colony  or 
station  abroad,  and  by  the  King,  in  respect  of  all  men 
serving  either  at  home  or  abroad,  until  six  months 
after  the  signature  of  a  definite  treaty  of  peace,  provided 
that  such  extension  of  service  should  in  no  case  exceed 
three  years.  Men  concluding  their  last  period  of  service 
could  not  be  called  upon  to  serve  for  more  than  six 
months  after  its  expiration.  No  man  could  be  drafted 
to  another  regiment  without  his  own  consent.  Every  two 
years  of  service  in  the  East  or  West  Indies  were  to  count 
as  three.  Every  man  who  had  earned  his  discharge  was 
entitled  to  a  free  passage  home,  and  to  marching- 
money  to  carry  him  from  the  place  of  discharge  to  his 
own  dwelling.  The  pay  of  corporals  and  privates  in 
the  cavalry  was  to  be  raised  by  one  penny  a  day  upon  their 
re-engagement  for  a  second  term,  and  again  for  a  third 
term  of  service.  The  pension  to  all  ranks  of  non-com- 
missioned officers  and  to  privates  after  completion  of 
their  second  term  was  fivepence  a  day.  At  the  con- 
clusion of  the  third  term  sergeants  could  retire  on  is.  to 
IS.  lod.;  corporals  on  is.  to  is.  6d.;  and  privates  on 
IS.  a  day.  If  they  served  beyond  their  third  period, 
they  were  entitled  to  an  extra  halfpenny  a  day. 

However,  in  case  the  supply  of  recruits  thus  obtain- 
able should  fail,  or,  as  Windham  put  it,  because  "  a 
custom  had  grown  up  for  Irish  Militiamen  to  enter  the 
Line,"  an  Act  was  passed  to  enable  Volunteers  from  the 
Irish  Militia  to  enlist  in  the  Army  (46  Geo.  III.  c.  1 24, 
2 1st  July  1806).  Hereby  the  King  was  empowered  to 
allow  Volunteers  from  the  Militia  to  enlist  in  the  Line 


1 66      WINDHAM'S  MILITIA  REFORMS   chap. 

1806.  during  twenty  days  in  each  year  after  the  24th  of  July 
(sees.  I,  2).  The  proportion  was  not  to  exceed  fifteen 
men  for  every  company  annually  (sec.  7),  and  if  a 
greater  number  offered  themselves,  the  Commanding 
Officer  might  select  among  them  which  he  would  let  go 
and  which  he  would  retain  (sec.  9).  The  establishment 
of  the  Irish  Militia  being  at  the  time  26,480,  this  source 
of  recruiting,  if  the  full  number  of  men  volunteered, 
would  bring  in  close  upon  4000  men  annually. 

Next  Windham  dealt  with  the  Militia,  which  he 
declared  to  be  our  true  army  for  home  defence,  and  for 
that  service  equal  to  any  part  of  our  force.  The  one 
change  which  he  purposed  to  institute  was  to  continue 
the  suspension  of  the  ballot,  and  to  rely  upon  a  limited 
bounty  to  produce  sufficient  recruits.  An  Act  was  there- 
fore passed  (46  Geo.  III.  cap.  91,  i6th  July  1 806)  for  the 
return  of  corrected  lists  of  persons  liable  to  serve  in  the 
Militia,  and  to  suspend  the  ballot  for  two  years.  This 
enacted  simply  that  new  lists  should  be  made  out  (sees. 
1-5)  ;  and  that  as  the  Militia  still  exceeded  the  original 
quota  fixed  by  the  Act  of  1802,  the  ballot  should  be 
suspended  for  two  years  (sec.  6).  But  powers  were 
reserved  to  the  King  to  cause  deficiencies  in  that 
original  quota  to  be  made  good  by  the  ballot  at  any 
time  (sec.  7). 

VI 

Finally,  Windham  attacked  the  great  question  of 
the  Volunteers  ;  and  here  he  was  absolutely  uncom- 
promising. He  admitted  that,  when  the  Levy  en  Masse 
Act  was  passed,  the  difficulty  of  enforcing  it  had  made 
him  favour  a  voluntary  system.  But  it  would  have  been 
a  very  different  system  to  that  which  was  actually 
adopted.  He  would  have  scattered  depots  of  arms  and 
schools  of  instruction  all  over  the  country,  and  trained 
the  mass  of  the  people  simply  to  fire  and  hit  their 
mark.  This  would  have  been  far  cheaper  than  the 
existing  arrangement,  which  was  exceedingly  expensive, 
and  moreover  locked  up  recruits  who  might  have  been 


Ill   WINDHAM'S  VOLUNTEER  REFORMS    167 

brought  into  the  Regulars.  He  would  have  encouraged  1806. 
the  Volunteer  Associations  to  arm  and  discipline  them- 
selves at  their  own  expense  ;  but  the  mass  of  the  people 
he  would  have  had  loosely  trained,  so  as  to  make 
useful  recruits  for  the  Regular  Army.  Another  matter 
also  needed  to  be  set  right,  namely,  section  26  of  the 
Volunteer  Consolidation  Act,  which  gave  rank  to 
officers  of  Volunteers  and  Yeomanry  next  to  those  of 
Militia  or  the  Regular  Army  of  the  same  grade.  This 
cheapening  of  military  rank  had  caused  great  discontent. 
Craufurd,  it  must  be  mentioned,  in  a  previous  debate 
had  adduced  the  case  of  a  retailer  of  tarts  and  cheese- 
cakes, who,  being  a  Colonel  of  Volunteers,  was  authorised 
to  give  orders  to  Lieutenant-Colonels  commanding 
Regular  battalions.  "  Such  a  man,"  he  said,  *'  might 
be  very  superior  to  such  officers  in  civil  life,  but  not  in 
military  ;  and  yet  if  a  General  of  a  brigade  were  killed 
in  action,  the  command  of  the  brigade  might  devolve 
upon  the  vendor  of  pastry."  ^  All  such  nonsense  as 
this  Windham  intended  to  bring  summarily  to  an  end 
by  enacting  that  in  no  case  should  an  officer  of  the 
Yeomanry  or  Volunteers  take  rank  above  field-officers 
of  the  Regulars  or  Militia.  An  Act  of  one  section 
(46  Geo.  in.  cap.  125)  to  this  effect  was  accordingly 
passed  on  the  21st  of  July. 

There  remained  the  problem  of  reducing  the  expense 
of  the  Volunteers,  a  problem  which  needed  to  be  faced 
at  once,  for  the  private  subscriptions  were  nearly  ex- 
hausted, and  it  was  plain  most  of  the  corps  must  lean 
wholly  upon  the  Government  in  a  little  while.  Windham 
admitted  that  the  reduction  must  be  gradual ;  and  there- 
fore proposed  to  begin  by  diminishing  their  allowances, 
cutting  off  their  pay  and  granting  them  privileges  in 
return.  This  would,  of  course,  lead  to  a  curtailment  of 
their  numbers,  but  even  if  a  Volunteer  corps  were  dis- 
banded the  men  remained.  First,  therefore,  he  would 
reduce  the  eighty-five  days'  training  in  the  year  to 
twenty-six,  and  lessen  the  pecuniary  grants  to  the 
1  H.D.  Commons,  28th  June  1805,  Craufurd's  speech. 


m 


i68  NATIONAL  TRAINING  BILL      chap. 

1806.  Yeomanry  by  reducing  the  pay  of  the  officers,  and  the 
allowances  both  for  drill  sergeants  and  for  permanent 
duty.  As  to  the  Volunteers  he  would  give  them  clothing 
for  the  current  year,  but  would  not  promise  it  for  the 
following  year.  The  principle  upon  which  he  meant 
to  work  was  that  Volunteers  should  not  exist  except  at 
their  own  expense.  No  men  who  accepted  more  than 
arms  and  accoutrements  from  the  Government  were 
worthy  of  the  name  of  Volunteers  ;  and  nothing  in 
future  was  to  exempt  a  man  from  national  training 
unless  he  became  such  a  Volunteer. 

Next,  as  to  the  national  training  itself,  it  must  be 
enforced  by  compulsion,  but  by  as  light  compulsion  as 
possible  ;  and  he  therefore  proposed  that  men  should 
undergo  it  without  leaving  their  homes,  and  that  dis- 
cipline should  be  as  mild  as  might  be.  But  obviously 
all  could  not  be  trained  at  once,  and  there  must  be 
selection.  For  this  purpose  he  would  divide  the  able- 
bodied  men  into  three  classes,  and  choose  from  them  by 
ballot  200,000  men  to  be  trained  annually  for  twenty- 
six  days,  receiving  pay  of  one  shilling  a  day.  If  a 
certain  proportion  of  men  voluntarily  offered  themselves 
for  training,  the  ballot  might  be  so  far  diminished ;  and 
if.  a  sufficient  number  came  forward  he  would  be  pre- 
pared to  accept  it  in  lieu  of  the  full  quota  prescribed  by 
law.  The  training  itself  he  proposed  to  conduct  by 
means  of  detachments  of  Militia  and  of  the  Regulars 
nominally  attached  to  the  counties.  In  particular  he 
would  take  advantage  of  the  officers  appointed  to  the 
skeleton  second -battalions  raised  under  the  Army  of 
Reserve  Act,  who,  at  great  expense  to  the  country,  had 
been  placed  on  full  pay  from  the  half- pay  list  or 
removed  from  their  proper  duty  some  time  before  a 
recruit  had  been  levied,  and  had  stood  "  waiting  and 
gaping  for  their  men  like  oysters  at  ebb-tide."  ^  All  of 
these  provisions  and  regulations  for  the  present,  however, 
would  apply  to  England  only  ;  for  in  Scotland  the 
people  were  more  military  and  the  Volunteers  more 
1  H.D.  Commons,  3rd  April  1806. 


Ill  NATIONAL  TRAINING  ACT  169 

efficient,   while   the    Militia   laws    also  were  of  more       1806. 
recent  introduction. 

It  was  not  to  be  supposed  that  changes  so  drastic 
would  pass  unchallenged  in  a  House  full  of  Volunteer 
field-officers,  and  yet  the  opposition  was  very  moderate. 
Castlereagh  protested  that  the  new  Training  Act  would 
be  a  breach  of  the  engagement  given,  that  the  Levy  en 
Masse  Act  should  not  be  enforced  if  a  certain  quota  of 
Volunteers  were  produced  by  the  counties ;  ^  but  this 
contention,  though  perfectly  just,  carried  little  weight. 
Perceval,  on  the  22nd  of  April,  initiated  a  debate  in 
defence  of  the  Volunteers,  but  gained  little  by  it,  and 
when  the  Training  Bill  was  actually  introduced  it  was 
received  for  the  most  part  in  no  carping  spirit.  General 
Pulteney,  in  his  shrewd  way,  went  to  the  heart  of  the 
matter  by  observing  that  much  as  he  admired  the 
Volunteers,  he  would  no  more  trust  to  voluntary 
services  for  the  defence  of  a  nation  than  to  voluntary 
contributions  for  the  support  of  its  finances.'^  In  fact, 
despite  a  few  vehement  protestants  to  the  contrary,  the 
House  appeared  to  favour  some  form  of  compulsory 
training.  The  one  doubtful  point  was,  how  should  that 
training  be  carried  out ;  and  this  Windham  left  far  too 
much  to  chance.  Indeed  he  provoked  a  roar  of  laughter 
by  insisting  upon  the  wisdom  of  a  provision  that  the 
parish  constable  should  be  present  at  all  drills  to  enforce 
the  instruction  given  by  the  sergeant.^ 

However,  on  the  i6th  of  July  the  Training  Act 
became  law,  being  confined  to  England  only  (46  Geo. 
III.  cap.  90).  It  began  by  repealing  the  First  Defence 
Act  and  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act  (sec.  i),  and  com- 
mitting the  execution  of  the  present  Act  to  the 
Lieutenancies  of  counties  (sees.  2,  3).  Upon  the 
return  of  the  lists  of  persons  liable  to  serve  in  the 
Militia,  the  Privy  Council  was  to  apportion  among  the 
counties  200,000  men  to  be  trained,  which  portions 
were  to  be  redistributed  by  the  Lieutenancies  among 

1  H.D.  Commons,  3rd  April  1806. 
2  Ibid.  24th  June  1806.  ^  /^/^.  27th  June  1806. 


I70         NATIONAL  TRAINING  ACT         chap. 

1806.  the  hundreds  and  parishes,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Militia 
(sec.  4).  Persons  exempt  from  the  Militia  were  not  to 
be  exempt  from  the  present  Act,  except  schoolmasters 
and  practising  doctors  (sees.  5,  6).  In  making  their 
apportionment  the  Lieutenancies  were  to  take  account 
of  the  number  of  effective  Yeomen  and  Volunteers 
who  were  exempted  from  training  under  the  present 
Act,  as  also  of  persons  exempted  from  the  Militia  but 
not  from  training  under  the  present  Act  (sec.  7).  The 
King  could  order  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  number 
apportioned  to  be  ballotted,  enrolled,  and  trained  ;  but 
if  persons  voluntarily  offered  themselves  for  training, 
then  only  the  number  deficient  of  the  quota  was  to  be 
ballotted  (sec.  9).  The  manner  of  ballotting  was  pre- 
scribed by  sec.  12  ;  wherein  it  was  ordained  that  the 
proceedings  should  not  begin  before  10  a.m.,  nor  be 
prolonged  beyond  6  p.m.  Appeals  against  the  ballot 
were  to  be  heard  by  Deputy-Lieutenants  (sec.  13). 
The  year  of  training  was  appointed  to  begin  on  the  i  st 
of  November,  and  to  last  till  the  ist  of  the  following 
November  (sec.  14).  Persons  trained  for  one  year 
were  not  liable  to  be  ballotted  again  for  two  years  (sec. 
15).  Exemption  for  one  year  could  be  bought  by  pay- 
ment of  a  fine  of  ^^lo  or,  in  the  case  of  persons  with 
incomes  of  less  than  ;^ioo  a  year,  of  £^  (sec.  16). 
Permanent  exemption  was  granted  to  ballotted  persons 
who  entered  Volunteer  corps,  so  long  as  they  remained 
efficient  (sec.  18).  Quakers  and  United  Brethren  were 
exempted  by  annual  payment  of  a  sum  ranging  from 
^i  to  j^7  :  I  OS.  at  the  discretion  of  the  magistrate  (sec. 
20)  ;  and  infirm  persons  could  be  exempted  free  of 
charge  by  two  Deputy-Lieutenants,  or  one  Deputy  and 
one  magistrate,  upon  a  medical  certificate  (sec.  23). 
The  King  could  order  persons  to  be  trained,  and  fix  the 
time  and  place  for  the  purpose  ;  but  Sundays  were  not 
to  be  days  of  exercise,  and  no  man  could  be  called 
out  for  more  than  twenty-four  days  in  the  year,  nor  to 
a  greater  distance  than  five  miles  from  his  home  (sees. 
25,    26).      Men  who  voluntarily  offered   to   undergo 


Ill  NATIONAL  TRAINING  ACT  171 

training  for  any  additional  days  might  be  regularly  1806. 
paid  for  them  at  the  King's  pleasure,  up  to  the  number 
of  twenty-four  days,  with  or  without  the  addition  of  a 
bounty  of  los.  at  the  close  of  the  training  (sec.  iii). 
One  constable  in  every  parish  was  to  attend  exercise,  on 
pain  of  a  fine  of  ^^i  for  every  day's  absence,  and  could 
be  rewarded  with  a  sum  not  exceeding;^ 5  (sec.  28).  The 
custody  of  arms  and  accoutrements  was  left  to  the  Lieu- 
tenancy (sec.  30).  The  King  was  empowered  to  appoint 
Generals  and  officers  and  non-commissioned  officers  for 
the  command  and  training  of  the  men  ;  to  embody  the 
enrolled  men  on  threat  of  invasion,  and  to  place  the  men 
enrolled  in  the  current  or  preceding  year  either  in 
existing  regiments  or  new  corps,  to  be  led  out  into  any 
part  of  Great  Britain  ;  and  the  men  while  embodied  were 
subjected  to  the  Mutiny  Act  and  Articles  of  War  (sees. 
33-35).  All  men  so  called  out  were  to  take  the  oath 
of  allegiance  ;  but  could  not  be  compelled  to  serve  out 
of  Great  Britain  (sees.  36,  37).  The  King  was  further 
empowered  to  give  provisional  orders  for  embodiment, 
and  the  Lieutenants^to  appoint  signal  and  alarm  stations. 
Men  not  appearing  pursuant  to  order  and  signal 
were  to  be  treated  as  deserters  (sees.  38-40).  Men  and 
officers  when  embodied  were  to  receive  the  same  pay  as 
the  Regulars,  and  to  be  entitled  to  Chelsea  pensions 
(sec.  42).  An  allowance  of  two  guineas  was  to  be 
given  to  each  man  for  necessaries  upon  embodiment, 
and  a  further  allowance  of  one  guinea  to  enable  him  to 
return  home  after  defeat  of  the  enemy  (sees.  43-44). 
Parishes  refusing  to  ballot  men  under  this  Act  were 
subject  to  a  fine  of  £^  for  every  man  deficient  of  their 
quota  (sec.  50),  but  the  Act  did  not  extend  to  the  City 
of  London  (sec.  49).  Finally,  all  persons  enrolled 
under  the  Act  were  subject  to  the  regulations  (sec.  22) 
laid  down  on  the  Schedule  thereto,  viz.: — 

All  persons  trained  under  the  Act  were  to  receive 
pay  for  twenty-four  days  at  is.  a  day. 

All  persons  were  to  attend  drill,  obey  the  orders  of 
officers  and  sergeants,  and  take  due  care  of  their  arms. 


172  ALLOWANCES  REDUCED  chap. 

1806.  under  penalty  of  a  fine,  elaborately  graduated  to  suit 
variations  of  income,  for  non-attendance.  In  cases  of 
misconduct  the  offender  was  to  be  delivered  by  the 
officer  or  sergeant  to  the  parish  constable,  and  to  be 
brought  by  the  constable  before  a  magistrate,  who  was 
empowered  to  fine  him  to  the  extent  of  los.,  with  two 
days*  imprisonment  in  default  of  fines  not  exceeding  5s., 
and  of  five  days'  for  fines  not  exceeding  £  i .  Finally, 
Deputy-Lieutenants  were  empowered  to  offer  rewards 
(to  be  defrayed  out  of  fines)  for  skill  in  marksmanship. 
Otherwise  all  fines  under  sec.  59  were  to  be  applied  to 
the  expense  of  training  within  the  county. 

Parliament  rose  on  the  28  th  of  July,  after  a 
momentous  session  ;  but  Windham  had  already  begun 
his  reforms  among  the  Volunteers.  On  the  9th  of  June 
he  issued  a  circular  to  the  effect  that  the  allowance  of 
£110  per  troop  of  Yeomanry  for  contingent  expenses 
would  be  discontinued  after  the  24th,  and  that  £2  per 
annum  for  every  non-commissioned  officer  and  man 
would  be  substituted.  A  month  later,  on  the  17th  of 
July,  he  circulated,  in  the  form  of  letters  to  the  Secre- 
tary at  War,  the  revised  regulations  for  the  pay  and 
allowances  of  the  Volunteers  and  Yeomanry  at  large  ; 
whereby  in  effect  he  swept  away  the  June  Allowances 
altogether.^  To  cavalry  under  the  June  Allowances  he 
granted  ;^3  a  man  for  clothing,  and  ;^2  a  man  for  all 
other  expenses,  and  an  adjutant  for  corps  of  three  troops 
of  forty  rank  and  file  and  upwards.  To  cavalry  under  the 
August  Allowances  he  gave  ;^2  a  man  for  all  expenses, 
an  adjutant  to  corps  over  300  strong,  and  a  sergeant- 
major  to  corps  of  over  120  and  under  300  men.  The 
infantry  he  appears  to  have  placed  uniformly  under  the 
August  Allowances  ;  and  to  corps  raised  after  the  24th 

^  As  usual  the  Clerks  at  the  Home  Office  inserted  no  printed 
copies  of  the  enclosures  which  are  the  essence  of  the  circular.  It 
is  certain  that  Windham  intended  to  put  all  the  Volunteers  on  the 
August  Allowances  {H.D.  22nd  April  1806,  vol.  vi.  p.  850),  but 
apparently  he  was  induced  to  relent  so  far  as  the  cavalry  was  con- 
cerned. The  new  rules  as  to  cavalry  I  found  in  I.D.  Miscell. 
July  1806. 


Ill  CHANGE  OF  MINISTRY  173 

of    July    1 806    he   refused    to    give    any    allowance       1806. 
whatever. 

Not  unnaturally  there  was  loud  and  dismal  outcry. 
Multitudes  of  corps  succumbed,  or  disbanded  them- 
selves in  indignation,  to  the  number  altogether  of  over 
11,000  men  ;  and  many  counties  vented  their  wrath  by 
passing  votes  of  confidence  in  the  Volunteers,  and 
lamenting  their  unhappy  destruction.  Windham  re- 
mained unmoved,  for  this  was  no  more  than  he  expected. 
The  Training  Act,  however,  proved  to  be  a  more 
difficult  experiment  than  he  had  looked  for.  His 
first  step,  on  the  15  th  of  September,  was  to  send  a 
circular  to  the  Lords-Lieutenant  saying  that  he  pro- 
posed to  station  detachments  of  certain  regiments  in 
every  county  to  assist  in  the  training  of  the  population 
and  to  collect  recruits,  and  desiring  to  know  if  the 
regiments  which  he  had  selected  would  be  acceptable,  or 
whether  any  county  would  prefer  some  other  or  others. 
This  as  a  preliminary  step  was  sensible,  but  meanwhile 
all  further  arrangements  were  suspended  while  the  new 
lists  of  men  liable  to  the  Militia  ballot  were  being  made 
out.  This  business  took  much  time;  and  in  spite  of 
repeated  reminders,^  the  lists  were  not  ready  until  the 
end  of  the  year,  so  that  it  was  February  1 807  before 
copies  of  the  Act  were  circulated  to  the  counties,  and 
directions  given  for  the  apportionment  of  the  quotas. 
The  royal  warrant  for  holding  the  ballots  under  the  Act 
followed  on  the  17th  of  February,  and  Windham 
declared  in  Parliament  that,  if  necessary,  it  would  be 
enforced  in  the  spring.  But  in  the  middle  of  March 
the  Ministry  of  all  the  Talents  resigned  ;  and  Castle- 
reagh,  Windham's  ablest  critic,  succeeded  him  as 
Minister  for  War  and  the  Colonies. 

VII 

Before  going  further  it  will  be  well  to  summarise       1807, 
once  again  the  position  of  England  and  of  Europe.     In 

1  Circulars  of  2nd  Aug.,  19th  Sept.  1806. 


174         GENERAL  SITUATION,  1807         chap. 

1807.  the  first  place,  there  had  arrived  in  October  the  news 
that  Sir  Home  Popham's  absurd  filibustering  expedition 
to  the  River  Plate  had  been  for  the  moment  successful, 
and  that  Colonel  Beresford  with  his  solitary  battalion 
had  taken  possession  of  Buenos  Ayres.  The  nation 
thereupon  went  mad  with  delight,  and  insisted  on 
sending  more  troops  to  hold  the  new  capture,  not 
knowing  that  upon  the  12th  of  August  the  Spaniards, 
remarking  the  weakness  of  Beresford's  force,  had 
attacked  him  and  taken  him  and  every  one  of  his  men 
prisoners.  Sir  David  Baird,  on  hearing  of  the  first 
success,  had  at  once  sent  2000  men  from  the  Cape,  and 
these  arrived  in  the  River  Plate  on  the  1 2th  of  October, 
when,  finding  Buenos  Ayres  in  the  enemies'  power,  they 
ensconced  themselves  in  a  smaller  town  on  the  coast. 
About  3400  men  were  sent  from  England  to  the  same 
destination  under  Sir  Samuel  Auchmuty  as  soon  as  they 
could  be  embarked,  and  a  second  detachment  of  4300 
men,  under  Craufurd,  sailed  on  the  nth  of  November 
for  the  coast  of  Chili,  under  incredibly  foolish  orders 
from  Windham,  but  was  presently  followed  by  new 
directions  that  it  should  join  the  rest  of  the  troops  upon 
the  River  Plate.  In  addition  to  this,  Turkey's  inclina- 
tion to  join  with  France  caused  the  Government  early 
in  March  1807  to  detach  5000  men  to  occupy  Egypt. 

In  Europe,  Prussia  had  at  last  drawn  the  sword  against 
France,  and  had  been  utterly  crushed  at  the  battle  of 
Jena  on  the  14th  of  October  1806  ;  and  on  the  21st  of 
November  Napoleon  had  issued  the  Berlin  Decrees, 
declaring  the  British  Isles  to  be  in  a  state  of  blockade, 
and  interdicting  all  commerce  with  them.  This  was  the 
decisive  step  in  Napoleon's  new  policy  of  endeavouring 
to  starve  out  Great  Britain  by  closing  all  outlets  for  her 
trade.  Russia,  however,  still  resisted  the  French  arms, 
and  at  Eylau  inflicted  a  check,  which  was  not  far 
removed  from  a  defeat,  upon  the  redoubtable  Emperor 
himself,  bringing  him  for  the  moment  to  a  stand- 
still. There  was  therefore  good  hope  that  England 
might  intervene  in  conjunction  with  Sweden  to  some 


Ill  WINDHAM'S  REFORMS 


ns 


effect  by  landing  a  force  in  North  Germany,  provided       1807. 
that  she  would  send  one  of  respectable  size.      The 
detachment  of  7500  men  to   South  America,   and  of 
5000  to  Egypt,  was  therefore  a  great  misfortune. 

The  Army  Estimates,  when  introduced  into  Parlia- 
ment, provided  for  an  establishment  of  279,602  Regular 
troops,  including  all  veteran  and  garrison  battalions,  all 
British  and  Colonial  corps,  and  all  foreign  corps  at 
home  and  abroad  ;  besides  108,384  embodied  Militia, 
and  about  360,000  Volunteers.^  The  new  system 
initiated  by  Windham  seemed  at  first  sight  to  be  a  great 
success.  Between  20th  October  1806  and  15th  January 
1807,  2155  recruits  had  been  raised  against  1208  in  the 
corresponding  period  of  1 805-6  ;  and  men  engaged  only 
for  service  at  home  had  showed  decidedly  greater 
willingness  to  enlist  into  the  Line  under  the  new  condi- 
tions. In  two  of  the  Reserve  battalions  alone  nearly 
600  men  had  exchanged  home  service  for  general  service 
within  six  months  ;  the  weekly  average  of  ordinary 
recruits  had  risen  from  214  to  509,  and  desertions  had 
decreased  from  i  in  157  to  i  in  268  men  enlisted.^ 

Altogether  things  seemed  to  be  extremely  satisfac- 
tory, and  yet  they  by  no  means  came  up  to  the 
requirements  of  the  military  authorities.  On  the  15th 
of  February  the  Commander-in-Chief  submitted  a 
memorandum  in  which  he  declared  that  ordinary  re- 
cruiting was  quite  inadequate  to  produce  an  army  suffi- 
cient for  England's  various  needs.  Already  the  demands 
upon  the  Regular  Forces  were  so  great  that  the  defence 
of  the  country  depended  chiefly  upon  the  Militia,  which 
consequently  required  to  be  kept  in  a  high  state  of  dis- 
cipline, and  must  be  stationed  on  the  coast,  to  the  great 
inconvenience  of  officers.  It  was  therefore  imperative, 
first,  to  provide  a  large  "  disposable  "  force  ;  secondly, 
to  institute  a  defensive  force  from  which  the  former 

1  The  Secretary  at  War  gave  the  number  of  the  Volunteers  at 
363,400.     H.D.  Commons,  12th  Jan.  1807. 

2  H.D.  Speeches  of  Windham  and  Sir  J.  Doyle,  12th  Jan.,  and 
of  Windham,  12th  March  1807. 


176  NEEDS  OF  THE  ARMY  chap. 

1807.  could  be  recruited,  experience  having  shown  that  men 
who  had  once  embraced  a  military  life  were  generally 
willing  to  extend  their  service  without  limit ;  and, 
thirdly,  to  form  a  more  extended  Militia,  which  might 
obviate  all  the  objections  to  the  present  system  and  to 
the  Volunteers.  The  Commander-in-Chief  therefore 
recommended  that  the  Infantry  of  the  Line  should  con- 
sist of  its  existing  loi  regiments,  and  that  each  of  them 
should  consist  of  two  battalions,  1000  strong  apiece, 
the  first  battalion  enlisted  for  general  and  the  second  for 
home  service.  Each  of  these  regiments  should  be 
allotted  and  attached  to  one  of  the  counties  of  the 
United  Kingdom.  The  second  battalions  should  be 
raised  and  kept  complete  by  ballot  for  seven  years,  their 
service  being  limited  to  the  British  and  Channel  Islands, 
but  with  liberty  to  enlist  for  general  service  in  the  first 
battalions.  The  deficiencies  in  the  second  battalions  only 
should  be  filled  by  the  ballot. 

As  to  the  Militia,  it  should  be  increased  from 
84,000  to  150,000,  either  by  ballot  or  exemption,^ 
formed  into  battalions  which  should  be  officered  by 
county  gentlemen,  and  which  should  not  be  liable  to  be 
moved  from  their  counties  except  in  case  of  invasion  or 
internal  commotion.  The  battalions  should  be  called 
out  for  one  month's  training  in  the  year  ;  the  companies 
should  be  further  exercised  once  a  week  or  once  a 
fortnight  in  their  parishes,  and  there  should  be  an 
inspecting  field-officer  to  each  four  or  five  thousand  men 
to  superintend  their  discipline,  and  to  take  command  of 
them  in  the  event  of  their  marching  out  of  their  counties. 

The  cavalry,  artillery.  Guards,  and  Sixtieth  Rifles^ 
would  be  able  to  maintain  themselves  by  ordinary 
recruiting. 

The  cost  of  the  new  plan,  for  pay  and  clothing  for 
the  Regular  Infantry  and  Militia,  would  be  ^9,799,000  ; 

1  I  use  the  exact  words  of  the  memorandum,  but  I  do  not  know 
what  "  by  ballot  or  exemption  "  means. 

*  The  Sixtieth,  it  must  be  repeated,  was  practically  a  foreign 
corps. 


Ill  STATE  OF  THE  ARMY,  1807  i77 

against  ;^9, 699,000,  which  was  the  cost  of  the  Regular       1807. 
Infantry,  Militia,  and  Volunteers  at  the  time.^ 

It  was  probably  the  production  of  this  scheme  which 
made  Windham  pause  before  proceeding  further  with 
the  enforcement  of  the  National  Training  Act ;  but  in 
March  all  power  passed  out  of  his  hands,  as  we  have 
seen,  into  those  of  Castlereagh.  Most  likely  this  was 
a  great  stroke  of  good  fortune,  for  Castlereagh,  not- 
withstanding the  lamentable  failure  (to  be  presently 
narrated)  of  Walcheren,  was  on  the  whole  the  ablest 
Minister  who  has  ever  presided  at  the  War  Office. 
Immediately  upon  installing  himself  he  ascertained  the 
number  of  Regular  soldiers  with  the  colours,  which  was 
returned  to  him  at  93,677  rank  and  file  serving  abroad, 
88,857  serving  at  home,  and  76,433  Militia,  ex- 
clusive in  every  case  of  Artillery.  Of  the  force  at  home 
33,622  2  rank  and  file  were  fit  for  active  service,  namely, 
23,596  infantry  and  10,026  cavalry,  leaving  131,768 
rank  and  file  for  home  defence.  Of  the  33,622  he 
reckoned  that  2000  must  be  held  in  readiness  as 
reinforcements  for  the  East  Indies,  and  5000  for  South 
America  ;  and  he  therefore  thought  it  imprudent  to 
hazard  more  than  10,000  or  12,000  men  for  Conti- 
nental diversions  unless  the  French  should  be  driven  back, 
in  which  case  the  number  could  be  extensively  reinforced. 
Meanwhile  he  proposed  to  provide  immediately  and 
to  keep  in  readiness  transports  for  that  number. 

As  to  the  Training  Act,  he  judged  its  execution,  as 
regards  actual  training,  to  be  impracticable,  and  recom- 
mended that  it  should  proceed  no  further  than  ballot 
and  enrolment.  Meanwhile  the  zeal  and  discipline  of 
the  Volunteers  must  be  revived,  in  order  to  restore  them 
to  their  former  condition  of  order  and  efficiency,  which 
had  rapidly  declined  under  Grenville's  administration  ; 
and  a  flattering  appeal  must  be  made  to  them  in  the 

^   Military  Transactions,  Supplementary  Volume. 

^  To  arrive  at  the  full  strength  it  is  necessary  to  add  one-eighth 
for  officers  and  non-commissioned  officers  above  the  rank  of  corporal. 
One  may  therefore  call  it  38,000  men,  to  which  at  least  2000 
artillery  could  have  been  added. 

N 


178        THE  VOLUNTEERS  REVIVED        chap. 

J  807.  King's  name  to  rouse  them  to  new  exertions.  In  a 
future  session  he  hoped  to  replace  this  "fleeting  and 
inapplicable  mass  "  by  a  Sedentary  Militia  ;  but  this  for 
the  present  was  impossible,  as  the  ballots  for  filling 
vacancies  in  the  Militia  were  already  beginning.-^ 

It  is  plain  that  the  Commander-in-Chief's  memoran- 
dum had  sunk  deeply  into  Castlereagh's  mind,  and  that, 
in  his  heart,  he  was  as  strongly  opposed  to  the  Volun- 
teers as  Windham  himself.  However,  for  the  present  he 
felt  constrained  to  humour  them,  and  as  a  first  step 
issued  a  circular  on  the  27th  of  April  announcing  that 
Windham's  allowances  would  be  granted  to  all  Volun- 
teer corps  whether  raised  after  the  24th  of  July  or  not, 
and  that  other  matters  concerning  the  Volunteers  were 
under  consideration.  This  last  phrase  was  coupled  with 
an  expression  of  sanguine  hope  that  the  measure  would 
encourage  Commanding  Officers  to  make  their  regiments 
efficient  and  prevent  the  gradual  decline  of  the  move- 
ment. Beyond  doubt  this  and  the  employment  of 
Volunteer  sergeants  as  recruiting  officers,  with  an  allow- 
ance of  five  guineas,  did  infuse  new  life  temporarily  into 
the  "  fleeting  and  inapplicable  mass "  ;  though  the 
course  of  events  showed  more  and  more  the  fatal  error 
that  Addington  had  made  in  neglecting  the  Regular 
Army  for  the  sake  of  the  Volunteers. 

But  the  matter  of  real  urgency  was  the  need  for  aug- 
menting the  Regular  Army,  and  to  this  end  Castlereagh 
could  at  first  sight  suggest  but  two  methods  "without 
involving  the  Government  in  Parliamentary  difficulties"; 
namely  to  complete  the  Irish  Militia,  which  was  6000 
below  strength,  so  as  to  draw  the  annual  1 5  per  cent  of 
its  men  into  the  Line  after  the  ist  of  July,  and  to  employ 
Volunteer  sergeants  all  over  the  United  Kingdom  as 
recruiting  officers.  A  fortnight's  further  study,  how- 
ever, convinced  him  that  some  more  eiFectual  means 
must  be  discovered  ;  and  he  found  himself  reduced  to 
one  of  two  alternatives,  either  to  draw  more  men  from 
the  Militia,   or   to  extort   them  if  possible  from  the 

^  Castlereagh,  Desp.  viii.  46-51. 


Ill  BAD  NEWS  FROM  ABROAD  179 

parishes  by  means  of  fines,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Army  1807. 
of  Reserve  Act.  The  latter  expedient  had  so  recently 
failed  that  he  could  not  hesitate  to  recommend  the 
former  ;  and  he  therefore  inclined  to  call  for  20,000 
men  from  the  Militia  of  Great  Britain,  and  so  to  regu- 
late the  process  of  volunteering  from  that  force  as  to 
shorten  as  far  as  possible  the  period  of  drunkenness  and 
disorder  v/hich  invariably  accompanied  it.  Lastly,  in 
order  to  avoid  a  ballot  if  possible,  he  suggested  that 
j^io  should  be  given  to  the  Colonels  of  Militia  for  every 
man  taken  from  them,  to  be  applied  by  them  to  the 
purpose  of  obtaining  voluntary  recruits. 

But  now  bad  news  began  to  flow  in  from  all  quarters 
with  dismal  iteration.  First  came  that  of  the  mutiny  at 
Vellore,  which,  though  happily  quelled  by  the  amazing 
gallantry  and  readiness  of  a  single  officer,  called  for  the 
immediate  despatch  to  India  of  4000  men.  Then  came 
the  story  of  the  disgraceful  failure  in  Egypt,  accom- 
panied by  what  was,  in  the  circumstances,  deplorable 
waste  of  lives.  Then  Lord  Hutchinson  wrote  from  the 
Russian  headquarters  pleading  earnestly  for  a  diversion 
in  the  Baltic  ;  and  the  King  of  Sweden  pressed  as 
earnestly  for  a  force  to  co-operate  with  him  and  with 
the  remnant  of  the  Prussian  Army  to  save  Stralsund. 
For  the  French  had  begun  to  move  again,  always  with 
success  in  spite  of  Eylau.  Dantzig  surrendered  to  them 
on  the  24th  of  May  ;  and  Stralsund  was  one  of  the  few 
ports  left  open  to  British  merchandise  on  the  Continent. 
The  case  was  so  urgent  that  the  Cabinet  resolved  to 
send  at  once  such  men  as  could  be  spared;  and  on  the  9th 
of  June  Lord  Cathcart  received  orders  to  take  command 
of  about  28,000  British  and  Germans,  and  to  proceed 
with  a  first  division  of  about  8000  Germans  to  Stralsund, 
as  soon  as  transports  could  be  procured  for  them. 

The  despatch  of  this  detachment  caused  Castlereagh 
deep  searchings  of  heart.  He  reckoned  that  it  would 
leave  the  British  Isles  with  but  21,290  trustworthy 
infantry,  including  the  Guards,  for  home  defence  ;  the 
second  battalions,  formed  from  the  Army  of  Reserve 


i8o  FRIEDLAND  AND  TILSIT  chap. 

1807.  and  nominally  nearly  29,000  strong,  being  too  poor  to 
be  relied  on  for  service  in  the  field.  Ordinary  recruiting 
could  not  be  counted  on  at  best  to  produce  more  than 
16,000  men  a  year,  which  was  about  the  figure  of  the 
casualties  in  each  of  the  two  years  last  past.  The  Army 
was  therefore  stationary.  The  second  battalions  were 
valuable  as  recruiting  dep6ts,  but  no  more.  There 
were  fifty-six  of  them,  complete  in  officers  but  with  only 
200  men  apiece.  The  cost  of  the  recruits  which  they 
gathered  worked  out  altogether  at  ^73  a  head.  They 
kept  16,000  men,  enlisted  for  general  service,  in  idle- 
ness because  these  could  only  be  transferred  to  the  first 
battalions  of  their  own  regiments;  in  fact,  unless  they  were 
at  once  filled  up  by  20,000  men  from  the  Militia,  they 
could  never  answer  their  double  purpose  of  feeding  their 
first  battalions  and  furnishing  an  efficient  force  for  home 
defence.  The  deficiencies  in  the  Militia  consequent 
upon  so  heavy  a  draft  could  only  be  made  good  by  the 
ballot,  more  especially  as  the  five  years'  service  of  some 
6000  principals  would  expire  at  the  beginning  of  1808.^ 
Such,  then,  was  the  conclusion  to  which  Castlereagh 
had  been  driven  by  the  end  of  May,  and  to  this  he 
rigidly  adhered  in  spite  of  much  private  advice  to  the 
contrary.  For,  as  the  summer  progressed,  the  situation 
became  more  and  more  serious.  Cathcart,  pursuant  to 
his  orders,  sailed  for  Stralsund  with  his  German  troops, 
and  arrived  there  on  the  i6th  of  July  ;  but  mean- 
while not  only  had  the  Russians  been  utterly  defeated  at 
Friedlandon  the  14th  of  June,  but  the  Tsar  had  thrown 
himself  into  the  arms  of  Napoleon  by  the  conclusion  of 
the  Treaty  of  Tilsit  on  the  7  th  of  July.  Thereby  not 
only  was  England  left  without  a  friend  in  Europe  except 
hapless  Sweden,  governed  by  a  half-demented  King  ; 
but  she  was  threatened  with  the  forcible  closing  of  the 
ports  of  Sweden,  Denmark,  and  Portugal  against  her,  and 
with  the  active  hostility  of  all  three  countries.  Thus  with 
the  Danish  fleet  at  his  command  Napoleon  might  hope 
to  renew  his  plans  of  invasion. 

1  Castlereagh's  Desp.  pp.  53-66. 


Ill      THE  COPENHAGEN  EXPEDITION      i8i 

The  peril  was  very  great.  It  seemed  certain  that  »8o7. 
England  must  be  driven  back  once  more  to  the  defen- 
sive, and  must  undergo  yet  another  term  of  the  miser- 
able anxieties  of  1803  and  1804.  Fortunately  some 
inkling  of  the  secret  agreement  between  Napoleon  and 
the  Tsar  reached  the  British  Cabinet,  which  determined 
it  to  forestall  France  in  her  designs  upon  Denmark.  On 
the  19th  of  July  a  powerful  fleet  was  ordered  to  proceed 
to  the  Baltic,  and  Cathcart  was  directed  to  bring  his 
German  troops  back  from  Stralsund  to  Elsinore,  where 
the  British  part  of  his  force  would  meet  him.  With 
an  army  completed  to  28,000  men  he  was  then  to 
demand  the  surrender  of  the  Danish  fleet,  and,  if  it 
were  refused,  to  besiege  and  capture  Copenhagen. 

Three  days  after  this  momentous  decision,  and  while 
the  country  was  still  quaking  over  a  fresh  alarm  of 
invasion,  Castlereagh  unfolded  his  plans  to  a  newly- 
elected  Parliament.  Having  first  dwelt  upon  the  in- 
sufiiciency  of  ordinary  recruiting  to  fill  the  ranks  of 
the  Army,  he  declared  his  intention  of  calling  on  the 
British  Militia  to  provide  2 1 ,000  men,  and  on  the  Irish 
Militia  to  provide  7000  men,  for  the  Line.  The  vacancies 
made  through  this  call  and  through  the  discharge  of 
Militiamen  who  had  served  their  five  years  were  to  be 
filled  up  by  ballotting  36,000  men  for  England,  and  pro- 
curing by  ballot  or  voluntary  enlistment  8000  men  for 
Ireland.  It  was  a  heavy  demand,  as  he  admitted,  but  it 
would  render  further  ballot  unnecessary  for  two  or  three 
years.  He  proposed  also  to  give  the  men  who  joined  the 
Line  the  alternative  of  enlisting  for  life  if  they  wished, 
and  to  grant  them  an  increased  bounty  if  they  did  so. 

Passing  to  Windham's  Training  Act,  he  declared  that 
he  had  found  it  impossible  to  carry  out ;  but  he  pro- 
posed to  use  its  machinery  for  classifications  and  ballots, 
and  if  possible  to  lengthen  the  training  to  two  if  not 
three  years.  From  thence  he  hoped  to  evolve  a  Local 
Militia,  and  so  to  render  the  Act  really  useful.  Mean- 
while he  thought  that  the  Volunteers  should  be  upheld 
until  some  decidedly  superior  substitute  to  them  should 


1 82        MILITIA  TRANSFER  ACT,  1807     chap. 

1807.  be  discovered.  He  had  therefore  revived  the  Inspecting 
Field-Officers,  who  had  been  aboHshed  by  Windham, 
and  should  encourage  the  Volunteers  to  come  out  on 
permanent  duty.  Therewith  he  introduced  bills  to 
enable  the  Militia  to  enlist  in  the  Line,  and  to  provide 
for  refilling  it  upon  the  consequent  depletion. 

Castlereagh's  expedients  were  obviously  only  meant 
to  bridge  over  a  single  year  until  he  could  devise  some 
permanent  scheme.  He  wished,  as  he  said,  to  disturb 
existing  arrangements  as  little  as  possible.  There  were 
of  course  strong  speeches  made,  condemning  resort  to 
the  ballot  and  recommending  that  if  it  must  be  employed 
it  should  be  for  the  purpose  of  re-creating  the  Army  of 
Reserve.  Great  objection  also  was  taken,  not  without 
reason,  to  the  depletion  of  the  Militia,  Addington  in 
particular  averring  that  it  had  led  to  the  resignation  of 
a  vast  number  of  officers  in  1804.^  Windham  went 
back  to  his  old  argument  that  ballot  created  bounty, 
bounty  rising  to  excess  created  new  ballot,  and  so  on  in 
a  vicious  circle  until  bounties  became  unendurable;  and  he 
urged  that  he  alone  had  tried  to  move  out  of  that  circle. 
This  might  be  true  ;  but  it  must  be  said  in  justice  to 
Castlereagh  that  he  meddled  as  little  as  possible  with 
Windham's  measures,  and  that  if  he  introduced  drastic 
treatment  of  his  own,  he  was  compelled  to  do  so  by  the 
pressure  of  the  military  and  political  situation  abroad. 

The  bills  for  permitting  enlistment  from  the  Militia 
into  the  Army  became  law  on  the  1 3th  of  August  (Ireland, 
47  Geo.  III.  sess.  2,  cap.  ^^;  Great  Britain,  cap.  57). 
They  provided  that  any  number  of  Militiamen  might  be 
enlisted  in  excess  of  three-fifths  of  the  establishment  of 
each  regiment  (sec.  i),  a  provision  which  set  free  16,327 
to  enlist  in  England,  4160  in  Scotland,  and  8680  in 
Ireland.  If  five-sixths  of  the  allotted  number  came 
forward  at  once  in  any  regiment,  no  more  were  to  be 
enlisted  (sec.  2).  If  five-sixths  did  not  come  forward 
within  thirty  days,  the  Commanding  Officer  was  to 
explain  the  terms  of  enlistment,  and,  if  the  number  even 
1  H.D.  27th  July  1807. 


Ill     IRISH  MILITIA  COMPLETION  ACT     183 

then  fell  below  the  quota,  a  book  was  to  be  opened  to  1807. 
receive  men's  names  for  ten  days  (sees.  5,  6).  At  the 
close  of  those  ten  days  all  enlistment  without  special 
leave  of  the  Commanding  Officer  was  forbidden  for  three 
months,  after  which  three  days  were  to  be  allowed  for 
volunteering,  and  so  again  at  the  end  of  the  next  three 
months  ;  no  man,  however,  being  allowed  to  offer  him- 
self at  the  end  of  twelve  months  after  the  passing  of  the 
Act  (sec.  7).  No  man  five  feet  four  inches  in  height 
and  under  thirty-five  years  of  age  was  to  be  rejected 
(sec.  3),  and  men  might  enlist  for  short  service  or  for 
life  (sec.  12).  Finally,  no  man  was  to  be  drafted  from 
his  chosen  regiment  against  his  will. 

The  draft  from  the  Militia  of  Ireland,  it  must  be 
remembered,  was  to  be  in  addition  to  that  of  15  per 
cent  annually  taken  from  that  force ;  and  was  reckoned 
to  deplete  it  to  the  extent  of  35  per  cent.  The  bounty 
offered  to  enlisting  Militiamen  was  ^^  10;  and  the  Duke 
of  York  further  encouraged  the  levy  by  offering  an 
ensigncy  in  the  Line  to  every  officer  of  the  Militia  who 
could  bring  with  him  forty  volunteers  for  the  Army.^ 

For  replenishing  the  Militia,  the  Irish  Act  (47  Geo. 
III.  sess.  2,  cap.  56,  13th  Aug.  1807)  provided  for 
raising  a  number  of  men  equal  to  one-half  of  the  estab- 
lished quota,  either  by  ballot  or  by  ordinary  enlistment 
at  the  discretion  of  the  Lord-Lieutenant ;  any  men  in 
excess  of  the  establishment  being  retained  as  super- 
numeraries (sees.  1-3).  A  bounty  of  four  guineas  was 
granted  to  the  Colonels  for  each  man,  and  one  additional 
guinea  for  expenses,  no  part  of  which  last  was  to  go  to 
the  recruit  (sees.  4-6).  Any  county  deficient  of  its 
quota  after  six  months  was  to  be  fined  ^^30  for  every 
man  wanting  ;  but  three-fourths,  one-half,  or  one-third 
of  the  fine  could  be  remitted  if  the  deficiency  were 
supplied  within  one  month,  two  months,  or  three 
months  (sec.  17).  Seven-tenths  of  the  expense  of  find- 
ing men  to  make  good  casualties  was  to  fall  upon  the 
counties  (sec.  18). 

1  Castlereagh,  Desp.  viii.  pp.  20,  72-75. 


1 84  MILITIA  COMPLETION  ACT       chap. 

1807.  The  corresponding  Act  for  Great  Britain  (47  Geo. 

III.  sess.  2.  cap.  71)  was  to  the  following  effect.  First, 
the  Act  for  suspending  the  ballot  was  repealed  (sec.  i). 
It  was  then  enacted  that  within  three  months  of  the 
passing  of  the  Act,  a  number  equal  to  three-fourths 
of  the  quota  under  the  Militia  Act  of  1802  should 
be  raised  (sec.  2).  Where  new  or  amended  lists 
were  required  the  time  was  extended  to  five  months 
and  four  months  (sec.  8).  The  fine  for  exemption 
was  raised  to  ;^20  ;  which,  or  any  part  of  it  not 
falling  below  half  the  average  price  of  a  substitute, 
could  be  paid  to  the  ballotted  man  who  was  enrolled  in 
place  of  the  person  paying  the  fine  ;  but  the  man  who 
accepted  the  ;^20,  or  any  part  of  it,  as  aforesaid,  was 
not  to  be  entitled  to  the  allowance  usually  granted  to  men 
worth  less  than  £soo  (sees.  16-18).  The  bounty  to 
be  given  to  parochial  substitutes  was  not  to  exceed  ;^  i  o, 
and  not  more  than  ^5  was  to  be  paid  to  any  substitute 
whatever  until  he  joined  his  regiment.  All  fines,  unless 
expended  as  aforesaid,  were  to  be  paid  into  the 
Imperial  Exchequer  (sees.  19,  20).  Volunteers  were 
not  exempted  from  the  ballot  unless  they  had  served 
the  full  number  of  days  provided  by  the  Volunteer 
Consolidation  Act  of  1 804  ;  nor  were  persons  ballotted 
under  the  Training  Act  exempted,  nor  officers  on  half- 
pay,  unless  they  had  tendered  their  services  as  officers 
of  Militia  or  Volunteers  (sees.  22,  23).  Counties, 
hundreds,  or  parishes  not  producing  their  full  quota  of 
men  were  liable  to  a  fine  of  £60  for  every  man  deficient, 
subject  to  a  remission  of  three-fourths,  one-half,  and 
one -quarter  if  the  deficiency  were  made  good  within 
one,  two,  or  three  months  respectively  (sees.  28,  31). 
Counties  that  refused  to  ballot  could  be  subjected  to  the 
same  fine  of  ^^60  (sees.  32,  23)-  When  the  full 
number  of  men  had  been  supplied,  the  ballot  was  to  be 
suspended  until  the  ist  of  January  18 10  (sec.  34). 
Finally,  the  Act  was  not  to  apply  to  London  (sec.  27). 
Dealing  first  with  the  transfer  of  Militiamen  to  the 
Line,  it  appears  that  most  of  the  Commanding  Officers 


Ill    UNFAIR  TREATMENT  OF  MILITIA     185 

of  Militia  behaved  very  handsomely  in  encouraging  1807. 
their  men  to  enlist ;  though  as  the  deficiency  of  officers 
in  the  service  increased  from  301  on  the  ist  of  July 
1807  to  449  on  the  ist  of  April  1808,  it  must  be  feared 
that  their  subordinates  were  not  equally  patient.  It 
must  be  confessed  too  that  the  Militia  was  not  treated 
fairly  in  the  matter.  An  order  was  sent  out  that,  during 
the  thirty  days  set  apart  for  the  enlistment  of  Militia- 
men, no  officers  of  the  Regular  Army  must  appear  near 
the  quarters  of  any  Militia  regiment  ;  but  the  Adjutant- 
General  sent  a  circular  to  all  the  Regular  battalions  to 
inform  them  of  the  date  when  the  thirty  days  would 
expire,  and  to  intimate  that  their  recruiting  parties 
might  then  go  to  the  Militia  regiments,  though  they 
"  must  be  careful  not  to  disturb  their  discipline."  Such 
a  caution  as  was  contained  in  these  last  words  might 
suffice  to  save  the  conscience  of  the  Horse  Guards,  but 
could  not  avert  the  scenes  of  riotous  drunkenness  which 
inevitably  accompanied  the  treating  and  other  methods 
of  suasion  employed  by  recruiting  officers.  The  whole 
proceeding  was  an  infringement  of  the  spirit  of  the  law  ; 
and  it  is  not  surprising  that  in  some  quarters  it  was 
deeply  resented.  The  Lieutenant  of  Lancashire,  indeed, 
on  receiving  directions  from  the  Adjutant-General  to 
admit  the  recruiting  parties,  flatly  refused  to  obey  them 
until  ordered  by  the  Home  Secretary.^ 

Again,  no  fewer  than  thirty-two  counties  produced 
five-sixths  of  their  quotas  at  once,  and  were  con- 
sequently excused  from  producing  the  remaining  sixth. 
None  the  less  the  Secretary  of  State  sent  a  circular  to 
the  Lieutenants  asking  them  to  use  their  influence  with 
the  Commanding  Officers  to  squeeze  this  little  residue 
of  men  out  of  them.  This  was  ill  received,  as  well  it 
might  be,  and  in  at  least  one  county  the  request  was 
curtly   refused.^     However,  in  spite  of  all  drawbacks, 

1  /.D.  vol.  ex.  O.C.,  Dumfries  Mila.  to  S.S.  9th  Oct.  1807;  vol. 
cxvi.  L.L.  Lanes,  to  S.S.  28th  Sept.  1807. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  cxxvii.,  Circular  of  S.S,  to  thirty-two  counties,  25th 
March  1808  ;  O.C.  Derby  Militia  to  S.S.  nth  April  1808. 


1 86  GOOD  SPIRIT  OF  MILITIA         chap. 

1807.  the  men  for  the  most  part  came  forward  willingly.  In 
Hertfordshire  the  Militia  furnished  its  quota  to  the 
Line  within  a  fortnight,  and  Buckinghamshire,  Cornwall, 
Salop,  and  Lincolnshire  were  little,  if  at  all,  behind  her. 
The  other  counties  took  rather  longer  to  make  up  their 
complement,  but  in  only  three  was  there  real  trouble, 
namely  Cumberland,  Caermarthen,  and  the  Isle  of 
Wight.  The  reluctance  of  the  Cumbrians,  which  was 
set  down  to  the  "  particular  disposition  of  Cumberland 
men,"  was  overcome  without  much  difficulty  ;  but  in 
the  Isle  of  Wight  the  Colonel  reported  that  the  case 
was  hopeless.  Cambridgeshire,  strangely  enough,  held 
back  for  a  time  because  the  men  were  not  allowed  to 
enlist  in  the  Marines.  The  Line,  so  the  Commanding 
Officer  reported,  was  not  popular,  excepting  the  Ninety- 
fifth,^  but  the  Marines  were  greatly  sought  after.  The 
ultimate  result  was  that  the  English  Militia  sent  to  the 
Line  15,262  mea  out  of  16,327  qualified  to  enlist,  the 
Scottish  Militia  3890  out  of  4160,  and  the  Irish  8353 
out  of  8680  ;  making  a  total  of  27,505  out  of  29,167.^ 
Upon  the  whole,  Castlereagh  had  every  reason  to  be 
satisfied  with  the  behaviour  of  the  Militia.^ 

1  This  of  course  was  the  present  Rifle  Brigade,  already,  after 
seven  years  of  life,  a  distinguished  corps.  Evidence  abounds  that 
the  Light  Division  could  always  obtain  the  pick  of  the  recruits 
from  the  Militia. 

2  Military  Transactions,  Supplement,  p.  16.  But  in  the  Castle- 
reagh Desp.  (viii.  125)  the  figures  given  state  the  British  quota  at 
19,832,  and  the  Irish  at  8556  ;  the  British  enlistments  at  19,118, 
and  the  Irish  at  8353  ;  and  the  totals  at  27,471  men  enlisted  out 
of  a  possible  28,388  ;  leaving  a  deficiency  of  714  for  Great  Britain, 
and  203  for  Ireland. 

2  I.D.  vol.  cxiv.  L.L.  Herts,  to  S.S.  6th  Sept.  ;  vol.  cvi.  L.L. 
Bucks,  to  S.S.  15th  Sept.  ;  vol.  cxx.  O.C.  Salop  Mila.  to  S.S.  13th 
Sept.  ;  vol.  cxvi.  O.C.  North  Lanes,  Mila.  to  S.S.  28th  Aug.  ;  vol. 
cviii.  O.C.  Cornwall  Mila.  to  S.S.  2nd  Sept.  ;  vol.  cvi.  O.C. 
Cambs  Mila.  to  S.S.  20th  Sept.;  vol.  cvii.  L.L.  Caermarthen,  to  S.S. 
l6th  Dec.  1807;  vol.  cviii.  O.C.  Cumberland  Mila.  to  S.S.  l6th 
Sept.  ;  vol.  cxiii.  O.C.  L  of  Wight  Mila,  to  S.S.  20th  Sept.  1807. 
Return  in  C.J.  vol.  Ixiv.  p.  502.  The  details  of  men  deficient 
are,  Englana  : — Cardigan,  5  ;  Caermarthen,  41  ;  East  Devon,  163  ; 
Pembroke,   23  ;    Westmoreland,  9  ;    West  Suffolk,  27  ;    1st  West 


Ill  DIFFICULTY  OF  RE-FILLING  MILITIA  187 

The  replenishing  of  the  Militia,  however,  was  a  very  1 807. 
different  story.  In  the  first  place,  the  levy  was  delayed 
by  the  necessity  of  making  out  new  lists  in  almost 
every  county,  so  as  to  include  boys  who  had  grown  up 
since  the  last  ballot,  and  to  enable  Volunteers  to  work  out 
their  exemption.  Then  there  were  very  thorny  ques- 
tions raised  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  sections  which 
governed  exemption.  The  reference  in  the  new  Act 
was  to  the  Volunteer  Consolidation  Act  of  1 804,  which 
required  that  returns  of  eff'ective  Volunteers  should  be 
furnished  on  the  ist  of  August  and  ist  of  December. 
Was  it  sufficient  for  a  Volunteer's  exemption  that  he 
should  have  served  for  sixteen  days  during  the  previous 
eight  months  or  the  full  number  of  twenty-four  days  in 
the  previous  twelve  months  ?  Such  was  the  kind  of 
question  from  county  after  county  which  flooded  the 
Secretary  of  State's  office  for  days  ;  and  finally  it  was 
decided,  by  very  strict  construction  of  the  law,  that  no 
Volunteer  should  be  exempted  unless  he  had  attended 
drill  eight  times  between  the  ist  of  April  and  the  ist 
of  August.^  This  decision  probably  seemed  severe,  but 
it  was  lenient  compared  with  the  suggestion  of  the 
Lord-Lieutenant  of  Surrey,  who  did  not  love  the  Volun- 
teers :  "  Will  not  all  the  Volunteers,  if  they  attend  all 
their  drills  before  the  ist  of  December,  be  exempt  from 
any  ballot  after  it  ?  If  so,  why  not  direct  all  ballots 
to  be  taken  before  the  30th  of  November  ^  It  can  be 
done."  The  worthy  nobleman  did  not  gain  his  point  ; 
but  he  was  not  to  be  troubled  by  Volunteers  much  longer. 

Another   hideous   complication   arose   out   of    the 
various  changes  of  attitude  and  legislation  in  respect  of 

York,  185.  Scotland: — Aberdeen,  12  ;  Dumfries,  61  ;  Edinburgh, 
13  ;  Forfar,  1 09  ;  Inverness,  6  ;  Ross,  19  ;  Stirling,  7.  Ireland'. — 
Fermanagh,  3  ;  Kerry,  68  ;  Kilkenny,  i  ;  Leitrira,  40  ;  Limerick, 
I  ;  Longford,  90.  Of  the  number  deficient  453  men  were  due 
from  seven  English  counties,  227  from  as  many  Scottish  counties, 
and  203  from  six  Irish  counties. 

1  I.D.  vol.  civ.  Minutes  of  G.M.  Aberdeen,  29th  Oct.  ;  vol. 
cvi.  Minutes  of  G.M.  Ross,  14th  Oct.;  vol.  cxv.  L.L.  Kent,  to  S.S. 
2nd  Nov.  1807. 


1 88        QUESTIONS  OF  EXEMPTION         chap. 

1807.  the  Militia  since  the  war  began.  It  will  be  remembered 
that  Addington  at  once  called  out  the  Supplementary 
Militia,  and  that  Pitt,  by  the  Permanent  Additional 
Force  Act,  enacted  that  the  Supplementary  Militia 
should  be  absorbed,  and  the  Militia  generally  reduced 
to  its  ordinary  establishment  under  the  Act  of  1802. 
It  will  be  remembered  further  that,  by  the  Volunteer 
Consolidation  Act  of  1804,  Volunteers  were  not 
exempted  actually  from  the  ballot ;  but  any  Volunteer 
on  being  baUotted  could  show  his  certificate  of  efficiency, 
and  thereby  obtain  exemption  from  service  in  the 
Militia.  His  name,  however,  was  retained  on  the  ballot- 
list,  so  that,  if  he  ceased  to  be  effective,  he  could  be 
called  up  for  service,  and  if  his  name  had  actually  been 
drawn  for  the  Militia,  he  was  liable,  in  this  case,  to  fill 
the  first  vacancy  that  occurred  in  the  Militia.  In  1 807 
there  were  many  Volunteers  in  this  predicament,  owing 
partly  to  Windham's  reforms,  partly  to  a  selfish  calcula- 
tion that,  if  there  were  to  be  no  more  ballot,  it  was  not 
worth  while  to  work  for  exemption.  Now  arose  the 
question  whether  such  men  could  be  forced  to  fill  the 
vacancies  caused  by  Castlereagh's  Militia  Transfer  Act 
and  Militia  Augmentation  Act.  The  vacancies  had  not 
been  brought  about  in  the  ordinary  way,  but  by  whole- 
sale sweeping  of  the  Militiamen  into  the  Line  ;  and, 
moreover,  Castlereagh,  after  thus  reducing  the  Militia 
by  three-fifths  of  its  ordinary  quota,  had  ordered  the  loss 
to  be  more  than  made  good  by  calling  up  three-fourths  of 
the  ordinary  quota  under  the  ballot.  Was  it  reasonable 
that  Volunteers  drawn  under  a  former  ballot  and  then 
exempted  but  since  become  ineffective,  should  be  called 
upon  without  fresh  ballot  to  make  up  deficiencies  thus 
artificially  created .?  The  question,  after  much  argu- 
ment, was  submitted  to  the  Law-Officers  of  the  Crown, 
who  decided  that  such  men  were  not  legally  liable  to  fill 
such  artificial  vacancies,  though  they  were  liable  to  fill 
natural  vacancies  if  their  county's  Militia,  at  the  time 
when  Castlereagh's  Act  was  passed,  was  short  of  its 
ordinary  establishment  under  the  Act  of  1802.     On  the 


Ill        THE  QUESTION  OF  STANDARD        189 

other  hand,  any  men  ballotted  in  future,  and  exempted       1807. 
as  effective  Volunteers,  would,  on  ceasing  to  become 
effective,  be  liable  to  supply  any  vacancies  which  might 
then  exist,  or  might  hereafter  arise.^ 

Another  question,  which  was  more  easily  decided, 
was  this : — Was  a  man  who  had  found  a  substitute  in  the 
Army  of  Reserve,  liable  to  be  ballotted  under  Castle- 
reagh's  Act,  since  under  43  Geo.  III.  cap.  123,  such 
men  were  exempted  from  the  Militia.?  ^  The  answer  was 
decisive.  The  Army  of  Reserve  Act  had  been  repealed  ; 
therefore  the  Act  above  quoted  was  no  longer  in  force, 
and  such  men  were  liable  to  be  ballotted.' 

Yet  another  trouble,  which  exercised  the  Deputy- 
Lieutenants  sorely,  and  not  for  the  first  time,  was  the 
standard  of  height.  The  Militia  Act  of  1802  fixed  the 
standard  at  five  feet  four  inches.  The  Act  43  Geo.  III. 
cap.  100,  sec.  2,  enacted  that  no  substitute,  personal  or 
parochial,  should  be  rejected  if  he  were  five  feet  two 
inches  in  height,  provided  that  he  were  otherwise  fit  for 
service.  Some  Lieutenants  and  their  Deputies,  not  un- 
naturally, construed  this  to  mean  that  principals  were  to 
be  five  feet  four  inches  high,  and  substitutes  five  feet 
two  inches.  Others,  quite  indifferent  as  to  the  physical 
quality  of  their  men  so  long  as  they  could  produce  them 
in  some  shape  or  form,  took  five  feet  two  inches  as  the 
standard  for  all ;  while  others  again,  being  conscientious 
public  servants,  rejected  men  under  five  feet  four  inches. 
By  all  the  folly  of  having  two  coexistent  standards  was 
impartially  denounced,  until  the  question  was  finally  set 
at  rest  by  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  at  War  that  the 
standard  of  five  feet  two  inches  was  now  universal.* 

Lastly,  an  old  failing  at  the  Home  Office  was  brought 
to  light  by  a  sarcastic  letter  from  a  Deputy-Lieutenant 

1  W.O.  Mi/a.  E.B.  784,  Sub-div.  Clerk  of  Leominster  to  Sec.  at 
War,  loth  Nov.  1807. 

2  W.O.  Mila.  E.B.  War  Office  to  J.  Allen,  12th  Nov.  1807. 

3  See  page  35. 

*  I.D.  vol.  cxviii.  O.C.  Northampton  Mila.  to  S.S.  2nd  Nov. 
1807  ;  vol.  cxx.  L.L.  Somerset,  to  S.S.  4th  Dec.  1807  ;  fV.O. 
Mila.  E.B.  W.O.  to  Major  Durbin,  23rd  Nov.  1807. 


I90    EVILS  OF  CRUDE  LEGISLATION      chap. 

1807.  of  Somerset.  "On  the  14th  of  August  last,"  wrote 
this  indignant  gentleman  in  October,  "  an  Act  was 
passed  for  speedily  completing  the  Militia.  It  has  not 
reached  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  yet,  nor  have  they  any 
reason  to  expect  it,  unless  you  order  copies  to  be  sent 
without  delay." 

Under  such  initial  difficulties  was  the  ballot  of  1 807 
set  on  foot.  Even  at  the  risk  of  wearying  the  reader, 
I  have  not  shrunk  from  setting  down  legal  difficulties 
which  have  long  been  dead  and  can  never  rise  again, 
in  order  to  show  how  infinitely  the  natural  obstacles  to 
the  levying  of  recruits  may  be  increased  by  hasty  and 
ill-considered  enactments,  and  even  more  by  additional 
Acts  passed  to  amend  and  explain  the  same.  The  root 
of  the  matter,  of  course,  lay  in  the  absence  of  a  definite 
policy,  the  inevitable  result  of  which  was  the  hurried 
abandonment  of  one  set  of  expedients,  and  the  equally 
precipitate  adoption  of  another  set.  But  though 
it  is  too  much  to  expect  of  human  wisdom  that 
it  can  foresee  all  the  ingenious  tricks  which  a  people 
may  discover  for  the  evasion  of  an  unpopular  duty,  yet 
there  are  far  too  many  signs  of  sheer  blindness  and 
carelessness  in  all  the  legislation  which  so  far  has  passed 
under  review.  And  it  must  be  remembered  that  every 
doubt  as  to  the  state  of  the  law  seriously  impeded  the 
progress  of  the  levy.  Every  legal  question  was  hotly 
discussed  before  it  reached  the  Secretary  of  State,  setting 
all  the  authorities  within  each  Lieutenancy  at  variance, 
embroiling  Lieutenancies  with  their  neighbours,  raising 
ill-feeling  between  commanders  of  Militia  regiments  and 
county  magnates,  and  embittering  the  perennial  strife 
between  the  civil  power  and  the  military.  It  is  a  reproach 
to  our  statesmen  that  such  friction  should  still  have 
abounded  after  fourteen  years  of  almost  unbroken  war. 

VIII 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  progress  of  the  ballot  itself. 
There  was,  of  course,  a  rush  for  substitutes  ;  and  crimps 


Ill  THE  BALLOT  OF  1807  191 

and  insurance  companies  drove  a  roaring  trade.  Crimp-  1807. 
ing,  indeed,  reached  such  a  height  that  it  was  carried  on 
not  only  by  publicans,  parish  officers,  and  such  like,  but 
by  privates,  non-commissioned  officers,  and  even  officers 
of  the  Army,  Militia,  and  Volunteers ;  nor  was  there  one 
who  failed  to  make  from  ^5  to  ^  1 5  out  of  every  substi- 
tute that  he  provided.  In  one  case  a  man  was  engaged 
for  the  Warwick  Militia  by  a  corporal  for  a  bounty  of 
j^io  ;  the  corporal  sold  him  to  a  sergeant  for  ^{^  18  ;  the 
sergeant  made  him  over  to  a  crimping  publican  for 
some  unrecorded  price  ;  and  the  publican  finally  disposed 
of  him  to  a  parish  officer  for  ^27  :  6s.  Indeed,  parochial 
officers  lay  generally  at  the  mercy  of  the  professional 
crimps,  who  controlled  the  market  by  laying  hold  of  the 
substitutes,  selling  them  to  one  another,  and  keeping 
them  in  pay  until  the  unhappy  parishes,  rendered 
desperate  by  fines  and  repeated  ballots,  were  driven  at 
last  to  give  them  their  own  price. 

Nevertheless  parishes  were  not  without  resources  of 
their  own.  Their  principle  was,  very  naturally,  to 
avoid  above  all  things  the  burden  of  supporting  the 
Militiamen's  families ;  and  consequently  they  always  pre- 
ferred to  enlist  single  men.  They  would  take  any  boy 
who  could  reach  the  standard  of  height  and  pass  a 
medical  examination,  rather  than  the  finest  of  married 
men.  In  Warwickshire  the  military  officers  complained 
loudly  that  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  were  remiss  in  the 
execution  of  their  duty.  The  Lieutenant  who,  with  all 
his  subordinates,  plumed  himself  upon  the  methods  by 
which  his  Lieutenancy  was  ruled,  indignantly  repudiated 
the  charge.  The  General  of  the  district  retorted  that 
two  hundred  children  had  been  furnished  as  substitutes, 
who  might  grow  into  men,  but  were  at  present  only  fit 
for  drummers.^  And  beyond  all  question  vast  numbers 
of  the  so-called  men  all  over  England  were  even  as  these 
children  of  Warwick.  As  crimps  the  parish  officers 
appear  only  to  have  mastered  the  elements  of  their 

1  /.D.  vol.  cxlviii.  L.L.Warwick,  to  S.S.  26th  Jan.;  Maj.-Gen. 
Cockburn  to  L.L.  Warwick,  and  to  S.S.  6th  February  1808. 


192  INSURANCE  SOCIETIES  chap. 

1 807.  profession,  for  we  hear  of  one  who  engaged  a  substitute  at 
Warwick  for  forty  pounds,  and  offered  the  man  as  much 
as  fifty  guineas  if  he  would  lend  him  the  money  for 
five  years  free  of  interest.  The  crudity  of  this  proposal 
suggests  ambition,  indeed,  but  hardly  financial  genius.^ 
The  insurance  companies  and  subscription  societies 
were  very  prominent  in  the  ballot  of  1807.  In  all 
counties  near  London  they  indemnified  the  holders  of 
their  policies  by  producing  either  a  fine  or  a  substitute 
who  had  cost  them  less  than  £10^  and  who  invariably 
deserted  with  the  £  5  which  the  law  permitted  to  be  paid 
to  him.  The  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Buckingham  deplored 
the  inefficacy  of  the  law  to  check  this  evil,  and  suggested 
that  it  might  be  possible  to  attack  it  by  invalidating  the 
policies,  on  the  ground  that  they  were  not  stamped.'^  In 
Gloucestershire  and  the  Western  counties  there  was  a 
very  extensive  insurance  office  which  charged  three 
guineas  for  an  insurance  of  ;^20,  an  extravagant 
premium  for  which  they  might  well  have  returned  ;^50. 
But  the  London  societies  spread  their  branches  wide  over 
the  country,  bribing  recruiting-sergeants  and  non-com- 
missioned officers  right  and  left,  and  sowing  corruption 
thickly  wherever  they  went.  "  We  shall  be  glad,"  runs 
one  of  their  circulars  to  the  sergeant-majors  of  Militia, 
"  to  receive  in  Middlesex  growing  boys  five  feet  two 
inches  high,  and  men  near  fifty  years  of  age,  unless  their 
age  is  too  manifest.  ...  I  propose  to  allow  two  guineas 
to  the  sergeant  and  his  party  engaging  the  recruit,  and 
one  guinea  to  you  for  each  person  we  may  pass  from 
your  county  ;  the  men  or  boys  to  be  obtained  for  us  at 
as  low  a  rate  as  possible,  and  in  no  case  to  stand  us  in 
more  than  ^^15  when  delivered  in  London,  I  should 
suppose  that  men  refused  by  your  regiment  will  be  after- 
wards had  for  j^8  or  ^10  ;  and  the  whole  of  their  sub- 
sistence till  they  can  arrive  in  town  must  be  borne  out 

1  The  authority  for  the  statements  in  the  two  last  paragraphs 
will  be  found  in  I.D.  vol.  cli.  C.G.M.  Warwick,  to  S.S.  23rd  Jan. 
1808. 

2  I.D.  vol.  cvi.  L.L.  Bucks,  23rd  Oct.  1807. 


in  INSURANCE  SOCIETIES  193 

of  their  bounty.     Captain  Whittaker,  late  of  the  Surrey       1807. 
Militia,  being  one  of  the  proprietors  of  this  office,  .  .   . 
will   receive  all  your   county  can  furnish  him  with."  ^ 

1  I.D.  vol.  cli.  C.G.M.  Warwick,  to  S.S.  23rd  Jan.  1808.  I 
print  the  whole  circular  below  : — 

"63  Newman  Street,  London,  Oct.  5,  1807. 
"  Sir — As  this  office  has  many  subscribers  in  your  county,  many  of 
whom  must  of  course  be  ballotted  upon  us,  and  as  the  peculiar  cir- 
cumstances of  Middlesex  render  the  C.O.'s  of  that  Militia  glad  to 
accept  men  which  the  county  regiments  will  reject,  I  conceive  that 
this  office  and  the  Sergeant-Majors  of  the  following  counties 
through  which  the  recruits  from  Lancashire  must  pass,  viz.  Lanca- 
shire, Cheshire,  Staffordshire,  Warwick,  Northamptonshire,  Buck- 
inghamshire, Bedfordshire,  and  Hertfordshire,  may  be  of  reciprocal 
advantage  to  each  other,  and  that  too  in  no  small  degree.  There- 
fore I  propose  to  you  in  the  first  place  to  influence  those  sergeants 
who  may  be  detached  from  the  regiment  you  belong  to  into  War- 
wick to  receive  the  men  under  the  approaching  ballots  for  that 
county,  to  engage  for  the  Middlesex  Militia  all  such  persons  as 
may  be  deemed  unfit  for  your  regiment  and  yet  be  fit  for  service. 

"  For  instance,  we  shall  be  glad  to  receive  in  Middlesex  growing 
boys  five  feet  two  inches  high,  and  men  near  fifty  years  of  age 
unless  their  age  is  too  manifest.  Those  are  circumstances  which 
must  be  left  to  the  sergeants,  and  which  every  one  of  them  are  of 
course  acquainted  with,  for  which  {sic)  I  propose  to  allow  two 
guineas  to  the  sergeant  and  his  party  engaging  the  recruit,  and  one 
guinea  to  you  for  each  person  we  may  pass  from  your  county  ;  the 
men  and  boys  to  be  obtained  for  us  at  as  low  a  rate  as  possible, 
and  in  no  case  to  stand  us  in  more  than  ^^15  when  delivered  in 
London.  I  should  suppose  that  being  refused  by  your  regiment 
they  will  afterwards  be  had  for  ;^8  or^^io  ;  and  the  whole  of 
their  subsistence  till  they  can  arrive  in  town  must  be  borne  out  of 
their  bounty. 

"  Captain  Whittaker,  late  of  the  Surrey  Militia,  being  one  of 
the  proprietors  of  this  office,  will  be  at  Manchester  for  the  purpose 
of  recruiting,  and  will  march  from  thence  all  the  way  with  the 
recruits,  and  receive  at  Coleshill,  Meriden,  Coventry,  and  Dunchurch 
all  your  county  can  furnish  him  with.  The  exact  day  of  his  being 
at  each  of  these  places,  you  shall  be  made  acquainted  with  in  due 
time,  for  the  information  of  the  sergeants,  to  enable  you  to  collect 
and  deliver  their  men  under  your  directions.  But  as  the  men  so 
engaged  by  you  and  received  by  us  may  desert  before  they  are  enrolled, 
or  by  chance  not  be  accepted,  the  allowance  to  you  and  the  sergeants 
can  only  be  made  on  the  return  of  the  party,  when,  if  any  should 
desert  or  be  rejected,  they  shall  either  be  restored  at  the  place  we 
received  them  or  satisfactorily  accounted  for.     The  guinea  to  you  for 

O 


194  INSURANCE  SOCIETIES  chap. 

1807.  The  circular  proceeded  to  say  that  if  any  of  the  office's 
clients  in  the  county  needed  a  substitute,  one  must  be 
procured  as  "  unlikely  to  desert  as  possible,  because 
much  of  the  success  of  our  insurance  depends  upon  our 
receiving  the  parochial  allowances,  which  we  are  only 
entitled  to  in  case  of  the  substitute  actually  serving  a 
month." 

Compared  with  this  lordly  way  of  doing  business, 
there  is  a  pathetic  helplessness  in  the  appeal  made  by  the 
"  Praeses  of  Delegates  of  twelve  Militia  Societies  in  and 
about  Glasgow  "  to  the  Secretary  of  State.  This  digni- 
tary complained  that  the  officers  appointed  to  receive 
substitutes  for  the  Militia  regiments  gave  them  no  sub- 
sistence, and  that  consequently  the  Societies  were  put  to 
the  great  expense  of  keeping  them  alive  until  they  were 
sent  to  their  battalions.  Moreover,  a  number  of  ballot- 
table  men  had  been  drawn  away  from  the  county  as 
substitutes  to  other  counties  a  hundred  miles  away,  which 
was  contrary  to  law.  "  The  bounties,"  so  ended  the 
letter,  "  have  been  very  oppressive,  and  if  the  societies 
are  to  furnish  subsistence  too,  the  burden  will  be  very 
heavy."  The  writers  apparently  had  not  the  slightest 
idea  that  they  were  themselves  contravening  the  law,  or 
at  any  rate  what  had  been  the  law,  when  they  called  upon 
the  Secretary  of  State  to  protect  them,  though  they  were 
ready  enough  to  invoke  the  Act  which  prohibited  the 
procuring  of  substitutes  from  distant  counties.^ 

each  man  may  possibly  be  better  remitted  from  town ;  you  can  receive 
it,  however,  in  any  way  you  direct. 

.  '*  Should  any  person  be  ballotted  upon  our  insurance  funds  in 
your  county,  all  we  have  to  request  is,  that  the  sergeants  to  whom 
the  person  ballotted  will  be  directed  to  apply,  will  procure,  as 
reasonable  as  he  can,  a  substitute  as  likely  not  to  desert  as  possible, 
because  much  of  the  success  of  our  insurance  depends  upon  our 
receiving  the  parochial  allowances,  which  we  are  only  entitled  to 
in  case  of  the  substitute  actually  serving  a  month,  for  which  we 
shall  make  the  same  allowance  to  them  and  to  you  as  for  the  recruits 
they  may  engage  for,  as  for  the  Militia  of  Middlesex." 

Addressed  :  To  the  Sergeant-Major  of  the  Warwickshire  (or 
other)  Militia. 

1  I.D.  vol.  cxiv.  Praeses  of  Delegates  to  S.S.  5th  Dec.  1807. 


Ill  TRAFFIC  IN  SUBSTITUTES 


195 


But  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  law  upon  the  one  1 807. 
point  as  upon  the  other  was  a  dead  letter.  In  Nuneaton 
notices  were  publicly  issued  offering  bounties  of  ^30 
and  j^  1 7  respectively  for  recruits  for  the  Northampton 
and  Leicester  Militia.^  From  Berwick  the  Lieutenant 
reported  without  concealment  to  the  Secretary  of  State 
in  January  1808  that  he  could  not  fill  the  ranks  of  his 
Militia  from  the  county.  The  people  were  all  agricul- 
tural ;  labour  being  scarce,  they  were  not  to  be  tempted 
by  bounties ;  and  hence  he  was  obliged  to  recruit  "  at  a 
distance  "  with  great  delay  and  expense.^  In  Birming- 
ham there  was  a  Major  of  Volunteers  who  was  also 
Lieutenant-Colonel  in  the  Leicester  Militia,  and  kept  a 
regular  recruiting  agency  for  his  Militia  in  the  town. 
The  county  of  Leicester,  it  seems,  made  a  practice  of 
encouraging  the  payment  of  exemption-fines  instead  of 
the  production  of  substitutes.  As  the  fines  under  the 
Militia  Act  of  1802  were  payable  to  the  stock-purse  of 
the  county's  Militia  regiment,  the  Leicester  Militia 
was  always  in  funds,  and  was  not  only  able  but  willing 
to  outbid  any  other  county  by  ^^5  in  the  purchase  of 
recruits.^  But  all  legislative  efforts  to  secure  that  the 
Militia  should  be  a  strictly  local  force  were  obviously 
futile,  so  long  as  substitution  was  permitted,  and  it  is 
needless  to  multiply  examples  of  the  fact. 

For  the  rest  the  wild  traffic  in  substitutes  literally 
raged  during  the  weeks  of  the  ballot  ;  and  it  is  probable 
that  in  England  the  national  taste  for  gambling  made  it 
a  positive  enjoyment.  In  some  cases  the  substitutes 
firmly  declined  to  engage  themselves  to  serve,  unless  the 
whole  of  their  bounty  was  paid  into  their  hand  instead 
ofthe^5  which  alone  was  allowed  to  them  by  law  before 
they  reached  their  regiments.  The  Deputy-Lieutenants 
in  Lancashire  in  vain  offered  printed  papers  to  their  men 
acknowledging  the  further  sum  due  to  them,  and 
promising  to  pay  it  at  the  appointed  time.     The  Lanca- 

1  I.D.  vol.  cxxii.  C.G.M.  Warwick,  to  S.S.  14th  Dec.  1807. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  cxxvii.  L.L.  Berwick,  to  S.S.  15th  Jan.  1808. 

■3  Ibid.  vol.  cli.  C.G.M.  Warwick,  to  S.S.  23rd  Jan.  1808. 


196 


RESULTS  OF  THE  BALLOT 


CHAP. 


1807.  shire  men  would  be  content  with  nothing  but  the  whole 
of  the  bounty  paid  down  in  hard  cash  ;  and  the 
Deputies  were  obliged  for  a  time  to  adjourn  the  ballot.* 
Nor  was  the  caution  of  the  recruits  wholly  unreason- 
able, for  in  Nottinghamshire  a  subdivision  clerk 
absconded  with  £  1 70,  the  property  of  some  unfortunate 
substitutes,  which  had  been  kept  back  from  them 
temporarily  in  fulfilment  of  the  law.^  Elsewhere  this 
provision  as  to  payment  of  the  bounty  (which  was  of 
course  designed  to  discourage  desertion)  was  simply 
evaded  by  a  private  arrangement  between  the  ballotted 
m_an  and  his  substitute.^  Finally,  in  March  1808  the 
levy  was  supposed  to  be  more  or  less  completed,  when 
the  following  results  were  published  * : — 


Quota. 

Joined  their 
Regiments. 

Enrolled  but 
not  joined. 

Deficiency  to 
be  supplied. 

Great  Britain 
Ireland . 

37,557 
9905 

28,261 
6119 

4308 
664 

4988 
3122 

From  another  return  it  appears  that  of  26,085  "^^^ 
enrolled  in  England,  3129  were  principals  and  22,956 
substitutes.  Among  the  counties  Middlesex  with  a 
quota  of  692,  Rutland  with  a  quota  of  61,  and  Car- 
narvon with  a  quota  of  96,  produced  not  a  single  prin- 
cipal ;  the  Tower  Hamlets  with  a  quota  of  320,  furnished 
two  principals  ;  Leicester  with  a  quota  of  480,  twelve  ; 
Derby  with  a  quota  of  667,  fifteen  ;  Cumberland  with 
a  quota  of  436,  twenty  ;  the  three  Ridings  of  York 
with  a  joint  quota  of  2329,  only  106  ;  Stafford- 
shire with  a  quota  of  824,  forty- two  ;  Lincolnshire 
with  a  quota  of  992,  fifty-four  ;  and  Northumberland 

1  l.D.  vol.   cxvi.  Thomas  Wilson  (D.L.  Lanes)  to    S.S.   26th 
Nov.  1807. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  cxliv.  L.L.  Notts,  to  S.S.  31st  May  1808. 

^  Ibid.  vol.  cxxviii.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  21st  March  1808. 
*  This  return  and  the  following  are  printed  in  C.y.  1808   (Ap- 
pendix), vol.  Ixiii.  pp.  613-614. 


Ill        PRINCIPALS  AND  SUBSTITUTES       197 

with  a  quota  of  480,  twenty-seven.  Among  counties  1807. 
that  gave  a  more  creditable  account  of  themselves, 
Pembroke  showed  76  principals  out  of  a  quota  of  148  ; 
Caermarthen  106  out  of  299  ;  Herefordshire  127  out 
o^  337  >  Cardigan  52  out  of  174  ;  Sussex  127  out 
of  466  ;  Suffolk  159  out  of  777  ;  Norfolk  182  out 
of  901  ;  Somerset  183  out  of  865  ;  Essex  166  out 
of  908  ;  Devon  168  out  of  899  ;  and  Berkshire  94 
out  of  380.  The  total  sum  paid  into  the  Treasury 
for  exemption -fines  was  ^14,958,  of  which  sum  over 
j^2ooo  came  from  Berkshire,  over  ^2500  from  Durham, 
over  j^ 2300  from  Sussex,  and  over  ^1200  from  Hamp- 
shire. Monmouth  was  the  lowest  contributor  with 
j^io,  and  Cornwall  ran  her  hard  with  ^^12;  but  it  is 
doubtful  whether  any  legitimate  deduction  can  be  drawn 
from  these  figures. 

The  bounties,  that  is  to  say,  the  average  prices  of 
substitutes,  of  which  a  return  was  also  made,  varied 
from  j^  I  o  in  the  Isle  of  Wight  to  ^  1 6  in  Montgomery 
and  Rutland,  ^^30  in  Devon  and  East  Yorkshire,  ^^40 
in  Cardigan  and  the  North  Riding  of  Yorkshire, 
£^i  :  I  OS.  in  Northumberland,  ^44  in  Anglesey,  and 
j^45  in  Monmouth.  Throughout  Wales,  with  the 
exception  of  Montgomery,  bounties  ran  very  high, 
which  possibly  accounts  for  the  number  of  principals 
produced  by  one  or  two  counties.  But  it  would 
be  rash  to  repose  too  much  confidence  in  these  figures, 
for  the  transactions  between  lotmen  and  substitutes 
or  crimps  were  by  no  means  always  public.  It 
may  be  mentioned  as  an  example  of  what  went  forward 
that  two  drummers  of  the  Aberdeen  Volunteers  paid 
their  Colonel  ^^20  towards  the  regimental  funds, 
having  received  ^^40  apiece  to  engage  themselves  as 
substitutes  in  another  corps.^ 

I  pass  next  to  the  Volunteers  of  the  United  King- 
.dom,  first  giving  a  comparative  table  in  round  numbers 
of  their  eflTective  strength  in  rank  and  file  from  the 
1 6th  of  December  1803  to  the  ist  of  July  1807  : — 

1  I.D.  vol.  cxxv.  Lt.-Col.  Finlayson  to  S.S.  8th  Feb.  1808. 


1 6th  Dec. 

1803 

414,000 

ist  July 

1804 

330,116 

jj 

1805 

318,173 

5J 

1806 

3075I63 

5J 

1807 

294,148 

198       STRENGTH  OF  VOLUNTEERS        chap, 

1807.  1 6th  Dec.  1803     414,000     of  which  in  Ireland  72,000 

'  »  »  71,895 

«  »  67,074 

«  »  64,085 

»  »  65,942 

Thus  it  will  be  remarked  that  they  had  shown  a  steady 
decline  in  numbers  from  the  first,  and  that  Windham's 
reforms  had  really  worked  no  very  notable  change  in 
their  strength.  Castlereagh,  as  we  have  seen,  inclined 
to  give  them  temporary  encouragement ;  the  most  solid 
part  of  which  was  permission  for  corps  which  had  not 
completed  their  twenty-six  days  of  drill  to  go  upon  per- 
manent duty  for  not  less  than  ten  or  more  than  fourteen 
days,  with  full  pay  for  those  periods  both  for  officers  and 
men.^  It  was  indeed  necessary  to  keep  some  of  the 
Volunteers  in  existence,  for,  owing  to  the  depletion  of 
the  Militia,  those  of  Devon,  Gloucester,  Kent,  Hamp- 
shire, and  Somerset  were  required  to  find  guards  for  the 
French  prisoners  at  Plymouth,  Portsmouth,  Bristol,  and 
Norman  Cross,  receiving  of  course  full  pay  for  the  duty.* 
There,  however,  the  encouragement  ended,  for  the 
reports  concerning  them  were  not  generally  very  favour- 
able. When  the  renewal  of  the  ballot  was  announced, 
a  number  of  men  thronged  to  join  Volunteer  corps,  but 
they  were  not  well  received,  and  rightly  so.  For  some 
time  past  the  Lieutenants  had  had  orders  to  forward  no 
further  offers  of  Volunteer  corps ;  and  this  placed  them 
in  a  difficulty,  for  such  tenders  of  service  were  often 
very  numerous.  "  The  people,"  wrote  the  Lieutenant 
of  Northumberland,  "  seem  to  think  that  they  have 
the  right  to  become  Volunteers  by  such  offers,  and  to 
exempt  themselves  from  the  present  and  future  ballots."  ^ 
The  fact  seems  to  have  been  that  evasion  of  national 
duty  was  now  become  the  sole  object  of  Volunteering. 
"  The    Volunteer   plan,"    reported    the    Lieutenant  of 

^  Circular  to  L.L.  6th  Aug.  1807. 

^  Circular  to  L.L.  of  the  five  counties,  22nd  Aug.  1807. 
^  I.D.  vol.    cxviii.    L.L.  Northumberland,   to   S.S.  13th  Aug. 
1807. 


Ill  VOLUNTEERING  DEBASED  199 

Surrey,  "  was  at  first  entered  into  in  a  right  and  proper  1807. 
spirit,  but  now  it  has  dwindled  down  to  little  else  than 
exemption  from  other  services."  ^  "  When  the  Volun- 
teers were  first  raised,"  wrote  a  gentleman  from  Nor- 
wich, "  I  subscribed  like  other  people,  as  it  was  conceived 
that  the  subscribers  were  to  bear  all  the  expense  ;  and 
numbers  of  people  enrolled  themselves.  But  when  pay 
was  allowed,  a  new  set  of  men  joined,  who  found  that 
when  work  was  short  the  Volunteer's  pay,  added  to  casual 
employment,  would  enable  them  to  live.  Half  of  them 
are  rank  revolutionists.  Half  of  them  meet  in  a  court 
at  the  back  of  my  house,  where  I  hear  them  damning 
the  King  and  Parliament.  They  command  their  officers 
and  declare  openly  that  they  will  do  what  they  please."  ^ 
Norwich,  it  must  be  remarked,  like  all  manufacturing 
towns  at  that  time  when  England's  transition  from  an 
agricultural  to  a  manufacturing  country  was  accomplish- 
ing itself,  contained  a  somewhat  turbulent  population  ; 
and  the  damning  of  Parliament,  though  a  serious 
symptom  in  those  days,  has  become  a  mere  common- 
place in  these.  But  that  men  should  command  their 
officers  is  an  evil  thing  in  every  generation  ;  and  there 
had  always  been  too  much  of  it  among  the  Volunteers. 
In  the  Isle  of  Wight  in  this  same  year  the  privates 
of  a  troop  of  Yeomanry  (which  were  then  reckoned 
Volunteer  cavalry)  had  decHned  to  serve  any  longer  if  a 
certain  officer  were  admitted,  maintaining  in  defiance  of 
Act  of  Parliament  that  every  officer  must  be  regularly 
proposed  and  approved  by  the  corps  at  large.  The 
Commanding  Officer  therefore  resigned,  whereupon  the 
troop  elected  an  officer  of  their  own  choosing  and  tried 
to  put  him  into  command.^  The  old  idea,  that  Volun- 
teers could  do  as  they  pleased,  never  wholly  perished, 
and  indeed  actually  received  countenance  from  the 
Courts  of  Law.  In  the  spring  of  1 807  the  Richmond 
Volunteers  were  on  parade,  when  a  sergeant  took  occasion 

1  I.D.  vol.  cxxi.  V.L.  Surrey,  to  S.S.  2nd  Sept.  1807. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  cxxiv.  Norfolk,  Thomas  Howes  (undated)  to  S.S. 

3  Ibid,  cxiii.  V.L.  Hants,  to  S.S.  8th  Oct.,  19th  Nov.  1807. 


200       VOLUNTEERS'  INDISCIPLINE         chap. 

J  807.  to  strike  Colonel  Drew,  the  Commanding  Officer.  Drew 
returned  the  blow  with  the  flat  of  his  sword,  and  caused 
the  sergeant  to  be  disarmed  and  turned  out.  The  ser- 
geant thereupon  brought  an  action  against  the  Colonel, 
when  Mr.  Justice  Heath  laid  it  down  that  Drew  had  no 
right  to  take  the  sergeant's  sword,  and  that  the  sergeant 
had  a  right  to  defend  it.  He  therefore  summed  up 
against  Drew,  and  the  jury  brought  in  a  verdict  of  ^^200 
damages  with  ;^300  costs.^  This  was  probably  the 
heaviest  blow  struck  at  the  subordination  of  the  Volun- 
teers throughout  their  existence ;  and  it  fell  just  at  a  time 
when  discipline  particularly  needed  to  be  strengthened. 
It  was  now  discovered  also  that  there  had  been  gross 
abuses  in  connection  with  the  allowances  granted  to  the 
Volunteer  corps  for  the  maintenance  of  their  arms  ;  and 
a  circular  was  issued  to  intimate  that  in  future  these  would 
be  granted  only  for  such  arms  as  were  certified  by  the 
Inspecting  Field-Officers  to  be  in  good  repair.^  In  Wilt- 
shire it  seems  that  good  reason  existed  for  extraordinary 
wear  and  tear  of  muskets  ;  for  the  Volunteers,  weary  of 
waiting  for  the  invasion  of  the  French,  had  turned  them 
to  the  destruction  of  game  and  rabbits,  an  operation 
which  was  probably  little  less  perilous  to  the  King's 
subjects  than  invasion  itself;  and  had  certainly  not  been 
contemplated  when  the  weapons  were  issued.^  In  fact 
whatever  the  Volunteers  may  have  been  in  1804,  they 
stood  revealed  in  1 807  in  their  primitive  condition  as  an 
armed  rabble. 

With  this  stern  fact  before  him,  Castlereagh  spent  the 
winter  of  1807  in  devising  means  for  replacing  this 
rabble  by  something  which  should  return  better  value 
for  the  money  expended  upon  it.  Meanwhile  the 
year  closed  with  a  stroke  of  misfortune,  which  was 
hardly  redeemed  by  real  and  effective  success  in  another 
quarter.  The  expedition  returned  from  Buenos  Ayres 
wrathful  and  humiliated  after  a  desperate  fight  in  the 

1   I.D.  vol.  cxxi.  L.L.  Surrey,  to  S.S.  18th  April  1807. 

2  Circular  to  L.Ls.  8th  Aug.  1807. 

3  I.D.  vol.  cxxii.  C.G.M.  Wilts,  to  S.S.  12th  Dec.  1807. 


Ill  FOREIGN  EXPEDITIONS  201 

streets  of  the  city,  wherein  the  men  had  covered  them-  1807. 
selves  with  glory  and  the  General  with  disgrace.  Rather 
more  than  a  thousand  officers  and  men  had  fallen  in  the 
course  of  these  ill-conceived  operations,  so  wantonly 
initiated  by  Popham  ;  but  the  remainder  to  the  number 
of  nearly  8000  were  at  least  restored  to  England  for 
future  campaigns.  From  Copenhagen  also  the  force 
had  returned,  fortunately  little  abridged  of  its  original 
strength.  It  had  done  its  work,  which  was  not  very 
arduous,  by  the  capture  of  Copenhagen  and  of  the  Danish 
fleet,  and  was  quite  fit  for  further  campaigns  elsewhere. 
The  whole  affair  had  been  well  managed,  especially  on 
the  part  of  the  Cabinet  ;  and  the  thrust,  as  was  testified 
by  the  wrath  of  Napoleon,  had  sped  home  and  undone 
his  ambitious  schemes  in  the  Baltic.  Still  the  outlook 
was  gloomy,  and  Ministers  could  hardly  guess  that  this 
was  the  darkest  hour  before  the  dawn,  and  that  another 
year  would  see  Napoleon  irretrievably  committed  to  the 
fatal  blunder  which  brought  about  his  fall. 


i8o8. 


CHAPTER    IV 

I 

At  the  opening  of  the  year  1808  the  progress  of  the 
Regular  and  Reserved  Forces  was  shown  to  be  as  follows, 
the  numbers  including  the  rank  and  file  only  : — 


Establishment, 
ist  Feb.  1808. 

Effective  Strength, 
ist  Feb.  1808. 

Effective  Strength, 
1st  July  1807. 

Cavalry  . 
Infantry  . 
Artillery  . 

28,792 

198,327 

25,662 

26,520 

178,295 

24,781 

26,315 

156,561 

24,071 

Militia     . 
Volunteers 

95,823 

77,164 
296,669 

77,790 
294,378 

Besides  this,  it  was  reckoned  that  10,000  recruits  had 
been  enrolled  for  the  Militia,  but  had  not  yet  joined 
headquarters.  Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  there  was  a 
solid  increase  to  the  Army  of  about  22,000  men,  and  to 
the  Militia  of  about  9000  men. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Commander-in-Chief  reported 
and  proved  up  to  the  hilt  that  the  short  service, 
increased  pensions,  and  other  reforms  introduced  by 
Windham  had  failed  completely  to  fulfil  his  promise 
that  they  would  sujffice  to  keep  the  ranks  of  the  Army 
filled  solely  by  voluntary  enlistment.  The  number  of 
men  raised  by  voluntary  recruiting  in  1806  and  1807 
was  much  larger  absolutely  than  in  previous  years,  but 
not  so  relatively  to  the  number  of  parties  employed. 
Yet   provision    for    additional   pensions    had    already 


202 


CHAP.  IV     WINDHAM'S  SCHEME  FAILS       203 

swelled  the  expenses  for  Chelsea  and  Kilmainham  by  1808. 
j^  2  00,000  annually  ;  and  this  sum  would  be  still  further 
augmented  within  a  few  years  as  the  periods  of  service 
of  the  various  batches  of  men  began  to  expire.  Lastly, 
constant  changes  of  station  made  it  impossible  to  apply 
accurately  the  rules  for  the  increase  of  a  man's  pay  after 
each  term  of  seven  years'  service,  particularly  in  con- 
junction with  the  privilege  that  two  years'  service  in  the 
East  and  West  Indies  should  count  as  three.  In  those 
days  men  had  a  passion  for  shifting  from  regiment  to 
regiment  as  often  as  they  had  opportunity,  and  it  was 
impossible  to  register  their  movements  so  closely  as  to 
do  justice  either  to  them  or  to  the  public. 

Castlereagh,  on  receiving  this  report,  very  mag- 
nanimously urged  every  consideration  that  could  be 
brought  forward  in  favour  of  Windham's  system  ;  but 
the  Horse  Guards  met  the  statements  and  arguments 
with  facts  and  figures  which  were  neither  to  be  contro- 
verted nor  ignored.^  Accordingly,  when  the  Mutiny 
Bill  came  before  Parliament,  in  March  1808,  Castle- 
reagh was  obliged  to  represent  that  short  service,  though 
it  might  answer  for  work  in  Europe,  was  impossible  for 
a  country  which  had  to  supply  so  many  foreign  gar- 
risons as  England.  Of  204,000  Regular  troops  in  the 
Army,  70,000  were  engaged  for  short  service  ;  36,000 
of  them,  enlisted  during  the  past  twelve  months,  would 
all  be  lost  in  seven  years,  and  in  fact  limited  service 
could  not  cover  its  own  waste.  He  mentioned  incident- 
ally that  the  great  increase  of  recruits  gathered  by 
voluntary  enlistment  had  been  due  really  to  an  extra- 
ordinary cause.  Windham  had  threatened  to  disband 
the  whole  of  the  fifty-four  second  battalions  formed  by 
the  Army  of  Reserve,  unless  they  were  increased  to  four 
hundred  men  apiece  within  six  months,  and  this  menace 
had  led  the  officers  of  these  battalions  to  make  unusual 
exertions  lest  they  should  be  relegated  to  the  half-pay 
list.  He  therefore  moved  a  clause,  not  to  sweep  away 
short  service  altogether,  but  to  allow  recruits  the  option 
1  Corresp.  in  Supplement  to  Military  Transactions^  Appendix  1 8. 


204         CASTLEREAGH'S  REFORMS  chap. 

1808.  of  enlisting  for  a  term  or  for  life  as  they  might  prefer.^ 
He  carried  the  House  with  him.  The  Mutiny  Act  of 
1808  bound  every  recruit  to  serve  until  legally  dis- 
charged ;  but  short  service  none  the  less  remained  as  an 
alternative  open  to  such  men  as  preferred  it. 

Windham,  as  was  natural,  stood  up  for  the  system 
which  he  had  introduced,  setting  forth  his  side  of  the 
question  in  a  series  of  thirteen  propositions,  with  a  vast 
array  of  figures  all  tending  to  show  that  recruits  were 
better,  cheaper,  and  more  numerous  under  his  scheme 
than  under  any  other.  Castlereagh,  unfortunately,  had 
yet  more  facts  and  figures  to  his  hand  to  overthrow  these 
in  a  series  of  counter  propositions  ;  and  it  must  be  con- 
fessed that  in  the  duel  of  statistics  he  came  off  the 
better.^  In  fact  there  was  no  gainsaying  the  unpleasant 
truth  that,  without  some  such  heroic  measure  as  the 
quadrupling  of  the  private  soldier's  daily  pay,  it  was 
impossible  to  keep  the  ranks  of  the  Army  filled  without 
some  form  of  compulsion  ;  and  Castlereagh  was  pro- 
foundly convinced  that  it  was  imperative  not  only  to 
maintain  but  to  increase  the  Army.  Enforced  service 
abroad  was  out  of  the  question  ;  but  enforced  service 
at  home  was  consecrated  by  constitutional  usage  and 
confirmed  by  the  Militia  Acts.  The  Army  of  Reserve 
had  been  an  experiment  in  another  department  of  com- 
pulsion, but  it  had  not  been  successful.  Practically  the 
only  resource,  therefore,  was  to  turn  the  Militia  once 
more  into  a  recruiting  dep6t  for  the  Army. 

To  this  end  Castlereagh  had  been  maturing  his  plans 
for  increasing  the  Militia  at  the  expense  of  the  Volun- 
teers. His  idea  was  to  select  first  all  that  was  good  of 
his  predecessor's  schemes,  and  to  graft  upon  that  stock 
a  new  shoot  of  his  own  ;  and  he  therefore  put  forth  the 
following  suggestions,  the  figures  being,  with  one  exce{>- 
tion,  reckoned  for  England  only  : — 

I.  To  keep  100,000  Volunteers  only  of  the  best  de- 
scription, in  Great  Britain  y  and  those  chiefly  in  large  towns 
and  populous  manufacturing  districts,  where  men  would 

1  H.D.  8th  March  1808.  2  /^/^,  13th  Aug.  1807. 


IV  CASTLEREAGH'S  REFORMS  205 

be  glad  to  turn  to  them  in  order  to  evade  other  service ;       1 808, 
the  State  imposing  on  them  such  conditions  as  would 
make  them  a  cheap,  useful,  and  efficient  force. 

2.  To  create  200,000  Sedentary  Militia,  to  be 
trained  for  twenty-eight  days  annually,  but  not  to  leave 
their  counties  except  in  case  of  invasion  or  rebellion. 

3.  To  train,  under  Windham's  Training  Act, 
200,000  men,  and  make  them  liable  to  serve  in  the 
Line  in  case  of  invasion. 

Though  he  set  down  these  three  descriptions  of 
force  in  the  order  thus  given,  he  intended  originally 
that  the  two  first  should  be  based  upon  the  last,  that  is 
to  say,  upon  the  Training  Act.  He  found  fault  with 
Windham's  measure  upon  three  principal  grounds — viz. 
that  Windham  had  offered  to  pay  the  men  called  out 
for  exercise  an  equivalent  for  the  loss  of  their  time 
and  labour,  which  the  country  could  not  afford  ;  that 
it  was  impossible  to  provide  adequate  training  for 
men  within  the  space  of  twelve  months ;  and  that, 
though  it  was  obviously  useless  and  dangerous  to  bring 
large  bodies  of  men  together  unless  previously  organised 
and  provided  with  officers,  it  was  impossible  con- 
veniently to  find  officers  for  so  large  a  number  as 
200,000. 

He  proposed,  therefore,  to  establish  the  following 
principles  as  the  basis  for  a  new  system  of  training  : — 

1.  That  instruction  in  the  use  of  arms  should  be 
imposed  upon  all  able-bodied  men  between  eighteen 
and  thirty  as  a  positive  duty,  to  be  enforced  by  fine  ; 
and  that  every  parish  should  keep  a  list  of  men  between 
those  ages. 

2.  That  the  State  should  provide  the  means  and  dis- 
charge the  expenses  of  instruction,  but  allow  no  pay  for 
attendance  at  drill.  Every  effort,  however,  should  be 
made  to  train  in  their  own  parishes  men  who  lived  at  a 
long  distance  from  the  places  of  assembly. 

To  facilitate  the  teaching,  the  Government  was  to 
distribute  and  employ  drill-sergeants  in  all  the  counties, 
taking  them  from  the  permanent  staff  of  the  Sedentary 


2o6         CASTLEREAGH'S  REFORMS  chap. 

1808.  Militia  (whose  organisation  will  presently  be  explained), 
give  them  charge  of  a  certain  number  of  firearms,  and 
pay  them  five  shillings  apiece  for  every  man  certified 
by  proper  inspectors  to  be  perfected  in  the  use  of  the 
firelock.  Men  so  passed  were  to  be  exempt  from 
further  drill  for  three  years,  after  which  they  would  be 
required  to  renew  their  certificate  to  prove  that  they 
were  still  completely  trained.  Men  not  certified  as 
efficient  were  to  be  mustered  once  every  six  months  in 
their  parishes,  and,  if  found  not  to  be  trained,  were  to  be 
fined  ten  shillings,  with  an  increase  of  ten  shillings  at 
every  half-year  until  their  certificate  had  been  gained. 
If  (so  he  argued)  men  found  that  they  must  train  them- 
selves under  penalties,  they  would  soon  organise 
themselves  into  squads  and  companies  for  their  own 
convenience. 

From  the  men  thus  trained,  he  proposed  to  form 
the  Sedentary  Militia  by  annual  ballot  ;  for  after  their 
previous  instruction  they  would  find  twenty-eight  days' 
drill  in  the  year  sufficient  to  make  them  fairly  expert  in 
the  higher  branches  of  exercise.  They  were  to  serve 
for  three  years,  and  then  be  exempt  from  further 
service  until  their  turn  came  round  in  rotation  ;  but  they 
were  to  complete  their  three  years'  service  even  if  they 
passed  the  military  age  during  the  course  of  it.  Ex- 
emptions were  to  stand  as  under  the  Additional  Force 
Act.  Ballotted  men  were  to  be  allowed  to  find  a  substi- 
tute upon  paying  a  fine,  but  such  substitute  was  to  be 
also  a  trained  man  of  military  age  ;  and  if  he  were 
ballotted  during  his  term  of  service  as  a  substitute,  he 
was  to  serve  first  his  three  years  as  a  substitute,  and 
then  proceed  with  his  three  years  as  a  principal.  The 
Sedentary  Militia  was  to  be  organised  in  battalions  of 
1000  rank  and  file,  with  a  permanent  staff  of  an  adjutant, 
a  sergeant-major,  a  quartermaster -sergeant,  twenty 
sergeants,  twenty  corporals,  and  twelve  drummers.  At 
every  ballot  there  was  to  be  drawn  not  only  the  full 
number  required  from  the  ranks,  but  a  supplementary 
number  of  one-third  or  fourth  of  the  establishment, 


IV  CASTLEREAGH'S  REFORMS  207 

who  were  to  be  liable  to  fill  vacancies  in  the  order  in  1808. 
which  they  were  drawn.  The  Sedentary  Militia  were 
to  be  at  liberty  to  enter  the  Army,  Navy,  Marines,  or 
Regular  Militia,  the  places  of  men  who  enlisted  being  at 
once  filled  out  of  the  supplementary  quota.  Its  number 
would  be  200,000  men  for  England,  and  a  propor- 
tionate number  for  Scotland  ;  the  full  strength  to  be 
arrived  at  gradually,  and  the  Volunteers  to  be  reduced 
as  the  Sedentary  Militia  increased. 

The  Regular  Militia  was  to  be  ballotted  for  as  under 
the  existing  Acts,  neither  the  trained  men  nor  the 
Sedentary  Militia  being  exempt,  but  the  men  being  still 
chosen  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty-five,  so 
as  not  to  throw  too  heavy  a  burden  upon  a  limited 
class.  "  Necessity,"  he  wrote,  "  may  lead  hereafter 
and  consequently  justify  us  in  applying  the  principle  of 
conscription  more  directly,  but  in  the  first  instance  our 
object  should  be  to  make  the  service  of  the  Sedentary 
Militia  as  little  onerous  as  possible,  and  to  try  what 
resources  can  be  drawn  by  proper  encouragement  and 
voluntary  enlistment  from  a  body  so  constituted."  ^  But 
the  Regular  Militia,  through  the  additional  facility 
of  procuring  men  by  enlistment,  would  be  much 
strengthened  ;  and,  as  Castlereagh  observed,  "  a  corps 
of  this  description  seems  an  indispensable  ingredient  in 
the  Army  of  a  state  which  must  reduce  its  military 
force  suddenly  in  time  of  peace,  and  call  it  forth  as 
suddenly  upon  the  recurrence  of  war." 

Finally,  the  Regular  Army,  when  the  system  was 
perfected,  would  be  kept  up  partly  by  ordinary  recruiting, 
partly  by  Volunteers  from  the  Sedentary  Militia,  and  in 
the  third  place  by  a  school  to  be  established  on  a  large 
scale  for  the  reception  of  boys,  who  should  pass  two  or 
three  years  there  in  education  before  being  attached  to 
regiments.  He  conceived  that  both  parents  and  parishes 
would  be  glad  to  send  children  to  such  an  institution  if 

1  This  sentence  is  faithfully  transcribed,  so  the  faults  in  it  must 
not  be  ascribed  to  the  author.     Castlereagh's  English  was  always 

detestable. 


2o8 


CASTLEREAGH'S  REFORMS 


CHAP. 


1808.  they  were  assured  that  they  would  be  educated  first, 
and  not  compelled  to  bear  arms  too  soon.  The  term 
of  service  for  such  boys  would  be  seven  years,  reckon- 
ing from  their  attainment  of  the  age  of  eighteen. 

All  the  recruits  were  to  have  the  option  of  enlist- 
ing for  short  service  or  for  life,  without  limitation 
as  to  place.  Men  engaged  for  life  would  be  thrown 
principally  into  first  battalions  ;  men  engaged  for  a 
limited  term  into  second  battalions.  Thus  the  difficulty 
of  relief  for  foreign  garrisons  would  be  overcome, 
and  any  advantages  derivable  from  short  service  would 
be  retained.  All  alike  would  be  liable  to  foreign 
service  ;  and  if  it  were  necessary  to  levy  a  large  number 
of  men  by  ballot,  they  would  be  received  into  the  second 
battalions,  from  whence  they  could  be  tempted  to  re- 
engage for  longer  service. 

In  round  numbers  Castlereagh  reckoned  that  the 
complete  armed  force  of  England  would  ultimately 
attain  to  the  following  strength  : — 


Navy,  Marines,  and  Sea  Fenc 
Army  and  Regular  Militia 
Volunteers  (Great  Britain) 
Volunteers  (Ireland) 
Sedentary  Militia  (England) 
Sedentary  Militia  (Scotland) 
Trained  Men 


bles 


1 50,000  men 
350,000  men 
100,000  men 
80,000  men 
200,000  men 
100,000  men 
400,000  men 

1,380,000  meni 


or   more  than  half  of  the   2,000,000   men  liable  to 
service  under  the  Levy  en  Masse  Act. 

Here  at  last  was  a  plan  for  effecting  that  which  was 

^  Castlereagh,  Desp.  viii.  pp.  113-124.  I  suspect  some  of  these 
figures  to  have  been  mistranscribed.  In  the  earlier  part  of  the 
memorandum  Castlereagh  gives  the  Army  and  Regular  Militia  at 
300,000  jointly,  which  would  reduce  the  above  total  to  1,330,000. 
Moreover,  the  calculation  of  100,000  Sedentary  Militia  for  Scot- 
land against  200,000  for  England  is  excessive,  the  Scottish  Militia 
being  to  the  English  Militia  as  i  to  5f.  The  true  estimate  for 
Scotland  would  therefore  be  about  35,000  men.  The  total  would 
then  stand  at  1,295,000  men. 


IV  THE  LOCAL  MILITIA  209 

really  needed — national  training  in  arms  ;  the  ideal  1808. 
which  had  been  foreshadowed  in  the  elder  Pitt's  original 
Militia  Act  of  1757.  It  is  very  evident  too,  from  one 
of  the  sentences  which  have  been  quoted,  that  Castle- 
reagh  designed  it  to  be  permanent,  and  to  be  valid  in 
peace  as  in  war.  Endless  embarrassments,  difficulties, 
and  disasters  would  have  been  averted  if  it  could  have 
been  erected  and  maintained  in  the  form  which  he 
suggested  ;  but  this  was  not  to  be  ;  and  when  he  laid  his 
Local  Militia  Bill  before  Parliament  it  was  shorn  of 
very  much  of  its  usefulness.  None  the  less  his  speech 
in  introducing  it  was  so  statesmanlike  that  it  is  worth 
while  very  briefly  to  abstract  it  here. 

He  began  by  saying,  most  rightly,  that  the  Regular 
Army  must  be  his  first  care,  and  took  credit  to  himself 
for  having  by  his  measures  added  40,000  men  to  it. 
Omitting  the  Artillery,  the  Regular  Army  and  the  Militia 
in  the  British  Isles  numbered  200,000  men.  If  every 
company  in  the  Regular  Infantry  were  raised  to  100 
men,  50,000  more  soldiers  could  be  admitted  ;  and  it 
would  be  of  great  advantage  to  have  these  men  ready 
trained  without  occasion  for  a  ballot.  This  could  be 
done  by  establishing  a  Local  Militia  (it  will  be  observed 
that  the  phrase  Sedentary  Militia  had  been  discarded),  with 
forty-eight  days'  drill  near  their  homes,  and  twenty-one 
days  of  embodiment  in  their  own  counties.  The  Volun- 
teers would  suffice  if  they  were  always  as  efficient  as  at 
present,  but  it  was  necessary  to  organise  a  permanent 
force  of  the  same  strength.  Then  in  the  First  Line 
there  would  be  the  Army  and  Established  Militia  ;  in 
the  Second  the  Volunteers  ;  and  in  the  Third  a  Local 
Militia  which  need  not  exceed  six  times  the  Established 
Militia,  that  is  to  say,  320,000^  men  in  Great  Britain. 
Add  to  this  70,000  effective  Volunteers  in  Ireland  ;  and 
there  would  be  400,000  trained  men,  ready  to  fall  into 
the  Line  and  Militia  if  required.  The  effective  Volun- 
teers in  Great  Britain  numbered  290,000,  of  which 
240,000  were  under  arms  at  the  last  inspections.     To 

1  The  number  should  be  309,000. 

P 


2IO  THE  LOCAL  MILITIA  chap. 

1808.       bring  these  290,000  to  320,000,  only  30,000  men  were 
wanted  ;  but  the  deficiency  was  so  unequal  in  different 
districts  that  not  fewer  than  60,000  would  answer  the 
purpose.     He    proposed    therefore    to    create   a   Local 
Militia  of  60,000  men,  to  be  gradually  increased  as  the 
Volunteers  diminished,  and  to  supersede  them  in  time 
of  peace.     The  force   would   be   raised  by  ballot,  but 
only   in  districts   where   sufficient   Volunteers,  or   men 
between   the  ages  of  eighteen  and  thirty-five,  did  not 
spontaneously  come  forward.    To  encourage  such  volun- 
tary offers,  he  would  give  a  small  bounty  to  those  who 
entered  the  new  force  of  their  own  will ;  and  he  hoped 
also   to   tempt   gentlemen  of  rank  to  join  as  officers. 
The  qualifications   of  the   Regular   Militia  would  be 
required  of  captains   but   not   of  subalterns.      Service 
would  be  for  four  years,  and  always  within  the  county 
except  in  case  of  invasion.     When  a  ballot  was  held,  no 
substitutes  would  be  allowed,  the  case  of  the  Provisional 
Cavalry  having   given  warning   against  such  a  course. 
The  fine  for  exemption  would  be  so  great  as  to  dis- 
courage men  from  paying  it ;  and  finally  all  insurance 
against  personal  service  would  be  made   penal.     The 
force  would  be  cheaper,  man  for  man,  than  Windham's 
levies,  and  would  finally  reach  the  number  of  400,000 
men.     With  such  a  force,  and  200,000  regular  troops, 
the  Empire  would  be  secure.^ 

It  will  be  observed  that  though  Castlereagh  hinted 
that  he  looked  forward  to  the  disappearance  of  the 
Volunteers,  he  adroitly  dissembled  his  true  feelings 
concerning  them  ;  so  much  so  that  he  brought  down 
the  usual  denunciation  of  them  from  Windham.  But 
Windham's  chief  quarrel  with  the  measure  was  that 
Castlereagh  had  practically  adopted  his  Training  Act, 
only  altering  the  number  of  days'  training,  and  incor- 
porating the  men  into  battalions,  whereas  he  himself 
wished  to  keep  them  as  a  great  reserve  to  be  passed 
straight  into  the  Line.  He  also  declared  that  Castle- 
reagh had  other  designs  than  merely  making  good  the 
1  H.D.  12th  April  1808. 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  211 

deficient  number  of  Volunteers,  because  a  circular  had  1808. 
been  issued  to  stop  all  further  increase  of  that  force. 
To  all  this  Castlereagh  responded  with  much  tact  that 
he  had  borrowed  a  great  deal  from  Windham's  Train- 
ing Act,  and  was  not  the  least  ashamed  of  it.  Upon 
the  whole,  the  opposition  to  the  Bill  seems  to  have  been 
half-hearted,  though  more  than  one  member  urged 
consideration  of  an  alternative  plan  suggested  by  Lord 
Selkirk.  This  was  to  call  up  all  young  men  from 
eighteen  to  twenty-five  years  of  age,  train  them  for 
three  months  in  their  first  year  and  for  smaller  periods 
in  subsequent  years,  until  at  twenty-five  they  became 
exempt.  Castlereagh  disposed  of  this  by  saying  that  it 
would  destroy  the  whole  system  of  quotas,  and  bear 
very  unequally  upon  the  counties  unless  the  Volunteers 
were  at  once  abolished.  And  it  must  be  remembered 
always  in  connection  with  Castlereagh's  scheme,  that  he 
had  inherited  the  *'  fleeting  and  inapplicable  mass  "  from 
his  predecessors,  and  that  its  existence  was  a  perpetual 
bar  to  any  but  a  very  gradual  reorganisation  of  the 
people  for  military  purposes. 

The  Local  Militia  Bills  became  law  on  the  30th  of 
June  (48  Geo.  III.  cap.  1 1 1,  Scotland,  cap.  150).  They 
enacted  that  a  Permanent  Local  Militia  should  be 
enrolled  in  Great  Britain,  not  to  exceed,  together  with 
the  Volunteers,  six  times  the  quota  of  the  Militia  under 
the  Militia  Act  of  1802,  that  is  to  say,  not  to  exceed 
308,934  men  ;  and  that  deficiencies  among  effective 
Volunteers  should  be  supplied  by  Local  Militiamen 
(sees.  1-3).  Only  men  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and 
thirty  were  to  be  ballotted  ;  and  no  substitution  nor 
bounty  to  ballotted  men  was  to  be  allowed  (sec.  8). 
Sick  or  infirm  persons  could  be  exempted  by  two 
Deputy-Lieutenants  under  medical  certificate  (sec.  11). 
Ministers  of  religion,  schoolmasters,  and  practising 
doctors  were  likewise  exempted  ;  also  men  who  were 
serving,  or  had  served,  in  the  Army  of  Reserve  or  had 
found  a  substitute  or  paid  the  fine  for  exemption  from 
service  therein.     Men  who  were  in  the  like  case  in 


212  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  chap. 

1 808.  respect  of  the  Regular  Militia  were  exempt  for  four 
years  after  the  expiration  of  their  term  of  service,  or 
for  six  years  from  the  date  of  the  enrolment  of  their 
substitute  (sec.  13).  Articled  clerks  and  apprentices, 
poor  men  with  fewer  than  three  children  born  in  lawfiil 
wedlock,  and  persons  under  five  feet  four  inches  in 
height  but  not  under  five  feet  two  inches,  though 
exempted  from  the  Regular  Militia,  were  liable  to  serve 
in  the  Local  Militia  (sec.  14)  ;  but  ballotted  apprentices 
might  not  enlist  in  the  Army  without  their  master's 
consent  (sec.  15).  Ballotted  men  were  to  be  sworn  to 
serve  for  five  years  unless  sooner  discharged  (sec.  16). 
Any  ballotted  man  not  presenting  himself  to  be  enrolled 
was  to  be  fined  ;C30  »  or  ^20  if  his  annual  income  were 
less  than  £100  ;  or  ^^  10  if  his  income  were  under  ;^  100 ; 
which  fines  were  to  be  paid  to  the  Paymaster-General 
of  the  Forces,  and  were  to  give  exemption  for  two 
years  only  (sec.  17).  Persons  imprisoned  for  not 
paying  these  fines  were  liable  to  serve  for  their  full 
term  of  four  years  after  expiration  of  their  period  of 
imprisonment  (sec.  18).  Ballotted  men  engaging  to 
serve  in  Volunteer  corps  at  their  own  expense  were 
entitled  to  remission  of  half  the  fine,  but  if  they  failed 
to  continue  to  serve  for  four  years,  they  were  liable  to 
forfeit  treble  the  sum  remitted,  and  to  serve  in  the 
Local  Militia  (sec.  20).  Persons  paying  the  fine  were 
required  to  declare  that  they  had  not  insured  themselves 
against  such  payment ;  and  on  refusing  so  to  declare, 
or  on  making  a  false  declaration,  were  to  forfeit  thrice 
the  amount  of  the  fine,  with  alternative  of  three  months'" 
imprisonment.  The  penalty  for  insuring  persons  against 
fines  was  a  fine  of  ^^50  (sees.  22,  23).  When  men 
between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty  voluntarily 
enrolled  themselves  in  any  parish,  the  ballot  was  to  be 
held  only  for  the  number  deficient  of  the  quota ;  and  such 
voluntary  recruits  were  to  receive  a  bounty  of  £2  :  2s.,. 
which,  however,  they  were  to  forfeit  if  they  enlisted  in 
the  Regular  Army  within  two  years  (sees.  24,  26,  27).. 
Members  of  Friendly  Societies  were  not  to  be  prejudiced 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  213 

by  entering  the  Local  Militia,  whatever  the  rules  of  the  1808. 
Societies  (sec.  25).  Corps  of  Volunteer  Infantry,  irrespec- 
tive of  age,  might  transfer  themselves  bodily  to  the  Local 
Militia,  with  the  King's  approval ;  also  Artillery  Volun- 
teers and  Yeomen;  but  any  vacancies  remaining  after  such 
transference  were  to  be  supplied  by  ballot  if  not  filled 
voluntarily  within  three  months.  All  transferred  Volun- 
teers were  required  to  declare  that  they  had  received  no 
bounty  exceeding  two  guineas  (sees.  29,  30).  On 
assembling  for  exercise  Local  Militiamen  were  entitled  in 
the  first  year  to  one  guinea,  and  in  subsequent  years  to 
half-a-guinea  for  necessaries  ;  also  to  a  further  guinea  on 
being  called  out  or  embodied  under  any  Order  in  Council 
or  proclamation  under  the  Act  (sec.  31).  Persons 
serving  in  the  Local  Militia  were  entitled  to  the  same 
exemptions  from  the  Regular  Militia  as  the  Volunteers 
had  received  under  the  Training  Act,  also  to  two  years 
exemption  after  the  end  of  their  four  years'  service,  unless 
their  turn  to  be  ballotted  came  round  earlier  (sec.  32). 
The  Local  Militia  could  be  formed  into  battalions  and 
regiments,  and  a  proportion  of  the  regimental  staff  kept 
on  permanent  pay.  Officers  were  to  rank  after  those  of 
their  grade  in  the  Regular  Militia ;  but  no  higher  title 
than  Lieutenant-Colonel  Commandant  was  to  be  held, 
except  by  Lords-Lieutenant  and  officers  who  had  held  the 
rank  of  Colonel  in  the  Regular  Army  or  Militia  (sees. 
34,  35).  Officers  of  Volunteers  transferred  with  their 
corps  to  the  Local  Militia  retained  their  rank,  but  were 
forbidden  in  any  case  to  take  rank  above  a  Lieutenant- 
colonel  in  the  Regular  Army  (sec.  36).  The  Local 
Militia  could  be  put  under  the  command  of  General 
Officers,  and  called  out  for  annual  training  for  not 
more  than  twenty-eight  days,  and  to  no  greater  distance 
than  an  adjoining  county  (sec.  38).  Men  could  remove 
from  the  Militia  of  one  county  to  that  of  another  on 
giving  notice  to  their  Commanding  Officers  (sec.  39). 
In  case  of  invasion  or  rebellion  the  Local  Militia  could 
be  embodied  and  marched  to  any  part  of  Great  Britain 
(sec.  40).     It  could  also  be  called  out  by  the  Lord- 


'  214  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  chap. 

1808.  Lieutenant  to  suppress  riots,  when  its  assembly  was 
limited  to  fourteen  days  only  and  was  to  be  counted  as 
part  of  its  training  (sec.  42).  In  both  of  the  above  cases 
it  was  to  be  entitled  to  the  same  pay  as  the  Regular 
Militia,  and  the  wives  and  families  of  the  men  were 
likewise  entitled  to  parish  relief  (sees.  43,  44).  Local 
Militiamen  might  enlist  in  the  Army,  Navy,  Marines, 
and  Regular  Militia  except  during  the  period  of  annual 
training  ;  and  the  vacancies  thus  created  were  to  be 
filled  up  like  all  other  vacancies  for  the  Militia,  any 
suspension  of  the  ballot  for  the  Regular  Militia  notwith- 
standing (sees.  45,  46).  Counties  were  liable  to  a  fine 
of  ;^I5  for  every  man  deficient  of  their  quota  on  every 
14th  of  February,  subject  to  remissions  of  two-thirds 
and  one-third  of  such  fines  if  the  deficiency  were  made 
good  before  the  14th  of  March  and  14th  of  April 
respectively  (sees.  47,  48).  Finally,  there  was  inserted 
at  the  instance  of  Whitbread  ^  a  section  for  the  relief  of 
men  who  had  paid  fines  or  found  substitutes  for  the 
Army  of  Reserve,  and  had  since  been  compelled  to 
serve  as  principals  under  Castlereagh's  Act  of  1 807  for 
completing  the  Militia  (sec.  47). 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  Act  in  its  final  form 
varied  somewhat  from  the  original  plan  sketched  by 
Castlereagh,  most  notably  in  the  omission  to  provide  a 
body  of  supplementary  men  for  the  immediate  filling  of 
vacancies.  The  invitation  to  entire  Volunteer  corps  to 
enrol  themselves  as  Local  Militia  was  also  a  concession, 
though  possibly  a  wise  concession,  which  marred  the 
original  idea  of  composing  the  new  force  wholly  of 
young  men,  who  should  have  received  their  elementary 
instruction  under  the  Training  Act.  There  was,  more- 
over, as  shall  be  seen,  another  weak  point  in  the  loose 
wording  of  the  sections  concerning  the  "  marching- 
guinea."  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  converted  at  a 
stroke  a  large  number  of  uncontrollable  men  into  corps 
which  could  be  disciplined  and  compelled  to  obey 
orders  ;  and  this  was  a  great  step  in  advance.     More- 

1  H.D.  2nd  May  1808. 


IV  PRESSURE  ON  VOLUNTEERS        215 

over,  it  will  be  noticed  that  the  experience  of  the  past  1808. 
was  wisely  turned  to  account  in  the  drafting  of  the 
Act.  There  were  to  be  no  more  doubts  as  to  the  worth 
of  exemptions  purchased  for  the  Militia,  the  Army  of 
Reserve,  or  any  other  Additional  Force ;  no  more 
questions  whether  men  could  be  ballotted  to  fill  vacancies 
or  recruits  could  be  enlisted  into  the  Army  ;  no  more 
trouble  with  the  tricks  of  Friendly  Societies.  Moreover, 
the  total  abolition  of  substitution  was  an  incalculable 
gain,  though  in  reality  the  reform  only  carried  out 
the  original  intention  of  the  elder  Pitt's  Militia  Act  of 
1757.  This  deserves  to  be  lifted  into  prominence  as 
perhaps  the  most  notable  point  in  the  whole  of  our 
administrative  military  history. 

It  will  be  convenient,  before  touching  upon  other 
topics,  to  follow  up  the  construction  of  the  Local 
Militia  during  the  summer  of  1808,  intimately  con- 
nected as  it  is  with  the  history  of  the  Volunteers.  At 
the  opening  of  the  year  the  Government  seemed  inclined 
to  continue  its  favours  to  the  latter  force,  for  it  issued 
a  circular  on  the  2nd  of  April  to  say  that  the  Volun- 
teers might  come  out  again  on  permanent  duty  during 
1808  for  not  more  than  fourteen,  or  fewer  than  ten, 
days,  with  the  same  allowances  as  in  1807.  But  within 
five  days  there  came  out  another  circular  to  say  that 
in  many  Volunteer  corps  the  difference  between  the 
effective  numbers  and  the  establishment  was  so  great 
that  a  new  establishment  must  be  made,  and  that  mean- 
while all  corps  were  provisionally  limited  to  the  number 
of  men  actually  enrolled  on  the  ist  of  April.  This,  no 
doubt,  was  [the  circular  to  which  Windham  alluded  in 
his  speech  ;  and  it  intimated  pretty  clearly  that  Volun- 
teer corps  below  a  certain  strength  would  be  swept  out 
of  existence  without  a  chance  of  completing  themselves 
so  as  to  avert  the  evil  day.  Two  days  before  the 
Local  Militia  Act  received  the  Royal  assent,  another 
circular  of  the  28  th  of  June  warned  all  commandants  of 
Volunteers  that  unless  they  sent  in  their  muster-rolls 
within  fourteen  days  of  the  ist  of  August,  their  corps 


2i6     CONVERSION  OF  VOLUNTEERS     chap. 

1808.  would  lose  the  privileges  of  effective  Volunteers  and  be- 
come subject  to  the  ballot  for  the  Local  Militia.  There 
was  to  be  no  delay,  no  evasion,  no  parleying.  The  **  fleet- 
ing inapplicable  mass"  must  become  stable  and  applicable, 
or  it  would  find  itself  turned  into  Local  MiHtia. 

Then  came  the  question  whether  the  Volunteer 
corps  would  or  would  not  as  a  rule  transfer  themselves 
bodily  to  the  Local  Militia.  Speaking  generally,  they 
seem  to  have  been  somewhat  backward  in  doing  so. 
In  some  cases  the  officers  were  willing  enough,  but  their 
men  would  not  follow  them.  In  Suffolk  the  Helming- 
ton  battalion  was  ready  to  furnish  ten  officers  but  only 
three  men.  In  the  same  county  the  transfer  of  the 
Risbridge  battalion  was  wrecked  by  the  conduct  of  two 
captains,  who  were  incensed  because  their  Commanding 
Officer  refused  to  recommend  one  of  them  for  pro- 
motion to  major.  It  is  satisfactory  to  know  that  in 
accordance  with  the  recommendation  of  the  Colonel 
this  corps  was  at  once  disbanded.  In  Sussex  the 
Volunteers  as  a  body  declined  to  have  anything  to  do 
with  the  Local  Militia ;  and  in  Nottinghamshire 
some  revolted  from  the  very  name  and  could  not 
be  won  over.  In  Ross  likewise  they  stood  haughtily 
aloof  until  they  discovered  that  their  parishes  would  be 
liable  to  heavy  fines,  when,  like  true  Scots,  they  begged 
hastily  to  be  transferred,  and  offered  even  to  sacrifice 
their  bounty  if  permitted  to  do  so.  In  Kent  the 
Volunteers  dissolved  themselves  in  dudgeon  in  all 
directions  ;  and  for  a  quota  of  7776  no  fewer  than 
5074  needed  to  be  ballotted.  In  Lancashire  over  5000 
Volunteers  accepted  service  in  the  Local  Militia,  but  even 
so  compulsion  was  necessary  to  force  nearly  7000  more 
into  the  ranks  ;  and  a  certain  number,  until  brought  to 
their  senses,  positively  refused  to  be  ballotted.  In  Lincoln- 
shire again  it  was  necessary  to  invoke  the  ballot  for 
nearly  half  of  the  quota.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
were  many  counties  in  which  the  spirit  was  very  much 
better.  Caermarthenshire,  Denbigh,  and  Wiltshire  pro- 
duced the  whole  of  their  men  without  a  ballot ;  Hamp- 


IV  CONVERSION  OF  VOLUNTEERS     217 

shire  did  very  nearly  as  well ;  and  in  Devon,  whose  full  1808. 
quota  was  9000,  over  8000  Volunteers  converted  them- 
selves into  Local  Militia.  In  all  it  seems  that  in  seventy- 
six  counties  of  Great  Britain  it  was  necessary  to  raise 
only  32,810  men  by  ballot.^  Upon  the  whole,  there- 
fore, the  Volunteers,  though  poor  of  spirit  in  some 
counties,  came  forward  as  well  as  could  be  expected  ; 
and  they  were  encouraged  by  the  latitude  which  the 
Act  gave  them  to  enrol  voluntary  recruits  in  the  Local 
Militia,  and  so  to  draw  in  stragglers  from  corps  which, 
as  complete  bodies,  had  no  relish  for  the  new  service.^ 
In  W^ales  it  seems  probable  that  the  readiness  of  the 
Volunteers  to  accept  transfer  to  the  Local  Militia  was 
due  to  the  poverty  of  the  officers  ;  for  in  Pembroke  the 
Lieutenant  pleaded  hard  for  a  corps  to  be  continued  in 
the  status  of  Fusiliers,  since  the  officers  were  chiefly 

1  Return  in  C.J.  vol.  Ixv.  p.  620.  Unfortunately  eleven  counties 
furnished  no  return. 

2  I.D.  vol.  cxxxviii.  S.S.  to  L.L.  Herts,  30th  Dec.  1808  ;  vol. 
cxlvii.  L.L.  Suffolk,  to  S.S.  1st,  23rd  Aug.;  O.C.  Risbridge  Vols, 
to  S.S.  3rd  Aug.  1808  ;  vol.  cxlviii.  L.L.  Sussex,  to  S.S.  17th  Nov. 
1808  ;  vol.  cxliv.  O.C.  Notts  Loyal  Vols,  to  S.S.  i6th  July  1808  ; 
vol.  clxvi.  L.L.  Kent,  to  S.S.  20th  Nov.  1808  ;  vol.  clxviii.  Minutes 
of  G.M.  Lanes,  i8th  Jan.;  Tviro  D.Ls.  of  Ormskirk  to  S.S.  20th 
Feb.  1809  ;  vol.  clxix.  Lines,  Return  of  loth  Jan,  1809  ;  vol.  clvi. 
L.L.  Caermarthen,  to  S.S.  22nd  Feb.  1809  ;  vol.  clix.  L.L.  Denbigh, 
to  S.S.  3rd  Jan.  1809;  vol.  clxxvi.  L.L.  Wilts,  to  S.S.  21st  Jan. 
1809;  vol.  clxiv.  L.L.  Hants,  to  S.S.  28th  Feb.  1809;  vol.  clx. 
L.L.  Devon,  to  S.S.  5th  Feb.  1809  ;  Entry  Book,  vol.  xliii.  S.S.  to 
Lord  Rolle,  25th  Jan.  1809. 

I  append  a  return  of  the  county  of  Devon  of  19th  July  1809, 
which  is  interesting  as  showing  the  part  played  by  a  single  county. 

Men  liable  to  Militia  service  (exclusive  of  men  serving)      14,692 
Yeomanry  and  Volunteers  exempt  .         .         .       11,454! 
Enlisted  in  Army,  Marines,  and  Sea  Fencibles  2258  J-14,682 

Clergy,  etc.,  exempt      .....  97°] 

Infirm  men  ........  9*9° 

There  is  thus  a  deficiency  of  ten  men  unaccounted  for. 

It  must  of  course  be  remembered  that  Devon,  with  the  sea  on 
both  sides,  and  with  a  large  naval  arsenal,  furnished  a  large  number  of 
seamen  and  marines.  Unfortunately  I  cannot  furnish  the  like  returns 
for  other  counties,  which  would  probably  be  equally  creditable. 


21 8   WEEDING  OF  VOLUNTEER  CORPS  chap. 

1808.  farmers'  sons,  and  subalterns  were  not  to  be  obtained 
unless  all  (as  was  the  rule  in  Fusilier  regiments)  enjoyed 
the  same  rank  and  pay.  The  wealth  of  Lancashire,  on 
the  other  hand,  may  account  for  the  fact  that  the 
county  considered  the  change  to  the  status  of  Militia 
as  a  degradation.  In  this  case  no  defect  more  damning 
to  the  whole  principle  of  the  Volunteers  as  founded  by 
Pitt  and  Addington  could  possibly  be  instanced. 

Meanwhile  the  process  of  weeding  out  inefficient 
Volunteer  corps  proceeded  steadily,  with  the  result  that 
some  curious  specimens  were  discovered.  One  of  the 
Inspecting  Field -Officers  held  a  review  of  the  South 
Elmbridge  Company,  which  possessed  arms  for  seventy- 
two  men.  Five  men  only  appeared  on  parade  ;  and  the 
inspector  approached  the  Commanding  Officers  of  the 
Kew  and  Ham  Volunteers  in  order  to  obtain  returns  of 
their  numbers.  One  of  them  returned  no  answer  what- 
ever ;  and  the  other  replied  that  he  had  resigned,  and 
that  his  corps  had  not  attended  the  last  inspection.^  It 
was  for  such  useless  and  absurd  bodies  as  these  that  the 
Office  of  Ordnance  had  been  plagued  to  find  arms. 
Another  rather  pathetic  but  very  ridiculous  case  was 
that  of  the  Somerset  House  Volunteers,  formed  for  the 
defence  of  that  building  only,  and  commanded,  for  its 
sins,  by  Colonel  Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan.  Somehow 
Sheridan  could  never  remember  to  issue  orders  for  his 
corps  to  be  inspected,  with  the  result  that  it  forfeited 
its  exemptions  from  the  Militia  ballot.  The  officers  in 
despair  appealed  to  LordTitchfield,  the  Lord-Lieutenant, 
who,  with  a  dry  humour  that  was  characteristic  of  him, 
reported  as  follows  on  the  loth  of  September.  "  I  have 
written  two  letters  to  Colonel  Sheridan  (in  July),  one  a 
private  letter  to  Carlton  House,  where  I  believe  he 
resides  ;  the  other  a  public  one  directed  to  him  in 
London.  I  cannot  tell  whether  either  has  reached 
him,  for  I  have  received  no  answer.  I  shall  be  much 
surprised  if  I  ever  do  receive  any  answer."  No  such 
surprise  was  in  store  for  Titchfield  ;  but  in  February  1 809 
1  I.D.  vol.  cxlviii.  I.F.O.  Surrey  and  Kent,  to  S.S.  7th  June  1 808. 


IV  FOREIGN  EXPEDITIONS,  1808         219 

Sheridan  wrote  to  him,  pleading  hard  for  indulgence  to       1808. 
the  Somerset  House  Volunteers,  quite  as  if  no  one  but 
himself  had  ever  given  thought  to  the  subject,  and  without 
a  word  in  acknowledgment  of  the  Lieutenant's  Jetters.^ 

Turning  now  to  more  serious  matters,  it  must  be 
noted  that  Castlereagh's  boast  that  he  had  added  40,000 
men  to  the  Army  was  no  idle  one.  Altogether  in  1 807 
and  the  first  three  months  of  1808  there  were  raised 
some  19,000  men  by  ordinary  recruiting,  and  26,000 
from  the  Militia,  making  in  all  45,000  men  against  a 
casualty  list  for  1807  of  14,570  men.  This  meant  a 
solid  gain  of  about  30,000  men  ;  and  though  many  of 
them  had  engaged  themselves  for  seven  years  only,  they 
were  under  no  restraint  as  to  foreign  service.  There 
was  therefore  a  respectable  force  to  hand  for  offensive 
operations  over  sea  ;  and  as  fate  willed  it,  there  was  an 
excellent  opportunity  for  such  a  force  to  act  in  1808. 

The  first  expedition  despatched  by  the  Government 
in  that  year  was  a  body  of  about  10,000  men  under  the 
command  of  Sir  John  Moore,  which  was  sent  to  Sweden 
with  some  vague  idea  of  defending  that  unlucky  king- 
dom. Its  real  mission  seems  to  have  been  to  make  a 
show  of  adherence  to  a  faithful  but  half-witted  ally  ;  for 
it  was  too  weak  to  be  of  any  service,  and,  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  it  had  been  consigned  to  a  lunatic,  was  hampered, 
not  unreasonably,  by  restrictions  which  made  it  utterly 
useless.  Accordingly  it  sailed  to  Sweden  in  May,  and 
sailed  back  in  July  ;  and  meanwhile  new  work  had 
appeared  for  it  in  another  quarter.  Napoleon  in  the 
winter  of  1807-8  had  invaded  Portugal  and  Spain,  and 
in  May  1 808  the  Spanish  nation  had  risen  in  insurrection 
and  sent  emissaries  to  beg  for  help  from  England. 
General  Spencer  was  already  at  or  about  Gibraltar,  afloat 
with  some  4000  troops  ;  and  though  Moore  had  not  yet 
returned  from  Sweden,  there  were  men  enough  to  spare 
for  a  little  campaign  in  Portugal. 

1  I.D.  vol.  cxHi.  Officers  of  Somerset  House  Volunteers  to  S.S. 
13th  July;  L.L.  Middlesex,  to  S.S.  loth  Sept.  1808  ;  vol.  clxix. 
Sheridan  to  L.L.  Middlesex,  12th  Feb.  1809. 


220  STRENGTH  OF  THE  ARMY        chap. 

1808.  The  effective  strength  of  the  Army  on  the  ist  of 

June  was,  exclusive  of  artillery,  as  follows  : — 


In  the  British  and  Channel  Islands 

107,022 

rank 

and  file 

In  Heligoland        .... 
In  Madeira             .... 

302 
1612 

Gibraltar,  Malta,  and  Sicily 

West  Indies            ..... 

24,282 
20,308 

North  America     ..... 

7818 

East  Indies  and  Ceylon 

Goree,  224  ;  New  South  Wales,  536     . 

19,776 
760 

On  passage            ..... 
With  Moore,  10,871  ;  with  Spencer,  3704 

4454 
i4»575 

»» 

Of  the  troops  at  home  the  greater  number  were 
second  battalions,  there  being  in  fact  but  two  first 
battalions  in  England,  four  in  Scotland,  and  nine  in 
Ireland.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  when  in  July 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  was  despatched  to  Portugal  with 
some  9000  troops,  the  whole  of  his  infantry  (nine  and  a 
half  battalions)  was,  with  the  exception  of  half  a  battalion 
of  Rifles,  drawn  from  Ireland.  He  was  reinforced  in 
August  by  seven  more  battalions,  three  of  them  second, 
and  four  of  them  first,  amounting  to  about  4000  men 
in  all,  and  with  these  added  to  Spencer's  force  was  fought 
the  campaign  of  Roli^a  and  Vimeiro. 

The  Convention  of  Cintra  brought  the  operations  to 
an  unfortunate  end  ;  and  the  recall  of  all  the  generals 
who  were  concerned  in  it  threw  the  command  into  the 
hands  of  Sir  John  Moore.  In  the  course  of  the  autumn 
and  winter  Castlereagh  increased  his  force  to  some 
42,000  men,  British  and  German  ;  and  with  33,000 
of  these  Moore  moved  north-eastward  from  Portugal  to 
join  the  Spanish  armies,  but,  finding  that  they  had  been 
hopelessly  beaten,  finally  decided  to  make  the  dash  upon 
Napoleon's  communications  which  has  made  his  name 
famous.  On  the  i6th  of  January  1809  he  fought  the 
action  of  Coruna,  and  on  the  following  day  the  wreck,  of 
his  army  embarked  for  England,  where  it  disembarked 
a  little  over  26,000  strong.^ 

^  I  am  indebted  for  these  figures  concerning  Moore's  army  to 
Oman's  History  of  the  Peninsular  War,  i.  646. 


IV       MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  BILL,  1809     221 


II 

On  the  25  th  of  January  1809  Castlereagh,  after  a      *  °^" 
very  handsome  tribute  to  Moore,  introduced  a  new  Bill 
to  enable  the  Militia  to  enlist  into  the  Army.     He  was 
not  without  good  justification.     The  casualties  for  the 
year    1808  had  been   17,183,  and  against  these  figures 
ordinary  recruiting  had  produced  only  10,477  ^^^  ^^^ 
2486  boys.     On  the  other  hand,  the  Spanish  insurrection 
against  Napoleon,  kindled  by  the  spontaneous  impulse 
of  a  proud  and  gallant  people,  had  roused  the  greatest 
enthusiasm  in  England.     Nine  battalions  of  Militia,  the 
Bucks,  the  Durham,  the  Hants,  the  Hereford,  the  Leicester, 
the  Pembroke,  Flintshire,  Merioneth,  and  Carnarvon, 
had  volunteered  for  active  service  in  Spain  within  a  few 
weeks  after  the  insurrection  became  known  in  England.' 
Moreover,  the  diversion  of  Napoleon's  troops  to  Spain 
had  drawn  great  numbers  of  his  men  from  Germany  ; 
while  the  capture  of  one  of  his  corps  at  Baylen  had 
heartened   all  the  armies  that  he    had  ever   defeated. 
Austria  was  arming   with  feverish  haste   to   take    her 
revenge  ;  and  even  in  Prussia,  crushed  and  humbled  to 
the  dust,  free  corps  were  organising  themselves  to  strike 
at  the  first  favourable  moment.     The  time,  therefore, 
seemed  propitious  for  a  great  effort  to  overthrow  the 
conqueror  who  for  so  long  had  dominated  Europe. 

Castlereagh  said  nothing  of  all  this  in  introducing 
his  Bill,  but  remarked  simply  that  it  was  now  ascertained 
that  the  easiest  and  swiftest  way  of  increasing  the  Army 
was  to  draw  men  from  the  Militia.  The  Act  of  1807 
had  encouraged  the  transfer  of  29,000  men  from  the 
Militia  to  the  Line,  and  in  twelve  months  over  27,000 
had  been  transferred.  He  had  asked  the  country  for 
45,000  to  fill  the  gaps  in  the  Militia,  and  in  six  months 

1  C.C.L.B.  8th  Aug.  1808  ;  I.D.  vol.  cxxxvii.  L.L.  Hants, to  S.S. 
26th  Sept.  ;  L.L.  Hereford,  to  S.S.  14th  Oct.  ;  vol.  cxxxix.  L.L. 
Leicester,  to  S.S.  14th  Aug.  1808  ;  ff^.O.  Mila.  E.B.  21st  July,  ist, 
3rd,  loth  Aug.  1808. 


222  MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  ACT,  1809     chap. 

1809.  41,500  had  joined  their  regiments.  He  proposed,  there- 
fore, once  again  to  encourage  Militiamen  to  enlist  in  the 
Army  to  such  an  extent  as  to  leave,  as  in  1807,  three- 
fifths  of  the  establishment  untouched.  But  whereas  in 
1807  it  was  necessary  not  only  to  complete  the  establish- 
ment but  to  raise  men  in  excess,  in  this  year  it  would  be 
necessary  only  to  cover  deficiencies,  so  that  for  England 
only  24,000  would  be  called  for  instead  of  36,000. 
He  purposed  if  possible  to  dispense  with  the  ballot,  and 
to  throw  the  expense  of  raising  these  men  not  upon  the 
counties  but  upon  the  public.  He  would  therefore  in 
the  first  place  try  to  gather  the  necessary  Militia  recruits 
by  voluntary  enlistment,  offering  a  bounty  often  guineas 
from  the  Imperial  Treasury.  If  a  ballot  were  found 
necessary,  he  would  give  this  sum  to  the  ballotted  man, 
either  as  a  bounty  if  he  served  himself,  or  as  a  subsidy 
towards  the  price  of  a  substitute.  He  hoped  that  the 
county  gentlemen  and  Colonels  of  Militia  would  forward 
the  levy,  since  the  expense  was  to  fall  upon  the  Imperial 
Treasury  and  not  on  the  counties  ;  and  upon  the  whole 
he  was  sanguine  that  the  ballot  would  be  unnecessary 
and  that  general  recruiting  for  the  Army  would  not  be 
injured. 

These  proposals,  of  course,  met  with  some  opposition. 
Tierney  saw  no  occasion  to  increase  the  Army  until  the 
House  knew  on  what  service  it  was  to  be  employed,  and 
Lord  Milton  declared  that  to  make  the  Militia  fill  the 
.  ranks  of  the  Regulars  was  nothing  less  than  conscription 
for  the  Army.^  On  the  other  hand,  Colonel  Wood  of 
the  Middlesex  Militia  declared  that  he  and  his  fellow- 
commanders  had  overcome  their  prejudices  against  the 
system,  inasmuch  as  by  furthering  it  they  could  best 
serve  their  country.  Bounties,  observed  the  Colonel, 
were  not  high  ;  for  he  had  lately  got  thirty  men  for 
eight  guineas  apiece — a  statement  of  delightful  effrontery, 
since  as  a  matter  of  fact  he  was  employing  an  agent  in 
Norwich  to  gather  recruits  from  the  Local  Militiamen, 
to  the  exasperation  of  that  county  and  to  the  infraction 
1  H.D.  25th  Jan.  1809. 


IV  MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  ACT  223 

of  a  whole  volume  of  Militia  Acts.^  Against  this  Mr.  1809. 
Giles  declared  that  the  Militiamen  drafted  into  the  Line 
had  cost  the  country  in  bounties  ^^28  a  head,  or 
;{[726,ooo  in  all,  one-third  from  general  taxation,  one- 
third  from  private  individuals,  and  one-third  from  the 
landed  interest ;  and  that  some  cheaper  way  ought  to 
be  found. ^ 

The  Bills  for  transferring  Militiamen  to  the  Line 
became  law  on  the  1 3th  of  March  (49  Geo.  III.  cap.  4  ; 
Ireland,  cap.  5).  The  men  to  be  enlisted  were  not  to 
exceed  such  number  as  should  leave  three-fifths  of  the 
establishment  intact;  but  when  the  number  of  men  in  any 
regiment  in  excess  of  three-fifths  of  the  present  estab- 
lishment should  be  less  than  two-fifths  of  the  establish- 
ment in  1807,  such  two-fifths  might  enlist  (sees,  i,  2). 
If  five-sixths  of  this  number  were  willing  to  enlist 
at  once,  no  more  were  to  be  engaged  without  the 
Commanding  Officer's  consent  (sec.  3).  If  the  five- 
sixths  did  not  enlist  within  thirty  days,  the  Command- 
ing Officer  was  to  explain  the  terms  of  enrolment  and 
allow  enlistment  for  a  further  seven  days,  after  which 
there  was  to  be  no  more  enlistment,  excepting  with 
his  consent,  for  one  month.  Then  three  more  days 
were  to  be  given  ;  then  after  another  month's 
interval  three  more  days  ;  and  after  that  three  more 
periods  of  three  days  at  intervals  of  three  months  (sees. 
6-9).  The  remainder  of  the  provisions  were  the  same 
as  in  the  Act  of  1807  ;  but  an  amendment  was  added  in 
an  Act  for  Completing  the  Militia  (49  Geo.  III.  cap. 
53,  sec.  32)  empowering  the  King  to  appoint  two 
more  periods  of  three  days  each  at  any  time  after 
the  ist  of  August  for  the  enlistment  of  Militiamen 
into  the  Line  from  any  regiments  that  had  not 
supplied  their  full  numbers.  The  quotas  of  men  thus 
permitted  to  enlist  amounted  to  18,130  for  England, 
3654  for  Scotland,  and  6708  for  Ireland,  or  28,492 
men  in  all. 

1  H.D.  2nd  Feb.  1809  ;  I.D.  vol.  cxliii.  L.L.  Norfolk,  to  S.S. 
24th  Dec.  1808.  '  f^-D.  24th  March  1809. 


224        SUGGESTED  ARMY  REFORMS      chap. 

1809.  Meanwhile,  at  the  Horse  Guards  there  had  been 

thought  out  a  further  plan  for  the  improvement  of  the 
military  force  of  the  country,  to  which  the  enlistment 
of  men  from  the  Militia  was  but  auxiliary. 

The  proposal  was  to  increase  every  regiment  of  the 
Line  to  two  battalions  ;  the  first  battalions  to  be  for 
unlimited  service  as  to  time  and  place,  and  of  the  strength 
of  800,  1000,  or  1200;  the  second  battalions  to  be 
uniformly  1000  strong,  composed  of  men  obtained  by 
ballot,  but  officered  by  officers  of  the  Regular  Army 
only,  who  would  pass  to  the  first  battalion  according 
to  their  rank.  This  would  give  a  "  disposable  "  force 
of  about  100,000  men,  and  a  force  for  home  defence 
of  the  same  strength,  but  having  the  advantage  over  the 
Militia,  that  the  officers  would  be  thoroughly  trained. 

The  rest  of  the  armed  strength  of  the  country  was  to 
be  distributed  into  Local  Militia,  Yeomanry,  and  Volun- 
teers only,  the  Regular  Militia  passing  out  of  existence. 

The  Volunteers  should  be  in  corps  not  less  than 
600  strong,  and  entirely  self-supporting,  so  as  to  be  of 
no  expense  to  the  public  except  for  their  arms  and  for 
their  pay  when  called  out  on  permanent  duty,  at  which 
time  they  ought  to  be  subject  to  martial  law. 

The  Local  Militia  should  be  formed  on  the  same 
principle  as  the  rest  of  the  Army,  the  establishments 
being  equalised  so  far  as  the  populations  of  the  counties 
permitted.  The  arrangements  for  calling  them  out  for 
training  should  be  such  as  to  make  the  service  as  little 
burdensome  as  possible,  so  that  the  country  gentlemen 
might  be  encouraged  to  hold  commissions.  The  Local 
Militia  should  in  every  case  assume  the  uniform,  colours 
and  equipment  of  the  regiment  of  the  Line  belonging 
to  its  county,  and  in  fact  become  a  part  of  it.  The 
men  of  the  second  battalions  should  be  encouraged  by 
bounties  to  extend  their  services  to  their  first  battalions, 
and  those  of  the  Local  Militia  in  like  manner  to  the 
second  battalions.  Probably  enough  men  would  come 
forward  voluntarily  to  fill  the  gaps  in  the  second  bat- 
talions, but  if  not  the  ballot  must  be  resorted  to  ;  for 


IV  CALVERT'S  MEMORANDUM  225 

the  essence  of  the  plan  was  that  the  second  battalions  1809, 
should  be  kept  complete.  Thus  a  real  and  useful 
connection  would  be  established  between  the  different 
branches  of  the  milit^r^  force  ;  the  regiments  of  the 
Line  would  be  closely  connected  with  the  counties  whose 
names  they  bore  ;  and  the  Militia  would  become  what 
it  ought  to  be  constitutionally — the  basis  of  the  national 
force.  Only  thus  could  the  recruiting  for  the  Army 
be  placed  on  an  assured  and  permanent  footing.  The 
amount  of  the  force  thus  produced  would  be — 

Infantry  of  the  Line  for  general  service,  exclusive  of 

Guards,  Veteran  battalions,  and  Sixtieth     .         .  100,000 
Second   battalions,  limited  to  service  in  the  British 

Isles        .......          .  100,000 

Local  Militia,  at  least     ......  200,000 

Yeomanry      ........  32,000 

Volunteers     ........  100,000 

Total  (all  foreign  corps  excluded)         .         .        532,000^ 

This  memorandum,  which  bears  the  signature  of  Sir 
Henry  Calvert,  the  Adjutant-General,  expanded  the 
scheme  proposed  by  the  Commander-in-Chief  in  1 807. 
It  anticipated,  as  will  be  at  once  remarked,  the  terri- 
torial system  which  at  present  obtains  in  the  Army  ;  and 
there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its  soundness  in  many  respects. 
It  was  an  absurdity  to  have  two  descriptions  of  Militia, 
one  of  which  in  practice  only  duplicated  the 
second  battalions  of  the  Line,  and  competed  with  them 
for  recruits  ;  and  the  division  of  the  forces  into  the 
Regular  and  Movable  Army  recruited  by  voluntary 
enlistment,  and  the  Sedentary  Army  recruited  by  ballot 
without  power  of  substitution,  would  have  been  more 
intelligible,  more  business-like,  and  more  efficient. 
Castlereagh,  however,  seems  to  have  shrunk  from  the 
change,  and  though,  as  shall  in  due  time  be  seen,  the 
Local  Militia  practically  displaced  the  Volunteers,  yet 
no  steps  were  taken  wholly  to  abolish  the  Regular 
Militia. 

1  Castlereagh's  Desp.  viii.  194- 1 97. 


226         MILITIA  COMPLETION  ACT         chap. 

1809.  The  levy  of  Militiamen  for  the  Line  opened  well, 

though,  as  in  1808,  some  few  counties  hung  back, 
Inverness  in  particular  declining  at  first  to  produce  a 
man,  while  others  came  forward  readily  with  their 
quota.  By  the  ist  of  June  16,429  of  the  28,492  had 
enlisted;  namely,  13,002  from  England,  1050  from 
Scotland,  and  2377  from  Ireland,  England  contributing 
a  far  larger  proportion  of  her  quota  than  the  sister 
Kingdoms.  On  the  25th  of  May  1809  the  effective 
strength  of  the  Regular  Army  was  returned  as  219,874 
rank  and  file,  including  31,077  foreign  troops,  of  which 
107,857  were  at  home,  and  112,017  abroad;  the 
largest  detachment  abroad  being  a  force  of  22,000  men 
in  Portugal,  of  which  more  shall  presently  be  said. 
Besides  these  there  were  in  the  three  Kingdoms  65,524 
Militia,  making  a  total  force  of  285,398  rank  and 
file,  or,  including  sergeants,  trumpeters,  and  drummers, 
but  not  including  officers,  301,598  non-commissioned 
officers  and  men. 

It  remained,  therefore,  to  fill  up  the  gaps  in  the 
Militia,  for  which  purpose  were  passed  two  Acts  (49 
Geo.  III.  cap.  ^2  for  England  ;  cap.  56  for  Ireland). 
The  former  provided  for  raising  Militiamen  equal  to 
one-half  of  the  quota  of  1802  (25,245  men)  before  the 
I  st  of  October  1 8 1  o  (sec.  i ).  Until  the  i  st  of  June  1 8 1  o 
voluntary  recruits  might  be  enlisted  for  the  Militia  by 
beat  of  drum  for  a  bounty  not  exceeding  twelve 
guineas,  such  recruits  to  have  not  more  than  one  child 
born  in  wedlock,  and  to  be  placed  in  respect  of  the 
support  of  their  families  on  the  same  footing  as  substi- 
tutes (sees.  2,  3,  5).  After  the  ist  of  June  all  defi- 
ciencies were  to  be  filled  by  ballot  ;  and  preparations 
for  this  ballot  were  to  be  made  if  any  deficiencies  existed 
on  the  ist  of  April  18 10  (sees.  7,  8).  The  fine  for 
exemption  was  fixed  at  ^^20.  The  bounty  to  ballotted 
persons  or  to  substitutes  from  the  ist  of  June  to  the  ist  of 
September  1 8 10  was  to  be  ten  guineas,  but  parish  officers 
were  empowered  to  raise  volunteers  for  the  same  bounty 
until  the  ist  of  September  1810  (sees.  14,  15).    Counties 


IV  MILITIA  RECRUITING  227 

not  providing  their  quota  by  the  i  st  of  October  1 8 1  o  were  1 809. 
to  be  fined  ^^40  for  each  man  deficient  (sec.  24),  which 
fines,  together  with  the  £10  exemption-fines,  were  to  be 
paid  over  to  the  Imperial  Exchequer  (sec.  34).  Power 
was  reserved  to  the  King  to  order  a  ballot  at  any 
time  before  the  ist  of  June  and  after  the  ist  of  October 
1 8 10  to  complete  the  Militia  (sec.  36)  ;  but,  after  the 
men  had  been  raised,  the  ballot  was  to  be  suspended 
until  the  ist  of  January  18 12  (sec.  29). 

The  process  of  raising  Militiamen  by  beat  of  drum 
seems  to  have  gone  on  fairly  quietly,  though  occasion- 
ally there  was  trouble.  London,  as  usual,  was  forward 
in  attempting  to  steal  men  from  other  counties.  Thus 
the  Tower  Hamlets  Militia  sent  a  recruiting  party, 
without  any  beating  order,  to  Stroud  in  Gloucestershire, 
where  they  offered  a  reward  of  a  guinea  to  any  man  who 
would  bring  them  recruits  for  their  regiment.  Recruits 
having  been  brought  in,  received  five  guineas  on  the 
spot,  were  sent  up  to  the  regiment,  and  from  thence 
were  at  once  sent  back  on  furlough  to  their  homes,  with 
the  intimation  that  they  too  would  receive  a  guinea 
for  every  recruit  that  they  in  their  turn  should  produce. 
By  this  ingenious  method  the  Tower  Hamlets  enlisted 
numbers  of  men  at  a  cheap  rate,  leaving  the  people 
of  Gloucestershire  enraged  but  impotent.^  Another 
difficulty  was  that  under  voluntary  enlistment  a  parish 
often  provided  more  than  its  quota,  and  thus  as  a 
reward  for  its  patriotism  incurred  an  undue  burden  for 
the  support  of  the  Militiamen's  families.^  But  on  the 
whole  the  complaints  were  few,  and  matters  seem  to 
have  proceeded  with  great  smoothness. 

In  Ireland  (49  Geo.  III.  cap.  ^6,  3rd  June  1809)  the 
men  for  completion  of  the  Militia  were  to  be  voluntarily 
enlisted,  at  a  bounty  not  exceeding  eight  guineas  (sec. 
i).  Counties  not  producing  their  quota  within  twelve 
months  were  to  be  fined  ^30  for  every  man  deficient. 
But  over  and  above  this  an  Irish  Militia  Consolidation 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxiv.  L.L.  Glos.  to  S.S.  4th  Aug.  1809. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  clxiv.  L.L.  Glos.  to  S.S.  8th  Dec.  1809. 


228  IRISH  MILITIA  ACTS  chap. 

1809.  Act  was  introduced  on  the  6th  of  February  by  the  Chief 
Secretary,  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  though  in  great  measure 
prepared  by  Castlereagh  in  1805.^  Hereby  the  Irish 
Militia  was  appointed  to  consist  of  thirteen  battalions  of 
six  companies  each,  two  of  seven  companies,  ten  bat- 
talions of  eight  companies,  one  of  nine  companies,  and 
six  often  companies,  or  24,100  men.  No  regiment  was 
to  have  more  than  100  rank  and  file  in  a  company 
(sees.  2,  9).  Militiamen  enlisting  into  the  Regulars, 
except  under  a  special  Act,  were  liable  to  six  months'  im- 
prisonment (sec.  63).  Full  machinery  for  the  ballot 
was  authorised,  but  the  Lord-Lieutenant  was  empowered 
to  allow  the  Militia,  or  any  vacancies  therein,  to  be 
supplied  by  voluntary  enlistment  (sec.  130)  ;  or  to 
authorise  parochial  assessments  for  money  to  raise  men 
in  lieu  of  the  ballot  (sec.  124).  This  last  was  the  most 
important  provision  in  the  Bill  for  Ireland,  for,  whereas 
it  had  been  a  temporary  expedient  before,  it  was  now 
made  a  perpetual  possible  substitute  for  the  ballot,  which 
had  always  been  a  source  of  trouble  in  that  country. 

Next,  some  amendment  was  needed  for  the  Local 
Militia  Act,  for  which  purpose  Castlereagh  introduced 
a  Local  Militia  Act  Amendment  Bill  on  the  27th  of 
March.  His  speech  showed  how  rapidly  this  new  force 
had  been  developed.  In  all  there  were  now  250  regi- 
ments of  Local  Militia  in  Great  Britain  ;  1 84  with 
149,440  men  in  England,  66  with  45,721  men  in  Scot- 
land, making  together  195,161  men,  or  an  average  of 
nearly  800  men  to  each  battalion.  Of  these  125,000 
had  passed  into  the  Local  Militia  from  the  Volunteers, 
and  50,000  or  60,000  had  been  voluntarily  enlisted. 
But  the  bounty  of  two  guineas  to  every  such  voluntary 
recruit  had  been  found  too  heavy  ;  and  Castlereagh 
proposed  to  leave  it  to  the  parishes  to  assess  themselves 
spontaneously  and  give  what  bounty  they  might  choose, 
not  exceeding  one  guinea  a  man,  which  sum  was 
ultimately  increased  in  the  Act  to  two  guineas.  There  was 
another  trouble,  though  it  is  not  mentioned  in  the  report 

^  Castlereagh's  Desp.  viii.  40-43. 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  AMENDMENT       229 

of  Castlereagh's  speech,  namely,  that  the  recruiting  1809. 
sergeants  of  the  Army  had  been  unable  to  resist  the 
temptation  to  enlist  Local  Militiamen  during  the  period 
of  training  ;  ^  an  evil  which  also  required  to  be  checked. 
Accordingly  the  Act,  when  passed  on  the  12th  of  May, 
contained  the  following  provisions  (49  Geo.  III.  cap. 
40).  Voluntary  enlistment  for  supplying  deficiencies 
was  permitted  at  any  time  (sec.  2),  and  vacancies  in  the 
Local  Militia  were  to  be  filled  at  once  without  orders 
from  headquarters,  irrespective  of  the  suspension  of  the 
ballot  for  the  Regular  Militia,  or  of  the  fact  that  the 
Local  Militia  and  Volunteers  in  any  county  might,  taken 
together,  exceed  six  times  the  quota  of  the  Regular 
Militia  (sec.  3).  Local  Militiamen  were  allowed  to 
enlist  in  the  Regular  Militia  (but  of  their  own  counties 
only,  49  Geo.  III.  cap.  129,  21st  June  1808).  The 
enlistment  of  Local  Militiamen,  during  the  period  of 
training,  into  the  Army  or  Regular  Militia  was  for- 
bidden under  penalty  of  a  fine  of  £20  (sec.  6).  Powers 
were  given  to  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  to  make  new 
apportionments  of  quotas  among  parishes  and  districts, 
and  to  regulate  the  inequalities  of  numbers  in  the 
divisions  of  the  counties  (sees.  8-10).  The  section  (26) 
of  the  original  Act  as  to  the  bounty  of  two  guineas  to 
voluntary  recruits  was  repealed  ;  and  powers  were  given 
to  the  parochial  authorities  to  offer  any  bounty  up  to  that 
sum  ;  but  the  bounty  to  Volunteers  transferring  them- 
selves to  the  Local  Militia  was  done  away,  unless  such 
Volunteers  were  actually  serving  before  the  present  Act 
was  passed  (sees.  11-14).  Volunteers  transferred  to 
the  Local  Militia  were  exempted  from  service  in  the 
Regular  Militia  (sec.  15).  Non-commissioned  officers, 
drummers,  and  bandsmen  of  the  Local  Militia  were 
forbidden  to  enlist  in  the  Regulars  without  consent  of 
their  Commanding  Officer  (sec.  28).^ 

1  I.D.  vol.    cliii.  Col.  Whitbread  (Beds.)    to  S.S.    26th  April 
1809. 

2  A  second  amending  Act  (49  Geo.  III.  c.  82)  was  also  passed 
later  in  the  session,  but  contains  nothing  essential  to  our  purpose. 


230  DECAY  OF  VOLUNTEERS  chap. 

1809.  It  will  have  been  gathered  from  Castlereagh's  speech 

quoted  above  that  the  Volunteers  had  declined  as  the 
Local  Militia  increased  ;  and  in  June  those  that  were  not 
genuinely  self-supporting  received  their  death-blow  in 
an  intimation  that  no  further  allowance  for  clothing 
would  be  granted  to  Volunteer  Infantry.^  Little  more 
therefore  will  remain  to  be  said  of  this  force,  though, 
curiously  enough,  the  services  of  the  Volunteers  were 
really  needed  in  Cornwall  in  February  1809.  A  trans- 
port containing  240  soldiers  of  Junot's  army,  which 
was  bound  to  France  in  pursuance  of  the  Convention  of 
Cintra,  came  into  Penzance  in  a  sinking  state.  The 
men  on  board  her  were  out  of  all  discipline  and 
control,  and  threatened  to  break  out  of  the  ship  and  land. 
The  Volunteers  in  the  district  were  therefore  hastily 
called  out  to  overawe  the  Frenchmen  and  to  patrol  the 
countryside ;  so  that  on  this  occasion  it  may  be  said  that 
they  were  of  real  value.^  But  from  this  time  forward 
they  were  wholly  eclipsed  by  the  Local  Militia,  which 
now  demands  a  slight  review. 

Windham's  criticism  of  the  new  force  was  that  it 
contained,  no  doubt,  a  fine  body  of  men  ;  but  were  they 
soldiers  ?  To  this  it  can  only  be  answered  that,  if  they 
were  not  in  some  measure  soldiers,  the  Volunteers,  from 
which  two-thirds  of  them  were  sprung,  must  have  been 
incurably  inefficient.  Out  of  the  195  battalions,  116 
came  out  for  a  month's  or  a  fortnight's  training  during 
1809,  which  was  a  creditable  number  considering  that 
the  Local  Militia  was  only  called  into  being  on  the  30th 
of  June  1808.  In  any  case  they  furnished  a  useful 
number  of  recruits  to  the  Army  and  Regular  Militia. 
In  June  1 809  a  circular  was  issued  empowering  Lords- 
Lieutenant  to  offer  a  bounty  of  eight  guineas  to  all  men 
who  would  join  the  Regular  Militia  ;  and  from  the 
Bucks  regiments  alone  nineteen  men  were  collected  in 
a  few  days.  The  Lord-Lieutenant  of  that  county  also 
suggested    and    obtained    approval    of   a    useful    and 

^  Circular  to  the  L.Ls.  30th  June  1809. 
2  J  D    vol.  clviii.  L.L.  Cornwall,  to  S.S.  23rd  Feb.  1809. 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  RIOTS  231 

economical  reform,  namely,  that  the  recruits  should  be  1 809. 
called  out  for  a  period  of  training  half  as  long  again  as 
that  of  the  rest  of  the  battalion.^  But  indeed  it  may 
be  said  that  Buckinghamshire,  under  the  guidance  of  the 
Grenvilles,  was  always  one  of  the  foremost  counties  for 
any  patriotic  work.  From  Denbigh  the  Lieutenant 
reported  that  his  Local  Militiamen  were  ready  to  enter 
the  Army  without  any  bounty  or  solicitation.^  In  fact, 
though  no  sufficient  evidence  exists  absolutely  to  prove 
the  fact,  it  should  seem  that  a  number  of  young 
fellows  no  sooner  found  themselves  obliged  to  serve, 
without  option  of  finding  a  substitute,  than  they  became 
ready  to  make  the  Army  their  profession  in  earnest. 

Nevertheless  there  was,  as  it  happened,  a  great  deal  of 
trouble  with  the  Local  Militia  during  1 809.  In  Aberdeen 
the  people  of  Garioch  rose  tumultuously  to  prevent  the 
enrolment  of  their  quota ;  and  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
only  accomplished  their  duty  at  great  personal  risk  and 
under  the  protection  of  a  military  force.'  But  this 
isolated  outbreak  was  of  small  importance  compared 
with  a  turbulent  spirit  which  appeared  in  all  parts  of  the 
Kingdom.  It  seems  that  certain  women,  by  whom 
inspired  it  is  impossible  to  say,  made  it  their  business  to 
tramp  from  regiment  to  regiment  of  the  Local  Militia, 
trying  to  excite  riots.  The  pretext  for  disturbance  was 
a  pretended  right  of  the  men  to  the  guinea  allowed 
under  sec.  31  of  the  Act  to  provide  them  with 
necessaries — "  that  fatal  clause,"  as  the  Lord-Lieutenant 
of  Carnarvon  termed  it — and  certainly  as  a  pretext  it 
proved  very  successful.  There  were  petty  mutinies  in 
various  quarters,  of  which  many  were  hushed  up ;  though 
some  record  of  the  more  serious  remains.  At  Ely  a  Cam- 
bridgeshire regiment,  after  perfectly  orderly  behaviour 
for  twenty-seven  days,  turned  against  their  Commanding 

1  I.D.  vol.  civ.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  27th  June  ;  21st  Dec. 
1809.  I  have  been  unable  to  discover  the  circular  alluded  to,  but 
its  existence  and  purport  are  proved  by  the  former  of  these  letters. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  clix.  L.L.  Merioneth,  to  S.S.  loth  June  1809. 

'  Ibid.  vol.  ccxxxvi.  L.L.  Aberdeen,  to  S.S.  2nd  Jan.  1813. 


232  LOCAL  MILITIA  RIOTS  chap. 

1809.  Officer  upon  the  twenty-eighth,  threatening  him  with 
their  bayonets  and  with  cries  of  "  no  knapsacks  "  ;  the 
grievance  being  that  some  of  the  captains,  following  the 
custom  of  the  Volunteers,  had  given  the  men  their 
guinea,  while  others  had  spent  it  upon  knapsacks  and  so 
forth.  It  was  necessary  for  the  Lord-Lieutenant  to  go 
down  in  person  to  explain  matters  to  the  men,  after 
which  five  ringleaders  were  tried  by  regimental  court- 
martial  and  flogged.  In  Merioneth  again  the  men  were 
discontented  because  the  money  was  spent  on  knapsacks 
instead  of  being  placed  in  their  hands.  In  Hertford- 
shire the  Archenfield  Local  Militia,  at  the  instance  of 
a  sergeant,  rose  against  their  officers  for  no  apparent 
reason,  but  doubtless  owing  to  trouble  over  the  wretched 
guinea  ;  and  all  the  townspeople  joined  the  mutineers 
in  a  disorderly  riot.  Once  again  it  was  imperative  to 
flog  four  men,  though  the  Commander-in-Chief  left  it 
to  the  Colonel  to  remit  any  excess  over  one  hundred 
lashes.  In  Taunton  a  far  more  serious  affray  arose  from 
the  attempt  of  a  corporal  and  several  men  to  rescue  a 
prisoner  from  the  guard-room.  The  townspeople 
joined  in  the  riot ;  one  of  the  officers  was  wounded  by 
the  bayonet  of  one  of  the  ringleaders,  and  order  was  not 
restored  until  the  Thirteenth  Light  Dragoons,  the 
Taunton  Rifle  Corps,  and  the  recruiting  parties  in  the 
town  had  turned  out  in  arms.  The  cause  of  the  trouble 
could  not  be  traced.  There  was  no  complaint  about 
the  marching-guinea  ;  and  on  the  morning  of  the  day 
the  battalion  had  done  no  more  work  than  a  march  of 
five  miles  to  the  Commandant's  country  house,  where 
he  treated  them  to  bread  and  cheese  and  beer.  In  fact 
the  riot  seems  to  have  been  due  to  a  kind  of  infection 
of  disorder  which  ran  all  through  the  Local  Militia — 
most  of  them,  it  must  be  remembered,  converted 
Volunteers — during  the  lastfortnight  of  June.  However, 
the  Commandant  at  Taunton  was  equal  to  the  occasion. 
He  assembled  the  regiment,  disarmed  it,  summoned  a 
drum-head  court-martial  which  sentenced  the  leader  to 
500  lashes  and  four  more  men  to  100  apiece  ;  tied  up  the 


IV  FOREIGN  AFFAIRS 


233 


leader  on  the  spot  to  receive  175  lashes,  remitted  ail  the       1809. 
remainder  of  the  punishments,  and  within  twelve  hours 
was  able  to  report  that  discipline  had  been  restored.^ 

So  much  for  the  strength  of  the  forces  in  1809  ;  it 
is  now  time  to  look  to  the  employment  of  them  abroad. 
First,  it  must  be  noted  that  in  the  spring  of  1809 
Austria  declared  war  upon  France,  and  the  Archduke 
Charles  advanced  against  the  French  Army  while  it 
was  not  yet  concentrated.  This  diversion  compelled 
Napoleon  to  recall  troops  from  Spain  ;  and  Sir  Arthur 
Wellesley,  who  had  been  sent  back  to  Portugal  in 
command  of  a  force  of  some  2 1 ,000  rank  and  file,  which 
was  presently  raised  to  some  33,000,  was  able  for  a  time  to 
take  the  offensive  and  fight  the  compaigns  of  the  Douro 
and  Talavera.  The  latter  of  these,  chiefly  owing  to  the 
sickly  state  of  his  army  in  the  valley  of  the  Guadiana, 
was  somewhat  costly  in  the  matter  of  casualties.'^ 
Moreover,  Minsters,  unable  from  dearth  of  specie  to  send 
more  troops  to  the  Peninsula,  despatched  in  July  an 
expedition  of  40,000  men  to  the  Scheldt,  where  the 
incompetence  of  the  Commander  assured  failure  to  an 
enterprise  whose  success  was,  at  best,  extremely  doubtful. 
The  climate  played  havoc  among  the  rank  and  file  and 
made  the  campaign  extremely  costly.  Add  to  this  the 
facts  that  General  Beckwith,  having  been  reinforced  by 
four  battalions  in  November  1 808,  attacked  and  captured 
Martinique  with  10,000  men  in  February  1809  ;  and 
that  General  Stuart  was  able  to  embark  1 1 ,000  men  for 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxiii.  O.C.  East  Staffs,  L.M.  to  L.L.  30th  June 
1809  ;  vol.  clvi.  L.L.  Cambs,  to  S.S.  25th  June  1809  ;  vol.  clix.  L.L. 
Merioneth,  to  S.S.  1st  July  1809  ;  vol.  clxv.  Sir  H.  Hoskyns  to  L.L. 
Hertford,  20th  June  1809  ;  vol.  clxxiii.  O.C.  West  Somerset  L.M. 
to  S.S.  27th  June  1809. 

3  The  return  of  casualties  in  the  Peninsula,  31st  March  to  25th 
December  1809,  was  : — 

Dead 493' 

Deserted         ....       349 

Discharged     .  .  .  •  4' 

Total 5321 

C.J.  vol.  Ixv. 


234       CASTLEREAGH'S  RESIGNATION   chap. 

1 809.  raids  upon  the  French  in  Naples  and  Calabria ;  and  it  will 
be  seen  that  in  all  some  84,000  rank  and  file,  or  say 
95,000  of  all  ranks,  were  employed  in  offensive  operations 
during  this  year,  though  with  lamentably  small  results. 

Meanwhile,  apart  from  Walcheren,  the  country  had 
encountered  a  series  of  misfortunes.  First,  the  Duke 
of  York  had  been  forced  by  the  scandals  concerning 
Mrs.  Clarke  to  resign  the  post  of  Commander-in-Chief ; 
and  the  weight  of  this  blow  to  the  military  administration 
can  only  be  appreciated  by  students  who  know  what 
the  Army  was  before  the  Duke  took  it  in  hand.  Again, 
the  Ministry  had  been  broken  up,  and  Castlereagh,  the 
ablest  man  that  ever  controlled  the  War  Office,  had 
been  driven  from  it.  Spencer  Perceval  had  become 
Prime  Minister  ;  Castlereagh's  place  had  been  taken  by 
Lord  Liverpool,  a  sound,  sensible  man,  whose  reputation 
is  far  below  his  desert ;  and  Palmerston  had  been 
appointed  Secretary  at  War.  Moreover,  the  Austrian 
attempt  to  break  down  the  power  of  Napoleon  had 
proved  a  failure.  Wagram  had  forced  her  to  a 
humiliating  peace  ;  and  the  Emperor  of  the  French 
was  free  once  more  to  turn  all  his  force  against  Spain. 
The  only  comforting  feature  in  the  situation,  known 
only  to  a  few  in  England,  and  hardly  apprehended  by 
them,  was  that  Russia  had  not  thrown  in  her  lot 
against  Austria  with  a  whole  heart,  as  her  alliance  with 
France  required  of  her.  In  England,  therefore,  all  was 
grumbling  and  discontent ;  and  the  denunciations  in 
Parliament  of  the  fiasco  of  Walcheren  were  hardly  more 
bitter  than  the  criticisms  concerning  Wellington  and  his 
campaign  of  Talavera. 

Ill 

In  such  a  temper  of  the  nation  the  tone  of  all 
opponents  whether  to  the  new  or  to  the  old  Govern- 
ment in  Parliament  was,  not  wholly  without  excuse,  to 
the  last  degree  captious.  When,  therefore,  the  Army 
Estimates  were  brought  forward  there  were  loud  cries 


IV  STRENGTH  OF  FORCES,  1810         235 

for  petty  economies.     However,  Palmerston  carried  his       18 10. 
estimates,    and,    since    the    Government   was    bent  on 
prosecuting  the  war  in  the  Peninsula  and  had  taken 
30,000  of  the  Portuguese  Army  into  pay,  it  remained  to 
be  seen  how  the  ranks  of  the  forces  were  to  be  filled. 

The  casualties  in  the  Regular  Army  for  1809 
numbered  21,630,  one  of  the  highest  figures  attained  in 
the  course  of  the  war.  The  chief  source  of  recruits  lay 
in  the  Militiamen  who  had  been  called  upon  to  enlist  in 
the  Line  by  the  Act  of  13th  March  1809.  The  number 
allowed  to  enlist  from  the  Militia  of  Great  Britain 
had  been  21,784;  and  of  these  by  the  same  day  of 
1 8 10  there  had  been  raised  15,331,  leaving  a  deficiency 
of  over  6000.  There  was,  however,  still  the  quota  of 
the  Irish  Militia  to  be  added,  over  and  above  Ireland's 
usual  contribution  of  3000  to  4000  men  annually  ; 
besides  which  there  had  been  raised  by  ordinary  recruit- 
ing 9675  men  and  2045  boys.  Thus  there  were  men 
enough  to  carry  the  Army  through  another  year  of  war. 

With  the  Militia  matters  were  not  quite  so 
prosperous.  The  number  required  to  fill  the  vacancies 
caused  by  enlistments  into  the  Regular  Army  was,  it 
will  be  remembered,  25,245  men  in  Great  Britain  ;  and 
these  according  to  the  Act  were  to  be  raised  by 
voluntary  recruiting  until  the  ist  of  June  18 10,  and 
after  that  date  by  the  ballot.  This  lenient,  though 
perhaps  politic,  method  of  dealing  with  the  Militia  was 
not  wholly  successful,  for  on  the  24th  of  January  18 10 
the  deficiency  was  still  18,512,  showing  that  only  6733 
men  had  been  obtained  in  eight  months.  This,  of 
course,  could  be  made  good  by  the  ballot ;  but  one 
troublesome  drawback  to  the  system  was  that  patriotic 
parishes  which  showed  zeal  in  providing  recruits  gained 
thereby  no  advantage  against  the  time  when  the  ballot 
should  come.  An  Act  was  therefore  passed  (50  Geo. 
iii.  c.  24)  to  enable  the  Justices  and  Deputy-Lieutenants 
to  make  a  just  apportionment  of  the  recruits  among  the 
parishes,  so  that  no  hardship  should  ensue  either  from 
this  cause,  or  in  respect  of  the  support  of  the  enlisted 


236  TROUBLES  WITH  BALLOT  chap. 

1810.  men's  families.  It  was  further  enacted,  for  the  pre- 
vention of  abuses,  that  the  provisions  of  the  Mutiny 
Act  as  regards  the  enlistment  of  apprentices  should 
apply  to  the  Militia. 

The  Government,  from  leniency  towards  the  counties 
and  to  give  them  time  to  prepare  their  lists,  prolonged 
the  time  for  voluntary  enlistment  to  the  30th  of  June  ; 
but  the  ballot  was  duly  applied  to  complete  the  Militia 
after  the  ist  of  July  ;  and  the  usual  crop  of  troubles  at 
once  sprang  up.  In  many  counties  it  seems  that  there 
was  something  like  a  revolt  of  the  Deputy-Lieutenants 
and  Justices,  "  whose  conduct  and  language  checked  the 
operation  of  the  law."  From  others  there  were  pathetic 
appeals  that  the  bounty  of  £10  to  parochial  substitutes, 
which  was  ordered  to  cease  on  the  ist  of  September, 
might  be  prolonged  to  the  ist  of  October,  owing  to  the 
time  consumed  in  making  out  new  ballot -lists.^  But 
the  Act  reserved  no  power  to  the  Crown  to  do  this  ; 
and  the  aggrieved  counties  were  fain  to  submit  to  the 
inevitable.  Where  new  ballot-lists  had  not  been  made 
out,  there  were  still  more  formidable  obstacles.  In 
Inverness  twenty-eight  indignant  tradesmen  complained 
that  they  had  all  of  them  been  drawn  for  the  Militia,  to 
the  omission  of  many  others  who  had  not  been  included  in 
the  ballot  because  the  lists  were  two  years  old.  They 
alleged  further  that  the  number  of  constables  had  been 
doubled  from  forty  to  eighty  within  the  past  eighteen 
months  to  secure  exemption  for  a  certain  number  of 
young  men ;  and  they  appealed  frantically  for  new  lists, 
because  trade,  since  they  had  been  ballotted,  was  at  a 
standstill.'^  In  another  subdivision  of  the  same  county 
the  ballot  failed  completely.  Several  of  the  lotmen 
disappeared  or  deserted  ;  others  raised  legal  objections 
which  procured  them  bill  after  bill  of  suspension  from 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxx.  L.L.  Linlithgow,  to  S.S.  2nd  August  1810. 
Eight  more  counties  made  the  same  request. 

*  liU.  vol.  clxxix.  Enclosure  in  David  Macpherson  to  S.S.  24th 
Aug.  1 8 10.  Memorial  of  a  subdivision  of  Inverness  to  S.S.  Dec. 
1810. 


IV  TROUBLES  WITH  BALLOT  237 

the  Supreme  Court  until  the  last  day  of  the  ballot  had       1810^ 
expired.     Their  suits  were  all  of  them  dismissed  with 
costs  ;  but  meanwhile  they  had  gained  their  point  and 
were  safe  until  the  next  ballot. 

This,  however,  was  but  one  manifestation  of  the 
general  hatred  of  the  Militia  in  Scotland.  The  Vice- 
Lieutenant  of  Bute  reported  at  the  end  of  October  that 
the  Arran  division  could  not  possibly  produce  its  quota 
owing  to  the  invincible  aversion  of  the  people  from 
personal  service  ;  and  he  requested  that  the  Militia 
might  be  completed  by  ballot  and  that  the  exemption- 
fines  might  be  applied,  as  in  former  cases,  to  the  pur- 
chase of  substitutes.  He  added  that  the  people  had 
begun  to  claim  exemption  as  seafaring  men,  and  that 
if  this  claim  were  allowed  it  would  be  preferred  by  the 
entire  population,  whereas,  if  his  recommendation  were 
accepted,  the  fines  would  certainly  be  forthcoming,  for 
there  was  an  insurance  company  ready  to  oblige  its 
clients  with  the  money  for  a  premium  of  four  guineas  a 
year.*  Nairn,  again,  one  of  the  counties  that  had 
pleaded  for  extension  of  the  time  wherein  the  ten-guinea 
bounty  might  be  granted,  declared  that  without  this 
privilege  she  could  not  raise  her  quota  of  men.  "  The 
business,"  added  the  unfortunate  Lieutenant,  "  is  so 
intricate,  owing  to  the  number  of  Acts  of  Parliament,  that 
scarcely  two  counties  have  acted  upon  them  under  the 
same  construction."  Perth  begged  likewise  for  postpone- 
ment of  the  ballot.^  In  Lanark  matters  were  so  far 
behind-hand  that  even  a  fortnight  after  the  time  for  the 
ballot  had  expired,  the  new  lists  had  not  been  distributed 
to  the  Deputy-Lieutenants.  This  was  due  in  part  ta 
certain  legislation  of  1804  which  deprived  the  Lieu- 
tenancies of  Scotland  of  the  power  to  remunerate  their 
own  servants,  and  made  it  in  consequence  exceedingly 
difficult  to  get  the  work  done.  But,  unlike  the  other 
counties,   Lanark  lamented   the   prolongation   of    the 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxix.  V.L.  Bute,  to  S.S.  30th  Oct.,  27th  Nov.  18 10. 

2  Ibid.vol.  clxxix.  L.L.  Nairn,  to  S.S.  2nd  Sept.   1810;  vol. 
cxcii.  L.L.  Perth,  to  S.S.  20th  June  18 10. 


238  TROUBLES  WITH  BALLOT         chap. 

iSio.  enlistment  by  beat  of  drum  for  one  month,  and  the 
consequent  loss  of  power  during  that  month  to  raise 
parochial  substitutes  for  ten  guineas.^  Edinburgh  made 
a  like  complaint  of  the  suspension  of  the  ballot  during 
June.  In  Midlothian  only  seven  men  had  been  raised 
by  beat  of  drum,  and  most  of  the  ballotted  men  had 
paid  fines  instead  of  finding  substitutes,  which  did 
not  deliver  the  parishes  from  the  fine  of  ^^40  for  every 
man  deficient.  Private  bounties  for  substitutes,  added 
the  Vice-Lieutenant,  had  in  some  counties  reached  the 
height  of£^o  ;  and  this  was  confirmed  by  the  Lieutenant 
of  Fife,  who  reported  that  he  had  raised  the  quota  for 
his  county,  but  that  bounties  had  indeed  exceeded  the 
above  figure,  the  £^0  paid  being  in  addition  to  the 
ten  guineas  allowed  by  the  Act,  so  that  the  total 
amounted  to  ;^6o :  los.  In  consideration  of  the 
circumstances  the  Vice-Lieutenant  of  Edinburgh  begged 
that  the  fines  of  ^20  paid  for  exemption  might  be 
accepted  as  part  of  the  penalty  of  £^0  levied  on  the 
county  for  every  man  deficient.  He  pleaded  in  vain. 
To  one  and  all  of  these  requests  that  the  law  might  be 
wrested  to  one  side  or  another  in  their  favour,  there 
could  be  but  one  reply — that  the  Secretary  of  State 
could  grant  no  dispensations  from  Act  of  Parliament.^ 

In  England  there  were  difficulties  of  much  the  same 
kind  as  in  Scotland.  In  Buckinghamshire  the  Lieutenant 
urged  that  a  short  Bill  should  be  passed  to  extend  the 
time  for  the  ballot  until  March  1 8 1 1 ,  so  that  recalci- 
trant counties  might  be  brought  to  their  senses  by 
heavy  fines.  His  own  quota  was  nearly  complete,  but 
in  his  virtuous  indignation  he  omitted  to  mention  that 
some  of  his  men  had  been  raised  at  Leicester,  where  the 
crier  had  been  sent  round  to  offer  forty  guineas  apiece 
for  three  or  four  men  for  the  Buckinghamshire  Militia. 
In  Berkshire  the  Lieutenancy  took  upon  itself  to  ballot 
men  after  the  ist  of  October,  and  would  not  set  them 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxxvii.  L.L,  Lanark,  to  S.S.  19th  Oct.  1810. 

2  Il>id.  vol.  clxxxiv.  L.L.   Edinburgh,   to  S.S.   3rd  Oct,  ;  vol. 
clxxxv.  V.L.  Fife,  to  S.S.  25th  Aug.  18 10. 


IV  TROUBLES  WITH  BALLOT 


■39 


free  without  the  Secretary  of  State's  order/  In  Cardigan  1 8io. 
a  new  and  unexpected  complication  came  to  light.  The 
county  had  duly  supplied  its  quota  of  men  under  the  Act 
of  1809,  but  the  Militia  was  still  short  of  its  strength  by 
eighty-four  men  ;  the  Government  having  calculated  its 
last  contributions  to  the  Line  upon  the  assumption  that 
its  regiment  was  up  to  its  establishment,  whereas  102 
men  were  wanting  to  complete  it.^  In  Lancashire  there 
was  as  much  trouble  with  the  Deputy- Lieutenants  as 
with  the  people.  The  mercantile  community  at  large 
had  come  to  an  amicable  agreement  that  apprentices 
should  enlist  when  trade  was  slack,  and  be  claimed  by 
their  masters  when  trade  was  brisk.  The  rest  of  the 
population,  stricken  with  envy  of  so  happy  a  solution 
of  a  difficult  problem,  bound  their  sons,  brothers,  and 
cousins  apprentices  pro  forma^  so  as  to  be  able  to  claim 
them  likewise  whenever  they  were  wanted.  Thus  in 
Lancashire  military  service  was  converted  into  a  kind 
of  out  door  relief,  which  could  be  repudiated  as  soon 
as  suited  the  convenience  of  the  recipient.  The  case  of 
the  Deputy-Lieutenants  was  different.  Always  highly 
critical  in  the  North  as  to  the  interpretation  of  Acts  of 
Parliament,  possibly  because  they  were  unwilling  to 
execute  them,  the  Deputies  were  divided  in  opinion  as  to 
the  construction  of  the  last  Act  for  completing  the  Militia. 
The  enactment,  so  argued  one  party,  was  designed  to 
procure  men  by  the  ist  of  October  :  after  that  date 
there  could  be  no  fresh  ballot ;  and  therefore  the 
payment  of  the  fine  of  ^40  would  exonerate  any  parish 
from  further  operation  thereof  On  the  contrary, 
contended  the  opposite  party,  the  intention  was  that 
the  ballot  should  be  continued  until  the  men  were 
supplied,  and  then  suspended  until  the  ist  of  January 
18 12.     The  question  was  carried  to  the  Secretary  of 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxx.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  14th  Oct.;  vol.  clxxxix. 
Subdiv.  Clerk,  Leicester,  to  S.S.  24th  Aug.;  vol.  clxxx.  L.L.  Berks, 
to  S.S.  22nd  Oct.  18 10. 

2  lbid.\o\.  clxxxi.  O.C.  Cardigan  Mila.  to  S.S.  nth  March 
j8io. 


240  OBSCURITY  OF  THE  ACTS         chap. 

1810.  State,  who  laid  it  down  that  both  sides  were  wrong. 
No  ballot,  he  wrote,  can  be  held  after  the  ist  of 
October  until  the  ist  of  January  18 12  without  the 
King's  special  directions ;  but  if  such  directions  be 
given,  payment  of  the  fine  will  not  exonerate  the 
parishes  in  default.^ 

Once  again  I  must  apologise  for  quoting  at  length  the 
difficulties  raised  by  the  construction  of  the  enactments 
that  so  rapidly  succeeded  each  other  in  these  times. 
The  judgment  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  quoted 
immediately  above,  shows  how  drastic  this  particular 
Act  really  was.  Practically  it  said  to  the  counties  : 
"  You  shall  produce  so  many  men  for  the  Militia  by  a 
certain  day,  or  you  shall  pay  a  fine  of  £^0  for  every 
man  deficient,  and  still  be  liable  to  produce  them  later 
on.**  But  the  Act  did  not  say  so  in  so  many  words, 
and  possibly  Ministers  refrained  from  inserting  any 
phrase  which  should  exactly  convey  such  a  meaning,  in 
the  hope  that  they  might  not  be  compelled  to  enforce 
this  particular  interpretation  of  it.  If  this  were  the 
case,  they  were  greatly  disappointed.  So  many  Acts 
dealing  with  the  Militia,  some  in  full  force,  some 
obsolete,  were  before  the  Lieutenants  and  their  Deputies, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  complications  produced  by  the 
establishment  of  the  Local  Militia,  that  they  became 
very  pardonably  confused.  They  therefore  either 
construed  the  Acts  according  to  the  precedents  known 
to  themselves,  or  wrangled  over  their  true  meaning,  or 
in  the  last  resort  unanimously  lost  their  tempers,  and 
shrank  from  putting  the  measures  into  force.  The 
exaction  of  a  fine  for  men  not  raised  was,  according  to 
the  Militia  Act  of  1802,  in  the  nature  of  a  composition 
which  balanced  the  two  sides  of  the  account ;  and  it 
would  have  been  better  in  the  first  instance  to  have 
made  it  perfectly  clear  that  what  held  good  in  1802 
was   not   intended   to   apply   to    1809.     The   natural 

^  I.D.  vol.  clxxxvii.  L.L.  Lanes,  to  S.S.  20th  Feb.;  Lord 
Stanley  to  S.S.  25th  Sept.  1810;  H.O.  Mila.  E.B.  S.S.  to  L.L. 
Lanes,  28th  Sept.  18 10. 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  AMENDMENT       241 

consequence  of  these  doubts,  and  of  the  bad  blood  1810. 
engendered  thereby,  was  that  in  18 10  there  were  levied, 
instead  of  the  18,512  men  still  required  to  complete 
the  number  laid  down  by  the  Act,  no  more  than 
14,934.  Of  these  6055  had  been  raised  by  beat  of 
drum  and  8879  by  ballot,  and  of  the  latter  797  only 
were  principals  against  8082  substitutes.^ 

The  Local  Militia  appears  to  have  stopped  short 
somewhat  in  the  progress  made  at  the  beginning  of 
1809.  Whitbread  stated  in  the  House  of  Commons 
that  half  of  that  in  his  own  county,  Bedford,  had  never 
been  out  on  permanent  duty  nor  received  their  clothing, 
while  in  other  counties  none  whatever  had  been  called 
out  for  training.  The  Government  seems  to  have  been 
uneasy  about  its  expense,  which  was  set  down  at  ;^i6  a 
man  annually  ;  and  it  was  further  alleged  that  military 
duty  was  unsettling  the  men  for  their  ordinary  pursuits.' 
Accordingly  an  Act  to  amend  the  Local  Militia  Act 
was  passed  on  the  i8th  of  April  (50  Geo.  III.  cap.  25), 
which  contained  the  following  provisions. 

In  case  of  reduction  of  the  permanent  staff,  com- 
mandants were  empowered  to  engage  other  non-com- 
missioned officers  at  a  reduced  rate  of  pay  (sec.  i). 
The  days  of  exercise  to  qualify  Volunteers  for  exemp- 
tion from  service  in  the  Regular  and  Local  Militia  were 
reduced  from  twenty-four  to  eighteen  annually  (sec.  2). 
The  fine  of  ^^  1 5  upon  counties  for  every  man  deficient 
of  the  quota  on  the  14th  of  February  was  suspended, 
though  it  was  to  be  enforced  for  every  man  not  present 
at  the  annual  training  (sec.  5).  Constables  were  required 
to  make  returns  of  deficiencies  on  the  14th  of  November, 
and  the  counties  were  obliged  to  make  them  good 
before  the  14th  of  February  on  pain  of  a  fine  of  ^^i  5  (sec. 
6).  Local  Militiamen  who  enlisted  in  the  Line  and  made 
no  declaration  of  the  bounty  that  they  had  received, 
in  order  that  the  same  might  be  refunded,  were  subject 
to  a  fine  of  twice  the  amount  of  the  bounty,  to  be 

1  C.J.  vol.  Ixvi.  p.  561. 
2  H.D.  Whi thread's  Speech,  ist  March  1810. 


242  LOCAL  MILITIA  EVADED  chap. 

1810.  stopped  from  their  pay  (sec.  7).  Local  Militiamen 
who  were  members  of  Friendly  Societies  were  not  to 
be  subject  to  fines  imposed  by  such  societies  for  non- 
attendance  during  their  period  of  service  (sec.  13). 
Apprentices  were  forbidden  to  transfer  themselves  from 
the  Volunteers  to  the  Local  Militia  without  their  masters* 
consent  (sec.  14).  It  was  further  ordained  that  military 
oiFences  of  Local  Militiamen  should  be  triable  by  court- 
martial,  whether  their  regiment  was  embodied  or  not 
(sec.  3). 

It  will  have  been  noticed  that  the  Government 
resolved  to  save  money  in  the  first  instance  by  reducing 
the  number  of  days'  training  for  the  Volunteers  rather 
than  for  the  Local  Militia  ;  but  early  in  1 8 1  o  an  order 
was  issued  for  the  reduction  of  the  permanent  staff  of 
the  Local  Militia,  as  an  initial  economy,  and  the  first 
section  of  the  Act  above  quoted  was  intended  to  comfort 
commandants  under  the  bereavement  of  their  favourite 
non-commissioned  officers.^  But  unfortunately  there 
were  other  matters  besides  economy  to  be  attended  to, 
for  which  no  provision  was  made  in  the  Act.  The 
original  measure,  binding  men,  as  it  practically  did,  to 
personal  service  by  ballot,  bred  in  those  liable  to  serve 
not  only  considerable  stubbornness,  but  an  amazing 
talent  for  evasive  trickery,  while  at  the  same  time 
developing  deplorable  weakness  in  some  of  the  Lieu- 
tenancies. In  Kent  over  seventy  ballotted  men  refused 
either  to  pay  the  fine  or  to  serve  ;  and  the  Lord-Lieu- 
tenant wrote  to  ask  the  Secretary  of  State  what  was  to 
be  done,  though  the  Act  distinctly  said  that  such  men 
could  be  imprisoned  and  were  liable  to  serve  after  their 
imprisonment.  Again,  several  wealthy  tradesmen  of 
Maidstone,  on  being  drawn  for  the  Local  Militia,  con- 
sented to  be  enrolled,  but,  on  the  day  before  the  training 
began,  took  the  bounty  to  enter  the  Regular  Militia, 
and  so  excused  themselves  for  not  attending.     They 

^  I  have  been  unable  to  find  this  order  or  circular,  but  its  issue 
is  proved  by  I.D.  vol.  cxcii.  O.C.  4th  Oxford  L.M.  to  S.S.  5th 
Jan.  1810. 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  EVADED  243 

were  astute  enough,  however,  to  agree  with  the  recruit-  1810. 
ing  officer  of  the  Regular  Militia  that  they  should  be 
allowed  to  find  a  substitute  ;  and  when  the  transaction 
was  completed  they  declared  that  it  was  cheaper  to  take 
the  bounty  and  find  a  substitute  for  the  Regular,  than 
to  pay  a  fine  for  two  years'  exemption  from  the  Local, 
Militia.  It  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  ingenuity 
of  these  men  did  them  considerable  credit,  and  lent 
great  force  to  Sir  Harry  Calvert's  contention  that  there 
should  be  only  one  description  of  Militia.  But  Kent 
was  remarkable  for  providing  knotty  questions  for  the 
Secretary  of  State.  In  this  same  year  it  possessed  a 
parish  in  which  every  man  liable  to  ballot  was  serving 
or  had  paid  the  fine  for  exemption,  but  which  none  the 
less  had  not  produced  its  quota  of  men  for  the  Local 
Militia  ;  and  there  arose  the  point  whether  or  not  it 
was  liable  to  a  fine  for  every  man  deficient.^  In 
Lancashire  again  the  Lieutenancy,  writhing  under  the 
ballot,  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  so  many 
suggestions  for  dispensing  with  it,  that  in  despair  he 
expressed  himself  as  unable  to  interfere  with  the  local 
details  of  enforcing  the  Militia  Acts.^ 

Another  great  difficulty  arose  from  desertion.  The 
Commandant  of  the  ist  Devon  Local  Militia  forwarded 
to  the  Home  Office  a  handbill  advertising  for  no  fewer 
than  seventy-seven  deserters  from  his  regiment.  There 
were  some  doubts,  he  said,  as  to  whether  they  could 
legally  be  convicted  of  desertion,  not  having  appeared 
at  the  last  training  ;  and,  if  they  could  not,  he  expected 
not  to  muster  half  of  his  men  at  the  next.  The 
Secretary  of  State  was  able  to  assure  him  that  under 
the  Militia  Act  or  1 802  these  men  were  liable  to  a  fine 
of  ^20,  or  six  months'  imprisonment ;"  but  it  was  one 
of  the  curses  of  the  Local  Militia  Acts  that  instead  of 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxxvii.  L.L.  Kent,  to  S.S.  8th  Feb.,  6th  June  18 10. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  clxxxvii.  L.L.  Lanes,  to  S.S.  22nd   March;   H.O. 
Mila.  E.B.  S.S.  to  L.L.  Lanes,  7th  May  18 10. 

8  Ibid.  vol.  clxxxiii.  O.C.  ist   Devon  L.M.  to   S.S.  14th   Oct.; 
H.O.  Mila.  E.B.  S.S.  to  O.C.  i6th  Oct.  18 10. 


244         TRICKS  OF  LOCAL  MILITIA        chap. 

1810.  giving  commandants,  who  at  best  were  only  amateurs, 
a  plain  code  for  the  government  of  their  regiments,  it 
was  constantly  referring  them  to  Militia  Acts  and 
Volunteer  Acts  of  which  they  had  no  knowledge. 

Yet  another  besetting  sin  of  the  Local  Militiamen, 
a  sin  begotten  of  cupidity,  was  to  enlist  as  Volunteers  or 
as  substitutes  in  the  Regular  Militia  of  other  counties 
than  their  own,  contrary  to  the  law.  Such  men  of 
course  received  good  bounty  ;  but  the  only  penalty  was 
imprisonment  for  "  neglecting  to  appear  at  the  place  of 
exercise "  as  Local  Militiamen.  In  at  least  one  case 
such  an  offender  gave  information  against  himself  in 
order  to  keep  his  bounty  at  the  cost  of  imprisonment, 
thus  exemplifying  once  more  the  error  of  keeping 
two  different  descriptions  of  Militia  simultaneously.^ 

In  Scotland  there  was  occasionally  unpleasantness 
because  some  corps  of  Local  Militia  had  carried  with 
them  the  habits  acquired  when  they  were  Volunteers, 
particularly  in  cases  where  independent  companies,  each 
under  its  own  petty  magnate,  had  been  united  into 
battalions.  In  one  battalion  of  this  kind  some  of  the 
captains  were  Deputy-Lieutenants,  and  as  such  assumed 
the  right  to  control  the  Commandant.  On  one  occasion 
when  their  Commanding  Officer's  views  did  not  coincide 
with  their  own,  they  formed  a  meeting  of  the  Lieu- 
tenancy and  delivered  to  the  men  their  arms,  accoutre- 
ments, and  camp  equipage,  contrary  to  his  orders  and 
indeed  contrary  both  to  Act  of  Parliament  and  the 
King's  regulations ;  and  the  unhappy  Commandant, 
submitting  at  the  moment  "  to  avoid  the  appearance  of 
dissension,"  carried  his  sad  story  to  the  General  of  the 
District,  who  forwarded  it  to  the  Secretary  of  State.^ 

But  the  greatest  obstacle  of  all  with  which  com- 
mandants of  Local  Militia  had  to  contend  was  the 
undisguised  hostility  of  the  population  in  many  quarters 
towards  the  force,  and  the  efforts  of  violent  men  to 

^  l.D.  vol.  clxxx.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  3rd  June  18 10. 
2  Ibid.   vol.   clxxxvii.    O.C.  Kirkcudbright   L.M.    to    G.O.C., 
Scotland,  7th  May  i8io. 


IV  RIOTS  IN  LOCAL  MILITIA  245 

prevent  the  Act  from  being  executed.  In  the  Cinque  1810. 
Ports  the  magistrates  faithfully  and  courageously  did 
their  duty  in  collecting  their  Local  Militiamen  amid 
daily  insults  and  menaces.  In  the  Romney  division 
not  a  man  would  serve  nor  pay  the  fine ;  but  the  magis- 
trates at  once  issued  warrants  against  the  recalcitrants, 
and  in  Hastings,  Pevensey,  and  Tenterden  they  suc- 
ceeded in  enforcing  the  Act.  They  ordered  the  recruits 
to  Dover  ;  and  the  men  were  peaceably  and  contentedly 
approaching  the  town  when  the  people  of  Dover 
waylaid  them,  and  either  persuaded  or  intimidated 
them  into  returning  home.  Some  of  them  were 
retrieved  and  taken  to  Deal  barracks,  as  the  only 
chance  of  training  them,  and  the  rest  were  warned 
that  they  were  deserters  and  that  unless  they  presented 
themselves  within  a  fortnight  they  would  be  treated  as 
such.^  In  other  quarters  the  old  supposed  grievance 
about  the  "  marching-guinea "  or  allowance  for  neces- 
saries, reduced  after  the  first  training  to  half  a  guinea, 
was  again  made  the  pretext  for  mutinous  outbreaks. 
More  than  one  commandant  was  nervous  lest  the  men 
should  claim  the  whole  of  it  in  cash,  though  the  Secre- 
tary of  State  had  directed  it  to  be  spent,  as  the  law 
intended,  upon  necessaries.  The  question  was  compli- 
cated by  the  fact  that  in  many  of  the  regiments 
of  Regular  Militia,  which  from  long  standing  and 
good  management  possessed  a  heavy  stock-purse,  it 
had  been  the  custom  to  pay  the  men  the  half-guinea 
without  any  deductions.^  It  seems,  moreover,  to  have 
been  the  fact  that,  at  any  rate  in  some  quarters,  the  men 
could  purchase  necessaries  for  themselves  more  cheaply 
than  their  officers  could  purchase  for  them.^  However 
that  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  the  rank  and  file,  in  spite 
of  Acts  of  Parliament,  regulations,  and  the  punishment 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxxii.  Clerk   to   Magistrates   of  Cinque   Ports   to 
Lord  Warden,  i8th  Sept.  1810. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  clxxxv.  O.C.  Glamorgan  L.M.  to  S.S.  22nd  March 
1810. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  clxxxvii.  L.L.  Kirkcudbright,  to  S.S.  1 8th  June  18 10. 


246  RIOTS  IN  LOCAL  MILITIA         chap. 

1 8 10.  of  rioters  in  1809,  still  harboured  a  vague  notion  that 
they  had  the  right  to  this  allowance  in  cash  without 
deductions,  and  that,  if  it  were  withheld,  they  were  being 
defrauded.  No  man  likes  to  be  cheated,  and  no  men 
enjoy  it  less  than  those  who  spend  their  lives  in  en- 
deavouring to  get  the  better  of  their  neighbours.  No 
class  is  so  suspicious  as  the  waged  class,  and  thus  its 
feelings  are  easily  worked  upon  by  unscrupulous  men. 

The  first  mischief  occurred  at  Bath,  where  the 
regiment  of  West  Mendip  Local  Militia,  usually  a 
loyal  and  orderly  corps,  was  assembled  for  training. 
On  the  morning  of  the  i6th  of  May  the  men  on 
receiving  the  order  to  march  refused  to  move,  but 
presently  obeyed,  and  went  without  further  ado  through 
a  field-day,  at  the  close  of  which  the  Commandant 
addressed  them  on  the  subject  of  the  marching  money, 
read  out  the  words  of  the  Act  of  Parliament  concern- 
ing it,  and  apparently  satisfied  them  thoroughly.  On 
returning  to  the  town  the  Commandant  ordered  the 
leading  sections  to  be  marched  as  prisoners  to  his 
lodgings,  where  he  intended  to  read  them  a  lecture. 
The  regiment  thereupon  broke  its  ranks  as  if  to 
rescue  them,  but  was  checked  by  its  officers ;  and  the 
prisoners  were  then  marched  to  gaol.  In  the  evening 
the  men  paraded,  perfectly  sober  and  orderly,  expressed 
regret  at  their  behaviour  of  the  morning,  and  begged 
for  release  of  the  prisoners,  to  which  the  Colonel 
replied  he  would  make  no  conditions,  but  that  their 
treatment  would  depend  on  the  behaviour  of  the  regi- 
ment. There  would  have  been  no  more  trouble  but 
that  the  rabble  of  Bath  came  up,^  led  away  a  few  of  the 
worst  characters,  and,  going  with  them  to  the  gaol, 
forced  the  doors  and  released  the  prisoners.  Then  all 
order  was  lost.  The  Colonel,  attempting  to  re-arrest 
one  of  the  prisoners,  was  threatened  by  the  bayonets 
of  his  own  men.     His  officers  were  attacked  by  the 

1  The  letter  says  that  they  had  "  Burdett "  upon  their  hats  ; 
that  very  absurd  person  being  the  popular  champion  of  liberty  at 
the  moment. 


IV  RIOTS  IN  LOCAL  MILITIA  247 

mob  ;  and  the  whole  town  was  in  uproar,  until  the  '^'°- 
Lancashire  Regular  Militia  arrived  from  Bristol  to 
restore  order.  Then  the  Local  Militia  came  to  their 
senses  and,  though  the  populace  was  still  raging,  escorted 
the  prisoners  back  to  gaol.  Two  of  them  were  then 
tried  by  court-martial,  sentenced  to  fifty  lashes,  tied  up 
before  the  whole  regiment,  without  the  slightest  sign 
of  indiscipline,  and  pardoned  at  the  last  moment.  The 
riot  lasted  for  three  days  ;  and  the  sympathies  of  the 
lower  class  were  so  entirely  with  the  mob,  both  at  Bath 
and  at  Bristol,  that  the  Lancashire  men  were  hardly 
allowed  by  their  landlords  to  leave  the  houses  in  which 
they  were  billeted,  and  indeed  in  some  cases  were  obliged 
to  force  the  doors.^ 

Within  a  few  days  this  was  followed  by  another 
mutiny  of  the  Upper  Tivy  Local  Militia  of  the  county 
of  Cardigan,  which  had  been  assembled  for  twenty  days' 
training  at  Aberystwith  on  the  loth  of  May.  The 
men  were  quite  orderly  and  contented  until  a  news- 
paper arrived  with  an  account  of  the  riot  at  Bath.  The 
Commanding  Officer  at  once  published  in  regimental  and 
company  orders  the  King's  Regulations  as  to  the 
expenditure  of  the  half-guinea  for  necessaries ;  but  on 
parade  that  day  there  were  signs  of  insubordination, 
though  after  the  reading  of  the  Regulations  to  the  men 
once  more  in  the  Colonel's  presence,  these  disappeared. 
The  parade  was  then  dismissed,  and  the  leaders  in 
disobedience,  on  expressing  contrition,  were  pardoned, 
with  the  exception  of  one  man  who  was  tried  by  court- 
martial  and  sentenced  to  three  hundred  lashes.  Upon 
this  the  Colonel  received  warning  from  several  indi- 
viduals that  he  and  his  officers  would  be  murdered  if 
the  sentence  were  carried  out ;  and  this  was  no  vain 
threat,  for  Aberystwith  was  a  kind  of  Alsatia,  a  home 
of  the  lawless,  fiill  of  men  who  could  serve  their 
country  but  would  not,  nor  might  be  constrained  to  do 
so  but  by  an  armed  force. 

^  I.D.  vol.  cxciii.  O.C.  West  Mcndip  (Somerset)  L.M.  to  S.S. 
17th,  1 8th  May  ;  G.O.C.  Western  District,  to  S.S.  loth  May  1810. 


248  RIOTS  IN  LOCAL  MILITIA  chap. 

1 810.  Ori  the  30th  of  May,  the  last  day  of  the  training, 

the  Colonel  formed  a  guard   of  twenty-seven    trust- 
worthy men  to  take  charge  of  the  prisoner,  and  dis- 
missed  the   rest  to  their  homes.     They  cheered  the 
Colonel,  and  many  of  them  left  the  town  that  evening. 
In  the  course  of  the  night  the  Colonel  was  warned  that 
an    attempt    would    be   made   to   rescue    the    prisoner, 
whereupon  he  repaired  to  the  guard-room  himself  with 
his  pistols,  and  ordered   in   ball-cartridge.      Nothing, 
however,    happened    until    next    morning,   when    the 
prisoner  was  tied   up  for  punishment  in  a  courtyard 
at  the  back  of  the  guard-room,  the  Colonel  intending 
only  to  inflict  a  few  lashes  to  bring  the  man  to  his 
senses.     One  of  the  mob  thereupon  jumped  on  to  the 
wall  of  the  courtyard,   and  at   this  signal  the  rabble 
without  discharged  a  shower  of  stones  upon  the  small 
party  within.     Several   men   of  the  guard  were  badly 
hurt,  and  the  remainder,  losing  their  tempers,  fired  at 
every    man   who    appeared    on    the    wall    until    their 
ammunition  was  exhausted.     The  prisoner  was  hastily 
unbound  lest  he  should   be  killed  by  stones,  and  the 
Colonel  withdrew  his  party  into  the  House  of  Correc- 
tion hard  by,  which  the  rioters,  among  whom  were  a 
few   Local   Militiamen,    at   once   assailed   with    every 
missile  that  they  could  find,  swearing  that  they  would 
murder  the  Colonel  and  officers.     At  last  the  Colonel 
went  out  alone,  when  the  populace  incontinently  took 
to  its  heels,  and  the  little  party  marched  out  triumphant 
with  its  prisoner  to  the  Colonel's  quarters.     None  of  the 
mob  were  injured,  but  many  of  the  officers  were  badly 
hurt,  one  of  them  indeed  dangerously  ;  and  the  Com- 
manding Officer  could  only  write  that  "after  thirty  years* 
service  he  had  always  found  that  these  marching-guineas 
led  to  mutiny."     "But,"  he  added,  "it  was  not  the 
guineas  but  the  punishment  of  a  mutineer  which  led 
to  the  riot,  in  which  there  were  engaged  all  the  scum 
of  Aberystwith,  but  only  about  thirty  Militiamen."  ^ 

1  I.D.  vol.  clxxxi.  O.C.  Upper  Tivy  L.M.  to  L.L.  Cardigan, 
ist  June,  23rd  July  1810. 


IV  RIOTS  IN  LOCAL  MILITIA  249 

There  were  other  mutinies  in  the  Local  Militia  in  »8io. 
Wiltshire,  Warwickshire,  and  Worcestershire  in  the 
course  of  the  summer  and  winter,  all  nominally  due 
to  the  miserable  marching-guinea,  but  ail  obviously 
excited  and  stimulated  by  the  townspeople.  In  Wor- 
cestershire, indeed,  the  Commanding  Officer  had  spent 
only  one  shilling  of  the  half-guinea  in  necessaries,  and 
was  prepared  to  give  the  balance  to  the  men ;  but  even 
so  there  ensued  a  riot,  to  suppress  which  it  was 
necessary  to  call  in  a  battalion  of  Regular  troops.^ 
It  will  be  seen  that  an  effort  was  presently  made  to 
end  the  trouble  about  the  marching-guinea  once  for 
all  ;  but  this  did  not  go  to  the  root  of  the  matter. 
The  heart  of  the  mischief  lay  in  the  general  aversion 
of  a  large  section  of  the  population  from  all  obedience 
and  subordination  whatever.  Such  aversion  still  exists, 
and  is  encouraged  by  the  ignorant  and  foolish,  who 
would  gladly  place  arms  in  the  hands  of  all  Volunteers 
that  ask  for  them,  forgetting  that  undisciplined  men  in 
numbers  are  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  mob,  and 
that  an  armed  mob  is  the  most  dangerous  of  all.  Yet 
these  same  men,  if  they  chance  to  suffer  from  the 
insubordination  of  Regular  troops,  are  always  the  first 
to  cry  out  against  the  indiscipline  that  they  themselves 
have  encouraged. 

It  remains  now  to  summarise  briefly  the  offensive 
operations  of  England  in  the  course  of  18 10.  These 
consisted  in  the  West  Indies  of  the  attack  and  capture 
of  Guadeloupe  early  in  the  year  ;  in  the  Mediterranean, 
of  some  petty  work  in  the  Ionian  Islands  ;  in  the  East, 
of  the  capture  of  Banda,  Amboyna,  and  Bourbon  ;  and 
in  the  Peninsula,  to  which  Napoleon  was  now  again 
able  to  devote  the  greater  part  of  his  force,  of  the 
defensive  campaign  which  is  identified  with  the  names  of 
Bussaco  and  Torres  Vedras.  By  reason  of  the  number  of 
troops,  over  20,000,  engaged  in  operations  within  the 

1  I.D.  vol.  cxcvi.  L.L.  Warwick,  to  S.S.  22nd  Nov.;  O.C. 
Wilts  L.M.  to  S.S.  loth  June  ;  vol.  cxcvii.  O.C.  Worcestershire 
L.M.  to  S.S.  28th  May  1810. 


250         CASUALTIES  AND  RECRUITS        chap. 

1 8 10.  tropics,  the  losses  from  sickness  were  considerable,  and 
the  casualties  for  the  year  amounted  to  19,498.  The 
effective  strength  of  the  Army  for  18 10  had  been 
returned  at  199,062  British,  and  38,390  foreign  and 
colonial,  cavalry  and  infantry.^  The  artillery,  British 
and  foreign,  numbered  25,245  ;  making  a  total  of 
262,697  rank  and  file  of  the  three  arms.  Apart  from 
men  enlisted  from  the  Militia,  there  had  been  recruited 
by  ordinary  means  7367  men  and  1728  boys.  In  all 
4092  men  and  3773  boys  joined  the  Regular  Army 
(exclusive  of  foreign  troops)  during  1809  and  18 10, 
making,  together  with  the  Militiamen,  44,700  recruits 
in  all;  while  the  casualties  in  those  two  years  amounted 
to  41,128.  Thus  the  net  balance  showed  3572  men 
to  credit,  so  to  speak  ;  but  if  the  3773  boys  were  not 
counted  as  men,  then  the  net  loss  on  the  two  years 
was  201. 

IV 

181 1.  Upon  the  introduction  of  the  Army  Estimates 
Palmerston  stated  the  Regular  force  of  the  Empire  at 
roughly  235,000  men,^  of  which  211,000  were  fully 
effective.  The  casualties  he  reckoned,  including  those 
of  the  foreign  corps,  at  22,000  to  23,000  annually.  He 
dared  not  reckon  the  proceeds  of  ordinary  recruiting 
at  more  than  1 1 ,000  a  year  for  British  troops,  and 
4000  a  year  for  foreign  troops  ;  leaving  a  deficiency  of 
7000  to  8000  men.  How  was  that  deficiency  to  be 
supplied  ?  The  establishment  of  the  Militia  for  Great 
Britain  and  Ireland  was  92,000  men,  and  the  effective 
strength  84,000,  besides  which  5000  to  6000  more 
were  due  from  the  ballot.  He  proposed,  therefore,  to 
reduce  the  Militia  of  the  United  Kingdom  to  its  old 
establishment  of  1802,  namely  70,000;  and  for  this 
purpose  to  allow  a  number  not  exceeding  10,000  men 

^  Not  including  30,000  Portuguese  in  British  pay. 

2  The  return  for  25th  Jan.  181 1  gave  the  figure  at  234,594, 
foreign  and  Colonial  corps  (excepting  the  Portuguese  Army) 
included. 


IV  PALMERSTON'S  MEASURES  251 

to  enlist  voluntarily  into  the  Line.  Hereby  no  new  181 1. 
ballot  would  be  needed  until  the  end  of  18 12.  In  the 
matter  of  expense  he  pointed  to  over  ^^  300,000  saved 
in  the  past  year  by  curtailing  the  annual  term  of 
exercise  for  the  Volunteers,  and  added  that  he  now 
proposed  also  to  reduce  the  training  of  the  Local 
Militia  to  fourteen  days  annually. 

Palmerston's  plan  for  raising  men  was  entirely  ap- 
proved by  Castlereagh,  who,  however,  wished  in  the  first 
place  to  encourage  volunteers  from  the  Militia  by  con- 
tinuing the  support  of  the  families  of  the  enlisting  Militia- 
men, which  hitherto  had  ceased  from  the  moment  that 
they  entered  the  Line  ;  and  in  the  second  to  recruit  the 
Militia  as  far  as  possible  for  a  fixed  bounty,  lower  than 
that  given  to  the  Regulars.  For  the  English  at  large 
he  adhered  to  the  existing  system  of  a  Regular  Army 
for  offensive  operations  over  sea  ;  a  Regular  Militia  to 
occupy  the  principal  garrisons  and  advanced  positions 
against  invasion ;  and  a  Local  Militia  to  assemble 
under  their  protection  for  the  repulse  of  the  enemy. 
Finally,  he  urged  the  advantages  of  making  it  possible 
to  transfer  British  Militia  to  Ireland  and  Irish  Militia 
to  England  in  rotation,  so  that  all  the  regiments  might 
in  succession  take  a  turn  of  service  in  the  sister 
islands. 

Accordingly  a  Bill  for  permitting  a  certain  number 
of  Militiamen  to  enlist  was  introduced,  and  passed  with 
no  great  difficulty.  Windham  was  dead,  but  a  few  of 
his  followers  still  advocated  his  plans  for  voluntary 
enlistment  only,  coupled  with  short  service  ;  to  which 
Mr.  Ryder  replied  that  short  service  was  still  optional 
with  recruits,  but  that  not  one-fourth  of  them  cared  to 
avail  themselves  of  it,  though  the  difl^erence  in  bounty 
for  limited  and  unlimited  service  amounted  only  to  the 
difference  between  five  guineas  and  six.  The  Bill 
therefore  became  law  on  the  nth  of  April  (51  Geo. 
III.  Great  Britain,  cap.  20;  Ireland,  cap.  30).  It 
provided  that  5714  men  from  the  English,  and  1142 
from  the  Scottish  Militia  should  be  allowed  to  enlist  in 


252  MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  ACT,  1811    chap. 

1811.  the  Line;  and  in  Ireland  fifteen  men  from  every  company 
(cap.  20,  sec.  I  ;  cap.  30,  sec.  4).  In  Great  Britain  the 
Secretary  of  State  was  to  ascertain  annually  the  number  of 
men  (not  exceeding  the  above  total  in  all)  to  be  enlisted 
from  each  regiment  of  Militia,  which  number  was  not  in 
any  case  to  rise  above  one-seventh  of  the  quota  of  1 802  ; 
and  he  was  to  signify  it  before  the  ist  of  February  to  the 
Commanding  Officer  of  every  regiment  (sec.  3).  A 
greater  number  might  be  enlisted  by  the  King's  order 
in  cases  where  counties  had  not  contributed  to  the  Line 
the  full  quota  allowed  to  them  under  former  Acts,  and 
had  therefore  an  excess  of  men  over  the  establishment 
laid  down  by  the  present  Act  (sec.  4).  In  Ireland,  if 
the  full  quota  were  not  enlisted  in  any  one  year,  the 
deficiencies  might  be  added  to  the  quota  of  the  next 
year,  and  enlisted  together  with  it  (cap.  30,  sec.  5). 
Commandants  of  Militia  were  to  explain  the  terms  of 
enlistment  into  the  Line  to  the  men  within  two  days 
of  receiving  the  order,  and  men  were  to  be  allowed  to 
enlist  for  the  seven  days  immediately  following  ;  after 
which,  at  intervals  of  not  less  than  a  fortnight,  periods 
of  three  more  days  apiece  were  to  be  appointed  for 
enlistment  (sees.  6,  8). 

The  remainder  of  the  provisions  dealt  with  the 
reduction  of  the  Militia  ;  so  it  will  be  well  first  to  state 
that,  by  an  Order  in  Council  of  the  nth  of  March,  the 
ballot  had  been  continued  in  such  counties  as  had  not 
completed  their  quota  of  Militia  to  the  establishment  laid 
down  by  the  Act  of  1 809  ;  and  that  on  the  4th  of  April 
there  had  been  passed  an  Act  (51  Geo.  III.  cap.  17) 
validating  all  enrolments  under  ballots  held,  without 
such  order,  after  the  ist  of  October  18 10.  The 
deficiency  under  the  Act  of  1809  was  therefore  in 
process  of  being  made  good  ;  and  it  was  now  enacted 
under  51  Geo.  III.  cap.  20,  that  fines  incurred  by 
parishes  for  men  deficient  on  the  ist  of  October  18 10 
should  be  remitted  to  the  extent  of  three-fourths,  one 
half,  and  one-third,  if  the  men  were  produced  by  the 
ist  of  June,  ist  of  July,  and  ist  of  September  181 1 


IV  MILITIA  COMPLETION  253 

respectively  (sec.  21).     When  the  men  required  under       181 1. 
the  Act  of  1809  had  been  raised,  the  ballot  was  to  be 
suspended  until   ist  July  18 13  (sec.  23)  ;  and  Militia- 
men might  thenceforth  be  raised  by  beat  of  drum  for 
a  bounty  of  twelve  guineas,  of  which  part  was  to  go 
towards  the  expense  of  obtaining  the  recruit,  and  part 
to   be   paid   into    his   hand  (sees.   23,  25).     Boys   of 
fourteen  and  upward  could,  by  the  King's  order,  be 
enlisted  to  a  proportion  not  exceeding   one-fourth  of 
the  whole  number  of  men  required  for  the  year  ;  their 
standard  of  height  to  be  fixed  by  regulation  (sec.  26). 
The  Militia  of  Great  Britain  after  the  passing  of  this 
Act  was  to  be  gradually  reduced  to  the  quota  of  1802  ; 
but  the  King  was  empowered  to  order  supernumeraries 
to  be  raised  by  beat  of  drum  in  numbers  equal  to  that  of 
the  men  enlisted  into  the  Line  in  each  year  under  the 
present  Act ;  which  supernumeraries  were  to  be  taken 
to  fill  no  vacancies  except  those  of  the  men  so  enlisted 
into  the  Line  (sees.  29-31).     Officers  and  non-com- 
missioned officers,  who  would  become  supernumerary 
upon  this  reduction,  could  be  ordered  to  remain  with 
their  regiments  ;  and  special  arrangements  were  made 
for  supernumerary  field-officers  (sees.  32-3$)-  The  King, 
after  the  reduction  of  the  Militia  as  aforesaid,  was  em- 
powered to  order  a  number  of  men,  equal  to  that  which 
had  been  allowed  to  enlist  into  the  Line,  to  be  raised 
by  ballot  in  each  county,  whether  such  number  should 
have  enlisted  or  not ;  and  if  a  ballot  were  so  ordered, 
all  vacancies  from  death,  discharge,  etc.,  were   to  be 
filled  according  to  the  provisions  of  the  Militia  Act  of 
1802  (sec.  36).     A  bounty  of  ten  guineas  was  to  be 
paid   to    every   ballotted    man,    whether   principal   or 
substitute,   and   no   further  allowance    whatever   (sees. 
37,   38).     Deputy-Lieutenants  were  to  apportion  the 
voluntary   and    ballotted    recruits  among   the   various 
parishes  (sees.   39,  40)  ;  and  Local  Militiamen  were 
permitted    to    enlist    into    the    Militia   of    their   own 
counties  (sec.  41).     Lastly,  support  to  the  families  of 
Militiamen  raised  after  the  passing  of  this  Act  was  to 


254  MILITIA  INTERCHANGED  chap. 

1811.  be  discontinued,  except  in  the  case  of  ballotted  men 
who  were  enrolled  as  principals  (sec.  20). 

These  enactments  for  England  and  Ireland,  as  will 
have  been  remarked,  were  a  new  departure,  inasmuch  as 
they  provided  for  a  fixed  annual  draft  of,  roughly 
speaking,  10,000  men  from  the  Militia  into  the  Line, 
which  draft,  if  not  complete  in  one  year,  could  be  made 
good  in  the  next  ;  and  it  was  obviously  intended  that, 
if  possible,  the  equivalent  for  this  draft  should  be 
voluntarily  enlisted  every  year  into  the  Militia  so  as  to 
silence  all  invidious  statements  that  men  were  being 
ballotted  or  conscribed  for  the  troops  of  the  Line. 
Thus  at  length  effect  was  in  part  given  to  Sir  Harry 
Calvert's  recommendations  of  1809  ;  and  though  the 
two  descriptions  of  Militia,  the  Regular  and  the  Local, 
were  still  preserved,  the  first  was  reduced  to  its  peace 
establishment,  and  the  ballot  was  reserved,  except  in 
cases  of  emergency,  for  the  latter  only. 

A  further  important  step  in  respect  of  the  Militia 
was  an  Act  to  permit  the  interchange  of  the  British  and 
Irish  Militias,  pursuant  to  Castlereagh's  advice  (51  Geo. 
III.  cap  118).  Hereby  it  was  enacted  that  in  future  all 
Militiamen  should  be  engaged  to  serve  in  any  part  of 
the  British  Isles — that  in  fact  there  should  no  longer  be 
a  Militia  of  Great  Britain  and  a  Militia  of  Ireland,  but 
one  Militia  of  the  United  Kingdom  (sees.  1-6).  No 
British  corps  was  to  continue  in  Ireland,  nor  Irish  corps 
in  England,  for  more  than  two  years  successively  ;  and 
at  no  time  was  more  than  half  of  the  British  Militia  to 
be  in  Ireland,  or  more  than  one-third  of  the  Irish  Militia 
in  England,  except  in  case  of  rebellion  or  invasion. 
Moreover,  British  or  Irish  Militia  who  had  once  served  in 
the  sister  Kingdom  were  not  to  be  liable  to  serve  there 
again  except  in  rotation  after  an  interval  of  four  years 
or  six  years  respectively  (sees.  8,  9).  No  corps  was  to 
be  called  upon  to  serve  in  a  sister  Kingdom  without  the 
King's  orders.  The  King  was  empowered  to  accept 
voluntary  offers  of  the  present  Militia  so  to  serve ;  and 
existent  Militiamen  voluntarily  engaging  for  service  in 


IV  BALLOT  DIFFICULTIES  255 

any  part  of  the  United  Kingdom  were  to  receive  a       1811. 
bounty  of  two  guineas.     It  was  specially  provided  that 
Commanding  Officers  should  explain  to  their  men  that 
there  was  no  compulsion  (sees.  10-14), 

Meanwhile  the  ballot,  prolonged  by  royal  order  for 
the  completion  of  the  Militia  under  the  Act  of  1 809, 
continued  during  the  opening  months  of  18 11,  and  was 
not  furthered  by  the  fact  that  no  bounty  to  ballotted 
men  was  now  granted  by  Government.  In  Scotland  the 
proceedings  were  still  delayed  by  petty  actions  brought 
against  the  Lieutenancies  by  lotmen,  by  endless 
ingenious  pleas  for  exemption,  by  the  absconding  of 
ballottable  men  until  the  ballot  was  over,  and  by  the  old 
dispute  with  the  Barons  of  the  Exchequer  over  the 
payment  of  the  Lieutenancies'  clerks  and  other  servants. 
The  price  of  substitutes,  also,  had  risen  to  an  appalling 
height.  In  Forfar  it  was  reported  to  range  from  ^^50 
to  j^8o;  and  the  county  declared  itself  unable,  even  by 
rigid  enforcement  of  the  law,  to  produce  its  quota. 
Nevertheless  there  were  signs  that,  either  from  better 
feeling  or  from  hard  necessity,  there  was  rather  less 
reluctance  in  Scotland  to  serve  in  the  Militia,  for 
Sutherland  among  her  quota  furnished  sixty-six  prin- 
cipals as  against  four  substitutes.  On  the  other  hand,  in 
Skye  and  other  parts  of  the  west  coast  men  prepared  to 
emigrate  to  Carolina  rather  than  serve  their  country  ; 
and  one  gentleman  in  Haddington  had  formed  so  low 
an  opinion  of  the  zeal  of  his  compatriots  that  he  recom- 
mended the  Secretary  of  State  to  discharge  the  whole  ot 
the  Scottish  Militia.  "  You  have  1 1 ,000  men  in  Scotland," 
he  wrote,  "doing  nothing,  and  unwilling  to  volunteer  for 
the  Line  as  they  will  lose  support  for  their  families,  which 
is  the  great  inducement  to  them  to  serve.  If  you  were 
to  discharge  the  11,000  you  would  get  9000  recruits, 
for  most  of  them  are  weavers  who  cannot  get  work."  ^ 

In  England  matters  were  little  different.     In  Man- 

1  I.D.  vol.  cc.  L.L.  Inverness,  to  S.S.  May,  12th  June;  Angus 
Mackintosh  to  S.S,  5th  July  181 1  ;  vol.  cci.  O.C.  Berwick  Mila. 
to  S.S.  1 2th  March.     Return  of  men  raised  in  Sutherland  under 


256  BALLOT  DIFFICULTIES  chap. 

181 1.  Chester  the  fines  paid  for  deficiencies  in  the  number  of 
men  amounted  to  £']ioo.  In  Brecon  the  price  of 
substitutes  rose  above  £60 ;  and  in  Staffordshire  it 
became  so  prohibitive  that  the  Lieutenancy  suspended 
enrolment  for  a  time  in  the  hope,  which  was  fulfilled,  of 
lowering  it.  In  Yorkshire  a  Deputy-Lieutenant  sug- 
gested a  general  commutation  of  service  for  money,  to 
be  paid  by  hundreds  and  even  larger  districts  within  the 
county,  as  a  certain  means  of  raising  men  at  less  cost  and 
with  less  oppression,  and  of  diminishing  the  abuse  of  in- 
surance. The  method  had,  he  said,  been  practised,  though 
prohibited  by  law,  and  when  exercised  by  honourable 
Colonels  had  been  found  beneficent  both  to  the  regiment 
and  the  county.  Thus,  even  in  the  ninth  year  of  the 
war,  the  one  idea  of  filling  the  Regular  Militia  was  still 
to  find  substitutes,  or  in  other  words  to  compete  with  the 
Regiments  of  the  Line  for  recruits  at  enormous  expense 
to  individuals  and  local  bodies.  Yet  the  Government 
continued  to  prefer  this  system  to  that  advocated  by 
Calvert ;  and  though  at  this  distance  of  time  it  seems 
utterly  to  be  condemned,  we  should  perhaps  be  rash  to 
infer  that  it  was  wrong  in  practice.  I  can  only  account 
for  Ministers'  adherence  to  it  upon  the  hypothesis  which 
I  have  already  suggested,  that  the  strong  element  of 
gambling  which  it  contained  was  palatable  to  the  people.^ 
It  must  be  added,  however,  that  when  the  ballot  was 
ended  and  enlistment  by  beat  of  drum  restored,  the 
Government  did  its  best  to  ease  matters  by  allowing 
every  Militia  regiment  to  recruit  its  full  proportion  of 
boys,  and  left  the  standard  of  their  height  to  the  un- 
trammelled judgment  of  Commanding  Officers.^ 

Act  of  1809,  9th  Jan.  181 1  ;  vol.  ccvii.  L.L.  Forfar,  to  S.S.  23rd 
Feb.  181 1  ;  vol.  ccxx.  Mr.  J.  Brown,  Haddington,  to  S.S.  15th  April 
1811. 

^  I.D.  vol.  ccxi.  T.  Stanley  to  Attorney-General,  12th  March 
(enclosing  memorial  from  Manchester)  ;  vol.  ccxvi.  L.L.  Staffs,  to 
S.S.  4th  Jan.  ;  vol.  cci.  L.L.  Brecon,  to  S.S.  27th  April ;  vol.  ccxx. 
Sir  J.  Duckett  (Yorks)  to  S.S.  20th  March  181 1. 

2  Circular  to  O.C.  Militia  Regts.  15th  July  ;  to  O.C.  1st  Somer- 
set Militia,  4th  Sept.  181 1. 


IV  GOOD  SPIRIT  OF  MILITIA  257 

In  the  matter  of  volunteering  for  the  Line  the  181 1. 
Militia  seems  to  have  shown  laudable  alacrity,  supplying 
11,453  recruits,  or  1143  in  excess  of  the  number 
required  of  them,  in  the  course  of  the  year  181 1.  In 
the  West  Middlesex  Regiment  so  many  above  the  full 
quota  offered  themselves  on  the  first  day  that  it  was 
possible  to  select  the  best  from  among  them  ;  ^  and  this 
is  the  more  remarkable,  for  the  operations  in  the 
Peninsula  had  not  yet  assumed  the  brilliancy  to  which 
they  were  later  to  attain.  Other  corps  were  equally 
forward  ;  ^  though  some  of  course  held  back  ;  but 
the  policy  of  asking  for  a  small  number  of  men  only 
was  in  this  year  successful.  Nor  were  the  regiments, 
as  a  body,  less  ready  to  volunteer  for  duty  in  Ireland. 
Some  hesitation  was  shown  at  first,  for  there  was 
nervousness  among  principals  lest  they  should  commit 
themselves  to  service  beyond  their  covenanted  term  ; 
but  they  were  speedily  reassured  when  they  learned 
that  strict  faith  would  be  kept  with  them.  The  Home 
Office,  however,  when  inviting  offers  from  the  various 
corps  made  one  very  foolish  mistake  by  omitting  to 
mention  that  the  men  serving  in  Ireland  would  be  paid 
in  Irish  currency,  which  was  below  the  British  currency 
in  value.  No  doubt  the  purchasing  value  of  the  Irish 
currency  in  Ireland  was  equal  to  that  of  the  British  in 
England  ;  but  Commanding  Officers,  after  representing 
to  their  men  in  good  faith  that  they  would  receive  the 
same  pay  and  allowances,  felt  greatly  the  awkwardness 
and  humiliation  of  having  to  explain  to  them,  after  they 
had  volunteered  their  services,  that  their  pay  would  be 
reduced.  The  War  Office,  which  also  sent  a  circular 
upon  the  subject  to  the  Militia  regiments,  was  careful 
to  make  the  matter  clear  ;  and  the  Home  Office  was 
quite  inexcusable  for  neglecting  to  do  so.  It  was  just 
such  folly  as  this  that  shook  the  faith  of  the  forces  in 

1  l.D.  vol.  ccxii.  O.C.  West  Middlesex  Mila.  to  S.S.  3rd  May 
1811. 

■-'  Ibid.  vol.  ccviii.  O.C.  N.  Hants  Mila.  to  S.S,  2nd  May  ;  voL 
ccxiii.  O.C.  Montgomery  Mila.  to  S.S.  1st  May  181 1. 

S 


258         LOCAL  MILITIA  IMPROVES  chap. 

1 81 1.      the  Government,  led  them  to  regard  every  offer  with 
suspicion,  and  brought  about  mutinies  and  riots.^ 

Turning  next  to  the  Local  Militia,  it  must  first  be 
observed  that  it  was  greatly  increased  by  further  dissolu- 
tion or  transference  of  Volunteer  corps  during  1 8 1 1 . 
Indeed  the  surviving  Volunteer  and  Yeomanry  corps 
were  none  of  them  called  out  upon  permanent  duty 
during  this  year,  and  therefore  disappeared  in  great 
measure  from  the  public  view.  What  increase  the  Local 
Militia  may  have  gained  hereby,  there  are  unfortunately 
no  returns  to  show  ;  but  it  is  evident  that  it  was  now 
settling  down,  and  was  accepted  as  the  backbone  of  the 
national  forces.  There  was  one  faint  echo  of  the  trouble 
over  the  marching-guinea  in  the  course  of  the  summer  ;  ^ 
and  there  was  one  very  bad  case  of  an  officer  who  sold 
his  uniform  at  the  end  of  the  training  in  18 10,  but 
retained  his  commission,  in  order  to  escape  the  ballot 
for  the  Regular  Militia,  until  the  outset  of  the  training 
in  1811.^  There  was  also  some  trouble  still  with  Local 
Militiamen  who  enlisted  illegally,  for  the  sake  of  the 
bounty,  into  Regular  Militia  regiments  of  other  counties, 
and  then  appealed  to  their  Commanding  Officers  to 
reclaim  them  for  the  Local  Militia  ;  but  the  Govern- 
ment seems  to  have  abstained  deliberately  from  taking 
measures  to  check  this  evil.*     Still,  generally  speaking, 

^  I.D.  vol.  cci.  L.L.  Bucks,  to  S.S.  9th  July;  vol.  ccix.  O.C. 
Hereford  Mila.  to  S.S.  181 1. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  cciii.  O.C.  Stirling  L.M.  to  S.S.  4th  June  181 1. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  ccxvii.  L.L.  Somerset,  to  S.S.  14th  June  181 1. 

*  The  following  letter  from  the  O.C.  Notts  Mila.  to  S.S.  loth 
April  181 1  {I.D.  vol.  ccxiv.)  will  show  the  extent  of  this  practice. 
"  Several  men  of  my  regiment  enlisted  into  the  Regular  Militia  of 
other  counties,  I  believe  with  fraudulent  intentions.  Last  year  a 
sergeant  of  the  Derbyshire  Militia  enlisted  four  of  my  men,  knowing 
that  they  belonged  to  my  regiment  ;  and  my  Adjutant  tells  me  that 
fifty  have  enlisted  into  other  Militia  regiments,  and  that  ten  of  them 
have  written  to  him  to  be  claimed.  What  am  I  to  do  ?  These 
men  have  clearly  acted  illegally  ;  but  if  I  seize  them  I  shall  injure 
the  recruiting  service,  probably  protect  men  who  have  been  guilty  of 
perjury  and  fraud,  and  encourage  others  to  do  the  like."  To  this 
the  Secretary  of  State  answered  that  the  Regular  Militia  must, 
under  49  Geo.  IIL  cap.  1 29,  be   discharged  if  claimed.     "  If  you 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  IMPROVES  259 

the  conduct  of  the  force  seems  to  have  improved  181 1. 
greatly,  while  the  Lieutenancies  shrank  less  than  before 
from  executing  the  Act  for  keeping  it  up  to  strength. 
In  Buckinghamshire  the  Deputy-Lieutenants  did  not 
hesitate  to  draw  a  young  gentleman,  past  eighteen  years 
of  age,  upon  the  foundation  of  Eton  College,  for  the 
Local  Militia,  a  proceeding  which  called  forth  a  noble 
and  dignified  protest  from  the  Provost.  To  this  the 
Secretary  of  State  replied  that,  though  there  was  no 
legal  provision  to  exempt  the  lad,  who  must  therefore 
pay  his  fine  or  be  enrolled  for  four  years,  yet  he  would 
take  care  that  no  hardship  should  come  of  it,  and,  in 
case  a  new  Militia  Act  were  required,  would  consider  the 
propriety  of  giving  exemption  to  students  upon 
eleemosynary  foundations.^  But  this  was  by  no  means 
all.  The  Local  Militia  began  to  display  a  fine  and 
enterprising  spirit.  When  the  Cornish  Regular  Militia 
volunteered  for  service  in  Ireland,  the  4th  Cornwall 
Local  Militia  offered  to  do  duty  for  it  in  England 
during  its  absence ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  summer 
the  Banff  Local  Militia,  1074  strong,  tendered  itself 
for  service  in  any  part  of  the  world,  and  the  Berkshire 
for  service  in  the  Peninsula.^ 

The  operations  of  the  year  were  confined  to  the 
capture  of  Mauritius  and  Java  in  the  Far  East,  and  to  the 
campaigns  in  the  Peninsula  which  are  remembered  by 
the  names  of  Barrosa,  Fuentes  d'Onoro,  and  Albuera. 
The  casualties  for  the  year  numbered  19,019.  The 
recruits  raised  by  voluntary  enlistment  amounted  to 
9532  men  and  1940  boys,  or  11,472  altogether,  which, 
added  to  1 1,453  men  transferred  from  the  MiHtia,  made 

deem  it  necessary  to  claim  them  [note  this  evasion  of  responsibility 
on  the    part  of  the  Secretary  of  State]  you  will  transmit  to  the 
Home  Office  such  particulars  as  are  necessary  to  bring  the  men  to     * 
condign  punishment." 

1  I.D.  vol.  cci.  Provost  of  Eton  to  S.S.  8th  May  1811  ; 
H.O.M.E.B.  vol.  xlvii.  S.S.  to  Provost,  nth  May  181 1. 

2  I.D.  vol.  cciii.  L.L.  Cornwall,  to  S.S.  13th  June  181 1  ;  vol. 
cc.  V.L.  BanfF,  to  S.S.  23rd  July  ;  O.C.  Berks  L.M.  to  S.S.  30th 
June  181 1. 


26o  CASUALTIES  AND  RECRUITS,  1811  chap. 

1811.  a  total  of  22,925,  or,  deducting  boys,  20,985  soldiers 
added  to  the  Army  in  the  course  of  the  year.  The  net 
gain,  therefore,  was  1966  for  the  year  181 1.  The 
casualties  among  the  foreign  troops  raised  the  total  by 
2000,  but  against  this  was  to  be  set  an  aggregate  of 
4795  foreign  recruits  enlisted.^  The  Army,  therefore, 
at  the  outset  of  1 8 1 2  was  in  a  strong  position,  and  all 
the  stronger  since  it  had  regained  in  181 1  an  excellent 
Commander-in-Chief  in  the  Duke  of  York. 

V 

1812.  The  estimates  for  1812  provided  for  an  establish- 
ment of  245,446  Regular  British  infantry  and  cavalry 
of  all  ranks,  and  nearly  27,000  artillery ;  of  which 
number  about  68,000  only,  including  15,000  of  Veteran 
and  Garrison  battalions,  were  to  be  employed  at  home. 
Roughly  speaking,  therefore,  there  were  about  145,000 
effective  British  and  Colonial  troops  employed  beyond 
sea,  over  and  above  some  30,000  foreigners — half  of 
them  of  the  King's  German  Legion — and  the  Portuguese 
army  of  30,000  men.  Besides  these  again  the  establish- 
ment of  embodied  Regular  Militia  was  set  down  at 
103,000,  and  of  Local  Militia  at  240,000  ;  but  these 
figures  are  certainly  far  in  excess  of  the  actual  numbers. 
Reducing  them,  however,  to  250,000  jointly,  there  still 
remained  a  force  of  at  least  300,000  well  and  fairly  well 
trained  troops,  besides  Volunteers,  for  home  defence. 
In  all,  therefore,  the  armed  forces  of  Britain  must  have 
amounted  to  nearly  500,000  really  effective  men.'^ 

The  strain  upon  the  resources  of  recruiting  was, 
however,  beginning  to  be  felt  so  strongly  that  on  the 
20th  of  April  a  short  Act  was  passed  to  enable  a  propor- 
tion not  exceeding  one-fourth  of  the  Militia  of  Ireland, 

1  H.D.  vol.  xxi.  p.  898. 

2  The  effective  strength  of  the  Army  (including  foreign  and 
Colonial  Corps)  and  Regular  Militia  for  25th  January  1812  is 
returned  at  320,940.  Allowing  180,000  for  Local  Militia,  Yeo- 
manry, and  Volunteers  (a  very  moderate  estimate),  we  get  the  full 
500,000. 


IV  NEW  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  261 

as  of  England,  to  be  raised  from  boys  of  fourteen  years  1812. 
of  age  and  upwards  (52  Geo.  III.  cap.  29).  In  addition 
to  this  the  ordinary  recruiting  service  was  reconstituted, 
according  to  a  plan  long  desired  by  the  Duke  of 
York,  and  more  zealous  officers  were  appointed  to 
carry  on  the  work. 

A  more  important  measure  was  an  Act  passed  on  the 
same  day  to  consolidate  and  amend  the  Local  Militia 
Acts  (52  Geo.  III.  cap.  38,  England  ;  cap.  68,  Scotland). 
Hereby  it  was  enacted  that  the  quota  for  England 
should  be  163,188,  and  for  Scotland  30,724,  or  193,912 
men  in  all  (sees.  14,  162,  166,  and  169),  which,  added  to 
the  really  efficient  Volunteers  of  London  and  other  great 
towns,  would  make,  roughly  speaking,  250,000  men. 
In  counties  where  the  present  quota  was  smaller  than 
the  number  of  men  serving,  the  men  in  excess  were  to 
continue  to  serve,  but  no  vacancies  were  to  be  filled  up 
until  the  number  had  been  reduced  to  the  level  of  the 
quota  (sec.  15).  When,  however,  the  quota  was  greater 
than  the  number  of  men  at  present  serving,  no  further 
enrolment  was  to  take  place  so  long  as  the  Local  Militia 
and  effective  Volunteers  together  were  equal  to  six 
times  the  quota  of  the  Militia  as  fixed  in  1 802  (sec.  16). 
When  the  number  serving  was  less  than  the  quota, 
Volunteers  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  thirty,  and 
having  not  more  than  two  children  under  fourteen  years 
of  age,  were  allowed  to  transfer  themselves  to  the  Local 
Militia,  receiving  two  guineas  bounty  if  they  had  been 
effective  on  the  12th  of  May  1809,  and  had  continued 
so  ever  since  ;  and  such  transferred  Volunteers  were 
exempted  from  service  in  the  Regular  Militia  (sees.  17, 
18).  Artillery  Volunteers  and  Yeomanry  might  also 
transfer  themselves  to  the  Local  Militia  ;  but  vacancies 
in  the  Yeomanry  were  not  to  be  filled  by  ballot  unless 
they  remained  for  six  months  unfilled  by  voluntary 
engagement  (sec.  20).  The  men  were,  as  before,  to  be 
ballotted  from  those  between  eighteen  and  thirty  years 
of  age  on  the  Militia  lists  (sec.  23)  ;  and  no  man  under 
thirty  was  to  be  made  a  special  constable  (sec.  25). 


262         NEW  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  chap. 

i8iz.  Parishes  might  be  grouped  together  for  convenience  of 
ballotting  (sec.  28),  The  clauses  forbidding  insurance 
and  substitution  were  re-enacted  ;  but  voluntary  recruits 
might  be  accepted,  and  parishes  could  levy  a  rate  to  pay 
them  a  bounty  of  not  more  than  two  guineas  (sees.  34- 
36).  Persons  voluntarily  enlisting  themselves,  if 
between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  thirty-five,  with  not 
more  than  two  children,  and  five  feet  two  inches  in 
height,  could  avert  the  ballot  to  the  extent  of  their 
numbers  (sec.  37).  Exemption  was  granted,  over  and 
above  the  persons  in  the  former  Acts,  to  poor  men  with 
more  than  two  children  and  to  students  on  an  eleemosyn- 
ary foundation.  Men  who  had  served  by  substitute 
in  the  Regular  Militia  or  in  any  additional  force  were 
exempted  for  four  years  after  the  expiration  of  their 
period  of  service,  and  men  who  had  served  in  person  for 
six  years  (sec.  38).  Men  already  enrolled  in  the  Local 
Militia  were  exempted  from  the  ballot  for  the  Regular 
Militia  for  two  years  after  the  expiration  of  the  period 
of  service,  unless  they  neglected  to  attend  training ;  but 
men  enrolled  after  the  passing  of  this  Act  were  to  be 
exempt  for  one  year  only  (sees.  39,  40).  The  fine  for 
exemption  was,  as  before,  ;^30,  reduced  to  ^^20  for  men 
with  annual  incomes  of  less  than  ^200,  and  to  ;^io  for 
those  whose  income  fell  below  ;^ioo.  Payment  of  the 
fine  or  personal  service  ensured  certain  exemption  for  two 
years  (sec.  44,  and  cap.  116,  sec.  i).  Men  imprisoned 
for  not  paying  their  fine  could  be  compelled  to  serve 
their  four  years  after  the  term  of  imprisonment  had 
expired  (sec.  45).  Deputy-Lieutenants  might  re-appor- 
tion quotas  in  cases  where  they  seemed  inequitable 
(sec.  48).  Vacancies  were  to  be  filled  up  by  fresh 
ballot,  the  parish  to  supply  the  vacancy  of  a  man  pro- 
moted to  be  non-commissioned  officer  being  chosen  by 
lot,  unless  the  promotion  were  due  to  the  reduction  of 
another  non-commissioned  officer  to  the  ranks  (sec.  60). 
Special  directions  were  given  as  to  the  timely  ballotting 
of  men  to  fill  the  place  of  those  whose  term  of  service 
was  expired  (sec.  61).     The  enrolment  of  servants  was 


IV  NEW  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT         263 

not  to  vacate  contracts  with  masters,  unless  the  servant  181 2. 
did  not  return  to  the  same  master  as  soon  as  possible 
after  the  end  of  the  training.  Any  dispute  concerning 
wages  under  the  value  of  ^^20  might  be  settled  by  a 
Justice  of  the  Peace,  who  had  power  to  levy  distress  if 
the  money  were  not  paid  as  he  decided  (sec.  62).  Local 
Militiamen  were  allowed  to  enlist  into  the  Line,  with  the 
exception  of  non-commissioned  officers  and  musicians, 
who  could  only  do  so  with  their  Commanding  Officer's 
consent,  and  of  apprentices,  who  needed  to  obtain  their 
master's  consent  (sec.  65).  All  vacancies  were  to  be 
filled  up  as  appointed  in  sec.  60,  even  though  the  ballot 
for  the  Regular  Militia  might  be  suspended ;  but  volun- 
tary recruits,  as  in  sec.  37,  were  allowed  to  enter  until  the 
quotas  fixed  by  the  present  Act  were  complete  (sec.  66). 
The  Local  Militia  was  to  be  formed  into  companies  of  not 
less  than  sixty,  or  more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty 
privates,  with  three  officers  ;  and  these,  where  the  num- 
bers in  the  county  sufficed,  were  to  be  organised  into 
one  or  more  regiments  of  not  more  than  twelve  or  less 
than  ten  companies  ;  or,  failing  this,  into  battalions  of 
not  more  than  seven  or  less  than  four  companies.  Regi- 
ments of  eight  hundred  men  and  upwards  were  to  have 
four  field-officers  ;  corps  of  480  to  800  men,  three  field- 
officers  ;  battalions  of  less  than  480  men,  two  field- 
officers  ;  and  corps  of  three  companies,  one  field-officer. 
Corps  of  five  companies  and  upwards  were  allowed  to 
have  a  Light,  or  a  Grenadier  company  ;  to  regiments  of 
eight  companies  and  upwards,  both  Light  and  Grenadier 
companies  were  permitted,  each  with  two  lieutenants 
instead  of  lieutenant  and  ensign.  Every  company  over 
ninety  strong  might  have  three  subalterns  (sec.  68). 
Officers  in  excess  of  the  establishment  at  the  time  of  the 
passing  of  the  Act  could  be  retained  (sec.  69).  Counties 
could  be  divided  into  districts  for  the  supply  of  different 
corps  within  them  (sec.  62).  Local  Militia  upon  embodi- 
ment were  entitled  to  the  same  pay  and  allowances  as  the 
Regular  Militia;  with  a  grant  of  los.  6d.  a  man  in  the  first 
year,  and  5s.  3d.  a  man  in  subsequent  years,  for  necessaries 


264         NEW  LOCAL  MILITIA  ACT  chap. 

J 8 12.  (sec.  86).  The  annual  training  was  to  be  for  not  more 
than  twenty-eight  days,  and  the  men  could  not  be 
ordered  to  march  outside  their  own  counties  (sec.  88) 
unless  the  Lieutenant  recommended  for  convenience  of 
training  that  the  regiment  should  be  assembled  in  an 
adjoining  county  (sec.  90),  and  except  in  case  of  invasion 
or  insurrection  (sec.  123).  Offences  committed  during 
the  training  could  be  tried  afterwards  (sec.  95).  Local 
Militiamen,  when  embodied,  could  be  subjected  to 
stoppages  for  linen  and  necessaries,  not  exceeding  four- 
pence  a  day  (sec.  102).  Men  absenting  themselves 
from  training  were  to  be  treated  as  deserters  and  liable 
to  a  fine  of  ^20  or  six  months' imprisonment  (sec.  105)  ; 
but  their  vacancy  was  to  be  filled  up  by  ballot  if  they 
were  absent  for  three  months,  though  they  were  none 
the  less  liable  to  serve  if  they  returned  (sec.  106).  A 
proportion  of  non-commissioned  officers  could  be  kept 
on  permanent  pay  by  the  King's  order  (sec.  116);  and 
these  could  be  called  upon  to  raise  voluntary  recruits  for 
the  Regular  Army  or  Militia  (sec.  119).  Commanding 
Officers  were  required  to  make  out  a  list  of  men,  of  the 
age  and  standing  prescribed  by  sec.  17,  who  were  willing 
to  prolong  their  service  for  a  bounty  not  exceeding 
^2  :  2s.  ;  and  such  men  were  to  be  enrolled  as  volun- 
teers for  the  place  or  parish  for  which  they  originally 
served  (sec.  135).  The  King  was  empowered  to 
increase  the  Local  Militia  to  six  times  the  quota  of  the 
Regular  Militia,  on  summoning  Parliament  within  four- 
teen days  (sec.  156).  Counties  were  to  be  fined  £1  ^  for 
every  man  deficient  of  their  quota  on  the  14th  of  February 
every  year  (sees.  176,  177)  ;  and  the  payment  of  this 
fine  was  to  be  accepted  in  discharge  of  its  duty  in  raising 
and  training  men  (sec.  185).  Local  Militiamen  actually 
serving  were  exempted  from  payment  of  rates  towards 
these  fines. 

The  most  important  novelties  in  this  Act  were,  first, 
the  reduction  of  the  strength  of  the  Local  Militia,  and, 
secondly,  the  power  given  to  Local  Militiamen  to  pro- 
long their  service,  which  was  justly  criticised  in  Parliament 


IV  LOCAL  MILITIA  RE-ENGAGED         265 

as  an  abandonment  of  the  original  principle  of  putting  iSri. 
the  whole  population  through  the  ranks.  It  was 
defended  on  the  ground  that  it  would  produce  a  more 
effective  force,  avert  the  need  for  calling  men  from 
their  ordinary  avocations,  and  save  ^100,000  a  year. 
No  doubt  at  so  critical  a  time  these  were  important 
considerations  ;  and  yet  it  was  a  great  misfortune  that 
Ministers  should  have  yielded  to  them.  For  the  first 
time  Castlereagh  had  compelled  the  country  to  recognise 
that  it  was  the  duty  of  every  able-bodied  citizen  in  the 
prime  of  life  to  be  trained  to  arms,  and  had  introduced 
legislation,  none  too  drastic,  to  enforce  that  duty.  Yet 
the  Act  vitiated  this  good  service,  first  by  admitting 
Volunteer  corps  without  regard  to  the  age  of  the  Volun- 
teers, and,  secondly,  by  allowing  men  who  were  ready  to 
do  their  duty  to  take  the  place  of  men  who  were  not. 
In  both  cases  they  admitted  the  very  principle  which 
they  professed  to  repudiate — that  of  substitution — and 
this  was  a  most  objectionable  compromise.  It  was 
unstatesmanlike  since  it  took  no  thought  for  the  future, 
whereas  Castlereagh  had  designed  the  Local  Militia  to 
be  a  permanent  force  ;  and  it  was  unnecessary,  because 
the  country  was  still  conscious  that  its  fate  was  uncertain 
and  could  only  be  assured  by  a  great  effort. 

The  truth  seems  to  have  been  that  Government  had 
not  foreseen  an  embarrassment  which  was  bound  inevit- 
ably to  show  itself  when,  as  was  the  case  in  1 8 1 2,  the 
four  years'  service  of  the  first  batch  of  Local  Militia- 
men should  expire.  As  the  entire  force  was  created 
practically  at  the  same  moment,  it  followed  necessarily 
that  the  entire  force  became  entitled  to  its  discharge  at 
the  same  moment,  and  that  consequently,  unless  a 
certain  number  of  men  were  allowed  to  re-engage,  no 
old  soldiers  would  be  left  to  leaven  the  raw  recruits. 
An  officer  in  the  Edinburgh  Local  Militia  pointed  out 
a  remedy  for  this  by  suggesting  that  every  man  on 
reaching  the  age  of  eighteen  should,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  be  enrolled  in  the  Local  Militia,  and  that  some 
machinery  should  be  devised  for  the  automatic  enlist- 


266       LOCAL  MILITIA  RE-ENGAGED     chap. 

1812.  ment  and  discharge  every  year  of  a  certain  fraction  of 
the  men  liable  to  service.^  In  the  absence  of  such 
machinery  the  Lieutenancies  were  at  a  loss  to  know 
what  to  do.  Many  of  them  recognised  the  importance 
of  making  the  Local  Militia  a  means  of  national 
training  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  the  officers  naturally 
clamoured  for  a  few  old  soldiers  to  be  left  to  them. 
Here,  however,  a  further  difficulty  arose.  A  bounty  was 
to  be  allowed  under  the  Act  to  every  Local  Militiaman 
who  extended  his  service,  but  the  bounty  was  to  be  paid 
not  by  the  counties  but  by  the  parishes.  Now  when 
the  Volunteers  transferred  their  services  to  the  Local 
Militia,  it  had  frequently  happened  that  through  the  zeal 
and  good  example  of  the  gentry  one  parish  had  contributed 
every  able-bodied  man  to  the  service,  while  its  neighbour, 
from  want  of  natural  leaders,  had  contributed  none.  The 
Local  Militiamen  of  the  zealous  parish  were  ready  and 
eager  to  re-engage  for  a  further  period  of  service  ;  but 
the  parochial  ratepayers  felt  it  to  be  a  poor  return  for 
their  patriotism  that  they  should  be  subjected  to  an  extra 
tax  for  bounties  because  they  had  provided  more  men 
than  their  neighbours  for  defence  of  the  country  ;  and 
complaints  upon  this  account  were  very  common.^ 

However,  in  spite  of  these  drawbacks  and  of  some 
perilous  reforms  wrought  by  the  new  Act,  the  Local 
Militia  appears  to  have  passed  through  the  year  1812 
very  quietly.  Some  Commanding  Officers  dreaded  the 
abolition  of  the  marching-guinea  and  the  change  which 
gave  Local  Militiamen  exemption  for  only  one  instead 
of  two  years  from  the  Regular  Militia  ballot ;  but  on 
the  other  hand  the  grant  of  relief  to  their  wives  and 
families  in  all  circumstances,  the  exemption  from  the 
duty  of  acting  as  peace-officers,  and   the  promise,  if 

^  I.D.  vol.  ccxxvi.  Sir  A.  Muir  Mackenzie  to  the  Lord  Chief 
Baron,  24th  Dec.  1812. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  ccxxvii.  C.G.M.  Glamorgan,  to  S.S.  i6th  Sept.  18 12, 
one  specimen  which  must  serve  for  many.  The  Sec.  of  State 
expressly  disclaimed  the  provision  of  the  bounty  from  the  Imperial 
Exchequer  in  a  letter  to  L.L.  Caithness,  14th  Aug.  18 12,  H.O.L.M. 
E.B.  vol.  liv. 


IV  FRICTION  BETWEEN  MILITIAS     267 

they  were  called  out  on  active  service,  of  freedom  to  18 1». 
carry  on  their  trades  in  every  town  in  the  Kingdom, 
seem  to  have  reconciled  the  men  to  these  unpopular 
conditions.^  The  Local  Militia  was  frequently  employed 
in  suppressing  riots  in  Cheshire,  Lancashire,  Yorkshire, 
and  Derbyshire  during  the  course  of  the  year,  but  there 
was  no  trouble  in  the  force  itself.  It  is  true,  however, 
that  the  Lieutenancy  of  Cheshire  recommended  that  the 
Stockport  and  Macclesfield  Local  Militia  should  not  be 
assembled,  owing  to  the  disturbed  state  of  the  district 
and  the  probability  that  every  private  in  the  corps  was 
more  or  less  concerned  with  the  causes  of  the  unrest.^ 
The  force  had,  in  fact,  definitely  settled  down  to  its 
work;  and  there  seemed  to  be  good  prospect  that,  if 
permitted  to  remain  in  existence,  it  might  yet  serve  its 
purpose  of  giving  military  training  to  the  whole  nation. 
The  continued  separation  of  the  Local  Militia  from 
the  Regular  Militia,  nevertheless,  remained  a  source  of 
weakness  and  of  friction.  The  restriction  of  the  Local 
Militia  to  men  between  eighteen  and  thirty  years  of  age, 
and  the  exemption  of  these  men,  even  for  one  year 
after  their  term  had  expired,  from  the  ballot  for  the 
Regular  Militia,  naturally  tended  to  throw  service  in 
the  Regular  Militia  chiefly  upon  men  over  thirty  years 
old,  who  were  for  the  most  part  married,  husbands  and 
fathers.  The  only  possible  remedy  would  have  been 
to  blend  the  two  Militias  into  a  single  Militia  of  two 
classes,  to  make  all  the  younger  men  pass  through  the 
Local  Militia  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  to  give  them 
no  exemption  from  the  ballot  for  the  Regular  Militia. 
Moreover,  personal  service  only,  and  not  service  by 
substitute,  in  the  Regular  Militia,  should  have  availed 
to  earn  exemption  from  service  in  the  Local  Militia. 
Had  the  war  been  prolonged  it  is  possible  that  the 

1  I.D.  vol.  ccxxviii.  O.C.  4th  Lanark  L.M.  to  S.S.  8th  Sept. 

1812.  ^   .     •,         , 

2  Ibid.voX.  ccxxiii.  Minutes  of  G.M.  Cheshire,  25th  April  ;  vol. 
ccxxix.  Printed  Minutes  of  Lieutenancy  of  Lanes,  ist  May  ;  vol. 
ccxxxv.,  O.C.  Sheffield  L.M.  to  S.S.  i8th  April  181 2. 


268  FOREIGN  AFFAIRS  chap. 

j8i2.  organisation  might  have  been  perfected  ;  but,  as  things 
were,  the  initial  blunders  of  Addington  and  Pitt  had 
consumed  in  foolish  experiments  the  years  which  might 
have  been  devoted  to  the  building  up  of  a  sound  and 
permanent  system. 

For  the  rest,  this  year  1812  was  the  great  year  of 
the  war,  which  saw  most  of  the  armies  of  Europe  march 
into  Russia  under  the  banners  of  Napoleon,  to  return 
not  again  except  as  a  scanty  remnant.  In  Spain  the 
operations  had  been  marked  by  a  series  of  brilliant 
British  successes  at  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  Badajoz,  and 
Salamanca.  The  Army  in  the  Peninsula  had  been 
reinforced  in  the  course  of  the  year  by  over  20,000 
men,  exclusive  of  nearly  1 1 ,000  drafts  sent  out  to  make 
good  the  waste  of  war  ;  ^  and  though  the  greater  part 
of  these  had  not  joined  the  Army  until  after  the  battle 
of  Salamanca,  they  were  nevertheless  upon  the  spot 
ready  for  the  next  campaign.  Moreover,  for  the  first 
time  a  detachment  from  the  enormous  garrison  which 
was  kept  idle  in  Sicily  had  been  withdrawn  for  service 
upon  the  east  coast  of  Spain.  The  time  was  come  for 
a  great  effort ;  and  the  country  was  fully  alive  to  the 
importance  of  making  that  effort.  One  cloud  only 
obscured  the  general  brightness  of  the  outlook.  Long 
disputes  with  America  over  the  British  maritime  code 
had  at  length  culminated  in  war. 

The  casualties  among  the  British  troops  for  the  year 
1 8 12  amounted  to  20,313  ;  and  among  all  the  troops 
in  British  pay,  to  29,562.^  In  the  course  of  the  year 
there  had  been  obtained  by  ordinary  recruiting  in  the 
United  Kingdom  12,563  men  and  1869  boys,  making 
a  total  of  14,432  ;  and  as  many  of  the  boys  enlisted  in 
former  years  must  by  this  time  have  grown  to  men's 

^  H.D.  Lords,  Lord  Wellesley's  speech,  12th  March  18 13. 

2  Another  return  in  C.J.  gives  the  figure  as  26,687.  Palmerston 
in  his  speech  {H.D.  8th  March  181 3)  explains  the  discrepancy  as 
due  to  the  fact  that  disabled  men  sent  home  from  the  seat  of  war 
were  struck  off  the  effective  list,  and  not  immediately  accounted  for 
upon  their  arrival  in  England. 


IV     CASUALTIES  AND  RECRUITS,  1813     269 

estate,  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  actual  gain  was  not  181 2. 
far  short  of  14,000  men.  Besides  these  the  Militia  had 
contributed  its  full  quota  of  9927  men,  making  in  all 
little  short  of  24,000  men  gained  in  the  course  of  the 
year.  Additional  battalions  had  been  furnished  to  the 
amount  of  5300  men  ;  two  new  Fencible  battalions  had 
been  raised  for  defence  of  Canada  ;  additional  Veteran 
Battalions,  British  and  foreign,  had  been  formed  for 
the  employment  of  men  who,  though  unfitted  by 
wounds  or  injury  for  service  in  the  field,  were  equal  to 
work  in  garrison.  Moreover,  the  establishment  of 
foreign  corps  had  been  raised  by  2000  men.  Altogether 
Palmerston  was  able  to  state  in  the  Commons  that 
against  the  29,562  casualties  suffered  during  18 12,  he 
could  set  39,762  men,  British  and  foreign,  added  to  the 
Army  ;  making  a  net  gain  of  10,200  effective  men, 
four-fifths  of  them  indeed  foreign,  but  2000  British. 


VI 

The  full  establishment  of  Regular  troops  of  all  arms,  18 13. 
British  and  foreign,  voted  for  the  year  18 13  was 
314,531;  of  which  the  foreigners  numbered  33,203.^ 
Their  effective  strength  was,  on  the  25  th  of  January 
1813,  255,876;  of  which  203,000  were  British,  and 
the  remainder  foreign  and  Colonial.  The  establishment 
of  the  Regular  Militia  was  93,210  men,  and  its  actual 
strength  71,000  ;  that  of  the  Local  Militia,  as  fixed  by 
the  Act,  was  193,912.  The  Volunteers  had  continued 
to  dwindle  during  18 12,  until  Huskisson  in  debate 
described  them  as  a  merely  nominal  force,  except  in 
Ireland.  The  infantry,''  with  the  exception  of  a  few 
corps  in  Middlesex,  Surrey,  Kent,  Devon,  Gloucester, 
Hants,  and  Northumberland,  was  finally  dissolved  by 
a  circular  of  17th  March   18 13,  their  weapons  being 

1  In  181Z  the  figures  had  been  304,896  and  32,525. 

2  Its  strength  is  given  in  a  return  of  6th  March  18 12  as  49,436 
effective  rank  and  file  ;  or  30,000  below  its  establishment. 


270  MILITARY  MEASURES,  1813         chap. 

181 3.  required  to  arm  the  insurgent  Prussians  against 
Napoleon/  The  Yeomanry,  on  the  other  hand,  was 
left  untouched  ;  indeed  later  in  the  year  Ministers 
announced  that  they  desired  to  increase  its  efficiency, 
and  to  that  end  encouraged  the  incorporation  of  all 
isolated  troops  into  regiments,  offering  also  the  pay  of 
Regular  cavalry  to  all  which  would  come  out  for  twelve 
days'  permanent  duty  annually.^  The  Government  was 
evidently  awaking  to  the  fact  that  the  Yeomanry  was  a 
far  more  valuable  force  than  the  Volunteers,  of  which 
it  had  formerly  been  reckoned  a  part. 

The  military  measures  brought  before  Parliament 
in  the  spring  were  comparatively  unimportant.  The 
Militia  of  the  Stannaries  had  complained  that  they  were 
not  allowed  to  enlist  into  the  Line,^  having  volunteered 
in  vain  for  service  as  a  complete  regiment  in  the  Penin- 
sula ;  and  an  Act  was  accordingly  passed  to  enable  them 
to  enlist,  to  the  proportion  of  one-seventh  of  the  quota 
of  1802  (53  Geo.  III.  cap.  20;  23rd  March  18 13).  A 
short  amending  Act  was  also  passed  to  alter  slightly  the 
dates  for  holding  the  ballots  for  the  Local  Militia, -to 
allow  battalions  of  the  force  to  consist  of  no  more  than 
six  companies,  and  to  regulate  the  appointment  of  the 
quotas  in  counties  where  there  were  effective  Yeomanry 
and  Volunteers  (53  Geo.  III.  cap.  28,  England  ;  cap. 
29,  Scotland).  A  short  Act  to  amend  the  Militia  laws 
was  also  passed  (53  Geo.  III.  cap.  81 ;  2nd  July  18 13), 
which  enacted  that  a  Volunteer,  whose  corps  had  been 
discontinued  by  Royal  order,  should  not  be  liable  to 
serve  in  the  Militia  if  drawn  for  the  ballot  while  he  was 
an  effective  Volunteer  (sec.  4).  The  King  was  further 
empowered  to  order  supernumerary  Militiamen  to  be 
raised  by  beat  of  drum  to  the  proportion  of  one-half  of 
the  quota  fixed  by  51  Geo.  III.  cap.  20  ;  and  Com- 
manding Officers  of  Militia  were  authorised  to  raise  men 

1  Circular  to  L.Ls.  of  England,  17th  March  181 3. 

2  Circular  to  L.Ls.  29th  Oct.  1813. 

'  I.D.  vol.  ccxxxiii.  Warden  of  the  Stannaries  to  Col.  Lemon, 
18th  Nov.  1812. 


IV    ORDINARY  RECRUITING  IMPROVES    271 

by  beat  of  drum  at  the  headquarters  of  their  regiments,  181 3. 
or  within  ten  miles  thereof,  even  though  such  head- 
quarters should  be  remote  from  their  own  county  (sees. 
6,  7).  The  number  of  men  enlisting  into  the  Line  in 
counties  having  more  than  one  regiment  of  Militia  was 
restricted  to  one-seventh  of  the  establishment  of  the 
Militia,  irrespective  of  the  number  actually  serving ;  but 
if,  on  the  24th  of  January  in  any  year,  the  actual  number 
of  men  serving,  after  deduction  of  the  quota  allowed  to 
enlist  into  the  Line,  exceeded  the  establishment,  such 
excess  of  men  was  to  be  allowed  to  enlist  also  (sees.  8, 
9).  For  the  first  time  since  the  war  began  no  special 
provision  was  necessary  for  raising  recruits  ;  and  the 
existing  machinery  worked  smoothly  and  well.  Never- 
theless, one  or  two  regiments  of  Militia  began  to  show 
signs  of  exhaustion,  or  at  any  rate  of  unwillingness  to 
furnish  their  quotas  of  men  to  the  Line  ;  for  between 
the  ist  of  April  and  the  25th  of  November  18 13  the 
Militia  furnished  no  more  than  9095  recruits,  out  of  its 
appointed  10,000,  for  the  Regular  Army.^  Ordinary 
recruiting,  however,  flourished  astonishingly  under  the 
new  regulations,  producing  in  the  course  of  the  year 
12,824  men  and  1874  boys,  or  an  average  of  a  full 
thousand  men  a  month. 

It  must,  however,  be  noted  that  some  of  these  recruits 
were  obtained  by  exceptional  methods.  In  order  to 
increase  the  force  in  America  the  Militia  of  thirteen 
Scottish  counties,  and  of  Wicklow,  South  Lincolnshire, 
West  Suffolk,  South  Hants,  and  West  Norfolk,  received 
permission  to  enlist  men  for  the  Forty-Ninth  Foot  for 
service  in  North  America  only,  with  an  assurance  of 
discharge  within  six  months  of  a  general  peace  ;  of  a 
grant  of  fifty  acres  of  land  to  privates,  sixty  acres  to 
corporals,  and  seventy-five  to  sergeants  ;  and  of  a  free 
passage  for  their  wives  and  families  to  Quebec  within 
twelve  months  of  the  husbands'  departure.* 

1  Return  in  C.J.  vol.  Ixix.  p.  638. 

2  The  English  and  Irish  regiments  above  named,  together  with 
the  Fife,  Perth,  Berwick,  Kirkcudbright,  and  Ross  regiments,  were 


272    MILITIA  RECRUITING  TROUBLES  chap. 

1813.  There   was    some    little    trouble    with    the    Scottish 

Militia  in  some  quarters,  owing  to  the  claim  of  a  great 
many  substitutes  to  be  discharged  on  the  completion  of 
ten  years'  service.  It  seems  that  this  was  the  result  of 
a  regular  agitation  set  on  foot  by  some  pettifogging 
lawyers  in  various  parts  of  Scotland  ;  but  the  wording 
of  the  Act  was  so  plainly  adverse  to  any  such  claim,  that 
the  men  were  easily  persuaded  of  their  folly,  and  the 
mischief  was  stamped  out  with  little  trouble.^ 

Another  and  more  serious  difficulty  was  that  the 
system  of  maintaining  the  Regular  Militia  by  voluntary 
enlistment  began  to  show  signs  of  breaking  down, 
even  though  the  bounty  offered  to  both  boys  and  men 
was  ten  guineas.^  The  provision  in  the  Act  of  18 13 
which  allowed  Commanding  Officers  to  recruit  men  at 
their  regimental  headquarters,  wherever  they  might  be 
stationed,  was  intended  to  remedy  this  failing,  but  it  is 
extremely  doubtful  whether  it  did  so.  Commanding 
Officers  were  loth  to  destroy  the  local  character  of  their 
regiments  by  taking  in  aliens  from  other  counties  ;  and 
in  cases  where  their  numbers  were  fallen  very  low,  they 
asked  rather  to  be  sent  back  for  a  time  to  their  county 
town  than  for  power  to  enlist  recruits  in  a  strange 
land.^  On  the  other  hand  it  appears  that  Highlanders 
would  follow  a  Highland  Militia  regiment  to  any 
quarter,  and  refuse  to  enlist  in  any  other.*  But  the 
concession  granted  by  the  Act  of  1 8 1 3  was  vitiated  for 

informed  at  the  same  time  that  on  the  istof  June  they  might  offer 
the  following  bounties  to  men  who  would  enlist  in  the  Regular 
infantry  : — viz.  to  men  who  were  serving  before  the  1st  of  April, 
14  guineas  for  life  service  and  10  guineas  for  limited  service  ;  to 
men  who  had  served  only  since  31st  March,  10  guineas  for  life 
service  and  6  guineas  for  short  service.  I.D.  vol.  ccl.  Circ.  of  S.S. 
14th  May  1813. 

^  I.D.  vol.  ccxxxvi.  O.C.  Banff  and  Inverness  Mila.  to  S.S.  29th 
Jan.,  nth,  26th  Feb.,  23rd  March  ;  vol.  ccxxxvii.  Lieut.-General 
Wynyard  to  A.G.  2nd  Jan.  181 3. 

2  liiJ.  vol.  ccxli.  Commdt.  Edinburgh  Mila.  Depot  to  S.S.  7th 
Oct.;  S.S.  to  Commdt.  nth  Oct.  18 13. 

3  Hid.  vol.  ccliii.  O.C.  Beds.  Mila.  to  S.S.  7th  Jan.  18 14. 

*  Ibid.  vol.  ccxxxviii.  O.C.  Ross  Mila.  to  S.S.  17th  Feb.  1813. 


IV  FRICTION  BETWEEN  MILITIAS      273 

purposes  of  recruiting  by  the  standing  order  which  1813. 
forbade  Local  Militiamen  to  be  enlisted  in  any  Regular 
Militia  but  that  of  their  own  county.^  It  was  useless  to 
give  commanders  power  to  invite  recruits  outside  their 
counties  when  all  the  finest  young  men,  being  absorbed 
by  the  Local  Militia,  were  withheld  from  them.  In 
truth,  the  competition  between  the  Local  and  the  Regular 
Militia  had  become  acute,  and  the  Commanding  Officers 
of  the  latter  began  to  complain  bitterly.  ♦*  The  Local 
Militia  has  become  a  source  of  patronage  to  its  com- 
manders," wrote  the  Colonel  of  the  Cardigan  Militia. 
"  Lately  sixty  young  men  offered  themselves  to  one 
of  our  County  Local  Militia  regiments.  The  Com- 
manding Officer  took  forty  of  them,  and  discharged 
that  number  of  undesirable  men.  Hence  the  ballot  for 
the  Regular  Militia  falls  on  old  and  married  men,  in 
fact,  on  the  rejected  of  the  Local  Militia.  If  they  serve 
in  person,  they  are  fit  for  nothing  ;  and  their  substitutes 
from  the  manufacturing  districts  desert."  From  Lanca- 
shire came  a  similar  remonstrance  owing  to  the  difficulty 
of  raising  Regular  Militiamen  by  beat  of  drum.  "Exemp- 
tion from  the  Militia  ballot  draws  the  finest  young  men 
to  the  Local  Militia,  because  if  they  wish  to  enlist  from 
thence  into  the  Line,  they  can  do  so  when  they  please. 
These  men  if  ballotted  [for  the  Regular  Militia]  would 
serve  ;  or  they  would  enlist  in  the  Line  or  Regular 
Militia  rather  than  risk  losing  the  bounty.  As  it  is, 
service  in  the  Regular  Militia  is  forced  upon  men  to 
whom  it  is  almost  ruin,  or  they  must  give  enormous 
bounties  to  substitutes." " 

These  were  serious  symptoms  ;  and  not  less  formid- 
able was  the  depleted  condition  of  some  of  the 
Militia  regiments  in  consequence  of  the  heavy  drafts 
required  from  them  by  the  Line,  and  the  discharge  of 

1  I.D.  vol.  ccxl.  O.C.  Devon  Mila.  to  S.S.  nth  July  ;  S.S.  to 
O.C.  Devon  Mila,  12th  July  1813. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  ccxli.  O.C.  Glamorgan  Mila.  to  S.S.  20th  Jan.;  vol. 
ccxxxviii.  O.C.  Cardigan  Mila.  to  S.S.  26th  Feb.  ;  vol.  ccxliii. 
O.C.  1st  Lanes  Mila.  to  S.S.  Feb.  18 13. 

T 


274     REGULAR  MILITIA  DEPLETED      chap. 

1813.  principals  upon  the  expiration  of  their  term  of  service. 
The  Adjutant  of  the  Notts  Militia  reported  that  he  had 
five  hundred  men  who  had  never  handled  a  firelock, 
and  fourteen  sergeants  out  of  thirty-one  who  were  new 
to  their  work.  He  therefore  begged  that  he  might 
be  allowed  to  give  his  non-commissioned  officers  seven 
days  of  preliminary  instruction  before  the  training  ;  ^ 
but  his  letter  was  not  even  answered.  Many  other 
regiments  must  have  been  in  much  the  same  condition, 
but  no  heed  appears  to  have  been  taken  of  them. 
Events  were  moving  fast  in  Europe,  and  Ministers 
appear  to  have  left  all  minor  details  to  chance.  Mem- 
bers of  disbanded  Volunteer  Corps  complained  loudly, 
and  not  unreasonably,  that  after  all  their  years  of  service 
they  had  lost  their  exemption  from  the  Local  Militia 
ballot  through  no  fault  of  their  own.  Ministers 
expressed  regret.  They  had  hoped  that  the  ballots 
would  have  been  over  before  the  time  appointed  for  the 
dissolution  of  the  Volunteer  Corps  ;  but  as  it  was  not 
so,  the  Volunteers  must  take  the  consequences,^  More- 
over, as  the  Regular  Militia  ballot  recommenced  on  the 
I  St  of  July  1 8 13,  the  Volunteers  became  subject  to  that 
also,  with  the  alternative  of  paying  from  ^^30  to  ^^40 
for  a  substitute.^  Emphatically  the  last  state  of  the 
Volunteers  was  worse  than  the  first. 

But  there  was  much  excuse  for  ignoring  such  small 
matters  as  these,  for  as  the  year  waned  disaster  upon 
disaster  befell  the  hated  Bonaparte.  Prussia  had  turned 
upon  him  early  in  the  year ;  Sweden  had  followed  her 
later  ;  and  in  August  Austria  at  last  threw  in  her  lot 
against  him.  Two  long  and  chequered  campaigns  were 
ended  in  October  by  the  decisive  overthrow  of  Napoleon 
at  Leipsic  ;  and  in  November  the  wreck  of  his  army 

^  I.D.  vol.  ccxlvi.  Adjt.  Notts  Mila.  to  S.S.  20th  March 
1813. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  ccxlviii.  Geo.  Jackson  (Surrey)  to  S.S.  23rd  April  ; 
S.S.  to  Geo.  Jackson,  26th  April  1813. 

3  IbU.  vol.  ccl.  L.L.  York  West  Riding,  to  S.S.  25th  April 
1813. 


IV  STRENGTH  OF  FORCES,  1813  275 

retired  across  the  Rhine.  A  few  weeks  earlier  Welling-  1813, 
ton,  having  utterly  defeated  Joseph  at  Vittoria  in  June, 
had  crossed  the  Spanish  frontier  into  France  ;  and  on 
the  loth  of  November  he  drove  Soult  from  the  lines  of 
the  Nivelle  with  heavy  loss.  A  week  before,  on  the 
4th  of  November,  Parliament  met  and  Casdereagh 
announced  that  the  time  was  come  for  a  supreme  effort. 
First  he  intimated  that,  in  spite  of  all  the  country's 
exertions,  the  Army  and  Militia  were  as  strong  numeric- 
ally as  ever  ;  for  improved  attention  to  the  health  and 
discipline  of  the  troops  had  so  greatly  reduced  casualties, 
including  desertion,  that  they  amounted  to  little  more 
than  12  or  14  per  cent  in  time  of  war,  whereas  they 
had  formerly  amounted  to  10  per  cent  even  in  the 
profoundest  peace.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  returns 
show  that  in  spite  of  heavy  casualties  in  the  Peninsula, 
the  effective  strength  of  the  Regular  troops,  British  and 
foreign,  was  260,797  on  the  25th  of  September  18 13, 
against  255,876  on  the  25  th  of  January  1813  ;  while 
the  strength  of  the  Militia  during  the  same  period 
had  been  reduced  only  from  71,055  to  69,886.  The 
casualties  for  the  year,  according  to  Castlereagh's 
estimate,  would  not  exceed  30,000 ;  but  while  he 
thought  that  ordinary  recruiting  would  continue  to  be 
successful  under  the  new  system,  he  doubted  the 
adequacy  of  the  supply  that  would  be  derived  from  the 
Militia.  Since  1 805  that  force  had  furnished  close  upon 
100,000  men  to  the  Army,  and  the  70,000  men,  of  which 
it  was  at  the  highest  computation  composed,  were  for  the 
most  part  ready  to  enter  the  Line.  But  some  of  them 
were  unfit  for  foreign  service,  and  he  did  not  therefore 
wish  to  send  the  regiments  bodily  out  of  the  country, 
but  to  allow  them  to  give  men  enough  to  the  Line 
to  enable  England  to  maintain  her  present  attitude.  He 
would  therefore  leave  at  least  one-fourth  of  each  regiment 
at  home ;  but  would  offer  a  small  additional  bounty  to 
tempt  the  rest  to  enlist,  and  if  a  certain  number  accepted 
service,  would  permit  their  officers  to  go  with  them.  In 
addition  to  this,  he  proposed  to  allow  a  certain  number 


276    FOREIGN  SERVICE  FOR  MILITIA    chap. 

1813.  to  serve  abroad  as  Militiamen  in  Provisional  Battalions, 
so  that  their  wives  and  families  could  enjoy  parochial 
support  during  their  absence,  their  service  abroad  being 
limited  to  Europe,  and  their  Commanding  Officers  to 
be  Colonels  of  Militia.  As  to  numbers,  he  proposed  to 
take  from  the  Regular  Militia  the  10,000  men  allowed 
every  year  by  law,  a  further  quota  of  1 0,000  in  advance, 
and  6000  to  8000  men  due  from  certain  counties  which 
had  not  produced  their  full  quota  in  former  years. 
These,  added  to  the  numbers  obtained  by  ordinary 
recruiting,  would,  he  hoped,  bring  the  year's  supply  to 
40,000  men.  For  the  rest  he  intended  to  allow 
Militiamen  to  count  previous  service  in  the  Militia 
towards  their  pensions,  and  to  give  pensions  also  to 
Militia  sergeants,  in  order  to  encourage  men  to  enlist. 

The  Bill  was  unopposed  upon  any  ground  even  by 
the  most  hardened  sticklers  for  constitutional  nicety, 
and  it  duly  became  law  on  the  24th  of  November  (54 
Geo.  III.  cap.  i  ;  for  the  City  of  London,^  cap.  1 7  ;  for 
the  Stannaries,  cap.  20).  Hereby  the  King  was 
empowered  to  accept  voluntary  offers  from  three- 
quarters  of  the  actual  number  of  men  in  any  Regular 
Militia  regiment  of  the  United  Kingdom,  to  serve  in 
any  part  of  Europe  (sec.  i).  A  bounty  of  eight 
guineas  was  to  be  given  to  all  non-commissioned  officers 
and  men  who  made  such  offer,  and  they  were  to  be 
sworn  to  serve  in  any  part  of  Europe  during  the 
remainder  of  the  war  and  until  six  months  after  the 
ratification  of  a  definitive  treaty  of  peace  (sec.  2). 
The  proportion  of  officers  to  be  accepted  was  as. 
follows  : — 

From  any  regiment  providing  900  men        .  3  field-officers 

From  any  regiment  providing  600  men        .  2     „         „ 
From  any  regiment  providing  300  men  or 

three-quarters  of  its  actual  strength      .  i     „         „ 

A  proportion  of  other  officers  might  also  be  accepted 
(sec.  4).     The  men  volunteering  on  these  terms  might 

^  Another  Act  (54  Geo.  III.  cap.  38)  was  passed  to  allow  a  pro- 
portion of  the  London  Militia  to  enlist  in  the  Line. 


IV       MILITIA  ENLISTMENT  ACT,  1813     277 

be  formed  into  provisional  battalions  (sec.  5).  No  181 3. 
officer  of  Militia  was  to  rank  with  the  Regulars  higher 
than  as  a  Lieutenant-Colonel  of  Militia  ;  and  if  sufficient 
Militia  officers  did  not  offer  themselves,  the  King  might 
appoint  others  (sees.  6,  7).  The  Militia  officers  accepting 
service  under  the  Act  were  entitled  to  half-pay,  and 
their  widows  to  pensions  (sec.  8).  All  ranks  of  Militia- 
men were  to  be  subject  to  the  Mutiny  Act  (sec.  o)  ; 
but  in  other  respects  they  were  to  retain  their  immunities 
and  privileges,  provision  for  wives  and  families,  etc.  (sec. 
10).  In  the  case  of  men  enlisting  into  the  Line,  the 
King  could  grant  commissions  in  the  Regular  Army  to 
Militia  officers  in  the  proportions  of  a  captain,  lieutenant, 
and  ensign  for  every  hundred  men;  and  five  sergeants  and 
six  corporals  could  likewise  be  enlisted  for  every  hundred 
privates.  Officers  could  be  allowed  also  to  smaller 
numbers  of  men  enlisted.  Such  companies  could  be 
attached  to  existing  battalions  of  the  Line,  or  massed 
together  into  additional  battalions  (sec.  12).  Their 
officers  were  to  be  entitled  to  half-pay  (sec.  18).  Com- 
manding Officers  of  Militia  were  empowered  to  refuse, 
on  sufficient  cause  shown,  to  discharge  Militiamen 
anxious  to  enlist  in  the  Line  ;  and  no  clerk  or  bands- 
man could  be  enlisted  without  the  consent  of  the  Com- 
manding Officer  (sees.  14,  15).  No  man  was  to  be 
drafted  from  the  regiment  in  which  he  had  enlisted 
without  his  own  consent  (sec.  16).  The  number  of 
men  to  be  enlisted  for  service  in  any  part  of  Europe 
was  not  to  exceed  30,000  men,  nor  three-fourths  of  the 
actual  strength  of  any  regiment  (sec.  19). 

Another  Act  (54  Geo.  III.  cap.  10,  6th  Dec.  18 13) 
enabled  the  Regular  Militia  to  be  employed  in  any  part 
of  the  United  Kingdom  without  reference  to  the  re- 
strictions in  51  Geo.  III.  cap.  118.  Yet  another  (54 
Geo.  III.  cap.  12)  empowered  the  King  to  augment  his 
foreign  force  by  the  addition  of  eighth,  ninth,  and 
tenth  battalions  to  the  Sixtieth  Rifles  ;  and  a  third  (54 
Geo.  III.  cap.  19)  authorised  the  King  to  accept  offers 
of  Local  Militia  to  serve  out  of  their  counties  until  the 


278         PROVISIONAL  BATTALIONS  chap. 

1813.  ^  25th  of  March  1 8 1 5,  for  not  more  than  forty-two  days  in 
the  year,  such  service  to  be  treated  as  part  of  the  annual 
training,  and,  if  it  exceeded  twenty-eight  days,  to  be 
accepted  in  lieu  of  it. 

These  measures  were,  of  course,  one  and  all  of  them 
revolutionary  and  adapted  for  an  exceptional  and  extra- 
ordinary crisis  only  ;  but  they  do  not  seem  to  have 
been  very  successful.  The  Local  Militia,  on  the  whole, 
though  there  were  a  few  exceptions,  offered  to  extend 
its  services  all  over  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance 
with  the  Act ;  but  the  Regular  Militia  by  no  means 
displayed  any  great  alacrity  to  extend  its  service  to 
Europe.  In  the  first  place,  the  Government  seems  to 
have  made  a  mistake  in  offering  two  different  kinds  of 
service  to  the  Militia,  for  the  officers  did  not  know  to 
which  to  encourage  their  men.  They  assumed  that  the 
Government  would  prefer  recruits  for  the  Line  pure  and 
simple,  and  used  their  influence  accordingly,  with  the 
more  readiness  since  a  smaller^number  of  men,  according 
to  former  regulations,  entitled  Militia  officers  to  a 
commission  in  the  Regular  Army.  It  was  therefore  a 
shock  and  a  surprise  to  them  when  they  were  informed 
that  Ministers  preferred  men  to  engage  for  the  Pro- 
visional Militia  Battalions,  and  would  accept  no  offer  from 
ofScers  unless  they  brought  eighty  privates  with  them.^ 
But  apart  from  this,  the  men  were  generally  unwilling  to 
serve  in  the  Provisional  Militia  battalions  except  on 
various  conditions,  such  as  being  left  with  their  own 
company-officers  or  field-officers,  and  the  like.  Thus 
in  the  Cornish  Militia  at  one  moment  107  men  were 
ready  to  serve  abroad  as  Militiamen  on  one  day,  but 
only  80  a  fortnight  later,  though  154  willingly  enlisted 
in  the  Line.  In  Westmoreland,  on  the  other  hand, 
nearly  200  men  came  forward  to  serve  abroad  as 
Militia  ;  whereas  in  Cumberland  there  were  only  17 
men  ready  to  accompany  14  officers.     In  Denbigh  the 

^  S.S.  to  O.Cs.  of  27  Militia  regiments,  6th,  9th,  nth,  13th, 
14th,  15th,  1 8th,  20th,  23rd,  30th  Dec.  I.D.  vol.  ccxli.  Staff 
officers  of  Glamorgan  Mila.  to  S.S.  9th  Dec.  18 13. 


IV  FAILURE  TO  RAISE  THEM  279 

officers  and  men  tendered  their  service  in  large  numbers  ;  i8n. 
but  they  withdrew  their  offer  unanimously  as  soon  as 
they  learned  that  their  Colonel,  Sir  Watkin  Wynn, 
would  not  be  allowed  to  accompany  them  ;  and  instead 
sent  67  recruits  to  the  Line.^  In  the  South  Devon 
Militia  every  officer  and  most  of  the  non-commissioned 
officers  volunteered  to  go  abroad  if  they  could  do  so 
with  three-fourths  of  their  men  ;  but  the  privates,  who 
were  mostly  substitutes  of  ten  years'  service,  were  dis- 
inclined to  move  unless  they  received  some  reward  for 
all  the  work  that  they  had  done.  The  East  Devon 
Militia,  which  had  long  shown  prejudice  against  enlist- 
ment into  the  Army,  sent  one  man  to  the  Line  only  ; 
and  in  the  North  Devon,  though  1 1  officers  came  forward 
to  form  a  Provisional  Battalion  on  condition  that  300 
men  would  join  them,  only  21  men  were  forthcoming. 
In  Dumfries  14  officers  and  6  men  volunteered  for 
Militia  service  abroad  and  one  man  for  the  Line.^  In 
Forfar  the  officers  presented  themselves  in  a  body,  but 
only  two  men  would  consent  to  serve  abroad  either  as 
Militiamen  or  in  the  Line.^  In  Lancashire  the  men 
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  extended  service  in  the 
Militia,  and  declined  to  enter  the  Line  unless  they 
could  choose  their  own  regiments.*  But  it  is  useless  to 
multiply  instances.  Suffice  it  that,  with  a  few  notable 
exceptions,  the  Militiamen  were  disinclined  for  service, 
as  such,  abroad ;  and  that  ultimately  after  much 
difficulty  and  confusion,  owing  to  the  withdrawal  of 
many  men  upon  second  thoughts  from  their  engage- 
ments, there  were  formed  by  the  end  of  February  only 

1  I.D.  vol.  ccxxxix.  Return  of  Cornish  Mila.  2nd  Dec,  O.C. 
Cornish  Mila.  to  S.S.  12th  Dec.  ;  O.C.  Cumberland  Mila.  to  S.S. 
3rd  Dec.  ;  O.C.  Westmoreland  Mila.  to  S.S.  28th  Nov.  ;  L.L. 
Denbigh,  to  S.S.  nth  Dec.  18 13. 

2  Ibid.  vol.  ccxl.  O.C.  S.  Devon  Mila.  to  S.S.  27th  Nov. ;  Re- 
turns of  East  and  North  Devon  Mila.  27th  Nov.,  1st  Dec.  ;  Returns 
of  Dumfries  Mila.  Nov.  18 1 3. 

3  Ibid.  vol.  ccxli.  O.C.  Forfar  Mila.  to  S.S.  9th  Dec.  1 81 3. 

4  Ibid.  vol.  ccxliii.  O.C.  ist  and  2nd  Lanes  Mila.  to  S.S.  2nd, 
3rd  Dec.  ;  Return  of  Lanes  Mila.  7th  Dec.  18 13. 


28o  IPROVISIONAL  BATTALIONS  FAIL    chap. 

1 813.  three  Provisional  Battalions,  the  First  under  Lord 
Buckingham,  979  of  all  ranks ;  the  Second  under 
Colonel  Bayley,  925  of  all  ranks  ;  and  the  Third  under 
Colonel  Sir  WatkinWynn,  881  of  all  ranks.  This  last, 
it  must  be  noted,  could  not  have  been  completed  unless 
Sir  Watkin  had  been  placed  in  command,  for,  as  has 
been  seen,  not  a  man  of  the  Denbigh  Militia  would  go 
abroad  without  him.^ 

Altogether  the  Provisional  Battalions  were  a  failure, 
partly  because  the  Militia  officers  obtained  better  terms 
by  taking  their  men  to  the  Line ;  partly  because 
neither  officers  nor  men  were  disposed  to  serve  abroad 
except  as  complete  battalions ;  and  partly  because, 
between  drafts  for  the  Army  and  the  competition 
of  the  Local  Militia,  the  patience  of  the  old 
constitutional  and  most  long-suffering  force  was 
fairly  exhausted.  The  men  formed  into  Provisional 
Battalions  numbered,  without  deducting  officers,  little 
more  than  2700.  The  Militiamen  enlisted  into  the 
Line  from  the  25  th  of  December  18 13  to  the  end  of 
the  war  in  June  did  not  exceed  3243.  Thus  the  total 
contribution  of  the  Militia  to  the  Regular  Army  during 
the  first  six  months  of  18 14  may  be  set  down  at  6000. 

^  The  three  battalions  were  formed  as  follows  : — 


First.     Buckingham's. 

Second.     Bayley's. 

Third,     Wynn's. 

Bucks  Mila.  415  all  ranks, 

.  Leicester          284  all  ranks 

.  Denbigh            1 3  5  all  ranks. 

Wilts                 93       „ 

W.  Middlesex  417        „ 

Derby                125        „ 

Northampton  1 80      „ 

E.  Suffolk          35       „ 

Hereford           no        „ 

1st  Surrey         32       „ 

Sussex                 94       „ 

Westmoreland  162        „ 

2nd  Surrey      xi8       „ 

Wilts                  95       „ 

2nd  W.  York  349        „ 

Worcester       141       „ 

925  881 

979 
^.O.  Mila.  E.B,  S.S.  to  Buckingham  and  Bayley,  14th,  29th  Jan. ; 
to  Sir  W.  Wynn,  31st  Jan.  ;  to  Buckingham,  24th  Feb.  1 8 14.  It 
must  be  remarked  upon  these  figures  that  Cambridgeshire  had 
offered  94  men  and  failed  to  produce  any,  and  that  Derby  had  at 
first  ofi^ered  328  N.C.Os.  and  men.  I.D.  vol.  ccxxxviii.  Return  of 
Cambs  Mila.  ist  Dec.  181 3  ;  Return  of  Derby  Mila.  28th  Nov., 
13th  Dec.  1813.  On  the  other  hand,  Lord  Buckingham  wrote  to 
the  Sec.  of  State  on  i8th  Jan.  18 14  that  he  made  up  his  contingent 
of  the  Bucks  from  415  to  470  {I.D.  vol.  ccliii.),  which  would  raise 
the  strength  of  his  battalion  to  1034. 


IV  STRENGTH  OF  ARMY,  1813-14        281 

Ordinary  recruiting  in  the  first  six  months  of  the  year  18 14. 
produced  5375  men  and  754  boys.  The  casualties  for 
the  same  period  cannot  be  ascertained,  being  made  out 
for  the  whole  year,  and  including  vast  numbers  of 
discharges  made  after  the  signature  of  peace  ;  but  as 
the  deaths  alone  for  the  year  amounted  to  over  12,000, 
it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  casualties  for  six 
months  from  death,  discharge,  and  desertion  reached  at 
least  that  total.  The  effective  strength  of  the  Army, 
in  rank  and  file,  had  been,  exclusive  of  foreign  and 
colonial  troops. 

On  25th  June  1813  .         .         .  2Ji,397 

On  25th  Dec.  1813  .         .         .  219,35' 

It  was  on  25th  June  1814  .         .         .  209,158 

With  the  prospects  of  peace  near  at  hand  fi*om  the 
moment  of  Napoleon's  abdication  in  April,  it  is  not  fair 
to  draw  too  strict  deductions  from  any  of  these  figures, 
though  it  must  be  remembered  that  we  were  still  at  war 
with  America.  It  must  also  be  recollected  that  Castle- 
reagh's  measures  at  the  end  of  18 13  were  by  admission 
desperate,  and  not  designed  to  meet  more  than  a 
temporary  emergency.  Nevertheless  it  must,  I  think, 
be  admitted  that  the  war  was  brought  to  a  close  before 
the  problem  of  recruiting  the  British  Army  had  been 
finally  solved. 


CHAPTER     V 

1 8 14.  Upon  a  review  of  the  whole  matter  it  may  seem  at 
first  sight  that  a  variety  of  opposing  conclusions  may 
be  drawn  from  the  facts  set  forth  in  the  foregoing 
pages.  Opponents  of  compulsory  service,  for  instance, 
can  point  to  the  constant  break-down  of  the  ballot,  to 
the  unfairness  and  oppression  which  it  caused,  and  to 
the  success  of  voluntary  enlistment  even  for  the  Militia. 
Advocates  of  Volunteers,  again,  may  adduce  the  readi- 
ness of  that  force  to  go  upon  permanent  duty,  and  its 
alacrity  in  turning  out  upon  the  few  occasions  when  a 
real  or  false  alarm  demanded  its  service.  But  the  whole 
question  of  the  recruiting  of  our  military  forces  must 
be  judged  not  by  isolated  occurrences,  but  by  the  whole 
mass  of  events  and  the  general  trend  of  legislation 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  war. 

The  initial  mistake  of  Addington  and  his  colleagues 
was  that  they  did  not  make  the  increase  and  mainten- 
ance of  the  Regular  Army  their  first  object — did  not 
perceive,  in  feet,  that  all  military  measures  which  are  not 
framed  with  the  ultimate  purpose  of  benefiting  the 
Regular  Army  are  not  only  useless  but  positively  pre- 
judicial. Thus  they  allowed  substitution  in  the  Militia 
Act  of  1 801,  though  the  exclusion  of  the  principle,  in 
the  case  of  men  enlisted  for  home  defence  only,  would 
have  been  perfectly  legitimate,  and  the  number  of 
Militiamen  called  for — 70,000  or,  including  the  Supple- 
mentary Militia,  94,000  for  a  population  of  fifteen 
millions  in  the  United  Kingdom — certainly  cannot  be 
considered   oppressive.     By   the  express  words  of  the 

282 


CHAP.v        SUMMARY— ADDINGTON  283 

Act  these  94,000  were  forbidden  to  enlist  in  the  Regular  1814. 
Army,  and  as  they  consisted  chiefly  of  substitutes,  they 
simply  deprived  the  Army  of  that  number  of  recruits. 
Having  thus  drained  the  recruiting  market  heavily  to 
produce  a  defensive  force,  Addington  in  the  second 
place  bethought  him  of  the  Regular  Army,  and  tried  to 
call  the  Army  of  Reserve  into  existence  to  supply  it ; 
the  said  Army  of  Reserve  being  simply  additional  to  the 
Militia,  formed  once  again  by  ballot,  with  the  principle 
of  substitution  again  admitted,  and  differing  from 
the  ordinary  Militia  only  in  that  the  men  were  allowed  to 
enlist  in  the  Regulars.  This  done,  he  allowed  the  Volun- 
teers to  take  the  bit  between  their  teeth  and  to  mass 
themselves  in  extravagant  numbers ;  and  then  proceeded 
to  reduce  the  ballot-lists  to  skeletons  by  exempting  all 
Volunteers  both  from  Militia  and  Army  of  Reserve. 
As  he  was  unprepared  with  rules  to  govern  this  mob 
of  men,  which  had  sprung  into  existence  against  his  wish, 
his  Home  Secretary  was  obliged  to  introduce,  by  side- 
winds and  sly  devices,  regulations  which  gave  rise  to 
endless  friction  and  discontent,  and  yet  were  powerless 
to  enforce  discipline.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  to 
the  end  of  the  war  our  military  system  never  recovered 
from  the  mischief  wrought  by  Addington  and  his 
Secretary  for  War,  Hobart,  during  the  year  1803.  It 
was  no  fault  of  theirs  that  England  was  not  ruined  both 
in  a  financial  and  a  military  sense,  so  unspeakable  were 
their  blindness,  their  weakness,  and  their  folly. 

The  ballot  having  been  discredited,  and  the  recruit- 
ing market  thrown  wholly  into  the  hands  of  the  crimps 
by  these  two  unhappy  men,  Pitt  took  over  the  military 
administration  in  a  state  of  utter  chaos.  His  remedy 
was  to  turn  parish  officers  into  recruiting  sergeants,  give 
them  a  reward  for  every  recruit  that  they  produced  fi-om 
Imperial  funds,  and  to  fine  them  for  every  man  deficient 
of  their  quota,  such  fines  being  payable  of  course  out  of 
local  funds.  Such  a  system  might  possibly  have  suc- 
ceeded had  it  been  tried  at  first  in  time  of  peace,  and 
become  familiar  to  the  parish  officers  ;  for,  financially. 


284        SUMMARY— PITT,  WINDHAM      chap. 

1814.  it  was  decidedly  ingenious.  But  foisted  suddenly  upon 
a  nation  demoralised  by  more  than  twelve  months 
of  incessant  ballotting  for  over  100,000  men,  it  was  a 
complete  and  dismal  failure.  Nevertheless,  as  has  been 
told,  it  brought  the  Army  into  closer  touch  with  the 
body  of  the  people  ;  and  though,  upon  the  whole, 
Pitt's  military  administration  is  a  blot  upon  his  fame, 
yet  at  the  end  he  did  admirable  work  by  his  staunch 
adherence  to  the  Duke  of  York's  principle  that  every 
battalion  abroad  must  have  a  second  battalion  at  home 
to  maintain  it  at  proper  strength. 

Then  came  Windham,  the  great  reformer,  who  held 
firmly  by  three  sound  principles  :  first,  that  the  Regular 
Army  was  the  ultimate  end  for  which  all  our  military 
organisation  existed  ;  secondly,  that  the  whole  nation 
ought  to  be  trained  to  arms  ;  thirdly,  that  a  Volunteer 
who  received  anything  from  the  State  besides  his  arms 
was  no  Volunteer.  His  practice,  however,  fell  short  of 
his  theory.  He  was  for  training  the  whole  nation  to 
arms  with  practically  no  organisation  ;  and  this  was 
almost  a  contradiction  in  terms.  He  was  for  using 
compulsion  and  yet  mild  compulsion,  ballotting  men  in 
turn  for  a  short  period  of  training,  yet  granting  them 
pay  for  the  few  days  on  which  they  were  to  be  exercised, 
thereby  ensuring  enormous  expense  with  a  very  doubtful 
return.  In  short,  his  Training  Act  broke  down  pre- 
cisely in  the  most  important  province  of  all,  the  training, 
the  problem  of  which  was  still  puzzling  him  when  he 
resigned  office.  His  idea  was  that  this  huge  mass  of 
men,  to  be  trained  no  man  knew  how,  would  turn  out 
like  the  hosts  of  La  Vendue  in  case  of  invasion  ;  and 
that  incidentally,  through  the  kindling  of  its  martial 
ardour,  it  would  furnish  an  endless  supply  of  recruits  to 
the  Regular  Army.  To  tempt  such  recruits  he  intro- 
duced short  service,  in  which  he  had  profound  faith,  with 
increased  pay  for  men  who  re-engaged  for  fresh  terms 
beyond  the  first,  and  with  an  increased  scale  of  pensions. 
His  ideal,  in  fact,  would  have  been  a  trained  nation  for 
defensive,  and  a  Regular  Army  for  offensive  service  ; 


V  SUMMARY— CASTLEREAGH  285 

with  not  even  Militia  intervening  between  them,  and  18 14. 
with  no  man  wearing  uniform  except  the  Regular  Army. 
His  plan  failed.  Short  service  proved  to  be  a  dis- 
appointment as  a  temptation  to  recruits.  The  national 
training,  as  he  projected  it,  was  impossible  ;  and  the 
one  great  service  which  he  rendered  was  the  suppression 
of  such  Volunteers  as  were  not  self-supporting.  Never- 
theless, his  brief  administration  marked  a  real  turning- 
point  in  the  history  of  the  war,  for  he  had  at  least 
upheld  principles  that  were  sound. 

Then  came  Castlereagh,  better  known  for  his  work 
at  the  Foreign  Office  than  at  the  War  Office,  and  better 
remembered,  unfortunately,  for  the  Six  Acts  than  for  his 
part  either  in  war  or  diplomacy.  Grasping  at  once  all 
that  was  good  in  Windham's  teaching,  he  started  from 
the  postulate  that  "  learning  the  use  of  arms  should  be 
imposed  as  a  positive  duty  upon  all  individuals  within 
certain  ages,  to  be  enforced  by  fine."  For  the  moment 
circumstances  compelled  him  to  maintain  the  Volunteers 
for  a  year  ;  but  in  his  own  mind  he  had  sealed  their  fate. 
To  make  national  training  a  genuine  institution  he 
established  a  Sedentary  or  Local  Militia,  to  be  chosen 
by  ballot,  without  liberty  of  substitution,  from  the 
entire  male  population  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and 
thirty,  for  four  years'  service,  during  which  period  the 
men  were  to  be  exercised  from  time  to  time  as  companies 
near  their  own  homes,  and  assembled  once  annually  as 
battalions  for  not  more  than  twenty-eight  days.  Into 
this  force  he  swept  as  many  of  the  false  Volunteers  as 
cared  to  take  service,  retaining  as  Volunteers  only  such  as 
were  self-supporting.  At  the  same  time,  after  making  an 
enormous  draft  upon  the  Regular  Militia  to  bring  the 
Army  to  respectable  strength,  and  reinforcing  the 
Militia  through  the  ballot,  by  an  even  greater  number 
than  the  draft,  he  laid  down  the  principle  that  a 
regular  supply  of  10,000  men  should  be  drawn  from  it 
annually  and  made  good  as  far  as  possible  by  voluntary 
enlistment.  He  thus  returned  in  some  measure  to 
Addington's  system,  using  the  Local  Militia  as  Adding- 


286  SUMMARY— CALVERT  chap. 

1814.  ton  had  used  the  Regular  Militia,  and  the  Regular 
Militia  as  Addington  had  used  the  Army  of  Reserve, 
but  with  this  difference  —  that  the  Local  Militiamen 
were  ballotted  without  option  of  substitution  and  could 
enlist  at  any  time  into  the  Regular  Army,  while  the 
Regular  Militia  could  enlist  only  at  stated  periods  and 
in  large  batches. 

By  these  expedients  the  necessary  supply  of  men  for 
the  Regular  Army  was  kept  up  until  the  end  of  the 
war.  That  they  would  have  sufficed  if  the  war  had 
lasted  for  two  or  three  years  longer  I  cannot  believe. 
The  Militia,  by  Castlereagh's  own  admission,  was  be- 
ginning to  fail  under  the  strain  ;  and  since  1 8 1 3  it  had 
been  forced  to  enlist  a  certain  number  of  boys  in  lieu 
of  men.  Morover,  though  Ministers  asserted  that  the 
expense  of  recruiting  soldiers  into  the  Army  through 
the  Militia  was  little  more  costly  than  direct  enlistment, 
there  was  small  object  in  keeping  up  so  expensive  a 
force  as  the  Regular  Militia  merely  as  a  great  recruit- 
ing dep6t,  more  especially  since  the  Local  Militia  had 
consented  to  do  service  outside  their  own  counties. 
Beyond  question  some  new  system  must  have  been 
found,  whether  borrowed  from  Calvert  or  from  some 
other  authority. 

Calvert's  plan,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  to  have 
one  hundred  regiments  of  Infantry  of  the  Line — the  first 
battalions,  containing  100,000  men,  to  be  enlisted  without 
limit  as  to  time  or  place  ;  the  second  battalions,  also 
100,000  strong,  to  consist  of  ballotted  men  engaged  for 
home  service  only,  but  officered  by  Regular  officers ;  the 
third  and  fourth  battalions  (for  such  they  were  to  be, 
though  he  did  not  call  them  so)  to  be  Local  Militia  at 
least  200,000  strong ;  and  the  whole  to  be  on  a 
strictly  territorial  basis.  The  first  battalions  would 
form  the  "  disposable  force  "  for  service  in  any  part  of 
the  world  ;  the  second  battalions  would  be  for  home 
defence  and  would  maintain  the  first  at  their  due 
strength  by  means  of  voluntary  enlistment  encouraged 
by  bounty  ;  and  the  third  and  fourth  battalions  would 


V  SUMMARY— CALVERT  287 

maintain  the  second  in  the  same  fashion.  Practically  1814. 
this  would  have  turned  the  Regular  Militia  into  second 
battalions  of  the  Regular  Army  ;  and,  as  things  were 
then  carried  on,  the  reform  would  probably  have  furthered 
both  efficiency  and  economy.  But  it  would  not  have  over- 
come the  prime  difficulty,  namely,  the  fact  that  only  the 
refuse  of  the  Local  Militia  ballot  would  have  remained 
to  be  gathered  in  by  the  ballot  for  the  second  battalions. 
Moreover,  the  open  employment  of  the  ballot  to  recruit 
the  Regular  Army  was  precisely  the  thing  which  had 
made  the  Army  of  Reserve  unpopular  ;  and  in  such  a 
ballot  it  would  not  have  been  possible  to  forbid  sub- 
stitution, which  was  the  curse  of  the  service. 

The  question  was  immensely  difficult.  Time  might 
have  brought  the  answer  if,  in  accordance  with  Castle- 
reagh's  ideal,  every  able-bodied  man  had  been  compelled 
to  serve  his  time  with  the  Local  Militia  upon  entering 
his  eighteenth  year.  But  this  is  no  more  than  to  say 
that  things  might  have  been  carried  on  very  efficiently 
if  a  proper  system  had  been  evolved  and  practised  in 
time  of  peace,  which,  of  course,  is  the  indubitable  fact, 
though  the  British  nation,  in  spite  of  a  thousand  proofs, 
steadily  refuses  to  believe  it.  Improvisations  in  time  of 
war  can  never  be  thoroughly  efficient,  and  must  always 
be  unduly  expensive.  The  wit  of  man  can  hardly 
devise  a  scheme  of  military  organisation  for  so  complex 
an  Empire  as  the  British  Empire,  which  shall  be  devoid 
of  faults  ;  and  it  is  far  better  and  cheaper  to  discover 
and  to  correct  these  faults  in  time  of  peace. 

Incidentally  it  may  be  remarked  that  one  special 
detail  of  the  War  Office's  plans,  which  was  particularly 
urged  both  by  the  Duke  of  York  and  by  Calvert,  was 
never  wholly  fulfilled.  To  the  last  there  were  a  few 
regiments  which  consisted  of  a  single  battalion  apiece 
only,  and  these  regiments  were  for  the  most  part 
quartered  in  the  East  and  West  Indies.  Nevertheless, 
there  was  some  method  in  this  omission  ;  the  Twelfth 
Foot,  for  instance,  being  supplied  with  a  second  battalion 
when   it   came  home  from  India.     But,  on  the  other 


288         SUMMARY— BOYS— CONVICTS      chap. 

1814.  hand,  the  ideal  arrangement  that  there  should  be  one 
hundred  first  battalions  abroad,  and  as  many  second 
battalions  at  home,  broke  down  completely.  The 
second  battalions  for  the  most  part  may  hardly  be  said 
to  have  existed,  except  on  paper,  until  Windham  became 
Minister  for  War ;  although  there  were  two  of  them 
in  Cathcart's  force  which  sailed  to  North  Germany  in 
1805.  Later,  there  were,  of  course,  many  both  in  the 
Peninsula  and  at  Walcheren.  The  territorial  attach- 
ment of  regiments  to  counties  also,  though  greatly 
improved,  was  not  perfected  ;  and  recruits  from  the 
Militia,  in  not  a  few  instances,  preferred  another 
regiment  to  that  which  was  assigned  to  them.  The 
favourite  corps,  as  has  been  told,  were  those  of  the 
Light  Division  ;  and  it  is  no  more  than  natural  that 
young  soldiers  should  have  preferred  to  enter  regiments 
which  were  daily  adding  to  their  fame.^ 

Two  small  points,  upon  which  there  is  often  much 
loose  talk,  may  be  briefly  touched  upon  before  I  bring 
this  sketch  to  an  end.  The  first  is  the  enlistment  of 
boys.  This  was  begun  in  1805  by  sanction  of  the  Duke 
of  York,  and  he  was  doubtless  wise  to  permit  it  early 
in  order  that  the  boys  might  have  time  to  grow  up. 
The  Army  of  Reserve  was  in  great  measure  composed 
of  raw  lads  who  drew  pay  as  men.  Boys,  on  the  other 
hand,  enlisted  as  such,  received  only  ninepence  instead 
of  one  shilling  a  day.^  The  total  number  of  boys, 
recruited  as  such  into  the  Army  during  the  war,  did 
not  exceed  20,000,  or,  roughly,  one-twelfth  of  the  whole. 

Again,  it  is  often  said  that  the  ranks  of  the  Army 
were  filled  with  the  sweepings  of  the  gaols.  Undoubtedly 
convicts  sentenced  to  transportation  were  discharged 
wholesale  from  the  hulks  on  condition  of  their  enlisting, 
occasionally  in  batches  of  five  hundred  together,  but  they 
were  all  sent  to  battalions,  which  were  practically  penal, 

1  During  the  late  South  African  war  young  men  flocked  from  all 
parts  of  England  to  the  dep6ts  of  counties  whose  regiments  had 
distinguished  themselves. 

2  H.D.  Palmerston's  speech,  26th  Feb.  18 10. 


V  RECRUITING  OF  CONVICTS  289 

in  the  West  Indies  or  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  as  1814. 
also  were  such  few  soldiers  as  chose  to  commute  five 
hundred  or  a  thousand  lashes  for  service  in  the  same 
much-dreaded  quarters.  Nor  was  the  principal  penal 
battalion,  the  Royal  York  Rangers,  a  bad  one.  At 
first,  under  an  unintelligent  commander,  it  seems  to  have 
been  a  hell  upon  earth,  where  the  cat  was  in  daily  use  ; 
but  presently  it  passed  into  good  hands,  when  flogging 
became  unknown  and  the  men  were  perfectly  docile  and 
well-behaved,  earning  praise  from  the  Commander-in- 
Chief.  Certainly  convicts  did  not  make  up  one  per 
cent  of  the  recruits.  No  doubt  Deputy-Lieutenants 
passed  a  good  many  doubtful  or  simply  wild  characters 
into  the  Militia,  who  were  gladly  transferred  by  their 
Colonels  to  the  Line  ;  but  to  suppose  that  the  ranks 
were  filled  by  the  criminal  class  is  to  assume  that  we 
were  a  nation  of  criminals. 

Two  more  fallacies  may  likewise  be  briefly  dismissed. 
It  is  often  said  that  the  aristocracy,  which  governed 
England  at  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
did  indeed,  by  its  high  spirit  and  stubborn  resolution  to 
continue  the  war,  fairly  wear  Napoleon  down  and  bring 
about  his  fall,  but  that  it  did  not  bear  its  fair  share  of 
the  burden  of  expense.  This  is  conclusively  disproved 
by  the  fact,  abundantly  evident  in  these  pages,  that  the 
expense  of  the  ballot,  and  of  thefines  and  bounties  incident 
to  it,  except  in  rare  instances,  was  thrown  wholly  upon 
the  parochial  rates,  or,  in  other  words,  upon  the  landed 
interest.  So  severe  indeed  was  the  pressure  upon  the 
landowners,  that  many  of  the  less  wealthy  among  them 
were  obliged  to  close  their  country-houses  and  retire 
into  the  towns. 

Again  it  is  averred  and  believed  by  many  good 
Irishmen  that  England's  battles  against  Napoleon, 
especially  in  the  Peninsula,  were  fought  and  won  by 
their  compatriots  ;  and  not  a  few  Scots  are  imbued  with 
precisely  the  same  notion  with  regard  to  their  country- 
men. This,  of  course,  is  simple  nonsense.  England 
produced,  as  indeed  she  ought,  far  more  recruits  than 

u 


290  LESSONS  OF  THE  WAR         chap.v 

1 8 14.  Scotland  and  Ireland  put  together  ;  and,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  there  were  English  regiments,  as  well  as  the 
Highlanders  and  Irish,  engaged  in  all  of  Wellington's 
actions,  though  they  do  not  talk  so  much  about  it. 
Each  of  the  three  kingdoms,  indeed,  did  its  duty  ;  and 
impartial  observers  at  the  time  were  of  opinion  that  the 
best  regiments  of  all  were  those  which,  like  old  Ninety- 
five,  contained  a  mixture  of  English,  Scots,  and  Irish. 

For  the  rest  the  broad  lessons  to  be  deduced  from 
the  foregoing  pages  seem  to  be  the  following  : — 

England  cannot,  any  more  than  any  other  nation, 
fill  the  ranks  of  her  Army  in  a  great  war  without  com- 
pulsion. 

Compulsion  cannot  be  applied  for  service  outside 
the  British  Isles. 

The  admission  of  the  principle  of  substitution  in 
any  scheme  of  compulsory  service  leads  to  ruinous 
expense,  demoralisation,  and  inefficiency. 

Compulsory  personal  service  for  home-defence  has 
been  tried  and  not  found  wanting. 

The  ultimate  end  for  which  all  our  military  organisa- 
tion must  exist  is  the  maintenance  of  the  Regular 
Army,  our  only  offensive  land  force.     (Windham.) 

The  true  basis  of  such  an  organisation  is  National 
training.     (Windham,  Castlereagh.) 

"  Learning  the  use  of  arms  should  be  imposed  as  a 
positive  duty  upon  all  individuals  within  certain  ages, 
to  be  enforced  by  fine."     (Castlereagh.) 

A  Volunteer  who  asks  more  from  the  State  than  his 
arms,  except  on  active  service,  is  no  Volunteer. 
(Windham.)  False  Volunteers  are  alike  troublesome, 
expensive,  and  useless. 

England  felt  the  false  measures  of  Pitt  from  1793 
to  1798,  and  of  Addington  in  1803-4,  until  the  very 
end  of  the  war  in  18 14.  All  measures  of  National 
Defence  and  military  organisation  must  be  thought  out 
and  tested  as  far  as  possible  in  time  of  peace.  Im- 
provisation doubles  the  cost  of  war,  while  imperilling 
its  success. 


APPENDIX  I 


291 


APPENDIX  I 

Return  of  the  Number  of  Casualties  which  occurred  in 
the  British  Army  during  the  undermentioned  years : 
distinguishing  British  from  Foreign  and  Colonial  Corps. 
— Adjutant-General's  Office,  13th  November  1813. 


Period, 

Casualties,  British. 

Casualties,  Foreign. 

ToUl. 

1803 

13,396 

2,674 

16,070 

1804 

13,347 

2,838 

16,185 

1805 

15,800 

2,443 

18,243 

1806 

13,856 

3,075 

16,931 

1807 

14,570 

2,968 

17,538 

1808 

17,183 

3,703 

20,886 

1809 

21,630 

2,937 

24,567 

1810 

19,498 

3,455 

22,953 

1811 

19,019 

3,441 

22,460 

l8l2 

20,313 

5,»85 

25,498 

1813 

19,653 

4,802 

24,455 

292 


APPENDIX  I 


Return  of  the  Number  of  Men  raised  for  the  Regular  Army,  ex- 
clusive of  Foreign  and  Colonial  Corps,  by  ordinary  Recruiting, 
and  by  transfers  from  the  Militia,  etc. —  Adjutant -General's 
Office,  13th  November  181 3. 


By  Ordinary  Recruiting.          | 

Raised 

Volun- 

1 

under  the 

teers 

Total. 

Additional 

from  the 

Men. 

Boys. 

Total. 

Force  Act. 

Militia. 

In 

1803 

11,253 

11,253 

... 

11,253 

1804 

9»43o 

9,430 

1,658 

11,088 

1805 

10,180 

1,497 

11,677 

8,288 

13,580 

33,545 

1806 

10,337 

1,538 

11,875 

5,834 

2,968 

20,677 

1807 
1808 

15,308 
10,477 

3,806 
2,486 

I9,ii4"l 
12,963/ 

29,108 

61,185 

1809 
1810 

9,675 
7,367 

2,045 
1,728 

11,720! 
9,095  J 

23,885 

44,700 

1811 

9,532 

1,940 

11,472 

11,453 

22,925 

1812 

12,563 

1,869 

14,432 

9,927 

24,359 

Dec.  25,  1 81 2  to  \ 
Sept.  25,  181 3  J 

9,845 

1,440 

11,285 

8,834 

20,119 

Total  . 

115,967 

18,349 

134,316 

15,780 

99,755 

249,851 

Return  of  the  Number  of  Recruits  (distinguishing  Men  and 
Boys)  raised  for  the  Militia,  by  Beat  of  Drum,  betv^^een 
27th  May  1809  and  24th  October  18 13. — Adjutant- 
General's  Office,  15th  November  18 13. 


Men. 

Boys. 

Total. 

For  the  English  Militia 
For  the  Scotch  Militia 
For  the  Irish  Militia    . 

23,053 

2,591 

17,967 

1,464 
252 
703 

24,517 

2,843 

18,670 

General  Total  . 

43,6n 

2,419 

46,030 

[Commons'  Journals,  Ixix.  p.  635.] 


< 


O 

X 

H 
O 

H 

h 
CO 

H 
>; 

(J 

Oh 
(>< 

w 


oo  c 
•I    o 

gu 

U    C 

_^ " 
'«*•  J? 

o  o 

^^ 

0)  JC 
JS    en 

-^-^  ^ 
S   c  *^ 

c  r*^  •-• 

"in    UJS 
.^•X3    CO 

w<    ^ 

■M    »-;  tfi 

^  ^^ 

•r;  .5    P4 
ij  *^  ti 

W  .^< 

■'-'    to    «> 

o  o  o 

M 


"2  73 

N     «0  N   so     *   •+ 

On  m  O    ••     Ht 

-  \o  t^  -  o  «o 

•O  r<>  <«■  t-lNO 

B    o 

-     t^  'i^    •"    *^ 

ON  O    On  0>nO 

^O    ~    ^  tri  ^  «0 

On  ON  C>  NO    o 

»^  to  vr,  r^  o\  - 

O    -    H    N    m 

N     N     N     N     N    M 

n 

On  0\  t*>   0\  t>v   t^ 

t^  On  vn  invo 

•a 

-    O    lO  VO  r^  1^ 

00   rn  >n  in»o 

^ 

VOOO  NO     X  \0    >0 

'f  •+  O   O  00 

ii 

vo  ^  ^vo"  tC  J" 

M    "f  tC  -    ^ 

00  00    t^  t^\o  oo 

»>»00    t^  J^NO 

M\0     OV  t^   t^  t^ 

N    •+  vnNo  i^ 

■« 

ON  Vn   M     W-»  M     t>. 

>n  ONOo   t^  ON 

*?  *?  1  t:  "t  " 

^  vnoo  oo   i^ 

g 

O    hT  v^  Onno"  -f- 

tC  •.?  fn  vn  O 

•ONO  oo    ON  rt    ro 

fn  »n  +  vnNO 

'-     "»     -     -     N     M 

N    N     M    M    M 

■u   a. 

-V 

C 

ON  in  <->No   t^  fv 

O     fO    >"     t^    ON 

P 

^  *^  :f  "  "  ■*■ 

0\  ■>*-00    vn  H 

(O 

O    to  O  00    N    ON 

»n  vnoo_  t^  t-. 

3 

'5  'S 

t^   N  NO    «0  t^NO 

00   O   «n  rT  tn 

o 

o  J 

1^    N    (S    tn  ro  ro 

m  ^  '4-  «n  tn 

H 

U,   o 

<*- 

O 

o 

e 
2 

■+  -  NO    w    O    O 

N     «-     ■^   ONOO 

■s  •» 

>ooo   r^  +  ii   t*» 

NO  >n  o   X  NO 

'S 

.S   cu 

vn  W-,  o  NO    N    N 

o  o  o  -  o 

o 
o 

^  ^f  00    «o  tC 

■no 

«0  On  On  ro  On  t^ 

PqU 

TO   fO   inNO   00     ON 

ON  ON  On  O    O 

u 

•4      HI      •«      rt       N 

cu 

roNO    On  t-~  t^  tv 

N    ■+  vnso    »^ 

■-4 

On  >n  >-    vn  N    r-. 

vn  ONOO     t^    ON 

C9 

«n  ON  >-    Tf  Tf  - 

•>i-  w-ioo  00    t^ 

o 

O    •^    >n  OnNO    Tt- 

j^  tJ-  m  »n  O 

«nNO  00    ON  N    m 

m  tn  •+  vnvo 

w    M    X    M    N    r< 

M     N    N     N    N 

>. 

•+NO     MOO     ON 

vn  tn  t^  T*-  t^  M 

r^  p-    N    m  r^ 

4-* 

r-.  «n  M   rj^  r^  N 

4^  vn  'tt-  vn  N 

fi 

•s         ^        VV         ««         ^ 

v2 

<^  •+  fi"  M  t».  «o 

vn  m  N   ►"    •^ 

1-1   M   +  »n  txoo 

OO  00     ON  O    O 

M       M      M      N      N 

illery 

nd 

neers. 

»0  OnNO    «    O    »n 

00  00    Th  i^  •«*• 

«    O    '^  vn  vnNO 

mvo   N   o   •" 

M    M    vn  On  N    >n 
tF  tC   ^  O    M    M 

rt  NO  00    '^  O 
»«    ^     0^    fc    •« 

•+  to  «n  «n  1^ 

M     ■»     M     N     N     N 

N    r«    r*    N    N 

»s 

ONNO  NO    M     f*    •- 

O    O  00    ►"    ♦ 

k> 

N    ►"     ONNO    O    ON 

'^  X    ro  CO  O 

"eS 

t>.  »n  M  N    +  «n 

t-.  «*-NO    9>  «n 

> 

NO     O     »ONO    NO     (^ 

t^  r^  t^oo    On 

o 

«     N     N    N     N    N 

H    N    N    H    H 

^  «nNo  t-.oo   ON 

O    X    N    to  to 

o  o  o  o  o  o 

X       l-l       M       M       M 

00  oo  oo  00  oo  00 

OO   00   00   00  00 

o  "                o 

«n                 "n 

.      S     S     R    S     S 

.        i       t       S  4i 

c 

5              fi< 

ct 

«•              .V 

•— » 

t— ,                Ui 

•a 


293 


294 


APPENDIX  III 


APPENDIX    III 


Effective  Strength  of  the  Volunteers 


Effective  Strength  of  the  Volunteers  of  Great  Britain  only ; 
of  all  Ranks  for  years  1803- 1808  ;  Rank  and  File  only, 
1812 


Great  Britain  only. 

Total. 

Ireland. 

Year.          i 

Cavalry. 

Infantry. 

Artillery. 

Dec.  16. 

1803 

... 

380,193 

80,000 

Jan. 

1804 

28,943 

341,011 

10,304 

380,258 

70,000 

Jan.    1, 

1805 

32,728 

316,079 

12,007 

360,814 

♦» 

1806 

30,927 

308,465 

12,116 

35».5o8 

tt 

1807 

30,032 

293,381 

11,297 

334.710 

»> 

1808 

29,605 

295,768 

11,031 

336,404 

» 

1809 

» 

1810 

'» 

1811 

Rank  and 

file 

19,207 

n 

»» 

1812 
1813 

49,436 

68,643 
or  30,000  rank 
and  file  below 
establishment 

APPENDIX  IV  j^^ 


APPENDIX    IV 

Memoranda  on  the  Recruiting  of  the  Army 

^^"^^'•^"d^-  Horse  Guards 

dth  Feb.  1807. 
Army  of  Reserve 

Passed.     6th  July  1803. 

To  be  raised  by  ballot  within  the  year  : 

[England        .         .         .     33,880 

(Quotas         .  -^Ireland  .  .      10,000 

[Scotland  .         .       6,000 


Total     .     49,880 


Number    of   men   raised   within  the   year   {vide  Return   (A), 
pp.  296-8)  :— 

England  ....  31,758 
Ireland  ....  8,197 
Scotland     ....       5j537 


Total     .     45,492 


Deserters  :  from  August  1803  to  May  1804      .  5.651 

Of  this  number     .     (Balloued  men        .         .  2,873 

(^Substitutes               .         .  41,198 
Extended  their  Services,  and  were  incorporated  in 

the  Line 17.307 

The  remainder  are  now  serving  in  the  Nine  Garrison  Battalions, 
or  have  fallen  casualties. 

[Military  Transactions  of  the  British  Empire,  i.  pp.  60-61.] 


296 


APPENDIX  IV 


RETURN   (A) 
Accounts  of  Men  raised  for  the  Royal  Army  of  Reserve, 

IN      EACH      month      TO    THE      1ST      MaY      1804,     SINCE     THE 

Commencement  of  the  Act  passed  for  that  Purpose 

England  and  Wales 

An  Account  of  the  Men  raised  in  England  and  Wales  for  the  Royal 
Army  of  Reserve,  in  each  Month  since  the  Commencement 
of  the  Act  passed  for  that  Purpose  ;  of  the  Number  of  the 
same  who  have  engaged  for  General  Service ;  and  of  the 
Number  of  Ballotted  Men  and  Substitutes  who  have  been 
enrolled  for  the  said  Army ;  as  far  as  the  same  can  be 
ascertained.  —  Inspector  -  General's  Office,  London,  ist  May 
1804. 


[Military  Transactions  of  the  British  Empire,  i.  p.  65.] 


APPENDIX  IV 


297 


RETURN   {K)—<ontinued 

Scotland 

An  Account  of  the  Number  of  Men  raised  in  North  Britain  for 
the  Royal  Army  of  Reserve,  in  each  month  since  the  Com- 
mencement of  the  Act  passed  for  that  Purpose ;  of  the 
Number  of  the  same  who  have  engaged  for  General  Service ; 
and  of  the  Number  of  Ballotted  Men  and  Substitutes  who 
have  been  enrolled  for  the  said  Army,  as  far  as  the  same  can 
be  ascertained. — Inspector-General's  Office,  ist  May  1804. 


Periods. 

Number 
of  Men 
raised. 

Number 

rejected, 

discharged, 

claimed  by 

Civil  Law, 

etc.,  etc. 

-a 

Q 

Number 
deserted, 
claimed  as 
Deserters 
from  other 
Corps, 
etc.,  etc. 

Num- 
ber of 
Effec- 
tive 
Men. 

Num- 
ber due, 
includ- 
ing 
Casual- 
ties. 

Number  vol- 
unteered for 
General 

Service,  in- 
cluded in  the 

Effectives. 

Aug.  I,  1803 
Sept.  1,    „ 
Oct.  I,     „ 
Nov.  I,    „ 
Dec.  I,    „ 
Jan.  I,  1804 

Total 

Feb.  I,  1804 
Mar.  I,    „ 
April  I,    „ 
May  I,     „ 

Total 

Number  \ 
Ballotted    i 

Number  \ 
Substitutes/ 

2,984 
999 
359 
227 
252 

8 

4 

3 

52 

12 

2 

lOI 

77 
53 
32 

20 

2,874 
917 
302 
142 
218 

3,126 
2,209 
1,907 
1.765 
1.547 

... 

4,821 

79 

6 

283 

4.453 

... 

215 

234 
193 

74 

7 

53 
8 

2 
3 

21 
25 
25 
10 

187 
«93 

IIZ 

56 

1,360 

1,167 

^055 

999 

48* 

371 

56 

«3 

5.537 

161 

II 

364 

5.001 

972 

294 
5.243 

8 
528 

286 

4.7  »  5 

[Military  Transactions  of  the  British  Empire,  i.  p.  66.] 


298 


APPENDIX  IV 


RETURN  {A)— continued 

Ireland 

An  Account  of  the  Number  of  Men  raised  in  Ireland  for  the  Royal 
Army  of  Reserve,  in  each  month  since  the  Commencement 
of  the  Act  passed  for  that  Purpose  ;  of  the  Number  of  the 
same  who  have  engaged  for  General  Service ;  and  of  the 
Number  of  Ballotted  Men,  Substitutes,  and  Recruits  enlisted 
for  and  serving  in  the  said  Army  ;  as  far  as  the  same  can  be 
ascertained.  —  Inspector  -  General's  Office,  London,  ist  May 
1804. 


Periods. 

Number 
of  Men 
raised. 

Number 

rejected, 

discharged, 

claimed  by 

Civil  Power, 

etc.,  etc. 

Number 
deserted, 
claimed  as 
Deserters 
from  other 
Corps, 
etc.,  etc. 

Num- 
ber of 
Effec- 
tive 
Men. 

Number 
due,  in- 
cluding 

the 

Casuals, 

to  be  made 

good. 

Number  vol- 
unteered for 
General  Ser- 
vice, included 
in  the  num- 
ber of  Effec- 
tive Men. 

Aug.  I,  1803 
Sept.  1,      „ 
Oct.  I,       „ 
Nov.  I,     „ 
Dec.  1,      „ 
Jan.  I,  1804 

Total 

Feb.  I,  1804 
Mar,  1,     „ 
April  I,     „ 
May  I,     „ 

Total 

1,508 
2,241 
1,367 
1,099 
658 

25 
32 
37 
19 

X 

22 

153 
200 
140 
.,6 

1,486 
2,063 

1,135 
922 
462 

8,514 
6,451 
5»3i6 
4,394 
3,932 

; 

6,873 

113 

I           691 

6,068 

497 
330 
282 

215 

20 
18 

25 
27 

34 

3 

10 

117 
201 

109 

360 

77 

202 

69 

3,572 
3,495 
3,293 
3,224 

1,444 
24 
191 
140 

8,»97 

203 

48 

1,170 

6,776 

1,799 

i\r.fi.-Numberoff?^"°«'^^     ' 
17  a    ^-      -K/f       ■{  Substitutes  . 
Effective  Men  Ij^^^^^j^^j 

48 
6,528 

200 

[Military  Transactions  of  the  British  Empire,  i.  p.  6'j.'\ 


APPENDIX  V 


299 


APPENDIX    V 

Additional  Force  Act 
Passed.     29th  June  1804. 


Provided  to  establish  and  maintain  a  Permanent  Force  : — 
Quotas 


[  England 
I  Ireland 
(  Scotland 


58,285 
10,000 
10,666 

78»95> 


Composed  by  adding  the  Quotas  of  the  Army  of  Reserve  to  the 
Sup.  Militia  ;  viz.  : — 

Quota  of  Reserve      .....     49,880 
Sup.  Militia  of  England  and  Scotland  .     29,071 


78,9s » 


N.B. — Ireland  had  no  Sup.  Militia.  Supposing  that  the  Quota 
of  the  Army  of  Reserve  had  been  complete,  and  the  Supplementary 
Militia  also  complete,  the  Additional  Force  Act  would  not  have 
commenced  its  Operation  until  Casualties  had  taken  place  in  cither 
of  the  above. 


To  be  forthwith  raised  on  the  passing  of  the  Act :  — 

„     ,     J  f  Reserve  Deficiencies 

England      .  •  |  Militia  do. 

Reserve  Deficiencies 
Ireland        .         .  \  Reserve  do. 

Militia  do. 

Total 


8,302 
6,476 
2,930 

829 

19,782 


300 


APPENDIX  V 


Brought  forward 

The  period  allowed  for  raising  that  force  was  one 
month  from  the  settlement  of  the  Deficiencies  by  the 
Lieutenancy,  but  was  prolonged  to  the  loth  of  Nov- 
ember 1804. 


On  the  loth  November  1804- 

England  had  raised 
Ireland  „ 

Scotland         „ 


Deficiency  . 


Men. 

Deserted 

367 

37 

69 

55 
3 

778 

95 

1 9,004. 


And  the  consequent  Penalties  to  be  levied 

on  the  Parishes  at  ;^20  per  man  is       .     j^  3  80,080 


To  be  raised  by  the  1st  October  1805  : — 
To   replace    men  who   had   volunteered  [  England    . 
into  the  Line,  not  exceeding  9000  <  Ireland 
annually,  for  England      .         .         .  (  Scotland    . 

Total  to  be  raised  by  ist  October  . 

The  excess  above  that  number  being  lost,  no  pro- 
vision being  made  by  the  Act  for  replacing  them. 


19,782 


9,000 

200 

1,800 


30,782 


Men  raised  by  1st  October 


England 

Ireland 

Scotland 


3,723 

3.132 

828 

7,683 


Here  again  an  additional  penalty  pre-  /  , ,  qoo  -  7  68^  +  778   Men 
sents  itself  for  the  deficiencies  of  I      '  /»     J     // 

£So,9SO 
380,000 


=  4,095,  which  at  ;^20  per  man  is 

which,  added  to  the  former  Assessment 


is         .         .     ^^460,950 
Had  the  penalties   been  assessed  under  the 

Reserve,  the  amount  would  be       .         .j^i,843,8oo 


APPENDIX  V  301 

Progress  of  the  Additional  Force 

The  Act  undertook  to  replace  the  Deficiencies  and  the  Casual- 
ties of  the  Reserve  and  Sup.  Militia  by  a  Return  to  the  Privy 
Council  annually,  and  a  new  Apportionment. 

These  Returns  were  made,  but  no  Apportionment  took  place. 

The  Fines  were  only  partially  levied. 

The  Act  continued  in  force  till  June  1806,  when  it  had  pro- 
duced : — 

England  .     8,547         By  Parish  Officers  .    10,907 

Ireland     .     5,570         By  Recruiting  Officers  .     4,871 


Scotland  .     1,661 


Total  Produce  of  the 

Additional  Force  .     1 5,778 


15.778 


Total  Desertion .         .     3,041 
Volunteers  to  the  Army     8,562 

The  remainder  placed  in  Garrison  Battalions. 


Bounty  of  Men  raised  for  Additional  Force 

First  Bounty        .         .         .         •         .         .         .    j^i  2   1 2     o 
Additional  Bounty  on  volunteering  into  the  Line  .       10  10     o 


For  a  General  Service  man  thus  acquired  .         .         .    ;^23     2 
For  a  man  raised  at  once  for  General  Service  at  that 

period       .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .        16   16 


Thus  a  competition  was  established,  detrimental  to  the 

ordinary  Recruiting  of  the  Array,  giving  sum  of  ,     £660 
to  those  going  circuitously  into  a  Regiment. 

{Military  Transactions,  i.  pp.  61-63.] 


302  APPENDIX  VI 


APPENDIX    VI 

Windham's  Measures 

The  Additional  Force  Act  repealed  in  June  1806,  and  followed 
by  Mr.  Windham's  Measure,  24th  June  1806. 

The  Mutiny  Act  limited  the  period  of  Service  in  the  Army. 

Men  raised  by  the  ordinary  means  of  Recruiting, 

from  24th  June  1806  to  23rd  January  1807       .         5,208 
Desertions ........  363 

From    28th    November  \  n       ^    r  n/r  •    j  4: 

,   T  >  Bounty,  AI2  :  I2S.     Men  raised      1,026 

to  23rd  January        .  J  ■"  '^  '^ 

At  this  period  it  wras  thought  advisable  to  employ  Officers  on 
half-pay,  or  who  had  quitted  service,  as  extra  Recruiting  Officers. 

Recruiting    by    extra    Officers    commenced    28th    November 
1806:— 

Men  raised  prior  to  extra  Recruiting    .         .         .         3,282 
Men  raised  by  extra  Officers         .  .         .         .  163 

Men  raised  since  extra  Recruiting         .         .         .         1,763 


5,208 
Number  of  Extra  Officers    .....  278 

[Military  Transactions,  i.  pp.  63-64.] 


APPENDIX  VII 


303 


APPENDIX    VII 


June   i 804-1 809,  State  of  the  Army 


(a)  State  of  the  Army,  June 
Mediterranean 


1804 


West  Indies  . 

North  America 

East  Indies    . 

On  passage     . 

United  Kingdom 

United     Kingdom 
Militia 


/  Gibraltar 

■  \  Malta    . 

{Leeward  Islands 
Jamaica. 
Bahamas 
f  Canada . 

■  \  Nova  Scotia,  etc. 
/  East  Indies     . 

\  Ceylon  . 

/  Great  Britain 
\  Ireland  . 
/  Great  Britain 
\  Ireland  . 


2,836 

S»329 
11,068 

3,857 
560 

1.534 

1,867 

i3»Soo 
5,447 
1,301 

59,785 
30,030 
70,918 
19,049 


West  Indies 


North  America 
East  Indies    . 


(i)  State  of  the  Army,   ist  of  June 

Mediterranean        .  |  S^*''"        ' 
\.  Malta    . 

Leeward  Islands 
Jamaica. 
Bahamas,  etc. 
/  Nova  Scotia   . 
* \  Canada . 

/  East  Indies     . 
*  \  Ceylon  . 
United  Kingdom  ex-1  ^         d  •    • 
elusive  of  76,7241?''"^/"''"" 
Militia      :  'V^ J  Ireland.         . 

On  passage     ..... 


1805 


3,318 
6,680 
11,904 
3,591 
589 
2,367 

',5»9 

11,998 

6,870 

64,614 
29,236 

12,442 


304 


APPENDIX  VII 


(f)  State  of  the  Army,   ist  June   1806 


r  Gibraltar 

..    Malta     . 

Sicily     . 

4,666 

Mediterranean 

4,119 

6,647 

'  Leeward  Islands 

11,093 

West  Indies  . 

.  -    Jamaica. 

3,645 

Bahamas,  etc. 

574 

(  Nova  Scotia  . 
■  \  Canada  . 

3,002 

North  America 

1,696 

East  Indies     . 

f  East  Indies     . 
■  \  Ceylon  . 

15,043 
8,739 

United  Kingdom  ex-^   Great  Britain 

73,857 

elusive  of  77,429  hreland.          .         . 
Militia       .         .  ) 

21,883 

Cape  of  Good 

Hope        .... 

5,058 

On  passage     . 

13,427 

((/)  State  of  the  Army,   ist  June   1807 


Mediterranean 


West  Indies  . 

North  America 

South  America 
With  Brig.-Gen. 

East  Indies     . 


Gibraltar 
Malta    . 
Sicily     . 
Egypt    . 
Leeward  Islands 
Jamaica,  etc.  . 
Bahamas,  etc. 
Nova  Scotia  . 
Canada . 


R. 


Goree    . 

New  South  Wales  . 

Cape  of  Good  Hope 

On  passage     . 

United  Kingdom  ex- 
clusive of  77,872 
Militia 


Craufurd . 
f  East  Indies 
\  Ceylon  . 


Great  Britain 
Ireland  . 


5,281 

5,288 

1 1,099 

5,074 

12,575 

4,680 

673 
2,831 

1,539 

5,956 

4,026 

14,499 

4,736 

226 

490 

4,193 
9,366 

62,569 
25,089 


APPENDIX  VII 


305 


(e)  State  of  the  Army,   ist  June 


1808 


Mediterranean 


[  Gibraltar 
^  Malta    . 
[  Sicily     . 
i  Leeward  Islands 
1  Jamaica,  etc.  . 
[  Bahamas,  etc. 
/  Nova  Scotia 
\.  Canada  . 
f  East  Indies 
I  Ceylon  . 


West  Indies  . 

North  America 

East  Indies    . 

Cape  of  Good  Hope 

Goree    . 

Madeira  .         . 

New  South  Wales  . 

With  M.-General  Spenser 

With  Lieut.-Gen.  Sir  John  Moore 

Heligoland     .  ,         .         _ 

On  passage     . 

United  Kingdom  ex-1  „ 

elusive  of  86,788  I  ^""^^^  Britain 
Militia  Ireland . 


5»328 

4*047 

'4.947 

12,556 

5.499 
2.253 
4,566 

3.252 

15.13' 

4.645 

7.042 

224 
1,612 

536 

3.704 

10,871 

302 

4.454 

63.355 
33.667 


if)  State  of  the  Army,  2  5th  May  1809 


Mediterranean 


1  Gibraltar 
Malta    . 
Sicily     . 
Leeward  Island 
Jamaica,  etc. 
Bahamas,  etc 
f  Nova  Scotia 
*  \  Canada 
/  East  Indies 
1  Ceylon  . 


West  Indies  . 

North  America 

East  Indies    . 

Cape  of  Good  Hope 

Goree    . 

Madeira 

New  South  Wales . 

Heligoland     . 

Detachments  on  passage 

Portugal         .... 

United  Kingdom  ex-l  ^        t>  -    • 
elusive  of  65,524  I  PT*^^"^'*'" 
Militia       .        7 1  Ireland. 


3.842 

3,594 

14,716 

15,011 

4.937 
1.470 
4,501 

3.559 

'9.843 

5,"5 

5,800 

283 
913 

'.3'7 
270 

4.223 
22,623 

9 '.999 

'5.858 


3o6 


APPENDIX  VII 


{g)  "  The  Extent  of  the  Armed  Force  of  all  Descriptions, 
Military  and  Naval,  as  borne  upon  the  Establishment  of 
THE  United  Kingdom,  and  of  its  several  Possessions,  in- 
cluding also  the  Local  Force  in  India,  on  2  5th  May  1809," 

Last  Returns  of  Population  : — 

England     ....         9»3+3,S78 
Scotland     ....  1,599,068 

Ireland       ....         4,000,000 

Amounting  to  14,942,64.6 


The  force  actually  maintained  by  that  Population  is  786,521, 
exclusive  of  Colonial  Corps  and  the  East  India  Company's  troops. 
The  whole  number  of  men  paid  by  the  Empire  amounts  to  : — 


Volunteers 


Regulars  and  Militia 
Local  Militia  . 

Great  Britain 

Ireland 
Marines 

Seamen  .... 
Artillery  and  Engineers  . 
East  India  Company's  f  Europeans 


Militarv  Force 


:{ 


Natives       128,418 


285,398  rank  and  file. 

198,534 
1 14,066 

75,340 
31,400 
98,600 
14,261 
4,051 


Total 


950,068 


APPENDIX   VIII 

25th  May  1809. — Foreign  and  Provincial  Corps  in 
British  Pay 


N.B. — In  the  numbers  returned  in  England  are  included  7,034  Rank  and 
File,  who  were  left  in  Spain  and  Portugal  by  the  Army  recently 
returned  from  thence;  viz.  260  Cavalry;  134  Foot  Guards;  and 
6,640  Infantry. 

Prisoners    of  War    in' 
France  and  Holland 


since  the  year  1805, 
not  included  in 
above  Abstract. 


9  Foot  . 

59  "     • 

I  Line  Bn.  K.G.L. 


Total 


236  R,  and  F. 
103 

5  /"Account!  have  been  received 
'  99-!    of  the»e  Men  having  entered 
-  (   the  Westphalian  Service. 


603 


[Military  Transactions,  Suppl.  to  vol.  i.  p.  148.] 
307 


XI 
X 

t-H 

Q 
W 

Oh 
Oh 
< 


o 

I 

CO 

o 


< 

>^ 

u 

I 

E- 

04 

o 

>- 
oi 

(4 

•-) 
■-) 

h 
Pi 
< 

X 

(b 
O 

o 

H 
u 


oo 

u 

C 

►2, 

o 

X 

OO 

o 
o 

to  N 

■<l-  o 

O    ro 

■4- 

to 
rT 

oo 
O 

oo 

V 

c 

3 
>— 1 

1) 

u 
o 

a: 

rooo 

IH 

O 
N 

VO    vr> 

VO     N 

M 

ro 

O 
oo 

c 

3 
•— < 

e 

o 

«  VO 
VO  VO 

t» 

>o  o 

to  O 

VO     to 

»o 

to 

OV 

O 
00 

V 

a 

S 

►— > 

o 

X 

lOVO 
11    to 

oo     N 

M 

vn 

xn  to 

O  VO 

t^    N 

OO 
VO 
ON 

o 

oo 

M 

u 

c 

3 
•— > 

O 

oo    ^ 
>-    to 

to    N 

«o 

IH 

VO    o 

M   VO 

VO 

oo 
VO 

•H 

4 
o 

oo 

(U 

d 
3 

>— 1 

8 

u 

o 

X 

N   oo 

N-    VO 

1  " 

O 
oo 
to 

.  2  S 
O  c 

oo    -< 

Cv 

5; 

to 

o 

oo 

c 

3 

1       ~" 

oo 

0 

0\  " 

O 

Great  Britain 
Ireland . 

Total 

ON 

o 

Ov  K-i  O     N     •<♦• 

0 

N     t~^   -     O     ON 

IH 

" 

to  o\  -    -    to 

OV 

OJ 

oo                     «o 

'*- 

c 

IH 

3 

•— > 

OO 

o 

*^ 

O    N    to   tJ-00 

t^ 

OO  VO     ►-     O    t~- 

to 

•* 

to  to  «     IH     ro 

to 

t^   -                   lo 

■4- 

a 

« 

3 

•— > 

r^ 

o 

VO   OO     VOOO   VO 

to 

VO  to  iri  w-i  iH 

N 

** 

N      N                       V-i 

M 

t:-         ^ 

to 

c 

»H 

3 

1— I 

vo' 

o 

+  0000 

■+ 

*^ 

■-     ■*vo  VO     to 

0 

•■ 

N     N                  00 

t1- 

VO     -                   to 

►^ 

c 

^ 

3 

"-» 

lr^ 

O 

tl     VO   N     0     " 

0 

VO     N   VO   VO   VO 

t^ 

•* 

VO    N                     VO 

VO 

VO    -                       to 

0 

S 

« 

3 

>— 1 

4 

o 

to  0    VO  -    to 

N 

VO     ovvo  VO     to 

„- 

OS  OV                  0 

IH 

■+                   to 

OV 

B 

•— I 

to 

o 

^  00    to  to  VO 

0 

*^ 

t^oo    to  to  0 

to 

" 

to-O                   VO 

VO 

to                         N 

VO 

a 

3 

I— > 

•     CO 

c 

0 

C                  -r; 

ritai 
Sta 

eat  B 

land 

sey 

ernse 

reign 

0 
h 

«"  i"  r,  =  0 

O^iS^^OcS 

0^ 


CL,. 
3 
CO 


55 


308 


XI 
X 

l-H 

Q 

iz; 

w 

Oh 

Oh 

<! 


CO 


c3 


oi 
Q 

O 

h 
< 


u 

u 

fa 
o 

2 

Bi 

H 


IT)      > 

3  .- 


X         -^ 


CO 

do 


XS     i^O^ 


-^   E  I 
■^   u  > 

^-  -^ 

.^    V  \J 


o 


o  IS 
.S  t!   I 


•:;  <u 


CJQ  4j     U 

OJ      '-'     4J 

12 -a   >. 

•5  «-^ 

**    »»"5 
^oo  Si 

E^    ^ 

«     r-     U 
■W     t^    I; 

ii   'M    r4 

3 


_. 

n 

•" 

H 

l-v 

»^ 

0 

0 

M 

.* 

t^ 

c^ 

,    , 

lO 

00 

VO 

0 

C 

4: 

rj" 

oo" 

Vo" 

S 

N 

'*■ 

cS 

o 

. 

'I- 

N 

*^ 

Ov 

t- 

>-. 

VO 

»o 

0 

o 

■+ 

M 

t^ 

-t- 

BQ 

N 

M 

^ 

t^ 

c 

>o 

0 

VO 

— 

o 

0 

lO 

Ov 

VO 

s 

f^ 

fT 

rC 

M 

M 

^ 

•*• 

2          r^ 

en 

VO 

ro 

0\ 

oo        ^ 

o 

lO 

<♦■ 

VO 

CQ 

«/l 

- 

•>*• 

. 

■+ 

00 

N 

U           iJ 

s 

l-^ 

o» 

t^ 

t>      t> 

**i. 

«o 

Q      O 

vo" 

M 

^               • 

«             N 

?. 

o\ 

0 

ro 

"rt 

OO          OO 

o 

"O 

00 

M 

«                  M 

CQ 

«o 

N 

0 

«««  -* 

h 

1>             V 

g 

OS 

VO 

0 

■* 
M 

"2 

Q      Q 

^ 

M 

e 

0 

^ 

o 

00 

«y% 

» 

oo        oo 

o 

M 

•-• 

^ 

CQ 

m 

■^2  ^ 

M           N 

00 

VO 

Ov 

B 

0 

<4 

00 

^    is 

s 

•/^ 

1^ 

Q      Q 

" 

^ 

o^      c5 

to 

o 

>. 

0 

ro 

oo       oo 

O 

I 

n 

^2  4 

N           N 

• 

«^ 

« 

•+ 

c 

t^ 

VO 

t^ 



0 
VO- 

g^      g^ 

?. 

^ 

oo       00 

(S 

" 

• 

tC2  f 

r»         « 

, 

0 

0 

00 

S*      ii 

n 

N 

0 

M 

u 

r^ 

VO 

«^ 

1      D 

s 

«^ 

«*» 

-a 

c 

c 

■^ 

c< 

ji 

c 

f-rt 

« 

be 

0 

c 

2 

309 


3IO 


APPENDIX  XI 


APPENDIX    XI 

Table  of  Dates  of  the  Addition  of  2nd  Battalions 
TO  Regiments  of  the  Line 


Act  of 

Act  of 

Regiment. 

Date  of  2nd 
Battalion. 

Pari,  by 
which 
added. 

Regiment. 

Date  of  2nd 
Battalion. 

Pari,  by 
which 
added. 

+  ist    (4) 

Dec.  15,  1804 

A.  of  R. 

28th  (2) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

2nd  (i) 

None 

♦29th  (i) 

None 

3rd  (2) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

30th  (2) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

4th  („) 

April  24,  1 804 

A.  F.  A. 

31st    („) 

Oct.  1,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

5th  („) 

1804 

32nd  („) 

» 

„ 

6th  („) 

» 

33rd  (i) 

None 

7th  („) 

5> 

*34th  (2) 

May  II,  1805 

8th  („) 

April  24,  1804 

35th  („) 

» 

9th  (,,) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

36th  („) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.A. 

10th  („) 

» 

rjune  II,  1813, 

nth  („) 

July  15,  1808 

*37th  („) 

I  possibly  never 

1 2th   („) 

Jan.  6,  18x2 

(      formed 

*i3th  (I) 

None 

38th  („) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

14th  (2) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

39th  („) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  ofR. 

15th  („) 

» 

>j 

40th  („) 

Oct.  1,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

*i6th  (i) 

None 

*4ist  (i) 

Sept.  2,  1 81 2 

17th  („) 

None 

42nd  (2) 

July  14,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

1 8th  (2) 

April  24,  1804 

43rd  („) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

19th  (i) 

None 

44th  („) 

1803 

A.  of  R. 

20th  („) 

None 

45th  („) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

2ISt     (2) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

*46th  (i) 

None 

22nd  („) 

Feb.  12,  1814 

47th  (2) 

July  7,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

23rd    („) 

April  24,  1 804 

A.  F.  A. 

*48th  („) 

July  21,  1803 

»> 

*24th  („) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

j> 

*49th  (i) 

None 

25th  („) 

„ 

>» 

50th  (2) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

26th  („) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

51st    (i) 

None 

r  2nd  Battn., 

52nd  (2) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

27th  (3) 

J  Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

53rd  („) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

j   3rd  Battn., 

*54th  (1) 

None 

I  Sept.  2,  1805 

SSth  („) 

None 

1 

*  A  recruiting  company  was  ordered  to  be  added  to  these  regiments,  whether  of  one  or 
of  two  battalions,  on  12th  June  1809. — S.C.L.B. 

f  This  regiment  had  always  two  battalions  ;  3rd  and  4th  raised  1 5th  Dec.  1 804. 


APPENDIX  XI 


311 


Regiment. 

Date  of  2nd 
Battalion. 

Act  of 
Pari,  by 
which 
added. 

Regiment. 

Date  of  2nd 
Battalion. 

Act  of 
Pari,  by 
which 
added. 

56th  (2) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

81st    (2) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

S7th  („) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

82nd  („) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

*S8th  („) 

1803 

» 

83rd  („) 

59th  („) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

84th  („) 

May  6,  1808 

»9 

rjuly  1806, 

85th  (i) 

None 

60th  (6) 

■|  7th  Battalion, 

86th  (2) 

Feb.  12,  18 14 

\  3rd  not  formed 

87th  („) 

Oct.  1,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

6 1  St    (2) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

*88th  („) 

62nd  („) 

Oct.  I,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

89th  („) 

n 

63rd  („) 
64th  (1) 

None 

n 

90th  („) 
9  ISt    („) 

" 

>» 

65th  („) 

None 

92nd  („) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  of  R. 

66th  (2) 

July  21,  1803 

A.  ofR. 

93rd  (1) 

None 

67th  („) 

1803 

„ 

9+th  („) 

None 

68th  (i) 

None 

r    2nd  Battn., 

69th  (2) 
70th  (i) 

July  21,  1803 
None 

A.  ofR. 

95th  (3) 

J  May  14,  1805 
j     3rd  Battn., 

71st    (2) 

Oct.  I,  i8c4 

A.  F.  A. 

I          1809 

72nd  („) 

» 

» 

96th  (2) 

1804 

73rd  („) 

Dec.  29,  t8o8 

A.  ofR. 

*97th  (i) 

None 

74th  (i) 

None 

98th  („) 

„ 

75th  („) 

»» 

99th  („) 

y 

76th  („) 

>» 

1 00th  („) 

J 

77th  („) 

» 

10  ISt     („) 

78th  (2) 

Apr.  19,  1804 

A.  F.  A. 

102nd  („) 

, 

79th  („) 

„ 

>» 

103rd  („) 

, 

80th  (i) 

None 

104th  („) 

> 

*  A  recruiting  company  was  ordered  to  be  added  to  these  regiments,  whether  of  one  or 
of  two  battalions,  on  I2th  June  1809. — S.C.L.B. 

A.  of  R.  signifies  Army  of  Reserve.     A.  F.  A.  signifies  Pitt's  Additional  Force  Act. 


APPENDIX  XII 


Strength  of  Forces  at  Disposal  of  District  Commanders 
IN  Great  Britain,  January  to  March  1804 


Regulars : 

Volunteers 

Militia 

and 

District. 

Contents. 

G.O.C. 

included. 

Effective 

Rank  and 

File. 

Yeomanry. 

Effective 

Rank  and 

File. 

Southern 

Kent,   Surrey,   Sussex  (ex- 
clusive of  London) 

General  Sir  D. 
Dundas 

32,406 

11,77s 

Eastern    . 

Norfolk,    Suffolk,    Cambs, 
Hunts,  Essex 

Lt.-Gen.  Sir  J. 
Craig 

28,720 

21,561 

London  . 

(Including    Surrey   within 
the  bills  of  mortality) 

Lt.-Gen.  Gwyn 

S,o68 

28,383 

South-West     . 

Hants,  Wilts,  Dorset 

Lieut.  -  General 
Gardiner 

10,935 

11,771 

Western  . 

Devon,   Cornwall,    Somer- 
set (exclusive  of  Bristol, 
Bath,    Troubridge,    Ux- 
bridge,    or   other   places 
garrisoned  from  Bristol) 

Lieut.  -  General 
Simcoe 

9,518 

26,043 

North-Westem 

Cheshire,     Salop,      Lanes, 
N.  Wales 

Lt.-Gen.  Prince 
William 

805 

9,806 

Northern 

Northumberland,  Cumber- 
land,        Westmoreland, 
Durham 

Lt.-Gen.  Sir  H. 
Dalrymple 

5,466 

14,126 

Yorkshire 

Yorkshire,  Lines 

Lt.-Gen.    Lord 
Mulgrave 

5,628 

16,788 

Isle  of  Wight  . 

... 

Major-General 
Hewett 

4,171 

1,870 

Severn 

Glos.,  Worcester,  Hereford, 
Monmouth,  S.  Wales 

Lt.  -  Gen.     the 
Duke  of  Cum- 
berland 

i.S4i 

7,945 

Home 

Middlesex,  Herts,  Berks 

Lt.-Gen.    Lord 
Cathcart 

4,942 

... 

North  Inland  . 

Derby,  Notts,  Staffs,  Leic, 
Warwick,  Rutland 

Lieut.  -  General 
Gardiner 

414 

... 

South  Inland  . 

Beds.,  Oxon,  Bucks,  North- 
ants 

Lieut. -General 
Gwynn 

Nil. 

... 

RESERVES  OF  VOLUNTEERS,  ADDITIONAL  TO  THE  ABOVE 

Wakefield    .              i4»303      Chester  2,200  Reading  .       6,566 

Salisbury      .         .       5*042      Liverpool  3,287  Aylesbury.  .       9,683 

Bristol          .         .       8,495      Lichfield  .  .     29,140  Brentwood  10,738 

Gloucester   .         .     12,451      Northampton  .       8,247  Dorking    .  7,299 

London     .  .     28,283 

Stations  for  carrying  troops  by  post :  Guildford,  Andover,  Marlborough,  Bedford, 
Banbury,  Daventry,  Northampton,  Kettering,  Stilton,  Cambridge. 

[Record  Office^  W.O.  Divn.  30,  vol.  Ixxvi.  ist  Jan.  to  27th  March  1804.] 

312 


INDEX 


Abercromby,  Sir   Ralph,  opinion  of  re- 
cruits from  Militia,  6,  49  «.* 
Aberdeen,    dislike      of    Militia    in,   48  j 
Volunteers  in,  60  «.^,  90  ;  price  of 
substitutes  in,  70,  197  j   Volunteer 
exemption    difficulties   in,    187    n. ; 
Local  Militia  riot  in,  231 
Aberystwith,  Local  Militia  riot  at,  247-8 
Acn  of  Parliament — 

1757.  Militia  Act,  explained,  3 ; 
mentioned,  209,  215 

1794.  Levying  men  for  Army  and 
Navy,  4 

1798.  Enlistment  of  Militiamen  into 
Line,  5 

1802.  42  Geo.  IIL  c.  66,  Great 
Britain ;  c.  68,  Ireland.  Enabling 
Volunteers  to  continue  their  service, 
summarised,  12-13  ;  mentioned,  81, 
93,  282  ;  repealed,  134 

1 802.  42  Geo.  III.  c.  72.  To  regulate 
Militia  of  the  Stannaries,  72 

1 802.  42  Geo.  III.  c.  90.  Militia 
Act,  summarised,  14-21  ;  mentioned, 
68,  132,  243,  250,  253 

1802.  42  Geo.  III.  c.  91.  Scotch 
Militia  Act,  referred  to,  21-2,  70 
n? 

1802.  43  Geo,  III.  c.  2.  Irish  Militia 
Act,  summarised,  22 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  19.  Prolonga- 
tion of  Militia  Training,  23 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  33.  Doubling 
bounty  for  Irish  Militiamen,  23 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  38.  Comple- 
tion of  establishment  of  officers  in 
the  Militia,  23 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  89,  Scotland  ; 
c.  47,  England.  Parochial  relief  for 
families  of  Militiamen,  23 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  50.  More 
speedy  completion  of  Militia,  sum- 
marised, 23-4  ;  mentioned,  41,  55 


Acti  of  Parliament — 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  55.  First 
Defence  Act,  summarised,  24  -  5  ; 
mentioned,  58, 62,  75  ;  repealed,  169 

1803.  43Geo.III.  c.  62.  Transferor 
seafaring  men  from  Militia  to 
Navy,  25-6 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  76.  Transfer  to 
Royal  Navy  of  seamen  in  Irish 
Militia,  25  n. 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  71.  Augment- 
ing Number  of  Field -Officers  in 
the  Militia,  26 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  82,  England  ; 
c.  83,  Scotland  j  c.  85,  Ireland. 
Additional  Force  Acts,  or  Army  of 
Reserve  Acts,  summarised,  27-30  ; 
mentioned,  56,  65,  126,  128,  132, 
168,  189,  206  ;  repeal  of,  164 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  96.  Levy  en 
Masse  Act,  summarised,  30  -  3  } 
Government  explanation  of,  63-4; 
mentioned,  67,  76,  78,  81,93,99, 
118,  124;  repeal  of,  169 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  100.  More 
speedy  completion  of  Militia,  pro- 
visions of,  33  ;  mentioned,  57,  77, 
189 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c,  loi.  City  of 
London  Army  of  Reserve,  27  n} 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  120.  Levy  en 
Masse  Amendment,  33-4,  76 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  121.  Billet- 
ing Act,  summarised,  34  \  blunder 
in,  65,  68-9  ;  mentioned,  76 ;  re- 
peal, 134 

1803.  43  Geo.  III.  c.  123,  England  ; 
c.  124,  Scotland.  Army  of  Reserve 
Amendment,  explained,  35  ;  men- 
tioned, 189 

1803.  44  Geo.  III.  c.  18.  Volun- 
teer Exemption  Bill,  mention  of 
121  J  repeal  of,  134 


3»3 


3H 


INDEX 


Acts  of  Parliament — 

1804.  44  Geo.  III.  c.  32.  Irish 
Militia  in  Great  Britain,  126 

1804.  44  Geo.  III.  c.  33.  Augmen- 
tation of  Irish  Militia,  126  ;  Army 
of  Reserve  Suspension,  126-7 

1804.  44  Geo.  III.  c.  54.  Volun- 
teer Consolidation,  discussion  of, 
1 21-3  ;  summarised,  134-8  ;  men- 
tioned, 167,  188 

1834.  44  Geo.  III.  c.  56,  England  ; 
c.  66,  Scotland ;  c.  74,  Ireland. 
Permanent  Additional  Force  Act, 
summarised,  1 30  -  4  ;  failure  of, 
142-4  J   152-6;  repeal  of,  163-4 

1805.  45  Geo.  III.  c.  31.  Supple- 
mentary Militia  to  enlist  in  Line  j 
summary  of,  145-7 

1S06.  46  Geo.  III.  c.  51.  Repeal  of 
Army  of  Reserve  and  Permanent 
Force  Acts,  164  n} 

1806.  46  Geo.  III.  c.  66.  Act  for 
punishing  Mutiny  and  Desertion, 
164 

1806.  46  Geo.  III.  c.  90.  Training 
Act,  discussion  in  Parliament,  167- 
9  ;  summary  of,  169-73  j  found  im- 
practicable, 177,  181  ;  utilised  by 
Castlereagh,  204-5,  210 

1806.  46  Geo.  III.  c.  91.  Return 
of  Militia  Lists,  166 

1806.  46  Geo.  III.  c.  124.  Irish 
Militia  permitted  to  volunteer  for 
the  Line,  summarised,  165-6 

1806.  46  Geo.  III.  c.  125.  Regulat- 
ing rank  of  Volunteer  officers, 
167 

1837.  47  Geo.  III.  sess.  2,  c.  55, 
Ireland  ;  c.  57,  England.  Militia 
Transfer  Act,  summarised,  182-3 

1807.  47  Geo.  III.  sess.  2,  c.  56. 
Militia  Augmentation  (Irish),  sum- 
marised, 183 

1807.  47  Geo.  III.  sess.  2,  c.  71. 
Augmentation  of  Militia  of  Great 
Britain,  summarised,  184 

1808.  48  Geo.  III.  c.  Ill,  England  ; 
c.  150,  Scotland.  Local  Militia, 
discussion  in  Parliament,  209-11  ; 
summary  of,  21 1-5 

1809.  49  Geo.  III.  c.  4,  Great 
Britain  ;  c.  5,  Ireland.  Transfer  of 
Militia  to  Line,  summarised,  223 

1809.  49  Geo.  III.  c.  40.  Local 
Militia  Amendment,  summarised, 
229 

1809.  49  Geo.  III.  c.  53.  Com- 
pletion of  Militia,  mentioned,  223, 
252  ;  summarised,  226  ;  bears  hard 
upon  counties,  240 


Acts  of  Parliament — 

1809.  49  Geo.  III.  c.  56.  Irish 
Militia  Completion,  226  \  Irish 
Militia  Consolidation,  summarised, 
228 
1809.  49  Geo.  III.  c.  82.  Local 
Militia  Amendment,  229  n.^ 

1809.  49  Geo.  III.  c.  129.  To 
limit  enlistment  of  Local  Militiamen 
into  the  Regular  Militia,  229,  258 
«.* 

1810.  50  Geo.  III.  c.  24.  Amend- 
ment of  Act  for  completing  Militia, 
etc.,  235-6 

1 8 10.  50  Geo.  III.  c.  25.  Local 
Militia  Amendment,  summarised, 
241-2 

1811.  51  Geo.  III.  c.  17.  Militia 
ballot  made  valid,  252 

1811.  51  Geo.  III.  c.  20,  Great 
Britain  ;  c.  30,  Ireland.  To  allow 
a  certain  proportion  of  Militia  annu- 
ally to  enlist  in  the  Line,  summarised, 
251-4;  mentioned,  270 

1811.  51  Geo.  in,  c.  118.  To 
allow  the  interchange  of  British  and 
Irish  Militia,  summarised,  254,  277 

1 8 12.  52  Geo.  III.  c.  29.  Militia 
Amendment,  permitting  enlistment 
of  boys,  260-1 

1812.  52  Geo.  III.  c.  38,  England; 
c.  68,  Scotland.  Local  Militia  Con- 
solidation, summarised,  261-265 

1813.  53  Geo.  III.  c.  20,  To  allow 
Militia  of  Stannaries  to  enlist  in 
Line,  270 

1813.  53  Geo.  III.  c.  28,  England  ; 
c.  29,  Scotland.  Local  Militia 
-Amendment,  270 

1813.  53  Geo.  III.  c.  81.  Amend- 
ment of  Militia  Laws,  270 

181 3.  54  Geo.  III.  c.  1,  Great 
Britain;  c.  17,  City  of  London; 
c.  20,  Stanneries.  To  permit  the 
Militia  to  serve  abroad,  or  enlist  in 
the  Line,  summarised,  276-7 

1 813.  54  Geo.  III.  c.  10.  To  per- 
mit the  Regular  Militia  to  serve  in 
any  part  of  United  Kingdom,  277 

1813.  54  Geo.  III.  c.  12.  Augmen- 
tation of  Sixtieth  Rifles,  277 

1813.  54  Geo.  III.  c.  19.  Local 
Militia  to  serve  outside  their 
counties,  277-8 

1814.  54  Geo.  III.  c.  38.  London 
Militia  to  enlist  in  Line,  276  n. 

Addington,  Henry  (later.  Viscount  Sid- 
mouth),  military  policy  of,  6,  8,  10,. 
II,  12,  74,  120,  123,  282-3  j  ""^'g- 
nation    of,   128;  speech  on   Militia 


INDEX 


Z^S 


depletion,   182;  mentioned,  57,72, 

Additional  Force  Acts,  see  Acts  of  Parlia- 
ment 

Africa,  West,  garrison  in,  157;  penal 
battalions  in,  289 

Albuera,  battle  of,  259 

Alexander,  Tsar  of  Russia,  mentioned, 
152  J  after  Austerlitz,  156-7;  con- 
cludes Treaty  of  Tilsit,  180  (and  see 
under  Russia) 

Alexandria,  expedition  to,  148 

Allen,  letter  of  J.,  189  n. 

Allowances,  the  June,  see  under  Volun- 
teers 

Allowances,  the  August,  see  under  Volun- 
teers 

Amboyna,  capture  of,  249 

America,  British  troops  in  North,  220, 
271  ;  war  with  United  States,  268, 
281  ;  special  recruiting  for  service 
in  North,  271 

Amherst,  Major-General  JefFery,a8  Major 
of  Volunteers,  104-5  5  letter  to,  113 

Amiens,  Treaty  of,  uncertainty  of,  6  ; 
broken,  23 

Anglesey,  price  of  substitutes  in,  55, 155  ; 
Volunteer  spirit  in,  92 

Apulia,  unrest  in,  8 

Archenfield,  Local  Militia  riot  at,  232 

Argyll,  price  of  substitutes  in,  70  ;  Volun- 
teer grievance,  84  «.*j  Volunteer 
quota,  91 

Army,  the  Regular,  effective  strength  in 
1803,9-10,  120;  in  1804,  144;  in 
1805,  147;  in  1806,  157-8;  in 
1807,  175,  177;  in  1808,  202, 
220  ;  in  1809,  226  ;  in  1810,  250  ; 
in  181 1,  250;  in  1812,  260;  in 
1813,  275  ;  in  1814,  281 
Casualties  in,  1809,  235  ;  in  18 10, 
250  ;  in  181 1,  259  ;  in  i8i2,  268  ; 
in  1813,  275  ;  1814,  281 
Distribution   in,    1803,    10 ;   in    1806, 

Enlistment  of  militiamen  forbidden, 
14,  228  ;  of  Army  of  Reserve  men 
permitted,  29,  71,  74,  127-9;  Acts 
permitting  enlistment  of  Militia- 
men, in  1805,  145-7;  '"  1806, 
165-6;  in  1807,  179,  181-3  ;  in 
1809,  221-3,  226,  235;  in  1811, 
250-4,  257;  in  1813,  276-7; 
Yorke's  measures  for  increasing, 
126-7;  Pitt's  proposals  for  Per- 
manent Reserve  for,  127-133; 
Craufurd's  proposed  reforms,  131; 
Windham's  reforms,  159-161, 164-6  ; 
military  opinions  on  short  service, 
161-2  ;  reforms  advocated  by  Com- 


Army — 

mandcr  -  in  -  Chief,  175-6;  CaUle- 
reagh't    reforms,    207-8 ;    Calvert'* 
scheme,  224-5,  286-7 
Formation    of    second    battalioat,  71, 
130,  156,  284;  scheme  incomplete, 
176,   287-8;  their   weakness,    i8o, 
204 ;    short   service    men   in,   208  ; 
new  proposals  as  to,  176,  224,  z86 
National  training  by  Regular  detach- 
ments, 168,  173;  territorial  atUch- 
ment  of  regiments  to  counties,  22;, 
288  ;  convicts  as  recruits,  288-9 
Formation   of   German    Legion,    151, 

157-8 
See  Appendices  U  H..  IV.,  VL,  VIL- 
IX.,  XI. ;  see  also  under  Recruiting 

Army  of  Reserve  Act ;  see  under  Acts  of 
Parliament 

Army  of  Reserve,  creation  of,  27-8  ;  how 
differs  from  Militia,  30,  56-7,  283  ; 
disliked  by  nation,  70  ;  strength  in 
1803,  120;  in  1804,73,  129  ;  made 
use  of,  1 10  ;  Pitt's  scheme  for,  127; 
contributes  to  Line,  71,  147,  157  b., 
158;  formed  into  2nd  battalions, 
71,  158,  168,204;  substitute  diffi- 
culty, 189;  gives  exemption  from 
Local  Militia,  211,  214;  and  see 
Appendix  IV. 

Arran,  hatred  of  Militia  service  in,  237 

Artillery,  the  Royal,  strength  in  1803, 
10;  in  1806,  157;  enlistment 
into,  147  ;  terms  of  short  service 
for,  165  ;  recruiting  for,  176 

Associations,  Volunteer  ;  i«ttff</^r  Volun- 
teers 

AthoU,  the  Duke  of,  letter  from,  quoted, 
80-1 

Auchmuty,  Sir  Samuel,  expedition  to 
South  America,  174 

Austerlitt,  battle  of,  150,  152.  156 

Austria,  struggle  against  France,  145, 
150,  152,  156,  221,  233-4,  274 

Ayr,  disputes  of  Lieutenancy,  711.;  lack 
of  arms  for  Volunteers,  84  ;  Volun- 
teer spirit,  91 

Babington,  Mr.  Henry,  M.P.,  speech  on 
recruiting  in  Leicestershire,  163 

Badajoz,  storm  of,  268 

Baird,  Sir  Davi<l,  commands  expedition  to 
the  Cape,  149,  174 

Baker,  letter  of  W.,  88  «.' 

Ballot.  For  Regular  Militia.  Under 
Militia  Act,  1757,  not  enforced,  3. 
Under  Militia  Act,  1802,  machinery 
and  method  for,  14-15,  39-4  •  >  ex- 
emptions, 16-18,  35,  51-3,  5S.  5 '  » 
example  of  a  return,  55  t. ;  evasion 


3i6 


INDEX 


of,  19,  56  ;  illegally  held,  78  ;  hated 
by  middle  class,  50 

Under  Volunteer  Act,  1802,  Volun- 
teers exempt,  12,  24,  81,  88,  134 

Under  Act  for  More  Speedy  Comple- 
tion of  Militia,  1803,  exemption 
fines  raised,  24,  55 

Under  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  no  exemp- 
tion from,  33 

Under  Volunteer  Consolidation  Act, 
conditions  of  exemption,  134,  188 

Under  Permanent  Additional  Force 
Act,  regulations  for,  132 

Under  46  Geo.  III.  c.  9,  suspension  for 
2  years,  fresh  lists  to  be  made,  i66 

Under  Completion  of  Militia,  1807, 
re-introduction  of,  181-4;  exemp- 
tions, 184;  difficulties  of,  188-9, 
195-6 

Under  Completion  of  Militia,  1809,  to 
supplement  voluntary  enlistment, 
226,  235-6  ;  difficulties  of,  236-40, 
252,  255-6 

Under  51  Geo.  III.  c  17,  validating 
enrolments,  252 

Under  Militia  Enlistment  Act,  1811, 
regulations  for,  253 

Under  Local  Militia  Consolidation  Act, 
exemptions,  262,  273 

For  Irish  Militia.  Under  Militia  Act, 
1802,  replaced  by  voluntary  enlist- 
ment, 22 

Under  Completion  of  Irish  Militia 
Act,  1807,  not  compulsory,  183 

Irish  Militia  Consolidation  Act,  ex- 
pedient instead  of,  228 

For  Army  of  Reser-ve.  Under  Addi- 
tional Force  Acts,  men  raised  by, 
27  ;  exemptions,  27-8,  35  ;  not 
compulsory  in  Ireland,  30  ;  differs 
from  Militia  ballot,  56-7  ;  Pitt's 
scheme  for,  127. 

Under  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  no  exemp- 
tion from,  33 

Under  Billeting  Act,  exemptions  from, 
34,  58,  65-6  ;  used  as  punishment 
for  insubordination,  99 

Under  Permanent  Additional  Force 
Act,  suspended,  130,  133 

Under  Volunteer  Consolidation  Act, 
conditions  of  exemption,  134 

For  Local  Militia.  Under  Local 
Militia  Act,  men  raised  by,  210-14, 
285;  exemptions,  210-14;  no  sub- 
stitution, 211,  215 

Under  Local  Militia  Amendment  Act, 
1809,  regulations  for,  229 

Under  Local  Militia  Consolidation, 
1 8 12,  regulations  and  exemptions, 
261-3,  273 


Ballot- 
Under  Windham's    Training  Act,  for 
national  training,  168-173  >  exemp- 
tions, 170 
Landed  interest  bears  cost  of  all,  289. 

Banda,  capture  of,  249 

Banff,  dislike  of  Militia  in,  48  ;  letter  of 
L.L.,  63  n.  ;  Volunteer  spirit  in, 
91  ;  Volunteer  officers  to  receive 
pay,  114;  Local  Militia  voluntee 
for  service  abroad,  259  ;  trouble  with 
Militia,  272 

Barrosa,  battle  of,  259 

Bath,  Volunteer  insubordination  in, 
105-6  ;  Local  Militia  riot  at,  246-7 

Battersea,  Volunteer  Association  at,  97 

Baylen,  capture  of  French  corps  at,  221 

Bayley,  Colonel,  commander  of  Second 
Provisional  Battalion,  280 

Beaufort,  Duke  of,  commander  of  Mon- 
mouth Volunteer  Cavalry,  96-7 

Beckwith,  General,  action  in  W.  Indies, 

233 

Bedford,  Duke  of,  his  Volunteer  corps,  95 

Bedfordshire,  letters  of  L.L.,  58  «.,  68  n.  j 
complaint  of  L.L.,  77  ;  Volunteer 
spirit  in,  92  ;  Whitbread  as  Volun- 
teer officer,  122;  inefficient  Local 
Militia,  241  ;  troubles  in  Militia, 
272  n.  3 

Berbice,  capture  of,  10 

Beresford,  Colonel  (afterwards  Lord), 
commands  first  expedition  to  Buenos 
Ayres,  174 

Berkshire,  inefficient  L.L.,  36  n. ;  price  of 
substitutes,  55  ;  lack  of  arms  for 
Volunteers,  84,  87 ;  objection  to 
pikes,  89 ;  'dislike  of  Permanent 
Additional  Force  Act,  155  ;  Militia 
quota  for,  197  ;  Militia  fines  from, 
197  ;  ballot  of  1 8 10  in,  238  ;  Local 
Militia  volunteer  to  serve  in  Spain, 
259 

Berwick,  price  of  substitutes  in,  70,  195  ; 
Volunteer  quota,  90 ;  ballot  diffi- 
culties in,  255  n. ;  special  recruiting 
by  Militia,  271  «. 

Billeting  Act,  see  under  Acts  of  Parlia- 
ment 

Birmingham,   Militia    recruiting  in,  47, 

'95 
Blackburn,  insurance  society  at,  42-3 
Blaquiere,    Lord    de,    opinion    of    short 

service,  162 
Bosanquet,  Mr.,  letter  of,  56  n. 
Bouilll,  Marquis  de,  his  plan  of  invasion, 

149 
Boulogne,  the  camp  at,  7,  1 50 
Bounties.      To    Regulars,   in    1803,    74; 

under  Permanent  Additional    Force 


INDEX 


3n 


Bounties — 

Act,    1 30,  133;  for  short   tervice, 

To  Militia.  Under  Militia  Act,  1802, 
to  parochial  substitutes,  17  ;  to  poor 
men,  18  ;  to  privates  prolonging 
service,  and  to  substitutes,  20  ;  to 
voluntary  enlisters,  20,  26 

Under  Irish  Militia  Augmentation, 
1804,  to  voluntary  recruits,  126 

Under  Militia  Enlistment  Act,  1805, 
to  recruits  for  Line,  147 

Under  Militia  Amendment,  1806,  to 
voluntary  recruits,  166 

Under  Militia  Enlistment,  1807,  to 
recruits  for  Line,  183  ;  and  from 
Irish  Militia,  183 

Under  Militia  Completion,  1807,  to 
ballotted  men,  and  substitutes,  183-4 

Under  Militia  Transfer,  1809,  to  re- 
cruits for  Line,  223 

Under  Militia  Completion,  1809,  to 
voluntary  enlisters,  226  ;  to  ballotted 
men  and  substitutes,  226,  Z36  j  to 
Irish  Militiamen,  227 

Under  Militia  Completion,  181 1,  to 
voluntary  enlisters,  253,  272  j  to 
ballotted  men,  253 

Under  Militia  Enlistment,  1813,  to 
volunteers  for  Provisional  Battalions, 
276 

For  the  Army  of  Reserve.  Under  Ad- 
ditional Force  Acts,  to  parochial 
substitutes,  28  ;  to  poor  men,  29  ; 
to  principals,  29  ;  to  men  enlisting 
in  Line,  71,  74 
Under  Permanent  Additional  Force  Act. 
By  Pitt's  proposals,  127  ;  to  Army 
of  Reservists,  1 30 ;  on  enlisting  in 
Line,  130-1  j  to  come  from  Imperial 
Treasury,  133;  raised,  152;  scale 
of,  153  n.  J  to  parish  officers,  133- 
144,  152 
For  the  Local  Militia.  Under  Local 
Militia  Act,  forbidden  to  ballotted 
men,  211  ;  to  voluntary  enlisters, 
210,  212 
Under     Local     Militia     Amendment, 

1 809,  altered  for  voluntary  recruits, 
228-9 

Under     Local     Militia    Amendment, 

1 8 10,  refunded    by    Local    Militia 
enlisting  in  Line,  241 

Under  Local  Militia  Consolidation,  to 
transferred  Volunteers,  261  ;  to 
voluntary  enlisters,  262 ;  to  men 
prolonging  service,  264,  266 

Coit  of  substitutes,  3,  5,  18,  39-40,  43, 
55,  58,  70.  74i  "6,  191,  19s,  197. 
227,  236-8,  *SS-6 


Bourbon,  capture  of,  249 

Brackenbury,  M.,  letter  of,  108  «.' 

Bragge,  Mr.,  Secretary  at  War,  opinion  00 
ballot  methods,  40  n. ;  scoffs  at 
danger  of  invasion,  149 

Brecon,  Billeting  Act  in,  68  ». ;  Volun- 
teer spirit  in,  92  ;  cost  of  substitutes, 
256 

Bricknell,  Captain,  letter  of,  8 1  n. 

Brindisi,  occupied  by  Napoleon,  7 

Bristol,  Volunteers  as  guards  for  French 
prisoners  in,  86,  198 

Brooke,  Mr.  de  C,  letter  of,  52  n. 

Brown,  J.,  letter  of,  256  n. 

Buckingham,  Marquis  of,  commander  of 
First  Provisional  Battalion,  280 

Buckinghamshire,  insurance  in,  44  «. ; 
cost  of  substitutes,  70  ;  lack  of  arms 
for  Volunteers,  85  ;  Volunteer  ex- 
emption difficulties,  89  n.' ;  Volun- 
teer quota  deficient,  92-3  ;  mistrust 
of  Volunteer  oath,  93  ;  labourers  as 
Volunteers,  no;  enlistment  of 
Militia  in  Line,  186  ;  L.L.'s  scheme 
against  insurance,  192  ;  Militia  vol- 
unteer to  serve  in  Spain,  221  ;  Local 
Militia  enlist  in  Regular  Militia, 
230-1  ;  ballot  troubles,  238  ;  evasion 
of  Local  Militia  service,  244  n. ; 
Eton  boy  drawn  by  ballot,  259 ; 
Militia  and  service  in  Ireland,  258  n. 
Buenos  Ayres,  expedition  to,  149,   174, 

200-1 
Bugby,  J.,  letter  of,  45 
Burdett,  Sir  Francis,  as  popular  champion, 

246  n. 
Burnaby,  Mr.,  letter  of,  53  ». 
Bussaco,  campaign  of,  249 
Bute,  dislike  of  Militia  in,  48,  237  ;  cost 
of  substitutes,  70 ;  hatred  of  Army 
of  Reserve,  71-2  ;  Volunteer  quota 
in,  90 

Caermarthenshirc,  Volunteer  mutiny  in. 
109 ;  failure  of  Permanent  Addi- 
tional Force  Act  in,  1 54 ;  Militia 
reluctant  to  enlist  in  Line,  186  ; 
Militia  quota  in,  197  ;  Volunteer* 
for  Local  Militia,  216 

Caithness,  Volunteer  spirit  in,  9 1  j  failure 
of  Permanent  Additional  Force  Act, 
152;  Local  Militia  bounties,  266  *. ' 

Calabria,  unrest  in,  8;  British  raid  on,  233 

Calvert,  Sir  H.  (Adjutant-General),  his 
memorandum,  224-5  i  mentioned, 
243,  254,  286-7 

Camberwell  Volunteers,  insubordination 
of,  10+ 

Cambridgeshire,  deficient  Volunteerquota, 
9  2-3  ;     Volunteer    insubordination. 


3^8 


INDEX 


107-9  5  labourers  as  Volunteers,  1 10 ; 
Militia  reluctant  to  enlist  in  Line, 
186  J  Local  Militia  disturbance,  232  ; 
produces  no  men  for  Provisional 
Battalions,  280  «. 

Camden,  Lord,  Secretary  for  War,  128 

Campbell's  Li-ves  of  the  Chancellors  quoted, 
102  n. 

Campbell,  David,  letter  of,  85  m.^ 

Canada,  garrisons  in,  157,  269  ;  troops 
in,  158,  220,  271 

Canning,  George,  defence  of  Permanent 
Additional  Force  Act,  144 

Canterbury,  animus  against  Volunteers  at, 
92 

Cardiganshire,  Militia  quota  in,  197  ;  cost 
of  substitutes,  197  ;  difficulties  with 
Militia,239;  Local  Militia  riot,247-8; 
friction  belvk^een  two  Militias,  273 

Caribbean  Sea,  French  fleet  in  the,  145 

Carlton  House,  as  residence  of  Sheridan, 
218 

Carnarvonshire,  ballot  method  in,  40-1  ; 
cost  of  substitutes,  1555  Militia 
quota,  196  ;  Militia  volunteer  to 
serve  in  Spain,  221 

Carr,  W.,  letter  of,  43  n. 

Castlereagh,  Lord,  defends  Permanent 
Additional  Force  Act,  144,  163  ; 
supports  proposal  for  enlistment  of 
Irish  Militia,  126  ;  protests  against 
Training  Act,  1 69  ;  becomes  Secre- 
tary for  War,  173,  177  ;  his  recruit- 
ing schemes,  181-4,  203-8,  285-6; 
his  Local  Militia  and  National 
Training,  205-7 ;  ^'*  speech  on 
introducing  Local  Militia  bill, 
209-11  ;  on  introducing  Militia 
enlistment  bills,  221-2;  his  Irish 
Militia  Consolidation  Act,  228  ;  his 
Local  Militia  Amendment,  228-9  > 
resigns  office,  234 ;  approval  of 
Palmerston's  policy,  252  ;  advises 
interchange  of  British  and  Irish 
Militias,  251,  254;  his  special 
measures  for  1813-14,  275-8 

Cathcart,  Lt.-Gen.  Lord,  mentioned,  76 
n. ;  commands  expedition  to  Ger- 
many, 152,  179,  180,  288;  to 
Denmark,  181 

Cavalry,  Provisional  Cavalry  a  failure,  5  ; 
mentioned,  210 
Fencible  Cavalry  disbanded,  6 
Volunteer   Cavalry.      See  under  Yeo- 
manry 
Regular  Cavalry,  no   difficulty    in  re- 
cruiting,  176  {and  see  under  Army, 
the  Regular) 

Ceylon,  native  troops  in,  9  ;  war  in, 
145  ;  British  troops  in,  220 


Charles,  the  Archduke,  of  Austria,  233 

Chatham,  John,  Second  Earl  of,  opinion 
of  short  service,  162 

Chelsea  pensions,  increase  of,  under  Wind- 
ham's scheme,  160;  mentioned,  171, 
203 

Cheshire,  Volunteer  insubordination  in, 
108  ;  Local  Militia  used  to  suppress 
riots,  267 

Cinque  Ports,  Volunteer  quota,  92  ; 
Local  Militia  riots,  245 

Cintra,  Convention  of,  mentioned,  220, 
230 

Clackmannan,  Volunteer  spirit  in,  91 

Clapham,  Volunteer  Association  at,  97 

Clarke,  Mrs.  Mary  Anne,  scandal  con- 
cerning, 127  «.  ;  234 

Clerk  of  General  Meeting  (C.G.M.).  See 
under  Lieutenancy 

Clode,  criticism  of  Military  Act,  19 

Cockburn,  Maj.-Gen.,  letter  of,  191  n. 

Committees,  Volunteer  Military.  See 
under  Volunteers 

Copenhagen,  siege  of,  181,  201 

Cornwall,  complaint  of  L.L.,  77  ;  lack 
of  arms  for  Volunteers,  85  ;  labour- 
ers as  Volunteers,  no;  failure  of 
Perm.  Add.  Force  Act,  155  ;  en- 
listment of  Militia  into  Line,  186, 
278  ;  Militia  fines,  197  ;  Volun- 
teers as  patrol,  230  ;  good  spirit  of 
Local  Militia,  259 ;  Militia  dislike 
service  abroad,  278 

Cornwallis,  Charles,  Marquis,  opinion  of 
short  service,  161 

Coruiia,  action  of,  220 

Craig,  Gen.  Sir  James,  mentioned,  75  n.  ; 
letter  of,  140  ;  service  in  Mediter- 
ranean, 148,  157,  159;  opinion  of 
short  service,  162 

Craufurd,  Colonel  Robert,  opinion  of 
Volunteers,  117-8,  125;  criticism 
of  Perm.  Add.  Force  Act,  131,  155; 
speech  on  danger  of  invasion,  149  ; 
on  rank  of  Volunteer  officers,  167  ; 
advocates  short  service,  131,  160; 
service  in  S.  America,  174 

Crimps  and  Crimping,  for  raising  new 
regiments,  2  ;  evils  of,  in  1794-5,  3  ; 
all  classes  engage  in,  72,  191  ;  pro- 
duces men  under  Perm.  Add.  Force 
Act,  143,  155,  163  ;  under  Cast!e- 
reagh's  Militia  Augmentation  Act, 
191 

Cromarty,  Volunteer  spirit  in,  91 

Crosby,  Colonel,  as  Volunteer  officer,  112 

Cuidad  Rodrigo,  storm  of,  268 

Cumberland,  Ernest,  Duke  of,  mentioned 
76  n. 

Cumberland  Militia  refuse    to    enlist  in 


INDEX 


319 


Line,    186  j    Militia    quota,     196 ; 
Militia  unwilling  to  serve  abroad,  27  5 

Dalkeith,  Lord,  letter  of,  82 

Dalrymple,  Lt.-Gen,  Sir  Hew,  75  n.  ; 
letter  of,  86  «.» 

Dantzig,  capture  of,  179 

Davies,  F.,  letter  of,  5 1  ». 

Davison,  Lt.-Col.  Alex.,  letter  of,  103  n. 

Deal,  245 

Defence  Act,  The  First.  See  under  Acts 
of  Parliament 

Demerara,  capture  of,  10 

Denbigh,  price  of  substitutes  in,  55 } 
lack  of  arms  for  Volunteers,  85  ; 
labouring  class  as  Volunteers,  no, 
III,  n.^  J  clergy  as  Volunteers,  113; 
Volunteers  and  Local  Militia,  216  j 
enlistment  of  Local  Militia  in  Line, 
231  j  Militia  offer  for  foreign  ser- 
vice, 278-80 

Denmark,  expedition  to,  181,201 

Derbyshire,  lack  of  arms  for  Volunteers, 
85  ;  Volunteer  spirit,  92 ;  false 
alarm  of  invasion  in,  150  j  Militia 
enlist  in  Line,  185  n.  j  Militia  quota, 
196  ;  Local  Militia  suppress  riots, 
267  ;  Militia  and  the  Provisional 
Battalions,  280  n. 

Derwent  Dale,  insubordination  of  Volun- 
teers, 106 

Desertion,  of  Militia  substitutes,  44,  46-7, 
1 92-4  ;  from  Army  of  Reserve,  72  ; 
under  Perm.  Add.  Force  Act,  i6o; 
from  Local  Militia,  243  ;  decrease 
of,  under  Windham's  reforms,  175 

"  Devil's  Own  "  Volunteers,  loi 
Devonshire,  work  of  L.L.,  37  ;  perplex- 
ities of  L.L.,  77  ;  Volunteer  patriot- 
ism, 90,  92  ;  Volunteer  quota,  92  ; 
Volunteer  insubordination,  99,   10 1, 
109  ;   Militia   quota,    197 ;    cost  of 
substitutes,  197  ;  Volunteer  guards, 
198  ;  Volunteers  and  Local  Militia, 
217   and  note  i  desertion  from  Local 
Militia,    243  ;  retention  of  Volun- 
teers, 269  J   Militia  recruiting,   273 
n.i  J    Militia   unwilling   for  foreign 
service,  279 
Districts  for  Volunteers,  scheme  of  Mili- 
tary, 75-6  n. 
Domingo,  St.,  operations  in,  7 
Don,  General,   commands  expedition    to 

Germany,  152 
Dorset,  price  of  substitutes,  70;  Volunteer 

insubordination  at  Dorchester,  109 
Douro,  Wellesley's  campaign  of  the,  233 
Dover,  Local  Militia  riot  at,  245 
Doyle,  Sir  J.,  letter  of,  175 
Drew,  Colonel,  case  of,  200 


Duckenfield,  Sir  A.,  letter  to,  58  ». 
Ducketh,  Sir  J.,  letter  of,  256  «.> 
Dumbarton,  Volunteer  spirit  in,  91 
Dumfries,  Volunteers  in,  82  «. ;  lack  of 
arms  for  Volunteers,  85  ;  Volunteer 
spirit,  90;  Militia  entiitment,  185 
n.  ;  Militia  unwilling  to  serve  abroad, 
279 
Dundas,  General  Sir   David,  mentioned, 
75    «. ;    the    eighteen    manauvre*, 
117  ;  opinion  of  short  service,  161 
Dundee,  Volunteers  in,  60  n. 
Durbin,  Major,  letter  of,  189  n* 
Durham,  lack  of  arms  for   Volunteers, 
85  ;      Volunteers     and     marching- 
guinea,    138;    Militia    fines,    197; 
Militia    volunteer    for     service     in 
Spain,  221 
Dutch,  prisoners   in  W.Indies,  10;  the 
Cape  taken  from,  149 

East    India    Company,    short    service   in 

army  of,  161,  164 
Edinburgh,  inefficient  L.L.,  36  «.;  Volun- 

teer  regiments  in,  60  n.,  90 ;  failure 

of  Perm.  Add.  Force  Act,  152}  ballot 

difficulties,    238 ;      proposals    of     a 

Local  Militia  officer,  265  ;  voluntary 

enlistment  of  Militia,  272  «.' 
Eglinton,  Lord,  as  L.L,,  35 
Egypt,  Militia  serve  in,  6  ;  expedition  to, 

174  J  disaster  in,  179 
Elford,  Jonathan,  letter  of,  88  «.'« 
Elgin,  Volunteers  in,  84,  91 
EUenborough,  Lord,  as  Volunteer,  102  it. 
Elliot,   M.P.,   Mr.,    criticism   of   Perm. 

Add.  Force  Act,  131 
Elmbridge,  South,  Volunteer  inefficiency 

at,  218 
Elsinore  and  the  Copenhagen  expedition, 

181 
Ely,  Volunteer  Association  in  the  Isle  off 

97  ;  Local  Militia  riot,  231-2 
Erskine,  Henry,  defends  Volunteer  right 

to  resign,  100  2,  i2i  ;  as  Volunteer, 

102  n.,  115 
Essequibo,  capture  of,  10 
Essex,     Lord,     opposed     to     Volunteer 

system,  78 
Essex,    ballotting   in,  40  h.  ;    evasion   of 

ballot,  55-6  ;  Militia  quota,  197 
Eton  College,  ballotting  of  a  scholar  of,  259 
Evesham,      Volunteer      insubordination, 

104-5 
Exemptions.     See  unJer  Ballot 
Eylau,  battle  of,  179 

Falkirk,  Volunteer  insubordination,  108 
Fencibles,  not  ballotted,  4  j  disbtnded,  6 ; 
Canadian  batulions,  269 


320 


INDEX 


Fife,  Volunteer  spirit  in,  91  j  high  boun- 
ties, 238  ;  Militia  recruiting,  271   n. 

Finlayson,  Lt.-Col.,  letter  of,  197 

Fitzwilliam,  Earl,  as  L.L.,  37,  119 

Flint,  lack  of  arms  for  Volunteers,  85  ; 
Volunteers  refuse  pikes,  89  ;  Militia 
volunteer  for  service  in  Spain,  221 

Forfar,  dislike  of  Militia,  49  ;  ballot 
return,  55  n. ;  Volunteer  spirit  in, 
91  ;  price  of  substitutes,  255  j 
Militia  refuse  foreign  service,  279 

Fox,  Charles  James,  speech  on  Volun- 
teers, 12 1-2;  on  subscription 
societies,  128  j  against  Perm.  Add. 
Force  Act,  163 

Fox,  General  Henry,  opinion  of  short 
service,  161 

Frederick  William  II.,  King  of  Prussia, 
mentioned,  150,  152 

French,  Colonel,  127  n. 

Friedland,  battle  of,  180 

Friendly  Societies,  rules  against  enlist- 
ment, 94-S,  212-13,  242 

Fuentes  d'Onoro,  battle  of,  259 

Fusilier  regiments,  status  of  officers,  2 17-8 

Gage,  Lord,  letter  of,  38  n. ;  mentioned, 
112 

Galloway,  Lord,  letter  of,  44  n. 

Gardiner,  Lt.-Gen.,  75-6  «. 

Garioch,  Local  Militia  riot  at,  231 

Gascoigne,  Maj.-Gen.,  letter  of,  109  n.^ 

Geddes,  J.,  letter  of,  ill  «. 

German  Legion,  the  King's,  formation  of, 
151  ;  mentioned,  157-8,  260 

Germany  (the  Weser  and  Stralsund),  ex- 
peditions to,  148,  151-2,  157,  175. 
288 

Gibraltar,  troops  at,  219-20 

Giles,  M.P.,  Mr.,  on  the  discipline  of 
Volunteers,  123  ;  speech  on  cost  of 
recruits  from  Militia,  223 

Glamorgan,  Volunteer  clothing,  ii6j 
the  marching-guinea,  138,  245  n.^ ; 
Volunteers  and  Local  Militia,  266 
«.2  J  friction  between  Militias,  273 
n.^  ;  Provisional  Battalions,  278  n. 

Glasgow,  Volunteer  regiment  in,  60  «. ; 
insurance  society  in,  194 

Gloucestershire,  Volunteers  in,  80,  99, 
107,  1 10  ;  insurance  society  in,  192 ; 
Volunteers  as  guards,  198;  London 
Militia  recruited  from,  227  ;  reten- 
tion of  Volunteers,  269 

Good  Hope,  expedition  to  Cape  of,  149 

Gorec,  independent  corps  at,  9  ;  Welsh 
battalion  at,  152  ;  troops  in,  220 

Gower,  Lord  G.  Leveson,  speech  on 
Volunteer  arms,  86 

Graham,    Colonel    Thomas    (afterwards 


Lord    Lynedoch),  opinion   of  short 

service,  162 
Grasse,  Count  de,  plan  of  invasion,  149 
Gravesend,  Volunteer  Rifle  Corps,  97 
Gray,  Owen,  letter  of,  97  n.^ 
Gregor,  F.,  letter  of,  ii i  n. 
Grenville,  Lord,  influence  in  Bucks,  93  ; 

Prime  Minister,  156 
Grey,  General  Charles,  First  Earl,  opinion 

of  short  service,  162 
Guadaloupe,  capture  of,  249 
Guadiana,  campaign  in  the  valley  of  the,  233 
Guards.     See  under  Regiments 
Gwyn,  Lt.-Gen.,  75  n. 
Gwynn,  Lt.-Gen.,  76  «. 

Haddington,  dislike  of  Militia,  48,  255  ; 
Volunteer  quota,  90 ;  marching- 
guinea,  138 

Hampshire,  work  of  L.L.,  36  ;  ballot  in, 
54  ;  lack  of  arms  for  Volunteers,  86  ; 
Volunteer  insubordination,  99,  199  j 
failure  of  Perm.  Add.  Force  Act, 
155  ;  Militia  fines,  197  ;  Volunteers 
as  guards,  198  ;  Volunteers  and 
Local  Militia,  217;  Militia  offer  for 
service  in  Spain,  221  ;  to  enlist  in 
Line,  257,  n? ;  retention  of  Vol- 
unteers, 269 ;  special  recruiting  by 
Militia,  271 

Hanover,  French  occupation  of,  151 

Hardwicke,  Capt.,  letter  to,  51  «. 

Harrington,  Lord,  opinion  of  short  service, 
161 

Harvey,  Lt.-Col,  R.,  letter  of,  114  n? 

Hastings,  dislike  of  Local  Militia  in,  245 

Hawkesbury,  Lord  (afterwards  Earl  of 
Liverpool),  defends  Perm.  Add. 
Force  Act,  143 

Hawthorne,  Mr.,  criticises  Perm.  Add. 
Force  Act,  163 

Heath,  Mr.  Justice,  decision  in  Volunteer 
case,  200 

Heligoland,  troops  in,  220 

Helmington, Volunteers  and  Local  Militia 
at,  216 

Herefordshire,  opposition  to  Volunteers, 
77  ;  Volunteer  spirit,  92  ;  and  in- 
subordination, 99-100;  Militia 
quota,  197 ;  and  service  in  Spain, 
221  ;  Local  Militia  riots,  232 ; 
Militia  service  in  Ireland,  258  ». 

Hertfordshire,  unequal  distribution  of 
Volunteer  Arms,  87-8  ;  Militia  en- 
listment in  Line,  186  ;  Volunteers 
and  Local  Militia,  217  n.^ 

Hessian  mercenaries,  151 

Hewatt,  Maj.-Gen.,  mentioned,  76  n.  j 
opinion  of  short  service,  161 

Highlanders,  their  hatred  of  Militia,  48 


INDEX 


321 


Hobart,  Lord,  Secretary  for  War,  67  ; 
his  folly,  283 

Holland,  operations  planned  in,  151 

Home  Office,  carelessness  of  clerks,  60 
«•  >  n-,  84,  189-90,  257  J  controls 
the  Volunteers,  67,  141 

Hope,  C,  letter  of,  36  ». 

Hoskyns,  Sir  H.,  letter  of,  233  n. 

Howes,  Thomas,  letter  of,  199 

Huskisson,  William,  speech  on  Volun- 
teers, 269 

Hutchinson,  Lord,  letter  of,  179 

India,  Mahratta  War,  145  ;  troops  in, 
158,  220  J  mutiny  at  Vellore,  179 

Indies,  West,  service  in,  loathed,  4,  160, 
289  ;  French  operations  in,  7,  145, 
149;  W.  I.  regiments,  9  «.,  157; 
successes  in,  10  5  troops  in,  158, 
220  J  operations  of  1810  in,  249; 
penal  battalions  in,  289  j  short 
service  terms  in,  165,  203 

Infantry.      See  under  ^rmy,  the  Regular 

Insurance,  against  the  ballot,  forbidden  to 
officials  by  law,  24  ;  origin  and 
methods,  42  -  5  j  Pitt's  scheme 
against,  127-8;  growth  of,  192-5; 
circular  of  a  society,  193-4  n. ;  com- 
plaint of  another  society,  194  ;  for- 
bidden by  Local  Militia  Act,  212, 
215 

Inverness,  Volunteers  refuse  pikes,  89  n?; 
Volunteer  quota,  91  ;  recruiting  diffi- 
culties, 142  ;  ballot  troubles,  236, 
255  ;  trouble  with  Militia,  272 

Ionian  Isles,  operations  in,  249 

Ireland.  See  under  Militia,  Ballot  and 
Bounty 

Italy,  feeling  against  France,  7,  8  ;  ex- 
pedition to,  148,  157  ;  Austrian 
troops  withdrawn  from,  156 

Jackson,  George,  letter  of,  274  n? 
Java,  capture  of,  259 
Jebb,  Lt.-Col.,  letter  of,  150  n. 
Jena,  battle  of,  174 
Joseph,  King  of  Spain,  defeat  of,  275 
Junot,  Marshal,  prisoners  of  his  army  at 
Penzance,  230 

Kent,  Volunteer  difficulties,  82  n. ;  and 
quota,  92;  and  insubordination,  100; 
Militia  backward  to  enter  Line,  147; 
Volunteer  exemption  troubles,  187  ; 
Volunteers  as  guards,  198  ;  dislike 
of  Local  Militia,  216;  evasion  of 
Local  Militia  service,  242-3  ;  reten- 
tion of  Volunteers,  269 

Kenyon,  Lord,  letter  of,  88  n? 

Kerrison,  T.,  letter  of,  47  n. 


Kew,  Voluntecri  in,  218 

Kincardine,  Volunteer  spirit  in,  91 

King,  Mr.,  letter  to,  140  n. 

Kinross,  Volunteers  refuse  pikef,  89  n?  ; 

Volunteer  quota,  90 
Kirkcudbright,    dislike   of  Militia,  49  ; 

Local  Militia  troubles,  244  <».',  245 

n?  J    special    recruiting    by    Militia, 

271  n. 

La  Vendee,  national  rising  in,  284 

Lake,  Gen.  (afterwards  Lord),  success  in 
India,  145 

Lambeth,  Volunteer  corps  insubordinate, 
104 

Lanark,  Volunteers  in,  91,  no;  ballot 
troubles  in,  237  ;  Local  Militia  in, 
267  n} 

Lancashire,  work  of  L.L.,  36-7  ;  insur- 
ance societies,  43  ;  lack  of  arms  for 
Volunteers,  86,  94;  Volunteer  quota, 
92,  94  ;  Militia  enlistment  into 
Line,  185,  279  ;  ballot  troubles,  195, 
2  39>  243  ;  Volunteers  in  Local 
Militia,  216-18;  Local  Militia 
suppress  riots,  267  ;  friction  between 
Militias,  273 ;  Provisional  Batta- 
lions, 279 

Lascelles,  Rowley,  letter  of,  1 16  n.;  1 38  n. 

Law  Association  Volunteers,  10 1 

Leake  (a  Volunteer  Officer),  case  of,  103 

Legion,  the  King's  German,  formed,  151; 
mentioned,  157-8,  260 

Leicestershire,  Volunteers  armed,  87 ; 
Perm.  Add.  Force  Act  in,  163 ; 
cost  of  substitutes,  195  ;  Militia 
quota,  196  ;  Militia  volunteers  for 
service  in  Spain,  221  ;  Bucks.  Militia 
recruited  from,  238 

Leipsic,  battle  of,  274 

Leominster,  Letter  of  Subdivision  clerk, 
189 

Levy  en  Masse  Act.  See  under  Acts  of 
Parliament 

Lewis,  Mr.,  letter  of,  5 1  n. 

Lichfield,  insurance  society  in,  41-3  ; 
Volunteers  from  labouring  clau,  1 1  in. 

Lieutenancies,  organisation  and  officials 
of,  14-15  ;  duties  under  Militia  Act 
of  1802,  15-21,  35;  under  more 
speedy  completion  of  Militia,  1802, 
23  ;  under  First  Defence  Act,  24-5  j 
under  Army  of  Reserve  Act,  27-8  ; 
under  Levy  en  Masse  Act,  30-2 } 
under  Levy  en  Masse  Amendment, 
33  ;  under  Perm.  Add.  Force  Act, 
132-3,  152-5;  under  Training  Act, 
169;  under  Local  Militia  Act,  211- 
12;  disputes  with  Military  authorities, 
70-2  ;  pyment  of  clerks,  237,  255  ; 
Y 


322 


INDEX 


discharge  of  Local  Militiamen,  266  ; 
confusion  owing  to  multifarious  legis- 
lation, 240 
Lord- Lieutenant.  General  character, 
duties,  difficulties,  35-7  ;  L.Ls.  and 
the  Billeting  Act,  34,  68-9  ;  careless- 
ness of  Government  officials,  77  ; 
opposition  to  Volunteer  system,  78 
Deputy-Lieutenants.  Property  qualifica- 
tions, 14 ;  general  character,  38  ; 
postal  extortion  from,  37-8  ;  D.Ls. 
and  the  ballot,  39-40,  189  ;  and 
insurance,  43-5  ;  not  exempt  from 
ballot,  52  ;  insubordination  in  Scot- 
land, 244  ;  critical  spirit,  239  ;  [and 
see  under  names  of  counties  and 
Parochial  Officers). 

Lincolnshire,  enlistment  of  Militia  into 
Line,  186  ;  Militia  quota,  196  j  Vol- 
unteers and  the  Local  Militia,  216  ; 
special  recruiting  by  the  Militia,  27 1 

Linlithgow,  Volunteer  spirit  in,  91 5  ballot 
troubles,  236  n.^ 

Little  Swaffham,  case  of  Volunteer  in- 
subordination, 109 

Liverpool,  Earl  of  (formerly  Lord  Hawkes- 
bury).  Secretary  for  War,  234 

Local  Militia  Act.  See  under  Acts  of 
Parliament 

Local  Militia.     See  under  Militia,  Local 

Lotmen,  terms  explained,  16 

Macaulay,  Zachary,  as  Volunteer,  97 

Macclesfield,  Local  Militia  untrust- 
worthy, 267 

Mackenzie,  Sir  A.  Muir,  letter  of,  266  «, 

Mackenzie,  Sir  J.,  letter  of,  1 1 1  n. 

Mackintosh,  Angus,  letter  of,  255  n. 

M'Leod,  D.,  letter  of,  70  «.,  1 14  n. 

Macpherson,  David,  letter  of,  236  n? 

Madeira,  troops  in,  220 

Maida,  battle  of,  149 

Maidstone,  evasion  of  Local  Militia  ser- 
vice in,  242-3 

Malta,  Craig's  expedition  at,  148  ;  troops 
in,  220 

Man,  Isle  of,  mistrust  of  Volunteer  oath 
in,  94 

Manners-Button,  Law-Officer  of  Crown, 
100 

Marching-guinea,  explained,  138,  213-14; 
causes  riots  in  Local  Militia,  231-2, 
245-9,  ^5^  i  abolished,  266 

Marines,  Militia  enlist  into,  147,  186  j 
Local  Militia  permitted  to  enlist  in, 
214 

Marlborough,  John,  ist  Duke  of,  recruit- 
ing under,  2 

Martinique,  capture  of,  233 

Matthew,  CoL,  letter  of,  51  «. 


Matthews,  Col.  J.,  letter  of,  100  ». 

Mauritius,  capture  of,  259 

Merioneth  Militia  volunteer  service  in 
Spain,  221  ;  Local  Militia  troubles, 
232 

Merthyr  Tydvil,  lawlessness  in,  1 54 

Middlesex,  ballot  difficulties  in,  46-7,  55  ; 
price  of  substitutes,  70  ;  Volunteer 
difficulties,  82  n. ;  Volunteer  spirit, 
92  ;  Volunteer  insubordination,  102- 
3  ;  Volunteers  drawn  from  labouring 
class,  no;  Militia  refuse  to  enter 
Line,  147 ;  failure  of  Perm.  Add. 
Force  Act,  155  ;  insurance  societies 
in,  192-4;  Militia  quota,  196  ;  eager- 
ness to  enlist,  257  ;  retention  of 
Volunteers,  269 

Midlothian,  Sir  W.  Scott  as  yeoman,  118; 
ballot  troubles,  238 

Militia,  the  Regular  (for  legislation  relat- 
ing to,  see  under  Acts  of  Parliament, 
and  see  also  under  Ballot,  Bounties, 
Substitutes,  Insurances,  and  App.  X. 
Effective  strength  in  1803,  54  ;    in 

1806,  159;  in  1807,  177;  in  1808, 
202  ;  in  1811,  250  ;  in  1813,  269  ; 
Establishment    in     1803,    120;    in 

1807,  175  ;  in  1808,  202  ;  in  i8n, 
250  ;  in  1812,  260  ;  in  1813,  269  ; 
and  reduced  by  Pitt,  127-8,  132, 
188;  and  by  Palmerston,  250-4; 
difficulties  of  replenishing,  187-90, 
235-40,  255-6  ;  terms  of  service,  16, 
23  ;  raised  by  ballot,  in  1802,  14-15, 
20,  39-41,  55  n.  ;  in  1807,  181-4, 
188-9,  '95"6>  '"  1809-10,  226, 
235-6,  237-40,  252,  255-6;  (for 
exemptions  from,  see  under  Ballot, 
and  Volunteers) ;  ballot  suspended, 
166,  173;  voluntary  enlistment  for, 
222,  226-7,  235-6,  241,  253,  256, 
270-3,  282  ;  substitution  permitted, 
7 1, 282  {see  under  Substitutes)  ;  enlist- 
ment into  Line  from,  forbidden,  14; 
permitted  by  special  legislation,  5-6, 
145-7,  158,  181-3,  186,  221-3,  226, 
235,  270-1  ;  in  fixed  annual  draft, 
250-4,  257,  285;  interchange  of 
British  and  Irish  regiments,  254-5, 
257  ;  volunteers  for  foreign  service, 
221,  270;  extension  of  service  to 
Europe,  275-6,  278-80;  Provisional 
Battalions  of,  276,  278-80 ;  local 
character  destroyed,  38-9,42-8,  194- 
5  ;  standard  of  height  in,  16,  18,  33, 
189;  position  of  N.C.O.  in,  19; 
disliked  by  nation,  49-53  ;  evasion 
of  service,  19,  56,  237,  239,  255 
{and  see  under  Insurance)  ;  flogging 
in,    50  ;  differs   from  Army  of  Re- 


INDEX 


323 


serve,  30,  56-7  ;  friction  with  Local 
Militia,  225,  267,  273,  280 ;  de- 
pleted condition,  1813,  273-4,  286  } 
parochial  relief  for  families  of  Militia- 
men, 23,  191,  251,  277 
The  Supplementary,  in  1796,  5  ;  as  aug- 
mentation of  Old  Militia,  14  ;  en- 
rolled, 23,  54,  188  J  officers  for,  26  ; 
difficulty  in  raising,  46,  129  ;  a  pre- 
tence in  London  and  Scotland,  55  j 
the  Volunteers  and,  63  ;  merged  in 
Army  of  Reserve,  128-9,  ^^^  >  P^""" 
mitted  to  enlist  in  Line,  145-7,  158 
The  Scottish,  increase  of,  2t ;  old  and 
new  organisations,  21-2  n.  ;  detested 
by  people,  48-9,  236-8,  255  ;  a  recent 
introduction,  169  ;  enlistment  into 
Line  from,  182,  186,  251  ;  ballot 
troubles,  236-8,  255  ;  trouble  with 
substitutes,  272  j  special  recruiting 
by,  271 
The  Irish,  ballot  not  used,  22,  183,  228  ; 
no  Supplementary  Militia,  22  ;  defi- 
ciencies in  1804,  73-4,  in  1807,  178 ; 
service  in  England,  126,  254  j  per- 
mitted to  enlist  into  Line,  165-6, 
181-3,  186,  235,  252;  replenishing 
of,  183,  226-7  ;  Castlereagh's  re- 
forms, 228 
The  Local,  Castlereagh's  proposals  for, 
181,  205-7,  209-10,  285  ;  creation 
of,  211-15;  substitution  forbidden, 
211,  215  ;  regulation  for  enlistment 
into  Line,  212,  214,  253,  258,273  ; 
Calvert's  conception  of,  224-5; 
development  of,  228,  241,  258  ; 
riots  in,  231-3,  244-9;  evasion  of 
service  in,  242-3  ;  desertion  from, 
243';  hostility  of  population  to, 
244-9;  reductions  in,  241-2,  264; 
difficulty  as  to  discharge,  265-6  ; 
reforms  in,  229,  241,  264-5,  ^7°  > 
extended  service,  259,  277  -  8  ; 
establishment  in  1812,  260;  in 
1813,  269;  friction  with  Regular 
Militia,  225,  267,  273,  280;  as 
means  of  national  training,  266-7 

Milton,  Lord,  speech  on  Militia  Enlist- 
ment bill,  222 

Minorca,  proposed  expedition  to,  148 

Moira,  Gen.,  Earl  of  (C.  in  C.  Scotland), 
praises  Scottish  Volunteers,  118  ; 
opinion  of  short  service,  162 

Money,  Gen.,  opinion  of  Volunteer  train- 
ing, 117  ;  difficulty  with  Volunteers, 

139-40  .  .    . 

Monmouthshire,  Volunteer  spirit  m,  92  ; 
Yeomanry  regulations,  96  ;  Militia 
fines,  197  ;  cost  of  substitutes,  197 

Montgomery,  crimping  in,  72  n. ;  Volun- 


teers in,  78,  113  ;  cost  of  (ubttitnto, 
197  ;  Mililia  enlist  into  Line,  257  m? 

Moore,  Lieut.-Gencral  Sir  John,  men- 
tioned, 1 36  ;  opinion  of  short  ser- 
vice, 162 ;  expedition  to  Sweden, 
219-20  ;  and  to  Portugal,  220 

Moravia,  fighting  in,  1 50-2 

Morgan,  C,  letter  of,  6S  ».,  82  n. 

Morritt,  Lt.-Col.,  letter  of,  117  n. 

Mulgrave,  Lt.-Gcn.  Lord,  mentioned,  75 
n. ;  opinion  of  short  service,  162 

Murray,  Sir  John,  letter  on  Volunteer 
allowances,  83 

Mutiny  Act,  Army  of  Reserve  subject  to, 
29  ;  embodied  Levy  en  Masse  sub- 
ject to,  32  ;  Volunteers  subject  to  in 
case  of  invasion,  34 ;  mentioned,  204 ; 
Militia  abroad  subject  to,  277 

Mytton,  Mr.,  letter  of,  78  «. 

Nairn,  dislike  of  Army  of  Reserve,  70 
n?^  lack  of  arms  for  Volunteers, 
84  ;  Volunteer  spirit,  9 1  ;  ballot 
troubles,  237 

Nantwich,  Volunteer  insubordination  in, 
io8 

Naples,  French  invasion,  7  ;  expedition 
to,  148,  157  ;  raids  in,  233 

Napoleon,  position  in  1803,7  ;  backward, 
preparations  in  1803-4,  98,  150; 
opinion  of  British  policy  1805,  148  ; 
plans  of  invasion,  149-50,  180; 
successes  at  U  Im  and  Austerliti,  1 50-2, 
156;  at  Jena,  174;  at  Friedland, 
180;  at  Wagram,  234;  Berlin 
decrees,  174  ;  Treaty  of  Tilsit,  180  ; 
miscarriage  of  Baltic  schemes,  201  ; 
invasion  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  219  ; 
of  Russia,  268;  defeat  oi;  274; 
abdication,  281 

Navy,  levying  men  for,  4  ;  seafaring  men 
transferred  from  Militia  to,  25-6  ; 
naval  men  exempt  from  ballot  for 
Militia,  16,  26  ;  and  for  Army  of 
Reserve,  29  ;  Local  Militiamen  per- 
mitted  to  enlist  in,  214 

Nelmes,  Richard,  letter  of,  107 

Nelson,  Horatio,  Viscount,  pursuit  of 
Villeneuve,  149 

New  South  Wales,  corps  in,  9,  157} 
troops  in,  220 

Newcastle,  defence  of,  98 

Newton,  Col.,  as  Volunteer,  ii» 

Nivelle,  Battle  of  the,  275 

Norfolk,  Volunteers  in,  92,  94,  no,  139- 
40;  Volunteer  insubordination,  loi ; 
pay  of  Volunteer  officers,  114}  fail- 
ure of  Perm.  Add.  Force  Act,  14*  J 
Militia  quota,  197  ;  special  recruiting 
by  the  Militia,  271. 


324 


INDEX 


Norman  Cross,  Volunteers  as  guards  at, 
198 

North  Britons,  insubordinate  Volunteer 
corps,  103 

Northamptonshire,  hard  case  of  ballot  in, 
52  ;  Volunteer  spirit  in,  92  ;  stand- 
ard of  height  for  Militia,  189  n.*  ; 
cost  of  substitutes,  195 

Northumberland,  cost  of  substitutes,  70, 
197  ;  lack  of  arms  for  Volunteers, 
86;  Militia  quota,  196-7  ;  evasion 
of  ballot,  198  ;  retention  of  Vol- 
unteers, 269 

Northumberland,  Duke  of,  as  L.L.,  35, 

^.^'  95       .  . 

Norwich,  recruiting  for  Middlesex  Militia 
in,  46,  222-3  j  Volunteer  insubordina- 
tion in,  199 

Nottinghamshire,  Volunteer  spirit  in, 
92  ;  Subdiv.  clerk  absconds,  196  ; 
Volunteers  dislike  Local  Militia, 216; 
Local  Militia  enlist  in  Reg.  Militia, 
258  n.*  ;  weakness  of  Militia,  274 

Nuneaton,  cost  of  substitutes,  195 

Oman's   Hist,   of  Peninsular    War,    ref. 

to,  220  n. 
Ormskirk,  ballot  troubles  at,  216,  217  n? 
Otranto,  French  occupation  of,  7 

Palmerston,  Viscount,  Secretary  at  War, 
234  ;  his  Militia  bills,  250-54 

Pancras,  St.,  Volunteer  insubordination 
in,  102-3 

Parochial  officers,  ballot  duties,  15,  41  ; 
under  Permanent  Additional  Force 
Act,  130-3,  142-4,  152-3,  283  j 
lack  of  zeal,  155  ;  share  in  insur- 
ance, 42-4  ;  as  crimps,  191  ;  raise 
Militia  recruits,  226 

Pearce,  insurance  agent,  45 

Peebles,  dislike  of  Militia,  48  ;  Volun- 
teers in,  91 

Pembrokeshire,  lack  of  arms  for  Volun- 
teers, 86  ;  Militia  quota,  197  ; 
Volunteers  and  Local  Militia,  217; 
Militia  volunteer  for  service  in 
Spain,  221 

Penzance,  French  transport  at,  230 

Perceval,  Spencer,  decision  as  to  Volun- 
teer right  of  resignation,  100,  121  ; 
as  to  fines,  123  ;  defends  Permanent 
Additional  Force  Act,  163  «.;  defends 
Volunteers,  169 ;  Prime  Minister, 
234 

Permanent  Additional  Force  Act.  See 
under  Acts  of  Parliament 

Perthshire,  dislike  of  Militia,  49  ;  Volun- 
teers in,  60  «.,  80,  83,  91  ;  failure 
of  Permanent  Additional  Force  Act, 


152;   ballot  troubles,  237;    special 
recruiting  by  Militia,  271  n. 

Pevensey,  dislike  of  Local  Militia,  245 

Pitt,  William,  ist  Earl  of  Chatham.  His 
Militia  Act,  48,  209,  215 

Pitt,  William,  weakness  of  military  ad- 
ministration, 3,  284  ;  West  Indian 
policy,  10  J  Volunteer  system  under, 
12,  49,  119,  124  ;  as  Volunteer,  92, 
115,  122  J  original  plan  for  Army  of 
Reserve,  120  ;  opinion  on  Volunteer 
fines,  123  ;  censure  of  Addington's 
Government,  127  ;  takes  office,  128  j 
his  Army  scheme,  127,  161,  283  j 
Permanent  Additional  Force  Act, 
130-4,  144  ;  speech  on  Volunteers, 
139;  his  Militia  Enlistment  Bill, 
145-7  ;  schemes  of  offensive  opera- 
tions, 147-52  j  death,  156 

Plate,  River,  expedition  to,  174 

Plumer,  Thomas,  letter  of,  1 1 1  n}  and  ^ 

Plymouth,  weak  Militia  at,  72  n. ; 
Volunteer  exemption  difficulty,  88  ; 
Volunteers  as  guards,  198 

Pocock,  Sir  J.,  letter  of,  89  n.® 

Pomerania,  Swedish  troops  in,  151 

Popham,  Sir  Home,  expedition  to  Buenos 
Ayres,  149,  174,  201 

Pole-Carew,  R.,  letter  to,  103  n. 

Portland,  Duke  of,  as  L.L.,  37 

Portugal,  action  against  England,  180 ; 
expeditions  to,  219,  233  ;  army  in 
British  pay,  235,  260 

Portsmouth,  Volunteers  as  guards  at,  198 

Powell,  Kynaston,  letter  of,  87  «.*  ;  94  n? 

Powell,  P.  L.,  letter  of,  10 1  n.^ 

Powis,  Captain,  letter  of,  82  n. 

Pressburg,  Treaty  of,  156 

Principals  (in  Militia),  term  explained, 
16;  their  rarity,  40,  47;  196-75 
in  Army  of  Reserve,  73.  {See  also 
under  Militia,  Insurance.) 

Provisional  Battalions,  explained,  276, 
278  ;  failure  of,  280  ;  numbers  of, 
280 

Prussia,  policy  in  Europe,  145,  150,  152, 
157,  179,  221,  274;  defeat  at  Jena, 
1 74 ;  armed  with  British  Volun- 
teers' weapons,  270 

Pulteney,  General  Sir  James,  opinion  of 
short  service,  161  j  of  the  Volun- 
teers, 169 ;  defends  Permanent 
Additional  Force  Act,  163 

Quakers,  Militia  fine  for,  18  ;  fine  under 
Training  Act,  170 

Radnor,  Volunteers  in,  92,  1 10 
Recruiting,  for  Regular  Army.    Ordinary, 
numbers  obtained  by,  in  1803-5,  '5^  j 


INDEX 


3^5 


1805-7,  175;  1807-8,  219,  2215 
1810,250;  1811,259;  1812,268 

From    Militia,    forbidden    by    Act    of 

1802,  14 ;  permitted  by  8pccial 
legislation,  5-6;  145-7,  158,  i79» 
182-3,  185,  226,  235,  251-4  ;  257  ; 
271  ;  275-6 

From  Irish  Militia,  forbidden,  228  ; 
special  legislation  for,  126,  165-6, 
183,  226 

From  Local  Militia,  permitted,  214, 
230  ;  forbidden  during  training, 
214,  229 

From  Army  of  Reserve,  permitted,  30, 
.71,  147.  "57,  "•'^j   158 

Pitt's  reforms  for,  127-9  i  ^34>  '42-3, 
152-3  ;  Windham's  reforms  (^see 
under  Recruiting,  short  service) ; 
their  temporary  success,  175  ;  further 
changes,  261,  264,  271  ;  inade- 
quacy of,  145,  175,  180;  summary 
of  methods,  282-7  ;  competition  of 
Regulars  and  home  defence  forces, 
74,  127-8,  155,  166;  recruiting  of 
boys,  145,  164,  288  ;  and  for  Militia 
also,  191,  253,  256,  260-1,  286  ; 
from  gaols,  288-9  ;  system  of  raising 
men  for  rank,  1-3,  126-7  5  ^nd 
battalions  as  recruiting  depots,  180  ; 
203 

Short  service,  under  Queen  Anne,  2 ; 
Craufurd  advocates,  131,  160  ; 
Windham's  reforms,  143,  159-61, 
284;  military  opinions  of,  161-2; 
terms  of,  164-5  >  failure  of>  202-3, 
285  ;  temporary  success,  175  > 
optional,  204,  208,  251 
Regiments :    Life    Guards,    strength    in 

1803,  10  ;  easily  recruited,  176 
13th  Light  Dragoons,  232 

17th  Light   Dragoons,   enlistment  of, 

162-3 
First  Royals,  9 

12th  Foot,  2nd  battalion  of,  287 
49th  Foot,  service  in  North  America, 

Sixtieth,  9,  176,  augmentation  of,  277 
78th  Highlanders,  2nd  battalion,  126  ; 

recruits  for,  154 
79th  Highlanders,  2nd  battalion,  126; 

recruits  for,  154 
87th  Foot,  127  n. 
95  th  Foot,  290 
Royal  York  Rangers,  penal  battalion, 

289 
De  Roll's,  9 
De  Watteville's,  9 
King's   German  Legion,   151,   iS7-8> 

260 
Renewal  money,  term  explained,  20 


Renfrew,  Volunteers  in,  9 1 

Reserve  Act,  Army  of.  See  under  AcU  of 
Parliament 

Reserve,  Permanent,  Pitt's  scheme  for, 
129,  152-3;  failure  of,  154-65 
weakness  of,  158 

Reynolds,  Lawrence,  letter  of,  99  ».' 

Richmond,  Duke  of,  work  as  L.L.,  3$, 
57.  89.  93.  »>8,  136,  155;  as 
Volunteer,  112 

Richmond,  Volunteer  insubordination  at, 
199-200 

Ripon,  Volunteer  insubordination  at, 
108 

Risbridge,  Volunteer  insubordination  at, 
216 

Roli9a,  action  of,  220 

Rolle,  Lord,  letter  of,  10 1 ;  letter  to, 
217  n? 

Romney,  Local  Militia  riot  at,  245 

Ross,  dislike  of  Militia,  4S  ;  of  Army  of 
Reserve,  70  ;  Volunteers  in,  91, 
110,  114,  187;  Volunteers  and 
Local  Militia,  216  ;  special  recruit- 
ing by  Militia,  271  ;  Highlander 
Militia,  272  n* 

Rotherham,  Volunteers  called  out  on 
false  alarm,  150 

Rous,  Lord,  letter  of,  1 39-40 

Roxburgh,  Billeting  Act  in,  69  ;  Volun- 
teers in,  91 

Russia,  policy  in  Europe,  145,  150,  152, 
156-7,  180,  234;  co-operation  with 
England,  148,  152,  157  ;  Napoleon's 
invasion  of,  268 

Rutland,  clerical  Volunteers,  113;  Militia 
quota,  196 

Ryder,    Mr.,   speech    on    short   service, 

St.  Lucia,  capture  of,  10 

Saints,  battle  of  the,  149 

Salamanca,  battle  of,  268 

Sardinia,  defence  of,  148 

Scheldt,  expedition  to  the,  233 

Scotland,  jealousy  of  L.Ls.,  36 ;  insur- 
ance societies  in,  42,  194  ;  hatred  of 
Militia,  48-9,  90-1,  236-8,  255 » 
Supplementary  Militia  in,  55  j 
Volunteers  in,  60,  82,  89,  108,  114, 
168  ;  hatred  of  Army  of  Reserve, 
70  ;  untouched  by  Windham's  re- 
forms, 168-9  ;  Local  MilitU  in, 
216,  244.  {See  alto  undtr  name* 
of  counties,  and  Militia,  Scottish.) 

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  as  Yeoman,  118 

Sedentary  Militia.  Ste  under  Militu,  The 
Local  . 

Selkirk,  Lord,  his  plan  for  NaUooai 
Training,  211 


326 


INDEX 


Selkirk,  dislike  of  Militia  in,  49 ;  Volun- 
teers in,  91,  118 
Seven  Years'  War,  recruiting  during,  2-3 
Sheridan,  R.   B.,  speech  on  Volunteers, 
122  ;    moves   repeal  of  Permanent 
Additional     Force    Act,     144  5    as 
Colonel  of  Volunteers,  218-19 
Shipley,  W.  D.,  letter  of,  86  n} 
Shrewsbury,  arms  for  Volunteers  at,  87 
Shropshire,  lack  of  arms  for  Volunteers, 
86-7 ;  Volunteer  exemption  troubles, 
88  ;  Volunteer  spirit  in,  92  j  checked 
by  Friendly  Society,  94  ;  enlistment 
of  Militia  into  Line,  186 
Sicily,  expedition  to,    148,    159;   troops 

in,  220  ;  troops  taken  from,  268 
Sidmouth,  Volunteer  insubordination  at, 

109-10 
Simcoe,  General,  his  work  with  Volun- 
teers, 72  n.*,  75,  loi,  no,  118 
Skye,  hatred  of  Militia  in,  255 
Somerset  House  Volunteers,  218-19 
Somersetshire,  the  Volunteers  in,  89-90, 
94,    105-6,    198  ;    Militia    trouble, 
189  «.^  5  quota,  197  J   Local  Militia 
riot  in,  232-3  ;  case  of  Local  Militia 
officer,  258  n? 
Soult,  Marshal,  defeated  at  the  Nivelle, 

275 
Southwark,  Volunteer  insubordination  in, 

Spain,  asks  British  help,  219,  221  ; 
campaigns  in,  233,  249,  259,  268, 
275 

Spencer,  General  Brent,  219-20 

Spitalfields,  price  of  substitutes,  70 ; 
Volunteers  in,  in  n. 

Staff  corps.  The  Royal,  9 

Staffordshire,  dislike  of  Army  of  Reserve  in, 
70 ;  Volunteers  in,  86-7,  94,  92,  1 10; 
Militia  quota,  196  ;  cost  of  substi- 
tutes, 256  ;  local  Militia  riot,  233  n. 

Stanhope's  Life  of  Pitt,  ref.  to,  148 

Stanley,  Lord,  letter  of,  240  n. 

Stanley,  T.,  letter  of,  256 

Stannaries,  The,  Militia  of,  14,  22,  270 ; 
Volunteers  of,  72  n. 

Stirling,  dislike  of  Militia  in,  48  \  Volun- 
teers in,  91,  108  ;  trouble  over 
marching-guinea,  258  n.^ 

Stockport,  Local  Militia  untrustworthy, 
267 

Stralsund,  expedition  to,  179-80 

Stroud,  Tower  Hamlets  Militia  recruited 
from,  227 

Strutt,  Joshua,  letter  of,  85  n.^ 

Stuart,  General  Sir  John,  233 

Subscription  societies.     See  Insurance 

Substitutes  and  Substitution,  in  the 
Militia,  permitted   by  Pitt,  4 ;  and 


by  Act  of  1802,  17,  282  ;  terms 
of  service,  17-18  ;  personal  and 
parochial  substitutes,  17  j  desertion 
of,  20,  46-7  ;  cost  of,  3,  5,  54-5, 
58,  126,  195,  197,  238,  255-6  } 
question  of  standard  of  height,  33, 
189  ;  outnumber  principals,  40,  47, 
197  j  troubles  with,  195,  272  j 
enlistment  of  Local  Militia  as,  244 
In  the  Army  of  Reser-ve,  permitted  by 
Act,  28,  283  ;  terms  of  service, 
28-9,  133  ;  parochial  substitutes, 
28  ;  cost  of,  70 ;  outnumber 
principals,  73  ;  Pitt's  scheme,  127 
In  the  Local  Militia,  substitutes  for- 
bidden, 211,  215,  262,  285;  com- 
promise, 1812,  265.  {See  alio  under 
Insurance,  Ballot,  Bounties,  and 
Militia) 

Suffolk,  Volunteers  in,  139-40,  216} 
Militia  quota,  197  ;  special  recruit- 
ing by  Militia,  271 

Sun  newspaper,  77 

Surinam,  capture  of,  10 

Surrey,  Militia  recruiting  in,  46-7  ; 
Volunteer  exemption  difficulty,  81  ; 
lack  of  arms  for  Volunteers,  87  ; 
Volunteer  insubordination,  104, 199- 
200;  and  inefficiency,  218;  reten- 
tion of  corps,  269  j  Militia  refuse  to 
enter  Line,  147  ;  officer  as  insurance 
agent,  193 

Sussex,  D.L.  and  postage  rates,  38-9  j 
dislike  of  Army  of  Reserve,  57 ; 
cost  of  substitutes,  70  ;  Volunteers 
in,  89,  93,  no,  112,  118  ;  failure  of 
Permanent  Additional  Force  Act, 
155-6;  Militia  quota,  197;  and 
fines,  197 ;  Volunteer  dislike  of 
Local  Militia,  216 

Sutherland,  lack  of  arms  for  Volunteers, 
85  ;  Volunteer  spirit,  91  ;  principals 
in  the  Militia,  255 

Sweden,  king's  hatred  of  Napoleon,  151; 
policy  in  Europe,  174,  179,  180, 
274  ;  expedition  to,  219 

Talavera,  campaign  of,  233-4 
Talents,  Ministry  of  all  the,  156,  173 
Tarento,  occupied  by  the  French,  7 
Tarleton,    General,    defends    Permanent 

Additional  Force  Act,  163 
Taunton,  Local  Militia  riot  at,  232-3 
Tenterden,  dislike  of  Local  Militia  at,  245 
Tierney,    George,   as    Volunteer,     103  ; 

speech   against    Militia    Enlistment 

Bill,  222 
Tilsit,  Treaty  of,  180 
Titchfield,    Lord,    correspondence    with 

Sheridan,  218-19 


INDEX 


327 


Tobago,  capture  of,  10 

Torres  Vedras,  campaign  or,  249 

Tower    Hamlets,  recruiting   of    Militia, 

45,      227  ;      Militia      quota,      196  ; 

Volunteer  quota,  92 
Townsend,  George,  Marquis,  as  L.L.,  35 
Trafalgar,  battle  of,  156 
Training  Act.  S««Wer  Acts  of  Parliament 
Training,  National,  Windham's  scheme, 

168-73,     '^lli    284;     Castlercagh's 

scheme,    205-6,    208,    210,    265-6, 

287  }  Lord  Selkirk's  scheme,  211 
Transport,  under  First  Defence  Act,  25  ; 

regulations  of  1803,  136-7 
Treaty  of  Amiens,  6 
Treaty  of  Tilsit,  180 
Tredegar,  C.  Morgan  of,  letter  from,  82  ». 
"Twenty      Pound     Act"     (Permanent 

Additional  Force  Act),  142 

Ulm,  capitulation  of,  150,  156 
United  Brethren,  their  exemption  under 
Training  Act,  170 

Vellore,  mutiny  at,  179 

Vienna,  capture  of,  150 

Villeneuve,  Admiral,  149 

Vimeiro,  campaign  of,  220 

Vincent,  John,  Earl  St.,  his  economies,  7 

Vittoria,  battle  of,  275 

Volunteers    (for    legislation    concerning, 

ue  under  Acts  of   Parliament ;   ite 

alio  under  Yeomanry  and  Appendix 

III.) 

Slualificatiom  of  effective,   12,  24,  34, 

59,  121,  134,  216,  241 
Exemptions  of,  under  Militia  Act, 
1802,  12,  16,  59,  81,  88,  121,  134, 
274;  under  first  Defence  Act,  25, 
75 }  under  Army  of  Reserve  Act, 
27,  57,  76 ;  under  Billeting  Act, 
34.  58,  65-6,  76,  134,  283  ;  Volun- 
teer Exemption  Act,  121,  134; 
Volunteer  Consolidation  Act,  121, 
134,  188;  Permanent  Additional 
Force  Act,  130,  133  ;  under  Train- 
ing Act,  170  ;  Completion  of  Militia 
Act,  1807,  184,  187-8  ;  under 
Local  Militia  Act,  212,  274;  corps 
refusing  exemptions,  90,  134,  136 
Allowances  of,  in  1802,  13,  59,  75  ; 
by  regulations  of  March  1803,  59, 
62;  the  June  allowances,  61-2,  75, 
79,  138,  172}  August  allowances, 
64-5,  76,79,  114,  138,  172;  by  the 
Consolidation  Act,  135  j  regulations 
of  1803-4,  137-85  reduction  of,  by 
Windham,  167-8,  172  ;  increase  of, 
by  Castlereagh,  178  j  abuse  of,  200  ; 
stoppage  of,  230 


Volunteer*— 

Discipline  ot,  13,  34,  122,  124,  ijj, 
141 }  fine*,  97,  99-IOO,  123,  1355 
insubordination  of,  99-110,  141, 
199-200 

Training  of,  113,  117,  125,  166  { 
clothmg,  62,  1 15-16,  125;  arms, 
lack  of,  85-90,  121  i  arms  recalled 
by  Government,  269-70 ;  composi- 
tion of,  Associations  and  Committees, 
12, 60, 95-8;  spirit  of,  66-7, 78, 90-4, 
141,  198-9  ;  Officers  of,  elected,  96, 
102-4,  '22  ;  Regular  officer*  among, 
112,  140-1  ;  weakness  oC,  118, 
140-1  ;  dearth  of,  113-14;  rank 
defined,  135,  167 

Numbers  of,  increase  in  1803,  14,  61  ; 
limited,  63-4,  67-8  ;  effective 
strength,  1803,69;  in  1806,  159; 
1803-1807,  197-8;  in  1808,  209; 
reduction  under  Windham,  173 ; 
gradual  decrease,  258,  269  ;  transfer 
to  Local  Militia,  210,  213-14,  xi6- 
17,  228,  261 

Various  reforms  of,  by  regulations  of 
1803-4,  136-9  ;  permanent  duty,  9S, 
118,  137-9,  141,  182,  282;  by 
Windham,  166-9,  172-3,  198 ;  1^ 
Castlereagh,  177-8, 182,  198,204-5, 
208,215-16;  proposed  by  Calvert's 
memo,  224 

Miscellaneous  mention.  Volunteer* 
before  1800,  4;  Col.  Vy»e's  recom- 
mendations, 59-61;  anomalous 
system,  68,  79-82  ;  quotas,  79 ; 
controlled  by  Home  Office,  67,  141  ; 
question  of  right  to  resign,  100- x, 
121,  135  ;  use  of  lash  in,  110  ;  cost 
to  nation,  117,  251  ;  called  out  on 
false  alarm,  1 50 ;  used  as  guards, 
198,  230;  sergeants  as  recruiting 
officers,  178  ;  specimens  of  ineffi- 
ciency, 218-19  ;  enlistment  of  Local 
Militiamen,  244 

Other  uses  of  the  word :  in  Militia 
Act  of  1802,  17  ;  in  Naval  Transfer 
Act,  26  n. ;  in  Army  of  Reserve  Act, 
28 
Vyse,  Colonel,  recommendations  of,  59- 
61,  83-4 

Wagram,  battle  of,  234 

Wakefield,  Volunteer  insubordination  at, 
108 

Walcheren,  expedition  to,  177,  233,  288 

Walcott,  W.,  letter  to,  58  «. 

Wales,  high  bounties  in,  197  ;  Volun- 
teers enlist  in  Local  Militia,  217; 
and  ue  under  names  of  counties 

Warwickshire,  insurance  society  in,  45, 


328 


INDEX 


193-4  n. ;  arms  for  Volunteers,  87  ; 
Volunteer  quota,  92  ;  generosity  of 
L.L.,  94;  crimping  in  Militia,i9i-2; 
enlistment  of  boys,  191  ;  cost  of  sub- 
stitutes, 195;  Local  Militia  riot,  249 

Welles  ley,  Marquess,  268  «. 

Wellington,  Arthur,  ist  Duke  of,  success 
in  India,  145  ;  expeditions  to  Portu- 
gal, 220,  233  ;  fighting  in  Spain, 
249,  259,  275  J  introduces  Irish 
Militia  Consolidation  Bill,  228 

Weser,  the  Lower,  expedition  to,  152 

West  Wrathing,  Volunteer  insubordina- 
tion in,  109 

Westminster,  Militia  recruiting  in,  46-7  ; 
Volunteers  in,  90,  92 

Westmoreland,  Militia  in  Provisional 
Battalions,  278,  280 

Weyland,  J.,  letter  of,  84  ».3 

Whitbread,  Samuel,  speech  on  election  of 
Volunteer  officers,  122;  on  fines, 
123  ;  on  Volunteer  system,  124-5  > 
on  Permanent  Additional  Force  Act, 
144 ;  his  amendment  to  Local 
Militia  Act,  214  ;  on  Local  Militia, 
229  n.^,  241 

Whitelocke,  Lieut.-General  John,  opinion 
of  short  service,  i6i 

Whittaker,  Captain,  an  insurance  agent, 
193 

Whyte,  Lieut.-General,  as  Volunteer,  112 

Wicklow,  special  recruiting  by  the 
Militia,  271 

Wight,  Isle  of.  Militia  refuse  to  enter 
Line,  186  ;  cost  of  substitutes,  197  ; 
Volunteer  insubordination  in,  199 

Wilbcrforce,  WilUam,  speech  on  failure 
of  Permanent  Additional  Force  Act, 
163 

Winding,  Richard, letter  of,  i  n  n}  and  tt.^ 

William,  Duke  of  Clarence,  75  n, 

Wilson,  Thomas,  letter  of,  1 96  ». 

Wiltshire,  Volunteers  in,  92,  94,  200, 
216  ;  Local  Militia  riot,  249 

Windham,  W.,  speech  on  ballot,  3  ;  on 
Provisional  Cavalry,  5  }  on  defensive 
policy,  iij  on  Volunteers,  ii6,  124; 
on  Permanent  Additional  Force  Act, 
130-1,  143  ;  Secretary  at  War,  156; 
his  reforms,  159-61,  164-6,  175, 
202-3,  ^^4»  2^^  j  resignation  of, 
173  J  speech  on  Castlereagh's  pro- 
posals, 182  J  his  thirteen  proposi- 
tions, 204 ;  speech  against  Local 
Militia  Act,  2 10- 11  ;  criticism  of 
Local  Militia,  230  ;  death,  251 

Windsor  Castle,  return  of  Volunteers  at, 
79  ";  91 


Windsor,  unfair  distribution  of  arms  to 

Volunteers,  87 
Windward   Isles   (West   Indies),   raid   of 

French  upon,  149 
Wood,    Colonel,    illegal    recruiting,    47, 

222-3 
Wood,  P.,  insubordinate  Volunteers,  103 
Worcestershire,   inefficient   L.L.,   36  n.  j 

Volunteers    in,    92,    104-5  j    Local 

Militia  riot,  249 
Wotton-under-Edge,     Volunteer     insub- 
ordination at,  107 
Wynn,  Sir  Watkin  W.,  influence  with 

Denbigh  Militia,  279-80 
Wynyard,  Lieut.-Gen.,  letter  of,  272  ».' 

Yeomanry,  for  Exemptions,  Allowances, 
Discipline,  Qualification,  etc.,  see 
under  Volunteers, 
considered  as  Volunteer  cavalry,  59, 
74 ;  quota  in  Bucks,  93  ;  rank 
of  officers,  135,  167  j  brigaded, 
139-40  }  Windham's  reductions, 
167-8,  172  ;  case  of  insubordination, 
199  5  transfer  to  Local  Militia,  213, 
261  ;  retention  and  reform  of,  270 

York,  Frederick,  Duke  of,  as  Commander- 
in-Chief,  161,234,260;  encourages 
Militia  enlistment  into  Line,  183  ; 
recruiting  reforms,  261  j  plans  for 
second  battalions,  284,  287-8 ; 
enlistment  of  boys,  288 

Yorke,  Charles,  Secretary  for  War, 
estimates  in  1803,  11  ;  controls 
Volunteers,  67-8  ;  speech  on  Army 
of  Reserve,  72  ;  and  on  Pitt's  pro- 
posals, 128  ;  foolish  policy,  93  j 
introduces  Volunteer  Consolidation 
Bill,  121-2;  mentioned,  78 

Yorkshire  (E.  R.),  Militia  recruiting, 
54;  cost  of  substitutes  in,  197  j 
Volunteers  in,  92,  106 
(N.  R.),  failure  of  Permanent  Addi- 
tional Force  Act,  163  ;  cost  of  sub- 
stitutes, 197 
(W.  R.),  work  of  L.L.,  36-7  ;  method 
of  ballot,  39  «.  j  Billeting  Act  in, 
69  ;  complaint  of  Home  Office  care- 
lessness, 77  ;  Volunteers  in,  92,  loi, 
108,  110,  274  ».^;  dislike  of  Levy 
en  Masse  Act,  118-19;  farmers 
refuse  to  muster  waggons,  137; 
alarm  of  invasion,  1 50  ;  failure  of 
Permanent  Additional  Force  Act, 
163;  Militia  quotas,  196;  Local 
Militia  suppress  riots,  267 

Young,  Sir  W.,  speech  on  Billeting  Act, 
6s».3 


Printed  iyR.  &R.  Clark,  Limited,  MtHMiuTxh. 


THE  LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 

Santa  Barbara 


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW. 


50m-l,'63(D4743s8)476 


A    000  576  969    o 


•  i.-^ 


