

    4 T. Rymer, Foedera, III, pt. i, p. 88. In 1353.
    6 Ibid., pt. iii, p. 8. June 16.
    6 Ibid., pp. 175-177.
    7 Ibid., p. 200.
    8 Ibid., IV, pt. iii, p. 5.
    6 Ibid., V, pt. iii, p. 194, pt. iv, pp. 4-5.
    10 Oliveira Martins, Historia de Portugal, II, 109-149.
         SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                        3
 Charles on April 1, 1641.11 They proposed peace and amity
 and abstention from aiding the enemy of either contracting
 party; permission for English subjects to serve in the Portuguese
 army and navy with their own persons, munitions, and ships;
 free commerce subject to customary duties; and the status quo
 in India. On April 8, they obtained a public audience, and
 commissioners were appointed to treat with them. News leaked
 out of the treaty signed between Portugal and Holland on June
 12, and the merchants of London presented to the Lords Com¬
 missioners eighteen articles for “better benefit and accomoda¬
 tion of” the treaty.12 The Portuguese ambassador protested
against five of these demands, refusing to concede to the Eng¬
lish freedom of religion and exemption from the power of the
Inquisition; the right of Englishmen to sail in British ships
hired by Portugal for her colonial trade, without the express
license from the king to trade with the colonies; the right to
reexport      goods    from     Portugal without paying additional
duties; the right to trade with all Portuguese dominions—
Africa, America, and the East Indies—on the same footing as
Portuguese subjects; and the payment of import and export
duties as fixed in the time of Sebastiao and Henry of Portugal
with exemption from all taxes levied since then. The merchants
replied to his protest, reasserting these demands and adding
others. A ten page “Remonstrance for the continuance of Trade
from England for Portugal” by merchants begging Charles to
arrange a treaty is included in this bundle of treaty papers.13
   These demands by British merchants demonstrate the im¬
portance of Portuguese trade to English commerce. The points

  11 Capitulates que A magestade do serenissimo Carlos Rey da Gra Bretanha
propoem os ambaixadores do serenissimo dom Joao Rey de Portugal. Signed by
Leitao. Great Britain, Public Record Office, State Papers, Foreign, Treaty Papers,
103/57* In view of the great number of citations from the Public Record Office,
dates will be given only in cases where the absence of a number on a dispatch re¬
quires a date for identification or where the date is considered necessary for a
more complete understanding of the text.
  13 S. P. For., Treaty Papers, 103/57. The group cited is dated 1640 on the back
of the packet. The records of the negotiations are largely undated and are in dis¬
order.
  “   Ibid.
 4           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 to which the Portuguese ambassador objected, with the excep¬
 tion of the religious demands which were partly commercial,
 deal exclusively with the question of colonial trade. Portugal
 was the “staple” for two streams of commerce; one from the
 Portuguese colonies through the mother country to England
 and one from England through Portugal to the colonies. The
British merchant desired control of this entrepot business and a
share in the carrying trade resulting from these two streams of
commerce. The treaty of 164214 was a decisive step in that
direction.
     The treaty was negotiated by England in a time of turmoil.
Strafford was executed during the month of the public audience
granted to the newly arrived Portuguese ambassadors; the five
members were impeached January 3, 1642; the king came for
his “birds” the next day; and seven days later Charles left
London. On the twenty-ninth the signed treaties were ex¬
changed. The English commissioners kept a cool head during
the excitement for the agreement left England with everything
to gain and little to lose, while on Portugal’s side the conces¬
sions were exorbitant and the advantages attenuated.
     By the twenty-one sections of the treaty England secured re¬
ligious toleration for her subjects resident in Portugal, said resi¬
dents being largely merchants, and protection from primary
losses resulting from action by the Inquisition; most favored
nation status commercially; a limited but effective extra-terri¬
torial jurisdiction under its own consul and immunity from
Portuguese laws for English subjects. Commissioners were to
be appointed to treat of concessions to the British in Brazilian
commerce, the first formal knock by the English at the door of
Portuguese South America. One searches in vain for an eco¬
nomic clause in behalf of the Portuguese. All they obtained
was recognition of independence and England’s friendship,
which was not a very stable commodity in 1642.