

  49 Sande’s first mission is found in: State Papers, Domestic, 1657-8, 1658-9, and
1659-60; S. P. For., Port., 89/4 and 5; Quadro Elementar, XVII, 114 ff. One of
Sande’s letterbooks, January, 1659-July, 1660, is at the Instituto Historico in Rio
de Janeiro, cod. no. 1158.
   14          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  title to depend on the fulfillment of the marriage proposals.
  Batteville, the Spanish ambassador, and Mazarin opposed his
  project, and the London court seethed with intrigue.
     The subsequent negotiations are given in detail by Claren¬
  don in the secret letters50 exchanged in cipher between him
  and M. Bastide in France. In March, 1661, Clarendon anx¬
  iously inquired how Louis XIV viewed the proposed Anglo-
  Portuguese alliance and whether he thought a wedding in
 Spain would be of better advantage. Bastide replied that he had
 the authority to assure Charles that the king of France was of
 the opinion that no wedding would do so well as one in Portu¬
 gal.61 In April, Bastide urged the wedding and promised the
 aid of Louis if such assistance were kept secret. Charles needed
 help, for the Spanish ambassador in London was creating
 trouble.62 But since Batteville was not a man of “great dex¬
 terity in treaties,” his propaganda in favor of a Protestant mar¬
 riage with the Princess of Saxe, or any other, with the king of
 Spam adopting her and giving as large a dowry as England
 should demand, was making little headway. When Bastide re¬
 peated an offer of money if Charles should need it at the meet¬
 ing of Parliament, Clarendon asked for fifty thousand pounds.63
    In May the Privy Council unanimously voted for the mar¬
 riage. Bastide at the same time warned Clarendon of the anti¬
marriage propaganda getting under way to upset the scheme.
The opposition, he said, planned to “raise the Protestants and
make a party at home by showing them that the King of Eng¬
land is so little concerned for their religion, that being in ca¬
pacity to make choice betwixt many protestant matches, all
of an equal advantage, by reason of the King of Spain’s proffers,
  ;° Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon, State Papers, III, Supplement. The cor¬
respondence was known to only six persons: Clarendon; his son, who carried the
 ispatches; M. Bastide, who had been secretary of the French embassy at London

Wl65^“7aS.again SCnt t0 L°nd0n by L°uis in i662J the two kings; and
atcr, M. d Estrade, French ambassador in London at the time of the correspond-

  61 Ibid., Supplement, i.

              Dip‘°m“k           of Por“S‘‘. p. 46, gives Battevillc’s activities in

 68 Clarendon, State Papers, III, Supplement, ii-v.
      SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                       15
he is more inclined to betake himself to a Catholic, who is so
far from affording him any considerable countenance or greater
advantages than others could do, that it is like to bring him a
Great War, the undoing of trade, and thereby of the whole
nation, and hurt the Merchants of London in their very
heart. 54 The propaganda was good but there were two ob¬
stacles of importance in the eyes of these merchants which pre¬
vented any acceptance of Spain’s offers: Dunkirk and Jamaica,
 taken from Spain by Cromwell in time of peace, would have
to be returned. Jamaica with her sugar and rum weighed
heavily on the side of Portugal.
   The Conde was informed of the decision of the Council and
told to hurry the project along as it would soon be made pub¬
lic. On May 21, Charles announced the proposed marriage to
an enthusiastic Parliament. One member wrote to the Conde
that this was the only business of importance that he had ever
 seen treated by Parliament without any opposition whatso¬
 ever.55 Bastide promised that although Louis could not show
 his joy over the marriage due to his peace with Spain, he would
be indifferent and not oppose it, while Louis himself was sar¬
castic over Spanish offers since not one penny of the Spanish
dowry of his wife had ever been paid.56 On June 23, the treaty
was signed.
   By one line the basic treaty negotiated so obstreperously dur¬
ing the Cromwellian regime was declared valid, for the first
article stated that “All treaties since 1641 are hereby reaf¬
firmed.” Tangier was ceded with proper precautions taken for
the transfer without riots. Due arrangements were specified
for the safe conduct to England of the lady involved in the
treaty, and for her reception there. Portugal presented two
million crowns57 dowry, a sufficiently attractive palliative to
accompany a princess torn from a convent; and due precau-
  64 Ibid., Ill, Supplement, vi.
  66 Francisco de Mello e Torres, Relagam da Embaixada, Lisbon, 1661. In a col¬
lection of Relafdes de Embaixadas, in the British Museum.
  66 Clarendon, State Papers, III, Supplement, ix.
  67 In 1688 the value of one crown was about five shillings gold (R. Holme,
Armory, III, 28/2. Given in New English Dictonary).
 16            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 tions were taken as to her privileges, financial and religious.
 The Portuguese guaranteed the English trade in the East In¬
 dies against the Dutch, and ceded Bombay permanently, while
 the English fleet was to aid the Portuguese in maintaining order
in its East India possessions. England was granted the privilege
of having resident merchants in Goa, Cochim, and Dio in the
East; in Bahia, Pernambuco, and Rio de Janeiro in Brazil;
and in all the Portuguese West Indies. Any town or territory
formerly belonging to Portugal which England might capture
was to remain in its possession, except Mascate or a part of
Ceylon, which were to be handed over to the original owners.
In return England, for the first time in this series of treaties,
promised more than its friendship, for troops and ships were
to be furnished; the British guaranteed help if Lisbon or Oporto
should ever be besieged, and a pledge was made never to make
a treaty with Spain which would interfere with this promised
assistance to Portugal. Nor would England ever deliver Dun¬
kirk or Jamaica back to Spain, or refrain from aiding Portugal
even to the extent of war with Castile. A secret clause promised
to defend Portuguese possessions against all enemies.68
   By the treaty of 1654 Portugal had become the virtual com¬
mercial vassal of England; by the present treaty that relation
was maintained and concrete fruits were added. Bombay, with
Madras and the station on the Hoogli, was to from one of the
three points of the triangle whence the East India Company
was to spread over India. The Portuguese East and West In¬
dies trade was thrown open to the English and further advance
was made in Brazil, while Charles was to get two millions of
crowns pocket money, the largest dowry ever conferred in a
European marriage settlement to that date. The price to be
paid was a Catholic queen on the throne of England, two regi¬
ments of soldiers, and ten ships in Portugal, and a guaranty
  68 Chalmers, Treaties, II, 286-296. June 23, 1661. Reaffirmed by Article XXVI
of the Treaty of 1810. For these negotiations see also; Prestage, Diplomatic Rela¬
tions, p. 142-147; Guernsey Jones, “Oldest European Alliance,” pp. 414 ffi; S. P.
For., Port., 89/4 and 5; Quadro Elementar, XVII. The best source for the Conde
da Ponte’s activities between February 17 and May 15, 1661, is his letter book in
the Iberian Library of the Catholic University at Washington, D. C.
       SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                     17
of armed support against any enemy which might attack—a
good bargain which had revealed an amazing paradox; for
Spain and the English Catholics had urged Charles to espouse
a Protestant queen while Clarendon and the Puritans had
zealously supported the cause of a Catholic.
   In the meantime, Lord Sandwich in Portugal was hastening
arrangements there. “Things have been dispatched here,” he
wrote,69 “with greater haste than this people (I believe) have
been known to make (though not so fast as I have desired and
urged them into).” But when the princess reached Portsmouth,60
trouble arose in regard to the form of the marriage ceremony
since the queen was a Catholic and Charles an Anglican. Over
Lord Russel’s vehement protest, the king took her by the hand
and declared her to be his wife; she did the like for him, de¬
claring him her husband, and afterwards the Bishop of London
read the words written on a piece of paper.61 The Bishop of
London declared the marriage legal and the king said that the
question did not interest him, if the queen was satisfied.62 On
June 23, the treaty was declared ratified.
   The agreement was consummated but, as before, dissatisfac¬
tion reigned. Queen Catherine led a dog’s life, held up to ridi¬
cule by Charles and forced to accept the king’s mistress, the
Countess of Castlemain, as her own Lady of the Bedchamber.
In former treaties Portugal had shown reluctance in paying
fifty thousand pounds; now the two million crowns were slow
of payment. Robert Southwell, sent three years after the treaty
was signed as agent to Portugal, returned only after fifteen
years of arduous service to claim his reward. By virtue of his
signal service in recovering so effectively the residue of the
marriage portion—sixty thousand pounds having entered, with
the rest coming in every day—the king ordered the Duke of