

     J. F. Borges de Castro, Collecfdo de Tratados, I, 82-101. Signatures: Antao
d’Almada and Francisco de Andrade Leitao for Portugal and Arundel & Surrey,
John, Count of Bristol, W. Say & Seale, and Falkland for England. Signed Jan¬
uary 29, 1642. Renewed by Article XXVI of theTreaty of 1810.
       SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                           5
    The treaty came to nothing for the time being, but it served
 twelve years later as the basis of Cromwell’s sledge-hammer
 demands. It was, in fact, the basis of all subsequent treaties.
    D. Joao helped his friend Charles loyally, more sincerely
 even than France or Spain.15 Letters, money, and supplies were
 smuggled to Charles by Antonio de Souza de Macedo, Portu¬
 guese ambassador in London from 1642 to 1646.16 Portugal was
 the first to protest against the Regicides, the first to recognize
 the Commonwealth and send an ambassador, and the first to
 renew relations with Charles at the restoration; or, as it were,
 it was first in war with the Puritans, first in peace with Crom¬
 well, and first in friendship for the Stuarts.
    In the meantime, the British merchants in Lisbon were sub¬
 mitting to D. Joao and his auditor, Nicolau Dias Tinoco, who
was also judge conservator of the English, a complaint against
the non-execution of privileges justly theirs with certain papers
showing the nature of these privileges. Arranged chronologi¬
cally, these documents were: a charter dated August 10, 1400,
by which D. Joao I conceded to the English the same privileges
as had been conceded to the Genoese; a charter dated October
29? i45°j by which D. Affonso V conceded to the English the
right to a special judge in all commercial cases which should
arise between them and the Portuguese; a charter dated March
28, 1452, by D. Affonso V, granting the right to Englishmen
to live and move about at will within the Portuguese kingdom;
and the letter patent, dated February 7, 1495, by which D.
Manuel granted special privileges to merchants from certain
German cities.
   In consequence of the petition Tinoco issued an order dated
May 11, 1645, commanding that “no other officer of ours,
either disturb or meddle with them [the English merchants],
or anything that belongs to them, except [through] their said
  15 Guernsey Jones, “The Oldest European Alliance—England and Portugal,
1640 to 1661,” American Historical Association, Reports, 1916, pt. I, p. 411.
  16 Macedo’s residence in England is given in: Quadro Elementar, XVII, 27-38;
S. P. For., Portugal, 89/4, fl. 220; Birch MS. 4155, fl. 250; Commons Journals, II,
III, IV; Edgar Prestage, Diplomatic Relations of Portugal with France, England and
Holland from 1640 to 1668, pp. 99-108.
 6            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 judges, or any [Portuguese officer] by their order.” In case of
 the necessity of imprisonment, the English were to be conducted
 to the castle by their said judge, or by his bailiff, in person and
 not by the servants or followers of these officials. The English
 might carry arms, and no other officer of justice might enter
 the house of English merchants without an order from the Eng¬
 lish conservator. The petition with its enclosures and the order
 were approved by D. Joao on November 4, 1647. These docu¬
 ments constituted the famous Charter of English Privileges in
 the Portuguese Dominions,17 and served to uphold Cromwell’s
 demands in 1654.18
     After the execution of Charles, Portugal waged a feeble war
on the English, doing its greatest damage by sequestering the
property of English merchants and imprisoning them. Prince
Rupert, son of the ex-king of Bohemia and a Stuart fire-brand,
used Lisbon as a place of refuge for his fleet and was bottled
up by Admiral Blake.19 When D. Joao despite his attitude of
ostensible neutrality refused to drive the prince out into the
jaws of the Puritan fleet, Admiral Blake wrote20 to Charles
Vane in Lisbon to tell the king that he “should take it far bet¬
ter at his hands that he did openly declare for Prince Rupert
against us than by such indirect policies to undermine us, and
by uncertain and equivocal pretenses of amity to entertain us
and to lead us along by the nose any longer with an opinion
of neutrality, when we may clearly perceive by that order21 to
his forts the contrary is intended.”