

   4 South American Handbook for 1928, p. 188. The estimate was made by Wileman’s
 Brazilian Review.
   6 Funk and Wagnalls, Atlas of the World and Gazeteer, 1924.
                                  FOREWORD                                       ix
sumption. Almost the entire production of cotton, which until
recently has been one of the principal exports, is being absorbed
by the textile industry in home manufacturing.6
   Brazil, therefore, with its forty millions of population offers
an economic market of domestic consumption, a condition
which is favorable to the investment of foreign capital and
the growth of foreign enterprise in Brazil itself. The growing
foreign trade7 is enhancing the value of the shipping business
and the increasing purchasing power of the population invites
international rivalry in the contest for control of the markets
of Brazil. Until 1914, British capital, British enterprise, British
shipping, and British goods predominated in the economic life
of Brazil. To-day Great Britain is still supreme in the amount
of capital invested and in the carrying trade of Brazil; but the
United States has won the markets for North American goods
and Yankee enterprise is challenging the traditional British
supremacy.
   In the words of the Prince of Wales, “the prestige of Britain
as a manufacturing country” is “no longer what it used to be
in South America. . . .”              So great has been that change, the
prince pointed out, that only by a personal visit of inspection
is it possible “to realize the extent to which the influence of the
North has penetrated into the industrial and commercial life
of the South.”8 In Brazil this waning of traditional economic
preeminence is in startling contrast to the absolute mastery en¬
joyed by British interests for over a century.
   The winning of half of a continent as a virtual economic col¬
ony and the maintenance of that position for one hundred
years constitute a British achievement which suggests several
interesting problems. How was that position of preeminence
secured? To what extent did Great Britain dominate the eco¬
nomic and political life of Brazil? What were the factors which
  6 Max Winkler, Investments of United States Capital in Latin America, p. 81.
  7 The foreign trade of Brazil increased thirty-three per cent, between 1913 and
1926 {ibid.).
  8 The New York Times, May 22, 1931, Sec.        I, pp. 3, 13. The quotations are
from a speech delivered by the Prince of Wales before three thousand members
of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce, May 12.
X                          FOREWORD
tended to undermine England’s influence in Portuguese Amer¬
ica? In what way and to what extent was British preeminence
threatened by foreign competitors? How did it happen that a
European power could win for itself the dominant political
and economic position in half the continent of South America?
     The attempt to answer these questions disclosed the fact that
there was a line of continuity in Anglo-Brazilian relation^ which
originated in the European background of the Anglo-Portu-
guese Alliance. The foundations of British preeminence in
Brazil, laid in Europe prior to 1808, were transferred to South
America when the exigencies of war forced the flight of the
Portuguese court to Rio de Janeiro. Two chapters (I, II), there¬
fore, are devoted to the establishing of British preeminence in
Portugal; four chapters (III, IV, VII, VIII) explain the man¬
ner in which that supremacy was transferred to the independ¬
ent empire of Brazil between 1808 and 18275 three chapters
(IX, X, XI) discuss the decline of British political preeminence
in Brazil; and a concluding chapter (XII) deals with the rise
of competitors who were to challenge Britain’s economic su¬
    premacy. Two chapters (V, VI) are concerned with the at¬
titude of the British Foreign Office toward the intricate prob¬
    lems created by the determination of the Rio court to annex
    and hold the eastern bank of the Rio de la Plata.
      The study does not pretend to be an exhaustive discussion
    of Anglo-Brazilian relations. The objective has been rather to
    discover how Great Britain, a European power, established its
    preeminence in Brazil, a New World nation, and how and to
    what extent that preeminence has declined.
     The writer wishes to express sincere gratitude for the very
    careful revision and personal inspiration of Professor J. Fred
    Rippy, by whose kindly cooperation this project was made pos¬
    sible. Grateful acknowledgment is made also of the fertile sug¬
    gestions and helpful criticism of Professor W. T. Laprade, par¬
    ticularly with reference to the first two chapters. Both Professor
    Rippy and Professor Laprade read the entire manuscript. Pro¬
    fessor Percy A. Martin was kind enough to examine the manu¬
    script also and to offer valuable suggestions. The map repro-
                        FOREWORD                             xi
ductions are the work of Mr. Ben F. Lemert of Duke University.
The writer is indebted for many courtesies received from the
authorities and personnel of the Public Record Office, the
British Museum, and the Pan-American Union, and from the
staffs of the Library of Congress, the Iberian Library of the
Catholic University of America, and the library of Duke
University. Much valuable material was received from Dr.
Mario Behring, Director of the Bibliotheca Nacional of Brazil.
And lastly, it is a pleasure to acknowledge the debt incurred
from the assistance of my most helpful co-worker, my wife.