


                                    Alan   K.   Manchester
  February, 1933
I
                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter                                                 Page

    I. The Basis of English Supremacy in Portuguese
        Commerce.                                          i

   II. A Period of Stress and Readjustment.               26
  III. The Transfer of the Portuguese Court to
          Rio de Janeiro.                                54

   IV. England   Secures   Preferential   Rights   in
          Brazil.                                        69
    V. Lord Strangford and Portuguese Designs on
          the Banda Oriental. 109
  VI. Success and Failure in the Banda Oriental,
          1815-1828. 136
 VII. England’s Attempt to Abolish the Portu¬
          guese Slave Trade, 1808-1822. 159

VIII. The Price of Recognition, 1822-1827. 186
  IX. The Beginnings of the Revolt Against Brit¬
          ish Dominance. 220

   X. The Decline of British Political Preeminence . 254
  XI. The Abolition of Special Privileges. 285
 XII. The Challenge to      Britain’s Economic Su¬
          premacy . 312

Summary. 337
Bibliography.                                           343

Index. 355
BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    ITS RISE AND DECLINE
                                 CHAPTER I


THE BASIS OF ENGLISH SUPREMACY IN PORTU¬
                          GUESE COMMERCE


From i 147      when English Crusaders helped the young AfFonso
Henriques of the House of Burgundy, first king of the new
state,1 to capture Lisbon from the Moors, until the first quarter
of the nineteenth century, when D. Joao VI was shorn of the
best of his overseas dominions, Portugal was an important pawn
on the chessboard of European history. Never much larger than
the modern state of Panama, it demanded the attention of
Spain, France, Holland, and England by virtue of its strategic
position in Europe and its overseas possessions. England’s in¬
terest in the country was greatest from 1654, when British mer¬
chants and shipping interests made of Portugal practically an
English commercial vassal, to 1825 w^en the colony of Brazil
won its independence.
  England secured a dominant influence in Portuguese com¬
merce by the triple complementary treaties of 164.2-^4.-61.
Some foundation on which to base these treaties had been laid,
however, in the five hundred years previous. Other crusading
expeditions called at Portugal after the first detachment and
helped Affonso’s successors to round out the kingdom, while
the Patent Rolls2 reveal much commerce between the two coun¬
tries in King John’s time. Henry IIP issued fresh letters patent
in the middle of the thirteenth century. These friendly rela¬
tions continued down to the reign of Edward III when the


 1J. P. Oliveira Martins, Historia de Portugal, I, 53-78, 82-86.
 2 Violet Shillington,   “The Beginnings of the Anglo-Portuguese Alliance,”
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, New Series, XX, 111-112.
 8 Patent Rolls, 42, Henry III, m. 13, p. 613. In 1258.
2               BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
first written treaty4 * between the two kingdoms was signed by
Edward on behalf of his people and by Alfonso Martin Alho,
a citizen of Portugal, on behalf of the merchants of Lisbon and
Oporto. The agreement, among other things, guaranteed the
safety of subjects of one country trading in the territory of the
other. The first political alliance6 was signed by Edward and
Fernando in 1373, with an eye to Spain. Later John of Gaunt,
whose wife, Constance, was the daughter of Peter the Cruel of
Castile, attempted to grasp that crown for himself after Peter’s
death; but succeeded only in getting his daughter, Phillipa,
married to Joao of Aviz and the two recognized as sovereigns
of Portugal by the effective aid of English land and sea forces.6
The Treaty of Windsor7 in 1386 guaranteed safe-conduct to
subjects of both countries, ceded commercial privileges, and
stipulated mutual defense. Phillipa’s son, Prince Henry the
Navigator, preferring his Portuguese ships to the captaincy of
Henry VTs armies, turned Portugal into a nation of maritime
explorers in advance of the other European peoples.8 Henry
VII9 conferred the Order of the Garter on Joao II and con¬
firmed the Treaty of Windsor.
    In 1580 Philip II brought Portugal under Spanish domina¬
tion but in 1640 the Duke of Braganga initiated a revolt to free
his country from the control of Spain.10 Striving for independ¬
ence and distracted by the inroads the Dutch were making on
the rich booty coming from the colonies, Lisbon turned to
England for help and sent a commission to London to nego¬
tiate a treaty which would recognize the newly proclaimed in¬
dependence. The instructions sent by Joao IV to his ambassa¬
dors, Antao d’Almada and Andrade Leitao, are illegible in the
only known copy, but the objects sought by Portugal are given
in the “Capitulagdes” which the ambassadors addressed to