NUNC COGNOSCO EX PARTE




TRENT UNIVERSITY
    LIBRARY
          Digitized by the Internet Archive
             in 2019 with funding from
             Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/britishpreeminenOOOOmanc
BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
   ITS RISE AND DECLINE
British Preeminence in Brazil
    Its Rise and decline


    q/I Study in European Expansion



                    By
        Alan K. Manchester, Ph.D.




                 19 6 4
        OCTAGON BOOKS. INC.

              NEW    YORK
    Copyright 1933, by The University of North Carolina Press




                         Reprinted 1964
by special arrangement with The University of North Carolina Press


                OCTAGON BOOKS, INC.
                       175 Fifth Avenue
                      New York, N. Y. 10010




       Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 64-24848




                         Printed in U.S.A. by
                     NOBLE OFFSET PRINTERS, INC.
                         NEW YORK 3, N. Y.
    J. Fred Rippy
SCHOLAR, TEACHER, FRIEND
                                FOREWORD


In September of 1922 the commercial secretary of the British
Embassy at Rio de Janeiro wrote to his government that Great
Britain since the World War had been overtaking slowly but
surely its American rival and that the official statistics for the
first quarter of the current year showed that Great Britain
once more occupied “its original position as the most impor¬
tant of Brazil’s suppliers.”1 A year later he ignored the United
States altogether and warned his government that Germany
was now the “most serious competitor of Great Britain in the
Brazilian markets.”2 But his satisfaction over England’s recov¬
ery after the war period was shortlived, for in 1924 the United
States surpassed Britain’s sales to Brazil by two hundred thou¬
sand pounds sterling. In 1925 the lead was increased to two
millions sterling; and by 1926 the United States was selling to
Brazil one and a half times as much as England.3
  Great Britain’s loss was serious. For one hundred and six¬
teen years, with the single exception of the World War period
and the post-war readjustment, England dominated the mar¬
kets of Portuguese America. Shortly after the middle of the
nineteenth century the United States began to purchase more
from Brazil than did any other country, and it has maintained
that position ever since. But England has not made a question
of absorbing Brazilian exports: its efforts have always been di¬
rected toward maintaining the supremacy of English goods in
Brazilian markets. Not once from 1808 until the World War
did Great Britain lose its position, but in 1922 England re¬
gained it only to lose it again to the United States. The loss is

  1 Great Britain, Diplomatic and Commercial Reports, 1922, Department of Over¬
seas Trade, “Report on Economic and Financial conditions in Brazil,” by E.
Hambloch, p. 23.
 * Ibid., 1923, p. 40.
 * Brazil, Directoria de Estatistica, Commercio Exterior do Brasil, 1927, pp. 8-13.
vlii                          FOREWORD
more striking in view of the predominance of English capital
in Portuguese America. In 1927 there was four times as much
British as American money invested in Brazil and over one and
a half times as much as all other foreign capital combined.4 *
In Central America and in other parts of South America, Eng¬
land lost first place in the markets to the United States before
the World War period; but it took the catastrophe of 1914 to
pry Britain loose from dominance in Portuguese America.
Brazil occupies half the territory and includes over half of the
population south of Panama.6 Supremacy in that market is a
valuable prize.
  The importance of Brazil to English exporters has been dem¬
onstrated by two missions which Great Britain has sent to
South America within the last few years in an effort to pro¬
mote the consumption of British goods. The first of these was
the D’Abernon mission of 1929, which visited Argentina, Uru¬
guay, and Brazil with the purpose of studying markets and
consulting with British and native importers in the countries
visited. The second of these missions occurred in the spring of
 1931 when the Prince of Wales and his brother toured South
America. With all the pomp and ceremony of the British Em¬
 pire the two princes were sent with the frankly avowed purpose
 of regaining markets for English articles. Their reception in
 Brazil demonstrated the importance of British interests in that
 country.
   Although the population of about forty-two millions does not
 possess a high purchasing power, the consumption of native
 products, both raw materials and manufactured articles, is in¬
 creasing steadily. Tobacco, which at one time was grown prin¬
 cipally for export, is now being consumed within the country
 itself, the amount exported being reduced to one-half of the
 production. Only a very small percentage of the sugar pro¬
 duced is sent out of the country and packing houses utilize the
 greater part of the production of fresh meat for home con-