

   41 He was commissioned February 19, 1655 (Thurloe, State Papers, IV, 546).
   42 Ibid., p. 759.
   « Ibid., p. 566.
   44 The attempted assassination was in vengeance for Pantaleao’s execution
(ibid., V, 28, 35, 124).
   46 Whitelocke, Memorials, p. 649.
  12           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  vincing proof of the ascendency of England, whose subjects
  trading with or residing in Portugal, were for the future in a
  better situation than the Portuguese themselves.46 Britain here
  laid the foundations of its privileged position in Portuguese over¬
  seas dominions.
    When in the summer of 1657 news reached Lisbon that
  France, Sweden, and England were resolved to join in the
 league against Spain, Portugal sent the Marquez de Sande to
 London with public and secret instructions ordering him to
 ask for the inclusion of his government in the negotiations.47
 Portugal, he suggested, would serve admirably as a southern
 base     naval as well as land— for the northern league against
 Spain, a potent argument in favor of his country for the suc¬
 ceeding one hundred and fifty years. His plea was successful,
 for in October the council appointed a committee of seven to
 treat with him. Although Mazarin blocked the league and de¬
 serted Portugal by the Treaty of the Pyrenees, the Portuguese
 Marquis signed an agreement with the English council of state,
 in April, 1660, authorizing Portugal to enlist twelve thousand
 infantry and to buy twenty-five hundred horses and arms.48
 He was ready to sail to secure ratification when the Restoration
 came in May.
  The agreement was reached just in time to have Charles II
return and catch his old friends, who had suffered so much for
the Stuart cause, red-handed in collusion with the murderers of
his father. Charles was sensitive on this point; he dispatched
unceremoniously, the French ambassador, Bordeaux, for his
too great intimacy with Cromwell, and for a time the rumor
spread that he would not receive any ambassador who had
treated with the preceding government. Portugal was in des¬
pair over this last blow of a malignant fate.
   Several forces were working beneath the surface, however,


  44 Prestage, Diplomatic Relations of Portugal, p. 132.
  47Quadra Elementar XVIII, 160 ff, under date of July 10, 1687, an error made
by Santarem which Ribello da Silva did not correct.
  “Ibid XVII 1,8. Little is given about this part of his mission in English
sources, due to the domestic turmoil in 1659-1660. The treaty was never ratified.
      SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                          13
that were to have bearing on the play of the pawn. France had
abandoned its ally in the treaty of the Pyrenees, ending its
twenty years of conflict with Spain and gaining a breathing
space of peace. During the war, France had protected the
House of Braganga in its secession from the empire of the Phil¬
ips; now, although nominally at peace with Spain and no
longer an ally of Portugal, France had no idea of allowing
Spain to wreak retarded vengeance. As to England, if the
Mediterranean naval policy adopted by Cromwell and de¬
manded by English merchants was to be continued, a base of
operations had to be retained in southern Europe. Portugal
fitted the bill precisely: her empire was vast and overflowing
with riches which were only in part fabulous and imaginary;
her ports were ideal for bases in South European Atlantic and
Mediterranean waters; and she was an irritating and effective
foil to be used against Spain. From England’s point of view
she would also-serve equally as well as a base of operations
against France.
  At the moment, Portugal was further backed by two forceful
arguments: Jamaica, which Cromwell had taken from Spain,
and the lure of India with its “most beneficialest trade that ever
our nation enjoyed.” Moreover, if Charles were to reverse
Cromwell’s policy of supporting Portugal against Spain, he
would have to run counter to Louis XIV and to the merchants
in the City. The argument was conclusive, and the negotiations
for the 1661 agreement were begun.
  In October the Marquis left for Portugal to obtain full powers
to complete the treaty which was to be sealed by the marriage
of Charles to Catherine of Braganga. Since the negotiations
were a deep secret, Sande departed with his whole household
as if discontented in order to deceive the diplomatic world.49
He secured the approval of the Portuguese court to his plans
and returned in February of 1661, as Conde da Ponte, the