

  17 Privileges of an Englishman in the Kingdoms and Dominions of Portugal, London,
1736, pp. 51-73. The compiler copied these papers from the original certificate
in the office of the scrivener of the Spanish Conservatory in Lisbon. These docu¬
ments of English privileges were found in the archives of the Spanish Conservator
because in 1691 a decree granted to the Spaniards the same privileges as those
enjoyed by the English (Relafdo de Leis Extravagantes, No. u, fl. 243). Borges de
Castro, Collecfdo de Tratados, I, 2o4ff. gives the “Charter of English privileges.” He
points out errors in the documents: the 1400 charter should be 1427 and D. Fer¬
nando, not Affonso, granted the 1450 charter.
  18 See Article III of the Treaty of 1654.
  18 See Historical Manuscripts Commission, Portland MSS., I, 520-542.
  20 Ibid., p. 522.
  21 The order reinforced the garrisons of the forts commanding the port and the
English fleet.
     SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                        7
  Two facts deterred the wily D. Joao from openly declaring
for Prince Rupert. The first of these was the cogent argument
of Dunbar. Whitelock states22 in December of 1650 “that upon
news of Parliament’s victory in Scotland, the King of Portugal
released” the English merchants whom he had seized and “re¬
solved to send an ambassador to England to the Parliament.”
D. Joao de Guimaraes therefore was authorized by the king
to treat of all points of difference between Portugal and
England and to attempt to confirm the treaty of 1642.23
The second fact which deterred Joao from breaking definitely
with the Roundheads was a real anxiety for his overseas domin¬
ions. The English council of state, in view of Rupert’s extended
stay in the neutral port, had ordered Admirals Popham and
Blake to blockade Lisbon and by letters of marque to prey on
Portuguese shipping and take “all and sundry,”24 with the re¬
sult that in October, Blake had captured rich booty from the
annual Brazilian fleet as it attempted to enter Lisbon. Dunbar
and his lost ships convinced D. Joao, and Guimaraes was dis¬
patched to England the next month.
  His was a luckless mission. His troubles began as soon as he
landed in Portsmouth, when the council of state demanded to
know whether he was an ambassador or only an agent and
what powers he had to treat of the damages done the English.
He made a conciliatory speech before the committee of Parlia¬
ment, seeking presentation; he extolled the past services of Eng¬
land to Portugal and requested that the sale of the Portuguese
goods seized by Blake be arrested until his mission could be
accomplished.26 A third petition by Guimaraes for admittance
before Parliament and for the suspension of the sale of the goods
received the reply that “England was getting redress in one
way for wrongs suffered but that it would be ready to take it
in another if he were sufficiently authorized for the purpose.”28


 33 Memorials of English Affairs, p. 484.
 33 Hist. Mss. Com., Portland Mss., I, 540-541; Commons Journals, VI, 530.
 34 Portland Mss., I, 527-528; Commons Journals, VI, 525.
 35 Portland Mss., I, 552; Commons Journals, VI, 523.
 38 Portland Mss., I, 555; Commons Journals, VI, 529.
 8           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Parliament then presented six articles for Guimaraes’ acquies¬
 cence before it would treat of any further accord, and the Por¬
 tuguese agent was unable to find out from the stiff-necked
 House of Commons what further demands or possible compen¬
 sations he would receive if he consented.
     All English persons concerned in the murder of Blake’s sail¬
 ors in Lisbon and the attempt on Blake’s flagship by an infernal
 machine were to be punished; all ships brought into Portu¬
 guese waters by Rupert were to be turned over, reparation
 being made for all English ships seized by the Portuguese; and
over two hundred thousand pounds sterling (later reduced to
one hundred and eighty thousand) was to be paid by Portugal
to cover the expenses of Blake’s fleet during the blockade.27
Guimaraes, with no money or sufficient authorization from D.
Joao, fought for time to soften these demands, by what the
committee of Parliament called “ambiguous and insignificant
answers to draw the business into length upon pretense of diffi¬
culties. 28 In desperation Guimaraes finally accepted all six,
but could not guarantee the execution of them for want of the
proper authorization. Instead he pawned “his head and per¬
son for his majesty’s putting into execution all and every of the
Six Articles,”29 and suggested a commercial treaty. Parliament
gave him three days to present security other than his head.30
When Guimaraes pleaded for time to return to Portugal for
the king s consent, Parliament gave him fourteen days to set
out with a one way passport and ordered the council of state
to supply any deficiencies in the matter of prize-taking among
the Portuguese trade.31
  Guimaraes was followed by an important personage, the
king s chamberlain, D. Rodrigo de Sa e Menezes, Conde de
Peneguiao, ambassador extraordinary with an imposing train.
On September 28, 1652, he forwarded his credentials to Par-
  27 Portland Mss., I, 565-566; Commons Journals, VI, 539, 558-560.
  28 Council of state to Parliament, April 1, 1651, Commons Journals, VI, 565.
  29 Ibid., p. 568.
  10 Portland Mss., I, 569-572; Commons Journals, VI, 570.
  " Comm°ns Journals, VI, 574'575- See John Thurloe, Collection of the State Papers
of John Thurloe, I, 141-142, 145, 168, for various side lights on these incidents.
        SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                            9
 liament and requested an audience.32 He agreed to all six ar¬
 ticles after gracefully reducing the indemnity demands to fifty
 thousand pounds sterling, by pointing out a “slight error in
 arithmetic made by Parliament.” Thereupon he proposed a
 revival of the treaty of 1642. During the ensuing negotiations
 the English merchants interested in the Portuguese trade gave
 the committee a list of thirty-six articles of additional privi¬
 leges and concessions which they thought desirable,33 and got
 them all.
    The treaty which resulted was the great charter of English
 liberties in Portugal.34 It confirmed, strengthened, and ex¬
 tended rights previously granted, removed petty annoyances,
 extended extra-territorial jurisdiction and religious freedom,
 gave English merchants freedom of trade with Brazil and the
 west coast of Africa on terms of equality with Portuguese sub¬
jects, and provided that Portuguese customs duties to be paid
 by the English should never be raised above the current rate
 without the consent of two English merchants residing in Por¬
 tugal and chosen by the English consul.36 Thirteen of the
 twenty-eight articles of the treaty36 were ratifications of the
 1642 document with amplifications, and the rights conceded
in the Charter of English Privileges were incorporated in
the agreement. Again England limited her obligations to pro¬
fessions of friendship with no expressed liabilities for military
assistance, while Portugal became virtually England’s com¬
mercial vassal.
   Cardenas, Spanish ambassador, wrote Philip IV on Decem¬
ber 21/31, 1654, that the treaty had been agreed upon fifteen
months before. His information was correct, for the negotia¬
tions had been concluded and now the agreement depended
solely on Peneguiao’s signature. He had hesitated to sign, how-