

  31 Portland Mss., I, 663.
   33 Papers of the Com. of Eng. Council of State, Add. Mss. 4192.
   34 Guernsey Jones, “The Oldest European Alliance,” p. 413.
   85 This last provision was in a secret article appended to the treaty.
   30 George Chalmers, Treaties, II, 267-286. Done at Westminster. Between Oliver
Cromwell and Joao IV. Ratified by Portugal at Alcdntara, June 9, 1656. Reaf¬
firmed by Article XXVI of the Treaty of 1810.
  10          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 ever, despite the undercurrents which swirled about him. Spain
 had worked feverishly for an alliance with England but the
 religious clauses demanded by Protestant England, when sub¬
 mitted to the Inquisition for an opinion, had been rejected and
 any possibility of an Anglo-Spanish alliance had vanished.
 The Portuguese envoy had circulated verses written in red let¬
 ters to the dishonor of Holland,37 and the Dutch ambassadors
 had refused to visit the Portuguese minister and had returned
 a pipe of wine and a cellar of strong waters sent them by the
 Portuguese envoy.
    Peneguiao still hesitated while his king failed in an offer at
 the Hague of an offensive and defensive alliance to be sealed
 by the marriage of one of his daughters to the king with four
 millions of florins as dowry.38 But personal reasons soon after
 forced his signature. His nineteen year old brother, D. Pan-
 taleao de Sa, after a scuffle in the Arcade in the New Exchange
 south of the Strand, returned with fifty men and in the brawl
 shot and killed one Greenway, an innocent bystander who was
 attempting to protect his sister and fiancee. Pantaleao was tried,
convicted, and sentenced to be beheaded, and Cromwell re¬
fused to interfere. On July io, 1654, the morning of the execu¬
tion, Peneguiao signed the treaty and fled in horror. White-
locke adds39 that the luckless ambassador was arrested at Graves¬
end by some London merchants to whom he owed great sums
of money. His goods were attached and he left for Portugal to
get the treaty ratified. As a guaranty for the fifty thousand
pounds due the English under the six preliminary articles, half
of the duties paid by the English merchants in Portugal were
to be held in pledge.40


  37 Thurloe, State Papers, I, 317, 324; Whitelocke, Memorials, p. 559. July 4 and
11, 1655 (N. S.).                                                       J
  38 Thurloe, State Papers, II, 50. February 4, 1654 (N. S.).
  39 Memorials, p. 598.
  40 Thurloe, State Papers, II, 200-201. Sources for Peneguiao’s mission are: Birch
VtV^p ^anSd°WneoMs; 223’ fl- "7; Add. Ms. 15170, fl. 295; Commons Journals,
     , S. P. For., Port., 89/4; Portland Mss., I. Fragmentary accounts of Pantaleao’s
trial are given in Howell’s State Trials, V, and a statement by him is given in
Harleian Miscellany, III,_285.
      SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                    n
  The treaty had thus been negotiated but ratification was
delayed due to the clauses conceding to the English mer¬
chants and seamen the free exercise of worship in their ships
and houses, the same article which had been refused at Madrid.
Philip Meadows was sent41 to Lisbon therefore to demand sig¬
nature without the change of a syllable. D.Joao offered to sub¬
mit the religious clause to the Pope42 for a decision, but Crom¬
well took the suggestion as an insult and became incensed when
he learned from Langland, English agent at Leghorn, that
it was “credibly reported in Italy that Spayn and Portugal
ar as good as agreed, which may hapilly be a reason why the
latter seeks to fly off from the agreement made with the Pro¬
tector’s hyhness.”43 Cromwell by way of reply ordered Blake and
Montague from Cadiz to Lisbon with the fleet. When an at¬
tempt was made to assassinate Meadows,44 the ambassador came
off with a shattered hand but a steady head. The talk at Lis¬
bon centered around the religious article, but Meadows divined
the trouble to be the fifty thousand pounds since the Pope had
not recognized D. Joao as king of Portugal after his revolt from
Spanish domination in 1640 and there was only one bishop
in the kingdom. D. Joao died soon afterwards, however, and
Meadows, playing a shrewd hand with the high trump of the
arrival of the British squadron to capture the overdue annual
Brazil fleet with its rich booty, obtained D. Affonso VTs con¬
sent to the treaty on May 31. He shipped the fifty thousand
pounds compensation on board the fleet46 and the full ratifi¬
cation was signed finally on June 9, 1656.
  The treaty thus finally ratified was a diplomatic triumph for
the Commonwealth, for by it great commercial and religious
advantages were secured from Portugal which had been sought
from Spain and refused while in return the Portuguese obtained
only what concerned peace and mutual amity. It gave a con-