

orate of the East India Company. He also served as Victualler for the Navy {Diet.
Nat. Biog.).
 v l. B. Packard, The Commercial Revolution. 1400-1776, pp. 71 ff.; Cunningham,
The Growth of English Industry, I, 458 ff.
  18 Cobbett, Pari. Debates, VI, 1211. MacPherson quotes contemporary opinion
which stated that the Portugal trade was the “very best branch of all our European
commerce” {Annals, III, 30).
    s
 34          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 the customary form” except for the eighth and ninth articles
 which were so “extraordinary in themselves” and “occasioned
 so great a stir and uneasiness at that time, as to bring the whole
 treaty of commerce to miscarry then, and ever since.”39 Article
 8 gave most favored nation privileges to France in England;
 by the ninth a law was to be passed that no higher duties
 should be paid for goods brought from France than those pay¬
 able on like goods imported from any other country in Europe.40
 The high protective tariff wall erected against France in favor
of English manufacturers and traders was to be demolished,
and the foundation of the Portuguese trade as established by
the commercial articles of the Methuen Treaty destroyed.
Henry St. John, Lord Bolingbroke, secretary of state, who rep¬
resented England in the negotiation at Paris, demonstrated in
the terms of the treaty his inclination toward the Church and
the gentry and his opposition to the moneyed class. The ac¬
tivities of the war, favorable to the profiteers of the war party,
made difficult the position of the ministry under Robert Har¬
ley, Earl of Oxford. The land and malt tax weighed on the
landed men, and a swarm of duties on the necessaries of life
came home to every household. Harley’s majority in the Com¬
mons was based in large measure on a wave of feeling hostile
to the war and the moneyed class and favorable to the Church.
Attention had to be paid to the feelings of this group in making
the treaty. To strengthen their position St. John and Harley
hoped to create a mercantile group in their own interest in
the City, then largely hostile to them.41 As a result, the existing
economic system, which was pro-Portuguese and anti-French,
was seriously threatened.
   The project aroused immediate opposition. Article 9 of the
treaty called for a law to reduce the tariff on French goods to
the level of duties levied on the goods of any other country. On

  39 MacPherson, Annals, III, 472-473.
  40 Chalmers, Treaties, I, 390-424. Articles 8 and 9, pp. 396-398.
  41 St. John to Harley, October 11 and November 6,1708, Hist. Miss. Comm., Bath
Papers, I, 191-94; Keith Feiling, History of the Tory Party, 1614-1714, pp. 433; 405,
429; Trevelyan, England under the Stuarts, p. 511.
                STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                     35
the same day that a bill to this effect was introduced for the
first reading,42 a petition against the measure was presented by
the powerful Levant Company. On June 4, the day set for the
second reading, thirteen petitions from London, Worcester,
Gloucester, Trowbridge, Liverpool, and the counties of Essex
and Suffolk came in. From then on an ever-increasing volume
of objections came up from every side.
  The arguments against the project as shown in the petitions
were more or less the same. The export of woolens to Potrugal
depended on the importation of Portuguese wines; if the French
treaty went through, Portuguese wines would be supplanted
both because the Englishman liked French wines better43 and
because the distance would add freight charges that would
make the Portuguese wines dearer than the French. Portugal
in retaliation, would renew its woolen industries and prohibit
the entrance of English goods. If French silks were allowed to
enter, the English silk industry, grown up under protection,
would go to the wall, carrying with it the Italian and Levant
trades, for the basis of that commerce was the exchange of raw
silk for manufactured woolens. A still worse calamity threat¬
ened, for the French woolen industry, developed under French
protection and carried on with cheaper labor and less expen¬
sive raw materials, would compete successfully with English
goods in the home market. And finally a trade with Portugal
which brought in from four hundred thousand to a million
pounds sterling of gold and silver a year would be exchanged
for a trade with France which would drain over a million out
of the country in the same length of time. Moreover “many
thousands of poor Manufacturers would be undone . . . and
many thousands of poor Families must become a Burthen to
their respective parishes, and the value of lands of England
would sink to a great degree and taxes rise.”44