

  27 Oscar Browning, “The Treaty of Commerce between England and France
in 1786,” Trans. Roy. Hist. Soc., N. S., II, 352.
  28 Chapman, “Commercial Relations,” p. 171.
  29 Jour, of Comrs. Trade, II, 535.
  30 Ibid., Ill, 179-180.
  31 Chapman, “Commercial Relations,” p. 171. Ireland carried on an export
trade to Lisbon of over £200,000 a year {Jour, of Comrs. Trade, I, 427).
  32 Cunningham, Growth of English Industry, I, 460-461. In Ireland the gold cur¬
rency was said to consist almost entirely of Portuguese pieces, received in exchange
for cattle, bacon, linen, and dairy produce, staples of Irish trade with Portugal
(Chapman, “Commercial Relations,” p. 172).
 32          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 turers of rugs, stockings, belts, hats, blankets, and serges. Be¬
 hind these interests were the large landowners whose profits
from raw wool mounted with the price of the manufactured
 article. Linked with both the manufacturer and the wool pro¬
 ducer was the newly created banking group. These interests
were scattered in the city of London, and its vicinity; in the
towns of Plymouth, Gloucester, Leeds, and Worcester; in coun¬
ties such as Essex, Devon, Suffolk, and Norfolk.33 Together
their influence possessed something of the power of a Standard
Oil Company or a United States Steel Corporation of to-day.
   A third factor tending to favor Anglo-Portuguese trade re¬
lations was British fear of French competition in the home
market. In the time of the Stuarts the English court had fav¬
ored34 trade with France for the sake of the large revenue which
a tariff on importations would bring. Under William and Mary,
however, a bill was passed prohibiting all trade with France
for “it hath beene found by long experience that the Importing
of French Wines, Vinegar,] Brandy, Linnen, Silks, Salt, Paper,
and other Commodities of the Growth, Product, or Manufac¬
ture of France or of the territories or Dominions of the French
King, hath much exhausted the treasure of this Nation, lessened
the value of the native commodities and manufactures thereof,
and greatly impoverished the English Artificers and Handy-
crafts and caused great detriment to this Kingdom in gener-
ale. ... 35 This         complete      prohibition       lasted    until    1710.
Houblon and Papillon drew up a document in support of the
bill, showing that England, besides suffering disastrous com¬
petition in her home markets, was the loser by a million pounds
sterling a year in her trade with France.38 Colbert began his
  33 Commons Journals, XVII. See various petitions, pp. 315 ff.
  34 James had removed (I James II, cc. 6, 7) the prohibition set on French trade
under Charles II (29> 3*-* Ch. II, c. par. 70).
  36 I W. & M. c. 3, 4.
  34 This document was published again in 1713 at the time of the French treaty
crisis, by Boyer in his Political State, V, 4,9. Sir John Houblon (died 1712) was a
merchant interested in the Spanish trade and was the first governor of the Bank
of England. He served in various governmental positions such as member of the
Admiralty Commission, the Victualling Office, and others. Thomas Papillon
(died 1702) was a merchant who served on the Board of Trade and on the Direct-
                STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                       33
revival of French commerce soon after 1661, imposed his pro¬
hibitory tariffs six years later, and put his rigid mercantilist
theory of commerce into practice during the succeeding years.87
Wars aggravated the rivalry. By 1713 the commercial and in¬
dustrial interests of England were as opposed to French trade
as they were enthusiastic for Portuguese commerce.
  Thus in 1713, due to the trade carried on between Portugal
and the British colonies, the advantages of the direct trade be¬
tween England and the Portuguese possessions through Lisbon
and Oporto, and the fear of French competition in the English
markets, the opinion was firmly intrenched among a powerful
class of Englishmen that the Portugal trade was “at present
the most advantageous that we drove anywhere.”38 Methuen
had opened a large foreign demand for manufactured goods
and stimulated employment of labor at home, and returns
from Portugal came to England largely in the form most neces¬
sary for restoring the currency and most convenient for carry¬
ing on the great European conflict.
  A fourth factor in the crisis of 1713 was the state of English
politics, for the Opposition used these economic forces as an
instrument with which to attack the ministry. Any attempt to
explain the decisive triumph of the Portuguese trade over its
French rival which fails to take into consideration the struggle
going on for the control of the English Government will be
wide of the mark. The Opposition defeated the French treaty
by arousing the fears of that powerful class which were profit¬
ing by an economic situation based on trade with Portugal.
                ,
   On May 8 1713, the queen’s message respecting the treaties
of peace and commerce which had been concluded at Utrecht
was read to the Commons and the agreements presented. The
forty-one articles of the French treaty of commerce were “in