

 66 Narcissus Luttrell, A Brief Historical Relation of State Affairs, V, 163.
 67 The Present State of Europe, XIII, 35.
 68 Luttrell, Historical Relation, V, 265, 282, 286, 289-90.
 «»Ibid., p. 78.                               70 Ibid., p. 190.
20           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  A rift in the Portuguese-French relations appeared in July,
however, when only four galleys and some few brigantines ap¬
peared instead of the forty men-of-war promised by France to
protect the Portuguese coast. The king told the French am¬
bassador to take them back home and called to mind Mazarin’s
desertion at the Treaty of the Pyrenees.71 But as Portugal still
refused to allow the English and the Dutch to use its harbors,
clubs were declared trumps by England, and the fleet at the
Isle of Wight was ordered to be victualled and to sail at once.72
Fresh news from the south soon mentioned a noticeable change
in the state of affairs in Lisbon due to Methuen’s activities,
although the Portuguese subjects still insisted on neutrality to
protect their trade. Porto Carrero, the Spanish minister at Lis¬
bon, after the manner of Batteville at the court of Charles II,
helped Methuen by overplaying his hand, and sneered that
“it was no more than could be expected from a rebel Duke of
Bragan$a.”73
  In September Lord Godolphin wrote to Robert Harley that
“the letters from our English Merchants at Lisbon as well as
those from Methuen say that the King has publicly signified
himself free from all engagements from France and resolved to
live in entire friendship with England, so I reckon if we suc¬
ceed at Cadiz, it will be our own fault if we do not come to an
alliance with the rest of our confederates.”74 Unfortunately Sir
George Rooke and the Duke of Ormond failed disgracefully
in the attack on Cadiz. On the way home news came to them
that the treasure galleons from the West Indies with a score of
French and Spanish warships had slipped into Vigo. By an
extraordinary feat of arms the British stormed the forts, broke
the boom, destroyed the great fleet,75 and wiped out the dis¬
grace of Cadiz.
  The argument was a sound one in the ears of the king of
Portugal, for Vigo is a short day’s trip (nowadays) north of

 71 Luttrell, Historical Relation, V, 280-281.
 73 Ibid., p. 180.
 73 Present State of Europe, XIII, 321 and 433.           74 Portland Mss., IV, 46.
 76 G. M. Trevelyan, England Under the Stuarts, p. 483; Luttrell, Relation, V, 231.
     SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                         21
Lisbon, and a victorious English fleet added weight to Me¬
thuen’s point of view. Rumors were current in Lisbon by De¬
cember that a treaty between the Grand Alliance and Portugal
had been reached, and the breach between the court of Portu¬
gal and those of France and Spain was widening.76 Yet when
Methuen returned to England with the treaty, the belief was
still current in London that the king of Portugal had resolved
to stand neutral.77 Unlike the previous treaties the Methuen
agreement was negotiated and ratified in Lisbon before it was
presented at London, and with such secrecy that even the best
informed circles of London had no hint of the provisions stip¬
ulated. The final ratification was given by the queen at Windsor
on July 12, 1703.78
  The treaty renewed for another and a longer lease of life the
system of alliance between Portugal and Britain originated by
the triple agreements of 1642-1661. Old treaties were reaf¬
firmed; the king of Portugal espoused the cause of Charles of
Austria as king of Spain and agreed to maintain fifteen thou¬
sand men and accept subsidies for thirteen thousand more; he
received twelve thousand auxiliary troops from abroad to swell
his army. Various arrangements as to money, horses, men,
munitions, and the command of the combined armies and
navies occupied twenty articles of the defensive and twenty-
nine of an offensive agreement in favor of Charles. The upshot
of the treaty was simply that Portugal joined the Alliance and
would serve as a base in southern Europe against Spain and
France.
  Had this been all, the Methuen Treaty would have no im¬
portance except in so far as it bore on the strategic operations
of the war. Another element of great significance entered how¬
ever. Between 1662 and 1701 the woolen export from England
had increased79 by over a million pounds sterling, or more than