

  69 Clarendon, State Papers, III, Supplement, xx.
  90 Quadro Elementar, XVII, 236-256, devotes twenty touching pages to the pic¬
ture of Catherine leaving Lisbon.
  91 Doctor Douglas, who saw the paper before it was destroyed, said the words
were those of the Liturgy in joining the hands of the parties (Clarendon, State
Papers, III, Supplement, xxi).
  91 Ibid., xxi. The Earl of Portland to Clarendon, May 20 and 21, 1661.
   2
 18          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Ormond to discharge Southwell of his quitrents in Ireland.63
 Moreover, mutiny broke out in Bombay; the soldiers com¬
 plained and did more harm than good; Tangier was a costly
 gift to maintain; and the Portuguese Conde got fro ward and
 captious.
   Nevertheless, Spain recognized Portugal as an independent
state in 166864 and England forced the Dutch to leave Portugal
alone.65 The doors to the East and West Indies and to South
America were opened to England while a base and a lucrative
market in a strategic point in southern Europe were obtained.
The alliance more than justified itself in the long run.
   General opinion names the Methuen Treaty of 1703 as the
principal alliance formed between England and Portugal, and
it was customary in after years to refer to this treaty as the be¬
ginning of England’s dominance over her ally and of the lucra¬
tive profit from her Portuguese relations. The seeds had been
sown, however, in the complementary treaties of i642-’54-’6i
with profitable results for half a century. The importance of
Portuguese affairs was enhanced by the Methuen Treaty in a
way which would attract attention, as it created a new vested
interest which became vociferous throughout the remainder
of the century at any suggestion of a rapprochement with
France. Portugal entered local English politics and got itself
allied with a strong element in the City which would lose its
lucrative business if England should turn from Portugal to
France. In the former treaties of i642-’54-’6i, England could
unite with France in negotiating and maintaining the clauses
specified therein, but the Methuen Treaty decisively ran coun¬
ter to France and would continue to do so as long as it was in
force. The importance of Portugal was enhanced by the dignity
of its opponent.
  The Methuen Treaty was signed only after the customary
vacillation on the part of the king of Portugal and the usual

  68 Warrant to James, Duke of Ormond, Lieut.-Gen. and Gov.-Gen. of Ireland,
in Hist. Mss. Com., Egmont Papers, II, 89-90. The quitrents amounted to fn*. a
year.                                                                      0
  M Borges de Castro, Tratados, I, 357 and 410.             65 Ibid., pp. 444 ff.
     SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                           19
trump card of the English fleet. A base for operations in the
Mediterranean and Spain was necessary to the allies then en¬
gaged in the War of the Spanish Succession, but Portugal had
agreements with Spain and France and maintained a strict
neutrality. In March of 1702, Anne declared her intention of
waging war on a large scale both by sea and land, much to
the relief of the Grand Alliance which had been formed against
the Bourbons. In the middle of the next month, John Methuen,
who was well versed in Portuguese affairs from long residence
at the court of Lisbon, was dispatched to demand a positive
answer of the king of Portugal whether he would recede from
his alliance with France and Spain or persist therein.66 War
was declared at London and at the Hague in May, and Marl¬
borough crossed to the Continent with the British army.
  Methuen found no easy task on his arrival in Lisbon. For
some time the French minister had been very importunate with
his Portuguese Majesty to recognize the Pretender, James Ed¬
ward, as the Prince of Wales, but his efforts had obtained no
reply from the king other than “I have acknowledged one
King of England already, and so long as he lives I shall ac¬
knowledge no other. I seek repose and love peace.”67 Little
chance had he to enjoy peace with two kings centering the
play around his section of the chessboard! Yet he stoutly af¬
firmed his neutrality and maintained it so resolutely that even
until the moment of the final presentation of the treaty in
London by Methuen, rumor had it that he had refused to
sign.68 He sincerely endeavored to keep peace with both sides,
for in February, 1702, before Methuen’s arrival in Lisbon all
of the ministers who had been turned out of his council for
opposing the earlier treaties with France and Spain were re¬
stored to favor again,69 while at King William’s death the king
of Portugal wrote Queen Anne that he intended to maintain
inviolable his old treaties with Holland and England.70