

  4 Ibid., IV, 342 ff.
  6 The conference adjourned for three days of celebration when the news of the
birth of the heir reached Utrecht (Boyer, Political State, V, 25).
  1 David MacPherson, Annals of Commerce, III, 35.
  7 Article XXIV of Treaty of Peace and Friendship with France concluded at
Utrecht, March 1-April 11, 1713. Chalmers, Treaties, I, 385.
  8 Bernard Moses, Spain’s Declining Power in South America, 1790-1806, p. 29. For
the history of Colonia, from its founding in 1680 to 1713, see: Jos6 de Charlevoix,
Historia del Paraguay, Tomo IV, Libro 13, pp. 67-96, 197-203; Robert Southey,
History of Brazil, II, 570-573; Calvo, Colleccion completa de los tratados de la America
Latina, I, 114 and II, 53.
 28           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 tests, backed by England and France, forced Spain to return
 the colony, which had been seized by the Spanish governor of
 Buenos Aires. During the war it had again fallen into Spanish
 hands; but England, at the insistence of its ally and mindful
 of the commercial advantages which the possession of the place
 afforded, urged that the town with enough territory for its de¬
 fense be given up to the Portuguese. Philip V was forced to
 consent, and Portugal obtained the special guaranty of England
 to the terms of the treaty with Spain.9
    In this manner Portugal reaped its reward for signing the
two treaties of offense and defense negotiated by John Methuen
in 1703. The two famous commercial articles concluded in
December of the same year had a more spectacular fate, for
they were largely instrumental in defeating the important
Anglo-French treaty of commerce of 1713.
   At first glance it is surprising that a country only a little
larger than Scotland and decadent almost to stagnation after
a glorious colonial period, should have competed successfully
for British trade against France. A more careful scrutiny, how¬
ever, reveals important factors supporting Anglo-Portuguese
trade relations.
   In the first place, there was a fairly brisk trade between
Portugal and the English colonies in America. Lisbon was a
good market for pitch, for early in the war several gentlemen
of the Pennsylvania Company petitioned the Commissioners of
Trade and Plantations for a bounty on some four hundred
barrels of pitch and tar which they might have sold in Portugal
for fifty shillings a barrel when their ship stopped on its way
from the Carolinas. In England, they complained, they could
not afford to sell for less than forty shillings per barrel unless
her Majesty helped them.10 By 1714 a yearly average of six
thousand barrels of rice was shipped from the Carolinas di¬
rectly to Portugal.* 11 Lisbon lay on the regular route of ships

   Chalmers, Treaties, II, 306-307; Calvo, Colleccidn, II, 115; Southey, History of
Brazil, III, 131-140; R. Altamira, Historia de Esparia, III, 179 ff. and IV, no.
  10 Journal of Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, I, 156.
  11 Ibid,, p. 156.
                      STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                             29
going from England to the British colonies in America and
served as a provisioning station.12 In addition, the fish trade
between Newfoundland and Portugal in the first years of the
century was considerable,13 and a free trade in everything ex¬
cept enumerated articles could be carried on between the Eng¬
lish colonies in America and the Portuguese Madeira Islands,
since these were considered to be in Africa and did not fall
within the application of the navigation laws. Consequently
Madeira wine poured into the colonies, until by 1775 the taste
for it was general; the English officers returning after that date
set the fashion for it in England.14 South Carolina alone took
yearly 230 to 250 pipes of wine from the islands.16 In exchange
any surplus of corn in the plantations went to the Madeiras.16
Usually one-half of the bill for wines was paid in British goods
and the other half by bills of exchange on Lisbon,17 although
sometimes the proportion rose to two-thirds payment in Eng¬
lish woolens and only one-third in letters of exchange.18
   Besides this trade in naval stores, rice, woolens, and fish from
the English plantations in America to Portugal, there was a
lucrative export business of lumber from the northern colonies,19
and six to ten thousand hogsheads of tobacco a year passed
through England to Portuguese ports.20 Considerable quanti¬
ties of wine, brandy, salt, oil, French linens, and other articles,
were carried to Newfoundland by English ships that fetched
salt from Portugal. On the banks these commodities were ex¬
changed for tobacco, sugar, and other enumerated articles,
brought there by New England vessels. This contraband was
then carried back to Lisbon.21 Also salt was obtained on the
Portuguese Islands of May and Bonavista, a trade which re¬
quired the full time of some 120 English vessels in 1713.22
   In the second place, the direct trade between England and