

  76 Present State of Europe, XIII, 472; XIV, 37, 78, 158, 196.
  77 Luttrell, Relation, V, 289.
  78 Chalmers, Treaties, II, 296-305 (Renewed by Article XXVI of the Treaty of
1810); Commons Journals, XIV, 224-226.
  78 The figures which follow are from a report by a special committee on the
“Account of the trade of this Kingdom since the last session of Parliament,   laid
 22          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 fifty per cent. In 1698 woolen goods lacked but little of ac¬
 counting for exactly one-half of the total value of the general
 exports. The wool business was important. But in 1700, despite
 the fact that the general exports increased, the woolens de¬
 creased in value. Complaints by producers of wool and by
 clothiers proclaimed the fall of the price of goods and their
 imminent ruin. Importation of wool from Ireland had jumped
 seven hundred per cent between 1693 and 1701; importation
of superfine Spanish wool had increased; the demand for woolen
articles on the Continent had decreased; and two and a half
pages of closely typed words lamented the growth of manufac¬
tures in the colonies with the resultant fall in the demand for
 the English commodity. The Turkey Company reported80 to a
select committee in November that the importation of silks
from India was the greatest enemy of their trade in Turkey as
it killed the trade in woolens which amounted to more than
two-thirds of the business of the company. The East India
Company was bringing in silk enough for the whole kingdom,
but India would not buy wool cloth. Woolens continued to
decrease in value of exportation during 1702.81 The woolen
industry was facing a serious crisis.
  In the meantime commerce with Portugal was undergoing
another transition. In the early part of the seventeenth century,
Brazilian tobacco and sugar shipped to England through Por-
tugal supplanted spices from Portuguese Asiatic colonies as the
principal articles sent to England. Virginia tobacco with the
aid of the navigation laws gradually forced the Brazilian prod¬
uct from the English market, leaving sugar as the mainstay
of Portuguese exchange. The planter of Brazil, using low marsh
lands with horses, Negroes, and cattle much cheaper than could
be had in English plantations, conveying his wood, canes, and
sugar by water and grinding by the same power—conveniences
not to be had on English plantation—was able to produce

before the House, November 20, 1702 (Lords Journals, XVII, 169, and Hist Mss
Com   Mss of House of Urds, 1702-4, V, 66-73) and signed by Dartmouth, Ph.
      WS> Wm' Blathwayt> Math- Prior> and others, to wit, the Board of Trade
 80 Mss. House of Lords, V, 73.
 n Ibid-> P- 334-
     SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                                         23
sugar thirty per cent, cheaper than the English planter.82 But
as the British sugar colonies developed under the navigation
laws, the last product exportable in any great quantity from
Portugal to England was cut off. By 1669 only 705 tuns of white
sugar, worth £38,480, were brought from Portugal, not one-
tenth of what had been the yearly importation before the rise
of the English sugar plantations.83 By 1690 the trade was limited
to not more than two thousand chests of finest Brazilian sugar,
worth about forty thousand pounds. One-quarter of the sugars
received in exchange for English manufactures was not brought
to England at all, but was carried to other European markets
in British ships.84 By 1700 the stream of commodities from the
Portuguese dominions, flowing to England through the ports
of Lisbon and Oporto, was well-nigh choked off.
  English shipments of commodities to Portugal had remained
practically the same from 1500 to 1700, textiles, hardware, and
provisions being the staples. As the woolen industry rose toward
the end of the seventeenth century, textiles became of para¬
mount importance. But Portugal, imitating England’s sugar
policy, imposed a protective tariff, and began to develop a
cloth industry of its own,85 thus adding to the already serious
woes of the English industry. The privileges gained so obstreper¬
ously by the triple treaties of 1642-1661 were of advantage only
in case the Englishman could find a profitable interest in the
Portuguese trade. These privileges could not create commerce;
their purpose was to give England a commanding advantage
in case such a trade existed. In 1700 it appeared that the ac¬
tive exchange which had gone on between the two allies for
over two hundred years was about to cease, and this at the very
time when the mines of Brazil were beginning to send a golden
stream of riches across the seas to Lisbon.86
  82 Tracts Relating to Various Trades, Item 265, “The State of the English Sugar
Trade with that of Portugal,” British Museum. The tract dates about 1689.
  83 Ibid., Item 266, “The Case of their Majesties Sugar Plantations,” also un¬
dated, but about 1689. See also: A. B. W. Chapman, “Commercial Relations of
England and Portugal, 1487-1807,” Trans. Roy. Hist. Soc., 3rd. Series, I, 164-169.
  84 Tracts, “State of English Sugar Trade.”
  86 Chapman, Commercial Relations, 164-169, passim.
  88 J. P. Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil e as Colonias Portuguezas, pp. 78-82.
  24         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    There was one commodity, however, which could substitute
 for sugar as a basis of Portuguese shipments to England. Wine,
 “the nerve of commerce between England and France,” had
 been prohibited87 entrance into England during the wars, and
 Portuguese wines had been substituted. In 1697, English trad-
 ers, judging that there would be a renewal of commerce with
 France, diminished their wine orders in Portugal with the re¬
 sult that exportation of English manufactures to that country
 likewise diminished. The next year wine orders increased, and
 so did the value of articles exported to Portugal. If the wine
 trade were extinguished, which would result if French wines
 were admitted on a par with Portuguese vintages, England’s
 “so flourishing trade” in manufactured articles “must needs be
 extinguished       also, which would be “of ill consequence” in
 view of the fact that only one-fourth of the value of all English
 manufactures exported to Portugal was returned in goods and
 three parts in money. “What trade can be more coveted by
 England?”88
   John Methuen met the crisis by his famous treaty concluded
at Lisbon December 27, 1703,89 a momentous document, re¬
freshing in its brevity and simplicity. Portugal was forever to
admit into Portugal the woolen cloths and the rest of the woolen
manufactures of the Britons free of duty; in return for this con¬
cession, England was forever thereafter to “admit Portuguese
wine into England in such a manner that even in war between
England and France, or in peace, no greater duties or customs
or charges by whatever title should be imposed on Portu¬
guese wine than is demanded of French wine with one-third
reduction.”
   The woolen business was saved, and the long argument over
heavy Portuguese port wine and the lighter French vintage,
  87 I. W. & M. c. 3, 4.
  88 S. P. For., Foreign Ministers, 100/37, “Reflexions on the importance of trade
with Portugal.” Unsigned, undated document attached to document dated April
21, 1699, from the Portuguese ambassador in London. It was written in 1699.
  89 S. P. For., Treaty Papers, 103/58. Ratification by Portugal, December 27,
1703; by England, May 6, 1704. A copy of the treaty in Portuguese (and Latin)
is given in Castro, Tratados, II, 192-198.
    SUPREMACY IN PORTUGUESE COMMERCE                        25
which lasted throughout the century, was begun. A stream of
woolens was to flow from England to Portuguese possessions
through the gateway of Lisbon and Oporto, where trade was
admitted. In time, Brazil came to absorb the greater part of
the stream. The return came to England largely in the shape
of wines from Portugal and gold from Brazil. By the treaties
of i642-’54-’6i England secured its privileged position in Por¬
tuguese commerce; by the Methuen Treaty Portugal tied Eng¬
land to its side and an economic basis for commercial exchange
favorable to both contracting parties was worked out. Britain
could not renounce Portugal without running counter to the
wool and wine interests; yet as long as it hung on to its ally,
France was irritated. England manoeuvred itself into a position
wherein it was forced to choose between Portugal and France
instead of being free to favor either as occasion demanded.
Portugal and England were united against France by new ties
of commercial advantage and new vested interests arose.
                              CHAPTER II