


    A PERIOD OF STRESS AND READJUSTMENT
                                  1703-1800


By the opening of the eighteenth century, England had estab¬
lished its preeminence in Portuguese commerce. The strong
English economic interests, strengthened by the treaty of 1703,
were enjoying special privileges obtained by the series of agree¬
ments concluded during the previous half century. The next
hundred years, however, witnessed a conflict between certain
forces which tended to destroy those firmly intrenched interests
and other influences of a military and economic nature which
tended to maintain the Portuguese alliance. During the first
decades of the eighteenth century the economic forces of union
triumphed decisively in the rejection of the French Commer¬
cial Treaty of 1713 5 by 1786 economic pressure reversed that
decision, and England chose France in preference to Portugal;
but at the turn of the century, war and new economic forces
brought reconciliation between the old allies. The colony of
Brazil was an important factor in this conflict.
 John Methuen won Portugal to the Grand Alliance in 1703
by treaties of offense and defense. During the entire war the
Portuguese ports served as bases for the English navy in its
operations in the Mediterranean and South-Atlantic waters.1
From a naval standpoint, Portugal was a success; but as mili¬
tary allies, the Portuguese were a constant tribulation to Eng¬
lish commanders and ministers.2 When Portugal began treating
secretly for a separate peace with France3 in 1711, the English

 1 Able Boyer, Annals of Anne, IV, 137; V, 314; VII, 178-179.
 *Ibid" ?VD30’ i63; V’ 308-309; VI, 31; VIII, 93-95; IX, 110-117; Hist. Mss.
       B“th PaPers> h 71. 84, 176; Cobbett, Parliamentary History, VI, 936-993.
  Able Boyer, The Political State of Great Britain,’ II, 313-316.
                  STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                           27
withdrew their troops, leaving the Portuguese “to stand on
their own bottoms.” The Marquis of Bey, seeing his oppor¬
tunity, broke into Portugal with a formidable Spanish force,
at a time when that country was destitute of its main support.
But the Portuguese defended themselves more vigorously than
at any time during the war and drove the Spaniards out by the
battle of Campo Mayor. Almost simultaneously with the ar¬
rival of the news of this victory at Lisbon, the Brazil fleet
reached port, very richly laden, and an heir was born to the
throne. In Portugal the war ended in a blaze of happiness.4
   At Utrecht Portugal fared well.5 At the end of the conference,
besides the usual terms such as those relating to the exchange
of prisoners and return of property and territory seized, Portu¬
gal secured from France the renunciation of its claims to the
north bank of the mouth of the Amazon and to any rights of
navigation on that river.6 This clause, which was of the utmost
importance to Brazil, was guaranteed directly by England.7
   Equally as significant was the sixth article of the treaty ex¬
changed with Spain at Utrecht, which provided that Colonia
do Sacramento should be ceded forever to the Crown of Por¬
tugal.8 Colonia, a town on the north bank of the River Plate
above the present site of Montevideo and almost straight across
from Buenos Aires, had been a thorn in the flesh of the Spanish
governors of that region. The Brazilians had founded the colony
mainly to establish rights to all land north of the river, but it
also served admirably as a place of secure deposit in the very
heart of the Spanish colonies for the smuggling trade of Por¬
tugal, England, France, and Holland. In 1701 Portuguese pro-