

  1 This picture of Joao VI is given by Tobias Monteiro, Historia do Imperio, A
Elaborafdo da Independence, passim. A more sympathetic picture is given by J. M.
Pereira da Silva, Historia da Fundofdo do Imperio Brazileiro, I, 50-51, 57-68.
  2 F. Martens, Recueil des Traitis des Puissances e Etats de I'Europe Depuis 1761, VI
604-608.
  * Ibid., VII, 140.
  4 Ibid., Recueil, VII, 201. Signed August 20, 1797.
   6 Lord Malmesbury, English peace envoy, called Araujo a “very strange man
. . . partial to revolutionary principles and modern philosophy.” Hist. Mss.
Comm., Dropmore Papers, III, 355, Malmesbury to Grenville, Lille, August 22
1797-
          TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                        55
Lord Grenville demanded that Lisbon disavow the negotia¬
tions and the treaty was not ratified.* * * * * 6 Diplomacy had failed to
win Portugal to France.
   By 1801 the overflowing warehouses of Lisbon, the trade with
England mounting to the two million pounds sterling mark, and
the strategic position of Portugal in the Peninsula could no
longer be overlooked by Napoleon. Hence he peremptorily de¬
manded that the Portuguese close their ports to the English,
send him fifteen to twenty million livres, and cede him the
Guianas in South America; if they refused, Spain, under the
unconscionable Godoy, Principe de la Paz, would oblige them
to obey.7 The Portuguese refused, and were forced to sign the
disastrous treaty of Badajoz with Spain, the second article of
which specified that the Portuguese ports in all the possessions
of the kingdom were to be closed to all English ships.8 A French
treaty negotiated by Lucien Bonaparte on the same occasion,
although it was apparently very stringent in its demands,
failed to please Napoleon, and a second agreement was forced
on the Portuguese by the Treaty of Madrid, September 29,
 1801. The ports were closed; no help of any sort was to be
given to the enemies of France; French Guiana was enlarged;
the original payment of one million livres monthly till fifteen
millions were paid was increased by five more millions;9 and
Lannes, one of Napoleon’s most brilliant generals, was ordered
to Lisbon to “hold the bridle on the Portuguese.”10
   By the Treaty of Amiens which soon followed, the integrity
of Portuguese territory was guaranteed by England, but the
French did not return the gains in Guiana nor did Spain re-

   9 For the Araujo-Malmesbury negotiations and the reaction of Pitt and Gren¬
ville, see: Hist. Mss. Comm., Dropmore Papers, III, 282, 355, 359, 373; Cobbett,
Debates, XXXI, 1422; J. Debrett, A Collection of State Papers, V, 173-212, VI, xvi-xx
and 136; Malmesbury, Diaries and Correspondence of James Harris, 1st Earl of Malmes¬
bury, III, 460-467, 488-496; Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, 54-57. After
the time limit of six months had expired, Joao, fearing a French invasion, did
send a ratification which was rejected by France.
   7 A. Sorel, LEurope et la Revolution franfaise, VI, 106.
   8 Martens, Recueil, Supplement, II, 340 ff.; Sorel, op. cit., VI, 153.
   * Ibid., II, 589 ff.; Monteiro, Historia do Imperio, p. 3.
   10 A Sorel, L' Europe et la Revolution franfaise, VI, 175.
 56           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 linquish the territory won by the Treaty of Badajoz.11 At the
 moment of the crisis in the Portuguese affair of 1801, England
 was forced to choose between Egypt and its old ally. By with¬
 drawing its forces from Portugal and concentrating on Egypt
 in accordance with a plan agreed upon by both countries,
 England left Portugal exposed to the advance of Godoy, Prince
 of Peace. In return, the English ministry voted the Portuguese
 a subsidy to help pay the twenty millions of francs demanded
 by Napoleon. The additional articles forced on Portugal re¬
 quiring the closing of the ports and the loss of territory were
 unfortunate, but could not be helped.12
   About the middle of June, 1803, Joao, now prince regent
 ruling in place of his demented mother, declared his country
 would be neutral if war broke out among his allies and friends,
 which included both France and England. In addition, re¬
membering the outcome of the 1801 affair, he prohibited the
entrance into Portuguese ports of privateers, war vessels, and
prizes, a stipulation which was detrimental to England’s in¬
terests.13 In March of the next year he secured the guaranty
of France to Portuguese neutrality by signing a convention
whereby the former agreed to convert the obligation of the
treaty of Madrid into a subsidy of sixteen million francs pay¬
able in monthly installments.14 Quite sure that he had brought
his country into safe harbor just in time to escape the tempest
of war which broke out afresh in 1803, D. Joao dismissed the
affairs of Europe from his mind, and the Portuguese nation
rejoiced in the prospects of peace.16
  But D. Joao was resting in false security, for “after Tilsit the
one great gap in Napoleon’s barrier was Portugal.”16 Closely
allied to England economically and politically and preoccu¬
pied with its colonial possessions, Portugal was reluctant to