

  68 Ignacio de Freitas, Collecgao, III, 541, gives the alvard, dated December 16,
1756. The statutes defining the powers and duties of the junta follow, pp. 543-582
The junta was substituted for the old Board of Trade, dismissed by Pombal for
inefficiency and corruption, at the time of the organization of the new junta.
  69 Smith, Memoirs of Pombal, I, 298-299.
  70 The Pragmatick or Sumptuary Law of 1749 prohibited the importation into
 ortugal of certain articles named as luxuries. The junta now used this law as
grounds for prohibiting importation of many articles which the English did not
consider as coming under the title of luxuries. S. P. For., Port., 89/64.
                 STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                          43
or household, and even for convents and monasteries, from the
English proprietor, who received no pay or payment only after
an extended delay, while accounting houses and homes of the
English were entered by common officers of the law without
the proper order from the British conservator.71 Pombal thus
conducted a vigorous campaign against English privileges and
English commercial supremacy.
  There yet remained one branch of commerce which Pombal
considered to be in need of regulation. The establishment of the
Portuguese wine business on a firm basis had been Portugal’s
share in the bargain of 1703. Yet by the middle of the century
English merchants, established at Oporto, bought the wines
directly from the farmer at prices set by themselves and so
reaped the profit from that trade.72 A delegation of the princi¬
pal husbandmen of the Upper Douro region and some inhabi¬
tants of Oporto delivered to Pombal in 1756 a statement of the
conditions of the wine trade. By holding a monopoly of the
middleman and shipping business, the commission asserted,
the English had pushed the price so low that utter misery re¬
sulted for the wine growers.73 Consequently after an investiga¬
tion, the marquis issued the alvara establishing the Alto Douro
Wine Company74 (August 31, 1756) for the purpose of regulat¬
ing the wine business of that region. As the Alto Douro district
was the center of the vineyard areas of Portugal, the company
in reality was to regulate the wine business of the country.
   By sections 29, 30, and 31 of the statutes of the company,
the exportation of wines from Portugal was limited to the pro¬
duction of the Alto Douro area. Only wine with a permit
could be sent down from Alto Douro to the port of Oporto;


  71 S. P. For., Port., 89/64. The complaints are taken from a memorandum of
merchants living in Lisbon, dated November 29, 1764.
  71 Thomas Hay, English ambassador at Lisbon, to secretary of state for foreign
affairs, March 18, 1763. The letter is given by Smith in Memoirs of Pombal, II, 47.
  73 From “An Account of the Establishment and Progress of the Oporto Wine
Company,” written by Pombal after his retirement from the ministry (Smith,
Memoirs of Pombal, I, 143 ff).
 74 Ignacio de Freitas, Collecfdo, III, 488-517. There are fifty-three sections to the
regulations of the company.
 44          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 failure to secure the permit resulted in confiscation of the wine
 by the agents of the company. Permits were issued by official
 tasters who approved for exportation or condemned for home
 use at their own judgment. The tasters were employees of the
 wine company, which was a competitor of the British mer¬
chants, and no appeal from their decisions was permitted. The
only sale possible for wine belonging to English merchants
which had been condemned was to the wine company itself,
as section 28 said that only the company could sell to any one
within a radius of three leagues of Oporto, and sale beyond that
limit became “exportation.” The English merchant therefore
was forced to accept for his condemned wine whatever price
the company set, while the employees of the company possessed
the power to condemn any amount they adjudged advisable.
By section 19, the company obtained a monopoly of the export
of wines, brandies, and vinegars to Brazil. By sections 7 and 8
the judge conservator of the company could commandeer all
means of conveyance, warehousing, and all artificers needful
for the wine trade of the company. By such drastic regulations,
Pombal tried to retrieve the wine business from the hands of
the English.
  Practically all of the measures adopted by the minister to
combat English supremacy were contrary to the treaty stipu¬
lations existing between England and Portugal. It was plain
that his design was to establish an active trade among the sub¬
jects of Portugal, and to make the foreign merchant useless.
Yet Thomas Hay, British ambassador at Lisbon, could add to
this declaration of Pombal’s purpose that he did not know a
more upright man than Pombal and that he was sure that the
minister firmly believed that he had advised only what every
sovereign had a right to do, independent of treaties, within his
own dominions.75 Pombal was not an enemy of England; he
was attempting to retrieve his country from a condition of virtual
vassalage to a foreign state.
  The result of this policy soon became obvious, for England’s
 76 Hay to sect, of state for foreign affairs, March 18,1763, Smith, Memoirs of Pombal
  49,50.
                STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                      45
trade with Portugal fell off decisively after the Peace of Paris.
In 1765 the woolen trade was half what it had been ten years
earlier. Fish from Newfoundland had diminished by one-fourth;
and the silk export to Portugal, begun so prosperously, had
been checked by the rise of home manufactures and importa¬
tion from Spain and Italy. French and Dutch woolens were
competing favorably with the English article while the silk
stocking trade was equally divided between France and Eng¬
land. Twenty years earlier there arrived annually at Lisbon
six or seven hundred English vessels which were the almost ex¬
clusive carriers of Portuguese trade in the Mediterranean.
Now due to Dutch and Swedish competition the number of
English vessels had shrunk to less than four hundred.76
  In summing up their findings, certain commissioners ap¬
pointed to study Anglo-Portuguese trade relations reported in
1767 that what appeared to them to be by far the most im¬
portant phase of all that had come under their consideration
was the situation of the trade with Brazil. They unanimously
concurred with the reports which came up yearly from Lisbon
representing that the improvement or diminution of Great
Britain’s commerce with Portugal depended on the trade with
the South American colony. Now the exclusive trading com¬
panies and the Junta do Commercio instituted by Pombal threat¬
ened to deprive England of participation in Brazilian colonial
commerce, which, in the opinion of the commissioners, was
by far the most important element in Anglo-Portuguese com¬
mercial relations.77
 In 1774 the trade with Portugal “usually so highly extolled”
was “sunk down to less than half of what it used to be form¬
erly.”78 In 1781 the Portuguese, after strictly prohibiting the
importation of cotton goods from England, now refused to ad-