

   Portuguese Monarchy was at its last gasp. The English had firmly
bound the nation in a state of dependence. They had conquered it
without the inconvenience of a conquest. . . . Portugal was power¬
less and without vigour, and all her movements were regulated by
the desires of England. ... In 1754 Portugal scarcely produced
anything towards her own support. Two-thirds of her physical ne¬
cessities were supplied by England. . . . England had become mis¬
tress of the entire commerce of Portugal, and all the trade of the
country was carried on by her agents. The English were at the same
time the furnishers and the retailers of all the necessaries of life that
the country required. Having a monopoly of everything, no business
was carried on but through their hands. . . .
   The English came to Lisbon to monopolize even the commerce
of Brazil. The entire cargo of the vessels that were sent thither, and
 consequently the riches that were returned in exchange, belonged
 to them. . . . These foreigners, after having acquired immense
fortunes, disappeared on a sudden, carrying with them the riches
of the country.60
  68 Mello was born 1699 and died 1782. He became Conde de Oeiras in 1759
and Marquis of Pombal in 1770. He was ambassador to London, 1738-1745. He
was dismissed from office, March 4, 1777, by D. Maria I, successor to D. Jos6. For
a brief sketch of his life see La Grande Encyclopedic, XXXVII, 177-178.
  69 November 1, 1755.
  60 John A. Smith, Count da Carnota, Memoirs of the Marquis of Pombal, I, 85,
112-116.
 40           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
      Cromwell’s treaty, negotiated before the discovery of gold
 in Brazil, continued, in the opinion of the minister, to bind
 Portugal to England after the gold mines had brought Euro¬
 pean prominence to Pombal’s country. The “former manufac¬
 tures of Portugal were destroyed. . . . Every article of clothing
 the” Portuguese nation “required was drawn from England,
 to the amount of twenty millions of cruzados annually.”61 When
 the rush to the mines began, Brazil ceased to send agricultural
 products to supply the needs of the mother country, allowing
 England to take over the provision trade in addition to the
 clothing business. “Every measure of political change was pre¬
 determined by the Cabinet of London.”62
    Moreover the marquis could see no advantage to his country
 from the influx of gold from Brazil.

    Gold and silver are fictitious riches ... the more they are mul¬
 tiplied, the less is their real value. . . . The Negroes that work in
 the mines of Brazil must be clothed by England, by which the value
 of their produce becomes relative to the price of cloth. To work the
 mines, it is necessary to have a large capital expended on slaves. If
 this sum be twenty millions, the interest, which is one million, inde¬
pendent of the cost of extraction, must be the first money paid for
 this produce. Add to this the food and clothing for more than an
hundred thousand persons, blacks and whites, which the mines
carry to Brazil, which food is not to be had in the colony, but must
be purchased from foreigners. Lastly, to supply the physical wants
of the country, which since the discovery of the mines had lost its
arts and manufactures, all the gold became the property of other
nations. What riches, great God! the possession of which involves
the ruin of the state!63