

   These words of the man who ruled his country with an iron
hand present a vivid picture of England’s supremacy in the
dominions of Portugal during the first half of the eighteenth
century. With due allowance made for exaggeration by one
who was Pleading a cause, it is clear that Portugal was the vir-

 H About £ 10,000,000, according to Smith’s estimate, given in footnote (Smith
Memoirs of Pombal, I, 117).
  M Ibid., I, 117-120.
                                               63 Ibid., I, 123, 125-126.
                  STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                       41
tual commercial vassal of England. To a man of Pombal’s in¬
telligence and spirit, such a condition could not continue. As
soon as he rose to power, he began his effective struggle to cur¬
tail England’s power in Portuguese dominions.
   By the law of October 30, 1752, the English judge conserva¬
tor was forbidden to grant mandates to impede the execution
of writs or orders issued by the ordinary courts, under penalty
of suspension from office for six months. Pombal thus repealed
the right granted by the Charter of English Privileges in
1647 and confirmed by the treaty of 1654, whereby the English
subject could not be arrested without the consent of the judge
conservator.64 The new trading companies of Grao Para and
of Pernambuco, the Alto Douro Wine Company, and the stat¬
utes of the newly organized Junta do Commercio, created Portu¬
guese judges conservators whose authority superseded that of
the English conservator. The power of these new courts was
so extreme that Britishers had first to litigate extensively as to
jurisdiction—whether the case lay in the British or the new
conservatorial courts—before they could bring suit even for
debt.66 In this way Pombal struck at the very roots of the priv¬
ileges of the English in Portugal. He now turned to commerce.
   By a decree dated June 7, 1755, the Portuguese trading com¬
pany of Grao Para and Maranhao was established. Every ship
which sailed from Portugal to the Brazilian provinces of Grao
Para and Maranhao had to belong to the company and had to
sail from Lisbon; no ship but that of the company could enter
or leave airy port of these provinces; no person who did not
belong to the company could send, take, or introduce any
goods whatever into them, although the company was prohib¬
ited from selling by retail in the colonies; and the exclusive
right to import slaves was granted to the company.66 In 1759
another company was instituted on the same basis to trade
with the provinces of Parahiba and Pernambuco.67 Both or-

  64 S. P. For., Port., 89/64.                        66 Ibid.
  88 Ignacio de Freitas, Collecgdo Chronologica de Leis Extravagantes, III, 432-465.
Capitulates 17, 20, 28, 29, and 30 of the alvard.
  87 S. P. For., Port., 89/64.
 42           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 ganizations had conservators to decide cases arising from action
 by the companies under their statutes.
      The year following the establishment of the Company of
 Grao Para, Pombal set up a Junta do Commercio,68 It had power
 to regulate all affairs connected with commerce, to prevent
 and punish smuggling, and to grant or refuse license for open¬
 ing retail shops. The members of tht junta had power to visit
 and inspect those retail shops already open, in order to check
 abuses of smuggling and the ownership of two or more shops
 by the same person. In many cases the shops, operating under
 different names, really belonged to one individual and he a
 foreigner, although such double ownership was contrary to law.
 This measure was directed especially against the English, be¬
 cause they carried on the principal commerce and engrossed
 much of the profit of the retail trade.69 As the junta maintained
 a conservatorial court with authority superior to the English
 tribunal and as the matters falling under the cognizance of the
junta involved English merchants, a clash between the two
 courts was inevitable.
   To curtail further the trade enjoyed by the English, the junta
declared contraband a long list of articles.70 Tanned leather
was prohibited entrance in 1758. New duties were added, such
as an additional two per cent, at Oporto to pay for the Portu¬
guese frigates which accompanied the ships of the Alto Douro
Wine Company on their voyage to Brazil. British merchants
complained that the king granted royal letters of protection
or moratoriums to his subjects who owed money to the English
and prevented the latter from bringing suit for recovery. The
Portuguese government often seized goods for the king’s troops,