

  78 MacPherson, Annals, III, 425-426. From 1748 to 1755, 1294 British ships
entered Oporto. From 1756 to 1763, the number was reduced to 757 (S. P. For.,
Port., 89/64, Annex 2). Another annex gives total value of exports and imports to
and from Portugal by years from 1750 to 1765. Exports diminished steadily after
1761, except for 1764 immediately after the Peace of Paris.
  77 S. P. For., Port., 89/64, pp. 118-119.
  78 MacPherson, Annals, III, 560; Smith, Memoirs of Pombal, II, 254.
46          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
mit woolen goods and printed linens from Ireland.79 In 1760
the balance of trade was nearly a million pounds sterling in
favor of England; by 177° it was down to two hundred thou¬
sand; by 1780 there was a balance against England of nearly
one hundred thousand pounds. In 1760 only Holland and
Germany took more English goods than did Portugal; but
fifteen years later, Holland, Germany, Spain, Italy, and Flan¬
ders pushed Portugal to sixth place among Britain’s foreign
traders, while Africa, the East Indies, Ireland, and the Amer¬
ican colonies far outstripped the Portuguese as buyers of British
merchandise.80
  It is evident from the foregoing discussion that the Portugal
trade underwent a radical change between 1713 and 1786.
The irritation from minor causes became acute under the
Marquis of Pombal’s anti-English policy; the income of gold
resulting from a favorable balance of trade shrank from over
a million sterling to little or nothing; and the trade itself fell
from being “the most advantageous that” England “drove
anywhere       to an humble sixth place among the foreign na¬
tions buying from England. Economically Portugal had lost
its paramount importance.
  Coincident with this change in the Portugal trade, there
arose a new group of vested interests in England, whose profit
dictated a new commercial policy. Before the rise of the new
class, the productive resources of England were mainly in the
hands of the landlords who controlled the national resources,
and of merchant princes who based their business on a monop¬
olistic commercial system. The great manufacturers, who rose
to power in the first half of George Ill’s reign as a consequence
of the transition to mechanical production, did not maintain
themselves by a monopoly either of raw materials or of trade
artificially acquired by protective laws at home and special
concessions abroad. By virtue of their new machines, they
could produce more goods at less cost for sale at prices under
those of any competitor. Trade restrictions on those articles in
 79 MacPherson, Annals, III, 685.
 80 Ibid., Ill, 339, 500, 673.
                 STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                         47
the production of which they excelled the world were not
necessary.81
  One of the principal articles which benefitted from the in¬
vention of machinery was cotton. In 1769 only some fifty thou¬
sand wheels were employed in spinning, but twenty years later
the number was around two millions. Manchester and Bir¬
mingham developed as centers of the new interests. Woolens suf¬
fered from competition of cotton cloths and from the slowness
with which the woolen manufacturers gave up their old meth¬
ods and adopted the new machine system.82 The tide of fashion
which had been so long in favor of French goods in England
now turned strongly in the contrary direction, with the result
that English manufactures of almost all kinds were in such de¬
mand in France that shop-keepers wrote over their doors “Afar-
chandises d’Angleterre” England could buy raw cotton from
France, work it up under double freights, send it back to
France under              per cent, duty, and still undersell the French
fabric by twelve to twenty per cent.83
   Leagued with the cotton group were the pottery and iron
manufacturers. Josiah Wedgwood, of pottery fame, testified
before a committee of the House of Lords that “there are ar¬
ticles of the utmost consequence to the manufacturers of this
kingdom, as they enable us to baffle all competition with for¬
eign markets. . . . These are the machines, presses, dies and
tools, in which the manufacturers of Great Britain excell all
the world.”84
  The ramifications of the new power were as far-reaching as
the woolen business of 1713, with an even larger number of
people “called from idleness to comfortable independence” by