


  81 For the best discussion of the rise of the great manufacturers of England,
1760-1790, see Witt Bowden’s book of that title. See also MacPherson, Annals, IV,
79-83, 132-134.
  82 Bowden, Rise of the Great Manufacturers, pp. 35-37. In West Riding of Yorkshire,
however, the transition to machines in wool manufacture followed quickly on the
revolution in cotton manufacturing.
  83 Bowden, op. cit., p. 39; MacPherson, Annals, IV, 82; Oscar Browning, “Com¬
mercial Treaty between England and France,” p. 359.
  84 Bowden, op. cit., pp. 41, 79.
 48         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 increased demands of labor.86 The new interests were able by
 their organization and finances to ship their own foreign trade
 and to search out new markets. They made money quickly,
 for one cotton lord cleared seventeen thousand pounds sterling
 a year for two successive years, and various manufacturers paid
 twenty to twenty-six thousand pounds excise tax in 1785.86
   These new industrialists felt the need of wider markets for
 their increased output. “It was now (and, strange to say, not
till now) discovered that France was capable of being a most
valuable commercial connection to Great Britain, and that a
trade with twenty-four millions of people, possessing many val¬
uable commodities which we stand in need of and wanting
many valuable articles which we manufacture and having
moreover a currency of near ninety millions sterling of real
gold and silver money, was likely to be an object of greater
importance to a manufacturing and commercial people than a
trade with any other nation of inferior population and opu¬
lence. 87 At the time when England’s market was narrowing
down, the creation of new outlets was becoming imperative.
Against this need of new markets to soak up the surplus of man¬
ufactures produced in England, Portugal closed its doors and
revived its own industries. On the other hand France turned
from Colbert Mercantilism to faith in the physiocrats and was
ready to offer liberal terms to English commerce.88
   When in October, 1785, England had not yet acted in re¬
gard to article 18 of the treaty of Versailles,89 France forbade
the importation of a number of British manufactures and in¬
dicated that it intended to turn to Holland.90 William Pitt,
then prime minister, was thus prodded into action. He had
learned by the failure of his Irish project that any measure

  “ MacPherson, Annals, IV, 133.
                                     84 Bowden, Rise of the Manufacturers, p. 62.
  87 MacPherson, Annals, IV, 11.
  » Cunningham, Growth of English Industry, I, 6oa; Hist. Mss. Comm, Dropmm.
rapersy I, 201, Buckingham to Grenville, May 17, 1786.
  89 1783. The article called for a commission to be appointed by England and
France to draw up a new arrangement of commerce between the two countries
on the basis of reciprocity.

 *° Br0Wnmg> “Treaty of Commerce between England and France,” pp. 349-363.
                  STRESS AND READJUSTMENT                                            49
dealing with commerce must have the approval of the new in¬
dustrial lords.91 He therefore cleverly chose William Eden from
the opposition to negotiate with France,92 with instructions to
remain in constant communication with the members of the
General Chamber of Manufacturers.93 Before he left for Paris,
Eden spent days in consultation with both the old and the new
style manufacturer, but his results show that he heeded the
advice of the cotton, hardware, and pottery groups, which made
up the new interests.94 The chamber, through its individual
members, exerted a profound influence on the terms of the
treaty, with Josiah Wedgwood and the Birmingham and Man¬
chester groups controlling the action of the manufacturers.96
The treaty was signed on September 26, 1786, and on January
26 following, a copy was placed before the House of Commons.98