

 11 Martens, Recueil, Supplement, II, 566.
  12 Speech by Lord Hawkesbury, Cobbett, Debates, XXXVI, 665; also speech
by Chancellor Addington, ibid., XXXVI, 667-668.
 13 Martens, Recueil, Supplement, III, 536 ff.
 !! Monteiro, Histona do Imfierio, p. 4; Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, 57-61.
 16 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., I, 60-61.
 16 A. D. Innes, A History of England and the British Empire, IV, 37.
           TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                            57
enforce the restrictions of the continental blockade. Yet Na¬
poleon believed it necessary, if England was to be starved out,
to stop British trade with Portuguese ports. “For the moment
he dreamed of but one thing; that was to secure in the Penin¬
sula the severest restrictions on British commerce and to ob¬
tain the submission of Portugal to his vast designs.”17
  When, in 1806, Talleyrand warned England that the em¬
peror intended to take possession of Portugal unless England
made peace with France, the Portuguese minister in London
reported to his government that the warning was only a threat
to frighten the English government into concluding peace.
The Portuguese cabinet thereupon refused the offer of ten
thousand English troops and frowned upon the British fleet
which was ordered to Lisbon by England in reply to Talley¬
rand’s threat.18
  In view of the critical situation, the English government
sent the energetic Percy Clinton Sydney Smythe, Viscount
Strangford, to Lisbon to hold Portugal fast to the English
alliance.19 There he found two groups in the Portuguese court,
each striving for control over the prince regent. One party, led
by Antonio d’Araujo e Azevedo, then minister for foreign af¬
fairs, leaned toward France. Napoleon, Araujo said, had given
a positive promise not to allow Spain to attack Portugal by
land, and France had guaranteed the neutrality of Portugal.
His group, however, would be guided by the example of Den¬
mark, which was then neutral; if Bonaparte should respect
that neutrality, Portugal would also be spared. Resistance to
France, he argued further, was futile, for what Prussia had
failed to do, Portugal could never accomplish.20 But to counter¬
act Spanish intrigues at the emperor’s court, Araujo estab¬
lished his former secretary as a special Portuguese agent in
Paris.21
  This party was in the ascendency when Strangford arrived.

 17 M. A. Thiers, Histoire du Consulat et de l’Empire, VIII, 20.
 18 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, 99-100.
 19 F. O., 63/54, from Strangford, Nos. 1-5.
 20 Ibid., Strangford to Howick, No. 5.
  "Ibid., No. 21.
58           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
The other group, led by Rodrigo de Souza e Coutinho, brother
of the Portuguese minister at London, was intriguing against
Araujo. Souza Coutinho favored active military measures and
a strong alliance with England in the face of Napoleon’s de¬
mands.22 From this group Strangford received valuable infor¬
mation and support.
   The two groups and the British minister centered their ac¬
tivities on the prince regent, where lay the final decision re¬
garding whatever course might be chosen. In their efforts to
influence D. Joao, these conflicting elements faced a provok¬
ing difficulty. Toward the end of 1805 the prince regent had
discovered a plot to declare him insane and seat D. Carlota
on the throne. The fact that the leader of the conspiracy was
his wife drove D. Joao into retirement at the convent at Mafra
six leagues from Lisbon. He rarely received visitors, still more
rarely came to Lisbon, and began to suffer from attacks of
vertigo. He saw treason in every corner and mistrusted every¬
body and everything.23 Thus during the critical months of
1807, the man in whom rested the ultimate authority and
responsibility for the Portuguese nation permitted only a
meager contact with his ministers and the diplomatic corps at
Lisbon and remained out of touch with developments in
Europe.
   Immediately on his arrival, Viscount Strangford was faced
by the hostility of Spain. Spanish rowboat privateers were
seriously damaging British commerce on the Portuguese coasts,24
and the Spanish minister at Lisbon complained in a nasty way
that it was only in consequence of supplies received by British
ships from Brazilian ports that England could maintain its
system of hostilities against the colonial possessions of Spain.26
  22 F. O., 63/55, Strangford to Canning, No. 54.
  23 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, 65-68.
  24 The rowboats could escape into Portuguese ports where British warships could
not follow, due to Portugal’s declaration of neutrality. Strangford said that there
were portions of the Portuguese coast more dangerous to British subjects than any
equal extent of coast in possession of England’s enemies (F. O. 63/54, Strangford
to Howick, No. 23).
  26 F. O., 63/54, Strangford to Canning, Nos. 27, 28; F. O., 63/55, Strangford
to Canning, No. 41.
             TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                                           59
Strangford appealed to the Lisbon cabinet for aid against the
rowboat privateers and urged that a proper national defense
be prepared.26 The inroads made by the Spanish on British
commerce led him to send home a long dispatch in which he
discussed the whole question of Anglo-Portuguese trade rela¬
tions. He suggested that a remodeled Methuen Treaty be
signed whereby Portugal was to admit English cotton manufac¬
tures at twenty per cent, ad valorem duty while England was
to give preference to Portuguese raw cotton from Brazil.27 Al¬
though the suggestions were fruitless, the dispatch demon¬
strates the minister’s preoccupation with the economic rela¬
tions of the two countries.
    On August 12, 1807, Portugal received notice that Talley¬
rand’s warning of the previous year was more than a threat.
A joint note signed by France and Spain was delivered on
that date, demanding that Portugal declare war on England
by withdrawing its minister from London and requesting the
recall of the English representative at Lisbon; that the ports
of Portugal be closed to British war vessels and merchantmen;
and that English residents in Portugal be imprisoned and their
property confiscated. A reply was to be made by September,
 and failure to comply with the demands would mean war.28
   Neutrality was no longer possible; Portugal had to choose
sides before the end of the month, but the cabinet was split,
and the prince regent was hiding in Mafra. Orders were sent
to the Chevalier de Souza in London to inform the English
government that the very existence of the Portuguese monarchy
depended on England’s making peace with Napoleon, and
that D. Joao would not confiscate the property of English sub¬
jects under any hazard. Strangford believed that Portugal
   26 F. O., 63/54, Strangford to Howick, Nos. 17, 23; Strangford to Canning,
No. 33.
   27 Ibid., Strangford to Canning, No. 33.
  28 F. O., 63/55, Strangford to Canning, No. 46. Also 63/57, Letters and Papers
from Cheu. de Souza, Portuguese Minister, and Others, extract of dispatch of D. Louren^o
de Lima, Portuguese minister at Paris, to Araujo, August 7, 1807, and the certified
copy of the French minister’s note of August 12, delivered at Lisbon. The copy
was sent to Souza with orders to show it to the English foreign minister. These
papers are in some confusion and are not numbered.
 6o           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
would accede to all of the other demands however.29 On Au¬
gust 20, news from England dispelled any hopes of salvation
through peace between Britain and Napoleon, and the Portu¬
guese court in despair begged England to be merciful. Strang-
ford suggested to the Foreign Office in the dispatch which con¬
veyed this plea for mercy, that in the situation which was
rapidly developing an opportunity would be presented for
England to secure concessions from Portugal such as the estab¬
lishment of English commercial houses in Brazil,30 the impor¬
tation of British cotton manufactures into Portuguese domin¬
ions, and the amending of the treaty of 1654 and of the Char¬
ter of Privileges to the advantage of England.31
   On the nineteenth the council of state formally refused to
confiscate British property and imprison British subjects. Time
was to be gained until an “apparent system of hostility” could
be worked out with England. Portugal required only that
England should not destroy Portuguese colonies and com¬
merce. War would be declared and England could seize all Por¬
tuguese warships which should operate against the British (al¬
though Portugal would prevent such operation by their ves¬
sels) and no letters of marque would be issued by Lisbon to
Portuguese subjects. Strangford added to his report of this
astounding proposal of a simulated state of war between Eng-