


  ENGLAND SECURES PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN
                                   BRAZIL


On   board the Portuguese fleet, conditions were deplorable.
D. Joao’s ship, the Principe Real, carried the incredible number
of sixteen hundred people. The water supply was insufficient,
food ran short, and plague beset the emigres in the crowded
and unhygienic quarters. Monteiro adds the interesting detail
that the fleas became so bad that the ladies, including the royal
princess, were forced to cut their hair in order to eliminate the
pests with the usual treatment.1 On the ninth day out the mis¬
ery was increased by a storm which separated the fleet. But
on January 19, 1808, the Principe Real with one English convoy
ship and a part of the thirty-six vessels which had left the Tagus
on the morning of November 29, sighted the captaincy of
Bahia, and two days later, amid extraordinary manifestations
of joy by the people, the prince regent landed on Brazilian
territory.2
  After a short period of rest, D. Joao instituted public audi¬
ences and sought advice as to what measures were necessary
in view of the peculiar situation which had developed in the
Portuguese empire. Taking advantage of the opportunity thus
offered, a colonial, Jose da Silva Lisboa,3 urged that the ports
  1 Monteiro, Historia do Imperio, p. 59- When the court reached Rio de Janeiro,
the colonials took the new style hair-dressing as the latest mode and cut their own.
Monteiro cites the number on board the Principe Real from the figures of an Eng¬
lish officer.
   2 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 5-8.
   3 Later Visconde de Cayru. He was born in Bahia, July 16, I75^> graduated
from the University of Coimbra, and taught Greek, Hebrew, and Philosophy in
Lisbon and the colony. He had published books on commercial law and political
economy which had made him famous in Lisbon. He was secretary of the Com¬
mission of Agricultural and Commercial Inspection of the Captaincy of Bahia
 70           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 of Brazil be opened to the trade of the world, a measure that
 at one stroke would abolish the restrictions of colonial com¬
 merce. The idea was one of common sense, he argued, for it
 was impossible to continue to close the ports of Brazil to world
 commerce and limit trade exclusively to Portugal when the
 French were in control of the mother country. In addition, the
 question of revenue was staring the Portuguese government in
 the face. The supply of gold had ceased, leaving industry and
 foreign commerce as the only resource available to the Portu¬
 guese court for a much needed income; yet no commerce was
possible unless the ports were opened to vessels of foreign
nations.
   Bento Lisboa, Jose s son, maintained4 that his father found
it difficult to carry his point. The prince regent was loath to
take such an important step, within a week after arriving in
his new home and without the greater part of his councillors
present to render an opinion on a measure which would de¬
stroy the old principle of colonial monopoly. But “such was the
force of Lisboa’s arguments,” asserted the son, “that Fernando
Portugal yielded to his persuasions and obliged the prince
regent to publish the Carta Regia of January 28.”
   By the letter patent6 direct commerce between Brazil and
nations friendly to the Portuguese crown was permitted, sub¬
ject to importation duties of twenty-four per cent, ad valorem
on drygoods (mercadorias seccas) and double the current duty
on certain provisions (generos molhados7), irrespective of the
when D. Joao landed (Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 8-9, and footnotes).
    Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico Brazileiro, 1856, Tomo I, 240. Monteiro,
Histories do Imperio, p. 65, Varnhagem, Historia Geral do Brazil, II, 1081, and Pereira
 a Silva, op. cit., II, 9, give Lisboa great credit for securing the measure. Rocha
 omb°, Htstona do Brazil, VII, 138, footnote 2, says it was inevitable and Lisboa
 ad little to do with it. The Brazilian does deserve credit for getting D. Joao to
make up his mind, however, and for suggesting a measure so liberal that all the
ports were opened to all friendly nations.
   ‘ Fernando Jos6 de Portugal, later Conde de Aguiar, had been captain general
ol Bahia, from 1788 to 1792, and viceroy at Rio de Janeiro from 1801 to x806.
He became minister of the interior (which included all internal administration
except war and navy) in the new cabinet. He accompanied D. Joao.
  6 It is given verbatim in Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 137, footnote 1.
    Such as wines, vinegars, olive oil, etc. Mercadorias seccas includes, besides dry-
           PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                      71
place of production or manufacture or the nationality of the
ship bringing in such goods. Exportation duties remained the
same as those charged previously. An exception to these regu¬
lations was made of the royal monopolies of Brazil-wood, dia¬
monds, or what by law or contract were considered as monop¬
olies.
   Canning had tried to secure such an open port for British
goods on the coast of Brazil at the time of the secret convention
of October 22, but the prince regent had refused to ratify the
additional article which conceded that privilege to the Eng¬
lish. Now by the decree of January 28, D. Joao opened all of
the ports of Brazil to the trade of all nations friendly to Portu¬
gal whereas Great Britain had urged one port open to England
alone. Later when the prince regent, after reaching Rio de
Janeiro, asked Mr. Hill, chargt in the absence of minister Strang-
ford, if England was satisfied with the decree of January 28,
he received the reply that “it could not fail to produce a good
effect in England, but that had it authorized the admittance
of British vessels, and of British manufactures upon terms more
advantageous than those granted to the Ships and Merchan¬
dize of other Foreign Nations, it would necessarily have afforded
greater satisfaction.”* * * 8
  The opening of the ports of Brazil to the commerce of the
world meant, in reality, that, as far as Europe was concerned,
they were opened only to the commerce of England as long as
the war lasted on the Continent. From the English point of
view, some provision had to be made for the time when the
blockade of Europe would end and other nations would
compete with Great Britain in Brazil. Two years were to pass,
however, before Strangford framed a treaty to the satisfaction
of the British Foreign Office, granting England preferential
rights in Portuguese America.
   The effect of the decree, although it was only provisional