

   68 F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 93.
   69 Ibid., Strangford to Canning, Nos. 96 and 99. Strangford argued that it
would be unbefitting the dignity of an English minister to leave on a Portuguese
frigate and insisted on waiting until the English fleet arrived. On the eighteenth
he left on a fishing boat and reached the fleet after two very uncomfortable days
of rough seas.
  60 Ibid., Dispatch of November 29, Separate.
   61 Ibid., No. 103.
   62 Thiers, Histoire du Consulat, VIII, 339*340 Sorel, L’Europe et la. Revolution
frangaise, VII, 219.
    5
 66          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 hope that matters might yet be arranged with France, Strang-
 ford exerted his best talents to secure an immediate departure
 for Brazil. He wrote to the prince regent, pledging forgiveness
 for the acts of hostility shown by Portugal against England and
 help for the future, on condition of a departure for Brazil with¬
in two hours. Another note was dispatched to Sir Sidney Smith,
who commanded the blockading fleet, advising him to help
and not attack the Portuguese when they sailed.63 The min¬
ister’s next move, as he reported to George Canning,

 was to see the Prince Regent, and to follow up the effect of my let¬
ter. I saw that not a moment was to be lost, and that my duty was
to destroy in H. R. H.’s mind all hopes of accomodating matters
with the Invaders of his Country, to terrify him with dark and
gloomy descriptions of the state of the Capital, which I had just
left, and then to dazzle him suddenly with the brilliant prospects
before him, to direct all his fears to a French army and all his hopes
to an English fleet; not to permit him to doubt an instant of the
reception which he would meet from the latter and finally by teach-
ing him to expect everything from the Friendship and Magnanimity
of the best and most generous of Sovereigns, to put him at peace
with himself and to remove from his mind the humiliating recol¬
lections of having done amiss, and the fear of the consequences.®4

  Strangford was sure that the magnitude of the benefits ac¬
cruing to England from securing such action by the prince
regent would outweigh any transgression of his instructions.
Successful in his appeal, the minister was

convinced that by calling them [feelings of gratitude and respect
toward the king of England for services rendered to Portugal] forth

   “ fiy ordcrs from Canning dated November 7, and received after Strangford
left Lisbon, the English fleet was to capture the Portuguese fleet and blockade
Lisbon in case all of the terms of the Convention of October 22 were not made
operative immediately by the Portuguese. The utmost that Canning would grant
the Portuguese ministry was to close the ports; any further measures would mean
instant wan Cannirg “rejected with contempt” the project of the “simulated
state of war.” In rase the prince regent failed to go to Brazil, Strangford and Smith
were empowered to repeat the Copenhagen affair in Lisbon (F. O., 63/56, Can-
ning to Strangford, Nos. 11, 13, 14).
  44 F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 103.
             TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                                        67
upon this occasion, I have entitled England to establish with the
Brazils the Relation of Sovereign and Subject and to require Obe¬
dience to be paid as the Price of Protection.65