

  24 Correio Braziliense, I, 115-116.
  S6 Ibid., II, 129; Pereira da Silva, Historia da Imperio, II, 77-78; Rocha Pombo,
Historia do Brazil, VII, 205-206; F. O., 63/61, Strangford to Canning, Nos. 33
and 35.
  26 The French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Dutch were excluded as being
enemies of the crown. The United States and Sweden followed England into the
new commercial field.
  47 The statistics are from Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 79-84.
  28 F. 0-, 63/68, Strangford to Canning, No. 10.
             PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                 77
Although at that time, due to the European situation, England
was profiting almost exclusively from the new economic free¬
dom of the colony, world peace would bring serious competi¬
tion in the Brazilian markets. Consequently from 1808 to 1810
England exerted strong pressure on the Portuguese court to
secure the preferential rights in Portuguese America which it
had enjoyed in European Portugal for centuries. The agent
chosen for the task was the man29 who believed that on the night
of November 28, 1807, he had established the relationship of
sovereign and subject between England and the Portuguese
government in Brazil. Although his task was a difficult one,
he succeeded beyond the expectations of the British Foreign
Office.
   Viscount Strangford’s credentials as envoy extraordinary and
minister plenipotentiary to the Portuguese court at Rio were
dated April 17, 1808.30 At the same time, he was given full
powers to negotiate a treaty of friendship and alliance, which
Canning considered important enough to merit special and
very detailed instructions.31
   Strangford was informed, in the first place, that “the general
and political relations of the British and Portuguese monarch¬
ies” were “not altered by the removal of the seat of the Portu¬
guese Government from Portugal to the Brazils. The ancient
treaties subsisting between the two Crowns sufficiently” de¬
fined “the nature of this connection. Those treaties must be
considered in force, until they” should “have been abrogated
by some ulterior arrangement.” But such an arrangement could
be deferred until the Portuguese government had taken root
in the new situation and the fate of Portugal had been decided.
   The minister was authorized in the meantime to conclude
formally any part of the secret convention of October 22 which
D. Joao was willing to accept, but he was to take care to insert
  29 Viscount Strangford.
  80 F. O., 63/59, Canning to Strangford, No. i.
  81 Ibid., Nos. 2-10. These instructions occupy the major part of a volume of
dispatches. They reveal clearly Canning’s attitude as regards the Portuguese
South American situation and merit special study. For clearness of thought and
conciseness of expression, these dispatches are superb.
78            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
that all old treaties were to be renewed until further negotia¬
tions took place. The prince regent, Canning thought, would
wish to have the clauses of the old treaties relating to Portugal
continue, while England wished to retain those referring to
Brazil. In addition, the minister was to secure permission at
once for the British squadron to continue off the coast of Brazil
and for the admission of all British ships—war or merchant
vessels—without regard to numbers, into the ports of Portu¬
guese America.32
     In a secret dispatch Canning urged that Strangford press
upon the prince regent the necessity of attending to his Bra¬
zilian domains and of relinquishing any hope of a quick return
to Lisbon. D. Joao was to concentrate on internal improve¬
ments of Portuguese America and leave Portugal in England’s
hands.33
  As to the commercial relations between the two countries,
Canning insisted that it was not expedient to conclude a defi¬
nite agreement at once, as the Brazilian court was too new.
For the present, the minister was to seek to open the commerce
of Brazil to England and to make secure the life and property
of Englishmen engaged in that commerce. He was to obtain
for them the right of free residence and exemption from moles¬
tation on account of religion and to secure the liberty of recip¬
rocal importation of all articles of the produce or manufacture
of each country, subject to regular duties. “With respect to
the amount of duties,” Canning added, it did “not seem neces¬
sary that any precise scale should be fixed at present. Although
it would undoubtedly be advantageous to obtain for British
manufactures a distinct preference over those of any other coun¬
try.    Brazil would profit immensely if Anglo-Brazilian com¬
mercial relations were placed on such a footing as “to induce
the British merchant to make the Brazils an Emporium for
British Manufactures destined for the consumption of the whole
of South America.”34