

goods, groceries such as flour, sugar, cheese, etc. Generos molhados includes “wet
provisions.” The terms are translated “drygoods” and “provisions” in this chap¬
ter.
   8 F. O., 63/63, Hill to Canning, No. 3. Dated March 30, 1808.
 72          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 and exacted a higher rate of duties than those of the previous
 regime, was far-reaching in the development of national con¬
 sciousness in Brazil.9 Contact with the outside world awakened
 the torpid colony; new people, new capital, and ideas entered.
 As a consequence of the new importance of the colony, the
 Brazilians felt their destiny to be larger and more important,
 a factor of potent influence among this Latin people. A national
 self-consciousness appeared; customs, habits, dress, social con¬
 tacts, business methods were changed. As a matter of fact, the
 political and social consequences set in motion by this provi¬
 sional decree of January 28, 1808, were to lead finally to an
 independent Brazil. The doors shut for three hundred years
 were thrown open, and the colony passed beyond the control
 of the mother country.10
   After a delay of nearly a month at Bahia, made more mem¬
 orable by the efforts of the inhabitants of that captaincy to per¬
suade the prince regent to establish his court there instead of
 at Rio de Janeiro, D. Joao sailed for the capital of the colony.
There the rest of the fleet with the three English convoy ships
anxiously were awaiting his arrival. On March 8, the prince
regent landed in Rio de Janeiro amid the delirious ovations
of the colonials, who cherished only respect and veneration
for the Portuguese monarchy. All of the blame for past mis¬
rule was laid at the door of the ministers and favorites who,
so the people thought, had failed to acquaint the prince with
the just complaints sent to the court. The monarchical senti¬
ment still dominated the colonials so profoundly that the royal
person was equivalent to a kind of divinity, and the love of the


  9 Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 140.
  10 In an article by Vicente d’E^a called “Abertura dos Portos do Brazil,” written
for the Sociedade de Geographia de Lisboa, 1908, a version of the affair between
France and Portugal from 1800 to 1808 with the part played by England, is given
by a pro-English Portuguese. England is ennobled, France is an archvillain with
Spain at its beck and call. The article is given verbatim in Rocha Pombo, Historia
do Brazil, VII, 217-225, footnotes. On the other hand, Martins concludes his ver¬
sion with the statement that “We were the instrument, the servant, the beast of
burden for England . . . our English allies did us greater harm than our enemies,
the Spanish and the French” {Historia de Portugal, II, 246-247).
             PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                       73
subject for the sovereign formed a second religion, not less
respected than that of the church.11
   As soon as the days of festival were concluded, the Portu¬
guese court set to work with an activity unusual in that ordi¬
narily stagnant body. The pro-French ministry had been dis¬
missed when the flight was ordered, and the pro-English group
installed. Fernando Portugal, a man of industry and expe¬
rience, but of limited, mediocre intelligence, became minister
of the interior. The jovial courtier, the Visconde de Anadia,12
became minister of the navy and colonies. Rodrigo de Souza
Coutinho—with the exception of Araujo now fallen from power,
the most intelligent Portuguese of the court group—received
the post of minister of war and foreign relations. Energetic,
vivacious, impulsive, a lover of the novel and grandiose, he
was an absolute monarchist with an intense aversion for the
principles of the French Revolution. Nearly all of the measures
proposed by the government during the next six years were
products of his initiative regardless of whether they fell within
his department. Decidedly pro-English in his sympathies, he
was on intimate terms with Viscount Strangford.13
   None of these ministers were colonials, nor was a single Bra¬
zilian chosen to serve on the council of state, which was nomi¬
nated along with the ministers. A bureaucracy, modeled on
the institutions of Lisbon without regard for the changed situ¬
ation of the government, was set up with an almost infinite
number of posts to care for the swarm of Portuguese nobles who
had accompanied the prince regent. Colonials were excluded
from participation in these offices also.14
  11 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 19-20.
  12 A Portuguese who had held the post of minister of the navy in Lisbon. He
died soon after his arrival in Rio de Janeiro.
  13 He was born in Lisbon, 1755. He later became Conde de Linhares. His father
had been minister to Spain and his brother was then minister to London (Pereira
da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 30-32).
  14 The various departments created by the ministry are given by Pereira da
Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 37-47. The editor of the Correio Braziliense pointed
out that no heed was paid to the necessities of the new country. Nothing like a
department of mines, of roads, maps, navigation, etc., was set up. The council
of state, he affirmed, was made up of men who thought it dishonor to study. Every
 74           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
      Considerable economic progress was made during the two
 years following the proclamation of the Carta Regia of January
 28. Cotton was planted in larger quantities; factories for sugar
 and salt multiplied; cultivation of wheat and hemp was begun
 on an extensive scale in the southern provinces of Santa Cath-
 arina and Rio Grande do Sul.15 By the decree of April 1, 1808,
 permission was given to the colonials and to foreigners of any
 nation to establish manufacturing plants of all kinds.16 Raw
 materials were exempted from import duties and drawbacks
 on re-exported articles were conceded. To favor Portuguese
 shipping, coast-wise trade was closed to foreign vessels, and
 foreign commerce was restricted to the ports of Rio, Bahia,
 Pernambuco, Maranhao, and Para. By decree of June 11, 1808,
the import duties of twenty-four per cent, ad valorem on dry-
goods were lowered to sixteen per cent, and the duty on pro¬
visions was reduced by a third for goods belonging to the Por¬
tuguese and imported in Portuguese vessels.17
   In October a bank of emission was founded.18 Before this date
there had been no commerce on credit nor any kind of bank in
Brazil despite the example of England and Holland.19 The bank,
founded by the initiative of Souza Coutinho, passed through
many vicissitudes in the first quarter of a century of its exist¬
ence, the king used it for his “private purse” and on his return
to Portugal in 1821 almost sacked it; the directors got rich and