

  46 Article VI.
  47 Article VII.
  48 Additional Article I.
  49 F. O., 63/58, Domestic, Letters and Papers from Chev. de Souza, Dispatch of
November 28, 1807. Also Borges de Castro, Collecfdo, IV, 254-262.
  60 F. O., 63/55, Strangford to Canning, Nos. 68, 71, 72.
  61 Ibid., Nos. 70, 71, 75; F. O. 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 80. Canning
was extremely anxious over the possibility that the fleet might fall into the hands
of the French (F. O., 63/56, Canning to Strangford, Nos. 10, 11, 14).
  52 F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, Nos. 79, 80.
64              BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
minister, Portugal would be saved. No half measures would
serve; war against England must be declared at once. Success
in his mission, Napoleon advised D. Louren^o, meant the sal¬
vation of his country, while failure meant ruin.63 Consequently
the Portuguese court now faced a serious dilemma as the choice
had to be made at last between the demands of France and
those of England. By yielding to the emperor’s demands, Por¬
tugal might be saved, but at the price of losing the colonies
for the British fleet could easily sever the arteries binding the
Portuguese possessions to the mother country. On the other
hand, by yielding to England’s demands, the colonies might
be saved, but at the price of losing Portugal, as resistance to
the Napoleonic armies was hopeless.
     The vivid picture of French wrath which Louren$o painted
at the council meeting stampeded the ministers.64 On Novem¬
ber 6, Araujo suggested that it would be advantageous to Por-
tugal s interests if Strangford and the consul general, James
Gambier, should leave Lisbon. The viscount replied that it
would be better if the Portuguese ministry would cease its dis¬
graceful subterfuges, and that he could not leave just at pres¬
ent. Strangford explained to Canning that his departure would
be proof of Portugal’s compliance with Napoleon’s demands,
and hence he refused to go.66 Two days later the order to
sequestrate all English property and detain English residents
in the country was issued, and Strangford was forced to ask
for conveyance for his departure.66 Since the prince regent was
unaware of the Treaty of Fontainebleau concluded between
Spain and France, October 27, by which Portugal was divided
between Napoleon, the Prince of Peace, the royal family of
Spam, and the queen of Etruria,67 he hoped that by these
    M F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 84.
    64 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, I, m.
    66 F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 89.
    M Ibid., No. 91. Comparatively little damage was done to the English at Lisbon
 y the decree as most of their property had been removed under the emergency
permission secured by Strangford late in September and a majority of the English
residents had already left the country,

.."Pereiora da Silva’ Historia do ImPerio> !» >04-105; Thiers, Histoire du Consulat,
V    II   OEM                                                                      1
            TRANSFER OF THE COURT TO RIO                                        65
measures against the English, he would avoid the invasion of
Portugal by the French. In case General Junot should cross
the frontier with his troops, however, the flight to Brazil would
be undertaken at once.58
    Viscount Strangford lingered in Lisbon for ten days after he
had asked for his passports, to the great uneasiness of the Por¬
tuguese ministry. A spirited note from Araujo drove him out
on the eighteenth59 to the British fleet which then blockaded
Lisbon. But on the twenty-seventh, he was back in the Tagus
to force the surrender of the Portuguese fleet or the immediate
departure of the royal family to Brazil.60
   When he landed in Lisbon on the night of November 28,
 1807, he learned that the greater part of the nobility had al¬
ready embarked on the fleet which was destined to sail for
Brazil.61 Six days before he returned, news had reached Lisbon
that Junot had crossed the Portuguese frontier with twenty-
three thousand troops. Two days later, the arrival in Lisbon
of Le Moniteur, the official gazette of the French Empire, an¬
nouncing Napoleon’s decision to dethrone the house of Bra-
gan^a,62 proved to the prince regent that he could no longer
hope to remain on his throne in case of the absorption of his
kingdom by the French. On the other hand, he had alienated
his old ally by the recent measures against the English, and
the British fleet was blockading Lisbon. The embarkation had
been ordered for the twenty-seventh, but as yet no command
to sail had been issued.
   On his arrival, Strangford learned that the prince regent
wished urgently to see him. As soon as he discovered from
Antonio d’Araujo that D. Joao still vacillated, nourishing the