

    The order was given to sail at daybreak. From eight to fif¬
teen thousand persons66 and half of the money in circulation
in the kingdom were on board thirty-six ships, with as much
furniture as could be managed. Eighty millions of cruzados
of treasure accompanied the fleet.67 In the city day and night
armed bands roamed aimlessly and ominous crowds packed
the quays, watching the ignominious flight of the royal family,
nobles, domestics, and hangers-on. Fourteen royal personages
were on board the fleet, among them being D. Pedro Carlos,
Infante of Spain. Early in the morning of November 29, the
fleet sailed out through the narrows and then lay to with an
adverse wind. A delay of two hours in weighing anchor would
have resulted in the detention of the fleet within the harbor as
the wind shifted immediately after the narrows had been
passed.68
   Meanwhile Junot, obeying Napoleon’s emphatic commands
to hurry, pushed on over the mountains to Alcantara on the
Spanish-Portuguese border and down the Tagus to Lisbon.
On the thirtieth, he left Saccavem with his vanguard reduced
to fourteen men and his army to twelve hundred, all that the
mountains and swollen streams had left of the twenty-three
thousand who had set out from Bayonne. Without cavalry,
artillery, cartridges, shoes, or food, stumbling with fatigue, the
troop resembled “the evacuation of a hospital more than an
army triumphantly marching to the conquest of a kingdom.”69
He entered Lisbon without opposition from the sullen and dis-

  65 Ibid.
  86 Thiers gives 8,000 (Histoire du Consulat, VIII, 340); Monteiro gives 15,000
(Historia do Imperio, p. 59); Pereira da Silva agrees with Monteiro (Historia do Im-
perio, I, 121).
  67 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., I, 121. A cruzado was worth about three shillings
{New English Dictionary).
  68 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., I, 122, 123; F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning,
No. 103.
  69 Sorel, VEurope et la Revolution frangaise, VII, 231.
68          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
gusted townspeople, in time to see the sails of the Portuguese
fleet, lying to beyond the narrows.70 His prize had escaped him.
   Sir Sidney Smith shared what supplies he could spare and
detached four ships of the line to escort the Portuguese fleet to
Brazil. Viscount Strangford returned to England for further
instructions; Sir Sidney Smith blockaded Lisbon; Junot held
Portugal with a handful of survivors; and the Portuguese stood
off on the course followed by Cabral three hundred years be¬
fore. The prince regent had been forced to the great decision;
he had delivered himself and his dominions into the hands of
England under circumstances which the representative of the
British nation deemed such as to entitle England to establish
with Brazil the relation of sovereign and subject.

  70 Monteiro, Historia do Imperio, p. 51, and footnote 1; Pereira da Silva, Historia
do Imperio, I, 123-124; F. O., 63/56, Strangford to Canning, No. 103.
                               CHAPTER IV