

    F. O., 63/59, Canning to Strangford, No. 2.
 33 Ibid., No. 3, Secret.
 14 Ibid., No. 4.
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                     79
   The main difficulty in the way of such universal importation
was the admission into Brazil of goods from the British East
Indies and into England of the Brazilian staples, coffee and
sugar, which would compete with the products of the British
West Indies. Such merchandise could be admitted for reex¬
portation, however, and England would absorb great quanti¬
ties of Brazilian hides, timber, tobacco, drugs, dyeing woods,
hemp, and other articles. Raw cotton would find an unlimited
market, and England would reduce the tax on the raw article,
which had been collected when cotton had entered England
in a Portuguese ship. The differential duties imposed on other
Brazilian produce when brought in by Portuguese ships could
be reduced also, if the reciprocal favor were granted by the
Portuguese government.35
   In case the minister secured these privileges, he was not to
press the right to set up the factory association in Brazil, as the
Portuguese government opposed those establishments. Such or¬
ganizations were unnecessary, provided the privileges and im¬
munities so long enjoyed by the British subject in Portugal
were guaranteed to him in Brazil. These privileges were known
to Strangford, but special attention was to be paid to obtaining
the special court of the English judge conservator, to the secur¬
ity of the property of persons dying intestate, and to the ex¬
emption of the English from the jurisdiction of the Inquisition.
In return, the Brazilians in England were guaranteed recip¬
rocal privileges “by the acknowledged excellence of the British
Jurisprudence, especially such as relate to matters of trade and
the important administration of Justice between Foreigners and
natives.” There was to be no equivalent in England for the
judge conservator, but Strangford was to press the point as
compensation for relinquishing the factory privilege. This was
“a point which must on no account be abandoned.”36


  “ Ibid.
  38 Ibid., No. 4. Consuls were to be appointed at Rio, Sao Sebastiao (capital of
Sao Paulo), Sao Salvador (capital of Bahia), Olinda (capital of Pernambuco),
Sao Luiz (capital of Maranhao), and Belem (capital of Pard), Sao Salvador was
another name for the city of Bahia, Sao Luiz for Maranhao, and Belem for Pard.
80         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
   With the two most important phases of Anglo-Brazilian rela¬
tions—political and commercial—cared for, Canning concluded
his instructions to Strangford by suggesting certain desirable
privileges which he could bear in mind. If possible, he was to
secure a free port on the island of Santa Catharina, where goods
might be transferred to Spanish and Portuguese ships for trans¬
portation to Spanish colonies with the connivance of the Spanish
colonial governors.37 The minister was to inform the Portuguese
court that in any treaty which should embody the final ar¬
rangement of the relations between the two countries, an article
dealing with the slave trade must be included,38 and he was to
do his utmost to prevent the granting of monopolies by the
prince regent to private individuals or companies.39 Finally,
the last of the instructions included a project for establishing
a line of packetboats between England and Brazil for carrying
correspondence.40
   Laden with these precise instructions, Strangford landed in
Rio de Janeiro on July 22, 1808.41 He found that one part of
his instructions had already been decreed by the prince regent,
as the jurisdiction of the British judge conservator had been
recognized, and courts had been established in Rio and Bahia.42
Souza Coutinho himself hinted at the advisability of immedi¬
ately concluding a definite commercial agreement and treaties
of friendship and alliance43 and informed Strangford that the
prince regent had authorized the Chevalier de Souza in Lon¬
don to borrow six hundred thousand pounds.44 By September
14, the convention establishing the packetboat line was con¬
cluded, securing every point contained in Canning’s instruc-
  37 F. O., 63/59, Canning to Strangford, No. 5.
  38 Ibid., No. 6.
  39 Ibid., No. 8.
  40 Ibid., No. 10.
  41 Ibid., Strangford to Canning, No. 1.
  42 Ibid., No. 5.
  43 Ibid., No. 8.
  44 Ibid., No. 9. The loan was secured, April 21, 1809. The revenue from the
commerce of Madeira Island and, if necessary, the revenue resulting from the
sale of the crown monopoly of Brazil-wood were pledged as guaranty (F. O.,
93/37/5. Protocol, Portugal).
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                      81
tions in regard to that matter.45 On the last day of the same
month full powers were exchanged between Souza Goutinho
and Strangford to negotiate the treaties of commerce and
alliance.46
   In the meantime news of the June 11 decree which had re¬
duced the rates on goods brought in by Portuguese ships from
twenty-four to sixteen per cent, reached England. Instead of
gaining perferential rates in Portuguese America, England was
being discriminated against in favor of Portuguese shipping.
Strangford was ordered to “make the most forcible Repre¬
sentations upon this subject to the Brazilian government” and
to inform Souza Coutinho that England expected the decree
to be revoked immediately. The minister was severely repri¬
manded for not having effected the repeal as soon as he had
arrived in Rio.47 England, by the Order-in-Council of Decem¬
ber 21, 1808, had removed the last of the duties on reexported
articles, which had not been included in the order of Novem¬
ber, 1808, allowing Brazilian produce free market-passage to all
European countries by way of England.48 The British Govern¬
ment, expecting the prince regent to reciprocate the friendly
attitude of England, was extremely disappointed in this dis¬
crimination against British commerce.
  Spurred by the reprimand, Strangford labored to conclude
a commercial agreement with Souza Coutinho. The two min¬
isters soon reached an understanding, but opposition arose in
the Portuguese court against the proposed treaty, while the
Papal Nuncio was using all his influence49 on the superstitious
prince regent to prevent his approval of the clause granting
religious toleration to the Protestants. The merchants in Rio