

  78 Article XIX.                            79 Ibid.
  80 By decree of October 18, 1810, the duties on merchandise brought in by
Portuguese ships was lowered from sixteen to fifteen per cent. (Pereira da Silva,
Historia do Imperio, II, 138, footnote 2).
  81 Article XX.                              82 Article XXI.
  83 Article XIII. The convention, which constituted the third of the treaties
signed February 19, 1810, set up a monthly service between Falmouth and Rio
touching at Madeira on the way. Regulations as to sailing dates, port privileges,
management, postal rates, etc., were specified. The convention is given by L.
Herstlet, Commercial Treaties, V, 406-411. The convention was included in these
treaties although it was practically the same as the earlier agreement made by
Strangford soon after his arrival in Rio.
go            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
English woolens.84 Stipulations as to contraband of war, ship¬
wrecks, pirates, and rights of subjects residing in the domin¬
ions of the other country at the time of the outbreak of war
occupied several articles.85
   To conserve the advantages gained for England by the agree¬
ment, Strangford added to the above the final articles86 that
“it is agreed and stipulated by the high contracting Parties,
that the Present Treaty shall be unlimited in point of duration,
that the obligations and conditions expressed or implied in it
shall be perpetual and immutable; and they shall not be
changed or affected in any manner in case His Royal Highness
the Prince Regent of Portugal, His Heirs or Successors, should
again establish the seat of the Portuguese Monarchy within
the European Dominions of the Crown.” At the end of fifteen
years from the date of ratification,87 the articles of the treaty
might be revised, with the stipulation, however, that no modi¬
fication could become effective until both parties agreed to the
change.88
  The second89 of these treaties dealt with political questions.
Perpetual union between the two countries was guaranteed90
and the obligation to preserve peace was accepted by both.91
Great Britain promised never to recognize as sovereign of Por¬
tugal any prince who was not the legitimate heir of the house
of Braganga; while the additional articles of the secret conven¬
tion of October 22, 1806, relative to Madeira Island, were re¬
affirmed.92 Portugal was to indemnify British subjects who had
suffered losses during the crisis of 1807, while England recipro¬
cated in regard to Portuguese losses caused by the seizure of
Goa by the British.93 In grateful remembrance of the assistance
rendered him by the English fleet, D. Joao conceded the privi-

  84 Article XXVI.                         85 Articles XXVII-XXXI.
  86 Articles XXXII-XXXIII.                87june 1 g, 1810.

  88 Article XXXIII. This last stipulation was added at the insistence of Galveas
and Aguiar (F. O., 63/83, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 16).
  88 F. O., 93/37/8, Portugal, Treaty of Friendship and Alliance.
  80 Article I.          n Article II.                « Article III.
  83 Articles IV and V. The English seized Goa when the order of sequestration
of English property in Portugal was issued.
             PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                       91
 lege to the British of cutting timber from Brazilian forests for
 the construction of war vessels,94 and pledged supplies of fresh
 meat, vegetables, and wood in case English war ships again
came to his aid.93 British war ships without limit as to the num¬
ber might enter any port in the Portuguese Dominions, even
in time of peace, a privilege which was expressly prohibited to
the ships of any other nation.96 Finally, the prince regent de¬
clared that the Inquisition should never be established in his
American possessions,87 and forbade his subjects to carry on the
slave traffic from any place in Africa except from the actual
possessions of the Portuguese crown in that continent.98
  By two secret articles99 England pledged its good offices with
the Ottoman Porte and the Barbary States in order to secure
peace between these states and Portugal and promised to work
for the restoration of Oliven^a (seized by Spain by the Treaty
of Badajoz) and for the settlement of the boundary dispute over
the French Guiana region according to the Portuguese inter¬
pretation since the Treaty of Utrecht. In return D.Joao prom¬
ised to prohibit the slave trade at Bissao and Cacheo on the
West African coast, and to cede these places to England for
fifty years, provided Great Britain secured Oliven^a and the
desired solution to the Guiana boundary.
   Thus an astute English minister, ably directed by the British
Foreign Office, secured preferential rights for his country in
Brazil. In negotiating the treaties, the Portuguese court had in
mind almost exclusively the necessities of Portugal itself. No
Brazilian was in the ministry or in the prince regent’s council
of state to fight for the welfare of the colony and point out the
stipulations which would be detrimental to its interests. The