

 68 Article II.        70 Article III.       71 Article V.
 71 Article VI.        73 Article VII.       74 Article VIII.
  7S Article IX.       76 Article IV.
  88          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  lish subjects residing in the port or city where the tribunal was
  to be set up should choose the magistrate by a plurality vote,
  subject to the ratification of D. Joao or his successors. Removal
  of judges by Portugal was possible only by appeal through the
  British ambassador or minister. In return for this concession by
  Portugal, his Britannic Majesty engaged to guarantee the “most
  strict and scrupulous observance of the laws, by which the per¬
  sons and property of Portuguese subjects residing within His
  Dominions are secured and protected, and of which they (in
 common with all foreigners) enjoy the benefit, through the ac¬
 knowledged equity of British jurisprudence and the singular
 excellence of the British Constitution.”77
    Article XII granted to the English religious toleration and
 the right to worship in their homes or in the churches and chap¬
 els to be built by them, provided such chapels and churches
 should resemble private dwelling houses and no bells should be
 rung to announce public worship. No one should be persecuted
 for his belief unless he declaimed against the Catholic religion
 or endeavored to gain converts to his own faith. Offenders, how¬
 ever, should be amenable to the civil police and not to religious
 tribunals and should be punished by fines or confinement to
 their dwellings.
    The “liberal system of commerce founded upon the basis of
 reciprocity and mutual convenience,” announced as the pur¬
 pose of the treaty in the preamble, was exemplified by the
clause which set the duties to be paid on British goods whether
consigned to English or Portuguese subjects, at fifteen per cent,
ad valorem. The tariff table by which this duty was to be as¬
sessed was to be drawn up by an equal number of British and
Portuguese merchants, aided by the English consul general and
the Portuguese administrator general of the customs. On the
other hand, Portuguese goods entering England were to pay

  77 This tactless vaunting of British superiority following the implied reasons for
the establishment of the special magistrates in Brazil was bitterly resented by the
Brazilians. The “acknowledged equity ...” phrase became to Brazilian writers
a pass word for British pretensions and effrontery. The phrase is usually attributed
to Strangford, but the idea and part of the phrasing were taken from Canning’s
instructions of April 17, 1808 (F. O., 63/59, Canning to Strangford, No. 4).
              PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                    89
 the duties demanded of the most favored nation.78 An attempt
 was made to render these terms iron-clad by the clause which
 prohibited the extension to any other nation whatsoever of the
 special privileges in import duties, granted exclusively to Eng¬
 land by Portugal or to Portugal by England.79 As the import
 tariff for all nations was twenty-four per cent, established by
 the Carta Regia of January 28, 1808, with the special rate of
 sixteen per cent, conceded to Portuguese vessels by the decree
 of June 11 of the same year, England gained a lower rate than
 even the colony or the mother country.80
    Brazilian sugar, coffee, and other articles similar to the pro¬
 duce of the English colonies were denied entrance to British
 markets, although the right was granted to Portugal to send
 such produce to England for reexportation, exempt from the
 higher duties imposed on such articles destined for consump¬
 tion within the British Dominions,81 a stipulation which in¬
 sured British vessels of cargoes and English merchants of busi¬
 ness. Likewise, the prince regent could set up prohibitory du¬
ties on English articles known by the name of British East In¬
dies goods and on West Indies produce, such as sugar and
coffee.82
   To facilitate communications, a packet line was to be estab¬
lished between England and Rio de Janeiro.83 All former trea¬
ties and agreements existing between the two crowns not con¬
trary to the new treaty were declared in force, while special
mention was made of the continuance of the articles of the
Methuen Treaty of 1703, in regard to Portuguese wines and