

  110 John Mawe, Travels, pp. 450-471. He pictures trade conditions on or before
1816. The following pages of description of conditions in Rio are taken from in¬
formation given in his book of travels.
96        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
tropical Rio, were left to rust themselves into junk. Crates of
prospectors’ hatchets with the sharp edge on one end and the
hammer on the other, destined for the use of those who wished
to go to the nearest mountain, break the rocks, and cut out the
precious golden metal, testified to the sanguine and ignorant
hopes of English exporters.
   The gullible representatives of these exporters exchanged
their goods, or money, for turmalines bought for emeralds or
for fake diamonds. They accepted at face value gold dust largely
mixed with powdered brass. The young agents, recently arrived
from England, had “grand ideas” as to the manner of conduct¬
ing their business. They took big stores at outrageous rentals,
set aside their hours for riding in the morning, visited their
country-seats in the afternoons, and attended gay parties at
night. Shopkeeping being considered manual labor, they were
forced to sell their goods by auction at ruinous prices. Brazil¬
ians and some levelheaded Englishmen who were less concerned
with their social position bought marketable merchandise, sold
at these auctions at prices below the wholesale quotations from
Europe, and set up firmly established businesses catering to the
real necessities of the population. Eventually the crash came;
bankruptcy notices filled the London Gazette; judges conserva¬
tors and the Brazilian authorities cooperated in clearing away
the debris; and trade between England and Brazil was estab¬
lished on a firm basis.
  By 1816 England was exporting to Brazil a steady stream of
goods, half of which went to Rio alone. The study of the articles
included in this stream gives a curious side light on the life of
Brazilian colonials with a European court in their midst. Stout,
fine cloth, particularly blue or black, sold quickly. There was
a steady demand for dress hats, boots, and shoes; earthenware
and glass; bottled porter, Cheshire cheese, and butter; mirrors,
silk and cotton hosiery, and fashionable dresses for women.
Hams, tongues, and pork; oil, wine and brandy; cotton goods
of all kinds, linens, and common woolens brought good prices.
Although the smiths preferred Swedish iron, there was a good
market for iron and steel articles. Salt, some hardware, glass,
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                        97
and some plated goods found ready sales. Tinplate, matches,
brass, lead, shot, gunpowder, and drugs sold well.                           Flour,
turpentine, tar, staves household furniture, and other items
from North America prevented any great sale of such articles
of British manufacture.
  In return for these articles shipped to Brazil, British mer¬
chants carried back to England from Rio de Janeiro gold, dia¬
monds, and precious stones; sugar, raw cotton, hides, and to¬
bacco; rum, wax, indigo, and certain highly prized woods. The
port of Bahia led in the raw cotton shipments, sending eight-
ninths of its cotton export to Liverpool. Much molasses and
rum left this port for England also. Britain took three-fourths
of the cotton exported from Pernambuco and half the sugar.
From tropical Pard, English vessels carried back cocoa, coffee,
rice, sarsaparilla, gums, drugs, sugar, hides, molasses, and
woods.
 A comparison of British exports to various foreign markets
demonstrates the importance of this Brazilian trade to English
foreign commerce. In 1812 Portuguese America took twenty-
five per cent, more English merchandise than did all of Asia,
half as much as did the United States or the British West Indies,
and more than four-fifths of the total sent to South America.111
Over three-fourths of the value of articles exported to Brazil
were cottons, with woolens ranking a poor second.112 World
peace in 1815, with thirsty markets thrown open to British ex¬
porters, reduced the importance of Portuguese America, for
Asia during that year surpassed Brazil by a million pounds
sterling, the British West Indies did the same by nearly five
millions, and the United States by ten millions. Yet the prince
regent’s American possessions still took two-thirds of the total