

  63 F. O., 63/83, Strangford to Bathurst, No. 2.
  64 Ibid., No. 12; Strangford to Wellesley, No. 17. Strangford sent D. Joao an
ultimatum demanding immediate signature; failure to sign would cause the min¬
ister to “give this court a demonstration which would prove very clearly that it
was easier to lose confidence and friendship than to regain them.” His conduct
and success rendered him obnoxious to the ministers opposing the treaty and an
effort was made to force D. Joao to complain to London of Strangford’s “pressing
and urgent manner” of carrying on the affair.
 86           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 worship to the “Honour of Almighty God” seemed to him to
 be a scandalous abuse of language. The prayers of heretics
 were regarded by the Almighty as an insult, and it did not be¬
 come the prince regent as a Catholic sovereign to establish a
 contrary principle. In support of his opinion he continued to
 threaten D. Joao with severest penalties from Rome if he signed
 such a clause. A favorite in the court65 maintained that “an en¬
 tire toleration of the Protestant Religion was all that was want¬
 ing to render Brazil an English colony.” The best means to
 secure a distinction, which he deemed necessary, between for¬
 eigners and natives in Brazil was to establish severe restrictions
in matters of religion. Despite the formidable opposition to the
clauses, however, Strangford carried his point.
   The minister even succeeded in obtaining concessions which
had not been included in the first treaty. The English were now
given the right, specifically stated, to sell by retail as well as
wholesale; goods might be consigned to either English or Por¬
tuguese subjects on the same terms; the Portuguese crown was
made responsible for loss or damage in case of goods deposited
in the royal customs houses; the right to pay customs duties by
three, six, or nine months notes instead of specie payment on
withdrawal of goods was secured; and the formal abrogation
of Article 23 of the treaty of 1654 was made by the Portuguese
government, whereas all other articles, alvaras, and decrees of
the past which granted privileges to Englishmen were specifi¬
cally reaffirmed.66
   The final stipulations, which were divided into three treaties
and some secret articles, were signed February 19, 1810, and
ratified by D. Joao seven days later.67 The preamble of the first
of these, the Treaty of Commerce and Navigation,68 main-

  66 The Conde das Galveas, formerly Chevalier d’Almeida.
  M F-     63/83, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 16.
  67 Ibid., No. 19. The letter patent of D. Joao, explaining the terms of the treaties
of 1810 and ordering the execution of the same, was issued March 7, 1810 (Os
Privilegios da Nagao Britannica, pp. 15-20).
  68 F. O., 93/37/7, Portugal, Treaty of Commerce and Navigation, signed at
Rio de Janeiro, February 19, 1810. It is given in English and Portuguese in par¬
allel columns and contains thirty-four articles. The signatures are those of Strang¬
ford and Linhares (Souza Coutinho).
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                       87
tained that the sole purpose of the agreement was to consoli¬
date and strengthen “the ancient friendship and good under¬
standing which so happily subsist, and have during so many
ages subsisted between the two Crowns” and to improve and
extend “the beneficial effects thereof to the mutual advantage
of their respective subjects.”
  The first nine articles were devoted to establishing the recip¬
rocal rights of the two contracting parties under the system of
opendoor commerce and navigation. The right of a subject of
one nation to sojourn or travel or trade in any port, town, or
province of the other country was guaranteed69; most favored
nation rights were set up as to payment of taxes and imports70;
reciprocity in drawbacks and bounties of exported goods was
instituted71; mutual commerce and navigation of both coun¬
tries on the basis of the most favored nation was expressly per¬
mitted in the ports and seas of Asia72; the sanctity of the home
of the subject of one nation dwelling in the territory of the other
was assured73; Portugal reserved the crown monopolies of ivory,
brazil-wood, urzela, diamonds, gold-dust, gunpowder, and to¬
bacco in the form of snuff74; and the reciprocal right to appoint
and maintain consuls was ceded.75 A clause, which later be¬
came irritating to Brazil when it wished to develop its own
merchant marine, stipulated that British vessels should not pay
any higher port duties within Portuguese dominions than the
Portuguese ships paid in English ports.76
  The lofty purpose enunciated in the preamble, of “liberal
commerce and reciprocal benefits” was strikingly illustrated in
the famous article ten. The prince regent by this clause granted
to England the privilege of nominating special magistrates to
act as judges conservators in those ports and cities of his domin¬
ions in which national tribunals and courts of justice were or
might hereafter be established. The judges were to try all cases
involving British subjects according to the laws established in
Portugal for such jurisdiction since the 1654 treaty. Eng-