


  64 Ibid., No. 11.
  66 F. O., 63/69, Canning to Strangford, No. 11. See 63/73, Papers on the Proposed
Treaty of Commerce, July-Sept., 1809, for the action of the council on the treaty and
the exchange of letters between Canning and the council and Canning and the
solicitor general. Canning opposed successfully some of the demands of the Coun¬
cil for Trade while he embodied others in his instructions to Strangford for the
revision of the treaty. The new draft passed through the hands of the council for
change and approval.
  66 F. O., 63/70, Canning to Strangford, No. 13. Dated August 1, 1809.
84            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ties. Now by Article 23 of the treaty of 1654 “all goods and
merchandise of the Enemies of either on board the ship of
either, or their People or subjects,” should remain                            “un¬
 touched,” a stipulation which would confirm the Portuguese
contention of “free bottoms, free goods.”67 Canning explained
to Strangford that the “question of free bottoms making free
goods” was “of such incalculable importance in the present
state of the world, that no consideration would induce His
Majesty to concede that Principle, or even to admit any modi¬
fication of it at the present moment.”68
       Hence Strangford’s treaty was returned to him, with a few
corrections and a new arrangement of the articles which sepa¬
rated the political clauses from the commercial stipulations.
The minister was to explain the necessity of a new signature
on the grounds that the extraordinary step of changing the
treaty after it had been signed and sent to England nullified
the entire document.69 Full powers to sign any treaty during
his stay in Brazil were sent to Strangford in order to allow him
to use his initiative in regard to such negotiations.60
       Although the new draft of the treaty was essentially the same
as Strangford’s first effort, there were some changes in addition
to the two points mentioned by Canning in his first criticism.
The definition of what constituted a British or a Portuguese ves¬
sel was added; the religious article, so vehemently opposed by
the Nuncio, was to stand in its original form; the clause stipu¬
lating the return of military and naval deserters was dropped,
as no satisfactory working of such a stipulation was possible;61
and some doubtful wording was modified.62

  67 F. O., 63/70, Canning to Strangford, No. 13.
  68 Ibid., No. 14. The principle to which Canning referred was the contention
supported by Brazil that a neutral flag covered all goods except contraband of
war on that vessel regardless of the fact that such goods might belong to a belliger¬
ent.
  69 Ibid., No. 13.
  60 Ibid., No. 16. Dispatch No. 19 under date of October .., 1809, was signed by
Bathurst.                                                                       7
  61
   The present difficulty with the United States taught that lesson to England,
Canning explained.
  62 Ibid., No. 14. Dated September 23, i8og.
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                    85
   When the revised treaty reached Strangford in Rio, he found
little difficulty in obtaining the consent of the prince regent to
the changes desired by the British Government. The difficulty
which he now encountered was the refusal of D. Joao to ratify
for a second time some of the unaltered articles. The Nuncio
was again vehement in protest against the provision concerning
the religious question, and Fernando Portugal, minister of the
interior, fought the stipulations concerning the slave trade. The
whole court was united against the viscount and Souza Cou-
tinho in an effort to block the ratification.63 Strangford was
forced to exert all of his magnetic influence on the prince re¬
gent, who was never “in the same mind during two Successive
Days.” At last, learning that the “frittering away of time” had
reached the point of transferring the treaty negotiations to Lon¬
don, the minister felt himself obliged “to assume a tone which
had the effect of instantly determining the Prince Regent to
accede to all” of his proposals.64
   The opposition to the treaty had been centered around sev¬
eral points. The stipulation which required that the master
and three-fourths of the crew be natural subjects of the prince
regent before the vessel could enter English waters as a Portu¬
guese ship was won by the minister only after an obstinate fight,
as the Portuguese merchantmen were manned largely by Span¬
iards and other foreigners. This clause would practically de¬
stroy the Portuguese carrying trade resulting from the Oporto
wine business, as the crews of the vessels engaged in that trade
were Gallician or Biscayan seamen.
   It was the religious clause, however, which gave Strangford
his greatest difficulty. The Nuncio declared that the phrase of
the treaty stating that British subjects might perform public