

  46 F. O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 13.
  46 F. O., 63/60. Strangford to Canning, No. 15.
  47 F. O., 63/61, Canning to Strangford, No. 38. Pressure was brought to bear
on Canning by the Board of Trade which insisted on the serious disadvantages
under which British commerce would labor as a result of the decree. See also F. O.,
63/60, Canning to Strangford, No. 28.
  48 F. O., 63/61, Canning to Strangford, No. 40.
  48 Strangford reported, F. O., 63/68, No. 5> that the Nuncio had written four
memorials to D. Joao that were “strong and menacing . . . containing senti¬
ments worthy of the darkest ages of persecuting Superstition.”
   6
82          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
who had been ordered by the committee of the London Asso¬
ciation to “watch the several Regulations which” were “now
under discussion at the Court of the Prince Regent,” and to
report to London their opinion of the negotiations, were “ob¬
truding into the business, making things more difficult.”50 The
consul general, Sir James Gambier, was creating yet more
trouble for Strangford by his efforts to participate in the social
life of Rio despite the strict etiquette of the Portuguese court.51
     Nevertheless, despite these handicaps, a treaty of alliance
and commerce was signed, February 28, 1809. Strangford
feared that he had exceeded his instructions by making a
permanent instead of a temporary agreement, but the moment
was, in his opinion, too favorable to let slip. The anxiety of the
prince regent over Portugal had led him to sign a treaty emi¬
nently favorable to England, since it contained a clause which
guaranteed to him his possession of the mother country. In¬
stead of “most favored nation” treatment for English commerce
in Brazil, the minister had striven for “much greater conces¬
sions” as a remuneration to his country for the preservation of
Portugal. He had entered on the negotiations, therefore, de¬
termined to concede no more than his instructions stated but
to obtain more than they stipulated. The results were embodied
in the treaty which he now sent to London.52 In the negotia¬
tions he had been governed by the principle that “England had
contented Herself with the Advantages which She must ever
derive from the Magnitude of Her Capitals, from the more
practiced Industry of Her Manufactures, and from the Great
Extent of Her Navigation.” In his opinion England by this
treaty had used its “undoubted Superiority” only to “acquire
a still stronger claim to the Title of Protector and Friend of
Brazil.”53
  Although the treaty had been signed and a copy sent to Eng¬
land, Strangford and Souza Coutinho still faced serious trouble

 60 F. O., 63/61, Strangford to Canning, No. 33.
 61 Ibid., No. 41.
 6S F. O., 63/68, Strangford to Canning, No. 8 (Duplicate).
 M Ibid.
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                         83
in Rio. The Nuncio threatened D. Joao with the “most terrible
exertions of . . . the vengence of” the Holy See, and even the
ministers joined the opposition in the effort to pull Souza Cou-
tinho from power by using this treaty as a bludgeon. The vis¬
count, to save the friend of England and the “only man of tal¬
ents and judgment in the Empire,” was forced to “make some
strong effort” to protect Souza Coutinho from his enemies.
Hence he proposed to the prince regent to drop out the clauses
dealing with the Inquisition, and to add a secret article guar¬
anteeing Englishmen against any jurisdiction of that institu¬
tion. D. Joao acquiesced, and the additional article was signed
by the minister, sub spe rati, and sent to England to be appended
to the original agreement.54
   When the treaty reached London, it was handed over to the
“Lords of the Privy Council for Trade” for the opinion of that
body on its stipulations.55 On the whole Canning approved of
the terms negotiated by his minister and praised his zeal, but
the document would have to be signed anew. Two points had
to be changed. In the first place, the clause which guaranteed
the reciprocal right to purchase, inherit, possess, or occupy
land, houses, and property of every sort would have to be modi¬
fied, as in England no one except a native born or a natural¬
ized subject could purchase or possess real property, and no
one could become naturalized who was not a Protestant. The
point could be remedied easily, said Canning, as this privilege
could not be of importance to the Portuguese, whereas the
right of the Englishman to own real property in Brazil was
necessary.56
  In the second place, the agreement reaffirmed all old trea-