

V, 189).
94            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
the treaty would retard the growing prosperity of the colony;
and the dignity and honor of the Portuguese nation was humil¬
iated before the world by the confessions and admissions con¬
tained in the agreement.107
   If the treaty had frankly stated what everybody knew to be
the truth, that England was the only support of the Portuguese
government, which was maintaining itself exclusively by means
of British troops, loans, munitions, arms, and ships; that these
benefits were so great and essential that in the actual state of
affairs, without them, the Portuguese would cease to be even
nominally a nation; that the Portuguese government, being de¬
void of any other means of repaying such favors, had granted
preferential commercial privileges to the English nation, then
the lack of reciprocity in the treaty would have appeared to be
the result of facts which were evident to all the world.108 The
Portuguese government had now paid in full for the support
received from Great Britain.
   The editor, however, did not censure England for securing
such a treaty, for that power was simply behaving in accord¬
ance with a national ambition which resulted in prosperity,
greatness, and power. The blame for the fatal agreement of
1810 lay at the door of the Portuguese ministry and court. By
inefficiency, ignorance, and selfish ambition to maintain them¬
selves and Jtheir patron in power, the ministers of the prince
regent had betrayed the nation.109
   While these criticisms, made by a man who was a fervent
Brazilian and an acute observer, have grounds of truth, it must
be admitted that the colony received some benefits from the
transaction. The influx of British capital and enterprise stimu-

  ]07 Correio Braziliense, V, 189.
   108 Ibid V, 302. He points out Articles 7, 10, 15, 16, and 19 as demonstrating
a lack of reciprocity in the treaty.
  m Ibid., XI, 218-219. Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 131, lays the
responsibility entirely on Souza Coutinho who dominated the councils of the
price regent “by the superiority of talents” which he displayed in advocating
the treaty terms. There were good reasons for concluding such a treaty from the
point of view of Portugal, a fact which influenced Souza Coutinho far more pro¬
foundly than the necessities, largely unknown to him, of the colony of Brazil.
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                   95
lated the economic growth of Brazil, even though it crushed
the budding industries which had sprung up since 1808. Pro¬
fessional men, artisans, trained mechanics, capitalists, and trad¬
ers, invited by the special privileges announced in the treaties,
flocked to Brazil. In 1808 the colony was emancipated, eco¬
nomically, from the decadent mother country; in 1810 it ac¬
quired a rich step-mother. Whether the emancipation of 1808
would have been sufficient, or whether the legal recognition of
England’s special position was necessary, is a question difficult
to decide. The economic superiority enjoyed by Great Britain
over its world competitors would have enabled it to baffle com¬
petition, but it is doubtful whether the economic resources of
that country would have been attracted to Brazil without the
legal recognition of special privileges and personal security.
Moreover, under the system of government promotion of trade
practised by the powers of Europe, it was incumbent upon Eng¬
land to guarantee itself against action by its rivals. Strangford’s
treaty forestalled any possible discrimination against Great
Britain in favor of any other country. In any case, the treaties
of 1810 were vital factors in Anglo-Brazilian relations until the
middle of the century.
 The English trade set in motion by the Carta Regia of 1808
received a powerful stimulus from the new treaty of commerce.
There was an influx of British merchants at Rio de Janeiro,
and speculation ran rife in England. So great was the volume
of goods sent out that the distracted customs service was unable
to clear its warehouses. Goods were left in the open, and the
natives, amazed at such a quantity of merchandise and listen¬
ing to golden rumors of Britain’s kindness to their sovereign,
thanked the “generous English” and “helped themselves to
what their own countrymen had hitherto charged a good price
for.”110 The supplies sent out of cut glass, brilliant chandeliers,
superfine woolen cloths, high priced English saddles, whips,
and bridles found no market; and ice skates, shipped to sub-