

  94 Article VI.
  86 Article VII. This article was reciprocal; if Portuguese war vessels should come
to the aid of England, Great Britain was to furnish similar supplies.
  88 Article VIII.
  87 Article IX. This article was severely criticized by the Portuguese and Brazil¬
ians as being a humiliating declaration. D. Joao should have decreed the closing
of America to the Inquisition, as the declaration in a treaty had the appearance
of having been forced by England.
  88 Article X.                 88 F. O., 93/37/9, Portugal.
 92           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Portuguese minister, pro-English in his sympathies, ignorant of
 conditions in Brazil, and precipitate in his manner of conduct¬
 ing public business, was guided by his preoccupation with the
 situation of Portugal, whereas England’s attention was directed
 principally to Brazil. Although the treaties were concluded in
 Rio de Janeiro, they were negotiated by a Portuguese court on
 the basis of past Anglo-Portuguese relations, with the European
 situation of the mother country uppermost in the minds of the
 small clique which controlled Portuguese foreign policy. In ad¬
 dition, strong pressure was exerted by the representative of the
 other party to the compact, under circumstances which forced
 on the Portuguese court a well-nigh hopeless handicap. In the
 words of Oliveira Martins, “once more the dynasty sold the
kingdom as Esau had sold his birthright; once more, the House
of Bragan$a, to preserve its throne, sacrificed the nation.”100
   Brazilian historians are quite unanimous in condemning the
treaties, maintaining that England had cornered the unheroic
prince regent in such a way that he could do nothing but sign
when the masterful Strangford presented his terms.101 While the
negotiations were still in progress, the editor of the Correio Bra-
ziliense warned his readers from London that a treaty of com¬
merce between Brazil and England was a most delicate task,
as the agreements existing between England and Portugal could
not serve as precedents. The two principal bonds of union be¬
tween those two countries, mutual interests of exportation and
protection against enemies, did not apply to Brazil, for the col¬
ony was self-sustaining in produce and, being isolated, feared
no invasion. In addition it was impossible to foresee what path
either the cultivator or the manufacturer would take in Brazil,
or whether the United States would not offer articles at less
price than would England. In view of these facts, the present
negotiations were very dangerous for Brazil, in the opinion of
  100 Historia de Portugal, II, 248.
  101 Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos para 0 Direito International, I, 29 ff., is especially
bitter; Abranches, Tratados de Commercio e Navigagao do Brazil, pp. 2-5, condemns
the treaty unsparingly; Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 173 ff., restrains
himself to stating that the treaty “was an error” and gives proof for his assertion;
Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 137, calls the treaty “defective and fatal.”
           PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                        93
the editor, especially since the Portuguese court possessed little
knowledge or experience of conditions in the colony.102
  In November of 1809, the Correio was warning Brazilian mer¬
chants that English traders were bringing influence to bear on
the British negotiator and was calling on them to awaken and
send in suggestions and demands of their own to serve as weap¬
ons with which the Portuguese court could refute the English
demands.103 Early in the succeeding year the editor gave as his
opinion that Brazil under the present circumstances could not
close an equitable treaty with England and preached the Man¬
chester doctrine of laisseifaire.104 Realizing the handicaps under
which the Portuguese negotiator was laboring, the editor
throughout the negotiations was determined to defend him
when the terms of the agreement should become known; but
the complete “capitulation” of Brazil to English demands which
the publication of the treaties revealed, deprived him of any
possible grounds on which he could support the minister.108
  The Portuguese version of the treaty, the editor pointed out,
demonstrated clearly that the agreement was a translation from
the English original and that the English negotiator had taken
the initiative throughout,106 while the terms themselves demon¬
strated the truth of that assertion. There was no real reciprocity
in the stipulations, although such an assertion was repeatedly
made in the treaty; the English were to enjoy privileges in Bra¬
zil denied even to the natives living in the colony; the effects of
  102 Correio Braziliense, II, 129-130. The editor was Hipolyto Jos6 Soares da Costa.
He was born in Colonia de Sacramento, 1774. While in Portugal, he had suffered
torture by the Inquisition, and had fled to London. He started the Correio Bra-
ziliense in 1808 and continued the paper until 1822. He died 1825 (Pereira da
Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 84-85). The British Museum has the set of twenty-
nine volumes. The September, 1811, and March, 1820, numbers are missing,
however. For the influence of the journal on Brazilian questions see F.          O.,
63/204, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, September 6, 1817, Separate.
  103 Correio Braziliense, III, 526-527.
  im Ibid., IV, 188.                         106 Ibid., V, 189.
  ion Snuff (tobacco em p6) was translated “tobacco manufacturado,” which included
cigarettes, cigars, etc., in Portuguese. Thus England recognized only the monop¬
oly of snuff whereas Portugal recognized as a monopoly all articles manufactured
of tobacco. The editor pointed out several such inaccuracies (Correio Braziliense,