

francesa.” Dated September 2, 1808. The document is given by Molinari, Ante¬
cedent es, III, appendix, i.
  81 Molinari, op. cit., Ill, 5. The Portuguese court later attempted to disallow
Curado’s action but Molinari does not believe he was acting contrary to instruc¬
tions.
   82 Revista do Instituto Historico e Geographico Bras., XLI, 302.
  88 The cabildo of Buenos Aires accused Elio of being in communication with
Curado after the withdrawal of the latter (Molinari, op. cit., Ill, 6, footnote 3).
  84 Liniers was accused of being pro-French and D. Joao’s fears were grounded
on the opinion held by a large group in La Plata itself. Bernardo de Sassenay,
agent of Napoleon sent to Buenos Aires in 1808, asserted that Liniers would have
acted favorably to the French view had he been able to ignore public opinion
(Carlos A. Villanueva, Napoledny la Independence de America, pp. 205-214).
  ii8          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  England should retain either Montevideo or Buenos Aires in
  case the plan succeeded.35
     In less than a month this grandiose scheme grew in Souza
  Coutinho’s mind until on August 20, he proposed to the Eng¬
  lish minister a joint Portuguese-British expedition to take the
  Philippines and to attack the west coast of South America. The
  viscount, waiting for news as to Britain’s relations with Spain,
  continued to be non-committal in his attitude.36
    But quite suddenly those plans were cast aside and an en¬
  tirely different policy was inaugurated, for news arrived from
  Europe of the abdication of Charles IV, the mutiny at Aran-
 juez, the captivity of Ferdinand, and the proclamation of the
 Napoleonic dynasty at Bayonne. The plans for the joint attack
 were replaced by a scheme to establish the wife of D. Joao as
 regent of the Spanish-American colonies. The prince regent’s
 wife, D. Carlota Joaquina, being the sister of Ferdinand (later
 VII), now became in her opinion the representative of the
 royal house of Spain, since the legitimate king was incapable
 of ruling.37 Four manifestoes were published in which D. Car-
 Iota and the Infante D. Carlos as members of the royal family
 of Spain protested against the forced abdication of the Spanish
 Bourbons and required the recognition by all Spanish-Amer¬
 ican colonies of their rights ad interim as representatives of their
 dynasty. One of the manifestoes was addressed to D. Joao, re¬
 questing that he approach Sir Sidney Smith in order to obtain

   85 F- O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 2. Dated July 25, 1808.
   36 Ibid., No. 11, August 24, 1808.
   37 Alfredo Varela in Duos Grandes Intrigas, I, 71-72 and 628, note (2), maintains
that the change in policy was due to Carlota’s efforts exerted on Coutinho. The
minister drew up the minute of the manifesto asserting her claims, on August 11,
and Sir Sidney Smith corrected it before it was translated into Spanish. Molinari,
Antecedentes, III, 7 and footnote (4), believes that Coutinho changed suddenly due
to the extraordinary successes won in the Spanish Peninsula and to the influence
o the English cabinet. Strangford’s correspondence does not show any influence
o the sort however. Strangford said the manifesto was drawn up by Sir Sidney
Smith (F. O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 12). The legal basis of D.
Carlota’s claims to succession to the throne in case of failure by her brothers and
their legmrnate descendants is given by J. M. Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina
y la Politico de Espana en America, pp. 42-45.
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                   ng
from that officer the means of defending Spanish America
against the designs of France. The prince regent, in his reply,
which was also one of the manifestoes, promised to support the
claims of the princess and the infante.38
   Strangford prophesied that these documents, which were to
be broadcast throughout Spanish America, would only inten¬
sify the hatred of the Spanish for the Portuguese. Joao’s real
purpose was to extend “the Portuguese American Empire as
far as the River of Plate,” and to recover the territories which
had been ceded by treaty either to France or to Spain. The
prince, so the minister thought, hoped that the reception of
these proclamations by the colonials would warrant him in
commencing hostilities. Strangford, until he should receive
definite information as to the relations of England with Spain,
would continue to be careful not to “check the Energy and
Spirit” which Joao had developed on the subject, but person¬
ally he was opposed to such a project, which was far beyond
the strength of the prince regent.39
   The viscount received his desired information in short order,
for on September 2, Canning wrote that it was “scarcely neces¬
sary to inform your Lordship, that in the present state of His
Majesty’s relations with Spain, He cannot countenance any
design hostile to the Peace and Independence of the Spanish
Dominions in South America.” Strangford was ordered, there¬
fore, earnestly to urge the Portuguese minister to suspend all
further operations undertaken with this in view, and to respect
in the South American colonies those ties of common interest
  38 The manifestoes are dated August 19 and 20, 1808. They are given in fac¬
simile by Molinari, Antecedentes, III, appendix, documents 2, 3, 4, 5. Strangford
enclosed copies in F. O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 12. The first mani¬
festo was the complaint against Napoleon’s action made by D. Carlota and the
Infante Don Carlos to D. Joao, requesting his aid and that of the admiral of the
British squadron in support of the two petitioners. The second was the reply of
D. Joao promising to support these claims. The third was directed to the faithful
vassals of Spain by D. Carlota, in which she declared null the forced abdication
of her father and brothers, asserted that she was the nearest representative of her
house, and called on all Spaniards to acknowledge her claims during the impris¬
onment of Charles and Ferdinand. The fourth was a similar document signed by
the Infante Don Carlos.
  39 F. O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 12. August 24, 1808.
120         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
and friendship by which Spain and Portugal were now united
in Europe.40 Two months later Canning added to those instruc¬
tions that “nothing could be more futile than the attempt”
made by Joao to extend his empire to Spanish America, “ex¬
cept the manner of conducting it.” Strangford was to continue
to oppose any such moves and to express England’s “entire
disapprobation of them.” Especially was Britain opposed to
any pretensions of Joao through his wife to the regency of
Spain.41
   These instructions left no doubt as to the course which Strang¬
ford was to pursue. Henceforth he was to employ all of his sub¬
tlety and masterfulness in checkmating the Portuguese designs
on the River Plate basin. To execute his instructions he needed
every bit of finesse of which he was capable, for his position
was a delicate one. D. Joao, with his faction, had acceded to
the publication of the manifestoes in the hopes that they would
result in a situation which would enable Portugal to take the
Banda Oriental by force under the cloak of a legitimate de¬
fense of Spanish rights in America. The ambitious D. Carlota,
who was living separated from her husband, hoped to make
herself queen over all of Spanish America. Sir Sidney Smith,
in command of England’s fleet in South American waters, used
all of his social and naval power to support D. Carlota’s as¬
pirations in opposition to the policies of D. Joao and Lord
Strangford. Spain added a further element of difficulty by
sending the firebrand, Casa Irujo, as minister to Rio after his
withdrawal from Washington, while revolutionary and royalist
agents from La Plata swarmed to the Portuguese capital in the
hope of securing aid.42