

  129 Now Conde de Funchal. Ibid., No. 30. Dated October 11, 1813.
  130 F. O., 63/144, Castlereagh to Strangford, October 11, 1813, Secret and Sepa¬
rate.
   131 F. O., 63/148, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 157.
   132 Souza Coutinho’s brother, the minister in London, was ordered to return to
Rio to take his brother’s place, but he refused to obey. Nor did he lose his post for
his disobedience.
 102          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 the interests of England, as there existed “not a class of men
 under the government less friendly disposed towards Great
 Britain than the members of the Brazilian Magistracy.” Strang-
 ford prevented the appointment of Araujo to the foreign office,
 but he was certain that the Conde de Aguiar, who became
 foreign secretary, would be a pliable instrument in the hands
 of the new minister. The appointment of Araujo pleased the
 Rio public, and illuminations on three successive nights after
 the announcement took place as a demonstration of joy over
 the rise to power of the anti-English faction.133
   England’s influence in Portuguese affairs, which had reached
 the crest in 1810, now began to decline sharply. The struggle
 resolved itself into a conflict between Strangford on the one
 hand and the ministers and court group on the other, for pos¬
session of the prince regent. The viscount, deprived of the sup¬
port of Souza Coutinho, strove to get D. Joao to return to Lis¬
bon, where once more he would be under traditional English
influence, while Araujo endeavored to keep the prince regent
in Brazil, where the “hatred of the natives . . . towards Eng¬
land” was “more violent than” Strangford could describe, and
where London was on the other side of the globe. In addition,
Araujo counted on the support of Lord Holland in England in
his opposition to the English envoy and Castlereagh.134 At first
D. Joao inclined to Strangford’s point of view and publicly and
privately signified his willingness to return to Lisbon if an Eng¬
lish squadron should appear in Rio to take him back. Conse¬
quently, during the latter part of September, two ships of the
line and one frigate were dispatched from England under Sir
John Beresford to conduct the prince regent to Lisbon.135
  The categorical answer demanded by Castlereagh in the dis¬
patch of October n, 1813, in regard to the Oporto Wine mo¬
nopoly and the slave trade regulations, was given to Strangford
by the Conde de Aguiar at the end of November, 1814. News

 2 f,'.?’’ f3/167’ Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 7. Dated February 20, 1814.
 134 Ibid., Nos. 8, 9, 23.

          N°' 53’ Dated June 2I) i8i4- F- 0-> 63/166, Bathurst to Strangford,
            PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS IN BRAZIL                                   103
of Napoleon’s defeat had relieved the anxiety of the Portuguese
court over the mother country and the reply was totally unac¬
ceptable.136 When, in order to influence public opinion in favor
of the suppression of the slave traffic, the viscount requested
permission from the Portuguese Foreign Office to publish the
recent messages of the British House of Commons and Lords
in regard to the slave trade, the Conde de Aguiar accused
Strangford of willfully desiring to incite the Negro slaves of
Brazil to rebellion under the protection of Great Britain and
warned him that the utmost rigors of the law would be imposed
on anyone, native or foreigner, who disturbed the public tran¬
quillity. When Strangford indignantly complained to D. Joao
of such outrageous language used to a foreign diplomat, he re¬
ceived a note from the Conde de Aguiar saying that he had
transgressed the respect due the prince regent and would be
debarred from further private interviews with the sovereign.137
Thus Araujo through Aguiar closed the avenue so long open
between Strangford and D. Joao, and the wire to London was
cut.
  On December 28, 1814, Sir John Beresford with the fleet ar¬
rived in Rio,138 and the play had reached the climax. Beresford
and Strangford used every effort to get the prince regent to re¬
turn, but Araujo triumphed, for the hapless D. Joao, through
the mouth of the Conde de Aguiar, affirmed that he had never
requested the ships, that the English minister had presumed by
sending for the squadron, and that he intended to remain in
Brazil. Strangford, who had foreseen the trend of events, had
written to Castlereagh before the arrival of the ships that his
word could not stand in the face of the word of a sovereign,                 al¬
though all the world knew that the sovereign’s word was false,”
and had petitioned for leave to return to London.139 On January
3, 1815, Bathurst signed his recall at the request of the prince
  136 F. O., 63/169, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. i to. Dated December i, 1814.
The Portuguese court offered to submit the points in dispute to the Congress of
the Allies. “Preposterous,” Strangford said.
  137 Ibid., No. 114.
  138 Ibid., No. 126.
  139 Ibid., December 17, 1814, Separate.
  104         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  regent,140 and on April 8, the minister turned the files over to
  Chamberlain as chargt and sailed for home.141 Before he left,
 however, the decree was issued which extended the charter of
 the Oporto Wine Company for fifteen years, from January i,
  1817. The proclamation was totally unnecessary as the com¬
 pany still had twenty-two months to run before the old charter
 expired.142 It was Araujo’s parting shot at his old enemy.
     British influence at the Portuguese court in Rio and among
 the Brazilians and Portuguese living in Brazil was at low ebb
 during the succeeding six years. Chamberlain noted in 1816
 that the extreme unpopularity of England among the Brazil¬
 ians and Portuguese was getting worse. No story, however
 extravagant, of unjust pretensions on the part of England
 against Brazil failed to receive implicit confidence.143 An at¬
 tempt was made to restrict the commercial freedom of the Brit¬
 ish within Brazil, for in December of the same year, the trans¬
 port of English-owned goods from one Brazilian port to another
 even in Portuguese ships was forbidden.144 In June, 1817, how¬
 ever, Araujo died, and his virulent anti-English policy was soft¬
 ened by his successors.146 In November, 1819, Edward Thorn¬
 ton, the new minister to Rio de Janeiro, took over the office
from Chamberlain, who had remained char si since Straneford’s
recall.146
     On his arrival, Thornton, who had been ordered to secure
an arrangement in regard to the disputed points of the treaty
of 1810, a settlement of the slave traffic question, and the re¬
turn of the king to Lisbon,147 found that he himself was caught