

  40 F. O., 63/59, Canning to Strangford, No. 18.
  41 F. O., 63/60, Canning to Strangford, No. 30. November 26, 1808. D. Carlota
sent letters to important political leaders in Spain such as D. Melchior Gaspar,
Dr. Francisco Saavedra (member of the Junta Central), the Conde de Floridablanca,
and the Bishop of Orense (who became the president of the regency). Letters were
sent also to military leaders such as Jos6 Palafoy, Francisco Xavier Castanos,
Gregorio de la Cuesta. Local and sectional juntas also received communications
from her, and she wrote to her father, mother, and brother recommending changes
in America (Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina, pp. 65-73).
   Jos6 Presas, Memorias secretas de la Princesa del Brasil, por su antiguo secretario, pp.
                     BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                      121
   In addition to the manifestoes, D. Carlota began an exten¬
sive private correspondence in support of her pretensions. Per¬
sonal letters copied in her own hand were sent by means of an
English agent under Smith’s orders to Viceroy Liniers, to the
audiencia of Buenos Aires, to Juan Almagro (assessor of the vice¬
royalty), to the dean of the Cathedral of Cordova del Tucu-
man, and to others in the viceroyalty of La Plata. Letters were
sent also to the governor, to the ayuntamiento, and to private
individuals of Montevideo; to the viceroy of Peru and to Goy-
eneche, who commanded the troops in that region; and to the
audiencia of Chile.43 Communications were addressed also to
the Marquis de Someruelos, governor of Havana, and to the
authorities of Guatemala. Most of the letters to the west coast
were carried by an Englishman who was supercargo on a
British ship, D. Carlota having secured him a commission as
a royal agent of the Portuguese monarchy in order to clothe
him with the proper authority.
   The manifestoes reached Buenos Aires on the day following
the receipt of Curado’s ultimatum.44 Such a sudden change of
front led Liniers to believe the manifestoes were either spur¬
ious or a trap for his fall. Consequently, he denied the right of
D. Carlota to assume the regency over the Spanish colonies.
Since Buenos Aires had sworn to support Ferdinand VII and
the Junta of Seville had proclaimed him king, the viceroy could
not acquiesce in the assertion that Carlota and the Infante Car¬
los were the titular heads of the Spanish House. The audiencia
adopted the same attitude in its reply to the private letter which
Souza Coutinho directed to that body, while the cabildo called
the documents <(tumultuarios,> and the governor of Montevideo
politely declined to support Carlota’s claims.                     The audencia of
Chile was equally unenthusiastic over the plan.46

27, 36) 39) 55-64, 84-99, I32*I33- Casa Irujo insisted that Joao allow Carlota to
go to Madeira Island in order to be near Spain in case the Spanish government
should invite her to occupy the throne in the absence of Charles and Ferdinand
(F. O., 63/83, Strangford to Bathurst, No. n. February 6, 1810).
  43 Presas, op. cit., pp. 27-34; Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina, p. 49, footnote 2.
  44 They arrived September 11 (Molinari, Antecedentes, III, 6-7).
  46 Ibid., Ill, 9-14.
  46 Presas, Memorias, pp. 33-34. The Junta Central of Spain also refused to ac-
 122         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    In general, therefore, the manifestoes met a cold reception.
 Yet a powerful group in Buenos Aires did accept the idea as a
 means of opposing the Junta of Seville, whose authority many
in the colony denied. A secret society counting such illustrious
 names as Manuel Belgrano, Martin Pueyrredon, and Mariano
 Moreno, was formed to watch the movements of the new vice¬
roy, Hidalgo de Cisneros, who had taken the place of Liniers
by orders of the Junta, to call the people to arms when the time
was ripe for action, and to proclaim D. Carlota Joaquina
regent of all Spain. General Pueyrredon was sent by the com¬
mittee to Rio to hasten the arrival of the princess in Buenos
Aires.47
   In the meantime, D. Carlota was fishing in very troubled
waters at the Portuguese capital. While Sir Sidney Smith and
Viscount Strangford were spending a few days at D. Joao’s
place at Santa Cruz outside of Rio, letters came from the prin¬
cess addressed to the prince and to Smith. D. Joao was informed
—his permission was not asked; he was merely informed—that
the princess intended to go at once to Buenos Aires, taking with
her D. Miguel, their second son, and all of the princesses. Smith
was nominated plenipotentiary for D. Carlota who now con¬
sidered herself an independent sovereign with jurisdiction over
Spanish America. He was given powers by the princess to cede
to D. Joao La Plata territory desired by Portugal on condition
that the Amazon river be opened to her subjects, the Spaniards.
The English admiral was to take the princess to La Plata; or,
in case he could not go, D. Carlota was to go alone, for go
she would regardless of what might arise to frustrate her plans.48
   Although the letters were in D. Carlota’s handwriting, it
was evident, at least to the prince, that Smith himself had com¬
posed them. D. Joao was exceedingly angry and requested
Strangford to make representations to London against the ad-