

quiesce in the pretensions announced in the manifestoes. D. Carlota then sought
the consent of the regency and the Cortes to her claims and succeeded eventually,
but too late (Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina, pp. 50-51).
  47 Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, II, 108-m.
 48 F. O., 63/60, Strangford to Canning, No. 20. Most Secret and Confidential.
October 9.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                   123
miral. When the party returned to Rio and the prince regent
discovered that D. Carlota had already taken her jewels from
the palace preparatory to leaving, he was shaken from his pla¬
cid taciturnity and complained violently to Strangford of the
admiral’s instigation of D. Carlota’s outrageous conduct. The
minister, in reporting the affair to Canning, lamented that such
an able officer as Smith should have been led astray by a “Serv¬
ice replete with circumstances of a new and romantic Na¬
ture.”49
  On October 15, D. Joao called Smith and Strangford to¬
gether for a conference on D. Carlota’s pretensions in Buenos
Aires, but the admiral cut short any conversation by stating
laconically that his recently arrived instructions gave him all
he needed to know and that they were so secret that even
Strangford was not to be informed of their contents. “The fate
of South America,” he asserted, “was in his hands.” This dec¬
laration checkmated Strangford until he could write home,
while it stimulated Souza Coutinho to urge Smith to go to La
Plata to calm the dissensions reigning in that region. D. Carlota,
belligerently encouraged by Smith’s stand, was determined to
accompany the admiral, “even though the batteries of Rio de
Janeiro should fire upon her at her departure.” The admiral
went so far as to promise England’s support of Carlota’s claims
to the throne of Spain in case of the failure of the reigning
branch, thus putting the entire Peninsula wholly under the
Bragan$a family.50
  In the face of these developments, D. Joao once again halted
between two opinions. Quite willing to have the English ad¬
miral capture La Plata for a member of the house of Bragan^a,
he acquiesced at first in Souza Coutinho’s insistence that Smith
be allowed to sail for Buenos Aires. But Strangford sowed seeds
of distrust in his mind by insinuating that, once queen of Span¬
ish America, D. Carlota might swallow Brazil with Smith’s aid
with as much facility as D. Joao could absorb the Spanish col¬
onies. The prince regent, perceiving clearly the imperious am-

 49 Ibid.
 60 Ibid., Nos. 23 and 25.
 124           BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 bition of his wife and realizing what that energetic princess
 thought of her fat, irresolute, unheroic husband, wavered be¬
 tween the advice of his own minister and that of the viscount.61
       Strangford’s pressure soon began to bear fruit, however. On
 October 24, he protested formally and energetically to the For¬
 eign Office against Smith’s interference in affairs of state, and
 three days later a protest from D. Joao was added. The next
 day Souza Coutinho, by authority of the prince regent, asked
 that the admiral be recalled;              and a few days later D. Joao
 flatly ordered his wife not to leave for Buenos Aires until he had
 secured the official concurrence of England in that move.63
       Although the Carlota faction was balked temporarily, the
princess and the admiral continued to agitate D. Joao, driving
him at times to the verge of his endurance.64 In April, 1809,
D. Carlota visited Smith at his country home, presented him
with a jeweled sword in recognition of his services,66 and prom¬
ised him the title of Duke of Montevideo as soon as they should
arrive in Buenos Aires. That happy event was never consum¬
mated, however, for on March 1, 1809, Canning wrote to
Strangford that England would never “countenance any meas¬
ure which” had “for its object any interference in the political
state” of Spanish dominions in America. The viscount was
praised for his moderation and steadiness during the interfer-
   61 Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 251-254. The Portuguese ministers were
not averse to Carlota’s pretensions (F. O., 63/70, Strangford to Canning, No.
65). Smith maintained that D. Joao actually gave his consent to Carlota’s expe¬
dition (F. O., 63/61, Strangford to Canning, No. 39). Rubio, La Infanta Carlota
Joaqmna, appendix, document VIII, gives a letter dated November 22, 1808, in
which D. Joao formally gave permission for D. Carlota to go to Buenos Aires
The permission was revoked by a letter dated November 28, 1808, on the grounds
that the British minister called the project “Absolutely inadmissable” (ibid, ap¬
pendix, document IX).
  **     O., 63/60, Strangford to Canning, Nos. 25, 26, 28.
   ** F'°-’ 63/6l» Strangford to Canning, No. 39. Presas lays the chief blame for
this refusal to the activity of Strangford (Memorias, p. 38). Brazilian authorities
concur m asserting that Strangford was the chief element in frustrating D
Carlota’s plan (Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 240-258; Pereira da Silva,
Histona do Impeno, II, 112-113). Calvo also lays the responsibility at the minister’s
door (Anales de La Revolucidn de la Amirica Latina, I, 80).
  M F. O., 63/61, Strangford to Canning, No. 39.
  66 Presas, Memorias, pp. 55-62.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                                    125
ence in his business which had resulted in such confusion in the
Rio court, and Sir Sidney Smith was recalled.66
  This dispatch cleared the air when it arrived at Rio. Strang-
ford at once wrote to the governors of Montevideo and Buenos
Aires, assuring them that England “would not countenance any
attempt to effect a change in the established authorities of the
Spanish colonies” as long as they persevered in their allegiance
to Ferdinand VII.57 As D. Carlota herself had long foreseen,
without the admiral’s help, hers was a lost cause.58 The plan
had received very chilly reception in Buenos Aires in the first
place; now her inability to appear in person to be acclaimed
regent frustrated the efforts of the secret committee, and Pueyr-
redon, disgusted, returned to La Plata. The conspirators lost
interest in part also because they learned that D. Carlota ab¬
solutely refused to consider a constitutional monarchy. Thus
failed the second attempt of the Portuguese court to win the
Banda Oriental by peaceful means.
  Although they had been balked twice in their efforts to secure
control of the River Plate basin, both D. Joao and Souza Cou-
tinho, with characteristic Portuguese tenacity, continued to
work for the annexation of the north bank of the river. This
time they were aided by events in La Plata itself, which set
them on the path which eventually led them to success.
  Late in 1809 the viceroy at Buenos Aires lifted the ban on
foreign merchandise and induced great quantities of British
goods to enter the city, assuring the merchants that sufficient
time would be given them for the sale of these imports. Yet on