

  22 Correio Braziliense, I, 255.
  23 The cabildo of Buenos Aires was so concerned over Liniers’ safety that it sent
a spy to Rio to effect his escape from prison in case he had been seized. Luiz
Liniers was a Frenchman.
  24 Hill had been worried about Liniers’ long stay at Rio, certain that the latter
was collecting information to be used against Portugal. Liniers, Hill said, was an
enemy of England, being French by birth and sympathies (F. O., 63/63, Hill to
Canning, No. 13). The count reached Buenos Aires August 17 (Molinari, Ante-
cedentes, I, 10).
  26 Molinari, op. cit., documents in appendix, xvii, xxii, xxiii, Iv. The audiencia
opposed Curado’s entrance but the viceroy argued that it was better to let him in
peacefully than to refuse him entrance and have him come in anyway. Oliveira
Lima in D. Joao VI no Brazil, I, 289, sets Curado’s mission in 1809, a mistake,
Molinari says, op. cit., p. 13.
 116            BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 less to attack Brazil backed by the English fleet and army.26
        When Santiago Liniers27 was informed by his brother of the
 warlike preparations also begun by Souza Coutinho, he notified
 the cabildo that the Portuguese minister would never embark on
 such a path were he not being instigated by the English min¬
ister.28 Yet ChargS Hill, by June 2, still had no more to commu¬
nicate to Canning than that the Spaniards feared a combined
 English and Portuguese attack but could offer little resistance
to such a move. Perhaps Hill inclined to the proposed plan in
view of the fact that during the preceding three months alone
the value of the commercial intercourse between Rio and
Buenos Aires had amounted to £120,000.29
    The reply of the cabildo of Buenos Aires refusing Souza Cou-
tinho’s offer of protection against France provoked orders from
the Portuguese court addressed to Curado, which instructed
him to inform the viceroy that unless the cabildo were forced to
accept the Portuguese proposals, he would be obliged to with¬
draw to the frontier of the Rio Grande. Consequently, Curado
prepared a letter to Liniers in which he peremptorily demanded
the delivery to the prince regent of the north bank of La Plata
under the pretext of the menace of an occupation by the
French.30 He presented his ultimatum to the audiencia at the
        Molinari, Antecedentes, I, 13-21 and documents in appendix, xxvii, xxviii, lii,
liii.
   27 By orders from Godoy which reached Buenos Aires May 13, 1808, Liniers
was given supreme political command of the colony. Hitherto he had had supreme
command of the army (Molinari, op. cit., I, 21 and footnote 2). But his position
was very precarious, with the cabildo of Buenos Aires, led by Alzaga, and the
governor of Montevideo intriguing against him. The merchants turned against
him when he attempted to raise much needed money by imposing import duties,
June 1. The tariff was modified, July 13, giving the viceroy the power to grant
special privileges to traders with foreign countries by exempting them from the
tariff, but this modification increased the opposition among the native merchants
who had to pay the tariff (Molinari, op. cit., II, 12-18).
   28 Molinari, op. cit., II, 5-6.
  29 F. O., 63/63, Hill to Canning, No. 13. June 2. It is probable that Hill lent
some support to the Portuguese plan as D. Joao praised Hill highly to Strangford
later (F. O., 63/59, Strangford to Canning, No. 1).
  80 “Oficio del Mariscal de Campo, Joaquin Xavier Curado a Santiago Liniers,
en que le hace saber que el Principe Regente exige que le entregue la guarda de
la margen septentrional del Rfo de la Plata, antes la amenaza de una occupacibn
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                    117
same meeting in which Elio and the cabildo of Montevideo de¬
manded the resignation of the viceroy. Liniers in reply told
Curado to leave Spanish territory at once.31 The general re¬
treated to Rio Grande, fearing an immediate invasion by the
troops of Buenos Aires,32 but conscious also that he had con¬
tributed to the breach between Liniers and Elio which eventu¬
ally was to enable Souza Coutinho to interfere between the
conflicting elements of La Plata.33
  Up to this point England’s participation in the affair had
been limited to tacit acquiescence by the chargi d'affaires at Rio
and the active cooperation of the English admiral in command
of the fleet in South American waters. But on July 22 the mas¬
terful Strangford landed in Rio, and Souza Coutinho hastened
to acquaint him with what had been done and to ask his help
in carrying out the Portuguese plans in La Plata. D. Joao, the
minister reported, was afraid of French designs in that region34
and was determined to take possession of both sides of the river.
As peaceful methods had failed, more violent measures were
necessary. Therefore it had been planned that the Paulistas who
first were to take Asuncion, Corrientes, and the Missions re¬
gions, were to join the forces from Santa Catharina and Rio
Grande in an attack on Montevideo, while Sir Sidney Smith
with the English fleet, after landing two thousand troops from
Rio in La Plata, was to prevent communications between Mon¬
tevideo and Buenos Aires. To this proposal Strangford mur¬
mured a non-committal reply and suggested to Canning that