


LORD STRANGFORD AND THE PORTUGUESE DE¬
             SIGNS ON THE BANDA ORIENTAL

A Glance at the map of South America demonstrates the eco¬
nomic and strategic importance to Brazil of the north bank of
the River Plate basin. The three great tributaries which form
the river have their origin in Brazilian territory and drain all
of the rich central and southern part of that country. The Para¬
guay starts southward from the watershed of Matto Grosso.
The Parana flows for nearly twelve hundred miles, separating
the states of Goyaz and Matto Grosso from those of Sao Paulo
and Parana, before it becomes the dividing line between Para¬
guay and Argentina. By a magnificent system of tributaries it
serves the interior of two of the most progressive states of the
union, Sao Paulo and Minas Geraes, and drains the promising
state of Parana. One of these tributaries, the Tiete, crosses the
coffee state from east to west with a course of six hundred miles,
for its source is almost within sight of the Atlantic Ocean be¬
tween the coast towns of Santos and Rio de Janeiro. The
Uruguay, the third of the rivers which unite to form La Plata,
serves the two southernmost states of Santa Catharina and
Rio Grande do Sul and forms the dividing line between Brazil
and Argentina and, in continuation, between Argentina and
Uruguay.1
 Thus, due to the abrupt mountain range which follows the
coast from the shoulder of Brazil to the southernmost state of
the union, the rivers of the region which since 1700 has been
the most important part of the country, drain westward into
three great streams which unite to form the River Plate. Com-

  1 Delgado de 'Carvalho, Geographia do Brasil, pp. 104-107; 377-3^1 > Varnhagem,
Historia Geral do Brasil, I, Sec$ao I.
 I ro              BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 mercial strategy, ever since early colonial times, has demanded
 that the Portuguese control the mouth of the system, while
 military strategy has required that the broad La Plata and the
 Parana-Paraguay rivers, or at least the Uruguay, divide Portu¬
 guese America from its Spanish neighbors. But such a position
 would enable the Portuguese at will to choke the only available
 outlet eastward open to that part of Spanish America which
 lies south of the Amazon and east of the Andes. The inevitable
 clash between these two conflicting interests centered in a strug¬
 gle for control of the eastern bank of the Uruguay river, gener¬
 ally known as the Banda Oriental.
      The simplicity of the conflict which began in 1580 was com¬
plicated by two factors of importance. In the first place, the
legal grounds on which each side rested its claim for possession
were confused by a universal doubt as to the location of the
famous Line of Demarcation set by Pope Alexander VI2 and by
the Treaty of Tordesillas.3 Both the Portuguese and Spanish
officials on occasion showed authenticated maps which placed
the Banda Oriental within the territory allotted to each nation.4
     2 The Bull Inter caetera, May 4, 1493, assigned to the present and future sover¬
eigns of Castile the lands discovered or to be discovered by their subjects to the
west of a line drawn from pole to pole at a distance of one hundred leagues to the
west of the Azores (Francis Davenport, European Treaties Bearing on the History of
the United States and its Dependencies to 1648, p. 56, document 7).
     3 Portugal, protesting vigorously against the Papal bull, forced Spain to sign
the Treaty of Tordesillas, June 7, 1494, which moved the line of demarcation
270 leagues farther west, and stipulated that a commission should be set up to
determine the boundary (Davenport, op. cit., p. 84, document 9). This extension
ot the line made possible the claims of Portugal to Brazil.
 ,*SP^ asserted ^at the line ran from Pari in the north to Iguap6, just south
of Sao Vicente; while the Portuguese located the line from Pari to a point close
to the Parani river, west of Buenos Aires. Although Spain’s contention very closely
approximated the line as measured to-day, Portugal’s claims seem to have been
accepted by a large number of Continental authorities throughout the period of
 issensiom        or t e Spanish claims, see L. Dominguez, “Conquest of the River
Plate        Hakluyt Society Publications. For the Portuguese side see Clovis Bevilaqua,
 As Capitamas Hereditarias perante o Tratado de Tordesillas,” Revista do Insti-
      Hutonco e Geographico Brasileiro, tomo especial, part II. For the history of the
        T'^fth        °/ <Jemarcation> see Davenport, European Treaties Bearing on
 e History of the United States, Bevilaqua, oP. cit., L. Dominguez, op. cit., E G
     urne.    The History and Determination of the Line of Demarcation Established
 y     ope Alexander VI,” Amer. Hist. Asso., Reports, XXII; Rocha Pombo, His-
                    BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                          111
It was not until the middle of the eighteenth century that a def¬
inite treaty settled further doubt in the matter by superseding
the old line of demarcation.5
   In the second place, the commercial interests of the great
powers drew the question into the maelstrom of European poli¬
tics. Whereas Portugal granted other nations a share in its co¬
lonial commerce on condition that the stream pass through the
ports of the mother country, Spain endeavored to maintain a
strict colonial monopoly to the exclusion of all foreigners and
for a century even closed La Plata itself to any trans-oceanic
commerce. Under Portuguese control, therefore, the mouth of
the river would serve as a base for European contraband trade
with the southern Spanish colonies and even with the viceroy¬
alty of Peru. In the course of events, although France and
Holland maintained an active interest in the question, Eng¬
land, due to its close relations with Portugal, became the um¬
pire in the struggle between the Spanish and the Portuguese
for control of the Banda Oriental.
  The importance of Golonia do Sacramento, which was re¬
turned to Portugal by the Treaty of Utrecht,6 finally penetrated
to Madrid. When in 1723 Philip V cut Colonia off from the
sea by ordering Montevideo to be fortified, the Portuguese un¬
der Joao V’s instructions seized the place, but were forced to
relinquish it to the Spanish governor of Buenos Aires.7 The gov¬
ernor then attempted to strengthen the town against the wave
of Portuguese settlers from the north and decided to stop the
“barefaced contraband” trade carried on through Colonia by
destroying that town,8 but England, Holland, and France again
united to prevent the expulsion of the Portuguese from the
River Plate region.9