

  16 The 1777 treaty is found in Martens, Recueil, II, 545"55^- The 1801 treaty
is found in Martens, op. cit., Supple., II, 340. England guaranteed the 1801 agree¬
ment.
 17 Martens, Recueil, Supple., II, 542.
 18 Diego Luis Molinari, Antecedentes de la Revolucidn de Mayo, I, 5-6, and appendix
xvii, xv. The threat involved in the last sentence was intended to call to mind
the English occupation of Buenos Aires of two years previous.
 114          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 March 13, 1808, five days after the arrival of the prince regent
 in Rio de Janeiro. At the same time a Portuguese agent, Brig-
 adeiro Curado, was dispatched to Buenos Aires with private
 instructions.19
    Coincident with these events came the arrival of Count Luiz
 Enrique Liniers, brother of Santiago Liniers of Buenos Aires,
 who under an assumed name touched at Rio on his way from
 Europe. He was recognized and taken to Souza Coutinho, who
 proposed that the count undertake the task of completing the
negotiations suggested in his message of March 13 to the cabildo.
The minister informed the count that his purpose was to work
out commercial security and personal safety for the subjects of
each power trading to or residing in the territory of the other,
and to prevent the Spaniards of Buenos Aires from being mo¬
lested by the English, since an attack by that nation on La Plata
would be very harmful to commerce between the two parties
involved. As a pledge of good faith on the part of Buenos Aires,
Portuguese troops were to be admitted into certain strategic
places in the viceroyalty.20 The count refused to consider the
guaranty of security, but communicated the proposals to his
brother, Santiago de Liniers, in Buenos Aires.
   Chargt Hill was unaware of this activity until the first week
in April, when Souza Coutinho expressed to him with great
earnestness his preoccupation over the possibility of inducing
the Spanish-American colonies “to declare in favour of the
Prince Regent, who would by that means become the sole
Sovereign of this immense Continent.” The Portuguese gov¬
ernment would attempt to gain this object by fair means; but
if the effort failed, the assistance of England would be asked
in order to take the Spanish colonies by force. Hill expressed
neither approval nor objection to this surprising communica¬
tion.21

  19 Molinari, Antecedentes, I, 7, footnote 4.
  0 Ibid., I, 7 and documents in appendix, xii-xv. Reports sent by the count to
his brother in Buenos Aires are dated March 26 and April 12.
  21 F. O., 63/63, Hill to Canning, No. 4. Although Hill did not discourage the
project, he did not encourage it; or if he did, he failed to report the action to
Canning.
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                   115
  Having acquainted his ally with his plans, Souza Coutinho
continued his operations. On May 1, the manifesto declaring
war between Portugal and France22 ended with such a men¬
acing tone toward Spain that Luiz Liniers realized the true
intent of the prince regent toward La Plata.23 He remained
two weeks longer, however, until Sir Sidney Smith reached Rio
with the English fleet and forced his departure by expelling
all subjects of the Bourbons.24
   In the meantime the Portuguese agent, Brigadeiro Curado,
having presented in writing his friendly overtures in regard to
a commercial convention and peaceful relations between the
two countries, obtained permission to enter Buenos Aires over
the protest of the cabildo.25 About the same time, however, Souza
Coutinho’s note of March 13 with the veiled threat was de¬
livered to that body, which rejected the Portuguese offer of pro¬
tection and passed the note on to Liniers in the hope that the
menacing tone adopted by Souza Coutinho would induce him
to refuse Curado entrance. The viceroy suspected the cabildo
and Elio, the governor of Montevideo, of setting a trap for him,
and Curado was allowed to enter, but secret instructions were
sent to Eh'o by Liniers to detain him at Montevideo until
further orders. Active preparations to attack the province of
Rio Grande were begun by the cabildo, only to be stopped by
the news of Sir Sidney Smith’s arrival in Rio, for that body
believed that England was behind the moves initiated at the
Portuguese capital and perceived that Buenos Aires was power-