

  s C. K. Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, pp. 63-69.   3 Ibid., pp. 70-73.
  4 The documents cited by Webster in support of these statements are dated from
i8i5,to 1817.
 138         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 plans of the Quadruple Alliance. The various congresses which
 met during the years from 1815 to 1822 carried this deviation
 to a final break between England and Eastern Europe; but
 before that time came, Portugal was to feel the conflicting cur¬
 rents of intrigue which were fomented by the various great
 powers in their efforts to attain their ends. It was into this mael¬
 strom of European politics that the question of La Plata was
drawn. The problem was particularly difficult, as it concerned
not only the relations of two of the smaller European powers,
 Spain and Portugal, but also the critical question of the status
of the South American colonies themselves, which were directly
involved in this dispute.
     In the River Plate region the situation was critical. Artigas
with his band of revolutionists held Montevideo and the Banda
Oriental, having forced the withdrawal of the Buenos Aires
troops which had held the capital since capturing it from the
Spanish governor, Gaspar de Vigodet. Artigas had an agree¬
ment to unite with Buenos Aires if Spain should make an at¬
tempt to regain the colonies; otherwise he intended to keep on
fighting the troops from across La Plata.6 The control of the
Banda Oriental by Artigas and the prevalence of what the Rio
government called revolutionary excesses aroused an uneasy
feeling in the autocratic Portuguese court and lent an aroma
of righteousness to its dreams of territorial expansion.
     The desire of the Rio court to conquer the north bank of La
Plata had been frustrated thus far by two principal factors; the
opposition of Strangford and the lack of adequate military
forces. In 1815, however, simultaneously with the withdrawal
of the English minister, came the demobilization of troops in
Europe, which freed Portuguese forces for use in South America
and provided an army of adventurers who preferred to fight
under any banner rather than return home to postwar read¬
justment. By November 25, more than twelve hundred Portu¬
guese troops had reached Rio from Europe and more were
expected daily.6 Preparations for war at the Brazilian capital

  6 F. O., 97/76, Memorandum-Montevideo—1811-1824 (February, 1826), extracts
rom dispatches of July 9, 1814, to March 29, 1815.
 *     O-’ 63/183, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 61.
                    BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                              139
became so pronounced that the foreign minister, Aguiar, was
forced to confess to Charge Chamberlain that the Portuguese
court planned an aggressive campaign against Artigas in the
Banda Oriental. The expedition, he added, was almost ready
to sail.7 On June 12, 1816, the fleet with about three thousand
five hundred men left for La Plata.8 Chamberlain’s protests,
made in conformity with the instructions sent to Strangford by
the Foreign Office, proved entirely unavailing. His efforts mere¬
ly elicited the reply that since Artigas was a very undesirable
neighbor for Brazil and a disturbing enemy to Spain and Buenos
Aires, the only thing to do was to suppress him by force. Buenos
Aires had tried and failed; Spain was in no condition to bring
about his subjugation; therefore, Brazil must do it in behalf
of Ferdinand VII.9
  This laudable declaration, Chamberlain reported, was serv¬
ing as a camouflage for the real purpose of the Portuguese court.
The plan was to acquire the Banda Oriental and perhaps to
annex the entire viceroyalty of Buenos Aires to Portuguese ter¬
ritory, thereby establishing the “Empire of South America.”
This dream was only in part chimerical, for a secret under¬
standing existed between certain leaders in La Plata and the
Portuguese court. Manuel Garcia, secretary of state for foreign
affairs of the Buenos Aires government (1816), after several
trips to Rio on secret business, had proposed that Buenos Aires
and its dependent provinces should acknowledge for their sov¬
ereign the prince regent of Portugal. D. Joao refused to sign
a treaty to this effect, but he intended to take advantage of the
offer to secure the northern bank of La Plata.10 The plan to
form the “Empire of South America” was wildly impracticable,
but there was every possibility of D. Joao’s securing the coveted
Banda Oriental.11