

  80 F. O., 97/76, Proceedings of the Ministers of the Mediating Powers at Paris and of
the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle, on the subject of the differences between Spain and Portugal,
January, 1817 to January, 1820, pp. 109-m.
  81 Ibid., pp. 112-113.
     10
 146          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
April 9, 1817,32 while the Spanish ambassador at Paris was ap¬
pealing vehemently to the conference on the necessity of im¬
mediate use of arms against the Portuguese.
   In May, 1818, Sir Charles Stuart, at the request of the other
ministers, presented a project to settle the differences between
Spain and Portugal. The plan was submitted to both the Span¬
ish and Portuguese representatives, each of whom returned pro¬
posals for a settlement. The mediating ministers on receipt of
these counter-proposals, drew up the project which was to serve
as the basis of the settlement suggested by the powers. By it
Montevideo was to be delivered to Spanish troops equal in
number to the Portuguese forces then holding that city with
the express declaration that the surrender of the place was due
to the mediating powers; Spain was to indemnify Portugal by
the payment of seven million five hundred thousand francs at
the time of the delivery of Montevideo; a negotiation was to be
initiated under the mediating powers to settle all territorial
disputes between the two lesser powers in Europe33 and in Amer¬
ica; the Spanish expedition to Montevideo was to number at
least eight thousand troops; and if the expedition did not ar¬
rive within six months, Spain was to pay Portugal an indemnity
of three hundred thousand francs a month until the city was
delivered to Spanish troops.34
   A few modifications were made at the insistence of both the
Spanish and Portuguese envoys, and the document was de¬
livered to Spain with the statement by the mediating ministers
that Portugal had agreed to every concession which could
reasonably be expected. The mediating powers therefore hoped
that Spain would accept and end the trouble.35
   There the matter stuck, for no satisfactory reply could be ob¬
tained from Spain. Early in October the Portuguese plenipoten-

  32 See supra, p. 142, footnote 20.
  33 Spain still held Olivensa on the Spanish-Portuguese frontier in Europe, con¬
trary to treaty stipulations. Portugal affirmed that the seizure of the Banda Orien¬
tal was no more violation of Spanish territorial rights than this retention by Spain
of Portuguese territory.
  34 F. O., 97/76, Proceedings, pp. 124-127.
  36 Ibid., pp. 127-134.
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                                  147
tiaries gave their ultimatum, stating that since they had ac¬
cepted the mediation of the powers and the settlement pro¬
posed by them, Portugal was absolved from further responsi¬
bility to the conference.36 At Aix-la-Chapelle nothing was done
except to authorize the ambassadorial conference at Paris to
receive Spain’s reply,37 if one should ever be forthcoming. In
December, 1818, Sir Charles Stuart reported to his govern¬
ment that the delay by Spain in replying was intentional. Mon¬
tevideo, in the power of the Portuguese, was safe from the dan¬
ger with which the remainder of Spanish America was threat¬
ened as a result of insurrectionary movements; the indemnity
per month had not begun; and the expedition being prepared
at Cadiz could be sent to other parts of Spanish America.38
   Six months later, June, 1819, the English ambassador at
Paris was instructed to enquire confidentially of the Portuguese
representative what his government would do in case the medi¬
ation failed. He was to inform the Portuguese agent also that
from the moment when Portugal had accepted unconditionally
the project of the mediating powers, the “King of Portugal
was considered to have satisfied the claims of justice, and there¬
by to have entitled Himself to the full measure of His Rights,
under Treaty with Great Britain.”39
   In August, 1819, the Spanish representative suddenly re¬
tracted certain promises made on behalf of his government in
regard to the mediation and left Paris on a special mission.40
The Portuguese envoy41 thereupon declared the negotiations at
an end and returned to London. The Spanish minister on his
return to Paris issued a long note justifying Spain’s action dur¬
ing the mediation; the Portuguese representative replied from
London; and no further proceedings took place.42 Spain’s dila-
  36 Ibid., pp. 137-138.                      37 Ibid., pp. 138-142.
  38 Ibid., p. 147.
  39 Ibid., pp. 155-156. The dispatch to Stuart was dated June 29, 1819.
  40 The minister went to Strassburg to compliment the Spanish queen.
  41 Palmella, nominated foreign minister at the death of Araujo, was still am¬
bassador at London. He had been named plenipotentiary to Paris for the medi¬
ation.
   42 F. O., 97/76, Proceedings, pp. 157-161. For a Portuguese version of the medi¬
ation, see Pereira da Silva, Historia do Imperio, IV, 41-75.
 148          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 tory tactics and characteristic refusal to make the slightest con¬
 cessions had spiked the guns of the mediators.
    The Portuguese emerged victorious from this intervention
 of the European powers in the River Plate question for the Rio
 court still retained the guaranty of England for its European
 territory despite the fact that it now enjoyed complete posses¬
 sion of the Banda Oriental. When Montevideo was occupied
 in 1817, the Portuguese maintained that their forces would
 withdraw when the necessity for their presence should cease.
 But, tired of bloodshed and anarchy, the local body at Monte¬
video intervened in the struggle still going on out on the plains
 and the Banda Oriental became pacified43 at about the same
time that the mediation of the powers was coming to a stand¬
still. Artigas was forced to flee to Paraguay, and Portuguese
domination over the Banda Oriental was complete.
   But there still remained the task of convincing the British
government that the Portuguese should retain the north bank
of La Plata. In his instructions to the new minister to Rio,
Castlereagh ordered Thornton to inform D. Joao that England
expected Portugal so to conduct itself in South America that
the continued mediation of the great powers would be fur¬
thered. Unless such a conciliatory attitude were shown, the
British government would be forced “even to hesitate as to the
propriety . . . of giving effect” to its guaranty. D. Joao, Castle¬
reagh warned, was to observe “a scrupulous delicacy towards
Spanish Rights and Interests.”44
   Thornton, however, soon after his arrival in Rio, recom¬
mended that his government favor the status quo in La Plata.
Although the Buenos Aires government had declared war on
the Portuguese as far back as March, 1819, no active operations
had followed. Now, with the failure of the Cadiz expedition,
there was every likelihood of a renewed activity on the part
of the insurrectionists. If Portugal withdrew from Montevideo,
the envoy said, that district would be irrevocably lost to Spain.