

  77 Pinto da Rocha, “A Politica Brasileira do Prataate A Guerra contra Rosas,”
Revista do Instituto Hist, e Geogr. Bras., 1917, tomo especial, V, 573; F. O., 63/103,
Strangford to Wellesley, No. 73; Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 263-264.
The events from January to October 20, 18x1, are given in detail by Rubio, La
Infanta Carlota Joaquina, Chapters XIV, XV.
  78 Pinto da Rocha, “A Politica Brasileira do Prata,” p. 573.
  79 F. O., 63/123, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 16. March 16, 1812.
  80 F. O., 63/122, Castlereagh to Strangford, Nos. 2 and 13. April 10 and May 29.
  132         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  Galveas81 was demanding vehemently that England comply with
  the guaranty of Portuguese territory stipulated under Article
  I of the treaty of alliance and friendship of 1810. Brazilian
  forces, he argued, were totally unable to cope with the danger
  which arose from the threat of the insurgents against Portu¬
 guese territory in the south. The minister had reason on his
 side, for Strangford, after reviewing the resources at the dis¬
 posal of the Portuguese government, confessed himself con¬
 vinced that only total ruin could result from a war with Buenos
 Aires.82
    Therefore, he proposed, instead of military aid from England,
 that another armistice be signed. Over the vehement but in¬
 effectual protests of the Portuguese secretary of state, Strang¬
 ford dispatched his confidential agent, Lieut.-Col. John Rade-
 maker, of the British army, to La Plata with instructions from
 the Portuguese court, which had been approved by the vis¬
 count, to mediate between Montevideo, Buenos Aires, and the
 Portuguese commander. In addition, the minister sent to the
 Buenos Aires junta a personal letter of assurance that Rade-
 maker had the support of England in his present mission and
 of guaranty that the terms agreed upon would be carried out
 by Brazil.83
    On the night of the day of his arrival at Buenos Aires, Rade-
maker signed the agreement which again stopped hostilities in
La Plata.84 An armistice, which could be broken only after three
month’s notice by either side, was agreed upon, and both the
Buenos Aires and Portuguese troops were to retire within the
limits of their respective countries as understood before the
Brazilian troops began their march. Montevideo was not in¬
cluded in the negotiations despite Rademaker’s instructions to

  81 Galveas, it will be remembered, had succeeded Souza Goutinho as secretary
of state and war at the death of the latter in January, 18i1.
  82 F. O.. 63/123, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 30. May 2, 1812.
  83 Ibid.
  84 Calvo, Andes, II, 53-54. The armistice was dated May 27, 1812, although it
was concluded on the twenty-sixth. It was signed by Nicolds Herrera for Buenos
Aires and John Rademaker for Portugal (Quesada, Historia Diplomdtica Latino-
Americana, II, 32-35; Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 265-267).
                 BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                   133
do so. On May 27 orders were sent to both commanders to
withdraw.85
  When the stipulations of the armistice reached Strangford,
he was exceedingly annoyed, as he had instructed Rademaker
to state specifically that the Buenos Aires troops hereafter should
not cross the Parana River. The territorial limits of the two
parties to the armistice as “understood before the Brazilian
troops began their march” included Montevideo within Buenos
Aires jurisdiction, according to the claims of the insurgents.
Thus the revolutionists of La Plata could again advance on
Montevideo and threaten the Brazilian frontiers, apparently
without violating the terms of the armistice. The viscount forced
Galveas to hasten new instructions to Rademaker in an effort
to rescind the first agreement and to rectify the mistake by
signing a second document, but the agent had left before the
orders to that effect reached him. The first agreement had to
stand, therefore, although it took the utmost pressure by Strang¬
ford on Galveas to obtain the ratification of the armistice by
Portugal.86 Nevertheless, the Portuguese troops withdrew with¬
in their own frontiers, despite the angered remonstrance of the
Portuguese commander of the forces in the south and the urgent
request from Montevideo begging them to stay.87
  The armistice stood as long as Strangford remained in Rio
de Janeiro, due almost entirely to his efforts. Although his ear¬
lier regard for the insurgents was fast breaking down, as the
radical tendency of the revolutionists became evident, he stuck
by his attitude of neutrality in favor of the status quo in La Plata.
Before the end of 1812 the minister warned Gastlereagh that
Buenos Aires was showing unmistakable signs of desiring a com-