

  66 F. O., 63/68, Canning to Strangford, No. 2.
  67 F. O., 63/69, Strangford to Canning, No. 40. June 7, 1809. Both Montevideo
and Buenos Aires weie convinced by Smith’s action that England was encouraging
a total change in the colonial government of Spain. Strangford prophesied a serious
danger to the friendly relations of England and Spain unless something were done
at once (F. O., 63/70. Strangford to Canning, No. 59, July 2, 1809). The minister
therefore in addition to his first note, assured the governors and juntas of La Plata
that England would not interfere to aid either side in the dissensions which were
rapidly developing between Montevideo and Buenos Aires (ibid.. No. 63, August,
16).
  68 “Yo voy viendo el caso perdido si sir Sidney Smith afloja,” Carlota wrote to
Presas (Presas, Memorias, p. 39).
 126         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 December 25, the alcaldes notified British subjects in Buenos
 Aires by order of the viceroy to leave within eight days regard¬
 less of the vast amount of goods which had been landed but
 still remained unsold. The committee of British merchants, ap¬
 pealing to Strangford for aid, estimated the British property
 involved to be “a million and a half” pounds sterling.69 The
 Portuguese were ordered to leave also.60
    Such acts on the part of Cisneros inclined Strangford to favor
 the revolutionary group in La Plata although he perceived
 clearly that the colonies were very near to an assertion of in¬
 dependence. D. Joao, fearing quite naturally to have the inde¬
 pendence wave break against his own dominions, would be
 satisfied, in Strangford’s opinion, by the cession of the north
 bank of the River Plate, which was half-Portuguese anyway.
 Moreover, the prince’s liberal commercial policy, contrasted
with Spain’s narrow restrictions, inclined the inhabitants of
that region to union with Brazil. Perhaps it might be wise to
let the prince have that region, the viscount hinted to Wellesley.
Unless England took the lead in some way and at once, in regard
to the situation created by the independence party of La Plata,
the United States would step in ahead of Britain. Why not give
the Banda Oriental to D. Joao and let the insurrectionary ele¬
ment in Buenos Aires feel that England was sympathetic with
the aspirations of autonomy and liberal commercial policies,
provided of course the allegiance to the Spanish royal house
was preserved? In great perplexity, Strangford urgently re¬
quested instructions in regard to the proper attitude to be as¬
sumed with reference to the revolutionary movement.61
   Scarcely had the minister written this dispatch when news of
the May revolution in Buenos Aires reached Rio. Simulta¬
neously with the news of the uprising, there arrived a special
letter from the cabildo beseeching Strangford to represent the
    F. O., 63/83, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 26.
  60 Ibid., Strangford to Bathurst, No. 10. June 10, 1810.
  61 F. O., 63/84, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 48. June 10, 1810. The minister
was worried over Sumter’s mission. A plenipotentiary with full powers from the
United States must have important business, Strangford thought. Thomas Sumter
was United States minister to the Portuguese court in Brazil from 1810 to 1819.
                     BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                   127
new government in a favorable light to the London court and
to secure from Brazil a pacific policy toward Spanish America.
An agent, following close on the heels of the letter, explained
that the junta at Buenos Aires wanted England, first, to protect
the new government from the Junta of Seville as well as from
D. Carlota’s faction until the Federal Government could be
formed; second, to protect the new government after its for¬
mation with a just recompense granted to England by Buenos
Aires for that protection; third, to furnish arms and ammunition;
and fourth, through Strangford, to prevent Brazil from em¬
barking on any military action on the frontier. In reply Strang¬
ford promised to forward these requests to London and to en¬
deavor to induce D. Joao to refrain from using his army beyond
the southern boundary of his dominions.62
  At an interview granted the minister at the palace, the prince
regent assured Strangford that he would be guided in his atti¬
tude toward the American Spaniards by that of England. Souza
Coutinho,       however,     bombarded     the viscount with letters
which pointed out the urgency to England as well as to Brazil
of having a natural southern boundary to Portuguese America.
The minister, Strangford reported, was only too glad of the
outbreak of revolutionary spirit in La Plata, since it offered an
opportunity of extending Brazil to the river. The minister as¬
sured Wellesley, however, that he would prevent any measures
in that direction until orders from England should arrive.63
  Once more the claims of D. Carlota to the government of
the Spanish colonies was pressed. The movement now was
backed by Carlota’s ambitions, by the Portuguese government,
which again hoped to obtain the north bank under the cloak
of her pretensions, and by the Spanish officials at Montevideo,
who conceived this plan to be the only way left to them of per¬
petuating their power. In Strangford’s opinion, however, it was
“scarcely possible to devise any project more entirely and uni¬
versally contrary to the wishes of the Spanish Americans than
that of establishing the Princess of Brazil as their Regent.”64