

  92 F. O., 63/181, Strangford to Castlereagh, No. 17. March 29, 1815.
                             CHAPTER VI


SUCCESS AND FAILURE IN THE BANDA ORIENTAL
                               —1815-1828


Even as Strangford was relinquishing his task in Rio de Jan¬
eiro, other hands were picking up the question of the River
Plate Basin. From 1808 until the fall of Napoleon, the conflict¬
ing interests involved in the struggle for control of the Banda
Oriental were concentrated at Rio de Janeiro. Now the lines
of influence were extended across the waters, where the powers
of Europe were to play a decisive role in the final outcome.
  The events which transpired in the Spanish Peninsula were
of the utmost importance in determining the action of the Por¬
tuguese court at Rio and of the European powers in regard to
the River Plate affair. Until 1815 Spain was incapable of pay¬
ing anything more than the scantiest attention to her colonies.
After the forced abdication of the Spanish Bourbons and the
proclamation of Joseph as king of Spain, a Junta Central of
twenty-four members (later thirty-five) was set up at Aranjuez
as the supreme body over the many local juntas which had
arisen in protest against Napoleon’s action. Later this Junta fled
to Seville, where it remained for a year before it finally estab¬
lished itself at Cadiz. In January, 1810, it set up the Regency
of Five with instructions for that body to call the Cdrtes. The
assembly met late in 1810 to pass its liberal measures and event¬
ually to adopt the Constitution of 1812. When Ferdinand re¬
turned two years later, however, he declared null and void the
constitution and the liberal decrees of the Cdrtes, and instituted
a rigorous reactionary policy, which was blind, unscrupulous,
and rancorous in its severity.1 The liberal regime adopted by
the juntas with regard to the colonies was doomed.

 1 Charles E. Chapman, A History of Spain, pp. 492-496.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                                 137
  In the larger field of Europe as a whole, the unity which had
existed during the common effort to defeat Napoleon was suc¬
ceeded now by a spirit of intrigue and suspicion. The rivalry
among diplomats and ministers for predominant influence was
especially violent at Madrid, where, due to the conflict between
the reactionary policy of Ferdinand and the liberal measures
demanded by the colonies, the dominance of the great powers
over the liberties of the small found a fruitful field for action.
The Quadruple Alliance had been formed with obligations
which only the great powers could undertake. In it the smaller
powers had no rights, but it was precisely the complications
raised by these lesser powers, such as Spain artd Portugal, which
were to prove difficult to overcome. The temptation was great
for the powers of Europe to treat the smaller states peremp¬
torily; yet the necessary concerted action among the members
of the Alliance in reference to the lesser powers, and particu¬
larly to Spain, was to prove increasingly difficult of attainment.2
  From the very first England through Castlereagh protested
against dragooning the rest of Europe to force the acceptance
of the decisions of the great powers. Although he agreed to
have the dangerous dispute between Spain and Portugal over
differences in Europe and South America brought up before
the conference of ambassadors at Paris, he vetoed the proposal
of the Russian, Pozzo de Borgo, to have the entire question of
the independence of the Spanish colonies discussed by the con¬
ference and refused point blank to accede to Metternich’s sug¬
gestion that the conference should become the organ of the great
powers in putting down intrigues of revolutionists all over Eu¬
rope. He would not allow the use of the ambassadorial com¬
mittee sitting at Paris as a means of arrogating to the great
powers a directing authority over the internal affairs of the
other states of Europe.3
  Thus early4 in the restoration period following the fall of Na¬
poleon did Castlereagh demonstrate his divergence from the