

 62 Ibid., No. 49. June 20, 1810.
 03 Ibid., No. 49.                  84 Ibid., No. 56.
 128        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
      On July 23, 1810, the viscount learned that Cisneros had
   been expelled from Buenos Aires and had been sent back to
   Europe. At the same time he was informed that Portuguese
   troops had crossed the borders into the Banda Oriental between
   the Ibicuf and Quarahim rivers, and Casa Irujo communicated
   to him officially that he had protested to the Portuguese gov¬
   ernment against such a step. Strangford thereupon presented a
   note to Souza Coutinho which, he hoped, would put “a com¬
  plete stop” to such designs of the Portuguese court.65 Souza Cou¬
  tinho in reply denied any knowledge of an advance by the
  troops—a diplomatic subterfuge, snorted Strangford,66 who im¬
  mediately warned the minister that nothing could endanger the
  relations between Portugal and England more quickly than a
  premature move on the part of Portugal to occupy territory on
  the north bank of La Plata.67
     In a dispatch written toward the end of September, the vis¬
  count revealed the motives which impelled him to oppose both
  the Portuguese and the Montevideo governments in their efforts
  to crush the Buenos Aires revolutionists. “Unless some assur¬
 ance of future protection and countenance on the part of Great
 Britain” should be given right speedily to the junta, there was
    great reason” to fear that it would “throw off its allegiance
 to its legitimate Sovereign” and thus be forced to a “premature
 declaration of independence, too probably under the guaran¬
 tee of France.” As only some action by England could now
 prevent the Spanish colonies from becoming French, the min¬
 ister urged that his country recognize immediately the new
junta, which upheld the sovereignty of Ferdinand VII, before
 complete independence should be declared. He warned Wel¬
lesley that to force the revolutionists to submit to the colonial
restrictions imposed by the Junta of Seville would result in the
total independence of Buenos Aires.68
     The delicacy of the minister’s position was increased by the
failure of the Foreign Office to reply to his plea of June 10 for

 u F. O., 63/85, Strangford to Wellesley, Nos. 57, 58, 60.
 68 Ibid., No. 61.              st Ibid> No 63>
 88 Ibid., No. 72. September 28, 1810.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                 129
instructions as to the attitude of his government toward the
revolutionists. Montevideo, the stronghold of the adherents of
the Seville Junta, blockaded Buenos Aires, with Captain Elliott,
commander of the British squadron in that region, acqui¬
escing.69 Carlota fomented discord between the two capitals of
La Plata, going so far as to send her jewels to Elio, the gover¬
nor of Montevideo, when she could not send arms or money.
She even managed to obtain a printing press and type for him
for propaganda purposes.70 In October the Portuguese govern¬
ment advised Strangford that if the Buenos Aires forces crossed
the Paraguay or Parana rivers to attack Montevideo, Portu¬
guese troops would cross the frontier. As Montevideo controlled
the naval forces of the region, the revolutionists were thus forced
either to acquiesce in the blockade or to face both the Spanish
troops of Montevideo and the Portuguese troops from the prov¬
ince of Rio Grande. The English minister, however, by great
exertions succeeded in obtaining a promise from D. Joao not
to allow his troops to move until news of England’s attitude
could be ascertained.71
  By the middle of November D. Joao became tired of waiting
on England’s pleasure. Several vessels had returned from Brit¬
ain without a reply since the urgent request for instructions,
sent on June 10. The increasing body of Buenos Aires troops
which were being massed near the Brazilian border necessitated
action on the part of the Portuguese,72 although through de
  69 Ibid. The blockade was illegal, Strangford asserted, since it was the local
government at Montevideo and not the sovereign power which had declared it.
  70 F. O., 63/86, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 87. D. Joao was highly incensed
at the jewel episode (Presas, Memorias, pp. 127-128). The printing press was ob¬
tained by Presas for Carlota from the Royal Printing shop with the permission
of Souza Coutinho. Strangford protested vigorously and obtained an order to
withhold the press and type; but he was too late, as the boat which was taking it
to Montevideo left two hours before the order was delivered to Presas (Memorias,
pp. 120-122). Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina, chapter XII, gives the story of
the jewels in detail. The value of the jewels sent was 40,030 pesos.
  71 F. O. 63/85, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 76. October 13.
  72 F. O., 63/86, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 90. November 15. No reply from
the English government as to its opinion on the political events in La Plata had
been received by December 5, although Strangford’s urgent request had been
sent June 10 (ibid., No. 97).
    9
 13o         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Courcy’s intervention, the blockade in La Plata had been lifted
 in so far as British commerce was affected.73
   Early in 1811 Portuguese troops crossed into Paraguay at the
 request, Souza Coutinho maintained, of a Spanish commander
 who was attempting to cut off General Belgrano’s revolution¬
 ary troops.74 Strangford protested and then showed the letter
 from Souza Coutinho, which announced the movement of the
 troops, to Casa Irujo, who immediately exploded to D. Joao,
 demanding that the Portuguese stay out of Spanish territory.75
The situation in La Plata had at last reached such a critical
stage that Strangford judged he should not only throw off pas¬
sive resistance to Portuguese aggression, but should also stop
the fight between the two Spanish parties in the south. He there¬
fore offered to Elio and to Buenos Aires the good services of
England as mediator, a proposition to which Joao acceded on
condition that he be co-mediator with his ally. Even Casa Irujo
agreed to cooperate in the effort. But when a violent insurrec¬
tion in favor of the revolutionists broke out in the Banda Orien¬
tal, Souza Coutinho ordered Portuguese troops to advance, re¬
gardless of the effect on the plan of mediation,76 security, not