

  11bid., No. 47.                           8 Ibid., No. 51.
  » F. O., 97/76, Memorandum, extracts from dispatches November 25,        1815,
to June, 1816.
   10 F. O., 63/194, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, July 20, 1816, and August 2,
Secret. The chargi enclosed numerous secret documents, which he obtained, as
proof of this intrigue (F. O., 97/76, Memorandum, extracts from dispatches, July
20-August 2, 1816).
  11 When news of the Portuguese expedition reached Buenos Aires, Balcarce, the
  140         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    In August the Portuguese forces entered Spanish territory,12
 and in November the Spanish minister at Rio formally pro¬
 tested, hinting that the continuation of the project of aggran¬
 dizement would result in a break between Spain and Portugal.
 In reply the Rio court informed Minister Villalba that Portugal
 had taken the River Plate region once before in behalf of Spain
 to prevent the spread of the revolutionary propaganda ema¬
 nating from Buenos Aires and had been forced to withdraw;
 that the revolutionary movements still continued, with Spain
 incapable of suppressing them; that Portugal in self-defense
 was forced to take drastic steps; and that the nearness of Artigas
 to Brazil compelled Portuguese troops to enter Spanish terri¬
 tory. Villalba in his counter-reply asserted that the proposed
 action by Portugal was illegal unless approved by the Spanish
 court, and such approval had not been given, nor had it even
 been asked.13
   Chamberlain reported that the Spanish minister was want¬
ing in energy, and the Portuguese court felt that nothing was
to be feared from Spain. The minister’s protests would be un¬
availing, therefore, unless England stepped in to back Spanish
demands.14 Moreover, the position maintained in the Portuguese
repiy that their action was based on self-defense against the
spread of revolutionary propaganda was strengthened when
news reached Rio that the United Provinces of Rio de La
Plata had declared their independence at Tucum&n, July 9,
1816, and had hurled defiance at Ferdinand and his successors
or any other foreign power which should try to subjugate
them.15
  As Chamberlain had foreseen, the Portuguese were deter-
acting director, made no preparations to oppose it. The junta turned him out, put
m two of themselves until Pueyrreddn, named supreme director by the Congress
at Cdrdoba, could arrive, and prepared to defend themselves against the Portu¬
guese. Thus the Portuguese party in La Plata was turned out (F. O., 63/10*
Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 82).

,“F' °-> 63/*95, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 84. See also Carlos A.
Villanueva, Bolivary et General San Martin, pp. 30-33, 51-57.
  18 Ibid., Nos. 102, 10*.
 14 Ibid.
 16 Ibid., No. 89. October 8, 1816.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                               141
mined to carry the thing through to completion. On January
20, 1817, General Lecor with the Portuguese troops entered
Montevideo, proclaimed himself captain-general of the prov¬
ince, and appointed his second-in-command, Sebastiao Pinto,
governor of Montevideo. In reply to a demand from Buenos
Aires that the Banda Oriental be turned over to the United
Provinces, Lecor announced that Buenos Aires had nothing
to do with the question, that the Portuguese troops had rid
both the United Provinces and Brazil of a common enemy,
that the territory was entirely independent of the authorities
across the river, and that the whole question was one which
had to be taken up in Rio de Janeiro.16 Buenos Aires thereupon
declared Portugal to have violated the armistice of 1812, and
announced the beginning of hostilities between them and the
Rio government.17
  The dream of centuries had come true for Portugal; for at
last its boundaries extended to La Plata, and the Banda Orien¬
tal was under Portuguese control. The triumph resulted when
Antonio d’Araujo, after his return to power, took the bit be¬
tween his teeth and proceeded to the conquest of La Plata over
the protests of the English and the Spanish representatives at
the court of D. Joao. Favored by the release of Portuguese
troops from the European battlefields and by a large number of
foreign volunteers, he was able to defeat Artigas and his band
of gauchos. The question which now arose was whether Portugal
would be able to retain the River Plate region after having
conquered it.
  Unfortunately for Portuguese aspirations, when General Le-
cor’s forces crossed the frontier and entered Spanish territory,
Portugal thereby was plunged into the maelstrom of European
politics. The first warning came from Castlereagh, who wrote
to Chamberlain, December 19, 1816,18 that Spain had appealed
to Austria, France, Russia, and England to mediate in the face
  16 F. O., 63/202, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 19.
  n F. O., 63/203, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 26. General Lecor informed
his government, however, that he had an understanding with the supreme director
that the latter would not execute the order to begin hostilities.
  18 F. O., 63/195, Castlereagh to Chamberlain, No. 11.
 142          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 of the Portuguese aggressions against Spanish dominions in
 South America. Unless the Portuguese court could give a satis¬
 factory explanation for its conduct, England would consider
 that Portugal had forfeited all claim to the fulfillment by Eng¬
 land of the guaranty of Portuguese dominions made by Article
 3 of the treaty of January 22, 1815.19 If the breach between
 Spain and Portugal over the South American question should
 lead to war, Spain would attack Portugal in Europe, and Eng¬
 land would not defend its ally unless D. Joao could convince
 Chamberlain as to the correctness of its action in La Plata.
 But Chamberlain was to use this threat only as a last resort.
    Furthermore England and the other powers appealed to by
 Spain had accepted the proposal to mediate and had agreed
 to settle the question by their envoys assembled at Paris. Ac¬
 cordingly, the Portuguese court, said Castlereagh,20 was to give
full powers to a minister in Europe to complete a settlement of
the Plate affair without further reference to Brazil.
   Chamberlain, in accordance with his instructions, inter¬
viewed Antonio d’Araujo. The minister informed the chargi
that the Banda Oriental belonged to Spain, but that Portugal
would not give it up even if a sufficiently large Spanish force
should be sent over to insure the security of the Brazilian fron¬
tier. His court, however, was willing to negotiate the question.
Much voluminous correspondence then ensued between the
two agents, Chamberlain endeavoring to get Portugal to with¬
draw from the Banda Oriental and Araujo attempting to justify
its seizure. Finally the charge informed the minister that his ex¬
planations were not satisfactory and therefore, by orders from
the Foreign Office, he declared England’s guaranty of Portu¬
guese territory no longer valid.21
   This declaration failed to frighten the Portuguese, for at the
court levee given by D. Joao to receive the congratulations of