

  73 Ibid., No. 95. December i. De Courcy had succeeded Sir Sidney Smith. Brit¬
ish property worth seven millions had been tied up in Montevideo by the block¬
ade. De Courcy was having trouble with his subordinate, Elliott, who supported
the Montevideo party in opposition to the interests of British commerce. Elio’s party
planned to reinstitute a rigorous colonial policy very detrimental to English in¬
terests. Rubio, La Infanta Carlota Joaquina, pp. 120-124, maintains that the raising of
the blockade at the demand of the English assured the revolutionists of Buenos
Aires of eventually winning their independence as by the loss of the weapon of
blockade, the reactionary forces of Montevideo fell an easy prey to Buenos Aires.
Thus, he maintains, England was responsible for the loss by Spain of the River
Plate region.
  74 The Portuguese commander, Diogo de Souza, carried secret orders from the
minister which show that the plan was to get D. Carlota declared regent. She
was then to settle the limits question with Portugal in a manner favorable to
Brazil’s interests (Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 262-263 and footnote
(2), p. 262).
  75 F. O., 63/102, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 18. April 7, 1811.
  76 Ibid., No. 30. April 12, 1811; F. O., 63/103, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 37,
June 17. Buenos Aires was still loyal to Ferdinand but only on condition that
Buenos Aires be made an integral part of the monarchy with equal privileges
with the rest of the empire.
                  BANDA ORIENTAL, 1808-1815                                     131
conquest, being the real motive in this case.                       Nevertheless
Strangford’s intervention bore fruit, for on October 20, 1811,
the first armistice was signed at Montevideo by which the
troops of Buenos Aires were to retire beyond the river, leaving
Elio in command of the Banda Oriental, while the Portuguese
were to withdraw at once.77
  A new menace now arose to threaten Montevideo, for Artigas
appeared in the Banda Oriental in favor of revolution. As his
only means of safety, Elio, now viceroy by order of the Cadiz
junta, requested the Portuguese troops to remain. Diogo de
Souza, the Portuguese commander, gladly complied and hov¬
ered within striking distance of the viceroy’s capital.78 Buenos
Aires, in retaliation, confiscated all Portuguese property and
declared its exceeding embitterment against England, due
largely to the activities of an American, Joel R. Poinsett, or so
Strangford thought.79
  At this critical juncture the longed-for instructions from Eng¬
land arrived. The British minister was informed by Castlereagh
that an English commission of mediation between Spain and
its colonies had left London (April 7) for the purpose of recon¬
ciling the colonies with the regency of Spain, of assuring Ferd¬
inand of recognition, and of obtaining for the colonies an in¬
tegral part in the Spanish monarchy. It was not expedient, the
instructions read, for the Portuguese to share the mediation of
a dispute in which they had such a deep interest; and further¬
more, they should keep out of the Banda Oriental until the
English mediators could do their work.80
   It was fortunate for Strangford that he could act now with
the full authority of England to back his words. The armistice
of October 20, 1811, was strained to the breaking point, while