


  19 This article annulled the treaty of alliance and friendship of 1810, but it
guaranteed Portuguese territory from attack by any foreign power, in conformity
with the old treaties since 1642 (Martens, Recueil, Supplement, VI, 100).
  20 F. O., 63/201, Castlereagh to Chamberlain, No. 5. April 9, 1817.
  21 F. O., 63/203, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 27. April 5, 1817.
                     BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                             143
the diplomatic body on the marriage of his eldest son, D. Pedro,
the deputies from Montevideo were received by the royal family
in the same manner as the subjects of Brazil.22 But Araujo showed
himself greatly vexed when Chamberlain delivered the threat
ordered by Castlereagh that Britain would withdraw all Eng¬
lish officers from the Portuguese army unless Rio submitted to
the demands of England in regard to La Plata. The loss of such
officers in that region and in Portugal would be a serious blow,
especially as it would mean the retirement of Marshal Beres-
ford, who was holding Portugal for D. Joao during his absence
at Rio.23 Yet, when the charge delivered the message sent in
Castlereagh’s dispatch of April 9, in regard to the mediation
of the great powers, Araujo still refused to change his plans in
La Plata, although D. Joao did promise to send a full explana¬
tion to the conference.24
  The Spanish envoy had no better success when by specific
instructions from his court, he demanded that the Portuguese
troops withdraw at once from the Banda Oriental, for Arau¬
jo flatly refused25 and, instead of withdrawing troops, sent rein¬
forcements. Alarmed by this move, Chamberlain called the
ministers of the mediating powers at Rio together and present¬
ed a joint note to the Portuguese government, offering to
transmit to the respective courts represented by the note any
explanation which the Portuguese minister wished to give.26
This united pressure exerted in the name of the great powers
and presented after the manner of the Quadruple Alliance,
elicited a dictatorial reply from the new minister, Bezerra,27
who refused to recognize the right of the envoys at Rio to
meddle in the matter. Apparently, Chamberlain reported, Por¬
tugal was determined to hold the Banda Oriental.28
 22 Ibid., No .50.                       23 Ibid., No. 51.
 24 Ibid., No. 55.
  26 F. O., 63/204, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 77.
  26 Ibid., No. 89. September 6, 1817.
  27 Araujo died June, 1817. Conde de Palmella, minister at London, was made
minister of foreign affairs and war; Conde de Arcos, captain-general of Bahia,
was appointed minister of navy and colonies; but Joao Paulo Bezerra was to oc¬
cupy both posts until the new ministers should arrive.
  28 F. O., 63/204, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, Nos. 89, 92. Castlereagh did not
 i44         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    Chamberlain was traveling too fast to suit Castlereagh, how¬
 ever, for early in January, 1818, the foreign minister informed
 his chargi that he had misunderstood his instructions in regard
 to the withdrawal of England’s guaranty of Portuguese terri¬
 tory. By the dispatch of December 19, 1816, Chamberlain had
 been told to declare that if the explanations of the Portu¬
 guese government in regard to the Plate expedition did not
 satisfy the prince regent of England, then the guaranty would
 be withdrawn. No such declaration by the British government
had been made as yet, although trouble had arisen in Paris
and Madrid, where the belief was current that Chamberlain
had declared in an official manner, the abrogation of the
guaranty.29
   Castlereagh’s motive was clear in restricting to a threat the
annulment of England’s guaranty of Portuguese dominions. If
Great Britain should relinquish the pledge to preserve the
frontiers of Portugal in Europe, the minister would lose one
of the most effective weapons available to him against the grow¬
ing policy of intervention which the powers of Europe were
announcing with increasing insistence. By the loss of the right
to protect Portugal, a right which was based on the sacred
obligations of treaties of nearly three centuries’ standing, Castle¬
reagh would place himself on the same footing as the Eastern
European powers in regard to Portugal. In the face of the im¬
pending conference at Paris, which was to settle the difficulties
between the two most troublesome of the lesser powers, Portu¬
gal and Spain, the minister could not afford to relinquish the
advantage accruing to him through the special guaranty of
Portugal, which Europe had long accepted as an established
fact.
   That Castlereagh would have need of every available weapon
in the impending settlement of the Portuguese-Spanish question
was made evident by the manner in which the intervention
approve of the method adopted by Chamberlain in the protest against sending
reinforcements. He had meant for the thargi to cooperate with the other ministers,
but he was to protest individually, not in a joint note (F. O., 63/201, Castlereagh
to Chamberlain, No. 20. December 2, 1817).
  59 F. O., 63/210, Castlereagh to Chamberlain, No. 1. January 6, 1818.
               BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                     145
was suggested. The Russian minister first brought the question
before the conference of ambassadors at Paris in consequence
of a representation to the Czar from the Spanish minister at
St. Petersburg, in which the interference of the Russian govern¬
ment was requested in order to prevent the rupture which must
ensue between Spain and Portugal should their differences not
be settled speedily. The ambassador was to propose that Russia
and the three governments included in the appeal should de¬
mand an explanation from Rio of the occupation of Spanish
territory in South America. Unless a satisfactory reply was re¬
ceived, the Russian ambassador was to declare that his em¬
peror could not view with indifference the unprovoked aggres¬
sion which had taken place and that in conjunction with his
allies he would omit no effort to enable the court of Spain to
support its rights and to compel the Portuguese government
to return to that state of affairs which the interests of both
parties required. Austria agreed to this proposal, but France
demurred on the grounds that the territory occupied was not
governed by persons acknowledging the authority of Spain.
France, therefore, could not admit that Portugal’s occupation
was an act of hostility.30
   The Austrian ambassador was then instructed by his gov¬
ernment to propose an amicable mediation as a substitute for
the menacing one made by the Russian minister. Consequently
in March the five powers agreed to a joint note to both Spain
and Portugal in which they took upon themselves the media¬
tion of the dispute and called upon Portugal for an explana¬
tion of the invasion. Castlereagh authorized Sir Charles Stuart
to sign the note and agreed to transmit it to D. Joao through
the English representative at Rio, with the understanding
clearly expressed, however, that Great Britain was not thereby
pledged beyond the employment of its good offices.31 The note
was transmitted in Castlereagh’s dispatch to Chamberlain of