


ENGLAND’S ATTEMPTS TO ABOLISH THE PORTU¬
                GUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822

The     most     serious     friction which has ever arisen between
England and Portuguese America resulted from the attempts
of the British government to suppress the slave trade. From
1808 through the century until slavery was abolished in Brazil
(1888), the constantly increasing pressure which the London
Foreign Office brought to bear in its efforts to abolish the
traffic caused such an intense feeling of resentment on the part
of the Brazilians that the friendly relations of the two countries
were seriously menaced. The question disturbed Anglo-Portu-
guese relations during D. Joao’s sojourn in Rio and contributed
to the growth of the separatist, republican sentiment in the
provinces of Pernambuco and Bahia; it became a sine qua non
of recognition by England of Brazilian independence; and it
injected itself so forcibly into the relations of the two countries
between 1827 and ^42 that it frustrated every effort of Eng¬
land to renew the commercial treaty negotiated as the price
of the recognition of Brazilian independence. The climax came
in the two decades between 1845 and 1863, which terminated
in the severance by Brazil of diplomatic relations with the
British government.1

  1 The Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, II, 238, states that in “1826
Brazil entered into a Convention with Great Britain promising to abolish the
trade in three years; and in 1830 this promise was carried out.” Yet in 1842 the
House of Commons complained to the cabinet that “at no period had the Brazilian
Slave Trade been so intensively carried on as it is at the present moment in Rio
de Janeiro itself” (F. O., 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 10, June 4, 1845).
Oliveira Martins estimates the average importation into Brazil from 1819 to 1847
at 40,000, not counting the loss during the voyage by death or capture. Before
England’s attempt to suppress the traffic, fifteen per cent, of the slaves died during
 160         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
    The special economic privileges which the English had en¬
joyed in Portugal for centuries were transferred to Portuguese
 America with the removal of the Lisbon court to Rio and were
 eventually fastened on the independent empire of Brazil as a
 part of the price of the recognition of its independence by Great
 Britain. There was a continuity, therefore, in the commercial re¬
lations of the English and the Portuguese from the formation of
the independent state of Portugal in the twelfth century to the
Brazil of the nineteenth century. In like manner, England im¬
posed on the new empire of Brazil the agreements concluded
with Portugal in regard to the suppression of the slave trade
at a time when the latter state was virtually a vassal of the
British Empire. The agreements under which England acted,
and against which Brazil protested so vehemently after 1827,
were negotiated between the British and Portuguese govern¬
ments before D. Pedro raised the cry of independence. As in
the case of the special economic privileges, the ratification by
Brazil of the stipulations concerning the slave trade, together
with a promise of total abolition in 1830, was demanded and
obtained as a part of the price of the recognition of its independ¬
ence by England. Thus there were foisted on Brazil, as the only
way out of an impossible situation, restrictions of which neither
the government nor the people approved, with the result that
the enforcement of these stipulations by Great Britain aroused
bitter resentment among the Brazilians after 1830.
   The future course of Great Britain in regard to the interna¬
tional suppression of the slave trade was forecast even before
the final bill for the abolition of the traffic passed the houses of
Parliament. On March 31, 1806, the importation of slaves into
those American colonies which had been conquered by the Brit¬
ish in the course of the war was prohibited; English subjects
were forbidden to import slaves into the colonies of any foreign
country whether neutral or hostile; and all British capital and
subjects were denied the privilege of engaging in the traffic in