

 **    G., 13/2» Canning to Stuart, No. 39. December      182s.
 70 Ibid., No. 40.
 71 Pinto da Rocha, “A Politica Brasileira no Prata,” p. 583.
 72 F. O., 13/37, Gordon to Canning, No. 39. May 10, 1827.
 73 Pinto da Rocha, op. cit., p. 584; F. O., 13/37, Gordon to Canning, No. 45.
 74 F. O., 13/38, Gordon to Dudley, No. 6.
                   BANDA ORIENTAL, 1815-1828                              155
to draw Bolivar into a concerted attack on the Brazilian Em¬
pire failed, and internal anarchy threatened to disrupt the
United Provinces. D. Pedro at Rio maintained an obstinate
refusal to any solution which would separate the Banda Orien¬
tal from the empire, until the news that the Caudilho Rivera
had invaded the Missions territory induced a more conciliatory
mood.75
   Minister Gordon, since his arrival on October 13, 1826, had
striven fruitlessly to bring about a settlement of the Montevideo
question. Now in the following October, he advised his govern¬
ment firmly, and somewhat grimly, that the war between Bue¬
nos Aires and Brazil called for the direct interference of Great
Britain. The reasons for such action by England were suffi¬
ciently weighty, in the opinion of the minister. The struggle
waged on the sea was a war between Englishmen, for twelve
hundred English seamen were in the Brazilian navy alone, and
the commanders of both sides were English. Every British ves¬
sel which entered Brazilian ports lost a large quota of its crew,
for considerable numbers of seamen deserted from each ship
to join their countrymen in the service of Brazil. That the con¬
flict had long since escaped from the control of Buenos Aires
was demonstrated by the fact that the many privateers com¬
missioned by that government were largely English and Amer¬
ican and acted like pirates in their disrespect of neutral prop¬
erty. If the war continued, both the Buenos Aires and Rio gov¬
ernments would be shattered, since the United Provinces were
already shaken by internal anarchy, while the avowed purpose
of the Buenos Aires government in the war was to cause the
dismemberment of the Brazilian Empire. A proclamation call¬
ing on Pernambuco, Bahia, and other centers of disaffection
within the empire to secede from their allegiance to the Bra-
gan$as had been published by the government of La Plata. Such
a state of affairs, the minister maintained, warranted the in¬
tervention of England, just as the three powers had intervened
between Greece and the Ottoman Porte. It was now up to

  76 Pinto da Rocha, “A Politica Brasileira no Prata,” pp. 584-585; Hildegarde
Angell, Simon Bolivar, South American Liberator, pp. 203-204.
 156         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 England to decide independently what interference was ad¬
 visable in order to end this war, “than which none was ever
 waged more iniquitous or more disastrous to all parties con¬
 cerned.”76
    Gordon, turning from eloquence to action before a reply to
 his statement of the case came from London, presented a proj¬
 ect to the Brazilian secretary of state for foreign affairs, which
 should serve as a basis of pacification. The project, which the
 minister received favorably, raised the Banda Oriental to a
 free and independent state through the mediation of the British
 Government.77 The Brazilian court at the earnest insistence of
 Gordon accepted the proposal with slight modifications and
 agreed to an armistice on the basis of the status quo;78 and Buenos
Aires signified its concurrence and promised to send agents to
Rio to conclude the formal preliminary convention.79 Gordon
had high hopes of ending the dispute quickly.
   But the minister was not permitted to finish the task so well
begun, for he was promoted to a European post, leaving Rio
August, 1828, before the envoys from La Plata arrived. Lord
Ponsonby, who was shifted from Buenos Aires to Rio, assisted
at the birth of the new nation by witnessing the signature of the
preliminary convention of August 27, 1828. By the agreement
both parties concurred in the establishment of an independent
Banda Oriental and bound themselves to defend the new state
for the length of time to be set in the final treaty of peace which
was to be negotiated on the basis of the present convention.
Certain articles provided for a temporary government to rule
the new state until the permanent organization could be set
up, while others specified the machinery for the prospective
elections and for the framing of a constitution, granted am¬
nesty to all concerned, and provided for the evacuation of the
territory by the troops of the contending armies.80