

passage, while after the attempt began, the loss rose to twenty-five per cent.
British cruisers captured only four per cent, of the total shipped from Africa
(Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil e as Colonias Portuguesas, p. 58, footnote 1).
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                       161
foreign ships. The outfitting of slavers of any nationality in
English ports was prohibited also.2 The following June, real¬
izing that the complete abolition of the trade by England was
merely a question of time, Wilberforce moved to address the
king “praying that he would be graciously pleased to direct a
negotiation to be entered into, by which foreign powers should
be invited to cooperate with his majesty, in measures to be
adopted for the abolition of the African Slave-trade.” His reso¬
lution passed both the Commons and the Lords without a
division.3
   These measures were forerunners of the acts of 1807, which
abolished the traffic entirely as far as the subjects of England
were concerned. Early in that year the bill was passed declar¬
ing illegal any participation by a British subject in the pur¬
chase, sale, or transfer of slaves on or from the African coast
after May 1. No slave was to be admitted into any British col¬
ony after March 1, 1808, and any vessel fitting out in the United
Kingdom for the traffic was to be confiscated.4 *
   England thus decreed the end of the slave trade in so far as
its own subjects were concerned. With the cruisers at its com¬
mand and the determination to enforce the laws enacted, the
British government was abundantly able to make its prohibi¬
tion effective. Yet the battle was only half won, since Holland,
France, Spain, the United States,6 * * * * 11 and Portugal still carried
  2 Thomas Clarkson, History of the Abolition of the African Slave-Trade by the British
Parliament, p. 334; Abstract of the Laws of Jamaica relating to Slaves—“An Abstract of
the Acts of Parliament Relating to the Abolition of the Slave-Trade,” pp. 149-
165. The bill passed the Lords, May 7.
  3 Clarkson, op. cit., pp. 337-341.
  4 Ibid., pp. 344-347; Abstract, pp. 165-174. The bill was passed in the Commons
despite the vigorous opposition of the West India interests which were supported
by the Duke of Clarence (later William IV). “The victory . . . was a crushing
defeat for the planter-merchant group ... a triumph . . . over the power of
vested interest and property” (Lowell Joseph Ragatz, The Fall of the Planter Class
in the British Caribbean, 1763-1833, p. 276).
  6 W. E. B. DuBois points out that despite the Act of March 2, 1807, which pro¬
hibited the importation of slaves after January 1, 1808, and the Treaty of Ghent
by which the United States bound itself to suppress the trade, the traffic continued
briskly until the Civil War. He estimates the annual importation between 1807
and 1862 to have been from 1,000 to 15,000 (American Historical Asso., Reports,
1891, “The Enforcement of the Slave-Trade Laws,” pp. 161-174).
   11
 162          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 on a thriving trade in slaves. Under the formidable pressure
 exerted by public opinion ably directed by enthusiastic reform¬
 ers and under the powerful influence brought to bear by those
 financially interested in the British West Indies, the English
 government, in conformity with the resolution of Wilberforce
 of June, 1806, now turned to securing the complete abolition
 of the trade. “The subject was one in which almost the whole
 nation had become interested. It could not be ignored. To the
 leaders of the movement no sacrifice appeared too great to se¬
 cure the complete cessation of the abominable traffic. They
 insisted that it should be put in the forefront of every diplo¬
 matic transaction. The relations between Britain and every
 other Power were thus affected, particularly relations with other
 maritime Powers, with whom, naturally, there was always the
 most friction.”6
   Chief among the nations7 on whom England exerted its in¬
fluence to obtain the abolition of the traffic was Portugal, since
that country was the traditional sinner and, on account of the
peculiar relations existing between the two governments, of¬
fered special opportunities for action by Britain. Yet the Portu¬
guese were to prove, perhaps, the most recalcitrant of all in
their determination not to renounce the trade. The reforming
public of England quite naturally failed to understand Portu¬
gal’s reluctance to follow Britain’s example and laid the per¬
sistence of the Portuguese slave traffic to the natural perver¬
sity of that race. Yet there were fundamental reasons which
impelled the subjects of the Bragan$as to cling to the trade in
slaves, which long since had been restricted to an exchange
between Africa and the colonies, principally between the west
coast of Africa and the east coast of South America.
   Negro slavery was deeply rooted in Brazil, far more so than
in Spanish America. The Indians, fleeing, disappearing, or dy-
ing, failed to supply the needed labor, as they did in the Spanish
  6 Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, p. 454.
  7 The diplomacy of the abolition of the slave trade has never been investigated.
Such a study is much needed (Webster, op. cit., p. 454, footnote). The nearest ap¬
proach to an investigation along this line is the work of William Law Mathieson,
British Slavery and Its Abolition and Great Britain and the Slave Trade, 1839-1865.
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                        163
possessions, while even the Jesuits themselves favored the Afri¬
can slave trade in an effort to save the Indians from the hands
of the Portuguese mameluco. Between the founding of Rio (1567)
immediately following the defeat of the French and the ex¬
pulsion of the Dutch from Pernambuco (1662), came the gold¬
en age of the Jesuits with their monopoly of Indian labor in
the missions of Bahia and the Amazon valley. Consequently
the Brazilian settler in those regions was forced to abandon his
plantation or to import Negro slaves,8 with the result that the
Portuguese became the first to develop the modern slave trade
extensively. Without Negro labor Brazil could never have been
developed, nor would Portuguese America exist to-day.9 From
1575 to 1591 from Angola alone fifty thousand Negroes were
exported to Portugal, Brazil, and the Spanish Indies, while
during the first half of the seventeenth century the number
reached fifteen thousand annually. After the expulsion of the
Dutch in 1662, a new impetus was given to the trade; but the
Marquez de Pombal, by his abolition of Indian slavery and
the emphasis which he placed on plantations instead of mines,
caused a striking increase in the traffic. During the first years
of the Company of Grao-Para more than one hundred thou¬
sand Negroes were carried to Brazil annually. From 1759 to
1803 the colonial registers state that between fourteen and fif-