

  8 Oliveira Martins,   0 Brazil, pp. 24-30. The need for slave labor in Bahia was
acute since that region was the center of the sugar production of Brazil. From the
middle of the sixteenth century to the beginning of the seventeenth, the Brazilian ou t-
put was large, the Brazilian product being the only sugar consumed in Europe
during that half century (Pereira da Silva, Historia da Fundafdo do Imperio, I, 233).
Since the Indians of Brazil had an unconquerable aversion to agriculture, Negro
labor was necessary for the sugar plantations (Azeredo Coutinho, An Essay on the
Commerce and Products of the Portuguese Colonies in South America, p. 53) •
  » Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil, pp. 52-53. The same was true of the development of
the British West Indies sugar plantations. F. W. Pitman in The Development of theBritish
West Indies, 1700-1763, says that “it is very probable that the production of sugar
would not have developed as soon as it did if slavery had not existed to furnish a
sufficiently large and continuous body of labor.” He adds (pp. 62-63) that        there
is little doubt that” the decline in the annual average of sugar exported from the
British sugar colonies after 1805 “was owing to the abolition of the slave trade and
slavery itself.” The Portuguese sugar growers in Brazil had pointed the way to
such a solution of the labor problem (p. 61).
  164          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  teen thousand yearly left Angola.10 In 1803 in the city of Rio
 de Janeiro there were over fourteen thousand Negro slaves and
 nearly ten thousand free Negroes out of a total population of
 almost forty-seven thousand.11
    By 1807 slave labor in Brazil had become an economic god
 with the slave trade as its strong right arm. To attempt to sup¬
 press the traffic, which was an essential adjunct to slavery it¬
 self, by simply passing statutes and signing treaties was a futile
 performance. In England a long and intensive education of
 public opinion preceded the final abolition of the trade, but
 now the British Foreign Office was being compelled to force
 the same measure on a country which believed fervently in the
 necessity of slave labor and relied on the African trade for the
 needed supply of fresh Negroes. The religious appeal which
 exercised such a deep impression in Britain12 did not influence
 either the Portuguese government or the subjects of the Bra-
 gan^as, whereas the economic influences in England which de¬
 manded universal abolition served only to strengthen the finan¬
 cial and agricultural interests of the Portuguese in their deter¬
mination to hold fast to the traffic. Faced by this opposition,

   10 Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil, pp. 54-56 and 56 footnote (1). Not all came to Bra¬
zil. There was a market for Brazilian sugar in Europe throughout the century for
England did not preempt the European sugar trade. Although the import of raw
sugar into Great Britain from the British plantations grew from 500,000 cwt. in
 1700 to close to 2,000,000 in 1770, the export of raw sugar to Europe remained
practically stationary around 200,000 cwt. annually (Pitman, British West Indies,
p. 168). Brazilian sugar found ready markets in Italy and the eastern Mediter¬
ranean country (ibid., pp. 163-164). The export of English refined sugar was
killed by 1693 anc* very little of the refined article was exported thereafter (ibid.,
p. 157). Brazilian sugar in 1760 constituted one-third of the total world produc¬
tion. By 1776, however, the percentage had fallen to less than six per cent, of the
world total, but toward the end of the century the production revived. By 1800
there were over 1000 engenhos in Brazil (Pereira da Silva, Historia da Fundafdo do
Impeno, I, 232-233). With the European market open to the Brazilian product
and with the principal agricultural emphasis of the colony being placed on sugar,
the need for slaves in Brazil continued to be pressing and the slave trade flourished.
    F- O., 63/84, Strangford to Wellesley, No. 35.
  12 Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, p. 455. A discussion of the propaganda
in favor of the slave-trade suppression is given by Ragatz, Fall of the Planter Class
pp. 237-276.                                                                          ’
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                     165
both Canning and Castlereagh, nevertheless, honestly exerted
every effort to bring about the complete abolition of the trade
by Portugal.
   Canning, who made the first attempt before D. Joao fled to
Rio, was rebuffed in unmistakable terms by Araujo, then for¬
eign minister. Araujo assured Strangford, in reply to the en¬
quiries of the latter as to the attitude of the Portuguese govern¬
ment relative to the suppression of the slave traffic, that it was
impracticable to expect Portugal either to annihilate or to dis¬
courage the trade. He explained that public opinion was en¬
tirely opposed to such a step, and although he himself admired
the philosophy which impelled Great Britain to abolish the
traffic, he would be very sorry to imitate it in his own country.
Moreover, he added, the Portuguese colonists would never con¬
sent to such a measure.13
   The London Foreign Office was not allowed to accept such
an answer, for both the reformers and certain financial inter¬
ests were determined to check the Portuguese slave trade. A
sample14 of the propaganda which was carried on about 1808
demonstrated the part played by economic influences in the
humanitarian mania which demanded the cessation of the so-
called “inhuman traffic.” The author of this document states
unequivocally that “the establishment of an independent met¬
ropolitan Government in Brazil” would be “ruinous to our
Sugar Colonies and to the commercial interests dependent upon
them, and” would prove also “a heavy political incumbrance,
instead of an advantage to Great Britain, unless the renuncia¬
tion of the African Slave Trade” were made an “article of any
Treaty of Commerce and Alliance into which we may now en-