

  16 In 1830 sugar constituted in value two-thirds of the total exports of the island
of Demerara, over one-half of the exports of Jamaica, ten-elevenths of those of
Barbadoes, and more than eight-ninths of those of St. Vincent. Sugar alone ac¬
counted for over sixty-one per cent, of the total exports of the British West Indies
in that year (Customs, 4/25, British Imports by Countries). Diagrams opposite
pp. 98 and 108 of 77le Development of the British West Indies by Pitman demonstrate
the one-crop agricultural system of the Barbadoes and Jamaica through the eight¬
eenth century as far as 1770. The same characteristics were true for Antigua,
Montserrat, Nevis, and St. Christopher. The exports to the West Indies in 1812
were greater than those to the United States and double the value of exports to
Brazil. In 1815, an unusual year, exports to the islands equaled half the value of
merchandise shipped to the United States and over three times the amount sent
to Brazil. In 1820 the British West Indies absorbed more English exports than did
the United States or Brazil. In 1825 the islands took over half as much as did the
United States and more than half as much as all of the South American States.
In 1830 and 1835 the United States forged ahead but the British West Indies
maintained their position in regard to the South and Central American states.
In 1835 the value of exports from Great Britain to the British West Indies was
nearly £3,200,000, while all of the South American states took less than £4,900,-
000. Brazil in that year received over £2,600,000 of English exports (Customs,
8/1, 3, 12, 21, 32, 42).
168          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
bring about the gradual abolition of the traffic throughout the
world.16
   Even this mild concession was gained with difficulty, and
England from the first accused Portuguese slave ships of viola¬
tion of the prohibition imposed by the treaty.17 Subjects of other
powers changed their flag to the Portuguese banner and plied
the trade unhampered by the international agreements of their
countries,18 while in Brazil immediate complaints arose against
the seizure of slavers off the coast of Africa by British cruisers.
   The city of Bahia especially grew very bitter over the sub¬
ject, for out of thirty-two vessels which had been fitted out for
the slave trade at that place in 1811, seventeen were known to
have been seized by British cruisers, while others were conjec¬
tured to have suffered the same fate. Five principal commercial
houses failed by the early part of 1812 and the indignation of
Bahia against England reached a high pitch. This attitude was
extended to include the Portuguese government at Rio, which
by its supineness in the face of Britain’s action was considered
by the inhabitants of that region no longer to merit the support
of Brazilians. Strangford warned his government that a very
real danger of rebellion in that province threatened the unity
of the colony as a result of the action of the British cruisers.
The envoy advised that the English authorities relax a bit in
their efforts to suppress the trade, for the abolition would have
to be very gradual as far as Brazil was concerned. Later over
half a dispatch book of documents was submitted by the Rio
government in proof of its contention that the aggressions of
the English cruisers were illegal and arbitrary.19