

  14 F. O., 63/54, Strangford to Canning, No. 31. June 4, 1807.
  14 The sample referred to is an unsigned, undated paper found among the Mis¬
cellaneous Papers of Lord Bexley, 1796-1844, Add. Ms., 31, 237, pp. 182-191. The
paper was written between 1808 and 1810, however. Nicholas Vansittart, first Baron
Bexley, was secretary to the treasury in Grenville’s administration to 1809 (March).
He was very active in the Commons during 1809 in regard to financial measures.
He refused the chancellorship of the Exchequer in October, 1809, but accepted
in 1812. He was chancellor during Castlereagh’s period in office (Dictionary of
National Biography, LVIII).
166       BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ter with that power.” In order to prove such a statement to
the public, pamphlets should be prepared and scattered abroad
in England, for the fate of the British West Indies was at stake.
  The danger which threatened the sugar colonies, that of over¬
production, would be remedied by the cessation of the slave
traffic within the British dominions, since such a measure would
prevent the extension of sugar growing through lack of labor.
But that remedy was now imperiled by the threat of a new and
enormous increase of sugar planting in Brazil. “In that vast
and fertile territory, an influx of British Capital and British
enterprise alone” was “wanting to compleat the ruin of all our
Islands in the Antilles . . . .” Land was ninety per cent, cheaper
in Brazil than in Jamaica while most of the supplies for a sugar
plantation were raised within the country. Hence the Brazilian
planter could sell with profit in Europe at a price which would
mean ruin to the West Indian plantation owner, and the Euro¬
pean market was essential to the British sugar trade, since Eng¬
land no longer absorbed anything like the total output of the
sugar colonies.
  The only solution to the difficulties confronting the West In¬
dies, therefore, was either to abolish the Portuguese slave trade
which supplied cheap labor to Brazilian plantations, or to pro¬
hibit any commercial intercourse between Great Britain and
Brazil; for the latter measure would prevent the influx of British
capital and enterprise into the Portuguese colony. Since com¬
mercial relations with England were fundamentally necessary
to Brazil, the Portuguese government should be made to pay
the price of attaining that advantage by a renunciation of its
traffic in slaves. By the influx of British capital into the colony
and by the pledge of alliance and protection by the British gov¬
ernment, Great Britain would acquire a right to prescribe the
terms of the partnership between the two countries. Therefore
let England “refuse to form any conventional relations, com¬
mercial or political, with Brazil, of which the cessation of its
Slave Trade” was not a fundamental article.
  The group which was represented by this propaganda was
an important element in British economic life. Since the West
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                     167
Indies were largely one-crop colonies, whatever affected the
sugar interests became at once the vital concern not only of the
plantation owners themselves, but also of the shippers and Lon¬
don middlemen. More indirectly but no less seriously, a group
of English exporters also was linked to the rise or fall of the
sugar business, for the merchandise shipped to the British West
Indies constituted one of the principal items of English trade.
If the sugar industry should decline, the manufacturers of West
Indies necessities, the exporters, and shipping interests would
suffer in proportion. Therefore these economic groups of Eng¬
land joined those of the islands in the demand for the universal
abolition of the slave trade, once that traffic had been forbid¬
den to the sugar colonies. Together these interests wielded an
important influence.15
   The propaganda was only in part successful, for although the
treaty of alliance of 1810 did include a clause dealing with the
slave traffic, D. Joao merely prohibited the trade from any
part of Africa not belonging to Portugal, while within the Por¬
tuguese dominions full license was allowed to the traders. He
promised, however, to cooperate with England in an effort to