

  M Article V.                                «9 Article VI.
  40 Peter Leonard, The Western Coast of Africa, Journal of an Officer, 1830-1832, pp.
92-96, gives an instance witnessed by him of such action by a slaver off the coast
of Africa.
  41 Article VIII.              « Article IX.                  « Article XI.
  44 No slave ship or merchantman could be searched in a port or roadsted be¬
longing to either crown. Every Portuguese vessel engaged in legal traffic had to
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                   175
nation destined to prevent the illicit traffic in slaves. In the
third annex, it was stipulated that the mixed commissions were
to render judgment on detained vessels within twenty days after
such ships were brought in, and the decisions were to be abso¬
lutely without appeal. The commissions were to have a com¬
missioner judge and a commissioner of arbitration from each
nation. In case the two judges could not agree, one of the com¬
missioners of arbitration should be chosen by lot, and the ma¬
jority decision would be final. The Negroes found on those
ships which the commissioners judged to have been guilty of
illicit traffic were to be freed, and each country bound itself to
guarantee the liberty of those slaves consigned to it.45
   To this detailed and complete plan for the restriction of the
Portuguese slave traffic was added on September 11 of the
same year a very significant separate article, which stated sim¬
ply that “as soon as the total abolition of the Slave Trade for
the subjects of the Crown of Portugal” would have taken place,
“the Two High Contracting Parties” should agree to “adapt to
that State of circumstances, the stipulations of the Additional
Convention concluded at London” on July 26 previous. “But
in default of such alterations the additional convention of that
date” should remain in force “until the Expiration of fifteen
years, from the day on which the General Abolition of the
Slave Trade” should take place on the part of the Portuguese
government.46
  At last Castlereagh had obtained from the worst sinner47 en-
have a Portuguese skipper and the crew had to be at least three-fourths Portu¬
guese. No conveyance of slaves from one port of Brazil to another or from the
continent or islands of Africa to possessions of Portugal outside of America was
to be permitted except by vessels carrying a special passport from the Portuguese
government.
    This stipulation was to give rise to a peculiar form of slavery in Brazil. The
Negroes nominally freed by the commissioners sitting in Brazil were re-enslaved
by various schemes, so that there arose in the ’40’s and ’50’s the problem of the
emancipation of slaves legally held and of Negroes already emancipated but still
slaves.
  « F. O., 93/38/15, Portugal.
  a Denmark abolished the trade to take effect in 1804 and forbade its citizens
to engage in the traffic in 1814. Sweden prohibited its subjects from participating
in the trade in 1814; Holland in 1815. Spain prohibited the trade by its subjects
176       BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
gaged in the slave trade definite restrictions on that traffic.
The trade was limited to Africa south of the equator and to
Portuguese America, with the right of visit and seizure granted
to British war vessels. Detained slavers were to be tried by
mixed commissions from whose decisions there was to be no
appeal. If Portugal should ever consent to abolish the trade
entirely, these stipulations were to be modified by common
consent; but in case the Portuguese could not be brought to
agree to the terms that England deemed best, the present regu¬
lations—including the right of visit and search—were to con¬
tinue for fifteen years from the date of the abolition of the traf¬
fic. There was only one serious slip to be found in the provi¬
sions of the convention and separate article; namely, the stipu¬
lation which required the actual presence of illicit slaves on
board to justify seizure.48 By the convention the traffic was se¬
verely restricted on paper; the problem was to obtain from D.
Joao the complete abolition of the trade within his dominions
and to effect the enforcement of the restrictions already agreed
upon.
   The first of these two tasks proved impossible, for the Portu¬
guese king stubbornly refused to advance another step on the
road toward the complete suppression of the traffic despite the
pressure exerted by his dominating ally. At first Castlereagh
attempted to obtain his end by calling in the great powers, but
he had made little headway by 1817. After the Vienna decla¬
ration signed by all of the European powers, which unanimously
to foreign colonies in 1814, granted England the right of visit in 1817, and abol¬
ished the trade to its colonies in 1820. France refused to allow the slave trade to
be called piracy or to permit mutual visit and search until 1831 and 1833 when
the reciprocal right of search was granted England. The United States remained
recalcitrant until the Civil War (Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, 1783-
1919, II, 235-238; DuBois, “Enforcement of the Slave-Trade Laws,” pp. 167-174).
  48 This error was partially remedied as far as Portugal was concerned by the
additional article signed March 15, 1823, at Lisbon, which legalized the seizure
of Portuguese slavers provided evidence was found that illicit slaves had been on
board in the particular voyage in question (F. O., 93/38/16, Portugal). But by
that date Brazil had declared its independence, and the stipulations therefore did
not apply to the Brazilian trade, which soon came to overshadow the traffic of the
mother country. The new empire refused to grant this right to England and held
fast to the original stipulation.
         PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                  177
condemned the slave trade, he instituted formal and perma¬
nent conferences at London where he hoped to create a center
of information and action for the complete suppression of the
traffic. Fourteen meetings were held prior to the conference at
Aix-la-Chapelle, but the minister accomplished nothing, beyond
the collection of material, toward the suppression of the trade49
either by the European powers or by his ally at Rio. After the
Portuguese Convention of 1817, he was driven on by the re¬
formers to make another attempt at the conference soon to
meet at Aix-la-Chapelle to persuade the powers to support a
universal condemnation of the trade. The abolitionists sent
Clarkson to the conference as an “unofficial observer” in be¬
half of the African Association, while Wilberforce exerted pres¬
sure on the British Foreign Office; but the net result was merely
a pious joint note signed by all the powers and addressed to the
king of Portugal, which urged the complete abolition of the
traffic carried on by that country.60 Under date of January 12,
1819, Chamberlain transmitted his copy of the note to the Por¬
tuguese Foreign Office and a month later obtained from Vil-
lanova Portugal an acknowledgment of the receipt of the
note and its contents with no comment whatsoever.61
  Any observation by the Portuguese court was unnecessary in
the face of the lists of slave importations which the chargt was
sending in to his government. Despite the fact that his every
move was closely watched by the authorities and statistics were
hard to get, Chamberlain succeeded in reporting over twenty
thousand slaves brought into Rio in 1816 with over five thou¬
sand taken to Bahia from Africa.62 In September, 1817, twenty-
one slave ships left Rio alone with the certainty that this fleet
would bring in half as much as the total number brought in
during the previous year.63 Not all of these vessels returned to
Rio but, even so, over twenty-two thousand Negroes were em¬
barked in Africa for the Brazilian capital,64 while Bahia con-
 48 Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, pp. 455-458.       60 Ibid., p. 463.
 61 F. O., 63/220, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 17. February 20, 1819.
 11 F. O., 63/202, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, Nos. 7, 24.
 M F. O., 63/204, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 97.
 64 F. O. 63/220, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 7, January 22, 1819.
  12
178        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
turned to trade north of the equator despite the convention of
1817.55 From 1811 through 1818 nearly one hundred forty thou¬
sand slaves were actually landed in Rio de Janeiro, while very
incomplete returns from Bahia give close to thirty thousand as
entering that port in spite of the activity of the British cruisers,
which disrupted that traffic so disastrously.56 No figures are
available for Pernambuco, Maranhao, or Para during this pe¬
riod owing to local disturbances which prevented the proper
supervision of the affairs of those provinces by the central gov¬
ernment at Rio. It is likely, however, that this northern section
participated to some extent in the astonishing increase which
occurred in the slave traffic after the removal of the Portuguese
court to Rio and the opening of the colony to foreign trade and
enterprise. In the face of this activity, it would have meant dis¬
aster for D. Joao to decree the total suppression of the traffic,
for his throne was none too secure toward the end of the second
decade of the century. Even had he so desired, he could not
have abolished the trade.
  Yet Castlereagh continued to the end in his efforts to satisfy
the abolitionists of England. Once more before he tossed aside
the burden which had become intolerably heavy, he preached
a sermon to the Portuguese court. Early in March, 1821, he
called Thornton’s attention to “the subject which the King’s
Government and the Country” had                    “anxiously at heart, to
witness by a general prohibition of the Slave Trade through¬
out the Portuguese Dominions, a prospect of a complete aboli¬
tion of that inhuman Traffick in every part of the world and
forever.” The time set by Spain for the final abolition had ar¬
rived, leaving Portugal as the only nation represented at Vi¬
enna which still legalized the traffic. The subject of the dispatch
was “one of the most anxious solicitude to His Majesty” and
Thornton was to press it upon the attention of the Portuguese
government.67 This persistence in the face of the impossible was
  M F. O., 63/246, Chamberlain to Londonderry, No. 20. July 3, 1822.
  M These figures were obtained from consular reports sent in by the consul gen¬
eral at Rio. F. O., 63, 1811 to 1818, various volumes.
  17 F. O., 63/237, Castlereagh to Thornton, No. 3. March 5, 1821. Overproduc¬
tion brought on by the increase of British possessions in the British West and East
          PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                   179
worthy of better success, but the minister died without having
attained his object. Yet his efforts were not entirely in vain,
for he restricted the Portuguese trade to the region south of the
equator and he obtained the signature of the king of Portugal
to the convention and separate clause of 1817.
  The first task, therefore, which confronted the British For¬
eign Office after the negotiation of the agreements of 1817—
the complete abolition of the traffic— was not accomplished
before D. Pedro raised the cry of independence. In his efforts
to effect the enforcement of the restrictions imposed by the
convention, the English government was only partially success¬
ful. Portugal signed on the dotted line, obedient as always to
its powerful ally; but the government lacked both the ability
and the will to carry out the terms agreed upon. The work of
the mixed commission set up by the convention demonstrated
clearly this attitude on the part of the Rio court.
   The London commission, which was to settle claims arising
from illegal detention of slavers by British cruisers between
June 1, 1814, and the setting up of the permanent mixed com¬
