

  MF. O., 63/182, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 34. July 18, 1815; F. O.,
63 /194> Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 71, July 30, 1816.
  34   O., 63/192, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 5. February 10, 1816.
  36 F. O., 93/38/15? Portugal. The additional convention was signed July 28,
1817, and the separate article, September 11, 1817, by Castlereagh and the Conde
de Palmella. Webster in his Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, p. 460, says that Castle¬
reagh obtained from Portugal a further convention dated September 28, 1817, to
carry out the terms agreed upon at Vienna, that this convention granted a limited
right of visit and search, and that the slave trade south of the equator should be
legal under the Portuguese flag for another five years. The convention was signed
July 28, however, with the separate article dated September u. No time limit as
to the Portuguese trade south of the equator appears in the copy of the convention
preserved at the Record Office and signed by Castlereagh and the Conde de
Palmella. Since England signed an agreement with the Portuguese government
in 1823 which was termed “additional” to the 1817 convention with the purpose
of regulating seizures by British cruisers of Portuguese slavers south of the equator,
it would seem that the five years limit mentioned by Webster did not exist. No
mention is made in this 1823 additional convention of a promise to abolish the
trade entirely (see F. O., 93/38/16, Portugal). The trade south of the equator was
allowed in conformity with the terms of the Vienna agreement, which placed no
time limit to that traffic.
           PORTUGUESE SLAVE TRADE, 1808-1822                                      173
ditional to the Vienna agreement) and the separate article
signed less than two months later, the English foreign minister
laid the foundation on which Great Britain based its action in
enforcing the abolition of the Brazilian slave trade until the
disturbing question was finally settled. When all other means
failed, England recurred to certain provisions contained in the
convention and the separate article and acted on them regard¬
less of the Brazilian interpretation of those documents.
   The convention of July, 1817, declared the object of the
agreement was to prevent the subjects of the respective powers
signatory to the documents from carrying on any illicit slave
trade. Such traffic was declared illicit if prosecuted by British
ships, under British flag, or by British capital; by Portuguese
vessels engaged in any other manner than that specified by the
Vienna agreement of January 22, 1815, or bound for any port
not in the dominions of the Portuguese king. The territories
in which the traffic was permitted to the subjects of D. Joao
were specified by name.36 Within two months from the date of
the ratification, the Portuguese king was to publish the penal¬
ties prescribed for violations of the existing agreement and to
prohibit by decree the importation of slaves into Brazil under
any other flag than that of his country, assimilating “as much
as possible the legislation of Portugal on this subject to that of
Great Britain.” All Portuguese vessels engaged in illicit slave
traffic were to carry royal passports, drawn up in conformity
with the model annexed to the convention.37
   Thus far the stipulations did not differ much from former
agreements on the subject, but the next article furnished the
weapon so long desired by England in the fight to suppress the
trade universally. In order to carry out the purpose of the con¬
vention the two signatory powers agreed that the ships of war
of each could visit any merchant vessel of the two nations that
might be suspected upon reasonable grounds of having slaves
  36 All of them lay to the south of the equator in Africa, on the east and west
coasts.
  37 Articles I-IV inclusive. The decree publishing the penalties to be inflicted upon
the offenders in the slave trade was dated January 26, but printed in May, 1818
(F. O., 63/212, Chamberlain to Castlereagh, No. 85. August 23, 1818).
174          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
on board. Guilty slavers should be detained and brought for
adjudication before special tribunals which were to be estab¬
lished. Ships empowered to make such seizures were to carry
specially prepared instructions drawn up in conformity with
the model annexed to the convention, while any losses incurred
by the subjects of either party by virtue of unlawful detention
were to be paid by the respective country implicated.38 Thus
did Great Britain obtain the right from Portugal of visit and
search applicable to merchant vessels in time of peace.
   The next article39 was a costly mistake on the part of Castle-
reagh, for it stipulated that no seizure was lawful unless slaves
were actually found on board. Evidence of the recent presence
of illicit slaves was not sufficient to condemn the vessel—a stip¬
ulation which resulted in the wholesale dumping overboard of
Negroes by slave-traders when they were in danger of capture
by British cruisers.40 Two mixed commissions were to be ap¬
pointed within a year of the ratification of the convention to
adjudicate captured ships, one in English and one in Portu¬
guese territory,41 in Africa and in Brazil, while regulations were
annexed to the convention for the guidance of those tribunals.
A third commission sitting at London was to settle Portuguese
claims arising from illegal detention by British cruisers between
June i, 1814, and the setting up of the mixed commissions
mentioned above.42
  The three hundred thousand pounds indemnity promised by
the treaty of January 21, 1815, had never been paid by Eng¬
land, but now the promise was renewed and the manner of pay¬
ment guaranteed, such payment to be effected only after D.
Joao had ratified the present convention.43 The first annex gave
the passport which the Portuguese merchant vessel was to carry,
and the second the instructions44 for the ships of war of each