

  74 Andrew Grant, writing about 1808, stated that around 5000 slaves were sold
annually in Rio de Janeiro, this number representing about one-fourth of the
number imported into Brazil (History of Brazil, p. 153). In 1821 a total of 20,854
arrived at Rio alone. The first six months of 1822 saw 14,827 actually landed in
the Brazilian capital (F. O., 84/17, Rio Commission, Nos. 23, 24). These figures
do not include the slaves brought to other ports.
                             CHAPTER VIII


        THE PRICE OF RECOGNITION, 1822-1827


England’s concern in its relations with Brazil during the resi¬
dence of the Portuguese court at Rio were centered on three
principal currents of interest. One of these was the attitude
which the Portuguese monarchy adopted in regard to the Banda
Oriental; another was commercial; and the third was involved
in the suppression of the slave-trade. The first of these points
was carefully detached by the British Foreign Office1 and even¬
tually was settled apart,2 while the other two were more or less
closely associated. The commercial and slave traffic questions
converged in 1822 when they became the price exacted by
Great Britain for its recognition of Brazilian independence. The
new state was forced to ratify the special economic privileges
obtained by England in the treaty of 1810 and to accede to the
continuation of the African-trade stipulations of Castlereagh’s
conventions of 1815 and 1817. In addition, the total abolition
of the traffic within a specified number of years was required
by the London court.
  The payment of the price demanded involved the new state
in serious difficulties which arose from the manner in which
the independence movement had developed in the colony.
Hence to understand the attitude which the Rio court assumed
toward the terms exacted by England, some knowledge of the
situation in Brazil itself is necessary.

  1 Sir Charles Stuart who negotiated the treaties of recognition of Brazilian in¬
dependence by Portugal and England was instructed by Canning not to enter
into the question of the Banda Oriental, which was finally settled in 1828 (F. O.,
13/2, Canning to Stuart, No. 23).
  2 Consequently this point was treated as a separate topic in this work in chapters
V and VI. Chapter VIII thus continues the two themes presented in chapter IV
and chapter VII.
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                        187
  Events in the revolting colony are associated with the name
of the young prince, D. Pedro, eldest son of the king of Portugal.
Despised by his mother who preferred her second son, D. Mig¬
uel, and feared and distrusted by his father, who favored D.
Pedro Carlos, a son-in-law and nephew, Pedro grew up in the
stables of the palace at Rio. Uncultured, inexperienced in the
business of government, untrained in the court etiquette of
Europe, and uneducated beyond the rudimentary stage, he
was more of a colonial than a European. A superb horseman,
impulsive, vivacious, handsome, and vigorously self-willed, his
immorality has become proverbial, his bonhommie a tradition,
and his personal bravery the subject of many ballads. He was
a very democratic-mannered son of a divine-right father.3
   His appointment as prince regent of Brazil after the Portu¬
guese court sailed for Lisbon in April, 1821, forced him into
the field of action when he was twenty-three years old. Almost
coincident with the departure of D. Joao, the Cortes in Lisbon
began to manifest its purpose of limiting the powers of D.
Pedro and of restricting the liberties of the co-kingdom. In con¬
sequence of an order issued in April, which detached all pro¬
vincial governments from Rio and made them subject directly
to Portugal, petty provincial and municipal juntas sprang up
throughout the colony but especially in the north, each cor¬
responding with Lisbon and refusing to pay revenue to Rio.
Thus though nominally regent of all Brazil, Pedro really be¬
came merely governor of Rio and the southern provinces. The
bank, looted by the king and robbed by the directors, failed in
July, and the treasury of the prince was empty.4 In September
the downfall of the co-kingdom was completed when the Cortes
by decree5 abolished the chancery court, the treasury, the junta
of commerce, and the various tribunals and establishments set