

  * For different pictures of the prince, see Oliveira Martins, 0 Brazil, pp. 108-109;
Oliveira Lima, 0 Reconhecimento da Independence, pp. 65-67; John Armitage, The
History of Brazil, I, 37-38.
  « Armitage, History of Brazil, I, 41-49; Pereira da Silva, Historia da Fundafdo do
Imperio, V, 143-177; Cartas de D. Pedro a Seu Pae, 1821-1822, letter of September
21, 1821.
  6 Decree of September 2g, 1821.
188         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
up during the reign of D. Joao; at the same time D. Pedro was
peremptorily ordered home. Two days later another decree
appointed governors-at-arms for each of the provinces. It was
clear that the Cortes intended to reestablish the colonial status
of Brazil which had been abolished when the colony was raised
to the rank of a kingdom in 1815.6
  The issue divided the inhabitants of the colony into two
camps; one approving the action of the Cortes and favoring the
return to the colonial status, the other insisting on the equality
of the two kingdoms under one ruler. To the first belonged those
Portuguese who had immigrated during the residence of the
court at Rio or those who still looked on the mother country
as the center of their interests although they had resided in
Brazil before 1808. These Portuguese constituted that part of
the commercial class which hoped to reestablish its ancient
privileges and immunities. Every foreigner was an interloper
in their eyes and the treaty of commerce of 1810 with England
was the special object of their detestation.7 They formed the
element which, with the soldiers and functionaries who looked
to Lisbon for their positions, remained loyal and forced a civil
war during the struggle for independence.
  To the other class belonged the Brazilians and those Portu¬
guese who, by marriage or interest, had become attached to
the colony. Both of these elements looked to D. Pedro as their
leader, yet between them there existed a traditional hostility.
During colonial times the descendants of the first conquerors or
of those who had occupied colonial governmental positions,
refused to accept the new arrivals as equals. Consequently the
latter were forced into commercial or mechanical pursuits,
leaving farming to the Brazilian colonial aristocracy. These
landowners with their relatives who lived in the cities as colon¬
ial office holders created a nobility native to the colony, and
forced the new arrivals to join the commercial and industrial

  6 Armitage, History, I, 50-54; Pereira da Silva, Historia, V, 211-243.
  7 Armitage, op. cit., I, 41-42. In the northern provinces of Bahia and Pernambuco
this element constituted a very large part of the commercial class. In Rio there
were more Portuguese of Brazilian sympathies (ibid., I, 42).
                         PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                     189
class of the cities which reciprocated the antagonism of the
Brazilians.8 The traditional cleavage still existed at the time of
the independence movement.
   This Portuguese element among the colonists which had be¬
come firmly rooted in Brazil by financial or social ties and had
severed connections with the mother country, was faced with
ruin9 when the Cortes threatened to restore the exclusive, mo¬
nopolistic system of colonial commerce. The Brazilians, for their
part, found it impossible to relinquish the gains which had
been obtained since the Carta Regia of 1808 had taken the first
step toward releasing the colony from its subjection to the
mother country. Both parties looked to D. Pedro to lead their
resistance to the decrees of the Cortes and, if necessary, to save
them by proclaiming the independence of Brazil from Portu¬
gal.10 Both elements, uniting to bring every influence to bear
which might lead the young prince to disobey the orders dis¬
patched from Lisbon, cooperated in inducing D. Pedro to defy
the Cortes and to raise the cry of “Independence or Death.”* 11
   During the early part of the revolt, the two parties continued
to cooperate in supporting D. Pedro in his struggle against the
loyalists and the feeble efforts made by Lisbon to subjugate
the colony. Yet, as the loyalists were expelled or silenced, a
  8 Pereira da Silva, Historia, I, 209-211.
  9 The old system of Portugal as the entrepot for the commerce of the colony was
to be reestablished by stringent legislation proposed in the Cortes (Pereira da Silva,
op. cit., VI, Documento 14, Parecer da Commissao Especial das Cortes sobre as Relafoes
Commerciaes entre Portugal e Brazil).
  10 Pereira da Silva, op. cit., V, 215, 232-234, 236-237; Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio
Brazileiro, pp. 41-42.
  11 The province of Sao Paulo was the most active in its influence; it was the first
to protest against the decrees of the Cortes; it furnished the principal leaders of the
independence movement, such as the Andrada brothers, Joao Carlos Oyenhausen,
Jose Costa Carvalho, and others; and the cry of independence was raised on the
outskirts of the city of Sao Paulo. The province was the center of traditional col¬
onial disobedience and the birthplace of the slave-hunting Bandeira expeditions.
With Minas Geraes this province was the center of the Brazilian party. For the
history of the manner in which the two parties influenced D. Pedro to proclaim
independence, see: Pereira da Silva, op. cit., V, 235-277, VI, 3-41, 69-151, 197-
233; Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 622-757; Cartas de D. Pedro a Seu Pae,
1821-1822, entire, but with special reference to letters of December 10, 1821, and
June 19, 1822.
19o          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
distinct cleavage began to appear between the two groups
which supported the prince. The Portuguese party on the one
hand favored an absolute monarchy under D. Pedro, with a
government entirely independent of the Lisbon court, but with
the two crowns united by family ties. To these Absolutists be¬
longed the Portuguese office holders who had been thrown out
by the suppression of the Brazilian courts and governmental
departments, the Portuguese commercial class and wealthy fam¬
ilies, and some Brazilians who, while they admitted the advan¬
tages of constitutional government, yet denied the policy of ap¬
plying it to the ignorant and heterogeneous population of the
new empire. The Brazilian party, or the Patriots, favored a
constitutional monarchy totally independent of Lisbon, while
a large element in the group leaned toward republican ideas. In
numbers the Patriots were stronger; but in experience in gov¬
ernment, in negotiable wealth, and in strategic location in the
cities, the Absolutists had the advantage. The divergence be¬
tween the two parties grew more acute as the success of the in¬
dependence movement became evident, while the struggle for
control of the prince grew more bitter. His adherence to either
party meant the dominance of that group.12
   It is evident therefore that the final success or failure of the
movement for independence in Brazil depended on the support
which both the Absolutists and the Patriots gave D. Pedro. It
is evident also that the two elements were so antagonistic that
the prince eventually would be forced to choose one side or the
other. His own arbitrary nature and the anarchy which the