

  67 F. O., 13/17, Canning to Stuart, Nos. i, 2.
  68 Archivo Diplomatic, I, cxxix; F. O., 84/56, Slave Trade, Draft 1.
  69 Archivo Diplomatico, I, cxxix and II, Gameiro to Carvalho e Mello, January
9, 1826.
  70 The Rio ministry denied any share in the publication of the terms (ibid., In-
hambupe [Pereira da Cunha] to Itabayana, May 6, 1826).
  71 Stuart’s treaty had granted the right of extradition of political refugees.
206         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
eral disavowal of the work of his envoy to all British ambassa¬
dors and agents with instructions that it be communicated to
all foreign governments.72
   The first bill presented by Great Britain to the new empire
failed, therefore, to receive the sanction of the Foreign Office.
To rectify the errors of Stuart’s attempt, Charles Gordon was
nominated by Canning as minister plenipotentiary to the court
of Brazil, with full powers to negotiate treaties of commerce
and the suppression of the slave trade.73 He was given projects
for both agreements which had been carefully worked out with
the collaboration of the Brazilian minister at London, and
Canning expected Gordon would have little difficulty in secur¬
ing the acceptance of D. Pedro to both treaties. The minister
was authorized to conclude the negotiations in Rio provided
no substantial alterations were made by Brazil in the terms
demanded by England. The correspondence which Gordon
would find in the Rio legation would suffice for his instructions,
but under no condition was he to yield to the Brazilian demand
for the abolition of the judge conservatorship. Also he was not
to sign the slave traffic agreement until the commercial treaty
had been agreed upon.74
  Gordon reached Rio on October 13 and began negotiations
at once on the two-fold task assigned to him. The commercial
problem which faced the minister was less complicated than
the slave trade question, since the economic preeminence of
England in Brazil was a fact of long standing to which the
Brazilians had become more or less reconciled. From the Eng¬
lish point of view, the empire had usurped the old place occu¬
pied for, centuries by Portugal. Canning, in addressing Pal-
mella during the Anglo-Portuguese negotiations for the renewal
of the treaty of 1810, was forced to admit to him that “the
English merchants considered the treaty with Brazil as an ob¬
ject of greater importance, far superior, without comparison,
to the treaties with Portugal.”75 In the interests of those mer-

 72 F. O., 13/17, Canning to Stuart, April 19, 1826. Separate.
 72 F. O., 13/25, Canning to Gordon, No. I. August 1, 1826.
 74 Ibid., No. 3.                                  75 Archivo Diplomatic, I, cxxi.
                      PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                       207
chants, the British minister had maintained resolutely through
the period of revolt that the terms of the treaty of 1810 still
held for the colony, although the authority of the government
which had negotiated this agreement had been renounced.76
He maintained his attitude in view of the importance of the
Brazilian trade to the British merchants. In 1825 the exports
to Portuguese America equalled almost half of the value of the
merchandise shipped to the United States and was a little less
than the total amount sent to the British West Indies. In that
year Brazil alone absorbed almost half of the entire value of
goods exported to all South America and Mexico combined,77
while England, on the other hand, purchased very little from
the empire.78
   In addition, the shipping interests were deeply concerned
over their economic relations with the new state. The number
of British ships which entered the harbor of Rio grew steadily
after 1815, the fleet engaged in that trade having more than
doubled by 1821. Although England itself did not absorb any
great amount of the exports carried on the return trip, the
British ships enjoyed the profits accruing from the steadily in¬
creasing value of goods which Brazil sold abroad. That carry¬
ing trade was becoming constantly more profitable, for be¬
tween 1815 and 1821, merchandise which left Rio for foreign
ports multiplied five times in value.79
   Gordon’s mission therefore was an important one. He was
chosen for his known ability and his negotiation proved his
  78 F. O., 63/275, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 17; 63/261, Chamberlain to
Canning, No. 123, Confidential. For a time the Rio court threatened to declare
the treaty at an end and did announce that it had expired de jure and only existed
defacto by virtue of the good will ofBrazil (F. O., 63/260, Chamberlain to Canning,
No. 101). This attitude was temporary, however (ibid., No. 122; F. O., 13/8,
Chamberlain to Canning, February 22, 1825. Separate. Secret; 13/11, Chamber-
lain to Canning, December 5, 1825).
  77 Customs, 8/21, Comparative Tables. The same ratio held for 1830 (Customs
8 / 32). In 1835 the same ratio held in reference to the United States and the British
West Indies, but in that year Brazil took close to a million sterling more merchan¬
dise than did all of South America and Mexico combined (Customs 8/42).
  78 Customs, 4/20. The same was true in 1830 (Customs 4/25) and 1835 (Customs
4/30). Raw cotton always constituted by far the largest item.
  79 F. O., 63/247, Chamberlain to Londonderry, No. 59.
208         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
worth. He acted with an efficiency which resembled that dis¬
played by Strangford in 1810. Although he took up the com¬
mercial question only after having concluded the vexing prob¬
lem of the suppression of the slave trade and although he had
met “most strange reverses,” he was able to send the treaty,
ratified by the Rio court, to the Foreign Office with provisions
which were “precisely according to the terms” which he had
been “instructed to require” of the Brazilian government.80 On
November io, 1827, ratifications of the commercial treaty of
1827 were exchanged in London and the agreement became
effective.81
  The document82 was an adaptation of the 1810 treaty to the
empire, with all of the old privileges of the earlier agreements
retained by England. Some of the articles were unobjection¬
able in the eyes of Brazil. Peace and friendship were to exist
between the two countries; consuls were to be appointed with
their powers clearly specified by the treaty; perfect liberty of
conscience in matters of religion was guaranteed; the invio¬
lability of domicile was assured; deserters were to be delivered
up on demand; mutual liberty of commerce in all ports of both
parties was granted, although coastwise trade was restricted to
national ships; port duties were specified; the packet service
was to continue; piracy was outlawed; shipwrecked or dis¬
tressed vessels were to be protected; mutual right of ware¬
housing and reexportation without payment of consumption
tax were conceded; drawbacks or bounties on reexported arti¬
cles were declared to be independent of the nationality of the
vessels receiving such reexported articles; Brazil abolished all
monopolies or exclusive commercial companies, except existing
crown monopolies; and the English merchants obtained the
privilege of making payments to the customs house on the same
footing as the subjects of Brazil.83
  80 F. O., 13/18, Gordon to Dudley, No. 17. Dated August 18, 1827. In contrast
to Stuart’s verbose reports, Gordon merely stated that it was unnecessary to tell
of his difficulties. His mission had been successful and that would suffice.
  81 F. O., 13/35) Dudley to Gordon, No. 31.
  82 Martens, Recueil, Supplement, XI, Seconde Partie, 479-491.
  88 Articles I-V, VII-XI; XIII-XIV, XVI-XVIII, XXII-XXIII, XXV-XXVII
respectively.
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      209
  There were other stipulations, however, to which the Brazil¬
ians objected strenuously. Article VI conceded that since “the
Constitution of the Empire of Brazil” had “abolished all special
jurisdictions,” the “office of Judge Conservator for the British
Nation,” should “subsist only until some satisfactory substitute
for that jurisdiction” should “be established, capable of pro¬
viding, in an equal degree, for the protection of the persons
and property of His Majesty’s Subjects.” That time never ar¬
rived, however, and the extra-territorial jurisdiction of Great
Britain in Brazil continued until the Rio court declared the
treaty void and refused to negotiate another agreement.
  Another source of friction arose from Article XII, which
specified that the nationality of a vessel, whether British or
Brazilian, was to be determined by the ownership, place of
construction, and nationality of the master and three fourths
of the crew, except such ships as should be lawfully captured
in war or as pirates. By such a stipulation the number of vessels
sailing under the Brazilian flag which could enter British ports
and enjoy the fruits of the present treaty was greatly dimin¬
ished, since Brazil purchased from abroad a large part of its
merchant fleet and manned its vessels principally with for¬
eigners.
  Despite the efforts of the Rio court to limit the number of
articles declared to be contraband of war, Gordon secured a
long list favorable to England’s traditional viewpoint (Article
XV). The low import duty of fifteen per cent, on British im¬
ports was to continue,84 also, with the additional pledge by
Brazil that no other country, Portugal excepted, should be con¬
ceded a lower rate than that granted to England.85 By virtue
of most favored nation stipulations, the empire was forced to
grant to the other powers the same low rate,86 which Brazilian