

  44 Archivo Diplomatico, I, xlv-xlvi.
  46 On leaving Rio, D. Joao told Pedro to seize the crown for himself in case some
adventurer threatened to grasp the throne (Cartas de D. Pedro a Seu Pae, 1821-1822,
D. Pedro to D. JoSo, June 19, 1822).
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                          199
  Therefore D. Joao should command, not merely consent,
that Brazil be independent, that Pedro hold the royal authority
under whatever titles the representative assembly of Brazil
might confer upon him, and that the connection between the
two crowns should be continued. This union between the two
crowns was to be signified by the use of the title “Heir Appar¬
ent of Portugal” when reference was made to the prince in the
royal letter. Brazil had already consented to a commission to
settle claims as to property losses, most favored nation com¬
mercial privileges, and similar questions. Nothing short of in¬
dependence would now serve, nor should Portugal attempt to
retain any rights of sovereignty over Brazil.46 Stuart was au¬
thorized to be the bearer of the royal decree commanding the in¬
dependence of Brazil, or he could serve as plenipotentiary for
the Lisbon court if Portugal chose to negotiate a treaty. If D.
Joao preferred to send an agent of his own, however, he could
do so, but Stuart was forbidden to accept the collaboration of
a Portuguese envoy, or even to accompany one to Brazil. In
case the Lisbon court refused to yield, he was to proceed to
Rio at once to treat independently on the part of Great
Britain.47
  Stuart was not to negotiate the revision of the 1810 treaty.
On the contrary, he was authorized merely to continue that
agreement for two years from the date of its expiration in order
to allow for proper provision without undue haste, to waive


  48 Portugal offered to acknowledge Pedro as emperor provided D. Joao should
share the same title and all future legislation, acts of grace, titles, and appointments
should be submitted to Joao for approval. Later Portugal proposed that the right
to negotiate treaties for Brazil be reserved to Lisbon, while both countries were to
have one diplomatic service and one army (F. O., 13/3, Stuart to Canning, No.
6). Such stipulations were vicious, Canning said (F. O., 13/z, Canning to Stuart,
No. 1). Canning’s fears as to the fate of Portugal after the death of D. Joao were
realized when the reactionary revolution under D. Miguel broke out soon after
the recognition of Brazilian independence (Temperly, Canning, pp.             208-210;
Armitage, History, I, 230-236, 293-308; Oliveira Martins, Historia de Portugal, II,
263-284).
  47 F. O., 13/1, Canning to Stuart, No. 1. Canning also suggested to Stuart the
possibility of securing reparations for losses by obtaining from Brazil the pledge
to pay some debt or to deliver property values to the mother country (ibid., No. 3).
200         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
any objection by England to the admission of Portuguese com¬
merce with Brazil to a more favored footing than that of the
British, and to stipulate that in the revised treaty there should
be introduced an article for the immediate and effectual aboli¬
tion of the Brazilian slave trade.48
   The envoy encountered an exasperating obstinacy in Lisbon
when he arrived to carry out his instructions. The trouble arose
over the question of the manner by which D. Joao should style
himself in granting the independence. He consented to ac¬
knowledge an emperor of Brazil by himself either as emperor
of Brazil and king of Portugal and the Algarves, or as emperor
of Portugal, Brazil, and the Algarves; or to acknowledge a king
of Brazil by himself as king of Portugal, Brazil, and the Algar¬
ves. Canning remarked, dryly, that these three royal letters in¬
cluded every variety “except the one which would have en¬
sured a speedy as well as a fortunate end to the negotiations.”
But D. Joao would not concede a royal letter which acknowl¬
edged an emperor of Brazil by the king of Portugal, Brazil,
and the Algarves.49 Every other point was arranged easily
enough, but Stuart could not force D. Joao from his position
in regard to the employment of the titles. Canning therefore
instructed him to do his best to secure the approval of the Rio
court to one of the three forms proposed by the Portuguese
king.60
   Stuart eventually obtained verbal permission from the Lis¬
bon court to modify one of the three royal letters after his ar¬
rival in Rio in case of absolute necessity, provided the entire
outcome of the          negotiations       hung     on     such   a   revision.61
His full powers as plenipotentiary of the Portuguese Govern¬
ment were drawn up in due form and a bill of Portuguese
claims against Brazil amounting to around three million sterling
was handed to him before he left Lisbon in May, 1825.62                       ad-