

  89 F. O., 63/257, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 5. Secret; Archivo Diplomatico,
I, Brant to Bonifacio, November 16, 17, 20, 1822 and May 6, 1823.
  90 Archivo Diplomatico, I, Brant to Bonifacio, June 1, 1823.
  91 Ibid., I, Brant to Bonifacio, June 29, 1823; Carvalho e Mello to Brant and
Gameiro, January 3, 1824.
  92 Rocha Pombo, Historia, VII, 899; Archivo Diplomatico, I, Brant to Bonifacio,
May 10, 1823; F. O., 63/259, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 20.
2i2        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
 Jose Bonifacio, intimate friend ofD. Pedro in the first months
of the revolt, assured Consul Chamberlain in April, 1823, that
he heartily detested the traffic and desired total abolition. But
it could not “be done immediately, the people” were “not pre¬
pared for it and until this” had “been brought about, it would
endanger the existence of the Government if attempted sud¬
denly.” The minister insisted that it was impossible for him to
undertake an international promise which he was unable to
fulfill. Yet he ardently wished that English “cruisers would
take every Slave Ship they” encountered at sea, for, he said,
“I want to see no more of them, they are the gangrene of our
Prosperity. The population we want is a White one.”93
  The minister was sincere in his personal desire to see the
trade exterminated, but two reasons forced him to withhold hfs
hand. In the first place, Negroes were an absolute necessity for
the cultivation of the land until white immigration should set
in to take their places. As this immigration increased, Bonifacio
promised, the incoming supply of Negroes would be lessened
until final abolition was secured. In the second place, the ac¬
tual precarious stability or even the very existence of the gov¬
ernment itself would have been destroyed by any measure
which precipitously abolished the traffic. The interests engaged
in the trade, powerful as they were, might possibly be faced
successfully, but there was no hope of a victorious conflict with
the owners of the great plantations of the interior, the element
which formed the backbone of the Patriot Party. The govern¬
ment, Bonifacio asserted, did not share in the opinion firmly
held by the agricultural people of Brazil, but that class was
the powerful element of the country. Manifestly, D. Pedro
could not abolish the trade at once, although the Brazilian
government was willing to enter into negotiations for the grad¬
ual extinction of the traffic.94 Chamberlain added to his report
of the interview the interesting detail that the government in-

  93 F. O., 63/259, Chamberlain to Canning, April 2, Secret.
  94 Ibid., No. 55. Secret, April 26, 1823. The consul was reporting an interview
with Bonifacio in which the latter gave him the result of a cabinet meeting at
which D. Pedro himself was present.
                       PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                        213
 come from the tax on Negroes imported into the country was
 close to two hundred thousand pounds a year. It was his opin¬
 ion that a gradual abolition” was “the only one this new gov¬
 ernment dared agree to.”95
    Brazil was forced, therefore, to refuse the enticing bait of an
 early recognition by Canning, who offered to act irrespective
 of the attitude of Portugal if the new state would grant him
 one condition. The Rio court was obliged to follow the longer
 path of negotiations at London and Lisbon, and to await the
 result of the interplay of European politics before England
 turned the magic key. Then Stuart came with his instructions
 to secure the abolition of the traffic, not on the basis of an un¬
 conditional concession by Brazil to a positive demand by Eng¬
 land, but merely as the continuation of engagements made by
 the Rio government in 1815 and 1817.96 To the preamble of the
proposed treaty, which stated that “the separation of Brazil
from Portugal entitles England to claim from Brazil the ob¬
servance of the Treaties concluded between England and
Portugal before the separation.” Canning added four simple
articles. The        trade should         be prohibited           entirely within
a specified number of years, with the penalty of piracy to be in¬
flicted on violators thereafter; until the abolition should take
place, the treaties, conventions, and additional articles of Jan¬
uary 22, 1815, and of July 28, 1817, should continue; the in¬
structions, powers, forms, and regulations annexed to the 1817
agreement should be applied to the present understanding97;
and the mixed commissions should continue.98