

  18 H. Temperly, Foreign Policy of Canning, p. 212.
  12 The Portuguese court asserted that this protection extended to internal danger
arising from revolting colonies. Both Castlereagh and Canning denied that Eng¬
land was obligated by treaty to maintain Portugal’s control over the colonies, but
Canning did admit that Lisbon had a general moral claim on England in reference
to internal questions with its possessions (Temperly, Foreign Policy of Canning, pp.
194, 212; F. O., 13/7, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 1). The Portuguese court
cited the treaties of 1642, 1654 (Articles 1 and 16), and 1661 (secret article) as the
basis of its demand for protection by England against Brazil (Oliveira Lima, O
Reconhecimento, p. 57).
  20 A. A. de Aguiar, Vida do Marquez de Barbacena, p. 98.
  21 F. O., 13/7, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 1.
  22 Temperly, op. cit., p. 215; Archivo Diplomatico da Independencia, IV (Austria),
Telles da Silva to Carvalho e Mello, July 10, 1824.
  28 Temperly, op. cit., p. 215 and footnote (1).
  24 Ibid., pp. 201-208.
                      PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      193
land.25 Unless Great Britain could be induced to recognize the
new state, complete independence would be delayed indefi-
nitely, with disastrous results to the empire. For, as long as
Portugal refused to grant recognition, anarchy and the divi¬
sion of Brazil into smaller republics after the manner of the
rest of South America threatened the huge colony. A big,
united, homogeneous republic like the United States, a form
of government repugnant to the dominant faction and yet the
only satisfactory alternative to an empire, would have been
the first and only example of that sort of thing among Latin
races.26 Consequently D. Pedro was forced to stake the existence
of the new state on England’s action.
   Great Britain was not free to act as it wished, however, for
in the opinion of Canning, Portugal appeared “to be the chosen
ground on which the Continental Alliance” had “resolved to
fight England hand to hand,” and Great Britain had to be
“prepared to meet and defeat them, under every imaginable
form of intrigue or intimidation, or to be driven from the
field.”27 In addition Canning was faced with the delicate ques¬
tion of the succession to the Portuguese crown. If by the recog¬
nition of the independence of Brazil, its emperor should lose
his right to succeed his father as king of Portugal, D. Miguel,
the absolutist son of the autocratic D. Carlota and the tool of
Metternich and France, would inherit the crown with unfavor¬
able results to British influence in the “chosen ground of bat¬
tle.”28 Therefore in order to preserve English influence in the
traditional strategic position in Europe, Canning was forced
to secure some arrangement regarding the succession and to

  26 On July 23, 1823, Brant Pontes, Brazilian agent in London, wrote to Jos6
Bonifacio, foreign minister of D. Pedro, that “with England’s friendship, we can
snap our fingers at the rest of the world ... it will not be necessary to go begging
for recognition from any other power, for all will wish our friendship in order to
participate in the advantages of commerce, which will be exclusively for our
friends” (Archivo Diplomatic, I, 278).
  26 Aguiar, Barbacena, pp. 98-99.
  27 A. G. Stapleton, George Canning and His Times, p. 501. The conflict between
England and the Continental powers which took Portugal as the field of battle is
given in detail by Temperly, Canning, pp. 189-225.
  28 Archivo Diplomatic, I, lxxxv-lxxxvii.
   13
i94         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
obtain the consent of the Portuguese monarch to the recogni¬
tion of the independence of the colony before Great Britain
itself could act.
   A second difficulty prevented England from yielding to the
insistence of the Brazilians for recognition. Although, in the
opinion of Canning, there were no specific stipulations which
required England to maintain the control of the Lisbon court
over its possessions as long as Brazil remained a colony, the
mere recognition of its independence would turn the new em¬
pire into a foreign country, thus obligating the London court
to fulfill against Brazil every guaranty which had been made
to Portugal since 1640. Unless Portugal acquiesced in the inde¬
pendence of the colony, a state of war between the two king¬
doms would continue despite the recognition by England, and
Great Britain ipso facto would be forced into war against Bra¬
zil.29 In addition, Canning considered that since his father still
reigned over Portugal and his father-in-law was emperor of
Austria, D. Pedro was too intimately connected with Europe
to detach himself from the ties which linked his new kingdom
to the old world.30 It was clear therefore that England did not
possess as much independence of action in regard to Brazil as
it enjoyed in relation to the Spanish American republics.
  By 1824 Canning believed the attainment of Brazilian inde¬
pendence was assured. The question was, how best to conciliate
the establishment and recognition of that independence with
the powers of the Old World.31 Hence the subsequent negotia¬
tions which took place in London, Lisbon, and Rio de Janeiro
were centered around this point. On September 23, 1823, the
Portuguese minister in London, Villa Real, applied for British
mediation, but insisted on conditions which Canning could not
accept. The appeal was renewed in December and Canning,
still not acquiescing in the grounds specified by Portugal, ac-