

  M Oliveira Lima, 0 Reconhccimcnto, pp. 132-141. D. Joao violated this agreement,
as the royal letter of May 13 with all the objectionable features including the asser¬
tion that Pedro was to inherit the Portuguese throne was issued at the time of the
publication of the terms of the treaty in Lisbon. The incident aroused bitter feeling
in Brazil against Portugal and created distrust of Pedro among the Patriots.
  67 England linked great importance to this provision, for if Benguela, Angola,
or the other African colonies which furnished Negroes for the slave trade should
unite with Brazil, there would be even greater difficulty in stopping the traffic.
The matter would be purely a domestic one and would cease to be a question of
international trade (Oliveira Lima, op. cit., p. 241).
  68 The treaty is given in Oliveira Lima, op. cit., Appendix, pp. 352-360. It is
dated August 29, 1825. It was ratified by D. Pedro the next day and by D. Joao
November 15, 1825. Copies were enclosed by Stuart in F. O., 13/4, Stuart to Can¬
ning, No. 67.
  69 The purpose of the loan had been to acquire funds to prosecute the war against
the Brazilians. The original debt had been £1,500,000, but £100,000 had been
paid by Portugal.
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                       203
remaining six hundred thousand within one year of the ratifi¬
cation of the treaty.60
   Such was the price demanded of the new state by the mother
country in payment for the recognition of independence, a
price which had been negotiated under the direct intervention of
England. Less than three years had passed since D. Pedro had
declared himself emperor of Brazil, and yet independence was
an accomplished fact. Gameiro Pessoa was received as minister
from Brazil by the king of England, January 30, 1826. Austria
recognized the new state in December, 1825, and France fol¬
lowed its example the next month. Recognition by the Vati¬
can61 (January 23), Sweden (January 5), Switzerland (Jan¬
uary 30), the Hanseatic States (February 14), Holland (Febru¬
ary 15), Hanover (February 18), and Prussia (March 6) fol¬
lowed rapidly.62 England had turned the key and opened the
door to the new nation, and the powers welcomed the empire
at once.
   By its own efforts and alone, Great Britain thus secured rec¬
ognition for Brazil; Sir Charles Stuart now presented England’s
bill for the service rendered. After divesting himself of his pow¬
ers as Portuguese envoy, he declared himself a minister from
England and began negotiations for an extended treaty of com¬
merce which was to take the place of the agreement of 1810.
To the surprise of the court of Brazil, instead of the simple
two-year prolongation of the 1810 treaty, he asked for the im¬
mediate conclusion of a permanent agreement, which should
contain the special privileges specified by the earlier treaty.
Carvalho e Mello, foreign minister, wrote to Gameiro Pessoa
in London, bitterly commenting that although such a proposal
  60 Oliveira Lima, op. cit., Appendix, pp. 363-365. The negotiations between
Stuart and the three Brazilians are given in Archivo Diplomatico, VI, Portugal,
pp. 36-142.
  91 The right of patronage was granted D. Pedro by the Pope, May 15, 1827. The
Chamber of Deputies refused to approve the Bull and declared that D. Pedro pos¬
sessed the right of patronage by virtue of the Imperial Constitution, Article
102 (Oliveira Lima, ibid., p. 297).
  92 Oliveira Lima, op. cit., pp. 287-305; Archivo Diplomatico, II, Itabayana (Gamei¬
ro Pess6a) to Rezende, January 31, 1826. Russia recognized the empire in 1827
and Spain in 1834 (Rocha Pombo, Historia, VII, 916, footnote 1).
204        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
was repugnant to the Rio court in view of the fact that Eng¬
land was not treating with Brazil on the same basis as that
which had been employed for the negotiations with the Span¬
ish republics, he could not refuse the demand for special priv¬
ileges in consequence of the part which the London govern¬
ment had taken in the question of the recognition of independ¬
ence. Sir Charles Stuart, said Carvalho e Mello, was demand¬
ing disproportionate commercial advantages and                        the   im¬
mediate abolition of the slave traffic without adequate compen¬
sation as payment for the intervention of his government, but
Brazil could not refuse.63
  Stuart, however, was exceeding his instructions.64 When Can¬
ning learned of the negotiations, he was biting in his criticism
and ordered the envoy, in case he had signed such a treaty as
the project which he had remitted to London, to inform the
Rio court that he had done so without instructions.66 But be¬
fore Canning’s dispatch reached Brazil, Stuart had signed two
permanent treaties, one of commerce and the other for the
abolition of the slave trade, and had secured the ratification of
D. Pedro to both documents.66 When they reached Canning’s
hands, he found it was impossible to approve of either, al¬
though he had anticipated that at least the slave trade treaty
would be in the correct form. His rejection of the commercial
agreement was due to three principal defects; first, the right of
visit and search in time of war had been relinquished; second,
the so-called reciprocity clause in commerce guaranteed noth¬
ing to England since no one knew as yet what privileges the
“most favored nation” in Brazilian trade would enjoy, whereas
all the world knew what favors the Rio court would secure
  M Archivo Diplomatic, I, Carvalho e Mello to Gameiro, September 28, 1825.
  M Canning had hinted to Stuart that he would send detailed instructions for the
negotiation of a new treaty (F. O., 13/2, Canning to Stuart, No. 22) but later he
forbade the minister to close a definite treaty in revised form. He was merely to
obtain the simple prolongation of the 1810 agreement (F. O., 13/2, Canning to
Stuart, No. 31). Stuart began negotiations without waiting for the detailed in¬
structions (F. O., 13/3, Stuart to Canning, No. 48, 64).
  M F. O., 13/2, Canning to Stuart, Nos. 33, 35. The project was sent to London
on September 30, F. O., 13/5, Stuart to Canning, No. 81.
  M F. O., 13/6, Stuart to Canning, No. 86. The treaties were dated October 18.
                      PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                         205
from England; and third, the office of judge conservator was
abolished.67 As for the slave trade treaty, it would have been
sufficient merely to state that the new empire accepted the
obligations incurred by Portugal under the convention of July
28, 1817, and that it pledged the abolition within a stated
number of years.68
   Fortunately the ratification by Brazil enabled England to
accept or reject the agreements as a whole, so that one point of
disagreement would suffice as grounds by which Canning could
reopen negotiations. But before the London Office could take
action, news arrived that the terms of both treaties had been
published in the Diario Fluminense69 at Rio in the edition of
November 14, 1825. Apparently, thought Canning, the Bra¬
zilian government was attempting to force his hand.70 In fact
he was placed in a very embarrassing position by the publica¬
tion of the terms of the agreements, for enquiries were made
immediately on the floor of Parliament and Russia demanded
the extradition of a political refugee.71 The treaty with Mexico
had been rejected on the grounds that it included the abolition
of the right of visit and search, and just the year before Can¬
ning had refused to define that right despite the fact that the
United States had been very insistent. By the present treaty
closed by Stuart, right of visit and search was relinquished. In
addition although the minister had persistently demanded the
continuation of the office of judge conservator in Portugal dur¬
ing the negotiations with that country concerning the renewal
of the treaty of 1810, his efforts were rendered futile by the
publication of Stuart’s document, for the Portuguese agent,
immediately after having read the Diario Fluminense, presented
a project in which that privilege was omitted. In view of these
embarrassments, therefore, Canning was forced to send a gen-