

other foreign merchandise, the increase to go into effect at once after June 19, 1825
(F. O., 13/8, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 61). The foreign minister of Brazil
informed Chamberlain in November, 1822, that the “Emperor had resolved not
to mix in the politics of Europe and would not allow Europe to interfere in those
of Brazil, or of South America” (F. O., 63/247, Chamberlain to Bathurst, No. 9).
  41 F. O., 63/275, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 1.
  42 Ibid. January 9, 1823, Secret and Confidential; Stapleton, George Canning and
His Times, pp. 394-395. The United States had recognized Brazil in 1824 (May
26). The United States was the first to recognize the new state, and Brazil was the
first government to adhere to the Monroe Doctrine (Rocha Pombo, Historia, VII,
909, footnote 1).
  43 The Comte de Gestas de Roquefeuille, French minister at Rio, by orders from
Chateaubriand, offered the Brazilian Government the cooperation of the French
squadron then in the harbor of Rio in putting down disaffection and maintaining
the authority of the emperor (F. O., 63/276, Chamberlain to Canning, No. 29-
March 3, 1824). In June, 1825, Gestas offered D. Pedro recognition of the com¬
plete independence of Brazil in return for a treaty of commerce (F. O., 13/8,
Chamberlain to Canning, No. 64. Confidential). This was before Stuart arrived
in Rio. Pedro’s wife, Princess Leopoldina, constantly urged her father, the emperor
of Austria, to recognize her husband’s position as emperor (Rocha Pombo, His¬
toria, VII, 897).
198          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
strike at the root of that trade would be lost.44 Unless Great
Britain by its mediation or independent action should guaran¬
tee the independence of the new state, the bill for services ren¬
dered could not be presented. On the other hand, if the ob¬
structive tactics of Austria and France were to delay recognition
so long that the disintegrating factors in the new empire caused
its fall, the advantages which would accrue to England from
the commercial concessions demanded of the new empire would
be seriously lessened.
  Brazil, therefore, succeeded in winning England to support
its declaration of independence. If possible, Portugal was to
be forced to concede the validity of the separation; but if the
Lisbon court remained obstinate, then Great Britain would
negotiate separately with the new empire.
  By Canning’s instructions to Stuart, dated March 14, 1825,
the envoy was to seek to preserve in both hemispheres, the in¬
terests of the family of Bragan^a; yet, since the treaty under
which the trade with Brazil was carried on was now threatened
with revision at the option of the new state, England could not
delay longer. As it was only by entering into new stipulations
that Great Britain could continue to enjoy a special footing in
Brazilian commerce, the Lisbon court was to be informed
clearly that Stuart could not “in any case leave Brazil, with¬
out some arrangement with the Brazilian Government respect¬
ing the treaty of 1810.” D. Joao by his own act, Canning
argued, had abolished the colonial character of Brazil, had
given it an independent judicature, had raised it to a separate
kingdom, had established a national representation, and had
provided for the case in which it might be necessary for the
safety of that separate kingdom to pronounce its independence
of Portugal.46 Pedro for his part had preserved the Portuguese
monarchy in America despite the unwise action of the Lisbon
Cdrtes. Nothing now remained but to complete the work.