

  19 F. O., 13/7, Canning to Chamberlain, No. i.
  ,0 Ibid. Canning throughout this long dispatch emphasized the difference be¬
tween England’s relations with the Spanish American republics and its obligations
to Spain on the one hand and its connection with Brazil and its duties to Portugal
on the other. The cases were entirely different, he argued.
  91 Ibid.-, F. O., 63/257, Canning to Chamberlain, No. 17. December 8, 1823.
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                       195
cepted the task of mediator and asked Brazil to send agents.
In April Felisberto Caldeira Brant Pontes returned from Rio
to unite with Manuel Rodrigues Gameiro Pessoa as the Bra¬
zilian commissioners nominated to negotiate the recognition of
independence by Portugal. The conference, held under the
mediation of England and Austria,32 lasted from July 12, 1824,
to February 18, 1825, when the Brazilian commissioners form¬
ally rejected the ultimatum of Portugal and declared their ne¬
gotiation ended. They could not accept the demand made by
the Lisbon commissioner that the basis of any agreement should
be the reestablishment of the sovereignty of Portugal over Brazil.33
Canning likewise lost patience and, politely ignoring Austria,
despatched Sir Charles Stuart on a special mission to Lisbon
and Rio to negotiate with D. Pedro a final settlement of the
question, preferably with, but if necessary, without, the previ¬
ous agreement of Portugal.34
  There were several reasons why Canning changed his policy

  « Baron Neumann, and later Prince Esterhazy, represented Austria during the
negotiations. Brant (later Marquez de Barbacena) had been in London in 1821 -
1822, as the agent of D. Pedro to checkmate any move of Lisbon in London and to
win Canning to support the Brazilian cause. He had purchased supplies and re¬
cruited soldiers and sailors for the Brazilian service. Portugal proposed to treat
with Brazil on the basis of four conditions: cessation of hostilities, restitution of
Portuguese property seized by Brazil, obligation of Brazil not to seize any colony
faithful to Portugal, and dismissal of all English subjects in the Brazilian service
(Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, VII, 903). Portugal called on the treaties closed
with England since 1640 to substantiate the demand for protection against the
colony. To this and to the fourth condition Canning disagreed (Oliveira Lima, 0
Reconhecimento, pp. 57-58).
  33 Portugal’s persistence in maintaining its sovereignty was based on more than
obstinacy. The Lisbon court feared that, since Pedro refused to state formally the
renunciation of his rights to succeed to the throne of Portugal, the mother country
eventually would become subordinate to the colony when D. Joao should die. The
danger lay in the fact that the rich, powerful colony would exchange places with
the weakened and decrepit mother country. The tail would wag the dog (Aguiar,
Barbacena, p. 56, letter from Palmella to Brant, Lisbon, August 7, 1824).
  34 The story of the London negotiations has been worked out in detail by Tem-
perly, Canning, pp. 213-220, and Oliveira Lima, 0 Reconhecimento, pp. 73-166. The
minutes of the conferences are given in the appendix to this work. For original
sources on the negotiations, see Archivo Diplomatic, I, 39-155;    1 “543; Canning’s
letters to Chamberlain, F. O., 63/275, Nos. 4, 5, and 13/7, Nos. 1, Confidential,
2, 6; Aguiar, Barbacena, various letters.
196          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
of waiting until Portugal could be induced to recognize the
empire before England took action. In the first place, while
the conference of allies at Paris was urging D. Joao to sustain
the conditions which he had laid down as the basis of any recog¬
nition, France35 and Spain signed the agreement of December
io, 1824, which continued the French penetration in Spain.36
To counteract the evident wish of the allies to aid Portugal to
reconquer the lost colony, Canning felt himself obliged to act.
Consequently he forced the pro-French minister, Subserra,
from power in Lisbon,37 achieved the recall of the obnoxious
de Neuville as French minister to the Portuguese Court,38 and
dispatched Stuart on his mission.
   In the second place, the commercial treaty of 1810 would
be subject to revision in the middle of 1825 and the commer¬
cial elements of England were pressing him to reach an agree¬
ment as to their standing in Brazil.39 On February 7, therefore,
Canning informed Brant that he had warned Portugal of his
intention not to delay direct negotiations between England and
Brazil beyond the date when the commercial treaty should
have to be renewed. Unless Portugal yielded before that time,
Stuart would treat independently with Brazil to obtain a com¬
mercial agreement which would mean the recognition by Eng¬
land of the independence of the other contracting party.40
  36 Temperly, Canning, p. 219.
  88 Archivo Diplomatic, I, ciii.
  87 Rocha Pombo, Historia, VII, 906-908; Temperly, Canning, pp. 206-208; Archivo
Diplomatico, I, cv-cvi. The Lisbon court tried twice to enter into direct negotiations
with D. Pedro, but on the basis of the sovereignty of D. Joao over Brazil. The Conde
do Rio Maior was sent officially and reached Rio on September 17, 1823. He was
unsuccessful (Pereira da Silva, Historia, VII, 175-186). In June, 1824, during the
London mediation, a tool of Subserra’s, one Leal, was sent secretly to Rio where
he was thrown into prison (Temperly, op. cit., pp. 218-219). Brant advised his gov¬
ernment that the Holy Alliance was behind the obstinate refusal of Portugal to
grant independence to Brazil (Archivo Diplomatico, II, Brant to Carvalho e Mello,
December 15, 1824).
  88 Temperly, op. cit., pp. 205-206.
 89 Stapleton, George Canning and His Times, pp. 501-503, Canning to Liverpool,
October 25, 1824.
  40 Archivo Diplomatico, II, 201-204, Brant to Carvalho e Mello, February 10, 1825.
Rio threatened to increase the import tax on British goods from fifteen per cent,
as stipulated by the treaty of 1810 to twenty-four per cent., the rate charged all
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                       197
  A third reason impelled England to recognize the new state
regardless of Portugal’s attitude. Canning feared that the one
nation of the new world which promised to establish a stable
monarchy would set up a species of Monroe Doctrine of its own
and would join definitely the New World in opposition to the
Old. Brazil, he advised Rio, would profit greatly if its new
rank “should be not merely arrogated by Herself but confirmed
to Her by the Consent of Portugal with the sanction of the
other Powers.”41 He had tried to obtain the consent of Lisbon
and the other powers and had failed: now he was desirous of
introducing into the family of European nations a monarchy
established in the continent of republics, with the new member
under the protection of England, since it would owe its exist¬
ence to that power.42
  A final reason inclined Canning to recognize the new em¬
pire before Austria or France could take matters into their own
hands and reconcile the two branches of the family of Bragar^a.
If England should permit the house of Austria to come to the
aid of its son-in-law or France to win special favors in Brazil43
on the basis of a defense of the slave traffic, the opportunity to