

  48 F. O., 13/1» Canning to Stuart, No. ig. May 12, 1825. Later Canning in¬
structed Stuart to extend the treaty for three years to give the London Office time
to negotiate a commercial treaty with Portugal first (F. O., 13/2, Canning to
Stuart, No. 31. October 10, 1825).
  48 F. O., 13/2, Canning to Stuart, No. 22.                       » Ibid.
  61 Oliveira Lima, O Reconhccimento, p. 201.
  61 F. O., 13/3, Stuart to Canning, Nos. 6, 20, 27, 43.
                    PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      201
dition D. Joao specified as the conditions under which the royal
letter conceding independence could be delivered that Brazil
should consent to the cessation of hostilities, the restitution of
prizes, the return of sequestered property, the assumption by
the new state of a part of the public debt, the payment of the
sums due by the Lisbon treasury to the holders of original dona¬
tions in the colony, and the basic stipulations for a commercial
treaty favorable to Portuguese interests.63
  Stuart arrived in Rio de Janeiro on July 18, 1825, and entered
into immediate negotiations with three Brazilian plenipoten¬
tiaries.64 Trouble arose at once over the question of the titles,
since any of the three forms advocated by the Lisbon court
connoted that independence had resulted, not from any efforts
of the colony but from the gracious condescension of the king
of Portugal. Brant Pontes suggested that D. Joao first grant
independence, acknowledge D. Pedro as emperor, and then
assume the title for himself, a formula which would acknowl¬
edge the part played by the colonials without granting to their
emperor a title which D. Joao did not himself enjoy.66 The Bra¬
zilians flatly refused to consider any other form of recognition.
  Stuart finally consented to a fourth royal letter which adopted
the suggestion of Brant Pontes. D. Joao acknowledged the in¬
dependence of the colony and D. Pedro as emperor, then as¬
sumed the same title for himself and transferred, freely and of
his own volition, his rightful sovereignty over the empire to his
son. The reciprocal question of the right of D. Pedro to the
throne of Portugal was carefully avoided, nothing appearing
in the treaty on that point. Stuart signed a reciprocal note which

  63 Oliveira Lima, 0 Rzconhecimento, p. 201. Metternich favored the negotiations
and persuaded France and Russia to instruct their ministers at Lisbon to render
any aid possible (ibid., pp. 180-181, 195-196; Archivo Diplomatico, II, Brant and
Gameiro to Carvalho e Mello, April 28, 1825).
  M They were Carvalho e Mello, minister of foreign affairs, Villela Barbosa, later
Marquez de Paranagud, then minister of the navy, and the Visconde de Santo
Amaro, who later succeeded Carvalho e Mello as foreign minister.
  66 Oliveira Lima, op. cit., pp. 223-224. Any formula which failed to emphasize
the part played by the colonials connoted to their mind the hidden purpose of the
house of Braganga to reunite the two kingdoms when an opportune moment should
arrive. The Absolutists favored such a policy, but the Patriots were vigorous in
their denunciation. This was why the formula became so important.
202         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
prohibited the publication by Portugal of any of the royal let¬
ters formulated in Lisbon, although D. Joao might issue a
diploma regio (royal declaration) modeled after the preamble of
the treaty, antedating the document to precede the time of
the negotiations.68
  Brazil acceded to the six conditions which constituted the
price which the colony was required to pay the mother coun¬
try. In addition, D. Pedro pledged himself not to accept the
union of any other Portuguese colony to the new empire, even
though such possessions should so petition.57 Hostilities were
declared at an end; a mixed commission with the collaboration
of England was to determine the indemnity for prizes, confis¬
cated or sequestered property; Portugal was to receive com¬
pensation for the loss of public property in Brazil; mutual most
favored nation clauses and fifteen per cent, importation tax
were granted and five months were given for ratification.68
   By an additional article, which was kept secret until the
Brazilian Assembly met in 1826, Brazil agreed to pay two mil¬
lions sterling to compensate Portugal for all losses sustained by
the independence of the colony. In liquidation of that sum,
the Rio treasury took over the debt of one million four hun¬
dred thousand pounds which had been contracted by the Lis¬
bon court in London (182369), and pledged itself to pay the