

  104 Ibid., Protocol to the Conferences of November 22 and 23. A “reversal note”
was presented by the Brazilians which required the English government to enter
into negotiations in London for a reasonable prolongation of the time limit with
the sole view of fulfilling the obligations of the ministry toward the pending law
in the Assembly (ibid.). Gordon transmitted the note to his government without
guaranteeing its ratification.
  106 Ratifications were exchanged in London, March 13, 1827 (F. O., 13/35,
Canning to Gordon, No. 19). Hence the traffic was to cease on March 13, 1830.
Some difficulty arose in Rio over the ratified document returned to Brazil, since
it lacked the signature of the British secretary of state. To render such a document
valid in Brazil, the foreign minister was required to sign. An attempt was made t’o
throw out the entire convention on this pretext of improper ratification by Eng¬
land, but the movement failed (F. O., 13/37, Gordon to Canning, Nos. 37, 42,
June 8, Separate; Gordon to Dudley, Nos. 3, 17).
  108 F. O., 84/56, Gordon to Canning, No. 2. November 27, 1826.
  107 F. O., 13/38, Gordon to Dudley, No. 3. July 14, 1827. The Assembly met
May 3, 1827. Itwas the second time that body had held session since the dissolution
of the Constitutent Assembly in 1823. The other meeting occured May 6, 1826
(Armitage, History, I, 281, 237).
  108 The document was enclosed in F. O., 13/38, Gordon to Dudley, No. 10.
Gordon immediately protested against this letter and demanded an explanation
216        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
1827, the Marquez de Queluz, foreign minister, delivered the
treaty to the Chamber with explanations as to why D. Pedro’s
ministers had consented to such an agreement. The progress
of the negotiations was given in detail; the desire of the Bra¬
zilian commissioners to delay matters until the Assembly could
act on its own project, Gordon’s refusal to postpone a settle¬
ment, and his insistence that the trade actually was prohibited
at the moment by treaties existing between England and Por¬
tugal were explained accurately. The marquis pointed out that
the envoy had made it perfectly plain, that in case the Brazilian
government refused to act, England would oblige the king of
Portugal to close his African ports to Brazilian slavers or it
would prevent by means of its cruisers any access to those ports
by Brazilian ships. He explained that in the face of the fear¬
ful losses which would accrue to Brazilian lives and property
under the threat to treat slavers as pirates, the ministers of D.
Pedro had been forced to concede what would otherwise be
accomplished by forceful means, and the slave trade treaty had
been signed.
  The letter of the foreign minister fanned the flames of indig¬
nation which consumed the deputies as they listened to the
death knell of their slave traffic. Five members of the Com¬
mittee on Diplomacy and Statistics reported caustically against
the convention on June 16. Although the deputies had no voice
in the matter, due to the provision in the Constitution which
placed the treaty making power exclusively in the hands of the
emperor,109 they could express an opinion and they were vocif¬
erous in their denunciation of the accomplished fact. The con¬
vention was derogatory to the honor, interests, dignity, inde¬
pendence, and sovereignty of the Brazilian nation, asserted
Cunha Mattos, who advanced seven arguments to prove his