


  1 See supra, pp. 39-40.
  2 The attitude of distrust in regard to the sincerity of the Rio government and
of contempt for the moral degradation of the Brazilians in continuing the in¬
human slave trade were evidenced in the diplomatic correspondence between the
Foreign Office and the British representatives in Rio. See, as examples, F. O.
84/84, Aberdeen to Ponsonby, December 6, 1828; F. O. 84/122, Palmerston to
Aston, November 1, 1831; F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, June 4, and Au¬
gust 9, 1845; and F. O. 97/97, Scarlett to Clarendon, June 25, 1857. The most ex¬
treme expression occurs in W. D. Christie, Notes on Brazilian Questions.
222         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ered Britain’s actions as equivalent to an effort to maintain
political control over its ally. In the opinion of one senator,* 3
Great Britain wished to dominate Brazil; it desired that the
weaker power should acknowledge a shameful protectorate un¬
worthy of the Brazilian. An ambassador4 who had served in
London for many years asserted that “under the pretext of our
old faults (which were numerous) the British legation assumed
a tone of censure, of vigilance, of insufferable dominance.”
The foremost historian5 of the founding of the empire com¬
plained that every argument with England was settled accord¬
ing to its own interpretation and the Brazilian nation was
forced to submit to the violence and force of a stronger power.
Writing in the ’sixties, the noted compiler6 of Brazilian treaties
asserted that although he admired the excellence of British in¬
stitutions, rendered homage to its civic development, and val¬
ued the help of its capital in opening roads and developing na¬
tional industries in Portuguese America, he could not“ tolerate
passively the affronts which this country” had “arrogated to
itself to force” on Brazil. The drastic conduct of the English re¬
sulted, in his opinion, not in the abolition of the traffic (the Bra¬
zilians suppressed the trade by their own efforts), but in mutual
resentment between the two nations.7
   This hostile resentment of the weaker toward the stronger
nation was reflected in the attitude of the Brazilian citizen as
well as in that of the historian and statesman. The clearest ex¬
pression of this point of view was given by Consul Pennell in
his reports to Canning and Dudley8. In Bahia, he said, the gen¬
eral public seemed “to regard the Treaties with England on
the Slave Trade, as the dictations of a superior authority, from
   8 Visconde de Jequitinhonha. Speech made in the Senate as quoted by Oliveira
Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, p. 211.
   4 Letter of Barao de Penedo to Rio Branco, May 6, 1856. Quoted by Oliveiro
Lima, op. cit., p. 212. Penedo was minister in London from 1855 to 1888.
   6J. M. Pereira da Silva (author of the seven-volume Historia da Fundafdo do
 Imperio Brasileiro), Memorias do Meu Tempo, I, 101.
   6 Antonio Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos para 0 Direito Intemacional, I, 386.
   7 Ibid., p. 387.
   8 F. O. 84/71, Pennell to Canning, June 8, 1827; Pennell to Dudley, August 22,
 1827.
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                      223
which it is lawful to escape, rather than as compacts which
they are bound to enforce.” The opinion was current, more¬
over, that the Rio government had submitted to the conventions
under duress, sacrificing the national dignity before the dicta¬
torial power of England. This dictation by Great Britain was
particularly odious to the public, he reported, since it was ex¬
erted over a weaker but friendly nation which, since independ¬
ence, had favored English interests beyond all others. The con¬
duct of the London court in attempting to abolish the traffic
by all legitimate means was conceded to be highly honorable;
but when Great Britain employed threats, it carried zeal to
reprehensible lengths and violated the principles of non-inter¬
vention on which it professed to act.
   These expressions indicate the deeply-rooted conviction9
which existed in the minds of the Brazilians that England in
its effort to stop the slave trade was intervening in the affairs
of the empire in a manner which was not permissible under
international usage and which evidenced a determination to
force upon a weaker country policies favorable to the more
powerful nation. An absolute emperor against the will of the
elected representatives of the people10 had undertaken obliga¬
tions which the Brazilian nation was unable to renounce. The
prince could be expelled from his throne, but the efforts of the
Rio government to induce England to rescind or modify his
engagements were entirely fruitless. The situation, therefore,
resolved itself into a tale of distress in which the Brazilian gov¬
ernment at Rio was caught between the two millstones of the
inexorable pressure exerted by Great Britain to end the traffic
and the dogged determination of the Brazilian public to con¬
tinue it.