

  23 See supra, pp. 173-174.
  24 W. L. Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, 1839-1865, p. 13.
  25 Peter Leonard, The Western Coast of Africa, pp. 92-96.
  26 England attempted to secure an equipment clause in connection with other
nations engaged in the traffic. In 1822 Spain agreed that evidence of slaves on
board during that particular voyage warranted seizure, but a four year delay in
ratification and difficulties of proving the presence of slaves on the voyage of the
seizure rendered the provision useless. Holland (1823) and Sweden (1824) agreed
to satisfactory equipment clauses. France (1833) agreed to equipment and break¬
ing up clauses. Spain refused until 1835 when equipment and breaking up clauses
were signed, but the severe penalties to be imposed by the Spanish government
to make these clauses effective were delayed. Similar negotiations with Lisbon
in 1835 broke down. By the Portuguese Bill of 1839 (August) the English Parlia¬
ment authorized seizure of vessels flying the Portuguese flag if they were equipped
for the traffic and in 1842 an agreement was reached between England and Por¬
tugal. Only Brazil and the United States resisted the pressure by Great Britain
to secure equipment clauses (Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, pp. 14-23).
                    BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                     227
Brazil’s consent to that remedy England exerted every effort.
  With the absolute prohibition of the trade set for March,
1830, an equipment clause became urgently necessary. There¬
fore, in obedience to instructions received from the Foreign
Office, Gordon addressed a note to the Brazilian foreign min¬
ister in which he proposed that an article should be concluded
which would establish “the illicit employment of ships by their
fitting up and by general circumstances therein specified in lieu
of the clause requiring proof of the slaves having been actually em¬
barked.” Great Britain, he continued, considered it to be essen¬
tial for the maintenance of the spirit and object of the slave
trade treaty that such an article should be concluded. Further¬
more, he advised the minister, the commissioners at Sierra
Leone already had been given instructions to act in the spirit
or principle of such an article.27
  The proposal, which received no answer from the Rio court,28
was revived in 1831 when Palmerston instructed Chargi Aston
to bring the question of seizures of vessels fitted out for the trade
before the Brazilian government.29 Two years later30 Consul
 General Ouseley again proposed negotiations, this time with
some slight hope of success, he thought.31 The present admin¬
istration, he reported in a confidential letter,32 was favorable
 to such a clause, but it was probable that                the Interest taken
 by the Inhabitants of this Country generally in defeating the
 Intentions of the Govt, and rendering negatory their efforts
for an effective suppression of the illegal Traffic in question