

  96 Ibid. The British agents reported “scandalous frauds” practiced by the Brazil¬
ians in the question of the slave trade. Freed slaves serving their fourteen years were
fraudulently declared dead; Negroes were secretly taken from seized slavers, de¬
clared dead, and sold into slavery; and the traffic was carried on openly in an illegal
manner in Maranhao despite the protests of the British agent (F. O., 84/56, Can¬
ning to Gordon, Nos. 2, 3, 4). Stuart wrote from Bahia that 18,000 Negroes were
imported annually into that province, by far the greater number coming from the
part of Africa north of the equator (F. O., 84/56, Stuart to Canning, March
14, 1826).                               96 F. O., 84/56, Canning to Stuart, No. 1.
  97 This provision guaranteed the right of visit and search of Brazilian merchant¬
men by British cruisers to ascertain the illegal presence of slaves.
  98 F. O., 84/56, Canning to Stuart, No. 1. January 12, 1826.
214        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  Stuart failed," but Gordon took over the task and on Octo¬
ber 30, 1826, held his first conference with two Brazilian com¬
missioners. The first obstacle which he encountered was the
fact that the Assembly itself during its last session had proposed
a bill to abolish the traffic within six years, and the Brazilian
agents considered themselves unable to negotiate until the rep¬
resentative body had taken action. Gordon countered by point¬
ing out that since Brazil no longer constituted a part of the
Portuguese dominions, the trade was automatically prohibited
by virtue of the conventions of 1815 and 1817 between Eng¬
land and Portugal, as those agreements abolished the traffic
between Portuguese Africa and any foreign country. England
was merely insisting upon a free will expression by which the
Rio government should acquiesce in a fact that had already
been accomplished.100 The Brazilians were reminded also that
Great Britain had treaty rights with Portugal which would
enable it to enforce the prohibition of the slave trade between
its old ally and foreign powers. Any resistance, therefore, which
the Rio court could make to the proposed total abolition of
its traffic, would be futile.101
   At the second conference, the Brazilians notified Gordon
that D. Pedro himself preferred to wait until the Assembly
could meet and take action. But again the envoy refused, sug¬
gesting as a solution to the difficulty that the negotiation and
the treaty should be kept secret until the Chamber met.102 At
the next meeting, Gordon brusquely refused to consider a four-
year time limit for the traffic and stated laconically that the
indemnity demanded by D. Pedro for loss of revenue to his
government could not be granted by England. He likewise
refused to change the preamble required by Canning, by which
 the empire acknowledged the validity of the conventions of
 1815 and 1817.103 On November 22, the Brazilians finally gave
   *® F. O., 84/56, Canning to Stuart, No. 1. In this dispatch Canning gives in detail
 the reasons why the treaty negotiated by the envoy was unsatisfactory.
   100 F. O., 84/56, Gordon to Canning, No. i. Protocol of First Conference.
   101 F. O., 13/38, Gordon to Dudley, No. io. Gordon denied making this threat
 but the situation was quite clear to the Brazilian commissioners (ibid.).
   101 F. O., 84/56, Gordon to Canning, No. i. Protocol of Second Conference.
   10S Ibid., Protocol to the Conferences of November 21 and 22.
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      215
 their consent to a three year time limit to count from the date
 of ratification, and the next day the treaty was signed.104
   Gordon, by obeying orders, thus obtained the treaty in the
 exact terms set down by Canning,105 but he was dubious as to
 the outcome of the affair. Writing to the foreign minister, he
 admitted that it could not “be denied that the measure of
 abolishing the Traffic in Slaves” was “to the highest degree
 unpopular in this country. . .                From the first he had been
 convinced      ‘that so far from its being advisable” to yield to
 the emperor s desire to wait until the meeting of the Assembly,
D. Pedro would not have been able to grant the abolition at
 all if the decision had been left to that body. Moreover, the
trade, as Gordon foresaw, would be carried on ten-fold during
the next three years and afterwards it would continue by a
system of contraband with the connivance of the Rio govern¬
ment. When the final abolition should take place, therefore,
 the task of sweeping the seas” would be thrown “entirely
upon the hands of Great Britain.”106
   The minister was a true prophet, for when the convention
was transmitted to the Assembly at the next regular session,
the storm raged for days.107 By a document108 dated May 22,