

  114 Armitage, History, I, 200-204; Oliveira Lima, O Reconhecimento, pp. 255-256.
  116 Oliveira Lima, 0 Reconhecimento, p. 255; Pereira da Silva, Historic, VII, 332-
333- The payment of the £2,000,000 was especially objectionable to the Brazilians.
It was not published along with the Portuguese Treaty recognizing the independ¬
ence, but the article, which was secret, was reserved until its final presentation to
the Assembly when that body met. It also was an accomplished fact and there was
nothing that the Chamber could do about it. It served as an additional reason for
distrust of Pedro’s intentions in regard to the future union of the two kingdoms.
                    PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      219
raised a storm of protest. Canning was almost violent in his
denunciation of D. Pedro when he heard the rumor that the
prince had offered to abolish the constitution in return for
recognition by Austria116; and yet to satisfy the demands of
that very minister the prince was forced to resort to absolute
power and to ignore the will of the Assembly and the dominant
party in the empire. The fiasco of the emperor’s policy in the
Banda Oriental and the distrust of his intentions in relation to
Portugal after the death of D. Joao in 1826 completed the alien¬
ation of the Patriots, and on April 13, 1831, the Brazilian party
expelled the absolutist prince who had established the empire of
Brazil and had secured the entrance of the new state into the
society of the nations of Europe.117 England’s price for its recog¬
nition of the independence of the empire was a serious con¬
tributing factor to the downfall of the founder of the Brazilian
nation.

  118 Archivo Diplomatico, II, Brant and Gameiro to Carvalho e Mello, May 11, 1825.
  117 Rocha Pombo, Historia, VIII, 254-264; Armitage, History, II, 103-143; Oli¬
veira Lima, 0 Imperio Bmzileiro, pp. 21, 210. For a discussion of the manner in
which D. Pedro won and lost the support of the Brazilians between 1822 and 1831
see the article by the author, “The Paradoxical Pedro, First Emperor of Brazi ”
The Hisp. Amer. Hist. Review, XII (1932), May.
                       CHAPTER IX


THE BEGINNINGS OF THE REVOLT AGAINST BRIT¬
                    ISH DOMINANCE


Between   1825 and 1827 British preeminence in Brazil reached
its culmination. The traditional supremacy in Portuguese eco¬
nomic life was transferred to the independent empire between
1808 and 1827; the virtual monopoly of Brazilian commerce
enjoyed by England during the Napoleonic wars was prolonged
until 1827 by means of the preferential importation tax secured
in 1810; and the opening of the ports of the colony to world
trade stimulated British interests. Between 1808 and 1827 Great
Britain thus secured a favored position among foreign powers
in Brazilian commerce, investment, and shipping, and estab¬
lished the Englishman as a permanent factor in the economic
life of the nation. Politically, Great Britain was beginning to
exercise a virtual protectorate over the empire. Under the com¬
pelling direction of the London Foreign Office, peace terms
with Portugal which aroused the distrust and resentment of
the Brazilian Patriot class were forced on the Rio government;
due solely to English influence, acknowledgment of independ¬
ence by Portugal and recognition by the European powers
were achieved by D. Pedro; a commercial treaty, disliked but
tolerated, solidified British economic privileges; a convention
suppressing the slave trade was forced on a vehemently pro¬
testing people who were unable to prevent ratification; and
extra-territorial privileges freed the Englishman from Brazilian
jurisdiction. Thus in 1827 British economic and political pre¬
eminence in Portuguese America was definitely established.
  The parallel between England’s position in Brazil in 1827
and the Anglo-Portuguese situation after 1703 is striking. In
both cases England had helped to establish the independence
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                   221
of a revolting nation; a profitable economic interchange pro¬
moted by special privileges which were guaranteed by treaties
tightened the union between the allies; and the Englishman
became the paramount factor in the economic life of the weaker
power. But here the parallel ceases: whereas in the eighteenth
century, England pushed these advantages until Portugal be¬
came virtually an economic and political vassal,1 nineteenth
century Brazil resisted similar efforts so strenuously that by
1845 the special favors granted England were revoked, the
commercial and slave trade treaties were declared annulled,
and the Rio court was frankly in revolt against the pressure ex¬
erted by the London Foreign Office.
   This revolt against British preeminence revealed two phases
one political and the other economic. The issue in the first
phase arose from England’s efforts to suppress the slave trade;
in the second phase, it was forced by Brazil’s determination
to place Great Britain on an equal footing economically with
other foreign powers. The discussion of Anglo-Brazilian rela¬
tions during the hundred years following 1827 whl be concen¬
trated, therefore, upon these two principal issues.
   England’s attempt to abolish the traffic was the direct cause
of the decline of its political preeminence in Portuguese Amer¬
ica. From the very moment of the signature of the convention
of 1826 until the late ’sixties, Anglo-Brazilian relations were
embittered by the slave trade, the distrust and contempt of
the British2 being matched by the fear and hatred of the Bra¬
zilians in whose minds the suppression of the traffic and sub¬
ordination to England were synonymous. Even the more mod¬
erate historians and statesmen of Portuguese America consid-