


  60 F. O. 84/141, Palmerston to Fox, No. 3, and No. 4, Enclosures.
  61 Sierra Leone, the West Indies, and British colonies on the northern coast of
South America were refused by Palmerston. Fie favored negotiations with the
United States in favor of exportation to Liberia (F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palm¬
erston, Nos. 15 and 19; Palmerston to Ouseley, No. 7).
   62 Correio Official, April 24, 1835. Correspondence exchanged between Aureliano
and Fox and Aureliano’s report to the Assembly, dated August 9, 1834.
   63 Ibid., May 20, 1835. Report of the minister of justice to the Assembly, dated
 May 20, 1835.
   64 The fate of the emancipado provoked Christie to severe criticisms of the Brazil¬
 ian government in 1865 (Jvotes on Brazilian Questions, pp. 3-6, 38-39).
   66 Christie, Notes, pp. 38-39; Joaquim Nabuco, Estadista do Imperio, Nabuco de
 Araujo, Sua Vida, Suas Opindes, Sua Epoca, I, 244.
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                        233
sight. But as in the first case, Brazil had shown clear and un¬
mistakable evidence of a successful revolt against the pressure
exerted by Great Britain.
  The third of the allied questions arising from England’s at¬
tempts to suppress the traffic, the dispute over the finality of
the decisions of the Sierra Leone commission, did not terminate
in the same manner as the two already discussed. Since the
commission existed by virtue of an international agreement, it
could not be restricted by Brazil to national legislation; and
instead of dropping into oblivion at its expiration in 1845, it
left a heritage of claims to vex the foreign offices of both na¬
tions. The present discussion will be limited to the period dur¬
ing which the commission actually functioned.
  By Castlereagh’s convention of 1817, mixed commissions were
set up, one on British territory in Africa and one on Brazilian
soil in Brazil, to decide on the legality of seizures made under
the terms of the convention. The Rio commission, which has
been discussed in an earlier chapter,66 never became an effi¬
cient instrument for the suppression of the slave trade. But the
court at Sierra Leone, located on English territory and sub¬
ject to the influence of the British Foreign Office, rendered de¬
cisions which aroused the Rio government to heated protest
and left claims that remained unsettled for decades. In this
case the revolt of Brazil against what its ministers termed the
arbitrary and illegal proceedings of Great Britain proved in¬
effectual; yet the attempt was made and friction resulted.


  66 Supra, pp. 180-183. The inability to operate efficiently continued after the
renewal of the 1817 convention was effected in 1826. It is fair to add, however,
that the Rio government in the later period attempted to facilitate its operation
(Brazil, Ministerio das Relagoes Exteriores, Relatorio da Repartifdo dos Negocios dos
Extrangeiros apresentado a Assemblia Geral Legislativa, 1839, pp. 4-5). Located in ter¬
ritory where public opinion strongly favored the traffic and severely hampered by
the difficulties surrounding the disposal of the emancipados, the Rio commission was
hopelessly handicapped. Consequently British cruisers began to take prizes seized
in Brazilian waters to Cape of Good Hope or to Demerara colonies for adjudi¬
cation instead of to the regular mixed commission (Relatorio dos Negocios Extran¬
geiros, 1841, p. 7, and 1844, p. 4). A list of vessels adjudicated by the Rio Commis¬
sion between November 28, 1826, and September 13, 1845, is given in Relatorio
dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1846, pp. 17-21.
234        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  Trouble was precipitated by the case of the slave ship Active,
which was brought before the Sierra Leone mixed commission
in May, 1826. The capture had taken place south of the equa¬
tor (the traffic was permitted south of the line until 1830) and
no slaves were on board at the moment of seizure; but it was
fairly well established that three hundred slaves escaped to the
shore and that the ship had obtained the Negroes from north
of the equator. The claim for damages entered by the owners
for illegal seizure was awarded by the commission, but pay¬
ment of damages was to be made only if the governments should
decide that such claims were “according to the true interest
and meaning of the Convention.” In September of the same
year, another slaver, the Perpetuo Defensor, was brought in under
similar circumstances and received the same sentence. Four
months later the Heroina was captured north of the equator
with no slaves on board but with all the equipment necessary
for the transportation of Negroes.67 All of these ships were re¬
turned to the owners by the court since the letter of the con¬
vention had not been violated, but the claims of compensation
for illegal seizure were to be decided upon by the two govern¬
ments.
 The decision was a shrewd one in that it forced negotiations
on the legality of seizure when a vessel was obviously engaged
in illegal traffic although no slaves were actually on board.
Minister Gordon immediately invited the Brazilian govern¬
ment to issue “a joint declaration which” should “set at rest
the above and all the future cases of the same nature,” by
authorizing the seizure of vessels with or without slaves on
board if they were found in places where the trade was not
permitted.68
  By the convention of 1817 authorizing visit and search, de¬
tention on such grounds was illegal if judgment was rendered