

from Queluz, on the grounds that the abolition had not resulted from menaces
by Great Britain nor as a concession to that government, but for humanity’s sake
and the honor of Brazil. Queluz explained more or less satisfactorily (ibid.).
  109 The constitution had been formulated by the emperor and had been declared
in force without the sanction of any constituent assembly. Some municipal bodies
voted to accept it (Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, p. 76).
                     PRICE OF RECOGNITION                                      217
charge.110 By virtue of this treaty, he argued, Brazilian citizens
would become subject to the jurisdiction of British Admiralty
courts; the only supply of labor possible to the country was
checked; and the only shipping business left open to the Bra¬
zilians after the commercial treaties with England and France
was prohibited.
   The Bishop of Bahia favored the convention, but the Bishop
of Maranhao opposed it.* * 111 Clemente Pereira, historic leader
of the republican wing of the Patriots, in a clear, forceful speech
delivered in the session of July 4, agreed entirely with Cunha
Mattos in his opinion that the convention was a serious mis¬
take. But the treaty was signed, he pointed out, and, in the
face of that action taken by D. Pedro and his ministers, there
was no recourse left to the Chamber but to accept it.112 His
speech was roundly cheered throughout.
   On July 4, after a long debate, the Chamber merely voted
not to take any action in regard to the convention but to re¬
serve its deliberations for the proper time.113
   The second item of the bill which Great Britain had pre¬
sented for its services in securing the recognition of the inde¬
pendence of Brazil was thus paid in full. But the payment had
entailed the desertion by D. Pedro of the Patriot, or Constitu¬
tionalist Party, for it was only by virtue of his absolute power
that the demands of England could be met. Early in 1824, the
prince stood hesitating between the Absolutist and the Patriot
  110 Raymundo Jos6 da Cunha Mattos, member of the Committee on Diplomacy
and Statistics. He spoke during the session of July 3.
  111 Debate of July 3.
  112 Clemente Pereira demonstrated that Brazil had not a sufficient number of
laborers. Yet neither would the Indians serve nor would the Europeans come.
Since the Negro supply from Africa was to be cut ®ff, the only recourse left was
to propagate the Negroes already in Brazil. More than three years were necessary
for that solution, however, and yet in 1830 the traffic must cease. The trade should
be stopped for philanthropic reasons, if for no other, but he could not believe that
England’s action was based exclusively on that ground. Economic and special
class motives likewise instigated its action, but Brazil also had its own economic
and special class reasons for delaying abolition.
  113 Gordon enclosed copies of the speeches in F. O., 13/38, Gordon to Dudley,
No. 3.
218         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
parties, with powerful influences pulling him toward both
camps. He chose the way of the autocrats and surrounded him¬
self with adulating sycophants and ignorant favorites. The lib¬
erty of the press, though nominally guaranteed, was extin¬
guished; presidents of provinces who exercised arbitrary au¬
thority were promoted; legislative powers were arrogated by
the cabinet; and members of the Absolutist Party were favored
throughout the empire.114
  Other factors than his relations with England undoubtedly
influenced the prince in the adoption of his autocratic course.
But it is evident that only absolute power in his hands could
have enabled D. Pedro to concede the price demanded by Eng¬
land for its old ally Portugal and to pay in full the bill rendered
by Great Britain for its services in securing the recognition of
the empire by the mother country and by the European na¬
tions. To establish the empire and to repress the disintegrating
tendencies of republicanism which threatened to disrupt Bra¬
zil, the prince was forced to betray the party by which he had
made himself supreme. The treaty with Portugal, negotiated
under the pressure of London, placed the monarchy and the
cabinet in a precarious position in the eyes of the Brazilians
who were becoming ever more suspicious of the reactionary
tendencies of their government.116 While it caused serious diffi¬
culties in the Absolutist Party and annoyed the Patriots, the
commercial treaty with England was accepted for the time
being, since the traditional dominance of Great Britain in
Portuguese economic life had prepared the Brazilians for the
inevitable preeminence of that nation in their own commerce.
But the slave trade convention, the work of a monarch acting
with absolute power and surrounded by irresponsible ministers,