

  111 The first article declared the slave trade to be piracy.
  112 Aberdeen agreed to the extension of time granted to the mixed commissions
to enable them to close pending cases.
250         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
Slave Trade.” Cruisers would continue to detain and visit
slavers as under the conditions specified by the convention of
1826; but instead of taking prizes to the mixed commission for
adjudication, they were to bring them before British admiralty
or vice-admiralty courts.113 At the same time Aberdeen in¬
structed his agent at Rio to inform the Brazilian government
that this bill would not be passed, or in case it became law, it
would be repealed, if the Brazilian trade should cease entirely
or the Rio government should enter into satisfactory agree¬
ment with Great Britain.114
 The bill became law on August 8, 1845, and on the next
day, Aberdeen sent Hamilton instructions115 for concluding a
new agreement with Brazil. The annexes and stipulations of
Castlereagh’s convention of 1817 were to be renewed; seizures
by English cruisers were to be authorized on the grounds of
equipment for the trade; and the duration of the new agree¬
ment was to be for a specified length of time with a stated num¬
ber of months to pass after the notification of termination by
either country. In a confidential aside to his agent, Aberdeen
added that in case of abrogation by Brazil, England could
again revert to the methods of suppression announced in the
bill just passed.
  Any hope of a new convention, however, was dissipated by
the passage of the Aberdeen Bill. Negotiations for a new agree¬
ment were already under way116 when news of the enactment
into law of the warning issued by the English Foreign Office
blocked further proceedings. Limpo de Abreu, Brazilian for¬
eign minister, advised Hamilton that the “new act of the Brit¬
ish Parliament was virtually a menace” and that a renewal of
the old convention would be “inadequate and unprofitable to
Brazil unless some stipulation offering more positive security
to her Coasting Trade” was included.117 Full powers were is-
  113 Great Britain, British and Foreign State Papers, XXXIV, 1216-1219; F. O.
 4/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 12.
  114 F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 12.
  115 Ibid., No. 18.
  118 F. O. 83/582, Hamilton to Aberdeen, Nos. 25, 31, and 35.
  117 Ibid., No. 40.
                       BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                  251
sued to a Brazilian plenipotentiary to negotiate with Hamil¬
ton118 but nothing resulted from the nomination.119 Hamilton
finally gave up hope in December and advised London of the
utter failure of his endeavors to obtain a new treaty.120
  Only an incurable optimist could have hoped for a renewal
of the convention in view of the storm which the Aberdeen
Bill created in Brazil. An able note121 written by Limpo de
Abreu phrased the point of view not only of the Foreign Office
but of the nation as well. In his reply to the act of the British
Parliament, he pointed out that no nation had the right to
exercise an act of jurisdiction over the property or persons of
another country, particularly within the territory of the second
nation. Visit and search on the high seas was exclusively a
belligerent right and unlawful in time of peace; yet Great
Britain by national legislation was proceeding contrary to in¬
ternational usage and was violating the sovereignty and inde¬
pendence of a free nation. Since the convention which declared
slave trading to be piracy had expired, that provision termi¬
nated also, particularly as no universal consent to treat the
traffic as piracy existed. In conclusion he stated emphatically
that “the Aberdeen Bill was not based either on the text or on
the spirit of the Convention of 1826; it contradicted the clearest
principles of the rights of nations, violated the sovereignty and
independence of Brazil and of all nations.” Therefore Brazil
refused to accept responsibility for the consequences of the bill
and affirmed its belief that the act was the result “of force and
violence.” His government at once entered claims for the dam¬
ages which its subjects might suffer as a consequence of acts
performed under the authority of the bill.122
  118 F. O. 84/583, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 42.
  118 Ibid., No. 52.
  120 Ibid., No. 55.
  m The note was dated October 22, 1845. It is given in Brazil, Relatorio dos
Negocios Extrangeiros, 1846, Supplement, Document 3.
  122 An acrimonious exchange of letters between the two foreign offices followed
the passage of the Aberdeen Bill but neither side moved its opponent to modify
his position (F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 18; F. O. 84/582, Hamil¬
ton to Aberdeen, Nos. 25, 35, and 40; Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros,
1846, Supplement, Document 29).
252        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  The issue was clearly defined: the Brazilian government,
which thus far had been unable to suppress the slave trade,
renounced the convention granting to England the two instru¬
ments employed for the abolition of the traffic, namely, the
mixed commission at Sierra Leone and the right of visit and
search. The utmost pressure by Great Britain failed to modify
that determination; hence the London Foreign Office decreed
that Brazilian slave ships were to be captured “under the some¬
what singular authority of a British statute,”123 until the Rio
government should agree to a satisfactory convention with
England. Persuasion had failed; coercion was to be employed
to quell the Brazilian revolt against submission to the desires
of the London Foreign Office.
  It is evident from the foregoing discussion that the twenty
years between 1825 and 1845 witnessed a steady decline in the
political influence exerted by Great Britain over Brazil.      In
1825 ^e larger power, to all appearances, was beginning to
exercise a virtual protectorate over its South American ally,
thus carrying on the tradition of Anglo-Portuguese relations
in a new setting. But friction that grew more embittered as
time passed arose over the continuance of the slave trade. The
three allied questions of an equipment clause, the disposal of
emancipados, and the finality of the decisions of the Sierra Leone
commission, increased the ill-feeling between London and Rio,
which not even the desire, common to both governments, of
stopping the traffic could surmount. The smoldering resent¬
ment felt by Brazil over what it termed the arbitrary and dom¬
inating action of England broke into open revolt at the expi¬
ration of the convention of 1826 when GreatBritain, determined
on the suppression of the traffic at any cost, employed coercion
when persuasion failed. Could that revolt be maintained, or
would the Rio government be forced to come to terms with
London and sign an agreement satisfactory to the British For¬
eign Office? The simplest solution to the crisis would be for
the Brazilians to stop the traffic by their own efforts, ignore
Great Britain’s stand, and maintain their attitude of hostility
 123 Mathieson, Great Britain and the Slave Trade, p. 130.
               BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                       253
until London granted recognition of the fact that the tradi¬
tional position of England in Portugal could not be continued
in Brazilian affairs. Such, as a matter of fact, was to be the
solution of the crisis of 1845, as the succeeding twenty years
were to show.
                               CHAPTER X