

stipulations contained in the additional convention signed by the plenipotentia¬
ries but unratified due to the refusal of the Chamber of Deputies to accept them.
  102 Ibid., 1838, p. 14.
  103 On an average of every two years between 1827 and 1844 England attempted
negotiations with a view to modifying the convention. In 1827, 1829, 1831, 1835,
1837, 1839-40, and 1841-43 more or less formal discussions occurred.
246         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
was clearly defined: could England, by repeating the exploit
of 1825-27, secure the acceptance of Brazil to a convention
which in popular opinion was derogatory to the dignity and
national interests of the nation?
  A warning was sounded at the time of the Ellis mission in
1842 that a renewal of the 1826 agreement was profoundly
distasteful to the Brazilian public. When it was announced
that D. Pedro had nominated representatives to treat with the
English plenipotentiary, great apprehension was manifested
in all classes of society. Brazilians of every rank were anxious
to have the convention terminate with the result that public
opinion “was energetically resolved to reject any convention
whatsoever with England.” The minister of foreign affairs,
Aureliano de Souza e Oliveira Coutinho, lost popularity and
his brother, who was running for election to the Assembly, was
defeated, due in large part to the disgust of the public over the
conduct of the minister. So uncertain was the Assembly itself
over the question of Aureliano’s ability to sustain Brazilian
rights in the face of British pressure, that it demanded the en¬
tire correspondence exchanged between the minister and the
English envoy. When his successor, Honorio Hermeto, broke
off the negotiations, he won amazing signs of public favor.104
  No agreement was ever reached, despite long negotiations
in Rio and London,105 and on March 12, 1845, Hamilton re¬
ceived a note from the Brazilian Foreign Office, which stated
succinctly that “under the Stipulations for the Slave Trade
Convention between Great Britain and Brazil, the Conven-

  104 Pereira da Silva, Memorias, I, 99-108. Henry Ellis presented his credentials
as envoy extraordinary on November 19, 1842. He continued with Honorio Her¬
meto Carneiro Leao the negotiations begun by Hamilton for the renewal of the
treaty of commerce and the slave trade convention (Brazil, Ministerio das Rela¬
tes Exteriores, Relates Diplomatics do Brasil, contendo os names dos Representantes
Diplomaticos do Brazil no extrangeiro e dos representantes Diplomaticos dos diversos paises
no Rio de Janeiro de 1808 a 1912, p. 175). Honorio Hermeto succeeded Aureliano as
foreign minister on January 20, 1843 (F. O. 13/227, Supplement, Foreign Min¬
isters of Brazil, 1822-1845).
  105 Hamilton continued negotiations in Rio after Ellis’ failure, but his efforts
dealt largely with the commercial treaty. The details of the negotiations are dis¬
cussed in the chapter on the economic phase of Anglo-Brazilian relations.
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                   247
 tion of July 28, 1817, would cease to have force and effect
 from the day following; and that consequently from that date,
 namely, the 13th of the month, would cease the right of visit
 and search provided for by the said convention of July 28, 1817,”
 with all the additional articles, instructions, and provisions ap¬
 pended thereto. The mixed commissions would sit for six
 months longer to finish cases that might be pending, if England
 agreed to the extension in time.106 On the following day the
 minister of justice notified the courts of law of the cessation of
 the right of visit and search, and informed them that until
further instructions captured slavers would be tried in the
ordinary courts.107
   The notice of expiration was received with approval by the
Brazilian public. An article in the Jornal do Commercio108 asserted
that the cessation of the terms of the convention was “a motive
for congratulations as regards” Brazilian “National Commerce,
which” was “thus freed from the vexations to which it” had
“been subjected by the violence of the British cruisers, and
which would have annihilated it entirely; and it” was “also a
motive for” Brazilians sincerely “to congratulate the English
Merchants established in the Country, to whom the new order
of things” could not “but be advantageous.” Moreover, the
article continued, no one was “ignorant of the progressive
prosperity of British Commerce in Brazil since 1808, of the
benevolence which Englishmen met with, of the Confidence
with which they came to the Country, and of the good recep¬
tion and preference which they encountered; but everyone”
knew “also that from 1835, the period when the violences of
the British cruisers commenced, and were exercised without
measure, and even in contempt of the Treaties, that confidence
and mutual kindly feeling began to be weakened and an irri¬
tation of minds appeared, which unhappily manifested itself