

  84 Ibid., 1844, p. 4. The Vencedora, Tartaruga, Anna, and Relampago suffered the
like fate. The Brazilians protested this action as being detrimental to their coast¬
wise trade (p. 18). The case of the Maria Theresa was decided in favor of the Bra¬
zilians and the captor was censured, but the seizures continued.
  86 Ibid., p. 20.
  86 F. O. 84/141, Ouseley to Palmerston, No. 8.
  87 Ibid., No. 16. Confidential. July 13, 1833.
  88 Ibid., No. 3.
  89 F. O. 13/212, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 47. June 8, 1844.
   16
242         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN RAZIL
evidenced by the various measures promoted by the govern¬
ment after 1830. That these were inadequate in the first place
or were rendered ineffectual after enactment does not prove
the want of determination on the part of the Rio court, for
circumstances beyond the control of the central power pre¬
vented the effective execution of its will until 1848. In spite of
public disapproval, the Brazilian government sincerely at¬
tempted to make the prohibition of the slave trade effective.
  The first of its measures was proposed on the last day of May,
1831, when the Marquez de Barbacena introduced a project
into the Senate, which had as its purpose the enactment of the
national regulations necessary to make the international agree¬
ment effective. It was approved, sent to the Chamber of Depu¬
ties in June, and became a law November 7 after having been
amended by the lower house.90 By the terms of the statute, all
slaves entering the territory of Brazil in the future were declared
free91; the importer of illicit slaves was to be punished according
to the terms imposed by the criminal code on those who re¬
duced free persons to slavery, with the added penalty of a fine
of two hundred milreis per head plus the expense of reexporta¬
tion to Africa. “Importers” were defined as the commander,
master, and mate of the vessel; the actual owner and the pre¬
vious title holder in case he was aware of the intended purpose
of the purchase; any one who invested in the enterprise or ren¬
dered assistance in any way whatsoever in the preparation, the
voyage itself, or the landing of the slaves; and anyone who
knowingly bought slaves brought in by such importers. In case
slavers were captured beyond the territorial waters of Brazil by
national vessels the same process would hold as in the case of
seizures in national ports.          Thirty milreis reward for each per¬
son apprehended was granted to informers; the commander,
officers, and crew of the vessel effecting a seizure on the seas

  90 Alves, “A Questao do Elemento Servil,” pp. 1206-210. The text of the law is
given verbatim, pp. 210-211, note 21. It is also to be found in Great Britain, British
and Foreign State Papers, XX, 165. A printed copy in Portuguese with a translation
was enclosed in F. O. 84/120, Cunningham and Grigg to Palmerston, No. 18.
  91 Exception was made of slaves in the service of ships flying the flag of a country
where slavery was lawful.
                     BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                       243
were to divide the fines as a reward. Negroes brought in from
Africa as free laborers would not be permitted to land on Bra¬
zilian territory, the officials of the vessel importing such Ne¬
groes being subject to a fine of a hundred milreis and costs of
reexportation. Any amounts over expenses and rewards ac¬
cruing from seizures were to be used for foundling asylums or
hospitals in the provinces in which the seizures occurred.92
  Although the bill was a very real effort to comply with the
convention abolishing the traffic and was the best that could
be done under the circumstances,93 it was inadequate. The
trade was not declared piracy nor was an equipment article
included; and the reexportation scheme, a sincere effort of the
Brazilian government to remedy the evils arising from the dis¬
posal of freed slaves,94 was blocked by England as being con¬
trary to the terms of the convention of 1826. Three years later
the Senate, influenced by the Regency, attempted to remedy
the worst defect of the bill by passing a law in which an equip¬
ment article was included, but the Chamber of Deputies killed
the project, as we have already noted, by adjourning discus¬
sion.95 The additional articles including the desired clause, ne¬
gotiated the next year between the foreign offices of Rio and
London, failed also.
  In 1837 Barbacena again presented a project which, in bal¬
ancing opposing interests, attempted to secure effective meas-