


  67 For the detailed correspondence relating to the three cases, see: F. O. 84/84,
Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3 and Enclosures: drafts, Aberdeen to Itabayana,
December 1 and 2, 1828; 84/84, Gordon to Dudley, No. 2; 84/95, Draft, Aberdeen
to Itabayana, March 17, 1829.
  68 F. O. 84/71, Gordon to Dudley, No. 1, July 5, 1827.
                    BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                        235
according to the letter of the law; and Brazil at once demanded
that a special commission be appointed to review the decisions
of the Sierra Leone court.59 But an appeal from the decisions
of the mixed commissions was forbidden by the same conven¬
tion, and Aberdeen laconically refused to entertain any such
proposal.60 Later, he confessed that there had been an evident
breach of the treaty in the cases of the Activo and the Perpetuo
Defensor, but indemnities had been awarded “provided the
British and Brazilian Governments” agreed in declaring “that
the said sums ought to be paid according to the said Conven¬
tion and not otherwise.” It was not the fault of England, he con¬
tinued, that the agreement in question had not been concluded,
since the Brazilian government had maintained a studied si¬
lence in the face of Gordon’s repeated efforts to conclude an
additional clause to the convention of 1826.61 As to the Heroina,
Aberdeen replied somewhat scornfully that since Brazil had
violated the convention in respect to the issuance of passports
to slavers,62 “England had no alternative” but to consider such
action as the expression of “Brazil’s determination to break
the Convention” and orders had been issued to the commis¬
sioners “to use the latitude thus given to the meaning of the
Convention.” The Heroina was the result of one such capture.
If Brazil did not like this point of view, it could obey the con¬
vention or sign an article containing an equipment clause.63 He

  69 F. O. 84/84, Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3, Enclosures: drafts,”Aberdeen to
Itabayana/September 15 and November 29, 1828.
  60 Ibid.
  81 Ibid., No. 3, Enclosure: draft, Aberdeen to Itabayana, December 1, 1828.
The negotiations referred to were those begun by Gordon in an effort to secure
an equipment clause. By the shrewd manipulation of the Sierra Leone Commission
the question of an equipment clause was thus forced to an issue. See supra, pp. 225-
230.
  69 Aberdeen asserted that “the Brazilian Government themselves have departed
in respect to the Passports, both from the spirit and the letter of the original Con¬
vention: not only by allowing their subjects to infringe with impunity, the stipula¬
tions of the Convention with respect to the Passports actually granted to them [the
Heroina had no papers permitting it to land north of the equator and should not
have been in waters north of the line]” but by issuing passports at variance with
the terms of the convention (F. O. 84/84, Aberdeen to Ponsonby, No. 3, Enclosure;
draft, Aberdeen to Itabayana, December 2).                                83 Ibid.
236         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
ordered Gordon to inform the Rio government, therefore, that
England refused to establish a commission to revise the deci¬
sions of the Sierra Leone court, that such sentences were final
and without appeal, and that British cruisers would continue
to stop illicit trade by seizing slavers north of the equator under
similar circumstances.64
   Cruisers assigned to the coast of Africa continued to bring
in vessels suspected of illicit traffic regardless of whether Negroes
were actually on board and the commission continued to re¬
lease the ships but to refuse claims of compensation for time
and expense incurred by the slavers.65 In answer to further
protests by the Brazilian minister at London, Aberdeen ex¬
plained that the cruisers and the court were acting “in strict
accordance with the spirit of the Convention.”66
   Since Great Britain refused to consider a special commission
to revise the decisions of the Sierra Leone court, Brazil’s next
step was to attempt to abolish the tribunal entirely. The mixed
commissions, Rio maintained, had been established to decide
the legality of seizures while the traffic was permitted; but
when abolition came in 1830, there was “nothing for those
courts to decide upon and therefore all sentences pronounced
by them after the 13th of March, 1830,” had to “be considered
as complete nullities.” Moreover, one injustice after another
had been perpetrated by the commission: vessels without slaves
on board had been condemned; ships that had proved they
were not engaged in the trade and others that had just begun
voyages and had not been near the African coast had been de¬
tained; seizures had been made by vessels other than author-