


  106 F. O. 84/581, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 8. The note is given also in Rela-
torio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1846, Supplement, Document 1.
  107 F. O. 84/581, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 8.
  108 Hamilton sent the article to London as an example of the opinion commonly
held by the Brazilians. It was published in the issue of March 19, 1845.
248         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
more than once in acts, and which at length might have pro¬
duced the most fearful consequences.”
  The article concluded with a significant paragraph. “We
who acknowledge,” it said, “how advantageous the produce
of the Industry of England, and its capital are to Brazil; we
who believe that no Foreign Commerce is more useful to the
Country, desire that the former good feeling be reestablished
and therefore we sincerely wish that the Right of Visit, happily
terminated, be interred forever.”
  Another illustration both of the resentment felt by the Bra¬
zilians against the arbitrary position assumed by England and
of their relief over the termination of the Convention occurred
in the speeches given in the session of the Assembly of March
31. One speaker109 pointed out that the offended nationality
of the Brazilians appeared desirous of supporting the traffic,
“if only in despite of England. If there was not a nation,” he
said with perhaps more emotion than veracity, “pretending to
impose the laws on” Brazilians, certainly their “Christian feel¬
ings, their patriotism” would have made them “reflect upon
the matter, and it” was “not possible that so many sessions
would have passed away without some steps having been taken
to put an end to the traffic in some manner or other, but
treated” as the Brazilians had been, they had on their part
“tried to uphold the traffic if it were only to show” their re¬
sistance.
  This rejoicing over the termination of the right of visit and
search was premature, for Aberdeen had no intention of re¬
linquishing the advantage which England had stubbornly
maintained for thirty years. In reply to the Brazilian note of
March 12, 1845, advising him of the termination of the con¬
vention and the cessation of the right of visit and search, he
sent an ominous warning110 to the government at Rio. In a
detailed review of the history of Anglo-Brazilian relations since

  109 Junqueira’s speech was forwarded to London by Hamilton, F. O. 84/581,
Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 25. April 21, 1845.
  110 F. O. 84/583, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 10. June 4, 1845. Instructions for
an official communication to be presented to the Brazilian government.
                    BEGINNINGS OF REVOLT                                   249
1828 in so far as they related to the slave trade, he pointed out
England’s efforts to obtain efficient cooperation from the Bra¬
zilian government and the failure to reach an agreement which
would serve as a basis for the complete suppression of the traf¬
fic. When the negotiations of 1840-41 failed, he had warned
Rio that if the Brazilian government still declined “to enter with
Great Britain into formal engagements calculated to give full
effect to the declared intentions of the Parties of the Conven¬
tion of 1826 for the total and final abolition of the Slave Trade
of Brazil,” it would “remain for Her Majesty to take alone and
by Her Own Means the steps which she” might “feel called
upon to adopt for carrying into full and complete effect the
humane object of the obligations imposed upon Her Majesty
by the first Article of the Convention.”111
  The warning, he continued, passed unheeded, the next com¬
munication from the Rio Office being the notification of March
12. He admitted that according to the terms of the agreement,
the convention of 1817 with all its annexes terminated on
March 13 last; but in that case, he affirmed, England was
forced to fall back on the stipulation of the first article of
the convention of 1826, “under which Her Majesty” had “acquired
the right to order the seizure of all Brazilian subjects found upon the
high seas engaged in the Slave Trade, of punishing them as pirates, and
of disposing of their vessels in which they ” might “be captured together
with the goods belonging to them as ''bona piratoram’. ” Great Brit¬
ain had hoped to the very last moment that Rio would not
force it to this step; but it now had no alternative but to ad¬
vise the Brazilian government that the necessary legislation
would be proposed in the English Parliament for the complete
execution of that article.112
  In pursuance of the intentions announced in this letter, Aber¬
deen had a bill introduced in Parliament giving to the courts
of admiralty the “power to take cognizance of and to adjudi¬
cate upon all” Brazilian “vessels captured for carrying on the