

         18
274              BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
lative friction of the past thirty years, England needed a cool,
able diplomat in Rio to prevent a total loss of that political in¬
fluence which had been so dominant in 1827; but unfortunately
W. D. Christie, minister from i860 to the break in 1863, was
impulsive, precipitate, and totally out of sympathy with the
point of view of the Rio government. How hostile his attitude
was may be seen in his letters and in the prefaces to his books
dealing with the Brazilian crisis.79 The opinions expressed by
him in those publications furnish a striking arraignment of a
friendly government by a high official in the British diplomatic
service.
  The letters and prefaces were written to offset the “paid
puffers of Brazil and the lacqueys of its legation” who had “had
it too much their own way in the English press and with the
general public.” Since no trustworthy book in English existed
on Brazil80 and a general ignorance as to South America and
a general indifference to Brazil prevailed, it was “time that
some truth about the Brazilian government should be told.”81
Christie, therefore, enlightened the British public on the sub¬
ject of the empire.
   In the first place, he reviewed the slave trade controversy.
The cessation of the traffic was due, in his opinion, not to an
aversion to slavery or to a sense of moral wrong but to external
pressure and public opinion.82 Moreover, the liberation of the
emancipados was a mockery: “the course of the Brazilian Gov¬
ernment about the Emancipados” had “been like that which
it pursued about the slave trade. Left to itself, it did nothing:

  79 These letters appeared in the Daily News from July 2 to October, 1864, over
the signature C. They were collected and published by Christie in 1865 under the
title of Notes on Brazilian Questions with a long preface. In 1863 he published The
Brazil Correspondence in the Cases of the “Prince of Wales” and Officers of the “Forte
Reprintedfrom Papers Laid before Parliament, containing “an introduction telling some
truths about Brazil.” The following discussion of the Christie affair is based largely
on these two publications and on the documents and correspondence in the for¬
eign relations reports of Brazil.
  80 Christie termed Kidder and Fletcher’s Brazil and the Brazilians an “elaborate
fulsome puff of Brazil which” had “done much mischief” (The Brazil Correspond¬
ence, p. iii).
  81 The Brazil Correspondence, p. iii.             82 Ibid., p. ix.
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                      275
it treated for a long time with neglect representations of the
English Government; it did not answer notes. When obliged
to reply, it protested that its dignity did not allow it to act
while pressed by a foreign government; it resented interference,
and claimed to be left free to execute its own laws, forgetting
that treaty stipulations gave a right to England to interfere.
At last after force had been used, and the English government
was known to be serious, and there seemed no help for it, it”
had “done what it ought to have done long before.”83 As for
the Aberdeen Act, it still remained on the English statute books
because Brazil had refused to make a new treaty, as other na¬
tions had done, which would enable Great Britain to maintain
the suppression of the traffic. The act was continued as secur¬
ity against the renewal of the Brazilian trade. England could
not “abandon in South America the privilege, which Mr.
Bright freely” used “in the north of‘teaching the nations how
to live’.”84
  The English merchants in Brazil, Christie contended, needed
“the strong arm of their government to protect them,” as fear
was “the only effectual security for justice” and the British
navy was “the right arm of the merchants. The gross amount
of commerce” would be “regulated by wants, without treaties,
which wants dispense with, and in spite of bad legislation,
which wants baffle. But individuals from time to time” needed
aid and protection: this their government must give them.85
When he went to Brazil, Christie confessed, he was favorably
inclined toward it, just as was the general public of England;
but slowly by contact with the Rio court “he swung to the other
side, since he saw that the government would do justice only
through fear and that all reasonable demands were met with
excuses and delays, evasions, subterfuges, and unfounded as¬
sertions.”86 In the end he became convinced that as England
was necessary to Brazil, if the Brazilian government found “that
they must behave properly,” they would “take care so to be¬
have.” As long as the Rio court was “just and becomingly mod-