

 61 F. O. 97/79, Scarlett to Clarendon, No. 62. June 25, 1857.
 •* Ibid. A copy of the reply was enclosed in the dispatch.
268        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
United States being sent as a model.63 The Brazilian emperor
approved the idea; a plenipotentiary was appointed; and the
convention was signed June 2, 1858.64
  By the convention65 “all claims on the part of the corpora¬
tion companies, or private individual subjects                of either coun¬
try upon the government of the other contracting power pre¬
sented since the date of the declaration of independence of the
Brazilian Empire or to be presented before a given date, were
to be referred to two commissioners, one appointed by Eng¬
land and the other by Brazil. Each commissioner would select
a permanent secretary who would also act as commissioner in
the case of the incapacity or absence of the latter. The com¬
mission was to sit in Rio; decisions were to be absolutely final;
and in case of disagreement by the two commissioners, they
were to select an arbiter, by lot if necessary, who would cast
the deciding vote. All claims had to be presented within twelve
months, or at the latest, eighteen months from the first meeting
of the commission; at least eight sittings a month were obli¬
gatory; a final decision on every claim presented was to be
rendered within two years; and each government engaged to
consider the result of the proceedings of the commission as a
final and perfect settlement of every claim prior to the exchange
of ratifications whether or not that claim was actually presented.
   Great Britain appointed its commissioner and secretary late
in September, 1858; in November, the Brazilian representa¬
tives were named; the first sitting occurred on March 10, 185966;
and claims were received for adjudication. By May 1, i860, of
the fifty-one British and ninety-nine Brazilian claims entered,


  63 F. O. 97/79, Scarlett to Clarendon, No. 112, and note dated February 15,
 1858. The convention between England and the United States was concluded in

 1853-
  64 Ibid., Scarlett to Malmesbury, Nos. 32, 43, 46. The London Office approved
of the convention (ibid., Draft to Scarlett, No. 8. July 7) and ratifications were
exchanged in London, September 9, 1858 (ibid., Draft to Scarlett, No. 12).
   66 F. O., Treaties, Protocols, 94/477, Brazil. The text is found also in Brazil,
Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1859, Annex C, Note 5.
   66 F. O. 97/79, Draft to Morgan, No. 1; Stuart to Malmesbury Nos. 83 (1858)
 and 18 (1859); and Morgan to Malmesbury, March 10, 1859.
         DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                          269
five British and eight Brazilian had been decided.67 Of the
ninety-one Brazilian cases remaining for consideration there
were fifty-two arising from sentences pronounced by the mixed
commissions of Sierra Leone and of Rio, chiefly of the former,
sixteen from condemnations by vice-admiralty courts under the
Aberdeen Act, and twenty-three miscellaneous cases. The
amount claimed by the Brazilians totalled about two millions
sterling; if the sixty-eight cases arising from the Sierra Leone
commission and the vice-admiralty courts were deducted, the
total was about four hundred thousand pounds sterling.
   The British claims arose from damages suffered by English
subjects during the revolutionary disturbances of 1821 to 1825,
or incurred as a consequence of the Brazilian blockade of La
Plata in 1825-1827. Some demanded compensation for excess
duties levied on imports, others for arrears of allowances or
pay due military officers or their widows, and still others for
destruction of goods during the numerous revolutions of the
period of instability.68 The total value of claims entered by
British subjects was two hundred and fifty thousand pounds
sterling.69
   The proportion of Brazilian claims based on damages for the
action of the Sierra Leone commission and seizures made un¬
der the Aberdeen Act revealed the purpose of the Rio govern¬
ment to use the claims commission as a means of liquidating
the heritage received from the slave trade controversy. In the
negotiations leading up to the signing of the convention and
the articles of the agreement no mention was made specifically
of the status of such claims before the proposed commission;
yet the first article provided that any claim could be submitted