


of Negro History, October, 1925, and R. W. VanAlstyne, “British Right of Search
and the African Slave Trade,” Journal of Modern History, II, No. 1.
   26 Lord John Russell admitted in 1861 that public opinion was a large factor
in the adherence of the government to the policy of coercion (Parliamentary Debates,
 1861, p. 961).
   18 Mathieson believes that it was due to the pressure exerted by the British that
the Rio government was prodded into action after 1848 and especially in 1850
{Great Britain and the Slave Trade, p. 133”135) -
   *7See supra, pp. 188-191, 211-213, 217-219.
26o          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  The native aristocracy with roots that extended back to the
early seventeenth century was based on land. The landowner
established his family socially as well as financially while he
arrogated to himself absolute power over slaves, dependents,
renters, share-croppers, mechanics, overseers, members of his
own family—any who existed on his possessions. In the north
the basis of this class distinction was the cultivation of sugar;
in the south, the plantation of the bandeirante28 or his descendant;
in both north and south the labor supply of the engenho or plan¬
tation was dependent on the slave trade.29
   It was this native aristocracy dependent on land and slave
labor which rose to power in 1831. Opponents of absolutist
centralization, this element favored a constitutionalist or even
a republican regime; and for the next ten years Brazil passed
through a period of severe internal readjustment when the an¬
archy and chaos which was sweeping over so many of the Span¬
ish republics threatened to dissolve the central government es¬
tablished at Rio.30 Under various names and led by different
figures, two main parties emerged and struggled for control,
the liberals and the conservatives.
   The liberals favored democratic forms, strove to diminish
the authority of the central government, worked to gain more
autonomy for the provinces, and appealed to the lower classes
and the radicals for support.31 The camaras32 (town councils)
were encouraged to enlarge their powers and decentralization

  28 The bandeirante was a member of the famous expeditions called bandeiras which
explored the interior of Brazil and wrested from the Spaniards three-fourths of
what became the Brazil of to-day. These expeditions originated in the captaincy
of Sao Paulo (Alfonso de E. Taunay, Historia Geral das Bandeiras Paulistas, 6 vols.).
  29 For a discussion of the rise of this Brazilian aristocracy and the manner in
which that class obtained control of the Brazilian government in 1831, see Alan
K. Manchester, The Rise of the Brazilian Aristocracy,” The Hispanic American
Historical Review, May, 1931.
  30 J- M. Pereira da Silva, Situation Sociale, Politique et Tconomique de VEmpire du
Brisil, pp. 35 ff.
    Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Biazileiro, p. 42; Pereira da Silva, Memorias, I, 29.
  32 The legal basis for the native aristocracy lay in the right to vote for or sit in
the camara. The town council had always been the center of the influence and ac¬
tivity of the native aristocracy (See Manchester, “Rise of the Brazilian Aristoc¬
racy,” p. 145).
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                      261
followed the absolutism of the exiled prince,33 the local bodies
thus becoming the key to the enforcement of the law with the
resultant ability to checkmate the execution of the imperial
decrees by the central authority.34 Thus the camaras, which
were controlled by the landed aristocracy, or the provincial
assemblies, which were responsive to the attitude of the locality,
could defy successfully the will of the Rio government in its
efforts to suppress the slave trade by serving as the effective
vehicles for popular opinion which considered the importations
beneficial to the agricultural life of the country.35 When threat¬
ened with defeat by the Conservatives, these Liberals, or de¬
centralists, were ready to resort even to arms in their effort to
maintain autonomy in the face of the centralization policy of
their opponents.36 The keynote to the ten years of regency rule
following 1831, therefore, was this conflict between the forces
of centralization37; nor was the issue settled until 1848 when
despite the disruptive tendencies manifested in the period be¬
tween 1841 and 1848, the Rio government was able to extend
its authority until it no longer feared the separatist efforts of
the Liberals.38
  The year 1848 was the turning point in the struggle to estab¬
lish a strong central government. During the four years prior
to this date, short-lived, ineffective coalition cabinets consisting
of leaders from all groups attempted to manage affairs with
no true majority possible in the national Assembly. But in 1848
the abortive revolt of the Liberals in Pernambuco resulted in