

  65 W. D. Christie, Notes on Brazilian Questions, pp. 90-92.
  66 Apontamentos, I, 369. Alvez (“A Questao do Elemento Servil,” p. 253) and
Pereira da Silva (Memorias, I, 219) agree with Pinto Pereira. Joaquim Nabuco,
(Estadista do Imperio, I, 226) agrees with Christie to the extent that the terror of
the British cruisers aided Queiroz in his successful suppression of the trade. Math-
ieson (Great Britain and the Slave Trade, pp. 123-124) agrees with Christie. In a brief
and superficial discussion, Sousa S& Vianna presents a pro-English version of the
diplomatic phases of the suppression of the slave trade (‘'O Trafico e a Diplomacia
Brasileira,” Revista do Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras., Tomo Especial VI, Parte 5, pp.
539-565)-
  67 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1851. Annex B, Note 7. In proof of the
sincerity of the Brazilian government, the foreign minister stated that between
October, 1849, and January, 1851, Brazilians had captured 1,200 slaves (ibid.,
note 19).
  68 Ibid., 1854, Annex B, p. 7. Both John Russell and Palmerston stated in the
House of Commons that without the Aberdeen Act the Brazilian slave trade would
not have ceased (ibid., 1855, Annex D, p. 6).
  68 Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazilerio, p. 209; Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Ex¬
trangeiros, 1855, xx, lx, and Annex D, pp. 6-7.
266         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
final suppression of the traffic. The feeling of resentment per¬
sisted with consequent loss of influence by Great Britain in the
political affairs of the empire. Economically, Brazil still leaned
toward England; but politically, the Rio court shifted to the
United States, and an entente cordiale developed between the two
American nations which lasted as long as D. Pedro II remained
on the throne. Due largely to the arrogant tone assumed by
Great Britain in the slave trade controversy, the Brazilian gov¬
ernment was alienated from its traditional friendship for Eng¬
land.60
  The fundamental cause of the irritation which had em¬
bittered Anglo-Brazilian relations since 1827 did not cease
with the actual suppression of the slave trade; for in addi¬
tion to the resentment which persisted, there were two types
of claims which in the opinion of the Rio court remained to
be settled. To the traditional claims for damages arising from
the decisions of the Sierra Leone Commission as stated in the
formal protest of the Chevalier de Mattos on November 30,
1833, there were now added others arising from the seizure of
Brazilian vessels by English cruisers under the authority of a
British statute, the Aberdeen Act. Until these claims, which
were inextricably bound up with the political relation's of the
two countries, could be settled or forgotten, amicable cooper¬
ation between London and Rio proved very difficult, for the
efforts to secure satisfactory settlement caused repeated reviv¬
als of the controversy and kept alive the bitterness of the
1845-56 period.
  In forcing action in regard to these claims, Brazil was aided
by the fact that English subjects were demanding compensa¬
tion for losses suffered during the revolution for independence
and the period of national instability which followed. With the
long slave trade controversy apparently settled by the actual
termination of the traffic and with a strong, centralized gov¬
ernment in command of the situation in Rio, England con¬
sidered the moment opportune to present these claims. Conse¬
quently, P. Campbell Scarlett, envoy extraordinary and min-
  10 Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, pp. 210-211.
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                         267
ister plenipotentiary at Rio, presented a list of the “very nu¬
merous and long outstanding British claims against Brazil.”16
The reply of the minister of foreign affairs and Scarlett’s com¬
ment on that reply present a vivid description of the relations
of the two powers in the middle of the century after the slave
trade controversy to all appearances had been settled. Scar¬
lett s dispatch to the London Office merits special attention,
therefore.
  The reply of the Brazilian minister to his note, Scarlett re¬
ported,62 was written in the usual very courteous terms and
stated that the more pressing claims specifically alluded to by
the British envoy had been referred to the competent depart¬
ment for a solution and the others would be taken up shortly for
consideration by the minister for foreign affairs. On the face
of it, the reply was satisfactory; but, Scarlett complained, this
was merely “one of many of a similar character adopted to¬
wards Her Majesty’s Ministers at Rio de Janeiro as a conven¬
ient form, when the last thing ever contemplated” was “a sin¬
cere intention to accede to repeated demands, or to give any
definite effect to assurances which” meant “really nothing.”
For a succession of years the ruling policy of the Brazilian gov¬
ernment had been one of courteous delay and civil evasion;
note after note had been written without the slightest hope of
success. Scarlett, convinced of the futility of continuing such a
procedure, requested instructions and hinted at the necessity
of “holding firm language” with the Rio government or of
“resorting if necessary to still more stringent measures for ob¬
taining reparations for the parties aggrieved.” His dispatch
shows the growing irritation of the British legation over the
polite inertia which was being used to counter the forceful ac¬
tion of a powerful and unwelcome friend.
  As a result of this report Scarlett received from Clarendon
full powers to negotiate a convention for the settlement of
claims existing between the two nations, a printed copy of the
instrument recently concluded between England and the