

  7* Ibid., No. 81. June 24, i860; and No. 61. May 5, i860. During the period
when the sittings were interrupted, the Rio government and the British legation
agreed that no new cases were to be received after March 10, i860 {ibid.).
  75 Ibid., Draft to Christie, No. 51. July 18, i860. A draft of a tentative reply was
first submitted to the law officers (see F. O. 97/84, Draft to Christie, June, i860
—Draft as submitted to the law officers, June 22, i860); two minutes by Lord
Wodehouse, dated July 6 and 14, suggested certain changes; and Lord Palmerston
and the queen passed on the final draft. The suggestions of Lord Wodehouse,
which were incorporated in the final draft, excluded “the argument introduced
by the Law Officers as to there being an appeal from Vice-Admiralty courts to
which the Bras, did not resort,” and included in the British refusal “all Slave
Trade Claims, whereas the draft as allowed by the Law Officers would confine”
British “objections to cases adjudicated, and would allow claims to be discussed
arising out of capture where the vessels were released without sentence—claims
which” England “had always refused to discuss . . . and which it would be most
dangerous now to admit.” He also changed the language somewhat (see F. O.
97/84, Draft to Christie, No. 51, July 18, i860. Two minutes by Lord Wodehouse).
272        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
strance against the action of the British cruisers under that
bill.” Consequently, Great Britain could not admit that the
Brazilian government was justified in attempting to treat as
“unsettled” claims which England had “invariably treated as
settled and into the merits of which it had always, upon this
very ground, refused to enter.”
  Christie was to acquaint the Rio government with the de¬
cision. If Brazil should concur with this interpretation of the
convention of 1858, the commissioners were to resume work
with an extension of time; or if the Rio court wished to submit
a list of claims excluding those of the two types under discus¬
sion, England would consent to a new convention, which
would specify in detail the character of the claims to be con¬
sidered; but if the Brazilian government adhered to its present
view, England would have no alternative but to allow the com¬
mission to expire. Whatever inconvenience might result would
be regrettable but Great Britain could not “yield to a preten¬
sion on the part of Brazil which would involve a departure
from the settled policy” of the London office.
   Christie delivered the note as instructed,74 although he had
already learned that the Brazilian government was firmly de¬
termined to adhere to its point of view. The cases to which the
protest of the Chevalier de Mattos of November 30, 1833, re¬
ferred and other similar cases since that date “were naturally
considered by the Brazilian government as still pending”; the
Rio court, therefore, held that “they were necessarily proper
to be referred to the Claims Commission and that the recon¬
sideration of these cases and of the cases adjudicated by British
Admiralty courts under the provisions of the Aberdeen Act in
defiance of the protests of the Brazilian Govt, was the advantage
which induced the Bras. Govt, to agree to the convention.”75
  Since neither London nor Rio would yield, the suspension of
the claims commission continued indefinitely with scarcely
more than a dozen cases actually adjudicated and no warrants
for payment issued even for those claims awarded.76 Thus as