

  67 F. O. 97/80, Christie to Russell, No. 57. Of the five British claims decided,
three were granted compensation; of the eight Brazilian, three were granted com¬
pensation. The British awards amounted to seven thousand sterling and the Bra¬
zilian to fifteen thousand seven hundred. The Brazilian minister of foreign affairs
reported to the Assembly that at the first meeting 108 Brazilian and fifty-one Eng¬
lish claims were entered (Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, i860, pp. 67-71).
  68 F. O. 97/80, Christie to Russell, No. 57. May 1, i860.
  69 F. O. 97/84, Christie to Russell, No. 72. A list of these claims with amounts
specified is given in Christie, Notes on Brazilian Questions, Appendix, pp. 233-236.
270         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
“which might have been presented to either government for
its interposition with the other since the Declaration of Inde¬
pendence of the Brazilian Empire and which yet” remained
“unsettled by either of the two governments.” The inference
seemed clear that these old claims which the Brazilian gov¬
ernment had pressed so often would be permitted.
  The English commissioner concurred with the Brazilian opin¬
ion that the first article of the convention empowered him to
review the decisions of the Sierra Leone court. In an early case
decided June 7, 1859, he concurred in the decision that since
the vessel in question had been condemned by the mixed com¬
mission of Sierra Leone the case had been definitely adjudicated
and the commissioners could not take cognizance of it. When
the Brazilian government protested this admission of the final¬
ity of the sentences of the Sierra Leone court and the Brazilian
commissioner argued for a revision of such cases, the English
commissioner yielded and in the case of the Principe do Guini
concurred in asserting the right of revision. Commissioner
Morgan, Christie explained to Lord John Russell, labored un¬
der the impression that his oath of office bound him “to act
entirely according to his own judgement without reference to
the opinions of Her Majesty’s Government.” Consequently, the
wording of the first article of the convention had led him to
take, “erroneously and unfortunately,” the same position in
regard to these slave trade claims as that assumed by the
Brazilian government.70
  Neither the British minister at Rio71 nor the London office
approved of this action of the English commissioner. On Feb¬
ruary 28, i860, Morgan presented to his Brazilian colleague a
dispatch from the English envoy stating that Lord John Russell
had issued instructions not to deal with any more cases arising
from the decisions of the Sierra Leone commission or from
seizures made under the Aberdeen Act until further notice.

  70 F. O. 97/84, Christie to Russell, No. 81. June 24, i860 (see particularly
Morgan’s letter of explanation to Christie, enclosure); Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios
Extrangeiros, i860, pp. 67-71.
  71 Ibid., No. 57. May 1, i860,
        DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                         271
Such an order, the Brazilian commissioner maintained, made
a suspension of the sittings unavoidable; Morgan concurred;
and work was interrupted. Toward the end of March when
the English envoy tried to force the required eight sittings for
that month by inviting the Brazilian commissioner to act with¬
in the limitation imposed by the London office, the Brazilian
government refused unless the motive for the suppression were
removed, and Morgan again concurred in the continued ces¬
sation of the work of the commission. The success or failure of
the claims commission now rested on the question as to whether
the disputed slave trade cases would be made subject to revi¬
sion or ruled out of consideration.72
  The decision of the British Foreign Office in regard to the
question was communicated to Christie under the date of July
18, i860.73 As to the admission of claims arising from the ac¬
tion of the Sierra Leone commission, England had uniformly
refused to have the decisions of the mixed courts reviewed and
had considered as absolutely final the sentences imposed by
that commission; neither government had a right, therefore,
to require that such cases be reopened. As to the second set of
claims, those arising from seizures made under the authority
of the Aberdeen Act, London could not admit that Brazil had
“any just foundation whatever on which to rest any remon-