

 83 Christie, Notes on Brazilian Questions, p. xxxv.   84 Ibid., pp. xlvi, lii-Iiii.
 86 Ibid., p. liii.                                    88 Ibid., p. lxvii.
276        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
est and respectful,” it need not fear violence and want of mod¬
eration” by England against a weaker nation; but any devia¬
tion from the path of justice, modesty, and respectfulness would
bring down upon Brazil the power of the British navy.
  These were the opinions of the diplomat in charge of the
English legation at Rio during the crisis of 1863. He arrived
at the time when the claims commission had reached the im¬
passe resulting from the dispute over the slave trade cases. A
firm believer in fear as the only effective security for justice
and in force as the only instrument by which Brazil could be
kept in hand thus became the crucial factor in Anglo-Brazil-
ian relations at a time when thirty years of growing irritation
and critical tension required the utmost tact to avoid a com¬
plete break between the two countries. The failure of the claims
commission with the revival of the slave trade controversy
greeted the impulsive Christie on his arrival; the habitual easy
procrastination of the Latin irritated the envoy imbued with
British ideas of energetic promptness; and no comprehension
of the internal problems confronting the Brazilian government
relieved the severity of his judgment. It was unfortunate that
the course of Anglo-Brazilian relations depended on the action
of a diplomat of Christie’s bent.
  Two incidents served as the occasion for the break in diplo¬
matic relations which occurred in 1863. The first arose from
the shipwreck of the Prince of Wales, out of Glasgow, on the des¬
olate coast of the province of Rio Grande do Sul near a place
called Albardao. Rumors of robbery and murder in connec¬
tion with the disaster reached Consul H. P. Vereker who de¬
manded an investigation of the “savage and wicked proceed¬
ings of the natives.” At the inquest held on June 24, 1861,
seventeen days after the wreck, only four bodies were produced,
the burial place of six more having disappeared in the shifting
sands of the deserted coast. The physician pronounced drown¬
ing as the probable cause of death in two cases; the other two
bodies were in too bad a state to enable him to render any de¬
cision. But several facts pointed to robbery, or perhaps murder,

  87 Brazil Correspondence, pp. xxix and xxx.
          DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                         277
 and the possible complicity of the local officials in the crime.
The sub-chief of police, a local officer who had arrived on the
spot five days after the wreck, failed to inspect the bodies al¬
though ten could have been produced in good condition at
that time. Many empty crates of crockery, many barrels, chests,
and cases lay scattered on the beach with contents pillaged al¬
though nothing could be found except a Bible and some empty
packing boxes which were unearthed in the house of the chief
landed proprietor of the district. Moreover, the affair was ag¬
gravated by the distance of the wreck from any center of civil¬
ization, the quality and condition of the inhabitants of that
region, and the prolonged time necessary to effect communi¬
cation between Rio and the province.88
   The imperial government, after receiving reports of the in¬
cident through regular channels, ordered a thorough investi¬
gation. When on October 25, the British envoy presented his
official complaint, it was passed on to the provincial authorities
by the Rio officials who entertained suspicions of robbery but
denied the possibility of murder.89 On September 6 a request
to the Admiralty by the British Foreign Office asked that a
war vessel be detached from the Rio squadron and sent to Rio
Grande do Sul90 where the inadequacy of the investigation car¬
ried on by the Brazilian authorities and the improbability of
bringing the individuals involved to justice was disturbing
Consul Vereker.91