


  27 Ibid., No. 16 (December 16) and No. 19 (December 23). Ellis stated that he
was empowered also to close a slave trade convention but the two negotiations
were to be kept distinct.
  28 Ibid., No. 23. January 14, 1843.
  22 Honorio Hermeto Carneiro Leao followed Aureliano de Souza e Oliveira
Coutinho as foreign minister on January 20, 1843. He was also prime minister
(Mello Moraes, Historia do Brazil-Reino e do Brazil-Imperio, I, 435).
  50 F. O. 131/12, Ellis to Aberdeen, No. 27.
  81 Ibid.
  82 Ibid., No. 28. February 20, 1843.
  83 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1844, pp. 7-8.
  84 The second project was an attempt to settle the boundary between British
Guiana and Brazil.
294       BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
both or neither.35 The first was unacceptable in Aberdeen’s
opinion as it was more restricted in its terms than any treaty
then in force between Great Britain and any other power in
any part of the world; and the second was not a matter to be
confused with commercial questions. Hence England could not
accept these terms; Ribeiro could not grant others; and nego¬
tiations again broke down.36
  In his reply to Ribeiro, Aberdeen revealed the motives un¬
derlying Britain’s actions during the negotiations. Brazil, he
said, was demanding entrance into England of its chief raw
materials, sugar and coffee principally, on the same terms that
such imports from British colonies enjoyed, and in return was
willing to grant only most favored nation treatment to Eng¬
land in the matter of importations of manufactured articles.
Such an arrangement would mean that while England would
be forced to compete with other foreign nations for the Bra¬
zilian market, the empire would be allowed to compete with
English colonial possessions in the British market, a situation
which was quite inadvisable. In the first place, no real reci¬
procity was possible under those conditions, for whereas Brazil,
by imposing a high tariff on all nations and thereby fostering
its own manufacturing interests, could limit British imports,
England could not restrict Brazilian importations without
prejudicing ipso facto imports from its own colonies.
  In the second place, as long as slavery and the slave trade
persisted in Brazil, the entrance of raw products grown in the
empire would have to be excluded from British markets. This
was necessary for two reasons: first, the admission of Brazilian
sugar into England would tend to increase the traffic and to
strengthen slavery by the increased demand for the product;
and second, it would not be “just to expose the West Indian
planters, the cost of whose production” had “been greatly en¬
hanced by the emancipation of the negroes,37 to a competition

 86 F. O. 131 /15, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 1. January 3, 1844. Enclosure 1.
 88 Ibid., No. 1. Enclosure 2.
 87 On the margin opposite this statement in Aberdeen’s letter there is an un¬
signed, uninitialed comment, “a dangerous admission.” It will be remembered
            ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                      295
 upon terms nearly approaching to those of absolute equality
 with the Sugars of a Country in which labour” was “obtained
 at a much lower charge and from very different sources.” To
 replace the advantageous treaty of 1827 with an agreement so
 unfavorable to England’s interests was quite impossible.
    Thus the initial efforts of Hamilton, the special mission of
 Ellis, and the London negotiations failed to secure even a
 simple renewal of the treaty which was to expire in November,
 1844. In a last futile effort Aberdeen sent Hamilton instruc¬
 tions to sign an agreement in Rio which, though not as desir¬
 able as England could desire, might save the situation. He was
 authorized to propose a treaty in every essential point similar
to the commercial draft presented by Araujo Ribeiro in Lon¬
don.38 Great Britain would be content to remain on a footing
of equality with other nations, provided that status could be
guaranteed by treaty.
   But even this moderate wish proved impossible of attainment,
due largely to the shadow cast by the slave trade controversy.
In the five months prior to the date when Hamilton received
instructions to close any treaty which would grant England
parity with other nations,39 three assaults on British naval offi¬
cers occurred in different sections of the empire. On January 5
at Santos the commander, the master, and the steward of the
Frolic were severely beaten on their way from the town to the
beach where their gig was awaiting them. All three were in
uniform. On March 4 the envoy reported an assault on the
crew of the Growler at Pernambuco; and on February 27 he
reported the imprisonment of the sailors and the seizure of the
gig of Lieutenant Hoare of the Dolphin when he went ashore
for supplies at Ubatuba. In all three cases the cruisers had been
that the apprenticeship period in the British possessions ended in 1837 when com¬
plete emancipation was granted.
  ** F. O. 131 /15, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 7. April 3, 1844. Aberdeen stated
that a refusal to sign the commercial treaty would be “little short of actual hos¬
tility” and that England had a right to demand a continuation of the old slave
trade convention (J. F. Cady, Foreign Intervention in the Rio de la Plata, 1838-50, p.
132)-
  39 The instructions were sent April 3 and were received May 16, 1844 (F. O.,
131/15, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 7).
296         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
active in suppressing the slave traffic in the vicinity where the
assaults occurred.40 So sensitive had public opinion become on
the subject of Anglo-Brazilian relations, or so the Brazilian
foreign minister interpreted the situation, that any negotiations
had to be kept a profound secret in order to prevent the oppo¬
sition from utilizing the issue to carry the next election.41 In
the provinces the opposition was raising the cry of “subserviency
to England” as the outstanding dishonor of the present minis¬
try,42 and was preaching a crusade against the venality of the
cabinet in its devotion to Great Britain.43
  On May 18 Hamilton broached the subject of the proposed
treaty,44 yet no plenipotentiary had been named to treat with
him by October, although the existing agreement would ex¬
pire the following month.45 On November 9 the minister of
foreign affairs notified the provincial authorities that the Anglo-
Brazilian treaty of 1827 had expired and the conservatorial
courts were abolished.46 Plenipotentiaries were appointed to
treat with Hamilton late in November,47 full powers were ex¬
changed in January, 1845, and there the matter rested48 until
in June the Brazilian minister submitted two conditions as the
sine qua non of any commercial treaty. In the first place, Eng¬
land must grant indemnities for seizures made by British cruis¬
ers under the illegal interpretation of the convention existing
between the two countries; and second, the boundary dispute
over the British Guiana frontier must be settled.49 Since Eng¬
land consistently refused to recognize the illegality of the seiz-
  40 F. O. 13/211, Hamilton to Aberdeen, Nos. 13, 17, 21, and 35.
  41 F. O. 13/212, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 48.
  42 Ibid., No. 50.
  43 F. O. 13/213, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 73.
  44 F. O. 13/212, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 42.
  45 F. O. 13/214, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 75.
  46 Hamilton attempted to secure the continuance of the courts as a perpetual
institution until a satisfactory substitute could be secured. Neither the Brazilian
government nor his own Foreign Office consented to this view, however, and the
courts were abolished definitely (F. O. 13/214, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 88,
and F. O. 13/224, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 23, April 21, 1845).
  47 F. O. 13/214, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 89.
  48 F. O. 13/215, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 5.
  49 F. O. 13/224, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 46. June 21, 1845.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                    297
ures in question, negotiations terminated, this time indefinitely.
  The Aberdeen Act of 1845 was a climax to the negotiations
just as it was to the attempts to conclude a slave trade con¬
vention. In reporting the situation in December, 1845, Ham¬
ilton, after enclosing a very bitter attack on England published
in a Pernambuco newspaper, stated that it was not alone in
that city or province that the Brazilian press indulged “in such
virulent invective against England, her Government, and her
people.” Wherever a provincial press existed, the same feeling
was manifested in its publications and that hostile attitude was
spreading and acquiring day by day, greater intensity. The
moving principle at that time, he explained, was the so-called
“Piratical Act of Parliament”60 and England’s “intrusive in¬
tervention” in the affairs of South America.51 In the face of
that universal opposition no cabinet dared enter into a treaty
with Great Britain.
   As a matter of fact, no treaty of commerce and amity was
concluded, nor has one ever been signed between Brazil and
England since that date. The empire, liberated at last from
the restrictions imposed by Great Britain as the price of recog¬
nition in 1827, was free to develop a national foreign policy
unhampered by international complications of a political char¬
acter. The key to this independence of action was Great Brit¬
ain, for that country with its extraordinary privileges had
served as the basis for the most favored nation treatment ex¬
tended to other powers. Thus with the termination of the
Anglo-Brazilian treaty, the Rio government was free to estab¬
lish a new basis for its commercial relations with all foreign
countries.     Extra-territorial jurisdiction            was    materially      re¬
stricted; the continuance of the British monopoly was hence¬
forth to depend on England’s economic superiority over its
rivals; and tariffs could be adjusted to the needs of the em-