

  88 Brazil Correspondence, No. i and Enclosure i, No. 2; Christie, Notes, pp. 177-
179; Brazil, Relatorio dos JVegocios Extrangeiros, 1862, pp. 56-57. R. P. Stephens of
the Steampacket Company of Glasgow demanded £5,500 exclusive of the ship,
plus £1,025, J9S for freight by way of damages, urged that a warship be sent to
demand restitution, and insisted that “no more humbugging on the part of the
Brazilian authorities be allowed” (Brazil Correspondence, Nos. 6 and 11).
  89 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1862, p. 57, and 1863, pp. 10-11;
Christie denied that any action was taken until he forced the issue at Rio (Brazil
Correspondence, No. 41).
  90 Brazil Correspondence, No. 4.
  91 Ibid., No. 19. The chief of police pointed out the wealthiest inhabitants of the
coast as the principal criminals (ibid.). Rio Grande do Sul was a frontier province,
the traditional center of revolt against the authority of Rio. Public order was largely
a question of local action among these independent plainsmen who recognized
little authority beyond their own wills.
278        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  The president of the province refused to allow Captain Sau-
marez of the gunboat Sheldrake, sent as a result of the above
request, to participate in the investigation,92 while Consul
Vereker reported that the action of the local authorities was
entirely inadequate, the investigation being conducted not to
ascertain the truth but to satisfy the British and the Rio gov¬
ernments.93 By May 23? fifteen days less than a year after the
wreck, seven culprits had been ascertained but none pros¬
ecuted.94 At the same time Foreign Minister Taques declared
to Christie that although the imperial government was free
from any responsibility for acts ascribed to the inhabitants of
the coast of Albardao, it intended to exert every effort to bring
the culprits to justice.95
  Just as Christie had reached the point of advising his home
office that “as much pressure as possible” be exerted on the
Brazilian government, a second incident occurred to aggravate
the situation. According to Christie’s version, three officers, a
chaplain, a lieutenant, and a midshipman, of the crew of the
British naval vessel, the Forte, on their return from a pleasure
jaunt to Tijuca outside the city of Rio de Janeiro, were set
upon by a Brazilian sentry, seized, forced to walk to the city as
culprits, thrown into the worst prison of the capital, changed
to a better and again to a better, and finally were released
without cause shown for the detention. The reasons given later
by the Brazilian authorities were that the officers were drunk
and disorderly on the road; they had attacked the sentry with¬
out provocation and had been arrested on just cause. They
were not in uniform and as soon as the fact was ascertained
that they belonged to the English navy, they were released.
Thirteen depositions were produced as evidence of this version

  92 Russell sent instructions to Christie insisting that a British officer should be
on the spot at the time of the investigation (Brazil correspondence, No. 29).
   93 Ibid., No. 33.                          94 Ibid., No. 37.
   95 Ibid., No. 27. For a detailed story of the events which occurred in Rio Grande
 do Sul and of the efforts of the Rio government to execute justice, see Brazil,
 Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1863, Annex, Documents Nos. 1-15. For texts
 of notes exchanged between the Brazilian Foreign Office and Christie, see ibid.,
 Nos. 16-29.
          DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                           279
 of the story. The officers swore, on the other hand, that they
 were the sober victims of an unprovoked attack by a sentry
 on the road to Rio.96
    Both Christie and Admiral Warren, who credited the story
 of the three officers, considered that an insult had been offered
 the British navy. They recommended to London that the en¬
 sign in charge of the post and the sentry who started the row
 ought to be punished and that the Imperial Government should
 express regrets over the affair and apologize for the conduct
of the prison officials of the capital.97 Lord John Russell ac¬
cepted the version of the minister and instructed him to de¬
mand the dismissal of the ensign, the punishment of the sentry,
an apology by the Brazilian government, and a censure of the
chief of police of Rio and the officials of the prison. He also
demanded restitution and indemnity in the Prince of Wales case,
the amount to be decided by arbitration.98 On November 4,
1862, Russell authorized Christie to resort to reprisals in case
Brazil refused to comply with these demands, although the
minister was to refer any proposal of arbitration made by the
Imperial Government to London. Later he suggested that the
reprisals be in the form of seizure of property such as a gov¬
ernment ship or, better, of private property in order to avoid
a clash between the two governments.99
   When Marquez de Abrantes, foreign minister, attempted to
transfer the question to London where the Brazilian legation
could confer directly with Lord John Russell, Christie pointed