


      THE ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES


The attitude which led the Rio government to resist British
economic preeminence differed somewhat from that which
prompted its revolt against the political dominance threatened
by Great Britain. In the latter case, Brazil sought to eliminate
English influence outright and, by cutting the traditional
thread which had linked the British and Portuguese empires
politically for centuries, to terminate the virtual protectorate,
the foundations of which had been established in Brazil be¬
tween 1808 and 1827. The economic phase of the revolt, on
the other hand, aimed not at severing connections with Eng¬
land, but at placing that country on an equal footing with
other nations by abolishing the special privileges granted by
the treaty.
  Evidence of this point of view may be found in the protests
of Brazilian writers, which are directed, not against British
economic enterprise, but against the vexatious restrictions im¬
posed by the stronger on the weaker nation. Pereira Pinto, who
was so severe in his criticism of the arbitrary and arrogant at¬
titude of England in political matters, commended the aid
which British capital had rendered Brazil in opening roads and
developing national industries.1 Dunshee de Abranches2 inter¬
preted the action of the Brazilian statesmen who negotiated
the treaties of 1825-1827 as an effort to free Brazil from the
humiliating position of Portugal which had always lived “un-
  1 Antonio Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos para o Direilo Internacional, I, 386.
  J Dunshee de Abranches, authority on foreign affairs, member of the Assembly,
and at one time chairman of the Committee on Diplomacy and Treaties of the
National Assembly, was a severe critic of Great Britain in its dealings with Brazil.
For an expression of an opinion see his speech reprinted with a bitter preface by
an unsigned author under the title A Inglatcrra t a Soberania do Brazil.
286         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
der the mailed fist of old England.”3 Although the effort failed
and a mortifying reproduction of the 1810 treaty was forced
upon the empire, it was not the preeminence of English cap¬
ital and commerce which provoked his criticism but the extra¬
territorial privileges, consular concessions, and restrictions on
the sovereignty of the nation imposed by the terms of the
treaty.4 * Oliveira Lima summarized the attitude of Brazil in
regard to this phase of the revolt against British preeminence
in his statement that England enjoyed in the empire privileges
which called to mind those imposed by European powers on
far-Eastern nations.6
  The desire to abolish those privileges and restrictions in¬
spired the revolt of Brazil against British economic preemi¬
nence, this issue thus becoming another phase of the move¬
ment described in the preceding chapters. The aim of the Bra¬
zilians was not to eliminate British interests in their foreign
commerce, capital investments, or domestic enterprises, but to
free themselves from economic restrictions imposed by England
and to open their country to the competition of other nations.
As long as Great Britain could maintain its paramount posi¬
tion by economic superiority, its preeminence in Brazilian com¬
merce, investment, and shipping would be assured. If a com¬
petitor should come to rival the advantages offered by England,
no exclusive privileges obtained by political pressure would
remain to bolster Britain’s position. The story of Anglo-Bra-
zilian economic relations after 1827 t^lus centers, first, in the
efforts of the Rio government to free itself from the restrictions
imposed by England during the period from 1808 to 1827,
and second, in the rise of competitors who were to challenge
Britain’s position.
   The main obstacle which barred the path to freedom from
restriction^ was the commercial treaty negotiated by Lord
Gordon in 1827.6 That agreement was objectionable for several
  8 Dunshee de Abranches, A Expansao Economica e o Commercio Exterior do Brazil,
p. 70.
  4 Ibid., pp. 70-71.
  6 Manoel de Oliveira Lima, 0 Imperio Brazileiro, p. 208.
  8 See supra, pp. 208-210.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                      287
reasons. In the first place, although the constitution of the em¬
pire had expressly abolished all special jurisdiction, the Eng¬
lish were granted a continuation of the century-old right to
maintain judges conservators or special magistrates, before
whom cases involving British subjects might be tried. The right
was to continue until a satisfactory substitute could be estab¬
lished; yet despite the criminal code and the judicial system
inaugurated by the empire, England refused to relinquish the
extra-territorial privilege and in 1835 the council of state in
Rio announced formally that it was “prudent to yield to the
demands” of the British government “since it refused to recog¬
nize as satisfactory the judges instituted under the Constitu¬
tion of the Empire.”7
   A second objection arose from the right granted to English
consuls not only to administer the property of British subjects
who died intestate in Brazil8 but also to sign clearance papers
and handle complaints in the customs houses on the same plane
as native administrators. A third objection resulted from the
fifteen per cent, maximum import duties levied on English
goods. By most favored nation clauses this rate was granted
at once to certain other countries which signed commercial
treaties with the empire; and by the decree of September 28,
1828, it was extended to include all goods imported into the
country irrespective of the nationality or origin of the com¬
modities. Thus although the market of Brazil was thrown open
to the competition of all nations despite the efforts of England
and France to maintain an exclusive field for their efforts, the
empire was limited to a maximum tariff of fifteen per cent.
Since the revenue from the customs houses furnished the chief
income of the imperial government, the Rio court in 1836 was
forced to impose an export tax of eight per cent, when growing
expenses created a deficit.9