


  112 Nabuco, Estadista do Imperio, II, 319-320.
  113 Christie, Notes, p. Ixix.
  114 Brazil Correspondence, pp. xvi-xvii    Christie gives a detailed account of the
means employed by the Brazilian government to spread favorable propaganda
in England and of the agencies, newspapers, and persons connected with that effort.
Letters in the Daily News, inspired articles in the Edinburgh Review, the. Morning Her aid,
The Brazil and River Plate Mail, The News, and The Star; the attacks of Cobden,
Bright, Lord Palmerston, Mr. Bramley Moore, and others; the conferring of de¬
grees on Brazilian ministers by Oxford; and the expenditure of large silms (Christie
estimated the amount spent yearly in foreign countries by Brazil for this purpose
to be £30,000) by Brazilian agents were pointed out as evidences of the effort to
create a favorable reputation for the empire (see the prefaces and letters in Notes
and Brazil Correspondence, passim).
284         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
fer of that dominance to the new world effected between 1808
and 1825 and the virtual protectorate begun in the new em¬
pire between 1825 and 1827 failed to last. In the words of a
writer115 in the Daily News, “what English interests” had the
succession of foreign ministers “promoted in Brazil?” They had
not obtained a treaty of commerce nor a consular agreement
such as France had secured; and they had not produced a set¬
tlement of the claims which the subjects of each country had
on the government of the other, as the United States long since
had obtained. In the opinion of the author, “a very different
policy in Mr. Canning’s time made Brazil an Empire almost
dependent on England. A subsequent policy of ‘taunting’ ”
had “converted it into an Empire on which the English Gov¬
ernment” had “not a particle of influence.”116
  In the first quarter of the century Brazil had been obliged
to yield to the forceful diplomacy of the able ministers, Vis¬
count Strangford and Lord Gordon, who were acting under
the keen direction of Castlereagh and Canning. By 1850 the
incipient empire was stabilized, confident with reference to the
future, and divorced from the old idea of maintaining close
relations with the European powers. Thirty years of continued
friction, arising principally from the slave trade controversy,
and the marked national and economic development of the
empire had weaned Brazil from its political allegiance to Great
Britain. In i860 it was strong enough to sustain its revolt;
thereafter friendly relations were to exist between the two gov¬
ernments, but the thread of political control by England in
Portuguese territory—a thread which runs back in a remark¬
ably clear fashion to 1640—was definitely broken in Brazil.
  116 The author, who signed as a “Friend of Both Countries,” was W. H. Clark,
formerly registrar of the Great Northern Railway, member of the Reform Club,
paid correspondent of the Rio Jornal do Commercio (Brazil Correspondence, p. xiii),
and coffee broker for a Rio firm (Christie, Notes, p. xxxiii).
  116 The article appeared in the Daily News of August 23, 1864, signed by a
“Friend of Both Countries,” quoted by Christie, Notes, pp. 105-106.
                                CHAPTER XI