

  96 Brazil Correspondence, No. 45. Christie to Russell, August 7, 1862. For docu¬
ments and correspondence exchanged between the Brazilian Foreign Office and
Christie on the case of the Forte, see Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1863,
Annex, Nos. 30-34.
  97 Brazil Correspondence, No. 48.
  98 Ibid., Nos. 52 and 53. On August 23, 1862, Christie reported that the sub¬
chief and the inspector of the district in the province had been dismissed for com¬
plicity or neglect of duty; eleven arrests had been made; fugitives to Montevideo
were being sought; and prosecutions were being arranged. No admission by the
Brazilian authorities as to the possibility of murder had been made and the action
had been delayed until conviction would be difficult {ibid., No. 49).
  99 Brazil Correspondence, Nos. 61 and 62. Orders were sent to Admiral Warren to
carry out the reprisal orders {ibid., No. 66).
280         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
out that unless satisfaction were given to him in Rio, he would
be forced to resort to reprisals; if on December 27? n0 satisfac¬
tion had been received, he warned, recourse would be had to
the navy.100 On the twenty-ninth Abrantes refused to accede
to the demands made by Lord John Russell; on the thirtieth
Christie advised the minister of his order to Admiral Warren
authorizing reprisals; from December 31 to January 5, Rio was
blockaded; and Admiral Warren seized and held five merchant
vessels flying the Brazilian flag.101
  The notice of the blockade and the manner in which the five
vessels were seized set the capital in a turmoil. Furious crowds
gathered in the streets, on the squares, hills, and beaches,
shouting curses and threats at the English, while some threat¬
ened to attack the British consulate and legation. Christie kept
discreetly within doors and sent heated notes to the Brazilian
foreign minister in regard to statements allowed to appear in
the Rio papers. Both police and regular troops were required
to prevent violence while only the popularity of the emperor
and of Joao L. Viera Cansancao de Sinimbu (minister of com¬
merce) enabled them to quiet the threatened riots by appeal¬
ing to the crowds in person.102 Forced to submit to superior
force, Brazil yielded on the fifth and promised to pay whatever
indemnity England might demand in the case of the Prince of
Wales, without, however, recognizing the principle of respon¬
sibility which was an attribute to such acquiescence and against
which it protested categorically. The demands in regard to the
Forte were rejected outright but Rio consented to arbitration
of the case.103 The reprisals were stopped and the king of Bel¬
gium was chosen arbiter.
  The Brazilian government immediately ordered its minister
in London, Carvalho Moreira (later Barao de Penedo) to de¬
mand satisfaction from Great Britain for the seizure of the five
vessels within Brazilian territorial waters and their detention
  100 Brazil Correspondence, No. 71; Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1863, p. 12.
  101 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1863, Annex, Nos. 39 and 40; Brazil
Correspondence, No. 72.
  102 Pereira da Silva, Memorias, I, 311; Brazil Correspondence, No. 72.
  103 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1863, pp. 12-13, and Annex, No. 53.
         DECLINE OF POLITICAL PREEMINENCE                                          281
within the bay of Rio.104 On February 23, 1863, Moreira re¬
mitted a check to Lord John Russell for £3,200 in payment
for the damages caused by the loss of cargo and personal effects
of the crew of the Prince of Wales, together with a heated pro¬
test reserving the right to require satisfaction for the seizures
made in Rio. Two months later he demanded an expression of
regret by England for violations of the national territory of Bra¬
zil and a recognition of the obligation to pay compensation,
the amount of which would be determined by an arbiter. Rus¬
sell refused; Moreira requested his passports and left England
June 4, 1863.105 One month later Cornwallis Eliot, charge in the
absence of Christie who had returned to England, obtained
passports and left Brazil.106
   Leopold of Belgium announced his acceptance as arbiter
early in March before Moreira requested his passports107 and
in June rendered the decision that “in the manner in which
the laws of Brazil were applied to the English officials, there
was no offense, either premeditated or intended, to the British
navy.”108 Thus the initiative in healing the breach between the
two countries was left to England. Russell announced in Par¬
liament his desire to renew relations; Portugal offered its med¬
iation; and Brazil consented.109
   Negotiations began in London in May, 1864, when the Con-
de de Lavradio, plenipotentiary mediator, proposed that Eng¬
land send a special envoy to Rio to declare: first, that the British
government had no intention of offending the dignity nor of
violating the territorial sovereignty of Brazil; second, that in
view of King Leopold’s decision, England deplored all acts