


  16 The Brazilian government insisted that the treaty terminated outright in 1842
but England maintained that notification of expiration could not be given until
November of that year, which would cause the agreement to terminate two years
later, or in November, 1844. After consulting the ministers of France and the
United States, the Rio government consented to the extension of time (F. O.
131/12, Ellis to Aberdeen, No. 30. February 20, 1843).
  18 F. O. 131/12, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 2. Enclosure: draft of proposed
treaty.
  17 Ibid., No. 2. Instructions to Hamilton.
    19
290         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
initial check, he opened the subject of the commercial treaty
with Foreign Minister Aureliano; on May 18, however, he re¬
ported to the London Office his impression that Brazil would
conclude no commercial treaty with England or anyone else.18
In July Aberdeen modified his instructions so as to leave three
options open to his agent: first, an arrangement which, in ad¬
dition to the advantages of the second and third options, in¬
cluded the slavery and sugar claims; second, an arrangement
with no mention of slavery or sugar but with guaranties of
special privileges such as the admission of Brazilian coffee (not
sugar) at reduced import duties into England and the fifteen
per cent, on English articles taken into Brazil; and third, a
simple reciprocity agreement with a most favored nation
clause.19 The first option was the paramount point to be ob¬
tained. Two months later, however, he modified these instruc¬
tions still further by authorizing the signature of an agreement
which omitted any reference to sugar or slavery, those subjects
to be left for a separate convention at a later date.20 Thus Aber¬
deen gradually reduced his original demands to the simple ex¬
tension of the existing treaty.
  Despite Hamilton-Hamilton’s pessimistic report, the London
Office considered the question of the commercial agreement
important enough to warrant a special envoy. Henry Ellis,
therefore, was sent to negotiate in place of the diplomat sta¬
tioned at Rio. On his arrival he was “met with ceremonial
pomp, received by the emperor and his sisters, saluted by all
the war vessels at anchor in the port of Rio de Janeiro, and
applauded and hailed by the English merchants residing in the
capitol.    His ostentatious magnificence with guards at the door
of his residence, his splendid carriages with eight thoroughbred
horses brought from England, his liveried servants and sump¬
tuous mode of living made him the object of universal curi¬
osity.21

  18 F. O. 131/12, Aberdeen to Henry Ellis, No. 2. August 26, 1842, and enclos¬
ures.
  18 Ibid., Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 14. July 6.
    Ibid., Aberdeen to Ellis, No. 7. September 28.
  21J. M. Pereira da Silva, Memorias do Meu Tempo, I, 98-99.
          ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                       291
  Yet his task was a difficult one; for despite the splendor of
his reception, he faced the apprehension and even the hatred of
the public and the press. As he reported to Aberdeen,22 the
language of the newspapers of Rio was “absurdly violent and
impertinent.” One journal23 pointed out that the emperor could
not act as D. Pedro I had done in signing the 1827 agreement,
as by Paragraph 8 of Article 102 of the constitution any treaty
which set new rates for imports must be approved by the Cham¬
ber before it could become law. Thus the empire could defend
itself against the determination of England “not to lose the
power which she” had “of enslaving Brazil with treaties . . .
after the same manner as she” had “accomplished with regard
to Portugal during the long intercourse of two hundred years”
since the separation from Spain in 1640. The history of Anglo-
Portuguese relations was clear evidence, the article continued,
of Britain’s systematic policy of utilizing occasions when its
allies were in difficulties to increase its own power. That “po¬
litical leech” was now talking of renewing a treaty which had
made of Brazilian commerce an English monopoly; no such
agreement should be signed.
  In addition to the opposition of public opinion24 Ellis was
faced with the ill will of the ministry. He reported that it was
hopeless to propose in the actual temper of the Brazilian gov¬
ernment any comprehensive scheme such as that laid down in
the instructions to Hamilton. Moreover, it was futile even to
attempt to fix a set rate of import duties on British articles en¬
tering Brazil as the cabinet then in office, as wfell as any other
that might succeed to power, was opposed to fettering the cus-