

  ss F. O. 131/12, Ellis to Aberdeen, No. 11. November 26, 1842.
  S3 0 Pharol Constitutional of November 12. Translation was enclosed by Ellis
(ibid.). Translation of another article of similar vein, published in Diario do Rio
on November 22, was enclosed also. In a later dispatch Ellis enclosed a vicious
attack on him personally, published in 0 Brazil (ibid., No. 21).
  34 For a detailed exposition of the attitude of the public toward the ministers
who negotiated with the English agent, see Pereira da Silva, Memorias, I, 100-108.
At one time the Chamber of Deputies became so uncertain as to the ability of the
foreign minister to sustain Brazilian rights in the face of Britain s attitude that it
demanded the entire correspondence exchanged between the minister and the
envoy (ibid., p. 106).
292        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
toms house with permanent maximum rates. The only recourse
left was to secure a treaty which would guarantee the individ¬
ual rights of the persons and property of British subjects, thus
putting Great Britain on an equality with other nations in
Brazil.26
  As a matter of fact, he reported, the British merchants in
Rio did not require more than that guaranty of equality. He
had learned this to his surprise at a meeting wherein he had
discussed the situation with the merchants themselves. They
revealed to him quite clearly that they linked no importance
to the continuation of the treaty of 1827. Under various forms
English goods were paying twenty-one per cent., some as high
as forty per cent., and Brazil would be stupid, said the mer¬
chants, to load any more duties on suddenly. Nor were they
solicitous about maintaining the conservatorial courts, for, as
they reported, traders of other nations were not suffering in¬
justice in the administration of the law although only the British
had the privilege of extra-territorial jurisdiction. They accepted
the customs rates then in operation and merely desired a guar¬
anty of the status of equality of all nations for the future. A
simple reciprocity treaty with a most favored nation clause
would suffice for their desires, but even that would be difficult
to secure as the action of the British government in suppressing
the slave trade had created such antagonism that any agree¬
ment whatever was very uncertain.26
  Ellis, therefore, decided to sacrifice the fifteen per cent, rate
and the conservatorial courts and to present terms so free from
objectionable points that their rejection could occur only in
case the Rio court was determined “to stand aloof from all
connection with Great Britain.” But when he proposed to For¬
eign Minister Aureliano a treaty granting England equality
with other nations, France for instance, the minister parried
by insisting that something would have to enter as to the con¬
duct of British cruisers in Brazilian waters. When Ellis sug¬
gested that the slave trade and commercial treaties were sepa-

  25 F. O. 131/12, Ellis to Aberdeen, No. 16. December 16. 1842.
  26 Ibid., No. 15.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                293
rate negotiations and should not be confused, Aureliano, si¬
lenced but unconvinced, returned to the point at a later date.27
  In January, 1843, the envoy learned that the Assembly op¬
posed any treaty with any nation which refused to allow Bra¬
zilian produce to enter on the same basis as produce from the
colonies of that nation.28 Soon afterward the new foreign min¬
ister29 announced that the conditions on which he proposed to
treat were the admission into England of Brazilian produce on
the same footing as goods introduced from British colonies,
and, despite the warning by Ellis that such conditions would
terminate negotiations, persisted in his stand.30 The British en¬
voy thereupon advertised his furniture for sale, had one more
conversation with the minister, closed the negotiation, and
sailed for home.31 In a confidential report Ellis interpreted the
action of the Rio court as an attempt to force England to send
another special minister who should bring larger powers en¬
abling him to grant the concessions required by Brazil in re¬
gard to the entrance of its chief exports, sugar and coffee, into
England. In Honorio Hermeto’s opinion Great Britain would
be forced eventually to concede those terms in view of the large
credits granted to Brazil by English interests.32
  Without waiting for that second mission to materialize, the
Rio office ordered Jose de Araujo Ribeiro, Brazilian minister
at Paris, to negotiate a treaty at London.33 On November 3,
1843, he presented two projects, one of commerce and the other
of limits,34 with the statement that he was authorized to sign