

 7 Dunshee de Abranches, Expansdo Economica, p. 73.
  8 This point rose to importance after the abolition of the judge conservatorship
at the expiration of the treaty in 1844. It is discussed in detail in connection with
Anglo-Brazilian relations of that period. See infra, pp. 298 ff.
  * Dunshee de Abranches, A Expansdo Economica, pp. 71 and 132; Oliveira Lima,
0 Imperio Brazileiro, pp. 199-200.
288        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
  Moreover, under the treaty the manufacturers of Brazil were
hopelessly handicapped by the lack of protection and British
articles had practically free entrance into the empire; yet the
principal exports of coffee and sugar from the South American
nation were excluded from England by prohibitive duties. Bra¬
zilian shipping was also sacrificed in benefit of the English
merchant marine; and the coastwise trade, by right the ex¬
clusive privilege of the native, was endangered by the preten¬
sions of British shipping interests.10
   The irritation which resulted in Brazil from these privileges
granted to a foreign power and from the restrictions imposed
on the sovereignty of the empire were aggravated by the tone
assumed by the London Foreign Office.* 11 The opinion was cur¬
rent among Brazilians that the English cabinets and foreign
ministers adopted as the only method of treating with the Rio
government a note of disdain on the one hand or threats of
armed intervention on the other; their attitude was the same
as that assumed toward the uncivilized or semi-barbarous na¬
tions of the South Seas or Africa. In the words of Minister
Macedo, “it was always with a threat on its lips that the Eng¬
lish Government spoke to Brazil.”12
   By Article XXVIII the obnoxious treaty of 1827 was to re¬
main in force for fifteen years from the date of ratification,13
with the understanding that it would continue to operate there¬
after unless one of the contracting parties should give notice
of its termination. In case of such notification two years were to
elapse before the treaty became void. Thus in 1842 England
was faced with the necessity of renewing the existing treaty,
concluding a new agreement, or allowing the privileges ob¬
 tained in 1827 to expire.
    Consequently, early in 1842 Aberdeen sent14 a draft of a new
 treaty to be negotiated by Minister Hamilton-Hamilton at Rio.

   10 Dunshee de Abranches, A Expansdo Economica, p. 73; and supra, pp. 208-210.
   11 Dunshee de Abranches, op. cit., p. 74.
   12 Letter of Minister Sergio de Macedo to Lord Clarendon, May 16, 1854, quoted
 by Dunshee de Abranches, op. cit., p. 75.
   12 Ratifications were exchanged in London on November 10, 1827.
   14 F. O. 131/12, Aberdeen to Hamilton, No. 2. February 1, 1842.
          ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                    289
The diplomat, in the first place, was to insist that the treaty
of 1827 was to be valid until 184415 in order to give time for
the negotiation of a new agreement. The draft sent to the min¬
ister as a basis for his efforts was a reproduction of the old treaty
with two important innovations. By Article IX of the new
project the emperor of Brazil was to engage “to take into His
consideration the question of abolishing Slavery throughout
the whole of His Dominions” and in the meantime to decree,
within two months from the date of ratification, that all chil¬
dren born in Brazil whether of slave parents or free should be
free subjects of the empire. Thus he would settle effectively the
vexing question of the slave trade by abolishing the incentive
of the traffic. In return for that concession on the part of the
emperor, England (by Article XV of the project) undertook
to lower its duties on Brazilian sugar and coffee six months
after the decree granting freedom to all children had been is¬
sued. Furthermore, reductions on Brazilian nuts, cocoa, un¬
tanned hides, bones, ostrich feathers, sarsaparilla, woods, and
other articles would be conceded. In other respects the draft
resembled the treaty then in force.16
   If, however, Hamilton found it impossible to secure the new
clause as to slavery, he was to warn the Rio government that
England would “never relax in any effort which Her treaties
and Her power” might “enable her to apply” in stopping the
traffic. Then he was to secure an extension of the old treaty
intact.17
  When the envoy proposed negotiations, he was informed that
the Brazilians intended to treat with Aberdeen direct through
their minister at London. Yet on April 10, undaunted by this