

in import duties one and a half times as much as did all other ports combined
(Diogo de Soares da Silva de Bivar, “A Chronica do Anno de 1842,” Revista do
Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras., V [1843], 388-389).
  * The only foreign loan contracted by the empire had been floated in London
and the economic penetration of the preceding twenty years would indicate an
influx of British capital.
  4 By the colonial laws France prohibited entrance of nearly all Brazilian prod¬
ucts, for coffee, sugar, and tobacco came from the French West Indies. Freights
from France were very high as a result, for the return voyage was usually in ballast
(0 Brazil, Suas Riquezas, I, 275). In 1839 Horace Say in his Histoire des Relations
Commerciales entre la France et le Brisil accused the Brazilians of favoring British arti¬
cles from force of long habit. A committee composed of Bento da Silva Lisboa and
J. D. de Attaide Moncorvo after studying the criticism advanced by Say reported
to the Institute Historico e Geographico that low cost and superior goods could
undermine England’s position but France did not have either the vast capital of
England, nor mechanics and engineers as expert as the British, nor machines capa¬
ble of putting as excellent goods on the Brazilian market as cheaply as did Great
Britain. France, in the opinion of the committee, was essentially agricultural, as
was Brazil, whereas England had a manufacturing and business interest which
obtained for it the favored position in Brazilian markets (report of the committee
found in Revista do Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras., 1839).
  6 0 Brazil, Suas Riquezas, I, 276.
314          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
the Regency and of the first years of the rule of the second
Pedro.6 During that period, Great Britain not only maintained
a fairly level average of exports to Brazil but even increased
its annual sales slightly. The fact that the income from the
fifteen per cent, duties on British goods rose from £321,735
in 1832 to £393,876 in 18417 * indicates this gradual increase.
Thus there was little chance for the rise of a successful rival.
  By far the largest item in the list of British exportations to
Brazil during this period was cotton manufactures with woolens
a poor second. Then followed, in order of value, linens, hard¬
ware and cutlery, Irish butter, iron of all sorts, hard soap, com¬
mon earthenware, copper goods, stationery, glass, silk goods,
beaver hats, beer and ale, gunpowder, lead and shot, painters
colors, umbrellas, steam engines and machinery, musical in¬
struments, and military stores. In 1835 the value of all exports
from the British Islands to Brazil was £2,553,203.®
  Of the imports received by England in exchange for these
articles, raw cotton led the list with coffee a poor second. Then
followed, in order, sugar, hides, woods, and cocoa.9 The total
value of imports from the empire into the British Islands was
£i,479,588.10
  As these figures show, British sales to Brazil greatly exceeded
British purchases. In 1842, whereas over fifty-one per cent, of
the total importations received at the port of Rio came from
Great Britain and its possessions, only twenty per cent, of the