

  86 Cardoso dc Oliveira, Actos Diplomaticos, I, 130.
  87 For a summary of the dispute of 1842, see Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, Note

3*. PP- 3”-3!4-
  88 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1896, Annex I, Nos. 21-23.
  88 Ibid., 1898, p. 20 and Annex I, No. 62.
  M The treaty was signed November 6, 1901, and ratifications were exchanged
January 28 of the following year (ibid., 1902, Annex, No. 3).
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                         309
sion and the question was definitely settled.91
   The second incident concerned the possession of a group of
small islands located 1,112 kilometers off the coast of Brazil
in the latitude of Espirito Santo. Discovered in 1501 by the
Portuguese, they remained unoccupied until 1700 when Ed¬
mund Halley took possession in the name of England. No set¬
tlement was made, however. Seventy-five years later J. Cook
touched at the islands and in 1781 the British attempted to
colonize the group. Portugal protested, and when England
withdrew, sent an expedition of military and agricultural col¬
onists to occupy the territory. In 1797 the attempt was aban¬
doned as the unfertile, volcanic soil proved incapable of sup¬
porting the population. No further attempt was made to estab¬
lish settlements although throughout the nineteenth century
occasional visits were paid the islands by the French (in 1817,
1825, and 1829) and by the Brazilians (in 1825, I846, 1871,
and 1873).92
   In 1895 England secretly but officially occupied Trindade,
incorporating that island and the smaller Martim Vaz into
British territory. When the news reached Rio six months later,
a vigorous protest was made to the British legation by the for¬
eign minister.93 Lord Salisbury for England offered to arbitrate
or to return the islands at once if Brazil would guarantee to
utilize them as a station for a cable which an English company
wished to lay; but Foreign Minister Carlos de Carvalho re-

  91 The boundary followed the watershed to the Mahu river and thence to the
Tacutu (Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, X, 452). Later the line was corrected
in view of certain errors made in the decision as to the location of the source of the
Cotingo River (Cardoso de Oliveira, Actos Diplomaticos, II, 323). For details of the
dispute see: Joaquim Nabuco, Primier Mimoire (7 vols.), Second Mimoire (6 vols.),
and Troisiime Mimoire, in which the case for Brazil was presented to the arbiter;
Barao do Rio Branco, Mimoire sur la question des limites entre les Etats- Unis du Brisil
et la Guyane Britannique; and Paul Fauchille, “Le Conflit de limites entre le Bresil
et la Grande Bretagne et la Sentence arbitrale du Rio d’ltalie,” Revue Generale de
Droit Internacional Public, January-February, 1905, pp. 25-142.
  92 Rocha Pombo, Historia do Brazil, X, 445; and Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios
Extrangeiros, 1896, Annex I, Supplement, Correspondencia e Documentos Diplo¬
maticos sobre a occupa^ao da Ilha da Trindade, Nos. 13 and 14.
  93 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1896, p. 57, and Annex I, Supple¬
ment, Nos. 13 and 14.
3io         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
fused to arbitrate or to condition the return of territory, the
ownership of which was clearly demonstrated by document
in the archives of four nations, Brazil, England, Portugal, and
Spain. He refuted energetically the argument advanced by
Lord Salisbury that in cases where the well-being and interests
of a densely populated nation required the use of certain places
for purposes for which that nation had shown special aptitude,
the owners of the localities in question had no right to prohibit
the proposed use or to retire those places from the service of
humanity. That doctrine, in the opinion of the Brazilian min¬
ister, was a very serious threat to the sovereignty of those na¬
tions which combined extensive territories and inadequate re¬
sources.94
  Through the mediation of Portugal, in which the traditional
ally of Great Britain explained the basis of Brazil’s claim to
ownership, England yielded. By orders from London the Bara-
couta, the same vessel which had taken the expedition to the
islands, was sent to remove all signs of occupation and in Jan¬
uary, 1897, a Brazilian cruiser placed a bronze plaque on the
largest island of the group as evidence of ownership.96
   The methods of solution and the outcome of these two inci¬
dents offer a striking contrast to the story of Anglo-Brazilian
relations during the first half of the nineteenth century. The
days of privileged position and practical tutelage established by
Viscount Strangford and Lord Gordon were past; the revolt
against the preeminence of Great Britain in the political affairs
of the empire and the attempt to abolish the special privileges
secured in the early years of national existence had liberated
Brazil from the traditional position maintained by England in
Portuguese territory. The dream cherished by George Can¬
ning of attaching the South American empire to Europe by
close political ties failed of realization, for not even England,