


  81 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1887, p. 11, and Annex, Nos. 25-43.
It was not until 1907, however, that Brazil denounced the perpetual articles of the
1826 commercial treaty with France. All provisions based on the perpetual stipu¬
lations of that treaty as well as the additional articles ceased on June 13 of that
year (Cardoso de Oliveira, Actos Diplomaticos do Brazil, I, 101).
  82 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1887, p. 12, and Annex I, Nos. 48-55;
and Dunshee de Abranches, Tratados, p. 45.
  88 The agreements in force between Brazil and Great Britain in 1924 were: 1)
delivery of deserters from merchant ships (signed 1888), 2) arbitration conven¬
tion (1909), 3) peace commission (1919), and 4) domestic postal rates, (1921). The
complementary declaration to the Treaty of Arbitration for the solution of the
boundary dispute over British Guiana (1901) was still in force (Hildebrando
Accioly, Actos Intemacionaes Vigentes no Brazil).
          ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                      307
determination of a boundary line between Brazil and British
Guiana, and the other over the possession of a small group of
islands off the coast. The first,84 which was the more serious of
the two, became an international question in 1838 following
a scientific expedition sent by the English into territory claimed
by the empire. Robert Schomberg, a German in the service of
Great Britain, traversed the region between Demerari and the
Rio Branco in 1836, and two years later after repeating his
exploit, this time penetrating to the Rio Negro, sailed for Lon¬
don to report and to receive his reward of promotion to a col¬
onelcy. Soon after his departure, a missionary, one Thomas
Yowd (or Youd), of the Methodist Society, entered the dis¬
puted region of the upper Rio Branco with the purpose of con¬
verting the Indians to loyalty to Methodism and the British
Empire. A Catholic priest, backed by the Brazilian governor
of the province, forced him to withdraw until Schomberg re¬
turned from England with orders to take possession of the region
to the west of the river called Rupunuri and east of the Rio Bran¬
co, a section which had been neutral ground between territory
recognized as belonging to England and Brazil respectively.
The Methodist missionary then returned, expelled the Cath¬
olic, and occupied the mission of the Carmelite friar. The priest
appealed to the governor of the province, who in turn presented
the case to the national government for solution.85
  The London Office, after appointing a commission to de¬
termine the true boundary, delivered a note through its agent
in Rio, laying claim to a frontier quite beyond the historic
limits. On March 24, 1841, the Rio court stated its position in
an able dispatch written by Aureliano de Souza e Oliveira
Coutinho, and by refusing to treat as long as the military oc¬
cupation continued, forced England to order the withdrawal

  84 One of the conditions, it will be recalled {supra, p. 293) which Minister Araujo
presented as the price of a commercial treaty in 1843 was a proposal for the settle¬
ment of a boundary line between Brazil and British Guiana.
  86 Antonio L. Monteiro Baena, “Memoria,” Revista do Inst. Hist, e Geog. Bras.,
1841, pp. 322-332. Explorations and demarcations of limits in this region had been
accomplished by Brazil between 1754 and 1823. The claims of the Rio govern¬
ment were based on the charts and maps resulting from these expeditions.
308        BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
of the expedition. In September of the next year an accord
was signed which declared the region in question to be neu¬
tral until some decision could be reached as to the true bound¬
ary. Until the line could be determined, the Indians were to
be sole possessors of the land and no armed force of either na¬
tion should enter the disputed territory.86
   Schomberg, however, continued the occupation, erected signs
asserting the ownership of Great Britain, and maintained an
armed force in support of the missionary, Thomas Yowd. The
Rio court protested; London ordered the signs removed and re¬
called the expedition87; and the dispute slumbered until 1895
when a rumor of another invasion of the neutral territory by
Great Britain disturbed Rio.88 Three years later when the Bra¬
zilian minister at London protested the expedition promoted
by the authorities of British Guiana, Lord Salisbury replied
that the English official who had entered the neutral zone was
merely on a visit of inspection and had not raised the British
flag nor proclaimed title of sovereignty. London, so the min¬
ister reported, had already ordered the withdrawal of the only
post established by the expedition.89
  In 1901 the long dispute was settled when the case was sub¬
mitted to the arbitration90 of the king of Italy for a definitive de¬
cision as to the location of the boundary line. The arbiter in
rendering his decision June 6, 1904, stated that since neither
Brazil nor England had established indisputable rights of sov¬
ereignty over the territory in litigation and since it was impos¬
sible to divide the region into equal portions, either in extent
or value, he had based his judgment on natural geographic
features. By the boundary which followed the watersheds of
the disputed region, Great Britain obtained the major part of
the territory in question, but both powers accepted the deci-