

  60 The “Piratical Act” referred to the Aberdeen Act.
  61 F. O. 13/227, Hamilton to Aberdeen, No. 84. December 6, 1845. A detailed
account of this intervention of Great Britain in South America may be found in
John F. Cady, Foreign Intervention in the Rio de la Plata, 1838-50. The relations of
Brazil and England during that intervention, particularly between 1838 and 1846,
are discussed in chapter V.
298         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
pire as understood by the Rio government.
  Yet despite the successful revolt against special concessions
there still survived one form of extra-territorial jurisdiction
which Brazil found it extremely difficult to abolish. By Article
II of the Anglo-Brazilian commercial treaty of 1827, consuls
were granted the right to administer the properties of the cit¬
izens of their respective countries, who died ab intestato, in so
far as the laws of each nation permitted such action.52 The stip¬
ulations which defined that right were so vague, however, that
innumerable controversies arose in relation to the collection,
the care, and the final disposal of the possessions of British
subjects dying in Brazil, the consular jurisdiction over the prop¬
erty of the deceased being extended eventually to include all
cases of goods left by foreigners whether or not wills existed or
relatives or heirs were present to serve as administrators.53 The
article was interpreted by one English envoy to mean that
British citizens although living in Brazil could dispose of their
properties strictly according to the laws of England without
any reference whatever to the national laws of Brazil.54
  With the expiration of the commercial treaty in 1844, the
jurisdiction of English consuls over the property of their fellow
citizens dying intestate terminated, and all possessions of de¬
ceased British subjects were administered by the judge of or¬
phans (juiz dos orfaos) if the deceased left no will or if there was
no heir or relative to administer the estate. Minister Hamilton
admitted the legality of the new regime, but lamented the harm
which the change in administration would do to the commer¬
cial relations of the two countries. It was unfortunate, he con¬
tended, that the English should be subjected to national jurisdic¬
tion in these cases whereas the French were exempt forever
from any interference by local authorities in the disposal of
goods left by their citizens, and he requested that the law grant-


  62 Treaty of Friendship, Navigation, and Commerce, signed August 17, 1827.
See supra, pp. 208-210.
  63 Pinto Pereira, Apontamentos, II, 286-288.
  M Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1854, Annex A, Henry Howard to
Limpo de Abreu, April 24, 1854.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                    299
ing jurisdiction to the judge of the orphans not be enforced.66
   The law was enforced, however, and as far as England was
concerned, the consular jurisdiction over the estates of deceased
citizens dying intestate in Brazil was ended for the time being.
Since the stipulations contained in the Anglo-Brazilian commer¬
cial treaty served as the basis of the demands of other foreign
powers to similar jurisdiction, it was to be expected that after
1844 all consular jurisdiction of this nature would terminate
regardless of the nationality of the consul or of the deceased.
France, nevertheless, flatly refused to consider the privileges ter¬
minated, successfully retained jurisdiction by its consuls over
the property of French citizens dying in Brazil, secured a con¬
sular convention in i860, and by keeping alive the privilege,
eventually enabled England to recover the right lost in 1844.
It was not until 1907 that the Rio government succeeded in
throwing off this form of extra-territorial jurisdiction. The story
is a curious one, illustrative of the long struggle required of
Brazil in its efforts to free itself from the tutelage of European
powers.
  The commercial treaty66 signed by D. Pedro I and Charles
X of France on January 8, 1826, did not grant judge conserva¬
torships to the French, but by Article IV consuls were granted
the same privileges in protecting the interests of their fellow
citizens as those which were or had been granted to the consuls
of the most favored nation. They were thus conceded the right
to collect, administer, and liquidate the inheritances of French
citizens who died intestate, unhampered by any interference
from the local Brazilian authorities.
   In an attempt to clarify the whole question of the adminis-
  66 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1847, Annex, No. 93, Hamilton to
the Imperial Government, April 2, 1846. The envoy was protesting against the
administration of the goods left by one John George March, a British subject who
died on his farm in the Organ Mountains in 1845. Despite the protests of Hamilton
and his successor, James Hudson, the Brazilian authorities, not the English consul,
administered the goods of the deceased British subject (ibid., Nos. 94-96, 98).
Protests on other cases which terminated in the same way as the March question
were entered also (ibid., Nos. 99-110).
  66 The treaty was ratified by Brazil on June 6 and by France on March 19. The
text is given in Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, 43-56.
3oo         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
tration of properties left by deceased, whether natives of Brazil
or foreigners, the Rio government in 1842 and 1845 issued regu¬
lations respecting the collection and disposal of the goods of
deceased persons or of persons whose whereabouts was un¬
known. In these regulations were included certain stipulations
regarding the administration of properties of foreigners dying
without a will or without heirs present to take charge of the
inheritance. Such properties were defined and ordered liqui¬
dated and the proceeds turned over to the national treasury
in case of escheat; a system of bookkeeping was established; the
duties and pay of officials were specified; and provisions for
methods of sale and liquidation drawn up. Then by Article
XLIII it was declared that the unclaimed inheritances (bens
jacentes) and escheats (bens vagos) belonging to foreigners dying
in Brazil with or without testament who were not citizens of
nations signatory to conventions containing stipulations to the
contrary should be subject to the terms of these regulations.
All judicial and administrative acts relative to such goods
should be performed in Brazilian courts with the assistance of
the respective consuls or of some person authorized by them
to act in their place.67
   France protested immediately and effectively.68 The follow¬
ing September the Rio court issued a circular letter to the gov¬
ernors of the provinces explaining that the decrees of 1842 and
1845 did not apply to the unclaimed inheritances or escheats
belonging to French subjects who died with or without testa¬
ment,69 although the Anglo-Brazilian treaty which had served
as the most favored nation basis for these claims of France had