

  63 By a joint note signed by the entire consular body at Rio, dated January 11,
1845, an interpretation of this article of the constitution was requested. The con¬
suls asserted that this stipulation was optional, not imperative, the choice of citi¬
zenship being left to the person born on Brazilian soil of a foreign father (Brazil
Relalorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1847).
  64 Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, Documento C, pp. 93-102.
  66 The French minister commented specifically on the liberality of the regula¬
tions in respect to the entire range of consular activity (Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos,
II, Note 10, p. 23). It was the position assumed in regard to inheritances and
nationality to which the powers objected.
  89 Dunshee de Abranches, Tratados, p. 43.
            ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                          303
 was discovered in the will, the deceased was declared to have
 died intestate, his goods were sold and estate liquidated to the
great damage of heirs in England, to business partners, or to
anyone investing in the company. Moreover, many vexatious
delays and losses resulted from the local jurisdiction of thejuiz
dos orfaos and the expenses of administration under Brazilian
laws were so great that often there was nothing left for the
heirs. And finally, every member of an English family when
only one child was born in Brazil became subject to Brazilian
jurisdiction although the parents and other children were still
natives of England. Surely, the minister concluded, the Rio
government would not refuse to remedy a situation so preju¬
dicial to Anglo-Brazilian commercial relations.67
   In the face of similar protests the imperial government grad¬
ually shifted its attitude in regard to the question of inherit¬
ances and nationality of foreigners. At first, from 1842 to 1857,
the Rio court vigorously defended its right to extend national
jurisdiction over inheritances of foreigners and maintained the
principles of nationality enunciated in the Constitution.68 But
after 1857 a distinct change occurred in the language of the re¬
ports of the foreign minister to the Assembly and in the meas¬
ures adopted by the Rio government. When early in that year
the French opened negotiations intended to settle disputed
points in regard to consular jurisdiction over properties of de¬
ceased citizens and to the nationality of French children born
in Brazil, it was discovered that no solution was possible until
the legislative body should modify the stipulations concerning
Brazilian nationality.69
   On June 13, 1859, Councillor Pimenta Bueno, therefore, pre-
  67 Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1854, Annex A, Henry Howard to
Limpo de Abreu, April 24, 1854. The minister also complained of the fact that
by the Brazilian law of nationality minors of foreign parents were liable to com¬
pulsory military service. This point was still in discussion in 1877 when the son of
an English citizen was forcibly called to the colors (ibid., 1877, p. 25, and Annex
1, Nos. 101-104). The question of nationality of children was important in Brazil
in view of the large immigrant population and the relatively small number who
were natives of a third or fourth generation.
  68 See the report of the foreign minister in Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1847.
  69 Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, IV, 234.
304         BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
sented a project to the senate regulating the nationality of chil¬
dren of foreigners70; and on September io of the following year,
the project became a law. By the terms of this new interpreta¬
tion of nationality, children of foreign subjects born in Brazil
retained the citizenship of the father until they were twenty-
one when they automatically became Brazilians. In case a
Brazilian woman should marry a foreigner, she lost her nation¬
ality until she became a widow, when she could recover her
former citizenship if she so desired; foreign women marrying
Brazilians acquired the civil status of the husband.71
  This law enabled the Foreign Office to sign consular con¬
ventions which contained stipulations satisfactory to France.
Three months to a day from the date of the final approval of
the law of i860, a convention was signed with France72 con¬
ceding to French minors the same civil rights as those enjoyed
by their fathers until they were twenty-one, and by 1863 sim¬
ilar conventions were concluded with Switzerland, Italy, Spain,
and Portugal. England was not included in the list of European
powers which secured such agreements.
  Almost immediately trouble arose over the interpretation of
the law of i860, as the consuls of the powers signatory to con¬
ventions stretched the privileges obtained by the agreements
to lengths unauthorized by any clause or understanding be¬
tween the governments in question. Consequently, on January
27, 1864, a circular was sent to the governors of the provinces
of the empire which specified the only cases in which consular
intervention would be allowed. These cases were: when there
were no heirs or executors by the will and when the heirs were