

  67 Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, Documentos A, pp. 70-88, and B, pp. 89-92.
Properties of deceased and absent were defined as: goods of deceased with or with¬
out wills when it is known or presumed that there are heirs who are absent; goods
of absent persons, whose whereabouts are unknown or whose existence is unde¬
termined. Such goods were to be administered until the heirs appeared or until
they escheated to the state. Escheated goods were defined as: properties without
established owners; properties belonging to a deceased who left no relative nearer
than the tenth degree, or whose heirs repudiated the inheritance.
  68 Dunshee de Abranches, Tratados, p. 42.
  68 The text of the circular is given in Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, note 6, pp.
17-18.
           ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                                     301
expired. Again France protested, this time against the fact that
merely unclaimed inheritances and escheats were excluded
from the operation of the decrees; France maintained that all
inheritances whether heirs were present and known or absent
and unknown fell under the exclusive jurisdiction of French
•consuls.60 The right to this jurisdiction was based on Article
XXV of the commercial treaty of 1826 which stated that con¬
sular privileges granted in the terms of the agreement were
perpetual. The Rio government on the other hand maintained
that although by the perpetual nature of the privileges granted
by the 1826 treaty France did possess the right to administer
the unclaimed inheritances and escheats of its subjects, no fur¬
ther jurisdiction was justified under the agreement. In the case
where heirs were present to receive and administer inheritances,
legal proceedings must conform to Brazilian law and all taxes,
tithes, and expenses paid as stipulated in the decrees of 1842
and 1845. Moreover, since the Franco-Brazilian treaty called
for perfect reciprocity, Brazil recommended that France estab¬
lish similar regulations with reference to the jurisdiction of
Brazilian consuls, pointing out at the same time that the ex¬
emptions conceded the Paris government established France
as the most favored nation in Brazil in view of the expiration
of the agreement with England.61
   A second difficulty complicated the situation, for in addition
to the question of jurisdiction over inheritances, there arose
the problem of nationality. By the constitution of the empire62
all persons “born in Brazil, whether free-born or freedmen,
even of foreign fathers” were Brazilian citizens, “so long as
these” were “not in residence in the service of their country.”
France, backed by England and other powers, denied cate-

   60 Ibid., II, 19. Note of the French minister dated March 4, 1846.
  61 Reply of Barao de Cayru to the French minister, October 21, 1846. Text is
given in Pereira Pinto, Apontamentos, II, note 7, pp. 19-21. Councillor Alves Branco
stated the grounds on which Brazil could contest the perpetual nature of the con¬
sular privileges in an opinion rendered as a member of the Council of State, Jan¬
uary 27, 1847 (ibid., IV, Note 5, pp. 228-231).
  62 Title II, Article 6, Paragraph 1. Text of the constitution is given in H. G.
James, The Constitutional System of Brazil.
302          BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
gorically the loss of citizenship by the son of a foreign national
born in Brazil and maintained the right of consular jurisdic¬
tion over the property of such children, whereas Brazil asserted
that the mere fact of the place of birth irrevocably determined
Brazilian citizenship and established the right of national juris¬
diction over such persons.63
  In order to clarify the situation and in response to the pro¬
tests of the foreign powers, the Rio government promulgated
the decree64 in 1851 by which it clearly specified the exemp¬
tions and prerogatives of the consuls and the manner in which
they should collect, administer, and liquidate the inheritances
of subjects of their respective nations. By this decree consuls
were granted jurisdiction in case the deceased died intestate
without legal heirs present or in case there was a will but no
heir present to claim the inheritance. In case one of the heirs,
whether present or absent, was a Brazilian citizen, however,
jurisdiction fell to Brazilian courts.
   Liberal as the decree was,66 it still left the question of nation¬
ality on the basis established by the constitution and restricted
the jurisdiction of consuls to the administration of one type of
inheritance. The powers of Europe demanded complete and
exclusive jurisdiction over all kinds of inheritances and insisted
pertinaciously in a reinterpretation of the disputed article of
the constitution.66 The inheritance law of 1851, Minister How¬
ard pointed out, worked great injury to English subjects since
if they had any capital invested in Brazil, they were forced to
dispose of their property and make their wills in accordance
with Brazilian laws instead of British regulations. If any error