

  M Brazil, Relatorio dos Negocios Extrangeiros, 1896, Annex I, Supplement, No. 49.
  96 Ibid., 1897, Annex I, Nos. 1 and 2 and p. 8; and Rocha Pombo, Historia do
Brazil, X, 446. For description and history of the islands see “Memoria historica
e geographica da ilha da Trindade. Organisada e dedicada ao Exmo. barao da
Ponte Ribeiro, pelo bacharel Pedro Torquato Xavier de Brito,” Rev. do Inst. Hist,
e Geog. Bras., 1877, pt. II.
        ABOLITION OF SPECIAL PRIVILEGES                    311
the traditional privileged power in Portuguese territory, could
maintain the concessions won in Brazil between 1808 and 1827.
By a struggle which lasted for nearly three-quarters of a cen¬
tury, the tutelage of Europe was renounced by the Rio gov¬
ernment while at the same time the position of Great Britain
was reduced to a plane of equality with other foreign powers.
Preeminence in the markets, investments, and shipping business
of the empire thus became a question not of privileged position
but of economic superiority over rivals.
                              CHAPTER XII


    THE CHALLENGE TO BRITAIN’S ECONOMIC
                               SUPREMACY


The   preeminence of Great Britain in Brazilian markets, in¬
vestments, and shipping was already an established fact when
the colony became an independent empire. The favored posi¬
tion in Portuguese territory during colonial times; the success¬
ful transfer of the historic privileges enjoyed on the European
continent to the South American possession when the seat of
the monarchy was shifted to Rio de Janeiro; the period of mo¬
nopolistic participation in Brazilian commerce while Europe was
at war; the great advantage resulting from the fifteen per cent,
import tax as against twenty-four for all other foreign powers;
the economic penetration carried forward under favorable cir¬
cumstances between 1808 and 1825; and the final consolidation
of these advantages in the young empire by the treaty of 1827
all worked together to secure for Great Britain the favored
position in Brazilian economic life.
  Statistics for the early period of the empire are uncertain or
non-existent, but there is no doubt that in 1827 England was
the greatest foreign supplier of the markets of Brazil.* 1 In the
number of ships entering the port of Rio, where more than
half of the imports of the empire was landed, Great Britain was
far in the lead. In 1821 for instance, there were reported 124
ships flying the Portuguese flag, 192 British, fifty-four American,
and thirty-one French. Five years later only seventeen Portu¬
guese vessels entered whereas in 1828, some 260 British ships
were registered.2 No figures are available as to the amount of

  1 Centro Industrial do Brazil, 0 Brazil: Suas Riquezas Naturaes, Suas Industrias,
I. 275-
   1 0 Brazil, Suas Riquezas, I, 276. In 1842 the port of Rio returned to the treasury
        CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC SUPREMACY                                              313
foreign capital invested in the empire in 1827, but it is more
than probable that British investments exceeded those of other
foreign powers.* * 3
   Yet competition began at once. For coincident with their
recognition of the independence of the empire, France, the
United States, the Hanseatic Cities, Holland, and Sweden in¬
itiated the long struggle which eventually was to result in the
successful rivalling of Britain’s favored position. In the early
period France was most active despite very serious handicaps
which resulted in part from French colonial laws and in part
from lack of capital and industrial development.4 Due to this
competition the number of British ships entering Rio in 1837
fell to no w'hereas French vessels numbered sixty-eight and
American ships (in 1836) almost equalled the British with 102.5 6
   This competition proved futile, however, as long as the mar¬
ket in which it occurred remained comparatively stationary in
the value of goods imported. That condition existed from 1827
to 1850 due to the disturbed conditions of the last years of the
reign of D. Pedro I and the internal disorder of the period of