

The   foundations  of British preeminence in Portuguese
America were laid before Brazil became a nation, for the line
of continuity may be traced to the Anglo-Portuguese treaties
of i642-’54-’6i. By those agreements practices which had be¬
come recognized by custom and by the decrees of Portuguese
kings were legalized, and additional privileges in Portuguese
economic life demanded by English merchants were guaran¬
teed to them. Methuen’s solution of the crisis of the last
decades of the seventeenth century established     a   lucrative
economic exchange between the two countries which the
British exploited under the special privileges obtained by the
earlier series of agreements. So valuable to Englishmen were
the commercial relations which developed after 1703 that
Portugal outrivaled France in the esteem of the British mer¬
chant and industrial class. Consequently, by the middle of the
eighteenth century English penetration developed to such a
degree that Portugal became the economic vassal of its ally.
To the British merchant, the principal factor in this Anglo-
Portuguese exchange was the colony of Brazil, for the mother
country served as the entrepot for the streams of merchandise
which flowed from England to the Portuguese colonies and
from these colonies back to England.
  The industrial revolution in Great Britain, which was co¬
incident with the effort of the Marquez de Pombal to free his
country from its economic vassalage, almost severed the con¬
nection between the two allies; but raw cotton from Brazil and
the wars with France reestablished the intimate relations which
had been threatened with dissolution. When the invasion of
the French forced D. Joao to flee to Rio under the protection
of England, the opportunity came for Great Britain to transfer
its old privileges and preeminent position in Portugal to the
    22
338      BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
colony itself. Strangford, by his treaty in 1810, succeeded in
this task beyond the expectations of the London court.
   From 1808 to 1821 the relations between the two countries
were conducted on the traditional European basis, although
the Portuguese court was residing in the colony. During these
thirteen years English penetration into Brazil assumed formid¬
able proportions, for, encouraged by the special privileges,
immunities, and guaranties specified to them by treaty, British
capital and enterprise were enticed into the huge colony, ripe
for exploitation. When the cry of independence was raised in
1822, these interests had become so important that Great
Britain forced the revolting colony to accept as binding upon
itself the obligations which Portugal had incurred by the
treaty of 1810, despite the fact that Brazil had renounced the
authority of the government which had negotiated that agree¬
ment. This transfer of the traditional English privileges so
long enjoyed in Portugal to the independent empire of Brazil
was completed by the commercial treaty of 1827, by which the
new state paid a debt due Great Britain for its services in se¬
curing the entrance of the empire into the family of European
nations.
  Two currents of interest threatened to disrupt the transfer
of traditional British privileges in Portugal to the new state.
One was the desire of the Rio court to absorb the north bank
of the Plate River, but under British mediation the question
was settled in 1828 without fundamentally disturbing Anglo-
Brazilian relations. The other problem, the suppression of
the slave traffic, was far more serious and proved impossible
of solution during the formative period of the empire, although
Great Britain succeeded in forcing Brazil to sign agreements
which nominally abolished the slave trade under conditions
which would enable the English to employ their cruisers to
enforce the prohibition. The history of the Portuguese and
Brazilian slave traffic between 1808 and 1827 presaged the
difficulties which were to confront the London court in its
relations with Brazil during the succeeding forty years. The
fact that the empire in 1827 acceded to the demands of Eng-
                           SUMMARY                              339
land in regard to the slave trade is evidence of the preeminence
of Britain in Brazil, but persistence in those demands con¬
stantly threatened during the first three-quarters of the century
to destroy the good relations which existed between the two
governments.
  Between 1825 and 1827 British preeminence in Brazil
reached its zenith. In shipping, commerce, and investments
Great Britain enjoyed the paramount position among foreign
powers interested in Brazil, and politically the London Office
was beginning to exercise a virtual protectorate over the em¬
pire. Yet the twenty years following 1827 witnessed a steady
decline in the political influence exerted by Great Britain over
Brazil. Friction which arose from England’s efforts to suppress
the slave trade embittered Anglo-Brazilian relations and led
to a revolt by the South American nation against the traditional
position of Great Britain in Portuguese affairs. The smoldering
resentment felt by Brazil over what it termed the arbitrary
action of England came to a crisis in 1845 at the expiration of
the convention of 1826 when Great Britain, determined on the
suppression of the traffic at any cost, employed coercion when
persuasion failed.
  The revolt against British preeminence in the political
affairs of Brazil was carried to a successful conclusion in the
two decades following 1845. By 1850 the imperial government,
which in the first quarter of the century had been forced to
yield to the commanding diplomacy of British agents, was
stabilized, confident of its future, and divorced from the old
idea of maintaining close relations with the European powers.
Irritated by forty years of friction arising mainly from the slave
trade controversy, and aided by the marked national and
economic development of the empire, Brazil was able to throw
off its political subjection to Great Britain. In i860 it was strong
enough to sustain its revolt; thereafter friendly relations were
to exist between the two governments, but the thread of political
control by England in territory possessed by the Portuguese
race was definitely broken in Brazil.
  A different phase of this revolt against British preeminence
340      BRITISH PREEMINENCE IN BRAZIL
was revealed in the efforts exerted by the South American em¬
pire to free itself from the extra-territorial privileges, consular
concessions, and economic favors imposed by England during
the period from 1808 to 1827. The aim of the Brazilians was
not to eliminate British interests from their foreign commerce,
capital investments, and domestic enterprises, but to open their
country to the competition of all other nations, and thus to
make the paramount position of England dependent not on
special favors but on economic superiority over rivals. That
objective was attained by the middle of the century.
  Yet Great Britain was able to maintain its position of eco¬
nomic supremacy in Brazilian shipping, markets, and invest¬
ments throughout the nineteenth century. The traditional
privileges, won in Portugal centuries earlier and transferred
to South America between 1808 and 1827, were abolished at
the expiration of the treaty in 1844 without altering England’s
preeminence in Brazilian economic life. During the period
when the trade of the Portuguese empire was a monopoly of
the mother country, these special privileges had played a use¬
ful part in opening colonial possessions to British trade and
their continuation in the early years of the independence of
Brazil had guaranteed a low import tax during the transition
period and at the same time had prevented the granting to
other foreign powers special favors adverse to British interests.
By the middle of the century, however, their usefulness was
past, for in open competition Great Britain was superior to
any rival.
  That superiority was threatened seriously for the first time
when Germany appeared to challenge England’s position as
the chief supplier of Brazilian markets. By 1914 it had risen
to second place in the carrying trade and in exports to Brazil,
only to drop out of the race when the World War started. For
the next eight years the United States, which since the late
’sixties had been the largest buyer of Brazilian products, oc¬
cupied Great Britain’s place as chief foreign exporter to the
South American nation. In 1922 England regained the lead
only to lose it again two years later to the same rival. The
                         SUMMARY                            341
United States not only succeeded to first place but by 1926
furnished a greater proportion of imports to Brazil than did
Great Britain prior to the outbreak of the World War.
  Yet England still retains a commanding position in the fields
of investments and shipping, despite the fact that the United
States is the largest buyer of Brazilian products and the prin¬
cipal supplier of foreign goods to the South American republic.
Thus the historic preeminence of Great Britain in Portuguese
domains has been challenged successfully in only one of its
three principal economic phases. Politically, British preemi¬
nence in Brazil has disappeared; economically, it is still a de¬
cisive factor in the life of Portuguese America.
*
              BIBLIOGRAPHY OF CITATIONS