28 P. E, TRTLOCK AND A. BELKIN

occurred.” One obvious form such reasoning takes is reliance on base rates
‘and patterns of covariation. For instance, we might justify the counterfac-
tual, “If Bill Clinton had lost the presidential election of 1992, he would
have been disappointed,” by observing in a two-by-two contingency table
that when people fail to achieve a goal for which they have worked long and
hard, the overwhelming majority experience disappointment, but when peo-
ple do achieve their goals, there is markedly less disappointment.

‘The “discovery” is hardly startling; more startling, however, is the strong,
stand that some scholars take on both the necessity and sufficiency of statisti
cal justification for assessing counterfactual claims. In his commentary,
Dawes, for instance, treats statistical evidence as trump when he declares
that counterfactual inferences are justified if and only if they are embedded
in a system of statistical contingency for which we have reasonable evi-
dence. He offers an intriguing example:

Suppose that someone is required to wager her entire wealth on a single roll of a
pair of fair dice. Her wealth will be doubled if she wins the bet; if she loses, she
will be bankrupt. Her choice is to bet either for or against a roll of snake eyes.
Being wise, she bets against snake eyes. The dice are rolled and they come up
snake eyes. She loses. She is bankrupt, Is it normatively valid to state that “if
‘only” she had bet on snake eyes, she would have won? Well, itis true that she bet
against snake eyes and that she lost, But does the “if only” add anything to the
analysis? I suggest the answer is no. But suppose she had bet on snake eyes and
lost. Here, I suggest that the regretful counterfactual inference that “if only” she
had bet against snake eyes she would have won is normatively justified. Why?
Because the odds are thirty-five to one against snake eyes, and those odds justify
the expectation that she would have won had she bet against snake eyes. It’s an
expectation; one can insert “probably won” if one wishes.

‘The plausibility of the snake-eyes counterfactual hinges on the aim of in-
quiry. From an historical point of view, the counterfactual is plausible. We
do not have to rewrite much history to reach a hypothetical world in which
the woman threw the dice slightly differently and won her bet. The bet
‘against snake eyes is an easily imagined and easily reversed cause of bank-
ruptcy. To statisticians of both the Bayesian and frequentist schools, how-
ever, the counterfactual is implausible because it posits so unlikely an out-
come. We certainly do not want people drawing the lesson from history that
it is a good idea to risk their fortunes on long-shot wagers.*

» Dawes's snake-eyes problem bears a deep resemblance to Neweomb’s paradox, which pits
statistical intuition against causal intuition through an ingenious thought experiment that calls
Upon us to imagine a being who has demonstrated a phenomenal capacity to make accurate
predictions (R® — 1.0) and who has asked us to make a choice involving two boxes, B1 and
BD. BI contains $1,000; 82 contains either $1,000,000 or nothing. Our choice is between 1wo
factions: (1) taking what is in both boxes; (2) taking only what isin the second box. Further-
more, we know, and the being knows we know, and so on, tha ifthe being predicts that we

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS 29

‘One need not, of course, accept the radical epistemological argument of
Dawes to agree with the more moderate mainstream view that canons of
sound statistical reasoning should constrain our judgments of counterfactuals
(King, Keohane, and Verba 1994) and, indeed, that we should be alert to the
psychological fact that people are flawed intuitive statisticians who fall prey
to various biases in detecting and using covariation data. The experimental
literature warns us that people often draw inappropriately strong conclusions
from observing only the cause-presenveffect-present cell of contingency ta-
bles and see strong relationships between variables that they expect to be
correlated but are in reality only weakly correlated (Nisbett and Ross 1980).
A good start in implementing our fifth criterion would be simply to improve
the accuracy of intuitive estimates of covariation, with special attention to
sensitizing people to the problem of missing counterfactual data, Accurate
‘covariation estimates would, however, be just the beginning and would not
protect us from accepting many false counterfactual claims (Type I errors)
and rejecting many true ones (Type II errors). We also need to beware of
biases produced by nonrandom selection, confounding variables, and omit-
ted variables, as well as a host of other familiar obstacles to meaningful
statistical inference (King, Keohane, and Verba 1994). These statistical is-
sues play an especially prominent role in Russett’s chapter, which grapples
with the controversial counterfactual that if all states in the twentieth century
had been democratic, there would have been markedly fewer wars. Skeptics
of the democratic-peace hypothesis challenge this counterfactual on various,
grounds, including the inadequacy of the available statistical samples (too
few democracies, too few wars, and too truncated a range of time), the
inadequacy of the operational definitions of democracy and war (the self-
serving suppleness of certain judgment calls), and—perhaps most impor-
tant—the collinearity problems created by confounding variables that, once
controlled for in regressions, may “explain away” the democracy effect.
Russett responds by rebutting these objections, in the process illustrating the
enormous overlap between traditional procedures for hypothesis testing and

‘will take what is in both boxes, he will ot put the $1 million inthe second box; if te being
predicts we will take only what is in the second box, he will put the $1 million in the second
box, The rules are straightforward. First the being makes his prediction; then he puts the SI
milion in the second box or not, according to his prediction; then we make our choice.

“The problem is paradoxical because powerful epistemic intuitions push us in opposite direc
tions (Nozick 1993), Statistical intuition tells us that if we take what is in both boxes, the being
almost certainly will have predicted this choice and will not have put the SI million in the
second bor, whereas if we take only what isin the second box we will almost certainly get
million. Therefore, we should take only what is in the second box. Causal intuition tells us,
‘however, thatthe being has made his prediction and has already either put the SI milion into
the second box of has not. That fact cannot be undone. Therefore, we will receive more money,
$1,000 more, by taking what is in both boxes.

“Thought experiments of this form provide a useful means of clarifying our intuitions about
how to resolve clashes between epistemic standards.
