he responsibility it entailed, to the Government. The Court of Directors was a mighty power; it had all the prestige attaching to the prolonged existence of 250 years; its antecedents and its history were the antecedents and the history of a power of no small importance. Its gigantic patronage had given it relations and interest in every household of the kingdom; its claims in the opinion of all sober-minded men were substantial, and on conservative affections could not be otherwise than great; but, notwithstanding all this, when the views to which he had referred were propounded in that House and disseminated out of doors, excepting the immediate retainers of the Company, not a single voice was raised in its favour. In no other way could that be explained than in this:—The leading statesmen of this country saw that the existing system had become effete—that it was no longer in harmony with the spirit of the times—and that the feeling had grown up in the minds of men that this mighty empire could only be governed and be increased with safety by those who, in a Parliamentary government like that of England, were placed at the head of affairs. Parliament required to know, and India required to know, how the government of 150,000,000 of the human race was to be conducted, and the circumstances of the time demanded that its administration should be brought under Parliamentary influence, for as long as another body existed, which practically had the government of India, they would never get a House—more than they had that night— to listen to a statement respecting Indian financial affairs or the progress of improvement in that country. If the right hon. Baronet or the House referred to the origin 1469 of the Indian speeches which they might read in Hansard, they would find that in many cases they were never made in the House at all, being the production of some clerk in the India House, who used to prepare them, and then, after Mr. Dundas had delivered a few sentences to the House, the MS. was handed over to Hansard; he was even told that the clerk in the Board of Control could show a number of the speeches got up in that manner. Unless, therefore, they got the ordinary Parliamentary motives to bear in relation to this question, it never could be a general subject of interest to the discussion of which hon. Members would aspire. He was glad to have had the opportunity of stating his views on this point, believing as he did that truth, although it might be told to an audience however small, would ascend in the world, and, being disseminated, take firm hold of the public mind, arming itself at last with irresistible power. He was unwilling to dwell longer on this subject, but he wished before he sat down to call the attention of the House to a point connected with finance, on which he conceived it might interfere most beneficially in the interest of India—he meant with respect to the propriety of an arrangement for bringing the offices of the Directors of the East India Company into close connection with the Government offices. That subject excited the attention of Parliament last Session, and if any hon. Gentleman would refer to the divisions which took place on it, he would find the House was almost equally divided on the question before them. The division, he recollected, was sixty-one to seventy-four, the proposition for bringing those offices together being negatived by a majority of thirteen, and in the minority of sixty-one would be found the names of a large number of Gentlemen on that side of the House who were known friends of India. The right hon. Baronet had detailed to them that evening the various expenses of India, and it certainly did strike him (Sir E. Perry) that it was most absurd that the offices of two consulting bodies should be more than four miles apart. He thought he could show the House how they could save to India at least 150,000l. The whole cost of what he might call the double government, taking it on the most moderate calculation, was as follows:—Salaries of Court of Directors (now 10,000l.), 7,568l.; of contingent expenses, consisting of repairs, taxes, &c., and petty charges, 32,062l.; 1470 salaries, &c., of the secretaries and officers of Court of Directors, 94,387l.; Board of Control and establishment, 29,420l.; rent of India House and other buildings of the Company, at 6½ per cent on their own valuation of 506,919l., 32,950l.; rent for India Board, on a valuation of 40,000l., 2,600l.—making, in the whole, 198,987l. Now, let them contrast that with the cost of Government offices which transacted similar duties—he meant the Colonial Office, doing the business of fifty-three Governments, which amounted to 40,550l., and if they added 10,000l. a year as salaries of the Court of Directors, supposing them to continue always in existence, the whole cost would be 50,550l.; therefore, the sum of 150,000l., or near it, might be applied to the purposes shadowed forth by the right hon. Baronet. He trusted that some hon. Member with more experience than himself would favour the House with his opinion of the practicability of such an amalgamation, for if a saving to that extent could indeed be effected, it might be attended with the most important advantages to India, and he had sanguine hopes the matter would be investigated by the right hon. Baronet himself, as he (Sir E. Perry) had seen enough of the Government of India to know that their chief desire was to deal out justice to the Natives of that country, and in their supervision to correct what was wrong. He sympathised with the hon. Baronet the Member for Honiton (Sir J. Hogg), in the assertion, that an attempt to do justice had characterised the rule of the East India Company. With the mass of business that fell to a Member of Parliament, it was impossible to waste a day in conferring with a clerk at the India House on points upon which information was desired, and which the Board of Control did not contain. The governing mind upon various small points of Indian administration could only be found among the superior class of examiners of correspondence at the East India House. Great benefit would result from getting all the Government authorities of India into one building, situate in the immediate vicinity of the other Government offices. He should not have gone so fully into the subject in so thin a House, except that the opportunity of speaking upon Indian subjects arose so seldom that one, who like himself strongly felt the responsibility cast upon this country by Providence in regard to India, would not do his duty if he did not seize any occa- 1471 sion of this kind that might present itself. Any one who had studied Indian history must see that the temper of the times had greatly changed, and that the views of the public had been much enlarged since the discussions of this subject commenced; fifty or 100 years ago the question was how much money could be got out of India, and not how much the Government could benefit 150,000,000 of our fellow-subjects. But the right hon. Baronet the President of the Board of Control, and others, were becoming sensible of the holiness of our mission. Parliament was "rising to the height of this great argument." He was sure that the most enlightened minds were desirous that our government in India should assume the most liberal form of policy that was compatible with the despotism that must always exist in an Asiatic country. This policy was as sound as it was unselfish, and he was sure it was only by the adoption of this large and generous policy that Parliament could preserve the connection that now existed for the benefit of both countries, and which, if every act were conceived in the same spirit, would, he trusted, continue for countless generations.