 described 25,765,000l., there have been taken in cash 1,447,000l., and the whole of the 5 per cent debt has been extinguished. Upon the portion which has been transferred there is a saving of 1 per cent, and upon the portion which has been paid off there is of course a saving of 5 per cent. The amount saved by the reduction of interest upon the amount transferred is 257,650l., and the saving upon the amount paid up in cash is 72,350l., making the annual saving upon the whole transaction 330,000l. I think that is a very satisfactory operation to be executed in the face of a local war just concluded, and of a general war just commencing, and nothing could more clearly show the high estimation in which the stability of Indian finance is held by persons competent to form an opinion upon the subject. Now, Sir, there can be no doubt that, if I could have afforded it, there are two or three taxes in India which I should have been glad to have dealt with. There is the land tax of Madras, for example, which excited a great deal of disapprobation in 1449 the Select Committee, there is the Moturpha tax in the same presidency; and there are likewise certain discriminating duties which ought to be abolished altogether. But I cannot forget, and I hope the House will not forget, that the whole of the saving which I have just mentioned will be absorbed in the proposed increased expenditure for education and public works; and when I remember, too, that during last year there was a falling off in the opium revenue to the extent of about 600,000l., I do not think I should be justified in urging upon the Indian Government any large reduction of taxation. With a deficiency last year of 800,000l., with no prospect of any increase in the opium revenue, and with a certainty of an increased expenditure upon public works and education, I do not think it would be wise for me to recommend any reduction in the sources of revenue, although I admit—and Lord Dalhousie entirely agrees with me—that in many districts the land tax should be reduced. That will be done as soon as possible; but I am afraid that in the meantime no such reduction can he made, at any rate to any considerable extent. I do not know that upon the question of finance it will be necessary for me to trouble the House at any greater length. I have stated what the income in 1852 was, what the expenditure was, and what the surplus was; I have stated what the estimates are for 1853–4; I have shown that in some of the sources of expenditure there is a certainty of an increase, and I hope I have convinced the House that under all these circumstances it would be unwise to urge upon the Indian Government any considerable reduction of taxation. Having done so, I will now proceed to state, as shortly as I can, what the state of India is generally, and what have been the changes since last Session of Parliament. First of all, with respect to the political state of India, I may state that the principal event which has taken place since that time has been the complete settlement of the province of Pegu. No hostile attempt has been made against us on the part of the King of Ava. He is now satisfied that we do not intend to proceed further than we have already done. At the date of the last accounts trade was going on most satisfactorily both in Ava and Pegu. Our troops in Pegu were supplied with provisions from Ava, with the special leave and sanction of the King, and, in short, there was every 1450 prospect of friendly relations being speedily established between the British authorities and the King of Ava. I am sorry to say that large bands of freebooters were committing depredations in some of the districts; but still I can state that even those districts were more tranquil at the dates of the last accounts than they ever were under the rule of Burmah itself. Pegu is exceedingly rich in productions of all kinds. A great part of the land is admirably adapted for the growth of cotton; the timber is exceedingly valuable in the upper part of the province; and, upon the whole, there seems to be every prospect, however unwilling we may have been to make the acquisition—and I can state that no man was more so than the Governor General himself—of the province becoming one of our most valuable possessions in India. The House is aware that the Rajah of Nagpore recently died without leaving any successor to his throne, and that his State has consequently been annexed to the British territories. In the North-Western Provinces an amount of tranquillity prevails which, I believe, is perfectly unexampled. It is notorious that in the districts beyond the Indus several of the tribes have for many years pursued their depredations unchecked, and that very great forbearance has been shown to them. I am glad to say that, after unavailing attempts by peaceable means to ensure freedom from their attacks, they have at last been coerced by the military force sent against them, and that for the last eighteen months not a sword has been drawn in those districts. Our exertions to establish tranquillity within our own frontiers have likewise been most successful, and such a state of tranquillity as now prevails over the whole of the North-Western Provinces has never been experienced before. Some time ago I wrote to the Governor General directing him to endeavour to establish friendly relations with the Afghans. I am happy to say that he has succeeded in that attempt. A treaty has been concluded with the Chief of Kelat, in which we have stipulated to aid him in putting down the bands of robbers that infest his dominions, while he has stipulated to give a free passage to our merchandise through his country, upon the payment of the small and simple duty of six rupees per camel load. I trust that treaty will be the means of extending British trade in Persia and the other countries which lie beyond Kelat in Southern Afghanistan, and that we shall 1451 derive many important advantages from our alliance with the Chief of that people. With respect to Cabool, after the events which have taken place within the last few years, it was not, of course, to be expected that we should be able to establish friendly relations with it immediately. Since 1849 there has been complete friendliness shown on our part to all persons coming from Cabool into the British territories. All the frontier duties have been taken off, and the communication between the two countries is now very considerable. It cannot be denied, however, that the Chief of Cabool appears to have entertained apprehensions of some further attack on our part, but measures have been taken to reassure him upon that head; and I am glad to say that approaches have recently been made to us, in that secret and reserved manner which forms an essential part of Indian diplomacy and negotiation. The officers upon our frontiers have been desired to reciprocate those approaches in the same friendly manner in which they are made; and I hope I shall be able, in the next Session of Parliament, to report the establishment of amicable relations with the Chief of Cabool. With regard to the great country beyond—Persia—she is placed in a somewhat difficult position between her two great neighbours who are now at war with each other. The Shah has professed, and has maintained, an unbroken neutrality, which is at once calculated to serve his own interests, and to secure the approval of at least one of the parties in the present struggle. Neutrality is the policy which we have all along urged upon him, and we hope he will be wise enough to continue it. So much, Sir, for the political state of our Indian empire, which is most satisfactory. I am happy to say that the attention of the Government of India, no longer distracted by external circumstances, has recently been turned to the internal improvement of the country. Early in the present Session a question was addressed to me with reference to the employment of Native judges. The only answer I could give at that time was, that I had called the attention of the Governor General to it. I am now happy to state that he, as Governor of Bengal, has laid before the Government of India a scheme for improving the condition and increasing the salaries of the Native judges in Bengal, and for placing them in a much higher position than they have ever hitherto occupied. He has likewise laid a scheme be- 1452 fore them for the improvement of the police, for the inspection of gaols, and for the improvement of the roads. These measures have not yet received the final sanction of the Government of India; but I have no doubt that they will be pushed vigorously forward and carried efficiently into execution by the very able officer—Mr. Halliday—who has been recently appointed to preside over the Presidency of Bengal. With regard to the North-Western Provinces, I can never refer to them without expressing my regret at the serious loss they have sustained by the death of Mr. Thomason. A very able civil servant —Mr. Colvin—has been appointed to succeed him, and I have not the least doubt that this gentleman will discharge his important duties most efficiently. The only great event in the internal affairs of India which has taken place since last year has been the opening of that gigantic undertaking, the Ganges Canal, a work which, I believe, exceeds any other ever heard of, either in ancient or modern times. Without troubling the House with minute details, I may state, from a paper drawn up by Major Smith, the able engineer officer who succeeded Colonel Cautley in the superintendence of the works, that the length of the main canal, which will be used for the purposes both of irrigation and navigation, is 525 miles, and of the branches 373 miles; making altogether 898 miles. The breadth at the upper part is 140 feet, and in other places it is 80 feet, diminishing to 20 at its termination. The depth varies from 10 to 5 feet. The flow of water at the entrance is 6,750 cubic feet per second; the area of irrigation is about 1,500,000 acres, and the population deriving benefit from it amounts to about 6,000,000 of people. There are two watercourses over it, the one 300 and the other 200 feet wide, and the canal itself is carried over a valley in an aqueduct of magnificent proportions, composed of 15 arches of 50 feet span, and a waterway of 750 feet. Throughout its whole course there are side canals, where necessary, so that there cannot by any possibility be a stoppage in the navigation. Compare this gigantic undertaking with some of the existing works in other parts of the world. The principal Italian canals are only 114 miles long; the two great canals in Egypt are 120 miles in length; the Erie Canal is 363 miles long; the four largest French canals are only 582 miles in length; while the principal canals in 1453 Holland are not more than 400 miles. The Ganges Canal, therefore, is nearly twice as large as the greatest canals in any country in the world; and it has been constructed under the superintendence of a single man, Colonel Cantley, to whom the Governor General of India most deservedly paid the highest honours which it was in his power to bestow, and whom I had great satisfaction in recommending to Her Majesty, since he came home, for the distinction of the Bath, as an acknowledgment of the distinguished services he has rendered to the country. I will not trouble the House by any enumeration of what has been done in the Punjaub; but I cannot help pointing out the remarkable fact that, although only three years have elapsed between the battle of Goojerat and the date of the Report on the administration of the Punjaub, which is in the hands of Members, yet a large tract of country has been changed from a state of lawless violence to a state of peace and security, which is not surpassed in some of the oldest settlements in India. The land revenue has been reduced 25 per cent, the Customs duties have been repealed, and all