---
source_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1854/aug/08/east-india-companys-revenue-accounts"
final_url: "https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1854/aug/08/east-india-companys-revenue-accounts"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "76e71581afe8ab8afab42db3e749e3ed54a56f95b0d0107d8ce6167d986887dc"
title: "EAST INDIA COMPANY'S REVENUE ACCOUNTS. (Hansard, 8 August 1854)"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

EAST INDIA COMPANY'S REVENUE ACCOUNTS. (Hansard, 8 August 1854)

# EAST INDIA COMPANY'S REVENUE ACCOUNTS.

HC Deb 08 August 1854 vol 135 cc1436-77 1436

§ Order for Committee read.

§ House in Committee.

Sir, I rise now in order to perform the promise I made last year to this House, that, if I occupied the position which I have the honour to hold as President of the Board of Control, I would submit a statement to Parliament respecting the finances of India, and, at the same time, would give a general explanation of the progress of India since the subject was last under discussion in this House. In order to enable me so to do, I propose to follow the precedent set in former years—though it is now only two years short of half a century since an Indian budget was last presented to the House of Commons—and to move certain Resolutions on the subject of the finances of India. Those who have referred to what took place on former occasions will be aware that many of the Resolutions then moved (though some relating to the commercial receipts of the India Company and to their transactions as manufacturers would be inapplicable to the altered state of circumstances) referred to the income, expenditure, and surplus of the Indian revenue, and they will be Resolutions similar to those which, before I sit down, I shall have the honour of proposing. The Resolutions referred first to the revenue and expenditure of the several presidencies, next to the revenue of India generally, and lastly, to the ultimate surplus, after defraying the whole of the charges payable out of the Indian revenues. The Resolutions which I shall submit are in truth, as on former occasions, nothing more than assertions of matters of fact, deducible from the accounts laid on the table of the House, whether those prepared in the old fashion, according to Acts of Parliament, or those framed in a different manner, which I moved for in the course of the Session, and which are now in the hands of hon. Members. The principal advantage, of course, which I anticipate from the present discussion, is not so much the eliciting the opinions of the House on the finances of India, as that it 1437 will enable Government to lay before the House a general view of the state of the Indian empire, and also afford an opportunity to hon. Gentlemen to make such observations as they think fit on the subject, or to seek for further information connected with that most important part of the British dominions, which, so far as I am able to give it from any documents in my possession, I shall be anxious to afford. I do not know that I need say much more on the general character of the Resolutions, but before I go further into the statement, I wish to say a word or two respecting the form of the Indian accounts in the hands of Members. Under Act of Parliament, accounts made up in a particular manner are annually laid on the table of the House. I did not think, when I had time to turn my attention to these matters, that the accounts presented in that shape afforded as much information as it was desirable should be laid before Parliament, and accordingly I desired accounts to be framed very much on the model of the finance accounts of this country, giving very full information on the subjects of the Indian revenue, income, and expenditure. These accounts hon. Gentlemen have had now in their hands for some time, and will be therefore able to express an opinion with respect to them. They were framed with very great care by a gentleman attached to the India Company's establishment in the City, and were submitted to another gentleman of the highest character in our financial department, the chief clerk of the revenue room in the Treasury. They afterwards underwent careful revision by myself, and I think they may be considered satisfactory as regards their form, and the character of the information they give. I am quite aware that they exhibit some defects, which I hope to remedy before presenting them to the House in another year, but for a first attempt to give full information to the House, I trust they will be regarded as a very great improvement on the present form of account. I also take this opportunity of saying that I was anxious to present at the same time to the House accounts similar to the trade and navigation accounts of this country; but I found that, in consequence of the accounts of the different presidencies not being kept in the same form, or not being brought up to the same time, it would be difficult in this year to produce complete accounts of this description. Instructions were sent out in the course of last autumn to the 1438 different presidencies, desiring that the accounts might be framed upon a new model, and I hope next year to be able to lay on the table Indian accounts corresponding with the trade and navigation accounts of the United Kingdom. I will only make one further preliminary observation with respect to the time to which these accounts are brought up. It is with very great regret that I am unable to lay before the House accounts—that is to say, complete accounts—up to a period later than the 30th of April, 1852. Those which have been laid on the table of the House pursuant to Act of Parliament, framed on the old model, I believe it would be easy to present at an earlier period. But I have been unwilling to make any change in this respect, because, though I might get the accounts presented two or three months sooner, I should not be satisfied, considering the accelerated means of communication with India, until I gained a whole year, and produced in the month of May or June complete accounts up to the end of the previous year. Instructions have been sent to the Governments of the different presidencies to expedite the transmission of the accounts as much as possible; and I hope, before a couple of years elapse, that I shall be able to effect the result I have stated. The general purport of the Resolutions which I shall move—following former precedents—will set forth the income and charge of each presidency, the income and charge of India payable in India, and the difference between the income and the charges. At the same time, it is true that the accounts will not give an exact representation of the charges of the separate presidencies, because there are some general charges included in the revenues of each presidency, and some, which ought to be divided among the several presidencies are charged to one. Thus, the charges of the Government of India are defrayed out of the revenues of Bengal; the charges of batta are paid out of the revenues of Madras, and of the Indian navy by Bombay, though these charges ought fairly to be distributed between the different presidencies. In like manner, the retired pay and furlough allowance for the whole of India are put into one general sum, though a portion belongs to each of the presidencies. I mention this circumstance to show that in the statement we are able to make out we do not accurately get the separate charges of the respective presidencies, nor the general charges of 1439 the Indian Government as distinguished from the local payments. Whether in another year it would be desirable to continue the accounts in this form is a subject for consideration, but at present I will only repeat that this is a first attempt to give information as fully as possible with respect to Indian finance. The information furnished in the statement I am about to make is principally derived from the Parliamentary papers on the subject under the heads in those papers, Nos. 12, 13, and 29. The first Resolution states the amount of the revenue of the Presidency of Bengal, including some districts attached to it, and the local charges thereon, exclusive of the military charge.