 this has been completed in little more than three years. This success has arisen from the adoption of what I hold to be a sound principle of Indian government, namely, European superintendence and Native agency; and the result is highly creditable to Lord Dalhousie, and the very able officers whom he employed. Here, too, they have opened about 1,350 miles of road, and surveyed about 5,200 miles more, and several hunched miles of canal have been commenced, in order to irrigate and bring into productive operation an enormous tract of country. In spite of the reduction of taxation there is still a surplus revenue. In 1849–50 that surplus was 520,000l.; in 1851–52 it was 626,000l.; in the next ten years, allowing for the great works in hand, it is estimated at 210,000l., and after that at 500,000l.; so that, when about 250,000l. is deducted for military expenditure, there will be a considerable surplus in a country which has very recently been brought under British rule. Works are also in progress for the supply of water to the town of Bombay, which is much required; for it is a curious fact that one of the purposes to which the railway has been applied has been to bring fresh water into the town, a purpose which, among the many advantages the railway confers, was certainly not originally ex- 1454 pected from it. In the Presidency of Madras, the Godavery annicut is nearly completed, that on the Kistnah is commenced, and we have sanctioned considerable further outlay on the Coleroon. The survey of the river Godavery has been partially made. We have ordered vessels to be sent out, of higher power and less draught of water, to complete it; and should the river be navigable, I will not say at all times, but for the greater portion of the year, it will open up one of the greatest cotton districts in India, and bring down that valuable product at a much cheaper rate than any transmission by railway, to the great advantage of the people of this country. With regard to the great railways of India, hon. Gentlemen are aware that the great difficulty has been the want of money, owing to the state of the money market. Up to last year there had been considerable delay, but the Government determined then that the great railways in India must at all events be made. The change of circumstances in the money market, just about the time that determination was come to, raised a difficulty which had not been anticipated; but steps have now been taken to prevent any further delay in the execution of the works. In Calcutta the line is by this time opened for forty-six miles, and the works for 120 miles more are under contract—the great obstacle to more rapid progress being the insufficient supply of iron rails from this country. The Madras Railroad is going on slowly, without any obstacles, and the Bombay line is opened for some distance. With regard to the lines to the north-east from Bombay, some doubt exists as to crossing the Ghauts, and until the country has been surveyed and reports sent in, it is impossible to decide on the exact course. In the meantime there is as much to be done on the line of railway towards Poonah as the railway company is likely to be able to accomplish, so that I do not consider that any time is really lost. In the last few months a work of much less difficulty, but of very great utility, has been nearly completed. The electric telegraph is laid down all the way from Calcutta to Agra, and from Agra to Bombay. It is, we know, in active operation, because messages have been received by it; and, I believe, by this time it will have been carried to Delhi. This important work has excited the greatest sympathy among the Natives of India, and it is satisfactory to find it can so easily be effected and maintained through the wild 1455 and desolate country which it must traverse in so great a distance. Great credit is due to the able officer, Dr. O'Shaughnessy, by whose zeal and skill this important work has been executed. An uniform postage, by means of a stamp, as in this country, has been established throughout India. The clothing of the troops has been put upon a proper footing, and various improvements of minor importance have been made, with which I will not now trouble the Committee. I will pass now to what has been done in execution of the provisions of the Act of Parliament of last Session. We have received intelligence of the assembling of the new Legislative Council at Calcutta, but it has only had time, subsequent to its meeting, to go through some formal proceedings. The House is, no doubt, aware that the Court of Directors, in conformity with another provision of the Act, have performed, with a single-minded view of what would be best for the public interest, the most painful task of reducing their own numbers to fifteen, and those numbers have been filled up by the addition of three named by the Crown. Some difficulty, it will be remembered, was anticipated that the Court so constituted might not work well together, but I am happy to say that such apprehensions have proved altogether unfounded. By the concurrent testimony of all parties, I am happy to say, no difference of the kind apprehended has existed, but the whole eighteen members have worked together as cordially as if they owed their origin to exactly the same authority. I feel here bound to bear my tribute of testimony to the assistance I have received from the whole of these Directors, and I think great advantage has been derived from their independent character, and the knowledge which they possess from having, as is the case with most of them, been so long in India. On all the important subjects which it has been my duty to bring before them I have found great readiness on their part to concur in what I thought necessary for the public interest. Passing from this point, it is desirable I should inform the House that the Law Commissioners appointed for the purpose of revising the imperfect legal procedures relating to India have not yet been enabled to bring into the shape of an Act of Parliament any measure which could be submitted for consideration this year; but I hope that, early next Session, I shall be able to carry out a Bill with a view to dealing with the Supreme Court in 1456 Calcutta, and in India generally to revise the forms both of civil and criminal procedure. Though nothing has been done in this direction in the present year, I hope next Session that a proposition will be brought forward for the establishment of a system of procedure even more simple than the improved system recently introduced into this country by the common consent of the most advanced lawyers both in this and in the other House of Parliament. Upon this subject legislation in this country has made great strides within the last year or two, and it is highly desirable that India should have the benefit of our improved legislation. A Commission for inquiring into and revising legal procedure is also sitting at Calcutta, of whose labours we shall have the benefit. Between the two, therefore, I hope that the present form of Indian judicature may undergo complete revision, and that a simple mode of procedure, easily intelligible to the Natives, will bring justice home to every man's door in a way which certainly has not been the case hitherto. With regard to the regulations for the examination of the assistant surgeons, I believe I have already stated to the House on a previous occasion that the first examination will take place in January next; it will be conducted on the principles of competition, and henceforward the examination will be taken half-yearly. As respects the admission to Haileybury, I was in hopes to have been able to state the regulations under which students might be admitted there by competition. The House is, no doubt, aware that no nomination can take place since the operation of the Act in April last, but a certain number of nominations had been made before that time which have not been taken up, and of course until those have been taken up there can be no admission by competition. Some time since I requested a number of gentlemen, most of them friends of my own, who felt an interest in this subject, to take it into their consideration. Among them was the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Edinburgh (Mr. Macaulay), the Vice Chancellor of the London University, Mr. John Lefevre, Lord Ashburton, Mr. Jowett, a distinguished member of Balliol College, and the Rev. Henry Melvill, the head of Haileybury. As soon as I am informed of the result of their deliberations, I shall be enabled to promulgate the regulations which may be necessary with respect to admission to Haileybury, and next sum- 1457 mer admission will probably take place by competition. There are now only two other subjects upon which I need trouble the House, both of which excited the greatest attention before the Committees of last year—I mean those of public works and education in India. The system of public works is one to which my attention was very early directed, and I could not but perceive the utter want of system with which they were conducted throughout India. The reports of Lord Elphinstone and of Lord Harris as to Bombay and Madras entirely confirm this view. Works appear to have been sanctioned and undertaken in India with very little regard to what could possibly be carried out, and it was impossible to know how much had been done or when it was done. Now, the estimates of public works in India ought to be framed annually, as they are in this country; and I have sent out a model upon which the estimates there should be framed, so that we may be informed what the total cost of each work will be, what has been the expenditure in each year, and what is required to complete it. So far as Bengal and the North-Western Provinces are concerned, there is already organised a separate department of public works, and I hope in the other provinces some similar system will before long be adopted, so that we shall have some responsible head for the management of this important department. The next essential consideration is the means of executing the works. Hitherto the only fund applicable in this way has been the surplus revenue in each district. Now, I thought that was not only bad economy, but was unduly postponing the benefit which the inhabitants, and ultimately the revenue, should derive from the execution of these works. I, therefore, have proposed to expend upon the main and principal public works as large a sum as may be found adequate for the purpose of completing them. Whilst the conversion of the 5 per cents was going on and we did not know what the drain on the treasury might be, we were obliged to reserve our balances in hand, but now we are at liberty to act more freely, and the Governor General is authorised to apply the necessary money to the execution of these great works. The real check upon the execution of these works not only now, but in former times, is the want of adequate superintendence. Money has been thrown away for the want of that superintendence.