

§ That is, I think, a satisfactory account of the general state of the peasantry in that part of the Indian empire. With regard, however, to the particular point, of the sufficiency of the supply of salt—that was the subject of his closest investigation, and he gives the result of inquiries which he made from 100 patients taken indifferently in the hospital, whom he questioned upon that subject. Ninety eight out of 100 stated that the supply of salt was ample for all their purposes, and two only stated that it was insufficient. I think that that is answer enough to the statement which was pretty generally made, that the people in that country suffered grievously from toe inadequate supply of salt, produced, as it was said, by the monopoly of the East India Company. Monopoly it most undoubtedly is not—but I will only state, 1444 upon this branch of the case, with regard to the mode of collection, which was the subject of the vote last year, that a Commission was appointed by the Governor General to inquire into the subject, and that Mr. Plowden, a very able civil officer, was desired to investigate it. He has visited Bombay and Madras for that purpose, and, when the result of his inquiry shall be sent home from the Governor General, I shall have great pleasure in laying it upon the table of the House. But the Committee must be aware what a great objection there is to the introduction of a system of Excise into India—an objection in which I shall be supported by my hon. Friend the Member for Newcastle, who stated that nothing could be more cruel and oppressive than the mod[...] which the Native collectors of the revenue discharged their functions. If you do establish an Excise, however, you must, for the protection of the revenue, increase the number of Native officers, and, with the number, increase their means of extortion and oppression. With regard to the only other item from which any considerable amount is produced namely, the Customs revenue, which produces, exclusively of salt, about 1,000,000l. a year—I fear that until the exports from India can be materially increased we cannot expect any great augmentation from that source. There has been a gradual increase of late years, and I hope that the exports from that country will increase. My hon. Friend the Member for Lancaster (Mr. Gregson) certainly leads me to hope that there may be in the present demand for fibrous substances some increase in the export of those articles from India. They do exist there in great quantities, and but a very insufficient proportion is brought to this country. I am aware the chairman of the Liverpool East Indian Association does not entertain any very lively expectation of a large amount being brought from that country; but the hon. Member for Lancaster knows the country, and I hope that he is right in his expectations. My own attention was attracted to the fact that large quantities of flax are absolutely burnt in Scinde, the only value which is attached to it being on account of the oil which is contained in the seed. I have desired the Governor of Bombay to ascertain if more of this flax could be sent to England, and I have requested the Governor General to consider the whole subject of the fibrous substances produced on the 1445 shores of the Bay of Bengal, and to send over any reasonable quantities of articles of that description which may be fairly submitted to the manufacturers of this country; because it is impossible that there can be any supply of hemp or flax or fibrous substances produced in any quantity of which our manufacturers would not be able to avail themselves. This being the case, I am afraid that there is no prospect—certainly no positive prospect—of an increased revenue in India, while in most of the items of expenditure I fear that there is no prospect of any material diminution. The large item of expenditure in India is, as I said before, the army, and we have already undertaken the defence and the maintenance of the peace of a very large additional territory, without any material addition to the army. The whole of the territory of the Punjaub, besides the territories of Nagpoor and Pegu, have been occupied, and the only addition which has been made in respect of the army has been two European regiments and the three not yet formed which were authorised by Parliament last year. With so much additional territory, it could hardly be supposed that an increased military force would not be requisite, and I fear, therefore, that we can hardly expect any great diminution in the expenses under that head. If you will refer to the statistical papers which were laid upon the table of the House last year, you will see how remarkably small is the number of troops by means of which our empire there has been maintained, especially when compared with the number of troops still supported by the Native States in India. Taking, in round numbers, the whole Queen's troops at 30,000, and the Europeans in the Company's service, including officers of Native regiments, at 20,000, we have a total of 50,000 Europeans. In addition to these there are 240,000 Natives, giving a total for Company's and Queen's army of 290,000. Beyond these, again, there are 30,000 contingents commanded by English, making altogether 320,000 men; while the few Native States that are left in India actually maintain for one description of force or another no less than 398,000 men. I do not think that we are justified, therefore, in anticipating any material diminution in that respect. When the means of communication shall be improved, and the power of moving troops from one part of the empire to another shall be facilitated, no doubt some reduction may be made; 1446 but, until that period arrives, it is not probable nor reasonable, with a great additional territory to be defended, that there can be any sensible reduction in the army expenses of India. With regard to other sources of expense I will, at present, only refer to two—first, public works; secondly, judicial establishments. I think the general feeling in the House last year, produced by the result of the examination before the Select Committee, was, that the expenditure under those two heads should be increased, and not diminished. Since that time I have derived much pleasure, as well as instruction, from the perusal of two very able publications connected with India; one by Colonel Cotton, upon the subject of public works, and the other by Mr. Norton, upon the subject of judicial establishments. Both writers, although they are not attached in any way to the Indian Government, distinctly point out the inadequacy of European agency, as they call it, with reference to the public works and the judicial establishments of India, and state that it is utterly impossible that either can be conducted properly without some increase in the number of Europeans employed in those departments. Now, I do not mean to say that we should take the opinions of those two gentlemen for more than they are worth; but, at all events, they show, I think, the necessity which exists for an increased European agency, if we expect the public works and the judicial establishments to be properly conducted, and their expenditure carefully watched, I have since talked the matter over with Colonel Cotton, and he is strongly of opinion that, unless we do send out European superintendents, we shall be throwing a great deal of money absolutely away. There is another source of expenditure which I may mention, namely, that upon education, and I refer to it only to say that I am quite sure nobody will grudge the sum to be expended under that head. I have now mentioned three great sources of expenditure in which it is clear an increase, and not a diminution, must take place, and upon those great main heads of expenditure, therefore, reduction is pretty nearly out of the question. There is, however, one considerable source of expenditure upon which I am happy to say we have been able to effect a considerable reduction. I refer to the interest paid on the Indian debt. Nothing has given me greater satisfaction than to have been able 1447 to complete—for although the transaction has not been altogether brought to a close, it has substantially been, to all intents and purposes, completed—the conversion of the India 5 per cents, which are now altogether reduced to a maximum interest of 4 per cent, with the exception of some old bonds payable at a certain time, and with the exception of a small portion of the 5 per cents, which have been paid in cash. I will state to the House what the result of that operation has been. A similar operation, but to a much smaller extent, took place in 1847, and on my accession to the office which I have now the honour to hold, I sent out directions to the Governor General to proceed at once to reduce the whole of the 5 per cents. He proceeded to do so with great discretion and judgment, and the following was the result of the operation up to the end of May last. The first debt operated upon was that of the transfer loan (England) for 3,411,000l. Of that sum there has been transferred to the 4 per cents, 2,734,000l.; taken in cash, 707,000l. The whole amount of the general debt at 5 per cent, which was next to be operated upon, was 23,771,000l. Of that sum 20,701,000l. have been transferred, 1,370,000l. have been taken in cash, and 1,700,000l. remained at that time untouched. The demand for cash very considerably increased when the funds of this country fell; and the operation of the war naturally produced an effect in India, so that those who would have converted their 5 per cents into 4 per cents demanded immediate payment in cash. But, prior to the despatch of the last accounts, the market here had turned, and therefore I think in all probability the demands for cash, after the arrival of those accounts, would not be in greater proportion to the conversions than they had been in the month preceding the departure of the latest advices from India. In estimating, therefore, what may be done with the 1,700,000l. which remained unaccounted for in May last, I will presume that they will be transferred or taken in cash in the same proportions as the transactions of the preceding month. If that be so, then 1,200,000l. will be transferred, and 500,000l. will be taken in cash. Of the whole 5 per cents, therefore—23,771,000l. —21,901,000l. will be transferred, and 1,870,000l. taken in cash. But I do not think that even that gives a fair representation of the result of this operation. It is the practice in India to have what is 1448 called an open loan; that is to say, any person who at any time pays money to the Government receives a certain amount of interest. Now, it so happened that at the time this conversion scheme was commenced, there was an open 4 per cent loan, which was closed in the month of September last, a new 3½ per cent loan having been opened since that date. Since the period of the conversions there have been paid into the 4 per cent and 3½ per cent loans, independently of the sums which have been taken in cash from the 5 per cents, and avowedly paid into the 4 per cent loan, 1,130,000½. Now, practically, that is a conversion, because as much money has been contributed to the 4 per cent and 3½ per cent loans as has been taken from the 5 per cents, and therefore to that amount we have not paid cash, but have merely converted one denomination of stock into another. The House will perceive, therefore, that we have actually paid in cash the sum of 740,000l. only. The general result of the whole transaction, including both that portion which was executed prior to my accession to office, and the conversions which the Governor General has been able to effect in consequence of the directions which I sent to him, may be stated in a few words. The total sum to be operated upon amounted to 27,212,000l. There have been transferred directly or virtually in the manner I have