

said, he trusted he should not be thought presumptuous if he ventured to take a part in this discussion, although he felt that he was more in need of indulgence than almost any one who had called the attention of the House to Indian affairs, for he was unable to bring before them any of those topics so well adapted to excite attention which had generally been urged in Indian debates. He was neither able to adduce such instances of misgovernment as had occasionally been brought forward, nor to paint such glowing pictures of prosperity as had been described by the hon. Member for Honiton (Sir J. Hogg) and other hon. Gentlemen. He (Sir E. Perry) hoped the Committee would believe that the opinions he was about to express had been formed without any personal bias one way or the other, his only object having been a sincere desire to ascertain the truth. He had heard the speech of the right hon. Baronet (Sir C. Wood) with unmixed gratification. He (Sir E. Perry) was satisfied that he represented the opinions of thinking people in India when he said, that that speech would be hailed as the most promising with regard to political prospects that had ever been addressed to them from this country. The right hon. Baronet had frankly admitted that the estimates he had framed presented what was certainly an alarming deficit, but, notwithstanding this circumstance, he had detailed the operations which he proposed 1464 with respect to four great subjects intimately connected with the prosperity of India. The despatches that had been laid upon the table showed that the right hon. Baronet had given to public works in India a stimulus such as those enterprises had never before received. The Governor General and the Governors of the different presidencies had been allowed to avail themselves of the large balances standing in the public Treasury, independently of the revenue of the year, in order to promote any public enterprise characterised by sound engineering skill, or which had local evidence in its favour. With respect to the judicial establishment, also, hints had been given to the Governor General as to the pay of Native judges—a subject on which so much evidence was taken before the Parliamentary Committees of last year, and on which a very strong feeling existed both in this country and in India. The right hon. Baronet had effected a very large and beneficial operation on the funded debt of India, by reducing the interest from 5 per cent to 4 per cent. If the tenure of the right hon. Gentleman's office was to be characterised by the measure of education he had sketched, he (Sir E. Perry) would be bold to say that the name of Sir Charles Wood would be linked by the grateful Natives of India with the two or three English names they loved to honour. He (Sir E. Perry) cordially concurred with every portion of the educational scheme of the right hon. Gentleman. For years past the educationists of India had been appealing to the home authorities for that assistance and encouragement which was now to be afforded them. They had previously appealed in vain for assistance to enable them to establish normal schools, training colleges, universities, and to promote education generally, but now, for the first time, did they find anything like large and general support extended to them by the home authorities. He considered that the gratitude of India was due to the right hon. Gentleman for having proposed these measures, which emanated, be believed, from the Board of Control. Although, however, he (Sir E. Perry) had listened to the speech of the right hon. Baronet with unmixed gratification, he could not help observing, from the demeanour of the House, and from the thinness of the benches, and even of the Treasury bench, that very little interest in discussions of this kind was shown within the walls of that House. It certainly 1465 might have been expected that the colleagues of the right hon. Baronet (Sir C. Wood) would have attended to hear what was certainly one of the most glowing pictures of India that had ever been drawn. He, however, attributed their absence and the dulness of demeanour that had characterised the House to the fact that discussions of this kind did not appear to lead to any practical result. He thought it was necessary, in order to excite the attention of the House, that hon. Members should feel that they were being instructed with a view to some operation on their part, or to some active demonstration to which they could lend aid. It had been the characteristic of all the Indian discussions of this nature that they took place in almost empty Houses. On the last occasion when a similar budget was opened, only about thirty Members were present, although the Duke of Wellington made an admirable speech in favour of his brother's administration. It was then, as it was now, and as it would continue to be, the general feeling of the House, that the information afforded by Indian discussions of this kind might be just as well gained from blue books. He (Sir E. Perry) thought, however, that a very important moral might be drawn from what they had heard from the President of the Board of Control to-night. If he (Sir E. Perry) had correctly characterised the scheme propounded by the right hon. Baronet for the government of India, it appeared to him the strongest argument that could be adduced in favour of a proposition brought before the House many times last year, as to the value of Parliamentary interference with respect to the great principles that should govern our rule in India. He attributed entirely to the Parliamentary discussions that had taken place, and to the Act that had emanated from them, the very great strides in administration which had been made with respect to India during the last twelve months. That Act very much enhanced the position of the President of the Board of Control; it greatly diminished the power of the Court of Directors; it threw increased responsibility upon the Ministers of the Crown; and the very statement that had been made that night afforded the strongest possible demonstration of the value of the plans propounded in that House last year. The proposition brought before the House last year was one which was most interesting to many thinking men out of doors; it occupied 1466 much public attention, and was re-echoed loudly by the press, and in the House was ably and eloquently urged by the hon. Member for Manchester (Mr. Bright), the main point being the general feeling which existed of the necessity of some Parliamentary influence with respect to the government of India. The hon. Member for Manchester brought forward his arguments on various occasions, always urging the necessity of such Parliamentary influence, and he (Sir E. Perry) took the liberty of saying, that the arguments by which the hon. Member for Manchester supported his propositions excited the admiration, if not of that House, of which at that time he (Sir E. Perry) was not a Member, of people out of doors, and he believed the soundness of his views, and the felicity with which he expressed those views, raised him, even in the opinion of Members of the House, to the highest rank of Parliamentary orators. In his own opinion, the breadth of the views propounded by that hon. Member, and the vigorous grasp he took of a difficult subject, convinced him that he was equal to all the exigencies of government, and was blessed with the possession of a statesmanlike mind, which, if he had had the opportunity, would place him in the first class of statesmen, as well as of Parliamentary debaters. He (Sir E. Perry) deduced from the topics which, upon the present occasion, had been so well brought forward by the right hon. Baronet the President of the Board of Control an argument in behalf of that position, and he was anxious to demonstrate that Parliament had never interfered with respect to India, except under the most beneficial auspices. It was a Parliamentary struggle which, twenty years ago, opened the trade of India to English merchants. It was by another Parliamentary struggle about the same period that the China trade was emancipated from monopoly; it was Parliament that first introduced education into India, that gave it that stimulus from which such great effects had resulted, and it was Parliament which by its last Act passed with reference to the subject, had interfered most beneficially to destroy what he conceived was one of the worst parts of the government of the Company—namely, the civil patronage it enjoyed, and which English statesmen knew had operated so injuriously to the good government of that country. The general objection brought forward to Parliamentary influence with 1467 India was, that it would reduce the Government of that empire to the condition of that of one of our Colonies, that Parliamentary influence with our Colonies had been generally deprecated, and Indian reformers were asked, whether they would have a system of ruling which was so deprecated introduced into that large country? That was the position which was thrust into their faces; but the House would observe there was one thing which, in the consideration of this matter, ought to be weighed most carefully; and that was, the extraordinary difference existing between the Colonies of this country and the empire of India. With respect to the Colonies in connection with this country, he might presume to speak with some degree of authority, having lived in one of them, and it would be found, as a general rule, that they were inhabited by an Anglo-Saxon democratic people, struggling for self-government, and animated by few of those feelings of interest in the aristocracy which appertained to the mother country. In general they had obtained self-government; they had, however, been unruly; the mother country had been annoyed during the struggle, but in the main they had succeeded in obtaining good government. India, on the contrary, was a large peninsula, a populous country, necessarily under a despotism, and it was, therefore, as utterly dissimilar in its condition to any of our Colonies as one country could be to another; to compare India with a colony was to compare two countries wholly different in their characteristics. It was, however, unnecessary to institute such a comparison, or to found any argument upon it, because we had an example of colonial government as applied to an Asiatic colony in direct juxtaposition with the government of India, and that example was to be found in the island of Ceylon, and he could show the House that that colony had during the last two or three years progressed in a more rapid and extraordinary manner than even India itself— In 1834 the first coffee estates were planted. In 1854 there were upwards of 300 plantations in full bearing, containing 60,000 acres of planted land. The capital thus invested by Europeans has been about 4,000,000l. Between the years 1838 and 1843 the Ceylon Government sold 250,000 acres of Crown land, and opened 800 miles of good carriage-road. There are now more than 3,000 miles of road in Ceylon. In 1837 the coffee shipped amounted to 43,000 cwt.; in 1852 to 324,000 cwt. In 1837 the value of the imports was 595,888l., that of the exports 326,860l. In 1468 1845 they amounted to 1,495,127l. and 679,286l. respectively. That was the wonderful state of progress in that island during the period he had described, and it was entirely owing to European enterprise and the investment of European capital giving to that island large views of government. While, then, he expressed his own opinion as to the views which were brought forward last year upon this subject, and advocated so strongly, he entreated the House to remember the manner in which those views were met by the leading statesmen of this country; they were met in a manner which led to the material curtailment of the power of the Court of Directors, and to the transfer of that power, and with it t