

1458 The engineer officers are employed on this service to the utmost extent which is compatible with the efficiency of their corps. Officers are largely withdrawn from the other regiments; civil engineers are not to be had; and all we can do is to supply the deficiency as well and as rapidly as we can. I trust the colleges now being established will induce many to educate themselves as civil engineers; but it is now only too true that the superintendence is deficient, and there are no very obvious means of supplying that deficiency. I now come to the last, and certainly not the least important, subject on which I shall trouble the House, and that is, the measures taken for supplying the great want of education in India. It would be most unjust to many persons not to pay a tribute of praise to them for what they have done, or to deny that a great deal has been done for promoting education in India; but I think, at the same time, it was evident from the evidence given before the Committee, that a great deal still remained to be done. Sir Thomas Munro, Mr. Wilson, Sir Charles Trevelyan, Mr. Macaulay, Mr. Bethune, Dr. Mouatt, Mr. George Norton, and my hon. Friend opposite (Sir E. Perry), are among the persons to whom honour is due. The members of the various missionary societies have, likewise, been most energetic to promote the cause of education. But certainly no persons can give stronger testimony than those gentlemen who have done the most as to how much remains to be done. They, by experience, are acquainted with what is wanted, and can point out the best way to provide it. The system of education appears to be different in different provinces. In Bengal, English education has been pushed to a very high extent; there has been there a great demand for the acquisition of the English language, with a view to employment in the public offices; and hon. Members may have seen, in examination, papers used in Bengal, which were printed in the appendix to the Report of the Lords' Committee, questions which I confess I should be very sorry to have put to me, and which probably many Gentlemen round me would find some difficulty in answering. Accompanying that high English education, there has, however, been in Bengal a great neglect of the education of the masses of the people. On the other hand, in the North-Western Provinces, Mr. Thompson established a system of schools for the Natives, which the people were induced to 1459 attend; by the advantage to be derived from learning the mensuration of land and the mode of calculating their holdings, Dr. Mouatt, who has recently been the Secretary to the Council of Education in Bengal, admitted that in practical and useful knowledge conveyed to the people in the vernacular, the schools in Bengal were very far inferior to those established by Mr. Thomason in the North-West Provinces. In Bombay there are very good mixed English and vernacular schools, and in Madras Lord Elphinstone exhibited a remarkably good college; but religious disputes unfortunately have prevailed there, and, so far as Government schools go, they are worth very little. On the other hand, the efforts of the missionaries have been more developed in Madras than anywhere else, and the vernacular education of the missionary schools is carried to a far greater extent there than in any other part of India. The medical college of Calcutta produces most exceedingly skilful pupils, and, wherever medicine has been taught, it has been taught with very great success. The working college of Roorkee, which has taken the name of its founder, Mr. Thomason, promises very well in drawing out engineering abilities. In Calcutta, the Governor General has established a college where medicine, law, and civil engineering are taught, and this promises good results, for by far the greatest defect of the education given in India is its want of a practical character. I am far from underrating any part of the education which is imparted under the system now followed in the various provinces, but the great object of any system of education in India must be to extend it to the great body of the people. Hitherto the greatest expenditure in proportion to the numbers has been upon education of a high description, and this appears to us to be wrong. Education of the higher class may be left to the care of the parties themselves who are to benefit by it, and who can appreciate its advantages; but what is really wanted for India is the extension of education to the great body of the people, and this has been the main end kept in view in the proposals we have made. With this object, we shall take every desirable part of the system we see existing in one part of India or the other, and endeavour to form a scheme which may be adapted to the whole country, leaving the details to be filled up by the authorities on the spot. We lay down a general scheme which they are to work out as 1460 the circumstances of each district seem to require. The great features of the scheme are so fully explained in the despatch which has been placed in the hands of hon. Members, that it will be unnecessary for me to detain the House by dwelling upon them at any length, nor would it be possible for me to state the details with much minuteness, as these must differ in different places and with different circumstances, and it is proposed to leave them to be carried out on the spot by the officers employed in the educational department. Hon. Gentlemen are aware that in India, as I am sorry to say is the case in this country, religious differences oppose a very great obstacle to the adoption of any uniform system of education. We have determined, however, to carry out a system which, I believe, is likely to succeed—that is, a system of grants in aid to schools according to their wants and their means of imparting education, irrespective of any religious instruction administered in those schools. We propose to put them all under inspection, requiring certain things from them—certain things to be taught and done. Such schools will be reported upon, and, according to their compliance with these requirements, they will receive assistance from the Government. I repeat, however, that as regards all religious teaching we carefully abstain from any interference whatever. That has been the principle upon which Indian government has been conducted for many years past, and it is, I believe, the only safe system upon which it can be conducted in that country. I am perfectly convinced that if the Government were to introduce into India any system of education which should lead the Natives to suppose that we had a wish to proselytise them, it would only injure and prevent that result which we all wish to see produced—I mean the advancement of education. I am, therefore, most anxious it should be fully understood that we give assistance to missionary, to Mahomedan, to Hindoo schools, and to any schools, of whatever religious faith they may be; that we look only to the secular education imparted there, requiring it to be of sufficiently high standing, and requiring the education to be properly imparted; but that we in no way want to interfere with the religious belief or the religious teaching in those schools. We propose to establish universities in the great centres of the Indian presidencies on the model of the London University—that is, 1461 with the power of conferring degrees after examination, without themselves engaging in the instruction of students. The universities will be at the head of affiliated colleges or institutions, as is the case with the London University. The affiliated institutions will include colleges of any religious persuasion—missionary, Hindoo, Mahomedan, or Government colleges. Every place of instruction, indeed, which gives an education sufficiently high to enable a person to obtain a degree, may be affiliated. Below these colleges we propose to have schools of two different classes. I do not like to distinguish these schools by the terms "Anglo-vernacular" and "vernacular" schools, for those terms do not express what we mean; but probably in the lower of these classes it may be found impossible to teach anything but the Native language, whilst in the class of schools above them I hope that both the English language and the vernacular dialects of India will be taught. At present, one of the greatest difficulties interposed in the way of Native education is the want of books in the vernacular languages of which the contents are valuable and worth teaching, but to some extent at least this want may be supplied, and at all events we may confidently look forward to the greater diffusion of the English language amongst the Native population, and with it a knowledge of the science and arts of Europe. We propose to establish scholarships as prizes from the lower schools, presenting to the students rewards which the more diligent and exemplary may hope to obtain. We hope from amongst the better scholars to find some who may adopt the profession of teaching, and do something to supply the great want of educated schoolmasters. There have been many instances of Native students of superior endowments, well fitted for the vocation of schoolmasters, and whom we should be willing and anxious to train up as teachers by the establishment of normal and training schools for schoolmasters. We propose to place the whole of these institutions under constant inspection, and examinations will be regularly conducted under the eyes of the Government inspectors. We think, also, that instead of continuing the Councils of Education, it would be far better that the educational system should be under the control of a Government department. I am very far from underrating the exertions which have been made by those Native and English gentlemen who are members of the 1462 Councils of Education, and I trust that most of them will continue to render their assistance in the promotion of education as members of the senates of the universities; but I think it is advisable that the system of education should be placed under the superintendence of a Government department. We also contemplate either the establishment of professional colleges or the appropriation of branches of the colleges to the purpose of instruction in professional knowledge. Students who display talent for particular professions—as, for instance, for engineering or medicine— may then be enabled to cultivate their abilities in these professional institutions. We shall thus provide, in truth, for promoting the education of the higher classes by the distinctions afforded in the universities for those who complete their education in the colleges, and for that of the mass of the people in the different classes of schools. In the lower class of schools we shall provide a native schoolmaster, with assistance in books and scholarships in the class above. For the upper class we shall give assistance towards the erection of school-houses, with scholarships to the colleges; and for the students most proficient in the end there will be scholarships in the training schools or the professional colleges. This is the scheme which, on the whole, I have thought it most advisable to adopt; but the Committee will give me credit for sincerity when I say that I have the greatest possible diffidence in my own judgment, and that I shall be overjoyed to have the assistance and advice of those who are competent, by their knowledge of the country, and acquaintance with the habits and dispositions of the Natives, to offer suggestions on this important subject. If, however, the scheme had rested entirely upon my own judgment, I should have hesitated in entertaining any very sanguine hope of its success; but I have consulted many gentlemen who, from the great interest they have taken in the question of education in India, were well qualified to afford sound advice upon the subject. I may content myself with observin