)




        Q_ /SC

    *   5^
        15% s
         .c'i'V
         ii*1/
         c . 3-
HARVARD HISTORICAL MONOGRAPHS

Published under the direction
of the Department of History
from the income of the
Robert Louis Stroock Fund

Volume LXXIII
“Begging Friars, Granada,” from John F. Lewis, Sketches of Spain and Spanish
Character made during his tour in that country in the years 1833-1834 (London, n.d.)
--




Church, Politics,
  and Society
   in Spain,
  1750-1874

--




William J. Callahan




  Harvard University Press
  Cambridge, Massachusetts
   and London, England
           1984




        AVE MARIA
Copyright © 1984 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
10 987654321

This book is printed on acid-free paper, and its binding materials have
been chosen for strength and durability.



Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Callahan, William James, 1937-

  Church, politics, and society in Spain, 1750—1874.
  (Harvard historical monographs ; v. 73)
  Includes index.
   1. Catholic Church—Spain—History. 2. Spain—Church
history. I. Title. II. Series.
BX1585.C214 1984             282'.46  83-26503
ISBN 0-674-13125-8 (alk. paper)



 r     *#. »     Mr
For my parents
        Preface




   Few subjects have aroused more controversy in the history of modern
Spain than that of the Church. Intimately involved in the great political
struggles and social conflicts of the twentieth century, it has long been
the focus of polemic on the parts of both defenders and detractors.
Recent advances in the study of the Spanish Church by ecclesiastical
historians, moved by a vigorous spirit of archival inquiry, and by the
new generation of social and economic historians have made possible a
more rational assessment of the Church’s role than could have been
undertaken just a few years ago.
   I am indebted to the staffs of the Archivo Historico Nacional, the
Biblioteca Nacional, the Hemerotecas Municipal and Nacional, and the
Jesuit Library in Madrid for assistance in gathering materials for this
book. Cambridge University Press granted me permission to use portions
of my essay from the volume Church and Society in Catholic Europe of the
Eighteenth Century (ed. W. J. Callahan and D. C. Higgs). Sage Publications,
publishers of the European Studies Review, and the editors of Historical
Reflections allowed me to reproduce parts of my articles from their jour¬
nals. I owe a special debt to Solita and Juan Marichal and to Mercedes
and Trinidad Aboitiz, who provided constant encouragement during my
research and writing. Several colleagues gave me generous assistance
and critical comment, particularly David Higgs, Olwen Hufton, C. C.
Noel, who kindly allowed me to consult his dissertation, J. H. Galloway,
and Paul Grendler. Financial support was provided by the Social Sciences
and Research Council of Canada. I also owe thanks to Eva Hollander
and Sandra McAuslan for their patience in typing the manuscript, to
Hedy Later for preparing the maps, and to Elizabeth Suttell of Harvard
University Press for her expert editorial assistance.
        Contents




1. The Organization of the Church, 1750-1790     1
2. Prosperity and Religion, 1750-1790           38
3. The First Shocks, 1790-1814                  73
4. The Struggle Intensifies, 1814-1833         110
5. The Destruction of the Old Regime Church,
     1833-1843                                 145
6. The Conservative Church, 1844—1868          186
7. Church and Society, 1844-1868               209
8. From Revolution to Restoration, 1868—1874   248

     Notes                                     279
     Bibliographic Essay                       307
     Index                                     317
        Tables

1. Ecclesiastical land holdings in the provinces of Castile, 1749     39
2. Principal sources of annual income (secular and ecclesiastical) in Cas¬
   tile, 1749     40
3. Index of revenues of episcopal households by diocese, 1729—1793     45
4. Revenues of selected episcopal households, 1813—1827          142
5. Nonobservants of the Easter Communion obligation in the parish of
   Santiago el Real, 1860-1890       245



        Maps

1. Distribution of income among the dioceses of the Spanish Church,
   circa 1800     44
2. Geographic distribution of signatures in the petition campaign of
   1869 against religious liberty  243
Church, Politics, and Society in Spain, 1750-1874
1   /   The Organization of the Church,
        1750-1790



   Few institutions have played so central a role in the history of
a people as has the Spanish Church. From the Middle Ages to
the twentieth century the Church, for good or for ill, has been
closely identified with the great issues of Spain’s past. The con¬
tribution of religion to the Reconquista, the centuries-old effort to
conquer the Moorish kingdoms of Iberia for Christian arms; the
activities of the Inquisition from the late fifteenth century onward;
the massive campaigns of evangelization among the Indians of
the New World; the sixteenth-century flowering of mysticism and
spirituality; the virulent anticlericalism of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries; and the support given by the Church to Fran¬
cisco Franco during the civil war of the 1930’s—all testify to the
historical importance of an institution praised by some and at¬
tacked by others, but ignored by few.
   This study begins with the Church of the later eighteenth cen¬
tury not because of an intention to ignore the richness and com¬
plexity of ecclesiastical history in earlier times. But the purpose
of this book is to reveal the origins of the problem of the Church
in modern Spain. It has been fashionable to consider the history
of the Spanish Church as a long continuum from the time of
Ferdinand and Isabella to the years before and during the civil
war of 1936—1939. However, the organization, economic base,
and mentality of the Church as it developed in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries were very different from those during
the Old Regime. It was, indeed, the collapse of the Church of the
eighteenth century, identihed with absolute monarchy and pos¬
sessed of immense privileges within a hierarchical and agrarian
society, that transformed the role of the Church and made it a
focus of conflict until our own time.



                                                                 1
  2                                The Organization of the Church




   The eighteenth-century Church was not the heroic and mystical
Church of the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. It produced
no Saint Teresa of Avila, no Saint John of the Cross, no spectacular
missionary achievements in distant and exotic lands. Even the
Inquisition went about its work with a desultory spirit that would
have shocked the harsh inquisitors of an earlier age. But the Church
of the eighteenth century, though it lacked the vitality of its pred¬
ecessors, continued to be a rich and powerful institution in a nation
where religious practice was deeply rooted and luxuriant in its
variety. Moreover, the Church impressed itself on the fabric of
social life more deeply then than in a later age. Through its re¬
ligious mission it held a nearly magical hold over the peasant
masses, who lived uneducated and isolated in an often unforgiving
natural environment. As supreme moral censor, the Church im¬
posed its standards of conduct on the entire range of society, from
aristocrat to agricultural laborer. Through its control of charity
and education, it exercised a social function that later would be¬
come the prerogative of the State. As a landowner and recipient
of the tithe, the Church possessed the financial resources necessary
to maintain an elaborate ecclesiastical organization touching the
lives of all Spaniards in one way or another. The eighteenth-
century Church was omnipresent; no one escaped its influence.


A Royal Church

   Few nations have seen their national fortunes grow and decline
as spectacularly as Spain did between the late fifteenth and the
eighteenth centuries. The great age of imperial expansion begun
under Ferdinand and Isabella and carried forward by Charles V
and Philip II was followed by a century of military defeat, eco¬
nomic depression, and inadequate political leadership. Although
the succession to the throne of Philip V, the first Bourbon king
of Spain, in 1700 did not immediately transform the kingdom, it
introduced a period of equilibrium that would endure until the
1790’s. The Bourbon monarchs, Philip V (1700-1746), Ferdinand
VI (1746-1759), and Charles III (1759-1788), failed to resolve
the nation’s fundamental problems, but their attempt to reform
antiquated political, social, and economic structures brought Spain
     The Organization of the Church                                3




closer to the more advanced states of Europe than it would be at
any time until the twentieth century. The process of reform, though
begun by Philip V and his ministers, reached its height during
the reign of Charles III. In this silver age of political stability and
modest economic and intellectual progress, the king, assisted by
a competent ministerial bureaucracy, attempted to stimulate eco¬
nomic development, update the curricula of the schools, reform
an archaic and inefficient tax system, and implement measures
designed to bring the kingdom into the modern world.1
   The Church partially owed its preeminence to its historic re¬
lationship with the State. For centuries the secular and ecclesias¬
tical worlds depended on each other and in the process became
so close that even today it is difficult to disentangle them. Church
and monarchy were different aspects of absolute power applied
to the religious and secular worlds. The Church was linked to
Rome by doctrinal ties, but the increasingly weak papacies of Ben¬
edict XIV (1740-1758), Clement XIII (1758-1769), Clement XIV
(1769—1774), and Pius VI (1775-1799) were incapable of exer¬
cising decisive influence over the administration of the Spanish
Church. This was above all a royal Church, molded by the Bour¬
bons to suit their policies. Spanish monarchs had long attempted
to control the Church at the expense of Rome, but it was only in
the eighteenth century that the “Catholic Kings” successfully min¬
imized the power of the papacy in Spain. The victory took the
form of the Concordat of 1753, which bestowed on the Crown
nearly universal patronage over the most important ecclesiastical
benefices, a right hitherto shared in an uncomfortable relationship
with Rome.2 Favoritism and influence played their parts in the
ecclesiastical patronage of the Bourbons, but during the reign of
Charles III the State used its powers to form a clerical establish¬
ment that accepted in large measure the royal vision of the Church’s
role in the reforming program.
   A few bishops were uneasy about the degree of state control,
but Madrid would brook no opposition to its expanding authority
over ecclesiastical affairs. When the aged bishop of Cuenca, Jose
Carvajal y Lancaster, expressed reservations about the changing
balance of the civil-ecclesiastical relationship in 1766, he received
an abrupt summons to the capital, where he was given a humili-
  4                                The Organization of the Church




ating dressing down by royal bureaucrats.3 The central adminis¬
tration moved with equal firmness against one of the most prom¬
inent clerical reformers of the late eighteenth century, Jose Climent,
the bishop of Barcelona. Climent’s impressive pastoral record at
the head of his diocese could not save him from Madrid’s anger
when he fell under suspicion—quite unjustified—of supporting
separatist aspirations in Catalonia. Determined to remove Climent
from Barcelona and also to avoid public scandal, the royal admin¬
istration offered him promotion to a non-Catalan diocese, but the
prelate, true to his principles, refused and resigned his post.4 In
general, however, the Church through its bishops accepted the
increasing use of the ecclesiastical establishment as a royal instru¬
ment. From 1750 on clerics outdid one another in their exaltation
of the Bourbon monarchy, which they compared in Old Testa¬
ment language to the kingship of David and Solomon; in their
view it possessed nearly divine attributes. Francisco Bocanegra,
archbishop of Santiago, was even moved to make the distinctly
untheological statement, “if we imitate our King, we all shall be
perfect.”5
   Enlightened absolutism as it developed after 1750 suffered from
internal contradictions. Absolute monarchy pressed forward to
centralize power, eliminate the archaic, and devise policies capable
of transforming the administration of the State and the economy;
but it would not, indeed could not, tamper with a traditional social
structure dominated by aristocratic and corporate privilege. In
the end, the reforming initiatives of the Bourbons resulted in only
a superficial resolution of national problems, but the utilitarian
spirit with which the Crown and its bureaucracy approached re¬
form influenced the State’s ecclesiastical policies.
   Kings and ministers frequently testified to their Catholicism.
Charles III, the most persistent royal patron of change during
the century, led a personal life of piety. The monarch participated
in the activities of pious associations, such as the Franciscan Third
Order, and alighted from his carriage and knelt on the ground
as willingly as any commoner whenever a priest passed carrying
the Eucharist to the dying. The personal Catholicism of the king
and his ministers was not, however, the religion of elaborate cer¬
emonial and “superstitious” practice so widespread in eighteenth-
century Spain. The public self-flagellation of penitents, the mu-
     The Organization of the Church                                5




sical bands and papier-mache giants dancing about the processions
celebrating liturgical feasts, the indecent Christmas carols sung by
the gypsies of Seville on Christmas Eve before the archbishop—
all were foreign to the more austere Catholicism that the king and
his ministers observed and wished to see spread throughout the
Church.
   The State profited from its control over clerical personnel and
wealth, but it hoped to reform abuses within the Church by elim¬
inating what it saw as superstition, establishing a more rational
ecclesiastical administration, and improving the quality of semi¬
naries—in short, creating a Church more attentive to pastoral
responsibilities. In October 1767 the Council of Castile, the insti¬
tution responsible for internal government of the kingdom, dis¬
patched a circular to the bishops ordering them to curb abuses
and superstition in their dioceses. After 1766 the government of
Charles III encouraged the creation of diocesan seminaries to
improve the lamentable education of the parish clergy, and it
curbed devotional excesses, such as flagellation in penitential
processions. The State intervened directly in ecclesiastical disci¬
pline and religious practice to realize its ideal of a pastoral Church.
   The reforming ministers of Charles III did not intend to con¬
fine the Church to the purely spiritual. Royal bureaucrats pro¬
posed to employ it in the modernization of the kingdom. They
expected the clergy, from bishops to parish priests, to cooperate
with the reforming impulse coming from the Crown. “Public util¬
ity,” declared one of the most enthusiastic clerical advocates of a
civic-minded Church, “is one of the objects of our religion, its
maxims lead to the good of souls and to the happiness and tran¬
quillity of peoples.”6 The clergy were seen as agents of the State
promoting economic development, improving education, building
public works, and, in general, advancing the utilitarian policies
formulated in Madrid. They were to be “the philosopher’s stone
which will enrich towns and villages and make them happy.”7 This
modernizing role for the Church reflected the increasingly secular
emphasis of the Bourbon monarchy, but at the same time it rein¬
forced the ties between Throne and Altar by blurring still further
the already hazy line dividing Church from State. The clergy were
to become a kind of religious civil service closely identified with
the task of national improvement.
  6                               The Organization of the Church




Bishops and Priests

   To improve the efficiency of the Church in its spiritual mission
and to make it an instrument of secular reform would have been
difficult enough had it possessed a simple organization with clearly
marked lines of authority. But the eighteenth-century Church was
a complex institution with an administrative structure determined
more by historical circumstance than by rational planning. The
ecclesiastical map showed a patchwork of unequal divisions.8 The
number of dioceses, sixty by the end of the century, was not
excessive by European standards, but three of the eight archdi¬
ocesan sees—Toledo, Santiago, and Tarragona—were located in
stagnating provincial towns, while Madrid, a city of nearly 200,000
inhabitants and the capital of a world empire, lacked episcopal
status. Barcelona, experiencing an economic and demographic
expansion that established it as the commercial and industrial
center of the kingdom, was only a suffragan diocese to the arch¬
bishopric in the sleepy town of Tarragona. Other towns—Si-
giienza, Calahorra, and Tarazona—had acquired bishops centuries
before, when they were cities of some importance. By the eigh¬
teenth century they were scarcely more than overgrown villages,
but they continued as diocesan seats. Bilbao, already an important
commercial town, would lack a bishop until 1949. The diocese of
Sigtienza provides the most glaring example of acquired historical
right taking precedence over reality. Located in a depopulated
zone of New Castile beyond Guadalajara, the diocesan capital
contained only 4,000 inhabitants in the midst of an impoverished
countryside. Yet it was one of the richer dioceses of the Church.
   Nor was there logic behind the division of the Church’s met¬
ropolitan provinces, each presided over by an archbishop. The
archbishop of Toledo, primate of Spain, headed an ecclesiastical
province of eight dioceses ranging from Valladolid in Old Castile
to Cordoba, Jaen, and Murcia; in contrast, the archbishop of Gra¬
nada had as suffragan bishops only the prelates of Guadix and
Almeria. Differences in territorial size among the dioceses were
accompanied by severe disparities of income. The archbishop of
Toledo enjoyed annual revenues amounting to 3 million reales;
the bishops of Albarradn, Barbastro, Tudela, Tuy, and Valladolid
survived on less than 100,000 reales.
     The Organization of the Church                                 7




    The ecclesiastical map of the eighteenth-century Church de¬
manded rationalization, but the difficulty of overcoming acquired
interests prevented any substantial changes in territorial demar¬
cation of dioceses. Four new sees were established during the
eighteenth century—Santander, Tudela, Ibiza, and Menorca—
but only the first was located in an important town. The effort to
separate Santander from the diocese of Burgos, begun by Philip
II in the sixteenth century, ended only in 1754. The struggle was
so troublesome it left even the reforming Bourbons with little
enthusiasm for the rationalization of diocesan boundaries.
    Unequal territorial divisions and the uneven distribution of
wealth provide glaring examples of the imbalance and confusion
characteristic of the Church’s administrative structure. Bishops
did not exercise supreme authority over their dioceses. They clashed
 frequently with cathedral chapters, the communities of canons
charged with providing liturgical services in episcopal churches.
 The accumulation of privileges from Crown and pope over the
centuries endowed chapters with a quasi-autonomous position in
 relation to their bishops. The unfortunate prelate quarreling with
 his chapter might be unwelcome in his own cathedral. Archbishop
 Yermo y Santivanez of Santiago (1727-1737) suffered the mis¬
 fortune of falling out with his chapter in a dispute over precedence
 on the very day he took possession of his see. In succeeding years
 the unforgiving canons seized every opportunity to frustrate the
 prelate’s administration.9 Further, bishops exercised little or no
 authority, depending on circumstances, over the religious orders.
 Episcopal authority over the great monastic foundations of the
 Benedictines, Cistercians, and Carthusians was nonexistent. The
 great Spanish monasteries, whether Silos in Old Castile or Poblet
 in Catalonia, formed minidioceses for all practical purposes, with
jurisdiction over parishes in the surrounding countryside. The
 bishops’ ability to control the mendicant orders, such as the Fran¬
 ciscans and Dominicans, was greater, but over them too they found
 it difficult to impose their authority.
    In theory, the Spanish Church of the eighteenth century was
 governed by the twin principles of authority and hierarchy. In
 fact, lack of clear jurisdictional lines, maldistribution of ecclesias¬
 tical wealth, and uneven territorial boundaries created an insti¬
 tution without strong cohesion. Eighteenth-century clerical writers
  8                                The Organization of the Church




correctly referred not to the Spanish Church but to the Spanish
“churches.” Bishops, for example, rarely came in personal contact
with one another, a circumstance noted by the English traveler
Joseph Townsend in the 1780’s: “the meeting of two prelates is
a phenomenon in Spain, because the moment a minister of the
altar accepts a mitre, he devotes his life wholly to the duties of
his office and confines himself altogether to his diocese.”10 The
“churches” lacked an institutional means of developing an inde¬
pendent stance against either king or pope. The ancient Congre¬
gation of the Churches of Castile and Leon, founded in the reign
of Ferdinand and Isabella, had once represented the financial
interests of the Church in negotiations with the Crown and Rome.
But by the end of the seventeenth century, the institution was no
longer important. Without a collective means of expression and
with an incoherent internal structure, the Church accepted the
direction marked for it by the Bourbon monarchy.
   To foreigners visiting Spain for the first time, the number of
priests, monks, friars, and nuns appeared “prodigious.”11 A mas¬
sive clerical presence was obvious in the major towns. Barcelona
alone had a cathedral, eighty-two churches and chapels, twenty-
six religious houses of men, eighteen of women, two oratories, a
seminary, a tribunal of the Inquisition, and several smaller foun¬
dations. In Valencia 2,610 priests and religious lived in a popu¬
lation of approximately 80,000; in Seville the religious orders were
so numerous that they could marshal 1,600 members to participate
in the processions of Holy Week and Corpus Christi. But the
impression of a nation overrun by priests, friars, and nuns is
misleading. The census of 1797 showed an ecclesiastical popula¬
tion of 182,778 in a total population of 10.5 million. But recent
studies of ecclesiastical demography have noted that this figure
includes a certain number of lay employees of the Church, such
as sacristans and administrators. An adjusted total of 148,409, or
approximately 1.5 percent of the general population, was not
excessive; in some Catholic countries the proportion was higher.12
Although there is little reliable evidence for estimating the size of
the clerical population early in the century, it appears to have
remained stable between 1700 and 1800, with perhaps a slight
decline at the century’s close.
   Within the ecclesiastical establishment the secular clergy num-
     The Organization of the Church                                9




bered 70,840; male religious, 53,098; and nuns, 24,471. But these
figures also must be adjusted. The secular clergy included over
10,000 clerics who had received only minor orders. Many had
entered the Church not to seek ordination but to qualify for ben¬
efices left by pious benefactors. The tendency of both the regular
and secular clergy to concentrate in towns and cities also magnified
the clerical presence, for in a rural and agrarian society the Church
was urban. The secular clergy flocked to the towns, where the
religious orders also preferred to establish their houses; at the
same time country parishes, especially in poor districts, often lacked
priests. The 1797 census reveals that nearly 3,000 parishes lacked
incumbents; the highest vacancy rates were in the impoverished
regions of Galicia, Extremadura, and Soria.13
   Functional and geographic imbalances in the distribution of
clergy further hindered the Church in its pastoral mission. Only
a minority of the secular clergy, approximately 22,000 of a total
of 60,000 ordained priests, were active in parish work as either
rectors or assistants.14 The majority of the secular clergy survived
on benefices, the endowments established by pious benefactors;
chaplaincies in noble households, cathedrals, and hospitals; and
the stipends received for conducting religious services. Many ben¬
efice holders performed liturgical duties and thereby contrib¬
uted to the pastoral life of the Church, but because they, too,
preferred the cities to the countryside, they did little to alleviate
the lack of clergy in rural districts. Benefices attracted priests into
an unseemly careerism that often conflicted with their sacerdotal
character and gave rise to criticism by secular and ecclesiastical
writers. There was no shortage of secular clergy in eighteenth-
century Spain, but their distribution also favored the cities and
often left poor country parishes without priests. The Council of
Castile frequently received desperate requests from rural villages
without clergy. In 1800, for example, three small towns—Cubillos,
Posadina, and Cubillinos—told the council that for twenty years
they had lacked “spiritual nourishment. . . because there was no
income to support a priest in the sacred ministry.”15
   The geographic distribution of the secular clergy with cure of
souls was uneven and already reflected the classic north-south
division between areas where religious practice was more deeply
rooted and those where it was not. On a national scale, there was
  10                                 The Organization of the Church




one priest with cure of souls for every 497 parishioners. The
regions well staffed with clergy were concentrated in the north
and northeast: Alava, 1:153; Leon, 1:170; Toro, 1:268; Valladolid,
1:345; Aragon, 1:441; and Catalonia, 1:403. Butin the south, the
center of dechristianized Spain in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, the ratio of priests to parishioners was significantly higher:
Cordoba, 1:1,115; Murcia, 1:1,721; and Seville, 1:1,332. The dis¬
parity between southern and northern dioceses arose in part from
the historic development of parochial organizations. Parishes in
the south were extremely large compared with those in the north.
In the administrative region called the kingdom of Seville, 303
parishes served a population of over 750,000. But in Catalonia,
with more than 800,000 inhabitants, there were 2,738 parishes.16
In some southern dioceses parishes could reach gigantic size; in
Cadiz a single parish located in the cathedral served a population
of 57,000, although chapels in monasteries and convents in the
city also provided services.17
   Day-to-day government of the Spanish “churches” rested with
eight archbishops—at Toledo, Seville, Santiago de Compostela,
Granada, Burgos, Tarragona, Zaragoza, and Valencia—and fifty-
two bishops. The bishops were aptly described by Cardinal Lo-
renzana of Toledo as “prelates placed upon a high lookout point”
who combined the duties of “shepherd, citizen, good vassal of the
King and good neighbor.”18 Bishops held responsibility for im¬
plementing in their dioceses directives emanating from the Crown
and, to a lesser extent, those from the papal nuncio in Madrid.
They formed a clerical elite necessary for the orderly functioning
of the Church. The State, recognizing the importance of the bish¬
op’s role, developed elaborate procedures through a chamber of
the Council of Castile to ensure the selection of “men of honor
and reputation” for episcopal office.19
   Eighteenth-century observers and later historians agree that the
quality of the hierarchy, especially during the second half of the
century, was high. Townsend said of the Spanish bishops: “these
venerable men, from all that I could hear and from what I saw
in the near approach to which they graciously admitted me, for
piety, and for zeal, can never be sufficiently admired.”20 The praise
of this perceptive Protestant cleric was echoed later by the French¬
man Alexandre Laborde: “the superior orders of the Spanish
     The Organization of the Church                                11




clergy . . . are, for the most part, exempt from the irregularities
which are charged (not altogether without reason) on the clergy
of other countries.”21 To be sure, there were occasional abuses,
concentrated largely in the first half of the century. The eight-
year-old son of Philip V, Luis de Borbon, received the temporal
administration of the rich archdioceses of Seville and Toledo.
Already a cardinal at fifteen, though unordained, the young prel¬
ate was installed as archbishop of Seville in 1742 with extravagant
ceremony. But such abuses were rare during the reign of Charles
III, when the Camara of Castile suggested to the Crown prelates
of known ability and probity. The most able prelates of Charles’s
reign, Cardinal Francisco Lorenzana of Toledo, Archbishop Fran¬
cisco Fabian y Fuero of Valencia, and Bishop Felipe Bertran of
Salamanca, were perfect examples of what the absolutist State
expected of its bishops.22 Men of culture and education, assiduous
in the fulfillment of their pastoral duties, they were at the same
time prelates who cooperated actively with the Crown’s reforming
policies by establishing schools, seminaries, and even manufac¬
tures.
    The Spanish episcopacy of the eighteenth century, unlike its
counterpart in France, was not an aristocratic preserve. Some
bishops were drawn from wealthy and distinguished noble fam¬
ilies, such as Francisco de Solis Folch Cardona, the son of a gran¬
dee of Spain and a baron in his own right who served as archbishop
of Seville from 1755 to 1775. But the number of prelates from
the great nobility was modest. Episcopal recruitment, however,
was neither democratic nor based on merit and service. For all
practical purposes the kingdom’s 22,000 priests with cure of souls
had little hope of becoming bishops. Whatever the quality of the
episcopacy, the system of recruitment reflected the inequalities of
a social structure in which access to high office, whether in the
State or the Church, belonged to a privileged minority. The sec¬
ular clergy, from whose ranks the vast majority of the bishops
came, was divided into two unequal groups, a small elite who
possessed the most lucrative benefices, and the great mass of clergy,
parish priests, curates, and a large number of clerics without any
living at all. The size of the ecclesiastical establishment is difficult
to establish, but it included the bishops; 2,300 canons in cathedral
and the closely related collegiate chapters; and a minority of the
  12                             The Organization of the Church




kingdom’s 15,000 benefice holders, a group, perhaps, of 5,000.
    Advancement rested on education—more precisely on training
in the theological, philosophical, and law faculties of the univer¬
sities. The clerical elite formed a highly educated group within
Spanish society. Bishops and canons frequently held doctorates
in theology, philosophy, canon law, and even civil law. Progress
through the ranks of the secular clergy depended in part on aca¬
demic accomplishment, for it was critical for the ecclesiastical
careerist to gain admission either to a university faculty or to a
cathedral chapter. Through the Spanish academic procedure known
as oposiciones, candidates for canonries had to pass examinations
in ethics, theology, and canon law.23 Because membership in a
chapter gave access to the most important episcopal recruiting
ground, only candidates with the requisite academic credentials
could hope to win the coveted prize. Priests educated in semi¬
naries, where the quality of education was inferior to that of the
universities, rarely bothered to apply for vacancies. Many secular
clerics received an even more rudimentary education, which ex¬
cluded them completely from any prospect of advancement. The
division of the secular clergy through academic streaming was
complicated by the nobility’s dominance in the kingdom’s clerical
elite. Commoners could become bishops, but the hierarchy was
the preserve of the numerous lesser nobility, who had respectable
but economically modest backgrounds. Bishops and cathedral can¬
ons often came from noble families, which traditionally had sent
their sons into the service of the State and the Church. For cen¬
turies these hidalgo families sought higher education for their
sons to provide them with the academic qualifications for suc¬
cessful ecclesiastical careers.
    The bishops of the eighteenth-century Church did more or less
what was expected of them. They carried out pastoral visits to the
parishes of their dioceses with remarkable diligence in an age
when poor communications and transport made this a burden¬
some task. Bishop Amador Merino Malaguilla of Badajoz visited
all the towns of his diocese at least five times during his tenure
of office.24 Bishops promoted the founding of seminaries and
ecclesiastical conferences to improve the education of the rural
clergy. Many distributed charity to the poor with a largess that
evoked the disapproving wonder of foreign visitors such as Town-
    The Organization of the Church                            13




send, who complained of the bishop of Cordoba, who had given
alms to 7,000 people. This example was not unusual. Bishops
established charity schools to educate the poor, and, following the
directives of the State, they participated actively in the work of
social and economic improvement. Cardinal Lorenzana of Toledo
tried to revive the decaying silk industry of his diocesan seat and
established a charity hospice for the poor. Felipe Bertran of Sal¬
amanca created a vocational school to train goldsmiths; the arch¬
bishop of Tarragona, Santiyan y Valdivielso, restored the city’s
ancient Roman aqueduct. Other prelates built bridges and town
gates, planted trees, and in general contributed to the physical
improvement of their diocesan seats.25
   In spite of the personal piety and responsibility of the vast
majority of prelates, there was a fundamental contradiction in the
position of the eighteenth-century bishop. The bishops formed a
privileged minority within the Church and were part of a privi¬
leged social elite in the broader society. Whether personally noble
or not, the eighteenth-century bishop possessed the education,
wealth, and culture that set him apart from the poorer and less
educated clergy of the countryside. Cardinal Lorenzana of Toledo
donated generously to charity but also spent lavishly to acquire a
library of rare books. An archbishop of Granada distributed alms
daily to thousands of poor gathered outside his palace gates and
provided wet nurses for 400 children. According to Townsend,
“his bounty to the poor is such, that we can scarcely conceive his
income to equal his expenditure.” Yet the good archbishop also
lived “in some degree of splendor,” with his meals prepared ac¬
cording to the rules of “French cookery” and served on silver
plate.26 The bishops of the eighteenth century did not on the whole
spend wantonly, but they lived comfortably when many of their
clergy did not. The eighteenth-century episcopacy existing within
the traditional social structure of the Old Regime established a
kind of equilibrium between the bishop as pastor and the bishop
as a noble seigneur. But the vast social and cultural differences
between bishops and priests remained a serious weakness in the
eighteenth-century Church.
   Below the bishops stood 2,300 canons in cathedral and colle¬
giate chapters.27 The canons lived in a world as diverse and col¬
orful as any within the Church. Chapters were large or small
            I'-
  14                               The Organization of the Church




depending on the size and wealth of individual dioceses. The
Oviedo chapter had thirty-six members, but the wealthy chapter
of Seville numbered over sixty. Canons in richer dioceses enjoyed
handsome revenues that sometimes exceeded those of bishops of
poor sees. Eleven canons of Seville received over 60,000 reales a
year, approximately the salary of a government minister; another
forty received a comfortable 40,000 reales a year. Elaborate styles
of ecclesiastical dress distinguished the canons of one chapter from
those of another. The canons of Zaragoza wore a black cassock
covered by a mantle of violet silk; the canons of Barcelona, a scarlet
cassock covered by a surplice trimmed in ermine. Members of the
chapters fulfilled a variety of responsibilities, which included
chanting the divine office daily in the cathedral and supervising
the elaborate ceremonies of the liturgical year. They also spent
much of their time maintaining the extensive properties and en¬
dowments that belonged to the cathedrals. Possessing an exag¬
gerated sense of their corporate dignity and enjoying revenues of
their own, chapters often jousted with their bishops and the civil
authorities over rights of precedence and the extent of episcopal
control over their affairs.
   The life of eighteenth-century canons left ample time for study
and reflection, although most chose to languish comfortably and
simply perform their modest duties. But from the ranks of canons
came bishops of superior quality. Canons also took an active part
in the reforming efforts of Charles III. Antonio de Paramo, a
canon of the cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, traveled widely
abroad, built a fine library and numismatic collection, and studied
natural history. He formed the most admired “cabinet” on that
subject in Santiago, a collection that he donated to the royal eco¬
nomic society of the town. Jeronimo de Roo, dean of the chapter
in Las Palmas during the 1770’s and 1780’s, founded a school of
design, promoted the foundation of an academy of architecture,
and became an active member of the royal economic society, which
had been founded in 1777 with the encouragement of the Crown
to stimulate the economic development of the Canaries.28
   As did the bishops above them, however, canons formed a priv¬
ileged minority within the Church. Although they led lives free
from scandal, and many were men of cultural refinement, they
were even further removed than the bishops from the difficult
     The Organization of the Church                              15




 pastoral work of city and country parishes. The endowments en¬
joyed by many chapters were often held at the expense of the
 parochial clergy. In Cordoba, for example, the cathedral chapter
 had the right to collect and retain the tithes originally destined to
 support the parochial clergy. Toward the end of the century in
 the diocese of Segovia, parish priests received only 28 percent of
 the tithes, even though they formed the most numerous group
 in the clergy. The small body of cathedral canons took about 16
 percent for its share, and the local bishop received 14 percent.29
 Everywhere chapters and diocesan administrations drained re¬
 sources away from the lower clergy.
    The kingdom’s nearly 19,000 parishes formed the strongest as
 well as the weakest link in the Church’s organization. The parishes
 and their priests touched the lives of the population more closely
 than the local bishop, who might make a pastoral visit once a
 decade, or the diocesan canons, who rarely left their cathedral
 towns. In isolated country villages the parish was the center of all
 social life, and the cura presided over the ceremonial recording
 of the basic stages of human existence. To the parish clergy fell
 the awesome task of teaching the elementary truths of religion to
 an illiterate rural population who had little or no contact with the
 educated clerical elite of the cities. In an agrarian society few
 groups in the Church should have been more carefully trained
 and generously treated. In fact, the 22,000 priests with cure of
 souls faced their task with often inadequate pastoral training and
 financial circumstances distinctly inferior to those of bishops and
 canons.
    Eighteenth-century clerics believed that the quality of the clergy
 was one of the gravest problems facing the Church. An examiner
 of candidates for parish appointments in the diocese of Mondo-
 nedo complained of priests who, having been taught to read and
 speak Latin “like parrots,” said Mass “without understanding what
 they were saying.”30 Complaints of priests saying Mass hastily and
 “with little reverence” were common.31 The Jesuit Pedro de Cal-
 atayud, who traveled indefatigably on preaching campaigns through
 the rural villages of central and northern Spain at midcentury,
 has left a devastating indictment of the parish clergy with whom
 he came in contact. He found some who never taught Christian
 doctrine from their pulpits and whose parishes included adoles-
  16                               The Organization of the Church




cents who had never received Holy Communion. He met others
who devoted their time to illicit business dealings and still others
who had lived for years with their mistresses and yet dared “to
go from the arms of Venus to the altar.”32 Decades later the vicar
of Ciudad Real stated that in his district “many priests were to be
found who were so stupihed and ignorant that it was a triumph
for them to understand the canon of the Mass.”33
   Serious problems in recruitment and education of the parish
clergy existed, but they were by no means universal, and any
explanation of them must go beyond the ignoble personal moti¬
vations that eighteenth-century critics believed were responsible
for the Church’s difficulties with its priests. A study of the clergy
of the Toledo archdiocese (one of the largest in territory) during
the last years of the Old Regime shows that the problem of neg¬
ligent parish priests was closely linked to the imbalanced financial
and administrative structure of the Church, even at the diocesan
level. The flow of ecclesiastical income from the countryside into
the cities and larger towns that was characteristic of the Church
as a whole also occurred in Toledo. The best-endowed parishes
(a few with incomes higher than some bishoprics) were located in
Madrid, Toledo, and towns where diocesan administrators had
their seats. In contrast, the poorest parishes were in isolated rural
districts in the Montes de Toledo, Extremadura, and La Mancha.
The ecclesiastical authorities believed that 55 percent of the arch¬
diocese’s parishes lacked the minimum income (5,000 reales) judged
necessary for modest sustenance of the parochial clergy.34
   The maldistribution of parish income in the Toledo archdiocese
inevitably meant that the best-qualified clergy moved into cities
and towns, where they would receive a comfortable income and
the possibility of further preferment. The rest of the parochial
clergy were left to struggle with the inadequate revenues provided
by country parishes. And it was there that the most serious abuses
took place, although regional differences existed within the arch¬
diocese. The vicars and visitors responsible for maintaining dis¬
cipline among the rural clergy of Toledo thus found the parish
priests of the Andalusian vicarates of Huescar and Cazorla to be
among the most intractable. An inspection of the vicarates carried
out early in the nineteenth century found numerous priests living
with their mistresses. Others were addicted to gambling and hunt-
     The Organization of the Church                             17




ing; still others engaged in contraband and business dealings. The
inquiry found many priests who even refused to wear clerical dress
as they performed their duties.35
   During the second half of the eighteenth century, the State
undertook several initiatives to remedy abuses and improve the
quality of the parish clergy. In 1766 Charles III issued a decree
designed to encourage the foundation of seminaries on a larger
scale and to improve the standard of instruction in those already
established.36 Seminaries had existed since the time of the Council
of Trent in some dioceses, but they operated under the control
of cathedral canons, who regarded their students as sources of
free labor to arrange chairs, pump organs, and otherwise assist
in the liturgical services of the cathedral to which they were at¬
tached. The seminary of Cadiz even refused to admit candidates
who could not sing well on the grounds that it required good
voices for the cathedral choir. Moreover, these early seminaries
were rent by disputes among different schools of scholastic phi¬
losophy that often made orderly instruction impossible.
   Charles III attempted to reform the seminaries by converting
them into quasi-universities, freeing them from the control of
cathedral chapters, and eliminating contention among philosoph¬
ical schools. Seminary expansion and reform were also designed
to put an end to the training of priests in local Latin schools,
where candidates for the priesthood received a rudimentary ed¬
ucation that scarcely went beyond the catechism and the form of
saying Mass and administering the sacraments. How many clergy
entered the priesthood through Latin schools is difficult to esti¬
mate, although there are indications that the number may not
have been as great as ecclesiastical critics of the time imagined.
Only 18 percent of those applying for parish vacancies in Toledo,
for example, lacked university degrees.37 It is at least certain that
the poorly educated clerics coming from these schools were doomed
to spend their lives in impoverished country parishes.
   Charles Ill’s efforts to increase the number of seminaries were
successful to the extent that ten were founded during his reign.
But the reforms the State promoted failed to improve signihcantly
the educational level of the lower clergy; most of them continued
to acquire whatever knowledge they needed for their ministry in
the traditional manner. Nor were the seminaries able to match
  18                               The Organization of the Church




the prestige of university faculties in theology and philosophy. By
1800 many seminaries were caught in serious financial difficulties
and were being disrupted again by internal disputes that often
led to disturbances. In Murcia, for example, clerical students rioted
in 1803 against the attempt of the cathedral chapter to intervene
in the seminary’s affairs.
   The civil and ecclesiastical authorities also attempted to raise
the quality of the parish clergy through a system of competitive
examinations, los concursos de curatos, designed to weed out clerics
unsuitable for pastoral work. Developed and refined in the arch¬
diocese of Toledo, the concurso system was extended to all dioceses
by royal order in 1784.38 In theory, the concursos were to recruit
the best-qualified clergy for parish vacancies. Priests throughout
the kingdom with three years’ parish experience could apply, and
the archdiocese sent circulars to the universities of Salamanca,
Valladolid, and Alcala de Henares hoping to attract well-educated
clerics. The examinations were elaborately organized under the
direction of the diocesan vicar general.
   The success of the concurso system varied from diocese to dio¬
cese. In Toledo it functioned with limited success, but in Osma,
according to a complaint of the bishop in 1790, only four of
twenty-one candidates appearing for the competition were judged
competent. The bishop had to appoint eight of the failed candi¬
dates, lamenting that this would be “prejudicial to the parishes
which will be filled with unsuitable ministers and the entire diocese
with ignorance.”39 Even in Toledo the results of the concursos were
disappointing. A survey of the condition of the diocesan clergy
near the turn of the century drew a bleak picture of “absenteeism,
a lack of interest in studies, and concubinage” as well as a general
failure in preaching and catechetical work.40 The concursos, which
in one form or another survived into the twentieth century, also
encouraged ecclesiastical careerism that resulted in constant turn¬
over of clergy hoping to move up from poor parishes to more
comfortable situations. In Toledo the youngest successful candi¬
dates were given the least desirable parishes, which later would
be left vacant as their priests moved up the ecclesiastical ladder,
or would be held by clergymen without the ambition or education
to continue their upward mobility.
     The Organization of the Church                                 19




   The difficulties the Church experienced with some parish priests
were real enough, but it would be unfair to tar the entire parochial
clergy with the brush of negligence and irregular behavior. Priests
in charge of impoverished rural areas far from the vigilant eye
of diocesan authorities were the most likely to engage in improper
activities. The geographic extent and topography of a diocese
helped determine, either favorably or unfavorably, the quality of
its clergy. The vast extent of the Toledo archdiocese, ranging from
Old Castile to Extremadura, La Mancha, and Andalusia, pre¬
sented a handful of diocesan administrators with an impossible
task. Occasional inspections, such as that carried out in the remote
vicarates of Andalusia, never succeeded in reforming clerical hab¬
its developed over years of isolation. Bishops of more compact
dioceses with easier communications were in a better position.
Bishop Jose Climent of Barcelona, a former parish priest himself,
paid special attention to the quality of his parochial clergy through
pastoral visits and supervision of the examination process. Within
the modest territorial limits of his diocese he was able to maintain
close contact with his priests. Although Climent held an austere
view of the qualities required of a priest and quickly censured
those failing to live up to their responsibilities, he believed that
the vast majority of his clerics were faithfully performing their
pastoral duties.41
    It is also evident that the quality of the parish clergy in the cities
and larger towns was far higher than in the countryside. The well-
endowed parishes of urban centers attracted well-educated priests,
 many with doctorates in theology or canon law, who were aware
of their obligations. Francisco Celma, doctor in theology and par¬
ish priest of Cati near Castellon for more than fifty years, provides
an example. Celma enthusiastically promoted devotion to the Eu¬
charist and the Sacred Heart, contributed actively to the town’s
charities, and worked to spread knowledge of doctrine among his
 parishioners through the publication of several popular cate¬
chisms written in Catalan. And he was by no means unusual.42
    The civil and ecclesiastical authorities viewed the problem of
 the parish clergy as one of education and recruitment, hence their
emphasis on seminaries, competitive examinations for parish ap¬
 pointments, and the periodic spiritual conferences so often con-
  20                               The Organization of the Church




yoked by eighteenth-century bishops for their priests. But the
problem had deeper roots. The parish priest stood at the bottom
of an ecclesiastical ladder heavy with the wealth, prestige, culture,
and education of a privileged minority.
   It is difficult to establish with any precision the financial situ¬
ation of the parish clergy over the kingdom as a whole. Conditions
varied from region to region; they depended in part on the num¬
ber of parishes in a diocese and on the size of parochial endow¬
ments. Within dioceses there also were substantial differences of
income among parishes.
   In some dioceses the general economic prosperity of the Church
between 1750 and 1790 filtered down to the parish clergy. In the
diocese of Segovia parish priests received an average of 982 reales
a year in surplice fees, approximately the yearly wages of an un¬
skilled workman, in addition to their basic source of income, the
tithe. Overall, the incomes of a majority of the diocese’s parochial
clergy compared favorably with those of highly skilled artisans
and minor royal officials in the area.43 Over the kingdom as a
whole, however, the existence of 3,000 parish vacancies, in spite
of a recruiting pool of 60,000 secular priests, suggests that many
parishes, particularly in poorer rural districts, could not offer
sufficient financial rewards to attract clergy, even from a
large body of unbeneficed churchmen desperately in need of
employment.
   In the minds of the civil and ecclesiastical reformers of the
eighteenth century the inadequacy of the parochial organization,
the alienation of parish tithes, and the financial situation of the
parish clergy demanded immediate remedies. Although there were
some attempts to create new and properly endowed parishes, these
often foundered on opposition from within the Church itself.
When the bishop of Cadiz proposed to erect six new parishes in
the city, he aroused the hostility of his canons, who felt that di¬
viding the city’s one parish, located in the cathedral, threatened
to diminish the chapter’s influence over the local clergy. Any sub¬
stantial readjustment of parish structures would have required a
massive transfer of funds from bishoprics and chapters to par¬
ishes, and this the privileged elite dominating the Church would
not accept. The weakness of the parish and of its clergy constituted
     The Organization of the Church                                21




one of the most serious inadequacies of the eighteenth-century
Church.


The Religious Orders

   To compensate for the deficiencies of the parochial clergy, the
Church might have turned to the approximately 50,000 priests
and members of the male religious orders. Distributed in 2,052
houses, according to the census of 1797, the regulars far outnum¬
bered the secular clergy with cure of souls. But their contribution
to the religious mission of the Church was uneven. Like the elite
of the secular clergy, the orders preferred the cities to the coun¬
tryside. The exceptions were the great monastic foundations, such
as the Benedictines and Cistercians, who traditionally established
their monasteries in rural areas. In Andalusia, where the large
size of parishes raised an obstacle to pastoral efficiency, the cities
were filled with monasteries and convents of both men and women.
The regular clergy outnumbered the secular in Seville, where
eighty-four monasteries and friaries occupied a more important
place in the city’s religious life than its thirty parishes. The orders,
moreover, avoided poorer regions, which in turn had the greatest
number of parish vacancies. In Galicia, where 28 percent of
the parishes lacked priests in 1797, the orders composed
approximately 24 percent of the total number of clergy; in
Seville they represented 59 percent. The orders were poorly rep¬
resented in Galicia; the Basque Provinces; and the less wealthy
provinces of Old Castile, Leon, Burgos, and Extremadura; but
they were well represented in Madrid, Cordoba, Murcia,
Seville, and Granada, and along the Mediterranean littoral, espe¬
cially in Catalonia and Valencia. The regular clergy suffered
from the same maldistribution of personnel as its secular
counterpart.
   For the orders the eighteenth century was a period of stability
and prosperity. The seventeenth century had seen a spectacular
increase in recruitment and the proliferation of new houses; the
eighteenth was an era of consolidation and material progress. A
few communities, notably among the Franciscans, were so deluged
by candidates for admission that the order drafted a plan to limit
  22                               The Organization of the Church




the number of novices in 1768.44 The comfortable prosperity of
the regulars disguised inertia, sterile routine, and a lack of intel¬
lectual and spiritual vitality. The decline was most evident in the
great monasteries of the Benedictines, Cistercians, Carthusians,
and Hieronymites. These houses were theoretically devoted to
contemplation and prayer, but more worldly concerns consumed
their energies.
   The Cistercian monastery of Poblet in Catalonia provides an
example of the deterioration of monastic life during the century.
This foundation, possessing extensive properties and seigneurial
rights in the surrounding region, spent so much time enforcing
its claims on the local population through a barrage of lawsuits
that at one point in the early 1770’s it was nearly bankrupt because
of excessive legal costs. Relations between the monastery and the
residents of the neighboring town of Vimbodl, over which Poblet
held jurisdiction, finally became so strained that the monks sent
armed bands including lay brothers with “pistols around the waist”
to threaten the villagers.45 Nor were conditions within the mon¬
astery walls any better. After 1760 the monks divided into warring
factions, which left the house in a state of undeclared civil war.
Disputes arose over the election of abbots and also from periodic
attempts by religious superiors to force the monks to observe the
order’s rules. In 1764 the monastery’s reforming administration
issued a decree revealing the low standard of monastic observance.
It forbade monks from attending bullfights and comedies; from
spending nights outside the monastery; from using silk, silver,
and gold in their dress; and from entering the houses of persons
“of ill repute.”46
    The state of the Carthusian monastery of Santa Marla de las
Cuevas in Seville was no better. Its administration spent gener¬
ously on ecclesiastical decoration and lavish entertainments, as in
 1749 when it regaled the visiting archbishop with “splendid ban¬
quets and agreeable refreshments.” The monastery suffered, too,
from the curse of internal dissension, which became so severe on
occasion that the monks retained a special prison for the recal¬
citrant. But to judge from the frequent reports of escapes, the
holy jail was not effective. And like all monasteries, Santa Maria
engaged in a perpetual round of legal jousting with the city and
     The Organization of the Church                               23




individuals it suspected of encroaching upon its property and
rights.47
   Monasteries contributed to the Church’s pastoral mission in¬
sofar as they often held responsibility for parishes in their vicinity,
but this usually meant that a monastery collected parochial tithes
and paid a miserable salary to a secular clergyman serving as vicar.
There were, however, some bright spots in this bleak picture. The
Premonstratensian monastery of Santa Maria de Belpuig in Cat¬
alonia developed a flourishing intellectual life and produced a
group of capable historians and archivists, such as Jaime Cares-
mar. The Benedictines included one of the great figures in the
intellectual history of eighteenth-century Spain, Benito Feijoo,
and their abbey of Silos in Old Castile imitated in a modest way
the scholarly work of the French monastery Saint Maur.48 More
typical of the intellectual poverty of the monasteries was the case
of Luis Jose de Urebal, a monk at Santa Maria de las Cuevas in
Seville, who spent his life writing thirty-three dreary volumes on
philosophy and theology that never saw the light of day. The
routine, extravagance, and intellectual mediocrity of the monastic
orders served the Church badly. The number of monks was not
great, only 10 percent of the regular clergy, but the enormous
wealth sustaining the kingdom’s monasteries and their small pop¬
ulations added another element of imbalance to the eighteenth-
century Church.
   The nonmonastic orders, particularly the mendicants and the
communities of canons regular—Franciscans, Dominicans, Car¬
melites, Trinitarians, Augustinians, and others—occupied a more
important place in the Church. The Franciscans, though divided
into several branches, formed the largest group within the regular
clergy—over 17,000 members according to the census of 1797—
far exceeding the 4,393 of the second-place Dominicans. Unlike
the monastic orders, the mendicants usually established them¬
selves in cities and towns and carried on active lives of preaching
and teaching.
   Yet it is difficult to assess the role of the mendicants within the
Church or in the broader society. Already in the eighteenth cen¬
tury they were regarded with little favor and considerable hostility
by the elite of the secular clergy and the royal bureaucracy. De-
  24                              The Organization of the Church




nounced by one critic as “the Pharisees of our time,” the men¬
dicants and the canons regular seemed an excessively numerous
body of clergy contributing little to the pastoral mission of the
Church. Friars appeared to many as propagators of crude reli¬
gious devotion bordering on superstition.49 But this picture is too
simply drawn. The mendicants esteemed education as much as
the secular clergy. Every order maintained colleges and houses of
study for the education of its members and of laymen as well. The
Capuchins, for example, maintained arts colleges in thirty-three
of thirty-nine friaries in their province of Cartagena and in twenty
of their thirty-eight houses in Andalusia.50 Moreover, the foun¬
dations maintained by the mendicants in the university towns of
Salamanca, Alcala de Henares, and Santiago de Compostela were
minifaculties of theology and philosophy; their professors often
competed for chairs in neighboring university faculties. A high
degree of education was as indispensable for advancement in the
orders as in the secular clergy. Most of the administrators (pro¬
vincials) of the Franciscan province of Santiago de Compostela
during the eighteenth century held doctorates in theology, phi¬
losophy, or canon law, and this was the pattern among other
orders as well.51 The intellectual quality of the elite of the men¬
dicants and canons regular was not overpowering, but the orders
produced some figures of distinction, such as the noted Augus-
tinian historian and archivist Enrique Florez.
   The problem of the nonmonastic orders was similar to that of
the secular clergy. An elite of well-educated priests monopolizing
high administrative and teaching posts presided over a more nu¬
merous body of clerics, whose intellectual quality and religious
commitment left much to be desired. Some clerics taught in arts
colleges, novitiates, and theological and philosophical faculties;
others, particularly the “apostolic missionaries,” who moved through
the kingdom in campaigns of popular evangelization devoted
themselves to preaching. But the orders had too many members
to provide full-time pastoral and educational employment for all.
The Franciscan friary of Barcelona, for example, had 150 friars
in residence at the end of the century; another 60 resided in two
smaller houses.52 The orders, moreover, recruited members in¬
discriminately from every social class. A respectable family and
educational background counted a good deal in the internal ca-
    The Organization of the Church                             25




reerism of the regulars, but the orders were willing to accept any
reasonable candidate for admission. In 1750 the Franciscan prov¬
ince of Santiago observed that it had so many friars that “it did
not know where to put them or to find the means to feed them.”53
   With only a minority of their members occupied completely
with pastoral or educational work, the orders sustained the re¬
mainder through the liturgical ceremonies and special devotions
promoted in their churches. The Augustinian community of Agreda
survived by maintaining a small arts college and conducting a
perpetual round of services in the town; processions and novenas
succeeded one another without interruption.54 The Capuchins
everywhere promoted the cult of the Virgen de la Pastora in their
churches; other orders encouraged particular devotions such as
that of the Sacred Heart, which was identified with the Jesuits.
Emphasis on ceremonial and devotional pursuits could not dis¬
guise the fact that the orders did not have enough to do, even
though pastoral needs were near at hand. This produced an at¬
mosphere of routine and religious formalism, as in Cadiz, where
the Capuchins rang matins each morning but stayed comfortably
in their beds. The provincial visitor of the Clerics Minor of An¬
dalusia found that conditions in the houses of the order had slipped
so far below a minimal standard that he forbade the clergy from
coming to choir in silk hats, smoking in the house’s environs,
lending money to laymen, and decorating their cells with English
wallpaper.55 Some attempts were made to revive the waning fervor
and austerity of the orders. Beginning in 1764 the Capuchins
established a series of friaries of “common life,” where the reli¬
 gious observed austere discipline. But such reforming movements
 were rare among the orders of the eighteenth-century Church.56
 In general, their members lived routine existences untouched by
 either great scandal or deep religious commitment.
    The mendicants and canons regular suffered from the same
 internal dissension that made life intolerable in some of the king¬
 dom’s monasteries. Squabbling might be initiated by clerics de¬
 fying their superiors, as in the case of an Oratorian priest in
 Granada accused by the order of spreading “hatred and rancor”
 in his house. Ecclesiastical politics created a more serious problem
 and often disturbed the tranquillity of cloisters. In 1788 the Dis-
 calced Franciscans quarreled over an attempt by the visitor, An-
  26                               The Organization of the Church




tonio Jose Salinas, to appoint provincial administrators if he
believed that the friars in their chapters had elected “unworthy
and useless subjects” to be superiors. Throughout the eighteenth
century the Franciscan province of Santiago de Compostela was
troubled by bitter dissension between friars from Galicia and Cas¬
tile. Similar tension in the order’s province of Extremadura finally
forced it to be divided in two, with the Tagus River as the de¬
marcation line.57 Dissension in the orders became marked as the
century progressed, especially during the 1780’s, when royal ef¬
forts to assert greater control over the regular clergy often began
undeclared civil wars among friars of different factions.
    Moved by a desire to use the ecclesiastical population to advance
its social and economic policies, the enlightened State of the sec¬
ond half of the eighteenth century did not view the orders sym¬
pathetically. Occasional examples of opposition to the Crown’s
reforming policies among the regulars irritated the authorities.
In 1786 in Zaragoza, the Capuchin Fray Diego de Cadiz, the most
celebrated preacher of the day, set off a national uproar by de¬
nouncing the materialism of the local economic society to the
Inquisition. The society, an association of notables interested in
promoting economic development that had been founded with
royal encouragement, immediately appealed to the highest coun¬
cils of government for redress in the midst of acrimonious con¬
troversy. The orders generally pursued a more prudent course,
realizing that the State was always willing and able to interfere in
their affairs. The Carthusian monastery of Las Cuevas in Seville,
for example, made a generous donation to the local economic
society just as Fray Diego was fulminating against its counterpart
in Zaragoza.
    The fundamental objection of the enlightened monarchy to the
regulars arose from the conviction that they were not contributing
to either the spiritual or material improvement of the kingdom.
The emphasis of the orders on “long prayers and the scrupulous
observance of certain exterior ceremonies” led them, in the opin¬
ion of one critic, to ignore “works of piety and mercy,” under¬
takings that would specifically contribute to material as well as
spiritual progress.58 The orders, he believed, should produce ar¬
chitects and engineers to build bridges and roads as well as priests
and teachers.
     The Organization of the Church                             27




   The State, although unhappy with the orders’ failure to con¬
tribute to its utilitarian program, was unable to redefine their role
or to undertake the kind of reform, already advocated by some
critics, that would substantially reduce the number of religious
and redirect their energies into useful educational and charitable
pursuits. Under Charles III the State contented itself with efforts
to assert as much control as possible over the orders. In 1776 the
Crown forced the appointment of a national vicar for the Fran¬
ciscans to limit the authority of the order’s headquarters in Rome.
This measure was extended to the Trinitarians in 1782, the Car¬
thusians in 1784, and the Augustinians in 1786. Royal authority
over the regulars expanded, but it failed to bring about significant
change. Increased governmental control tended to aggravate fac¬
tionalism, as monks and friars fell into the habit of appealing to
the Council of Castile for resolution of internal conflicts.
   The kingdom’s 24,000 nuns fulfilled a different role from that
of their male counterparts. The vast majority of the nuns lived in
contemplative communities. Although there are some examples
of educational and charitable activity among orders of women, in
general active work was not common. Significantly, the Sisters of
Charity, an order involved in hospital and charity work, experi¬
enced the greatest difficulty establishing itself in Spain. The first
community did not appear until the 1780’s, and even then the
order spread slowly. One reason for the lack of active communities
during the Old Regime was the long monastic tradition of the
women’s religious orders in Spain; another reason may have been
the special social function convents played in the structured society
of the Old Regime. Not every convent was a refuge for genteel
women who could not be supported economically in the outside
world, but the activities of the contemplative orders, however harsh
and austere they might have become on occasion, fit into a wide¬
spread mentality that such activities were proper for women and
that employment in hospitals and orphanages—work among the
lowest classes of society—was not.
   The organization of the regular clergy remained unchanged
during the eighteenth century with two exceptions. In 1787 the
State suppressed the Order of San Antonio Abad because it lacked
patients for its leper hospitals, the principal reason for its exis¬
tence. More spectacular was the expulsion from Spain in 1767 of
  28                              The Organization of the Church




the Jesuits and the subsequent extinction of the order itself by
Pope Clement XIV in 1773 at the instigation of the Spanish court.
   Few orders were more closely identified with Spain than the
Society of Jesus. Founded by a Spaniard, Ignatius of Loyola, and
numbering prominent Spaniards among their early recruits, the
Jesuits became the glory of the Counter-Reformation Church and
one of Spain’s most influential orders. The order’s militancy, com¬
mitment, rigorous recruitment, and training program created a
powerful and effective instrument for the revival of sixteenth-
and seventeenth-century Catholicism. But by the eighteenth cen¬
tury the order had lost much of its earlier elan. The Spanish
Jesuits, numbering fewer than 3,000 on the eve of the expulsion,
suffered from many of the problems troubling other orders.59
Although the educational level of its members was high, the order
produced only a few figures of intellectual distinction, the histo¬
rian and archivist Andres Burriel, the Basque grammarian Man¬
uel de Larramendi, the historian of the Jesuit missions in Paraguay
Pedro Lozano, and the author of the celebrated satirical novel
Fray Gerundio, Jose Francisco de Isla. Theological and philosoph¬
ical studies in the order suffered from the same meaningless and
trivial emphasis on disputation that characterized ecclesiastical
learning elsewhere in the eighteenth-century Church.
   The Jesuits, however, continued to play an important role in
secondary school teaching through 117 colegios and two of the
kingdom’s most distinguished institutions of learning for the no¬
bility: the Colegio Imperial and the Seminario de Nobles in Ma¬
drid. But the order by no means confined itself to education of
the nation’s elite. Along with the Capuchins, the Jesuits provided
the personnel for perhaps the single most important religious
initiative of the century—the vast missionary campaign that saw
clerics, such as the Jesuit Pedro de Calatayud, traverse the king¬
dom in a determined effort to spread knowledge of religious
doctrine to an illiterate and isolated rural population. The Jesuits
also continued their missionary activity in the dominions of the
Spanish Empire, particularly in Paraguay, where their missions
among the Guarani Indians were extraordinarily successful.
   The Jesuits of eighteenth-century Spain were no longer the
tough and disciplined religious shock troops of the sixteenth cen¬
tury, but they were influential. Through their schools they dom-
     The Organization of the Church                              29




inated the intellectual formation of the nation’s social elite; through
their influence at court, where the royal confessor was invariably
a Jesuit, and through their connections with prominent families,
they achieved an envied place in the ecclesiastical establishment.
But they were not popular within the Church. They shared with
the other orders a readiness to enter into combat over theological
and philosophical issues. Jesuits and Augustinians thus struggled
for nearly a century over the questions of free will and predes¬
tination.60 Clerical polemicists delighted in attacking their oppo¬
nents with the vehemence formerly reserved for heretics. But
differences between the Jesuits and other orders were more than
intellectual. The orders resented the influence of the Jesuit royal
confessor over ecclesiastical politics. Father Ravago, the confessor
of Ferdinand VI, acquired extraordinary influence in the murky
world of clerical patronage and created resentment in the process.
Some Jesuits became adept intriguers in court politics during the
early 1750’s with the emergence of the pro-Jesuit marques de
Ensenada as Ferdinand Vi’s most important minister. Ensenada’s
fall from grace in 1754 was a setback, but the king continued to
show his favor to the order.
   The succession of Charles III to the Spanish throne in 1759
opened a dangerous period for the Jesuits, culminating in the
expulsion of 1767. The new monarch, though exemplary in his
personal piety, had absorbed the strong regalist traditions in vogue
in the kingdom of Naples, where he had ruled for twenty-one
years before becoming king of Spain. Charles assembled about
him ministers whose vision of a Spanish royal Church left no place
for the Jesuits. Objections to the order included an alleged attempt
to convert the Paraguay missions into Christian republics free of
royal control; its persistent opposition to one of the king’s favorite
schemes—the canonization of an anti-Jesuit seventeenth-century
Mexican bishop, Palafox; its known sympathy for Ensenada’s re¬
turn to power; and the widespread suspicion, not entirely justified,
that it opposed the vigorous regalism of the king and his new
ministers. All these made the order the decisive religious issue of
the early 1760’s.
   A series of riots in Madrid beginning on Palm Sunday 1766
against a reforming minister, the marques de Esquilache, was the
catalyst. The State accused the Jesuits of fomenting the disorders
  30                              The Organization of the Church




as part of a plot to bring about ministerial change, though the
causes of the disturbances are not clear even today, in spite of the
attention they have received from historians. The king named a
special tribunal of the Council of Castile to assess responsibility.
This body, on which five bishops sat, placed the blame squarely
on the Jesuits: “the riot of Madrid was certainly their work with
the purpose of placing the government entirely at its disposition,”
said the archbishop of Burgos, Rodriguez de Arellano.61 There
was no convincing evidence behind the accusation, but regalist-
minded ministers and clerics believed firmly in the theory of Jesuit
conspiracy.
   The Esquilache riots furnished the State with an excuse to elim¬
inate an order that did not conform with its plans for the Spanish
Church. The order’s prestige and suspected political influence
aroused resentment in the government and the ecclesiastical es¬
tablishment. Further, the Jesuits’ principal activities were not the
kind of utilitarian pursuits so highly esteemed by the enlightened
monarchy of Charles III. Classical education provided to a largely
noble elite in the Jesuit schools seemed anachronistic to royal
bureaucrats, who wished to shift the emphasis of Spanish secon¬
dary and university education to the sciences, mathematics, and
economic concerns. Moreover, the Jesuits’ gentler interpretation
of the rigorous precepts of Catholic moral theology did not sit
well with the harsh code of conduct accepted by the king, his
ministers, and the anti-Jesuit faction within the Church. Accusa¬
tions of laxity in resolving problems of moral theology revealed
that the Jesuits were out of touch with the reforming spirit that
had begun to develop in the Church after 1750. This movement,
denounced as “Jansenist” by the Jesuits, received wide support
among the clerical elite of Charles Ill’s royal Church. It vigorously
attempted to curb the excesses of “popular” religion and to impose
on the faithful an austere, puritanical code of morality. The Jes¬
uits’ expressed opposition to the so-called Jansenists made the
order appear to be an obstacle to reform in the Church.
   The Jesuits’ expulsion was welcomed by the hierarchy and the
religious orders. Opportunism and ecclesiastical careerism un¬
doubtedly inclined some clerics to support the State’s action, but
many ecclesiastics believed the Crown was contributing to the
Church’s welfare by expelling the Society of Jesus. Forty-two of
     The Organization of the Church                               31




the kingdom’s bishops supported the expulsion; many published
pastoral letters extolling the king’s initiative. The superiors of the
religious orders also welcomed the expulsion with ill-disguised
satisfaction.
   However, the reaction within the Church and the use to which
Jesuit property and endowments were put by the State reveal that
the motive of the expulsion was not antireligious. The Crown
ordered that the order’s houses and income be used for religious
and educational purposes. The confiscation of Jesuit property
allowed the State to found new seminaries for the improvement
of the parish clergy, to establish new schools under religious aus¬
pices but with more advanced curricula, and to create charitable
institutions under clerical direction.


The Inquisition

   One institution still occupied a special place within Church and
State, the Inquisition. Founded by Ferdinand and Isabella in 1478,
the Council of the Supreme and General Inquisition, although
established by papal decree, was in fact a royal body whose head
was named by the Crown. Originally created to punish converted
Jews or their descendants (conversos) suspected of secretly observ¬
ing their old faith, the Inquisition gradually expanded its activity
to include censorship and the punishment of heresy; witchcraft;
sorcery; magic; superstitious practices; moral offenses, such as
bigamy and homosexuality; and immorality among the clergy.
The Inquisition of the late fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth
centuries went implacably about its work of enforcing orthodoxy
and morality. With its secret procedures, its ability to confiscate
the property of its victims, and its enormous jurisdictional powers
over laymen and clerics alike, it could act whenever and wherever
it pleased. Its celebrated sixteenth-century victims included an
archbishop of Toledo and primate of Spain, Bartolome Carranza,
who stood accused of Lutheranism; and the poet, theologian, and
mystic Fray Luis de Leon, who spent years in inquisitorial prisons
before being released.
   The terrible force of the Inquisition was not primarily in its
ability to have its victims burned at the stake in the elaborate public
ceremonies of the autos de fe. A recent examination of 50,000 cases
  32                               The Organization of the Church




between 1560 and 1700 shows that only 1 percent of those accused
suffered the ultimate penalty; the incidence of execution was far
higher in the Inquisition’s first twenty years than at any later
time.62 Secrecy coupled with the ability to strike at any moment,
confiscate the property of the condemned, and destroy a career
for even minor offenses conspired to create the pervasive psy¬
chology of fear that lay behind the institution’s ruthless effective¬
ness as a guardian of orthodoxy and morality. So successfully did
the Inquisition instill fear in the population at large that the vast
majority of denunciations it received came not from its agents but
from relatives, friends, and acquaintances of the accused. The
Inquisition did not select its victims capriciously. According to its
own lights it pronounced judgment only after careful examination
of the evidence. Anyone summoned before the Holy Tribunal
might well have trembled with fear and terror, but it was possible
to be absolved. And there were occasional examples of common
sense overriding popular passions, as in Navarra in the early sev¬
enteenth century, when the Inquisition effectively ended Spain’s
witch craze after a searching examination into accusations pro¬
duced by mass hysteria.63
   The history of the Inquisition in the eighteenth century has not
been widely studied, and for good reason. After a flurry of activity
against conversos (often Portuguese merchants who had settled in
Spain between 1720 and 1730), the cases coming before the Holy
Office declined to the lowest levels in its existence. Thus, the
Inquisition of Toledo (one of fourteen provincial tribunals) heard
an average of 200 cases a year during the middle of the sixteenth
century, 30 a year during the early seventeenth century, and only
3 or 4 a year by the end of the eighteenth.64 Moreover, charges
showed a dramatic shift away from the most serious accusations
of Judaism and Protestantism toward those focusing on supersti¬
tion, morality, and erroneous and heretical “propositions” that
fell short of formal heresy. A survey of more than 4,000 cases
taken to the Supreme Council during the eighteenth century shows
that 43.5 percent dealt with “propositions” (compared with 19.4
percent in the seventeenth century) and less than 10 percent dealt
with Judaism and Protestantism (compared with 48.6 percent in
the preceding century.)65 The changing pattern of accusations also
corresponds with the less frequent exaction of the death penalty,
     The Organization of the Church                              33




which was carried out only in 1714, 1725, 1763, and 1781. The
Inquisition’s last victim, Dolores of Seville, provoked inquisitorial
wrath because of her claim that she maintained contact with the
Virgin and had released millions of souls from purgatory.
   The Inquisition’s reduced activity during the second half of the
eighteenth century also reflected the efforts of Charles III and
his enlightened ministers to impose limits on the exercise of in¬
quisitorial authority, which on occasion seemed to threaten that
of the government itself. Although a royal council, the Inquisition
had acquired over time a sense of its own autonomy clearly un¬
acceptable to a monarchy obsessed with the preservation and ex¬
pansion of its own power.
   In 1761 the decision of Inquisitor General Manuel Quintano
Bonifaz to publish a papal bull condemning a Jansenist book with¬
out seeking prior approval from the king provoked a crisis. Charles
III, irritated at seeing a work condemned that he had approved
as king of Naples, exiled the inquisitor general from Madrid and
allowed him to return only after exacting a statement of submis¬
sion. The king followed with a decree (January 18, 1762) forbid¬
ding the publication not only of any papal bull but even of the
edicts of the Inquisition until they received royal authorization.
Although this measure was suspended a few months later, in 1768
the Council of Castile proposed unheard-of restrictions on the
Inquisition’s censoring powers and repeated the terms of the 1762
decree on the publication of its edicts. The crown attorneys (fis-
cales) who commented on the proposal affirmed the absolute right
of the king “to watch over the use which the Inquisition makes
of its jurisdiction, to enlighten it, to reform its abuses, to impose
limitations on it and even to suppress it if this should be demanded
by necessity and public utility.”66
   The audacious proposal of 1768 did not lead, however, to the
severe restrictions on the Inquisition that its authors had in mind.
Charles III, with his characteristic prudence, chose instead to guide
the Inquisition in a more moderate direction through the ap¬
pointment of inquisitors general sympathetic to the reforming
spirit prevalent in the government. The king’s decision to appoint
Felipe Bertran, bishop of Salamanca and a leading episcopal re¬
former, to be inquisitor general in 1774 opened a period of mod¬
eration, particularly in the held of censorship, that would last until
  34                               The Organization of the Church




1790.67 By the mid-1780’s the Inquisition’s reputation had so im¬
proved that even Joseph Townsend, the English clergyman who
visited Spain during these years, could say: “I am inclined to think
that in proportion as light has been diffused in Europe, even
inquisitors have learnt humanity.”68
   It was, paradoxically, during Bertran’s tenure as inquisitor gen¬
eral that the Inquisition aroused itself from its apparent lethargy
to strike a spectacular blow reminiscent of the heady days of old.
The arrest in 1776, trial, and subsequent condemnation of a prom¬
inent royal official, Pablo de Olavide, on a charge of formal heresy
shocked enlightened circles in Spain and Europe. That the former
royal governor of the extensive province of Seville and superin¬
tendent of one of the king’s favorite schemes (the creation of new
settlements in the Sierra Morena) should disappear into the pris¬
ons of the Inquisition for two years without a trace and should
then appear in the peaked cap and smock of the condemned to
hear himself sentenced to eight years of conhnement to a mon¬
astery and the confiscation of his property seemed to herald the
beginning of a new age of inquisitorial fanaticism.
   Sensational as it was, however, the case did not lead to a general
campaign of persecution against the enlightened circles of gov¬
ernment and society with whom Olavide was identified. But it did
reveal that the Inquisition was still capable of baring its teeth. The
charge of formal heresy against Olavide rested on a series of
dubious accusations levied by the numerous enemies he had made
during his tenure in Seville (1769-1776). Although Olavide was
personally devout (witnesses testified that he knelt in prayer beside
his bed each night before retiring), he disliked the extravagant
and superstitious practices he believed were characteristic of Span¬
ish Catholicism. And, what was more dangerous, he did not shirk
from expressing these objections publicly. “Gentlemen,” he once
told a gathering of local noblemen about to spend a vast sum to
decorate a shrine, “you would do far better assisting your neighbor
to use this money to develop agriculture and increase the value
of your properties and thus give sustenance to the poor who are
perishing, that would be good devotion.”69 Olavide’s view of re¬
ligion—that it should emphasize interior spiritual development
rather than external ceremony—was not significantly different
     The Organization of the Church                               35




from that expressed by so-called “enlightened” Catholics else¬
where in Europe and within Spain itself. But to express such views
in an urban society dominated by a conservative clergy and nobility
invited trouble. Olavide, moreover, alienated the local oligarchy
by introducing reforms that sought to eliminate the corrupt deals
made possible through its control of municipal government. Olavi-
de’s most redoubtable enemy, however, proved to be the superior
of the Capuchin friars, who had been brought in to provide re¬
ligious services to the new towns of the Sierra Morena. The gov¬
ernor’s efforts to prevent the friars from introducing what he
believed to be the worst excesses of popular piety led in the end
to the denunciation that destroyed him.
    Given the importance of the accused, the Supreme Council of
the Inquisition quickly assumed jurisdiction over the case. Because
little is known of the discussions in the council, it is difficult to
establish whether its professional inquisitors saw the process against
Olavide as the symbolic weapon that would allow the institution
to recover its old free-wheeling autonomy at a stroke. But the case
could not have proceeded without the support of the inquisitor
general, a churchman known for his moderate views, and the
authorization of Charles III, who was kept fully informed at every
stage. Whether Bertran endorsed prosecution of Olavide out of
conviction or timidity before the pressure of his fellow councillors
is unclear.70 It is equally uncertain whether the king allowed the
case to continue because his own deeply held piety took offense
at the charges against Olavide or because he dared not halt a
process into which the Inquisition threw all its energy. But if the
Inquisition believed that its spectacular initiative would substan¬
tially alter the royal policy designed to curb its excesses, it was
mistaken. Until the end of his reign Charles III continued his
policy of controlling the Inquisition through the appointment of
moderate, reform-minded ecclesiastics to the post of inquisitor
general.
    If the Inquisition failed to capitalize on the Olavide affair as it
had hoped, neither did it face extinction. Cautious to a fault,
Charles III never seriously considered suppression. The historic
relationship between the Crown and the Inquisition, which for
centuries contributed to the latter’s power, was weakened during




                          AVE MARIA UNIVERSITY
  36                               The Organization of the Church




Charles’s rule. However, following the king’s death in 1788 and
the outbreak of revolution in France during the summer of 1789,
the old relationship was reestablished, albeit incompletely and in
somewhat different form.
   The ministers of Charles IV (1788-1808), particularly the conde
de Floridablanca, believed that the French Revolution threatened
the survival of absolute monarchy in Spain. Measures were taken
to isolate the kingdom from the contagion of revolutionary ideas.
The censoring powers of the Inquisition (to which royal officials
had often objected in the past) offered the government a useful
tool in the effort to keep the nation free of subversive opinion.
In 1789 the Spanish ambassador to France advised Floridablanca
that “a secret agreement between the Court and the Inquisition
would be the best way of rooting out this evil.”71 In 1792 the
government and the inquisitor general worked out an arrange¬
ment designed not merely to censor suspected works but to ex¬
clude them entirely from the country through rigorous inspection
at the frontiers and confiscation of books that had already made
their way into the peninsula. The Inquisition threw itself into the
task with unaccustomed fervor. Of all the condemnations of French
books between 1747 and 1807, fully one-half fell in the fifteen
years after the outbreak of the French Revolution. The Inquisition
had always condemned books judged dangerous to faith and mor¬
als, but its censoring role took on a more immediately political
purpose as it sought, according to the inquisitor general, to re¬
move “the difficulties which could result from the introduction of
seditious books and papers.”72
   The revived alliance between an absolute monarchy concerned
with its survival and the Inquisition did not mean that the latter
abandoned its traditional preoccupation with questions of doc¬
trine and morality, nor did it mean that the State gave the In¬
quisition a blank check to do as it wished. The tension characterizing
relations between the government and the Holy Tribunal in the
reign of Charles III did not disappear. By the end of the 1790’s
influential ministers were advocating outright suppression as a
result of new conflicts with the Inquisition. But by then the eco¬
nomic and political difficulties of the monarchy prevented decisive
action. The ambiguous relationship between the Crown and the
    The Organization of the Church                              37




Inquisition would continue until the end of the Old Regime, be¬
cause each institution believed that it needed the support of the
other.



   After the skirmishing of the 1760’s, the organization, personnel,
and institutions of the Caroline Church followed the road that
the king and his ministers had marked for it. The weaknesses
inherent in the structure of the eighteenth-century Church were
disguised by the reforming ecclesiastical policies of the Crown.
An ineffectual papacy offered no serious opposition to the State’s
direction of the Church, and a carefully selected hierarchy ac¬
cepted, sometimes quietly, sometimes enthusiastically, its assigned
role. The Church, in its relations with the Crown and in its internal
life, achieved an equilibrium of sorts. The period 1750-1790 was
one of prosperity, stability, and general calm for the ecclesiastical
establishment. But in the end the equilibrium of the Caroline
Church proved no firmer than that of absolute monarchy.
2    /   Prosperity and Religion, 1750-1790



   In the four decades after 1750 the Spanish Church enjoyed for
the last time a flourishing material prosperity built upon its cen¬
turies-old accumulation of resources. As the wealthiest single in¬
stitution in the kingdom, the Church received the immense revenues
necessary to maintain a public cult of extraordinary variety and
splendor and to play a comprehensive social role in an agrarian
society dominated by ecclesiastical and noble privilege. The end
of that society was not far off, and with its disintegration the
Church found itself deprived for the flrst time in centuries of the
economic base that had sustained it as one of the nation’s fun¬
damental social and religious institutions.



Wealth

   The complex organization of the eighteenth-century Church
rested on solid economic foundations. Through legacies, dona¬
tions, and purchase it had acquired over time the land and ag¬
ricultural income necessary for the prosperity of any institution,
secular or religious, within a predominantly agrarian society. The
variety of the Church’s resources, the complexities of land tenure
in the Old Regime, and the drain on ecclesiastical funds created
by fiscal obligations toward the State make an accurate assessment
of the extent of clerical wealth difficult. There are, however, par¬
tial indications of the immense weight of the Church in the Span¬
ish economy of the time. The only cadastral survey of the period,
carried out in 1749 at the order of the marques de Ensenada,
provides information on the extent of clerical wealth in the twenty-
two provinces of Castile.1 The figures provided are, of course,
approximate given the extraordinary difficulty of gathering the
data, but they show beyond any doubt that the Church was one
of the kingdom’s most powerful economic institutions.


    38
         Prosperity and Religion                                              39




     Ownership of land provided the foundation of ecclesiastical
  wealth. The Church possessed nearly 15 percent of the property
  in the provinces surveyed, although there were significant regional
  variations (Table 1). The proportion of land owned by clerical
  institutions ranged from a low of 5 percent in Galicia to a high
  of 27 percent in Zamora. The presence of the Church as land-
  owner was strongest south of the Guadarrama Mountains, and in
  Salamanca, Palencia, and Zamora in the north. In the provinces
  of Toledo, La Mancha, Extremadura, and Seville the Church pos¬
  sessed at least 20 percent of the land. In the provinces of Old
  Castile and Leon its share of land was somewhat less but still



Table 1. Ecclesiastical land holdings in the provinces of Castile, 1749.

                                                    Ecclesiastical Land Holdings
Province                                                       (percent)

Avila                                                            19.8
Burgos                                                           16.7
Cordoba                                                          20.0
Cuenca                                                           10.0
Extremadura                                                      21.0
Galicia                                                           5.1
Granada                                                          17.2
Guadalajara                                                      13.0
Jaen                                                             15.5
La Mancha                                                        27.2
Leon                                                             12.5
Madrid (less city)                                               17.6
Murcia                                                           12.3
Palencia                                                         20.2
Salamanca                                                        26.5
Segovia                                                          13.1
Seville                                                          20.0
Soria                                                             9.4
Toledo                                                           20.2
Toro                                                             18.7
Valladolid                                                       19.1
Zamora                                                           27.3

   Source: “Resumen general de tierras, poblacion, ganados y colmenas de Leon
y Castilla a mediados del siglo XVIII, segun las averiguaciones realizadas para
el establecimiento de la unica contribucion,” in Antonio Matilla Tascon, La unica
contribucion y el Catastro de Ensenada (Madrid, 1947), appendix 34.
  40                                                Prosperity and Religion




substantial, with the exception of Soria, where its holdings were
less than 10 percent.
   The extent of ecclesiastical land holding, however, tells only
part of the story. The share of agricultural wealth the Church
derived from its property was significantly higher than the pro¬
portion of land it owned. Thus, in Cordoba, where ecclesiastical
institutions owned 20 percent of the land, the Church received
nearly 30 percent of the agricultural income. This pattern pre¬
vailed in the other provinces as well, with the exception of Galicia,
where the share of agricultural income received by the clergy was
only marginally higher than the extent of its property. The higher
profitability of ecclesiastical holdings reflected their superior qual¬
ity, as in Cordoba, where Church lands were concentrated in the
fertile areas bordering the Guadalquivir River rather than in the
poorer hill districts.
    Income from agricultural property furnished the Church with
its largest single source of revenue (Table 2). Ecclesiastical insti-



Table 2. Principal sources of annual income (secular and ecclesiastical) in Castile,
1749 (in reales).

                                                                       Percentage
Source of Income     Ecclesiastical      Secular          Total       Ecclesiastical

Agricultural
  holdings           259,654,410       816,666,797    1,076,321,207       24.10
Tithes,
  urban property,
  etc.                136,419,500      169,958,177      306,377,677       44.50
Loans
  (censos)             26,852,134       11,446,924       38,299,058       70.10
Industry                9,858,758      475,368,519      485,227,277         0.02
Livestock              21,934,599      197,922,217      219,856,816         9.90

Total                454,719,401      1,671,362,634 2,126,082,035         21.40

   Source: “Resumen general de tierras, poblacion, ganados y colmenas de Leon
y Castilla a mediados del siglo XVIII, segun las averiguaciones realizadas para
el establecimiento de la unica contribution,” in Antonio Matilla Tascon, La unica
contribution y el Catastro de Ensenada (Madrid, 1947), 535-43. The ecclesiastical
figures include both the income of church institutions and that from the clergy’s
personal property. The latter forms approximately 15 percent of the clerical
total.
     Prosperity and Religion                                   41




tutions received nearly one-quarter of Castile’s annual income
from the agrarian sector of the economy. In addition, the Church
received nearly one-half of the income generated by tithe pay¬
ments, certain dues, and the rents produced by urban property.
And clerical institutions held a quasi-monopoly over a kind of
mortgage loan (censo) that was the single most important credit
instrument for the upper classes. The Church also profited from
the ownership of 2,725,842 head of grazing stock. Only in the
area of manufacturing and artisan income did its share decline
to insignificant proportions. The Church, then, received just over
one-fifth of all the income produced by the leading sectors of the
economy, according to the Ensenada survey. It enjoyed other
sources of income as well, such as the stipends paid for funerals,
marriages, and baptisms. In a detailed study of the eighteenth-
century economy, Gonzalo Anes estimated that the total income
of the Church in Castile may have reached the substantial pro¬
portion of nearly 28 percent of the gross income of all economic
sectors.2
    Not all these funds remained in the coffers of ecclesiastical
institutions; the Church paid dearly for its privileged relationship
with the State. The king had the right to claim part of the income
 of benefices falling under royal patronage through a variety of
 special levies, such as the mesada and the media annata, and he
 received the income from all benefices left vacant by the death or
 transfer of the incumbent (espolios y vacantes). Other royal imposts
 on the Church (the excusado and subsidio) augmented the State’s
 treasury, as did the Crown’s right to receive two-ninths of the
 amount collected from tithe payments. The tithe was further
 diminished in certain regions, such as Galicia, by the claims of
 secular patrons of parish churches. And there were other
 encumbrances on ecclesiastical income. Clerical institutions often
 paid pensions to fulhll the terms of wills leaving property to the
 Church, and they frequently had to pay the interest on loans
 assumed to finance building and decoration. It is not possible to
 estimate with precision the amount lost through these obligations.
 But what remained provided a generous income.
    The eighteenth-century Church was urban, but the source of
 its wealth lay in the countryside. Ecclesiastical institutions pos¬
 sessed the kingdom’s best land, whether in the fertile Campina of
  42                                      Prosperity and Religion




Andalusia or in the productive cereal lands around Estella and
Tafalla in distant Navarra. Religious institutions, however, placed
only a small proportion of their property under direct cultivation.
In the diocese of Segovia, for example, the Church cultivated only
26 percent of its land directly; the remainder it leased to private
individuals under a variety of rental arrangements.3 Some culti¬
vation was carried on by monasteries and convents, which were
often models of efficient agricultural management. Laborde thus
admired the fields worked by the Carthusian monks of La Con¬
cepcion near Zaragoza, where “the most attentive cultivation as¬
sists its various products.”4 More impressive still were the gardens
of the Carmelites of Ugarte in Vizcaya, where the friars reclaimed
saline marshlands and planted 6,000 fruit trees deemed so pre¬
cious that a unanimous vote of the community was required to
cut a single one.5
   The land of the Church, whether tilled directly or rented, did
not take the form of large estates, even in Andalusia, the region
of the great latifundia. Institutions rented out their property as
they received it, whether through purchase or donation—hence
the fragmented character of Church property throughout the
kingdom. Only 59 of the 107 religious communities possessing
land in the province of Seville had more than 200 hectares. The
secular and regular clergy between them possessed more than
5,000 separate pieces of rural property, which were rented in turn
to small tenants. Nearly 64 percent of those leasing Church land
in the region rented plots of less than 15 hectares, though there
were a few larger holdings of 125 hectares or more.6 This pattern
of distribution also prevailed elsewhere. The richest friary in To¬
ledo, the Dominican house of San Pedro Martir, received its in¬
come from numerous small farms rented out in the surrounding
countryside.7 Though chapters and monasteries tried to squeeze
as much as possible from their property, the scattered nature of
individual institutions’ holdings prevented the Church from tak¬
ing full advantage of its landed wealth. Institutions maintained a
small army of administrators, lawyers, and rent collectors to keep
their numerous tenants in line, but economies of scale were not
possible.
    Religious institutions also possessed real estate in urban areas.
In cities where the Church dominated economic life, these hold-
     Prosperity and Religion                                  43




ings could reach impressive proportions, as in Toledo, where the
cathedral chapter, monasteries, and convents controlled more than
half the city’s building stock.8 The proportion was not as high in
larger towns, but it was still substantial. In Madrid the Hermandad
del Refugio, the capital’s most important charitable organization
operating under religious auspices, financed its activity from the
rents paid by tenants in the forty buildings it owned in the city.
But urban real estate was less lucrative than rural property. The
necessity of making costly repairs to shoddily constructed build¬
ings as well as the obligation of royal taxes on city property re¬
duced the return on investment to a modest 1—2 percent.9 Few
ecclesiastical institutions were willing to pour money into the im¬
provement of their urban real estate. The return was too low, and
it was next to impossible to evict tenants who fell behind in their
rents. Religious institutions served, indeed, as eighteenth-century
versions of modern slum landlords. The houses they possessed in
Madrid late in the century, four- and five-story tenements in poor
condition, were let out at low rents to servants, washerwomen,
small tradesmen, and unskilled artisans. The return on another
important source of Church income, the interest on loans (censos)
made to individuals and institutions who could offer suitable col¬
lateral, was also modest, from 2.5 to 3.0 percent during the late
eighteenth century.
   Revenues produced by real estate, the tithe, censos, and other
sources can be classified as Church income, but this simply means
the accumulated income of a multitude of ecclesiastical institu¬
tions—bishoprics, monasteries, convents, and charitable and pious
associations. Clerical wealth was fragmented in its origins and its
distribution. The income of the kingdom’s bishops at the end of
the Old Regime thus ranged from the 34,534 reales received an¬
nually by the prelate of Ibiza to the 3,550,874 reales of the arch¬
bishop of Toledo. The distribution of episcopal revenues reveals
the disparities of income not only over the nation as a whole but
within its ecclesiastical provinces (Map 1). The archbishop of San¬
tiago’s revenues of 1,527,176 reales made him one of the wealthi¬
est prelates of the Spanish Church; his neighbor in Tuy, with
97,343 reales, was one of the poorest. With the exception of the
dioceses of Coria in Extremadura, Guadix in Andalusia, and Se-
gorbe in the Levante, the poorest sees were concentrated in Galicia
                                                                                  44




                                                                                  Prosperity and Religion


1. Distribution of income among the dioceses of the Spanish Church, circa 1800.
        Prosperity and Religion                                          45




(save for Santiago), Aragon (save for Zaragoza), and rural Cata¬
lonia. In coastal Catalonia, southern Old Castile, New Castile,
Andalusia, and the Levante the bishops enjoyed comfortable in¬
comes; the wealthiest were the archbishops of Toledo, Seville, and
Valencia.
   In spite of the imbalanced distribution of resources, the drain
on ecclesiastical income created by financial obligations, and the
problems arising from the fragmented character of religious prop¬
erty, there is no doubt that the Church was wealthy and that it
maintained its economic position as the century progressed. A
steady rise in agricultural prices, especially of wheat and other
grains, in the years after 1750 benehted those owning property
and receiving payments in kind. Christian Hermann’s study of
the income of episcopal households in the Kingdom of Castile
shows that their revenues, derived largely from payments made
in grain, approximately doubled between the 1730’s and the 1780’s
(Table 3). The growth of income was less spectacular in the dioceses
of the Crown of Aragon, save for the bishopric of Barcelona,
which saw its revenues increase more than twofold between 1765
and 1738.10 The strong inflationary pressures of the later eigh¬
teenth century diminished the real value of these increases, but,


Table 3. Index of revenues of episcopal households by diocese, 1729—1793 (base
= 1).
Diocese                           1729-1758                        1777-1793

Toledo                               1.18                               —


Seville                              1.35                              2.66
Santiago                             1.37                              2.85
Malaga                               1.38                              2.75
Cuenca                               1.15                              2.15
Sigiienza                            1.04                               —
Granada                              1.20                              2.26
Cordoba                              1.19                              2.07
Cartagena                            1.64                              3.04
Jaen                                 0.89                              1.90

   Source: Christian Hermann, “Les revenus des eveques espagnols au dix-huiteme
siecle (1650—1830),” Melanges de la Casa de Velazquez, 10 (1974), 188.
  46                                      Prosperity and Religion




as an institution receiving large payments in the form of agricul¬
tural products, the Church clearly held its own in a time of rapid
inflation.
   Ecclesiastical institutions did not neglect the opportunities for
profit produced by the rising demand for agricultural products.
Numerous complaints came before the Council of Castile begin¬
ning in the 1760’s from tenants of cathedral chapters who sud¬
denly found their rents doubled and tripled. There is evidence
that some chapters were not above using their control over grain
stocks accumulated through the tithe to create artificial shortages
and drive up prices. In 1754 the chapter of Toledo, the wealthiest
in the kingdom, deliberately maintained the price of bread at a
high level even though it held grain supplies that could have
lowered the cost for the local population.11 Moreover, the pressure
some ecclesiastical institutions exerted on the peasantry through
high prices for agricultural products was in addition to the tithe.
   Analysis of Church income according to the Ensenada survey
in terms of the per capita contribution of the population shows
that every resident of the twenty-two provinces of Castile paid—
albeit in theory—more than 90,000 reales a year to ecclesiastical
institutions. There were some regional variations, but the differ¬
ences among the provinces were not extreme. Only Galicia, with
an average annual payment per capita of 17,000 reales, fell sig¬
nificantly outside the pattern. The economic weight of the Church
bore down on the population of the Kingdom of Castile with
relentless uniformity.


Consumption and Charity

   The disproportionate share of the national income received by
ecclesiastical institutions allowed the eighteenth-century Church
the luxury of sustaining its archaic organization. In spite of the
limited religious knowledge of much of the urban and rural pop¬
ulation, no thought was given to efficient use of resources for
pastoral needs. Apart from the funds used for physical sustenance
of the clergy, religious institutions spent heavily on building, dec¬
oration, and what was euphemistically called the “splendor of the
cult.”
  The eighteenth century witnessed an orgy of construction by
     Prosperity and Religion                                       47




the secular and regular clergy. Some were massive projects, such
as the great Baroque facade of the basilica of Santiago de Com¬
postela, built between 1738 and 1747, and the cathedral of Cadiz,
begun in 1722. Wealthy monasteries engaged in a round of new
construction or reconstruction of old facilities. The Benedictines
of Silos spent a fortune between 1751 and 1792 constructing a
new church to replace the Romanesque edifice that had served
them for centuries. The Carthusians of Santa Maria de las Cuevas
of Seville at midcentury engaged the most famous craftsmen of
the city to cast a statue of their founder, Saint Bruno, in silver
and poured thousands of reales into the purchase of vestments
and other liturgical ornaments. Enough remained for the mon¬
astery to spend more than 100,000 reales in the same year on
repairs to a stable, a brick kiln, and a barn for livestock. At Santiago
de Compostela the cathedral chapter let out a three-year contract
to a local silversmith for a hundred candelabra. Chapters, espe¬
cially in the wealthier sees, maintained large staffs for the conduct
of services. The cathedral of Toledo employed 237 canons, chap¬
lains, choristers, musicians, and vergers; its staff was second only
to Saint Peter’s in Rome. Even in Avila, a relatively poor diocese,
services in the cathedral were conducted by a staff of more than
a hundred.
    These generous expenditures made the Church one of the king¬
dom’s most important consumers. The preindustrial character of
the economy, with isolated pockets of commerce and manufac¬
turing and an expanding population straining the productive lim¬
its of agriculture, enhanced the Church’s economic role in regions
and cities with many religious institutions. The constant drain of
revenues from countryside to town created by its organization
enhanced the eighteenth-century Church’s urban nature and made
ecclesiastical institutions indispensable to local economies. In the
great cathedral towns of Santiago, Toledo, Tarragona, and Seville,
where industrial and commercial activity was poorly developed,
communities of silversmiths, roofers, carpenters, candlemakers,
and musicians depended on the employment the Church pro¬
vided. Ecclesiastical spending did not flow into the productive
channels of an emerging capitalist economy, but it made the Church
a major force in a traditional economic system that would be
transformed only with the industrial revolution of the nineteenth
  48                                       Prosperity and Religion




century. The Church, moreover, obtained important social ben¬
efits from its economic function within an Old Regime society. By
providing employment the Church contributed to the mainte¬
nance of social equilibrium in the cities and to the survival of its
own privileged situation.
   The employment provided by bishops, chapters, and monas¬
teries could not, however, resolve a more fundamental problem—
a large population living either in poverty or on its margins. Mas¬
sive poverty arose from the weaknesses of an economy without
sufficient agricultural and industrial productivity to provide for
a constantly expanding population. Though some estimate that
as much as 50 percent of the population was unable to afford
food, shelter, and clothing, accurate assessment is difficult. But
the poor were everywhere, and their presence in both town and
country was an accepted fact of life. The archbishop of Granada
on one occasion in the 1780’s counted more than 5,000 paupers
waiting at his palace gates for the daily distribution of alms. Joseph
Townsend complained of “the multitude of beggars, infesting
every street” in Malaga and the swarms of mendicants roaming
Alicante in search of assistance.12 In Burgos beggars circulating
through the cathedral constantly upset the decorum of services
with their loud appeals for alms.
   Responsibility for poor relief fell primarily upon the Church,
which accepted and fulhlled the obligation with reasonable suc¬
cess. Theology and tradition dictated that the Church should come
to the aid of the impoverished. A vague social contract existed
between the Church and the poor. The former realized that it
was under “rigorous obligation,” according to the archbishop of
Santiago, to help the impoverished; the latter turned naturally to
the Church in times of distress.13 Moreover, the Church enjoyed
surplus revenues, which made it the only social institution capable
of relieving popular misery.
   Churchmen did not speak of relief or public assistance; they
spoke of charity—the distribution of alms to save the souls of
donor and recipient alike.14 The charity dispensed by religious
institutions, however, was very different from the assistance such
groups would provide later. Few religious orders worked directly
in hospitals, orphanages, and asylums. Charitable activity in the
modern sense was not an important concern of either the secular
     Prosperity and Religion                                   49




or regular clergy and certainly not of the orders of nuns. Hospitals
and other charitable institutions operated under ecclesiastical aus¬
pices, but religious personnel rarely worked directly with the un¬
fortunate. The charity of the Old Regime Church was more diffuse
and yet more comprehensive. Bishops, cathedral chapters, mon¬
asteries, and convents distributed food, clothing, and alms—in
many cases on a daily basis—to all who appeared in need.
   How much the Church spent on its charitable efforts is impos¬
sible to say given the fragmented way assistance was distributed.
But there are indications that during the eighteenth century the
charitable expenditures of religious institutions reached an un¬
precedented level. The income of Madrid’s most important char¬
itable group, the Hermandad del Refugio, was six times greater
in 1800 than in 1700, a significant increase, even taking into ac¬
count the effect of inflation.15 In the 1780’s the bishop of Malaga
spent half his annual income on the poor. And an eighteenth-
century account of the charity of the archbishop of Granada de¬
clared: “besides private pensions to families and occasional relief
in seasons of distress, he provides nurses in the country for 440
orphans and deserted children; he sends poor patients to the hot
baths at the distance of eight leagues from Granada, where he
actually maintains fourscore, and he daily distributes bread to the
poor, who assemble at his doors ... In this bounty he is imitated
by forty convents at which are distributed bread and broth without
discrimination to all who present themselves.”16
   Charity served an important purpose during the periodic agrar¬
ian crises, which exposed both urban and rural populations to
widespread misery and hunger. In 1768—69, for example, heavy
rains destroyed the harvest in Galicia and drove the price of grain
to unheard-of levels; thousands of starving peasants filled San¬
tiago de Compostela and besieged the city’s civil and ecclesiastical
authorities for help. A relief effort organized by Archbishop Rajoy
y Losada and the cathedral chapter raised funds to buy eighteen
shiploads of grain in southern France for sale at a subsidized price
to the needy.17 In Seville, during the tenure of Archbishop Del¬
gado y Venegas (1776—1781), the diocesan authorities distributed
23,000 bushels of wheat to peasants whose crops had been ruined
by hailstones.
   The Church fulfilled a similar function in the towns, where no
  50                                       Prosperity and Religion




scene was more familiar than crowds of the indigent clustered
around monastery and convent doors awaiting the daily ration of
bread and soup. In urban areas pious associations operating under
religious auspices served as primitive versions of modern social
agencies. In Madrid the Hermandad de San Fernando gathered
beggars from the streets and furnished them with food and lodg¬
ing; the Congregation of San Felipe Neri, composed of prominent
members of the nobility, sent its members to work every Sunday
in the city’s charity hospitals; and the Hermandad del Refugio
assisted more than 5,000 people a year between 1750 and 1785
with weekly gifts of alms.18 The Church thus provided eighteenth-
century society with a critical mechanism for the preservation of
social peace. The vagaries of agriculture subject to frequent nat¬
ural disasters, the limitations on production imposed by the in¬
equalities of the land tenure system, and the inadequate base of
urban economies meant that unemployment, distress, and in some
cases hunger were widespread at all times and massive in periods
of economic dislocation. Moreover, these crises occurred with
greater frequency as the century progressed.
   The Church’s charitable role should not be exaggerated. The
assistance distributed by religious institutions was massive, but it
was not well organized or particularly efficient. The fragmentation
of charitable undertakings among a host of institutions prevented
development of a coordinated scheme of relief for the poor. At
best, the Church provided temporary assistance to the numerous
victims of the agrarian economy of the Old Regime. Left by the
State with the principal responsibility for poor relief, the Church
was able to fulhll its charitable role effectively, even in the midst
of recurring agrarian crises after 1748. It did so because rising
agricultural prices paradoxically increased the numbers of those
requiring assistance while endowing religious institutions with the
revenues to provide that help. Ecclesiastical prosperity between
1750 and 1790 allowed the Church to fulhll the terms of its social
contract with the poor. Vast sums were spent on buildings, statues,
vestments, and decoration, but the Church understood that these
expenditures must be accompanied by generous spending on the
impoverished. The vague social contract or trade-off between the
Church and the poor served the interests of the religious estab¬
lishment. The charity practiced by ecclesiastical institutions but-
     Prosperity and Religion                                     51




tressed the Church’s popularity in an age when the social equilibrium
of a traditional society was still sheltered from revolutionary at¬
tack.
    The Old Regime Church contributed far less of its resources
to education than to charity. A well-developed network of Church
schools teaching large numbers of pupils would not appear until
the mid and late nineteenth century. Local primary schools were
numerous enough in the eighteenth century (more than 11,000
in 1797), but they taught few students (approximately 400,000)
relative to the total population of 10 million.19 The Church or,
more precisely, the religious orders paid little attention to ele¬
mentary instruction in country villages. Education in the coun¬
tryside was left in the hands of ill-paid and badly trained
schoolmasters, who were given a miserable wage by local author¬
ities.20 Instruction in the catechism figured prominently in the
curriculum of primary schools, but with little effect, to judge by
clerical complaints about the religious ignorance of the rural pop¬
ulation. The urban character of the Church meant that its insti¬
tutional role in education was greater in the cities and larger towns,
primarily because of the instruction offered by the religious or¬
ders. Secondary education, in the sense of institutions devoted
exclusively to the training of youth (in contrast to the large number
of monastery schools designed to educate religious but also open
to lay students), was dominated by the Jesuits until their expulsion
in 1767. With more than a hundred schools, the Jesuits concen¬
trated their efforts on the education of local elites through in¬
struction that emphasized the Greek, Roman, and Spanish classics
as well as literary and social graces. The Seminario de Nobles of
Barcelona, serving the Catalan elite, maintained two dancing mas¬
ters, three music teachers, and a fencing instructor in addition to
an academic staff. And its students were warned that “they must
not develop friendships . . . with boys of low birth.”21
   The expulsion of the Jesuits gave the State an opportunity to
reform secondary education. New schools, such as the Reales Es-
tudios de San Isidro and the Asturian Institute established by
Gaspar de Jovellanos at Gijon in 1794, developed more secular
and utilitarian curricula, although the teaching of religion re¬
mained an important concern. A similar reform of university ed¬
ucation ordered by Charles III instilled new life into a curriculum
  52                                       Prosperity and Religion




previously dominated by a narrow and pedantic scholasticism.
Charles III moved Spanish higher education in a more secular
direction, but even the reformers regarded religious studies as
necessary for the secondary school and university student. More¬
over, the religious orders continued to dominate secondary ed¬
ucation and were still represented on university faculties as the
eighteenth century drew to a close.22


Religions Practice and Reform

   The real strength of the Church lay in its spiritual hold over
the population, from aristocrat to peasant. That Spain was Cath¬
olic in the eighteenth century, at least in a formal sense, seems
beyond dispute. The Inquisition, performing its appointed task
with methodical efficiency, had eliminated religious dissent. To
the casual observer, the influence of the Church appeared to per¬
vade every aspect of life. Peasants and city dwellers set their sched¬
ules on the tolling of church bells; religious processions filled city
streets on the great festivals of the Christian year. The basic stages
of human existence—birth, marriage, and death—were sur¬
rounded by sacramental ritual. Even the pattern of leisure activity
was determined by more than ninety holy days, on which the
population did not have to work.
   Yet the religious condition of Bourbon Spain is not easily es¬
tablished. To assess the quality of faith among a population di¬
vided by deep economic, social, regional, and cultural differences
presents serious difficulties, which students of the question have
never successfully resolved. It is at least possible, thanks to the
efforts of Gabriel Le Bras and other religious sociologists, to use
the incidence of practice—attendance at Sunday Mass, reception
of the sacraments, and so on—as an external sign of conformity
to the Church’s authority. What the level of observance says about
the depth of religious commitment is less certain.
   The few studies of this kind available for the Old Regime tend
to confirm the image of a Catholic Spain at the level of practice
and minimal doctrinal knowledge. A study of evangelical efforts
in New Castile between 1540 and 1650 shows that the Church was
remarkably successful in spreading a basic but highly limited body
of religious knowledge and commitment to practice among the
     Prosperity and Religion                                    53




population as a whole.23 Based on the responses of witnesses in
inquisitorial cases who were asked if they attended Mass regularly,
confessed, and knew certain prayers—such as the Our Father and
the Hail Mary—the study discovered a high degree of religious
ignorance in 1540; only 40 percent of those questioned could meet
the minimal requirements of the Church. By the early seventeenth
century this situation had changed dramatically. Nearly all those
examined knew the basic prayers, attended Sunday Mass, and
confessed regularly. There were, to be sure, some exceptions,
generally itinerant tradesmen and artisans, and it is clear that this
limited religious knowledge was based on rote learning rather
than catechetical techniques concerned with the meaning of doc¬
trine. In spite of these limitations, however, the Christianization
of the urban and rural populations in New Castile had made
significant progress.
   The limited information available for the eighteenth century
suggests a continuation of this pattern. Pastoral registers record¬
ing baptisms in Bilbao between 1724 and 1734 show that the
ceremony took place in the vast majority of cases on the day of
birth—a clear sign of Christianization according to students of
religious practice. Surveys of the Easter Communion obligation
in the Catalan town of Vimbodi in 1772 and in the diocese of
Pamplona in 1801 again indicate that observance was virtually
universal in these rural districts, and a catechetical campaign
launched in the middle of the eighteenth century on Mallorca—
a region known then and now for its Catholicism—shows that
most of the population at least knew the Our Father, the Hail
Mary, and the Ten Commandments.24
   The limited research carried out on religious practice in the
eighteenth century does not permit an accurate map of obser¬
vance. It is likely that external conformity to the basic require¬
ments of the Church was generally high, but it is not yet possible
to perceive the regional and local variations that would make such
a map meaningful, particularly in light of the massive nineteenth-
century dechristianization in the industrial cities and the southern
countryside. There were already in the eighteenth century ten¬
uous signs of urban disaffection with the Church—an early in¬
dication of the dechristianizing process according to religious
sociologists. The English traveler Joseph Townsend noted that in
  54                                       Prosperity and Religion




the Madrid of the 1780’s the resourceful were able to avoid the
Easter Communion obligation by purchasing the certificates of
compliance demanded by the ecclesiastical authorities.25 The cer¬
tificates, bearing no names or signatures, were easily obtained in
the churches, often by prostitutes, who did a brisk trade selling
them to the public.
    There were also signs of decline among the pious associations
or confraternities characteristic of urban social life during the Old
Regime. In Seville, a city known for the number, wealth, and
splendor of its associations, the decline is evident after 1750. The
Confraternity of the Holy Trinity, founded in 1535, ceased par¬
ticipation in the great Holy Week processions for which Seville
was celebrated after 1778, and it was by no means the only ex¬
ample.26 In Gerona toward the close of the century, the city au¬
thorities found so few artisan guilds willing to join religious
processions that they had to order them to appear. Even so, many
guild members fled to the countryside rather than take their tra¬
ditional places in the line of march.27 The decline of the urban
confraternity, although related to many causes—including gov¬
ernment hostility and the deterioration of the guilds’ economic
and social position—signaled, however weakly, a diminution of
religious fervor in the cities.
    It would be premature to suggest that later dechristianization
in an age of rapid city expansion bore any relation to the few
signs of dissatisfaction observed at the end of the eighteenth cen¬
tury, but it may have had some relation to the growth of urban
anticlericalism clearly evident by the revolution of 1820. It would
also be useful to know whether the dechristianization of the An¬
dalusian countryside in the nineteenth century emerged only as
a result of the harsh economic and social conditions prevailing
among the landless of the time, or whether it had deeper historic
roots. It is at least possible that the glaring inadequacy of parish
organization in the south prevented the kind of effective Chris¬
tianization that had taken root in New Castile by 1650. As late as
 1958 and after two decades of intense proselytizing activity in an
age of easy communications, the Church in Franco’s Spain still
found itself unable to minister to isolated villages in Andalusia,
where the clergy scarcely ever appeared.28 The history of de¬
christianization in Spain, however, save for the very recent past,
     Prosperity and Religion                                      55




has not yet been satisfactorily explored. The examination of its
historic origins awaits further research.
   The means the Church used to convey its message to a diverse
and often unlettered population were many. There were, first of
all, the official rituals marking the distinct phases of the liturgical
year and the celebration of the sacraments. The “splendor of the
cult” occupied a far more important place in the ceremonial life
of the Church than would be thought appropriate in a later age.
In wealthy cathedral towns liturgical ceremony reached heights
of costly magnihcence difficult to imagine today. The cathedral
of Seville, for example, contained eighty-two altars on which 500
Masses were said daily. In the course of a single year the cathedral
consumed 24,195 liters of wine, 10,040 liters of oil, and 11,500
kilograms of wax. Its extensive body of canons were assisted by
twenty chanters, two vergers, a master of ceremonies and assistant,
thirty-six choirboys, twenty-three musicians, several music direc¬
tors, nineteen chaplains, and several other salaried priests for a
total staff of 235.29
   The celebrations held in the city in 1761 to mark the procla¬
mation of Mary of the Immaculate Conception as official patroness
of Spain testified to the grandeur of Baroque ritual. For three
days and nights the bells of more than a hundred churches rang
out at regular intervals as thousands of candles illuminated reli¬
gious buildings. A great banner embroidered in gold and silver
hung from the famous tower of the cathedral, the Giralda, while
4,000 candles lit its Gothic facade. On the final day the pious
associations of the city, accompanied by choirs, musical bands, and
hundreds of priests, moved in solemn procession through the
streets carrying a statue of the Virgin with a priceless crown of
gold and jewels.
   The “splendor of the cult” attained its greatest magnihcence in
cathedrals and churches able to pay for it, which meant for all
practical purposes that it was conhned to the cities, although wealthy
monasteries in the countryside also indulged their expensive li¬
turgical tastes. The clergy suffered no embarrassment over con¬
ducting costly services, which were seen as eloquent testimony to
God’s power and majesty.
   A second manifestation of urban religious sentiment used by
the Church served a more didactic purpose. The processions held
  56                                                 Prosperity and Religion




on certain great feast days of the liturgical year, particularly dur¬
ing Holy Week and on Corpus Christi, attempted to evoke intense
religious feeling among participants and spectators alike through
visual effect. During Holy Week, for example, statues of ex¬
traordinary realism depicting the Passion and death of Christ
conveyed a message of repentance and resurrection that even the
most unlettered onlooker could comprehend. The statues were
carried by members of religious confraternities. Some bore heavy
crosses; others, belonging to the “confraternities of blood,” scourged
themselves as the procession followed its route. Joseph Townsend
has left a detailed description of such a procession in Barcelona
during the 1780’s:

The last supper of Christ with his disciples, the treachery of Judas, attended by
priests, together with the guards, the flagellation, the crucifixion, the taking
from the cross, the anointing of the body and the burial . . . were represented
by images large as life, placed in proper order on lofty stages . . . This procession
was preceded by Roman centurions clothed in their proper armour, and the
soldiers of the garrison brought up the rear. The intermediate space was oc¬
cupied by the groups of images above described, attended by eight hundred
burgesses clothed in black buckram, with flowing trains, each carrying a flambeau
in his hand. Besides these one hundred and four score penitents engaged my
attention . . . These were followed by twenty others, who walked in the proces¬
sion bare footed, dragging heavy chains, and bearing large crosses on their
shoulders . . . immediately after them followed the sacred corpse, placed in a
glass coffin, and attended by twenty-five priests. Near the body a well chosen
band with hautboys, clarinets, French horns and flutes, played the softest and
most solemn music.30

    Not all processions took on this somber, penitential character.
 Their atmosphere varied with the feast being celebrated and often
 with the region. Processions marking the feast of Corpus Christi
 in June were marked by solemnity combined with the airs of a
joyous secular festival. In Seville and Valencia the processions of
 the Corpus were led by papier-mache giants dancing about the
 streets to the vast amusement of the populace, who coined nick¬
 names for their favorite figures. The procession held in Valencia
 to celebrate the city’s patron saint, Vincent Ferrer, blurred still more
 the distinction between the religious and the secular. Eight mobile
 stages, on which were presented scenes from the lives of the Virgin
 and the local patron, were attended by an astonishing array of
 picturesque figures: “two men dressed as Moorish kings, with
     Prosperity and Religion                                    57




great beards and royal crowns on their heads, carried banners, a
great number of children, some dressed as shepherds, others as
sailors, others in a costume which cannot be defined, shook their
tambourines, dancing and leaping about, twelve men dressed in
white, played the castanets ... a great number of others, in white
breeches and waistcoats with red mantles on their shoulders, masks
upon their faces and long white sticks in their hands, repeatedly
throwing the stick[s] into the air.”31
   The elaborate processions characteristic of urban Catholicism
conveyed knowledge of the faith simply and directly to the pop¬
ulation, and for this reason the Church valued them. But there
were aspects of these manifestations of faith that did not sit well
with the ecclesiastical and civil authorities. Public flagellation in
the processions of Holy Week was seen as an example of excessive
zeal that distracted onlookers from contemplating the sacred scenes
passing before their eyes. Clerical pressure finally persuaded the
State to forbid the practice in 1780, although the prohibition was
often ignored. And to many churchmen the joyful character of
other processions seemed to have degenerated into simple fri¬
volity. In 1768 the bishop of Ciudad Rodrigo was so incensed by
the funds a local confraternity spent on bullfights, comedies, meals,
and refreshments during the feast of Corpus Christi that he called
on the government to initiate a general inquiry into the condition
of pious associations in the entire kingdom.32
   The vitality of the procession as an instrument of religious
instruction depended in no small measure on the participation of
the numerous confraternities abounding in every Spanish city.
Seville and its region contained more than a thousand, according
to a survey of the early 1770’s.33 Although such pious associations
were common in medieval Europe, the period of their greatest
growth in Spain corresponded to the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. Every confraternity served a religious purpose, for each
took the name of the Lord, the Virgin, or a saint and conducted
services in its patron’s honor during the year. But there were
several distinct types of associations. Some were primarily chari¬
table institutions engaged in the distribution of poor relief; others
served as mutual benefit associations providing minimal health,
unemployment, and burial assistance to their members. The vast
majority, however, were devotional in purpose; in simple terms
  58                                       Prosperity and Religion




this meant that the brothers gathered each year, often at a special
altar in a particular church, to celebrate the feast day of their
patron. Membership in the confraternities reflected the social di¬
visions of an urban hierarchical society. The groups were open
in theory to all displaying a sincere religious intent. In fact, entry
into confraternities was often restricted. Thus, in Seville noblemen
belonged to an association of their own, as did lawyers; artisans
gathered in confraternities according to their craft. Each associ¬
ation also possessed a distinctive and colorful form of dress for
use in public ceremonies.
   In spite of their importance in urban social and religious life,
the Spanish confraternities have not received the attention they
deserve. There is no doubt, however, that they provided the Church
with a useful means of focusing religious sentiment among the
population of the cities. The pious associations were not primarily
ecclesiastical institutions. Each conducted its internal affairs with
considerable autonomy, subject only to occasional inspection by
the civil and religious authorities. The corporate autonomy of the
confraternities, particularly in financial matters, attracted the un¬
favorable attention of the reforming president of the Council of
Castile between 1766 and 1773, the conde de Aranda. Supported
by enlightened opinion at court, Aranda ordered a general inquiry
into the state of pious associations because of allegations that many
were wasting their funds on frivolous pursuits or costly religious
services.
   The brunt of Aranda’s attack fell not on associations actively
engaged in charitable work but on those with a primarily devo¬
tional purpose. Reports received from the kingdom’s intendants
confirmed the central government’s view that something had to
be done about the devotional associations. The intendant of Se¬
govia reported to Madrid that in his province the officers of con¬
fraternities spent lavishly from their own pockets and often ruined
themselves in the process because they wished “to outdo their
predecessors in extravagance.” The intendant also observed that
confraternities in his region often competed with one another to
see which could place the greatest number of candles on the altars
of their respective patrons. This competition, he complained, re¬
sulted from “pure vanity” and cost immense sums to import wax
     Prosperity and Religion                                     59




from outside the country.34 The offensive of the enlightened State
against the confraternities did not lead to their suppression. But
Aranda was close to the truth in his perception that many had
strayed from their devotional origins to become little more than
social clubs. The clear signs of decadence by the late eighteenth
century indicated that this traditional form of religious life was
gradually losing its vigor.
   The eighteenth-century Church did not devote to pastoral work
the resources it consumed maintaining the “splendor of the cult.”
Reforming bishops, such as Climent of Barcelona and Bertran of
Salamanca, exalted the parish as the fundamental institution of
popular evangelization. Upon the parish priest fell the primary
obligation of providing “a continuous explanation of Christian
doctrine and of the maxims of the Gospel” to the faithful.35 These
high hopes could not be easily fulfilled, however. The imbalanced
distribution of ecclesiastical wealth and the uneven quality of the
parochial clergy raised serious obstacles to a vital parish life. Com¬
plaints of parish priests who failed to instruct their congregations
even through the Sunday sermon were common. The Jesuit
missionary Father Pedro de Calatayud noted that the clergy of
rural parishes in the districts where he traveled “neither in¬
structed . . . nor drew poor countrymen from their crass igno¬
rance.” Decades later the vicar of Alcaraz in the Toledo archdiocese
declared that “although the number of secular priests is excessive,
the Christian people do not receive the spiritual nourishment
which is necessary.”36 Bishop Bertran of Salamanca felt called
upon to remind his parish priests that the obligation to provide
instruction in doctrine was not simply “a work of supererogation
and a simple counsel” but “a specific and important obligation.”37
Father Calatayud also attacked the assumption he declared was
widespread among the parochial clergy in towns with monasteries
that they had no need to preach because that task was being carried
out by monks and friars.
   This is not to say, though, that parish priests everywhere ne¬
glected their responsibilities. There is evidence that in dioceses
where a town’s parochial clergy formed communities of cabildos
parroquiales roughly similar in structure to cathedral chapters, the
degree of pastoral responsibility was considerably higher. The
  60                                       Prosperity and Religion



success of Francisco Celma, the model parish priest of Catf, arose
in part from the vitality of the parochial community to which he
had belonged almost since the day of his ordination.
   The parish could not fulfill the important role envisaged by its
promoters for the simple reason that it did not enjoy a religious
monopoly, save in the smallest villages. Church law required that
the faithful be baptized in their parish and that parishioners re¬
ceive the obligatory Easter Communion in their local church. The
bishops expected congregations to appear for the principal Sun¬
day Mass to receive instruction through the sermon. But there
was nothing to prevent the residents of a town from attending
Mass at the churches and chapels of the religious orders and
confraternities or, in the case of the wealthy urban elite, in the
oratories established in private houses. Cardinal de Borbon of
Toledo complained that the competition of the latter, where re¬
ligious instruction was rarely given, seriously undermined the par¬
ish: “Oratories have been converted into parishes by the indiscreet
devout. They are the cause of much Christian doctrine being
ignored, for their supporters look with indifference if not with
disaffection upon the parishes.”38 In a society abounding in churches,
chapels, and oratories, the task of elaborating effective pastoral
techniques that touched the lives of all parishioners was difficult
if not impossible.
   To encourage popular piety the Church also relied on a variety
of religious devotions. The eighteenth century formed a transi¬
tional period in the history of devotional practice. Alongside the
traditional processions and religious services of the confraterni¬
ties—with their emphasis on external, collective manifestations of
pious sentiment—there existed another world of devotion stress¬
ing the individual and his relationship to God. This formal piety,
unlike certain religious practices that escaped clerical control, was
stimulated and directed by the Church itself. The great propa¬
gators of the new devotions in Europe—notably Saint Alphonsus
Liguori (1696-1787) and Saint Francis de Sales (1567-1622)—
emphasized the spiritual, the personal, and the affective in their
devotions. From the viewpoint of the Church these devotions,
untouched by popular excesses, provided an effective technique
for spreading religion among the masses without the dangers
inherent in totally free expressions of personal piety.
    Prosperity and Religion                                    61




    The new devotions originated outside Spain, particularly in
late-seventeenth-century France, but they soon spread to the Ibe¬
rian Peninsula. The cult of the Sacred Heart, which enjoyed wide
popularity in France through the efforts of Saint Francis de Sales,
Saint John Eudes (1601-1680), and Saint Margaret Alacoque (1647-
 1690), was introduced into Spain by the Jesuit Bernardo de Hoyos
in the early 1730’s.39 The new cult stressed the love of Christ for
men and the necessity of personal spiritual development. It dif¬
fered in many ways from the collective, community-oriented piety
promoted by the traditional religious confraternities. The Jesuits
made the cult of the Sacred Heart their own and worked to spread
it throughout the kingdom.40 Jesuit missionary preachers founded
pious associations known as congregations in the parishes they vis¬
ited. The congregations, unlike the older confraternities, devoted
themselves entirely to spiritual exercises. Thus, the congregation
founded in 1746 at Deva in the Basque Provinces met several
times a year exclusively for devotions to improve the spiritual
condition of its members.41 Although devotion to the Sacred Heart
fell under suspicion with the attack on the Jesuits in the 1760’s,
it received wide support from bishops during the 1740’s and 1750’s
and became the most important new cult in the kingdom. There
were others, such as that of the Virgin as Shepherdess of Souls
promoted by the Capuchins, but none equaled the Sacred Heart
in popularity.
    The spread of the new devotions strengthened the faith among
a population that at best commanded a minimal knowledge of
doctrine. The Church also sought to encourage a basic knowledge
of the faith through the distribution of the old but still popular
catechisms of Gaspar Astete (1599) and Jeronimo Ripalda (1618).
Their effectiveness was limited both by widespread illiteracy, par¬
ticularly in the countryside, and by the absence of any catechetical
technique save the simple memorization of questions and answers.
Although some bishops introduced the more sophisticated cate¬
chism of the abbe Fleury, the Spanish Church failed to produce
an effective catechetical text of its own until the mid nineteenth
century.
  An abundant literature devoted to more detailed exposition of
doctrine and the norms of moral conduct served the kingdom’s
educated minority. Works such as La familia regulada by the Fran-
  62                                        Prosperity and Religion




ciscan Antonio Arbiol, or the Promptuario de la theologia moral by
the Dominican Francisco Larraga, were to be found in even the
smallest personal libraries.42 These guides to the proper Christian
life were meant for those with a certain degree of formal edu¬
cation. The texts were invariably long; Arbiol wrote nearly 600
pages; Larraga outdid him with more than 700. Moreover, each
page contained appropriate scriptural citations and references to
theologians and philosophers, which only the formally educated
could comprehend. These works were not directed to the culti¬
vation of spirituality within the great tradition of Spanish religious
writing. They were rather manuals emphasizing in a narrow, le¬
galistic way the obligations of the Christian and the diverse means
by which he might fall from the standard demanded of him. In
a general discussion of the sacraments, for example, Larraga de¬
voted more pages to penance (86) and matrimony (48) than to
the equally important sacraments of the Eucharist (23) and bap¬
tism (18). And for good measure he allotted nearly 200 pages to
the numerous sins that could be committed against each of the
Ten Commandments.
    The norms of conduct expected of the faithful according to
this literature reflected secular as well as religious concerns. Within
the framework of an absolute monarchy and a hierarchical society
dominated by the nobility, it is not surprising that authors em¬
phasized the obligation of submission and obedience to authority.
In his explanation of the fourth commandment Larraga stressed
that respect and obedience must be rendered not only to one’s
parents but also to the ecclesiastical authorities and “to the other
superiors who govern us,” from kings to teachers. This duty was
further linked to the structure of society, for each individual was
bound to observe “the obligations which correspond to his estate
and occupation.”43
    The manuals devoted considerable attention to family life. Here
too the principle of authority was rigorously upheld. Antonio
Arbiol affirmed that “Married women are subject to their
spouses . . . because the man is the head of his wife just as Christ
Our Lord is the head of his Holy Church; . . . thus, women must
be subjected to their husbands in all things.”44 Larraga observed
that the obligation of obedience to the father was so great within
a family that “the son who does not obey his father in matters
     Prosperity and Religion                                    63




involving the government of the household and good customs
commits a mortal sin.”45 On the terrain of morality the manuals
took pains to underline the numerous temptations of the flesh
threatening the stability of the family. This literature, however,
was not exclusively concerned with questions of personal morality.
The manuals invariably exhorted their readers to practice charity
both to save their souls and to preserve a hierarchical society,
which was thought to rest on organic links based on the mutual
obligations of all its members, from king to beggar. How deeply
these manuals influenced their readers is impossible to say. Their
continued popularity throughout the eighteenth century does in¬
dicate that they were being read by a wide public and that they
continued to be useful as a means of communicating knowledge
of doctrine and the Church’s teaching on moral questions.
   An instrument of popular evangelization was also used by the
Church with some success. Since the Council of Trent the Church
throughout Europe had relied on groups of priests, drawn gen¬
erally from the regular clergy, to revive religious fervor and spread
knowledge of basic doctrine through the preaching of popular
missions. The missions of the seventeenth and eighteenth cen¬
turies produced a number of extraordinary figures, whose instinc¬
tive grasp of mass psychology and communications techniques
made them highly effective preachers. Saint Vincent de Paul (1580—
 1660) and Saint John Eudes in France, and Saint Alphonsus Ligu-
ori and Saint Leonard of Port Maurice (1676-1751) in Italy were
among the most successful practitioners of the missionary art.46
The Spanish Church produced no one of similar magnitude and
organizational skills, but the missions of the eighteenth century
allowed it to instill a measure of religious fervor in a population
whose pastoral needs were often badly served.
   Missionary campaigns carried on by the orders, especially the
Jesuits and the Capuchins, were examples of mass evangelization
that any modern preacher might envy. The missionaries, chosen
for their oratorical skills, planned their activities with care and
precision, first arousing local interest with placards, leaflets, and
processions and then conducting the services of the mission itself.
Continuing from eight to fifteen days, a successful mission pro¬
duced an atmosphere of terror, fervor, and repentance that could
combine into an explosive emotional mixture capable of sweeping
  64                                      Prosperity and Religion




an entire town into a wave of religious exaltation. Thus, Father
Pedro de Calatayud, the most famous missionary of midcentury,
placed his congregations in a receptive mood through an opening
sermon on the words of the prophet Jonas, “In Forty Days Nin¬
eveh will be destroyed,” as he painted a dark picture of the fate
awaiting unrepentant sinners.47 The missionaries, who regarded
themselves as prophets preaching in a wilderness of moral cor¬
ruption, spared their hearers nothing in their threatening ser¬
mons. The Capuchin Fray Diego de Cadiz, described by a
contemporary biographer as “a prophet whose lips were purified
with a burning coal,” preached with such emotion against come¬
dies in Antequera toward the end of the century that those present
shouted spontaneously that they “hated them and wished to de¬
stroy them,” which, indeed, they did at the close of the service by
pulling the local theater to the ground.48 The emotions aroused
by Fray Diego, the most popular missionary preacher of the late
eighteenth century, were so intense that he had to be protected
against the zeal of his admirers, who would have pulled his clerical
habit to shreds in the hope of obtaining a remembrance and future
relic.
   The missions were not simply occasional outbursts of religious
enthusiasm. The missionaries stressed communication of the basic
truths of the faith in their sermons and endeavored to establish
devotions and pious associations where they preached in the hope
of preserving the fervor they had aroused. The Capuchins, for
example, identified with devotion to the Stations of the Cross,
spread the cult throughout the kingdom; the Jesuits established
congregations of the Sacred Heart during their missions. Some
clerics doubted the effectiveness of the missions, and in one sense
they were correct. Though carried on across the length of Spain,
the missions did not bring about a religious transformation. But
they may well have allowed the Church to hold its own, particularly
in those areas, such as Andalusia, where parish structures were
inadequate. The most significant pastoral contribution of the re¬
ligious orders to the eighteenth-century Church lay in the small
groups of missionary clergy who fanned out through rural Spain
in these periodic evangelical campaigns. Thus, the Capuchins alone
preached missions in more than a hundred villages in the arch¬
diocese of Toledo during 1769 and 1770.49
     Prosperity and Religion                                    65




   Civil and ecclesiastical authorities regarded the missions as nec¬
essary for the preservation of the faith, and hence gave them
moral and financial support. But the mentality of the missionaries,
the emotional fervor with which they preached, and their vision
of the world as a morass of moral corruption existed uneasily with
the emphasis of the royal Church’s elite on personal spiritual
development and simple liturgical practice. The missionaries were
if nothing else combative; they believed that their task, in the
words of Fray Diego de Cadiz, was “to expose libertines face to
face.”50 The State, moreover, found it difficult to control the
preaching of the missionaries, who exercised a freedom of expres¬
sion not found elsewhere in the Church. Fray Diego frequently
found himself in difficulty with the authorities for sermons touch¬
ing raw official nerves.51 In Ecija he upbraided a congregation of
stunned municipal councillors for their corruption and neglect of
the needs of the poor; his attack on the economic society of Zara¬
goza came perilously close to an unheard-of questioning of royal
policy.
   The concerns of the missionaries, fervor and repentance, were
far removed from the preoccupations of many bishops with the
State’s projects to modernize Spain. Regarding the material world
as corrupt, the missionaries essentially rejected the secular role
assigned to the Church by the Bourbon monarchy. Father Pedro
de Calatayud thus attacked the commercial practices of the mer¬
chant guild (consulado) of Bilbao, a body highly regarded by the
State, reproaching it for exploiting the peasantry in a dispute that
the Council of Castile finally had to resolve.52 The missionary
mentality, based on a theocratic vision of human existence, would
in the end make the missions an instrument of conservative re¬
action to the reforms promoted by the secular authorities.
   Alongside the official liturgy and clerically promoted devotions
existed a variegated and luxuriant array of religious practices that
largely escaped from ecclesiastical scrutiny. What has been called
“popular” or, most recently, “local” religion is difficult to define
within the context of formal religious belief. In a recent study
William Christian argued that these relatively uncontrolled reli¬
gious customs, observed by all levels of society from peasants to
aristocrats in both town and country, arose from the deep need
for assurance when confronted with the fragility of human exis-
  66                                       Prosperity and Religion




tence. Death, disease, locusts, droughts, storms, and a variety of
other natural catastrophes gave to all an immediate sense of the
precariousness of the human condition and of life itself.53 Thus
there developed a world of vows, shrines, and religious images
designed not to win the grace necessary for salvation, of which
the theologians spoke, but to protect man from earthly disaster,
bring him good fortune in this life, and secure intercessors for
the life hereafter. Religion at this level served as a protective
talisman, for it rested on a bargain or contract with God, the
Blessed Virgin, and the saints—all of whom were represented in
immediate and physical terms by sacred places, statues, and in¬
tercessory rites.
   Whether “popular” or “local” religion existed as autonomously
from the official liturgy of the Church as Christian suggested is
not entirely clear. It is at least certain that during the eighteenth
century this varied and often extravagant form of religious prac¬
tice persisted. The prospect or fact of natural disasters invariably
resulted in intercessory rites designed to win the support of par¬
ticular saints whose efforts were thought to be efficacious in spe¬
cific calamities. In 1758, when locusts and ants invaded the fields
of Andalusia, the head of Saint Gregory Ostiense, who was es¬
teemed for protection against natural plagues, was brought to the
afflicted regions from distant Pamplona. Representatives from
country towns filled the cathedral of Seville to venerate the sacred
relic and to obtain holy water that had touched the head to sprinkle
on their fields as they returned home. Natural disasters frequently
involved the formal participation of the clergy. When the earth¬
quake of 1755 struck Seville, thousands rushed to the streets
“pleading for confession and mercy” as the clergy organized
processions through the city to persuade the population to repent
in that dark hour which seemed to herald the end of the world.54
Other intercessory rites were designed to win good fortune, as in
Oviedo when thousands of peasants from the surrounding coun¬
tryside filled the cathedral each year for the exposition of a holy
shroud imprinted with the image of Christ. The congregation
raised baskets filled with bread and cakes as high as possible when
the shroud was raised “in the full persuasion that these cakes, thus
exposed, would acquire virtue to cure or to alleviate all diseases.”55
     Prosperity and Religion                                     67




   There was little liturgical purity and even less decorum in the
many examples of popular piety that have come to light. In Tala-
vera de la Reina, for example, a high Mass was sung in a local
church on each of the nine days before Christmas for the town’s
children. They arrived “furnished with whistles ... As soon as the
Mass begins the vaulted roofs of the church resound with the
strong and shrill sound of innumerable whistles; they accompany
the singing of the priests with this disorderly noise at the elevation
of the host, the communion and the prayers at the end of Mass.”56
Such picturesque activities received grudging tolerance from the
Church. But the clergy viewed others with open hostility. The
festival of Las Mondas held in Talavera after Easter evoked in¬
tense clerical opposition. In a ceremony with origins in a remote
and perhaps pagan past, peasants moved through the town car¬
rying “corn, wine, oil, fruits and flowers” and leading “lambs,
sheep, as^es, and hogs” into the church itself, where they were
offered to the Virgin.57 In 1802 the clergy of the town declared
that they would not attend the ceremony, because in their judg¬
ment it was entirely profane and unsuitable from a religious point
of view.58 The authorities of the archdiocese of Toledo took even
more vigorous action to eradicate a custom that had taken root
in the town of Torrijos. At vespers on the feast of San Gil, a bull
was introduced into the parish church and led to the altar as the
priest intoned the Magnificat. The animal was then taken to the
local hospital so patients could kiss the rope with which it had
been led and benefit from its miraculous qualities.59
   The Church had long sought to eradicate or at least control
religious practices it judged superstitious. These efforts became
particularly intense after 1750. Bishop Felipe Bertran of Sala¬
manca summed up the attitude of many of his episcopal colleagues
before customs he believed were irregular and damaging to the
faith. Such practices, he held, were “so opposed to the simplicity
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ” that they threatened “to suffocate
the seed of true and healthy doctrine.”60 Ironically, bishops such
as Bertran and Climent, esteemed for their commitment to pas¬
toral work and numbered among the most enlightened members
of the hierarchy, attacked “popular” religion most vigorously. In
Barcelona Climent worked tirelessly against such practices, as did
  68                                        Prosperity and Religion




Francisco Lorenzana in Toledo, Francisco Fabian y Fuero in Va¬
lencia, and Bertran in Salamanca.61 These efforts, however, did
not succeed in eliminating customs that had taken deep root in
patterns of local sociability. Climent’s admonitions to parish priests
of churches where “the most horrible abuses” were thought to be
taking place reveal that the clergy was not particularly willing to
reform practices that continued to enjoy wide popularity.62
   The opposition of bishops, such as Bertran and Climent, to
“superstitious” practices was one aspect of the reforming move¬
ment that swept through the elite of the Spanish Church after
1750. The reformers were committed to a purity of belief and
practice incompatible with both the extravagances of the official
cult and the practices of “popular” religion. The reformers, al¬
though labeled Jansenists by their enemies and enlightened Cath¬
olics by recent historiographical admirers, did not constitute a
tightly knit group committed to the realization of a specific pro¬
gram of change within the Church.63 The movement rested on
its supporters’ perception that religious ignorance, superstition,
and moral corruption made Spain Catholic in name only, and that
the problems facing the Church required critical examination and
rational solutions.
   The intellectual origins of the reforming movement were ex¬
tremely diverse, ranging from the Gallican French reformers, no¬
tably Bishop Bossuet and the abbe Claude Fleury, to the Tuscan
reformers gathered around the bishop of Pistoia in the 1780’s,
Scipione de’ Ricci. Many of the ecclesiastics identified with reform
in Spain also looked back to the brilliant humanistic culture that
had developed in the sixteenth century under the influence of
Erasmus. The concerns of these “new humanists” of the eigh¬
teenth century were similar to those of their sixteenth-century
predecessors, whose aversion to the narrow world of scholasticism
and religious formalism they shared. The reforming movement
in the eighteenth-century Church was, moreover, a significant
intellectual phenomenon in the secular culture of the period. Fig¬
ures such as Francisco Perez Bayer, the biblical scholar; Enrique
Florez, the archivist and historian; and others testify to the solidity
of its cultural foundations.
   The reforming movement, although it did not rest on a co-
     Prosperity and Religion                                      69




herent set of philosophical and theological assumptions, did at¬
tempt to study the obvious problems the Spanish Church faced
with a rational and humanistic spirit. The emphasis was not doc¬
trinal but practical and pastoral, hence the wide differences of
opinion that often separated the reformers on specific issues. But
between 1750 and 1785 suggestions for reform in certain areas
received wide support from bishops such as Climent of Barcelona,
Bertran of Salamanca, Lorenzana of Toledo, and Fabian y Fuero
of Valencia as well as from canons in cathedral chapters and priests
holding university chairs. Those pressing for reform formed a
minority of the clerical elite, but their education, intellectual gifts,
and religious commitment produced a vital ecclesiastical culture
that the Spanish Church would never know again.
   The issues attracting the reformers’ attention in the three dec¬
ades after 1750 were primarily pastoral. Prelates, such as Bertran
in Salamanca, painfully aware of the intellectual poverty of their
clergy, worked actively to promote the foundation of new semi¬
naries and urged their priests to participate in periodic spiritual
conferences. The extravagant language and theatrical gestures
common to Spanish preaching until the middle of the century
evoked severe disapproval. The preacher holding a lantern in
front of him in a darkened church to search for lost souls, carrying
chains that he clattered to illustrate the fate of the damned, flut¬
tering a white handkerchief to hold the attention of his congre¬
gation, or using elaborate language incomprehensible to most of
his hearers—all were censured by the reformers. Particularly in
the 1770’s and 1780’s, a reform designed to make sacred oratory
more effective through simplicity of language and gesture was
encouraged.64
   The great enemy of the reformers was what they saw as su¬
perstition and the vast range of popular devotions, which they
believed hindered the faithful from practicing their religion with
the purity the reformers felt it merited. Through their influence
 public flagellation and dancing giants in processions were forbid¬
den, and other devotions were subjected to scrutiny. The reform¬
ers had little use for the new piety embodied in cults such as the
Sacred Heart and the Virgin as Shepherdess of Souls. After the
expulsion of the Jesuits, reforming bishops worked actively to
  70                                      Prosperity and Religion




eliminate devotion to the Sacred Heart from their dioceses on the
grounds that it detracted from the central object of liturgical
devotion, the Mass.65 The reformers also encouraged biblical study,
and in 1783 the Inquisition took the unheard-of step of allowing
the Bible to be read in the vernacular. This initiative led to the
first complete Castilian translation of the Bible, published in Va¬
lencia between 1790 and 1793 by Father Felipe Scio. The ideal
of the reforming movement was an intellectual religion in which
the faithful understood the truths of the faith, practiced the lit¬
urgy with simplicity, and advanced on the road of personal spir¬
itual perfection.
   The success of ecclesiastical reform was closely tied to the sup¬
port it received from the State during the reign of Charles III. A
close alliance existed between reform and regalism; clerics inter¬
ested in promoting change endorsed expanding royal interven¬
tion in Church affairs even at the level of discipline. Reforming
ecclesiastics welcomed the expulsion of the Jesuits, the royal foun¬
dation of new seminaries, and the intervention of public author¬
ities against the excesses of “popular” religion. Moreover, the
interests of reformers and royal bureaucrats coincided on such
issues as the power of the bishops in relation to the papacy and
episcopal control over the religious orders. But some clerics, Bishop
Climent of Barcelona, for example, feared the consequences of
excessive state control. In general, however, reforming church¬
men looked to the State because they perceived that it alone had
the authority necessary to grapple with both Rome and deeply
entrenched religious custom.
    Between 1750 and 1780 the reforming movement, with its pri¬
marily pastoral and educational emphasis, received broad support
from the elite of the Caroline Church. During the 1780’s, however,
reform began to move toward a more vigorous program, which
envisaged deeper changes within the Church and a sharper chal¬
lenge to papal authority on the issue of episcopal jurisdiction. The
emergence of a new generation of reformers, who exemplified
the vitality of ecclesiastical culture in the 1770’s and 1780’s, and
the influence of the ambitious reforms proclaimed in Italy by the
diocesan Synod of Pistoia in 1786 with the support of Bishop Ricci
and the grand duke of Tuscany, opened new perspectives of
     Prosperity and Religion                                      71




change.66 The new reformers—Archdeacon Palafox of Cuenca;
Antonio Tavira, later a leading reforming bishop; Juan Antonio
Llorente, canon of Valencia; and others—viewed the problems of
the Church in sharper focus and pressed for change more ag¬
gressively. Their hostility to the religious orders and the Inquisi¬
tion as well as their determination to reduce papal authority over
the Spanish Church were viewed with sympathy by the royal bu¬
reaucracy. But by 1790 a growing number of clerics, including
some of the old reformers of the 1760’s and 1770’s, regarded
these views with increasing suspicion.
   Whether in its first or second phase, the reforming movement
of the second half of the eighteenth century shows that a cultural
vitality closely tied to the intellectual currents of the age was pres¬
ent in a select minority of the ecclesiastical establishment. How
deeply reform penetrated through the dense mass of ritual and
popular religious practices is another question. Even the real
achievements of the reformers aroused opposition within the
Church. The decision to allow the reading of the Bible in the
vernacular, for example, was not greeted with uniform enthusi¬
asm by the clergy. “It is unbelievable,” said Canon Joaquin Lo¬
renzo Villanueva, one of the advocates of the reform, that such
“fears and suspicions” should persist among priests who were
afraid of the faithful reading the Scriptures.67
   The reforming movement failed to produce the transformation
its supporters so ardently preached. Although the post-Vatican
II world might view many of the reforming initiatives of the eigh¬
teenth century with approval, the emphases on a more personal,
interior religion, on knowledge of religious truth, and on the
practice of a simple liturgy had little appeal to a population for
whom religion meant emotion and ceremony and rested at a pop¬
ular level on a mixture of faith and folk belief.
   The reforming movement, moreover, emerged from a small,
cultivated clerical elite that owed its very existence to the unjust
and imbalanced structure of the eighteenth-century Church. The
reformers advocated improving the financial lot of the lowly par¬
ish priest, and in general wished to see a reduction in the number
of monks and friars, but they did not propose any fundamental
restructuring of the Church to redistribute personnel and re-
  72                                       Prosperity and Religion




sources and allow it to fulfill its pastoral mission more effectively.
The chasm between the reforming ideal and the social reality of
the Church was never bridged.



   The appeal of traditional forms of religious expression and the
organizational weaknesses of the Church prevented the religious
transformation of the kingdom. The Spanish Church arrived at
the end of the reign of Charles III (1788) in the same form and
with the same problems that had troubled it thirty years before.
Its weaknesses—organizational, material, and pastoral—had been
held in check by the quality of civil and ecclesiastical leadership
and by economic circumstances, which had made the four decades
after 1750 perhaps the most prosperous in the history of the
Spanish Church. But in the 1790’s Church and monarchy alike
entered a new and dangerous phase, which over the long term
would transform their places within the social and political order.
3   /   The First Shocks, 1790—1814



   The final decade of the eighteenth century opened a long pe¬
riod of institutional decline for the Spanish Church that would
end in the destruction of its wealth and the constraint of its priv¬
ileges. By 1840 the Church had lost much of its property and was
on the verge of losing the remainder; it had seen the suppression
of the male religious orders and faced a challenge to its interpre¬
tation of social standards and culture from the nineteenth-century
secularizing revolution associated with the rise of liberalism. Be¬
tween 1790 and 1808 the Church saw the erosion of its financial
resources and its once comfortable relationship with absolute
monarchy. It confronted for the first time the danger posed by
revolutionary upheaval, and after 1808 it reeled under the ma¬
terial devastation that followed Napoleon’s intervention in Span¬
ish affairs. The convocation of Spain’s first modern parliamentary
assembly, which met at Cadiz between 1810 and 1813, effectively
ended the absolute monarchy of the eighteenth century. The Cortes
of Cadiz introduced a new political order involving limitations on
royal power, the creation of parliamentary institutions, and the
undermining of social privilege, which the vast majority of church¬
men refused to accept. There thus began the long conflict between
liberalism and the Church that characterized Spain’s nineteenth-
century history. The struggle was not easily resolved, for the Church
emerged from the crisis that began in 1790 with a harsh and
theocratic view of its role in society. This would make its task of
adaptation to new social and political forces impossible over the
short term and painful over the long.



The Church in Crisis, 1790—1808

  The opening of the period of crisis coincided with the death
of Charles III, the most successful architect of the royal Church,


                                                                73
  74                                            The First Shocks




in 1788 and the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789. Both
events would alter the course of Spanish history and exercise a
profound effect on the Church’s future.
   The succession of Charles IV (1788-1808) did not promise
substantial changes in the enlightened absolute monarchy that had
functioned well during the preceding reign. The new king’s lim¬
ited intellectual abilities, indecisiveness, and preference for car¬
pentry and collecting clocks over attending to the affairs of the
State were already well known. But the ministers of Charles III,
particularly the conde de Floridablanca, were kept in office, and
there was every indication that government policy would continue
on the same course. The ministerial stability so prized by Charles
III did not long survive the court intrigues and vacillating char¬
acter of the new king, however. Few periods in Spain’s history
demanded a higher degree of statesmanship than the two tur¬
bulent decades following the accession of Charles IV. The emer¬
gence of an aggressive France during the Revolutionary and
Napoleonic periods and a series of economic and fiscal crises, each
deeper than the preceding, would have tested the survival of the
kingdom’s absolute monarchy in the best of circumstances. The
direction of the State after 1792, however, rested with a royal
favorite, a young ex-officer who had won the favor of the king
and queen. Manuel de Godoy would dominate the kingdom’s
political history, except during the years 1797-1800 until 1808.
Although often ridiculed by his political opponents and blamed
for Spain’s subsequent misfortunes, Godoy possessed a quick if
superficial intelligence that reflected the traditional concerns of
the eighteenth-century royal bureaucrat. His policies were not
very different from his predecessors’, although his opportunism,
lack of administrative experience, and personal greed impeded
the continuation of effective reforms.
    The policy of the State toward the Church appeared to follow
the pattern laid down by Charles III. But the royal Church that
fit so smoothly into the projects of enlightened absolutism began
to suffer new strains. The prudence that had allowed Charles III
to convert the Church into a useful instrument of royal policy
yielded to more direct pressures under Charles IV. Favoritism in
ecclesiastical appointments, though not lacking during the pre-
     The First Shocks                                              75




ceding reign, became widespread, as evidenced by the large num¬
ber of bishops appointed from Godoy’s native Extremadura and
by his open intervention on behalf of certain monks and friars
for appointment as national vicars of their orders.1 Although Godoy
continued the practice of extending state authority over every
aspect of ecclesiastical life, it became clear that the ideal of a royal
Church took second place to manipulation designed to buttress
the favorite’s personal power.
   Prelates daring to question the State’s expanding hold over the
Church, particularly in ecclesiastical finances, aroused a violent
reaction in Madrid. Symbolic of the changing character of the
relationship between Throne and Altar was the fate of a model
bishop of the royal Church of Charles III. Francisco Fabian y
Fuero as bishop of Puebla (Mexico) had supported the expulsion
of the Jesuits before returning to Spain as archbishop of Valencia
in 1773. Few prelates of the Caroline Church came closer to the
ideal of the cultured, public-spirited, and pastoral bishop. None
was more loyal to Charles Ill’s design for the Church. But even
the Valencian archbishop became uneasy over the demands of
the Crown in the 1790’s. An order issued in 1795 by the city’s
captain general commanding a group of French Ursulines to leave
Valencia provoked an episcopal protest that prompted the wrath
of Godoy. Accused by the Council of Castile of having acted “in
direct contradiction to the orders of His Majesty,” Fabian y Fuero
was forced to resign his see in the midst of a controversy that
showed how far Madrid was prepared to go to eliminate any
challenge to its authority.2
   Prelates such as Cardinal Lorenzana of Toledo who showed
concern over the direction of state policy were eased from their
positions. Lorenzana, primate of the Spanish Church since 1772
and, like Fabian y Fuero, a model of the enlightened bishop, found
himself expendable as Queen Maria Luisa and Godoy intrigued
at court to secure the appointment to the Toledo archdiocese
of a member of the royal family, the Infante Luis de Borbon,
whose pliable character contrasted with that of the more de¬
termined incumbent. The eliminations of Fabian y Fuero and
Lorenzana did not provoke widespread opposition within the
Church, but they stimulated an undercurrent of dissatisfaction
  76                                             The First Shocks




among clerics who were growing uneasy over the degree of state
control.
   The aggressive ecclesiastical policies of the State after 1792
served Godoy’s political interests; they also won support from
influential groups in the royal bureaucracy that wished to elimi¬
nate remaining papal control over the Spanish Church and rein¬
force the authority of the bishops. The new regalism of the 1790’s
reflected the growing influence in official circles of the program
of ecclesiastical reform developed at the 1786 Synod of Pistoia.
   The departure of Godoy as principal minister in 1797 and the
installation of the most progressive ministry of the century saw
the State attempt to extend its authority over the Church.3 The
new ministry, dominated by enlightened figures such as Gaspar
de Jovellanos and Mariano Luis de Urquijo, did not intend to
undermine the privileged position of the Church, but it believed
that in certain areas of ecclesiastical policy changes were necessary.
The opposition of conservative ecclesiastics prevented the adop¬
tion of significant reforms, but the new government skirmished
with the Inquisition, and in 1799 it issued a controversial decree
ordering that matrimonial dispensations previously accorded by
Rome should be granted by the bishops.4 The decree, another
unilateral extension of royal authority over the Church, aroused
the apprehensions of leading members of the hierarchy. The arch¬
bishops of Santiago, Burgos, Tarragona, and Valencia saw the
beginnings of a schism between Rome and the Spanish Church
in the government’s action. A few prelates, notably Bishop Tavira
of Salamanca and Cardinal de Borbon of Toledo, supported the
State’s initiative because it reinforced the authority of the epis¬
copacy, but others kept silent. Although the attitude of the bishops
revealed divisions within the Church, for the first time in over
four decades a significant minority of the hierarchy began to look
to Rome as a possible counterweight to the pressures of absolute
monarchy.
   The equilibrium between Throne and Altar was also upset dur¬
ing the 1790’s by the royal treasury’s demands on ecclesiastical
revenues. The government of Charles III had appropriated a
considerable portion of clerical wealth for secular purposes, but
the general prosperity of the Church after 1750 allowed eccle-
     The First Shocks                                            77




siastical institutions to bear that financial burden. Although evi¬
dence suggests that revenues, particularly for institutions receiv¬
ing payments in kind, rose during the last decade of the century,
state financial pressure on the Church increased more rapidly.5
The kingdom’s archaic tax structure, inefficient in the best of
circumstances, could not produce the funds required to support
heavy military spending for the war with revolutionary France.
Spain’s precarious international situation in subsequent years meant
a continuing drain on the treasury for military expenses and pushed
the State close to bankruptcy. Moreoever, a series of agrarian
crises in 1793—1794, 1797—1798, and 1803—1805 created an un¬
favorable economic climate.
    Desperate for new sources of revenue, the State turned to a
variety of expedients, including massive issuance of interest-bear¬
ing notes, the vales reales, and forced loans and special levies im¬
posed on civil and ecclesiastical institutions.6 Bishoprics, cathedral
chapters, monasteries, and convents were expected to contribute
generously to the royal treasury. The outbreak of war with France
in 1793 set off a wave of clerical giving. Initially, ecclesiastical
institutions donated generously in a burst of patriotic fervor. In
 1793 the cathedral chapter of Santiago de Compostela offered
 Charles IV a gift of 2.5 million reales; the archbishop of Seville,
Antonio Marcos de Llanos, donated 750,000 reales and promised
 an additional 300,000 a year for the duration of the conflict. But
 the war and state finances went badly, and in 1795 the royal
 treasury had been so reduced that the king ordered cathedral
 chapters throughout Spain to forward gold and silver ornaments
 not being used for liturgical services to the mints of Seville and
Madrid.
  With the coming of peace, disastrous though it was for Spain,
the financial crisis eased. But it revived again in 1798, when the
kingdom found itself at war with England because of the alliance
with France that had been part of the 1795 settlement. Again the
State turned to the Church for assistance, but ecclesiastics re¬
sponded with less enthusiasm. The chapter of Santiago grumbled
that “it had exhausted its possibilities” when it received the request
for funds, but it raised 500,000 reales for the State and donated
an additional 500,000 to the captain general of Galicia for defense
  78                                            The First Shocks




of the region against possible English attack.7 The State also re¬
sorted to more forceful measures. A decree of 1798 ordered ec¬
clesiastical and charitable institutions to invest certain endowments
in a redemption fund for the vales reales in return for 3 percent
annual interest.
   The insatiable appetite of the royal treasury did not directly
threaten Church property, but conservative churchmen became
apprehensive over the State’s intentions. In 1795 Caspar de Jo-
vellanos published, with the support of Godoy, a Report on an
Agrarian Law that was openly hostile to the Church’s accumulation
of property through entail. Although the proposals of Jovellanos
were never put into effect, they aroused the suspicions of the
Inquisition. It was, however, the fiscal exigencies of 1798 that
forced the State into a drastic action, which—though it did not
attack ecclesiastical property—seemed to establish a dangerous
precedent. On September 15, 1798, Charles IV ordered the sale
of the property of charitable institutions, hospitals, orphanages,
and certain pious foundations at public auction. In theory, the
State did not order an expropriation; the funds realized from the
sale were to be deposited in the vales redemption fund in return
for annual interest. In fact, the weakness of royal finances between
 1798 and 1808 meant that the interest was paid sporadically and
often not at all. The sale of charitable property moved slowly at
first, but progressed rapidly from 1805 on and reached substantial
proportions by 1808.
   Implementation of the 1798 decree affected the charitable
function of the Church. The erosion of revenues and sale of the
property of institutions engaged in poor relief diminished re¬
sources just when economic difficulties increased the number of
poor requiring assistance. However, the distribution of charity
under religious auspices did not disappear; monasteries, convents,
chapters, and bishoprics continued to dispense alms, and some
charitable institutions managed to retain their property. But by
 1800 the traditional system of charity was in crisis; the Church
found it more and more difficult to fulfill the terms of its social
contract with the poor. The royal Church survived intact until the
great upheaval produced by the Napoleonic intervention of 1808.
But by 1800 the State’s aggressive regalism and its pressing h-
     The First Shocks                                          79




nancial demands had already strained the once comfortable re¬
lationship between Throne and Altar.


Regalism, Revolution, and Reform, 1790—1808

   The mistrust of state policy felt by some clerics was linked to
the serious divisions emerging within the Church over the char¬
acter and direction of the movement for ecclesiastical reform.
During the 1790’s the reformers, supported by elements of the
state bureaucracy, began to press their demands more vigorously.
Progressive clerics for the first time found themselves well placed
to propagate their views and influence government policy. Figures
sympathetic to the reforming cause—Juan Antonio Llorente, sec¬
retary general of the Inquisition and Bishops Antonio Tavira,
Agustfn Abad y Lasierra, and the latter’s brother, Manuel, who
was appointed inquisitor general in 1792—promoted works en¬
dorsing ecclesiastical reform. Theological and philosophical books
recommended by the Synod of Pistoia found an eager audience
in the universities, where antischolasticism became fashionable.8
The reformers’ intellectual offensive, however, was not matched
by practical achievement. No synod similar to Pistoia was ever
held in Spain, although bishops favoring reform introduced mod¬
est changes into their dioceses.
   Determined opposition to the reforming movement appeared
for the hrst time during the 1790’s. Expressions of support for
organizational changes within the Church, particularly those de¬
signed to improve the status of parish priests and reduce the
influence of the religious orders, aroused the suspicions of some
clerics, who perceived a threat to the Church in its traditional
form. The religious backlash of the 1790’s produced the hrst
assault on the reforming movement, although it did not arise
suddenly or inexplicably.
   Martinez Albiach’s study of the eighteenth-century ecclesiastical
mentality has called attention to the pessimism that gripped the
clergy, especially monks and friars, after 1750.9 Both reformers
and traditionalists started from the same perception—that every¬
where about them existed unbelief and immorality. For both Spain
seemed a more pagan than Christian nation. The reformers of
  80                                             The First Shocks




the 1760’s and 1770’s stressed the necessity of pastoral work to
reeducate Spaniards in the faith. To other clerics the task was not
one of education but of rooting out vices they held responsible
for the moral decay of the kingdom. The restoration of the faith
through pastoral work was secondary to purging what the tradi¬
tionalists called “libertinism,” the indulgence of individual pas¬
sions.10 For the early generation of reformers, the seminary, the
sermon, and the Scriptures were weapons in the struggle to revive
the simple faith of early Christianity; but for traditionalists it was
not reason that mattered but rather an emotional, spiritual awak¬
ening preached with the fire of the Old Testament prophets.
Celebrated missionary preachers of the 1790’s, such as Fray Diego
de Cadiz, saw repentance and moral fervor as the key to a national
religious revival. Many reformers attacked “libertinism” as vig¬
orously as any missionary friar. But there was a fundamental
difference. The reforming movement saw institutional reform as
the only means of transforming the Church so that it might con¬
duct its spiritual mission more effectively. For the traditionalists,
on the other hand, the cause of the Church’s difficulties was not
the corruption of ecclesiastical institutions but the moral perversity
of men.
   This vague sense of impending doom grew more intense and
specific after 1790. The radical course of the French Revolution,
especially after the execution of Louis XVI in January 1793, ap¬
peared to many ecclesiastics as the clear sign of the triumph of
libertinism abroad, which had cast down Throne and Altar, the
bulwarks of a Christian society. The vengeful spirit with which
preachers aroused popular emotions against the French, “impious
enemies of God and country,” represented a new phase of the
traditionalist campaign for moral regeneration at home. The dis¬
asters visited on Spain between 1793 and 1808—military defeat,
a weak and incompetent king dominated by a corrupt favorite,
the round of ever more frequent food shortages culminating in
the great hunger of 1803-1805, the devastating epidemics of yel¬
low fever that swept through southern Spain in 1800—all con¬
firmed some clerics’ vision of a world threatened with destruction
by an impatient deity weary of a nation’s moral dissolution.
   In 1800 when Fray Jose Arnau preached in Valencia, which
was threatened by the epidemic already ravaging Cadiz, he told
     The First Shocks                                          81




his congregation that the cause of their misfortunes was “the lib¬
erty in vice, the unbelief, the arrogance, the vainglory, the cor¬
ruption of youth, the injustice, the intemperance and the
lasciviousness” reigning in the city.11 Arnau’s appeal for moral
reform led by the clergy was echoed by countless preachers during
these years, and it provides one of the keys to understanding the
Church’s role during this period of national disintegration. Spain
could be saved by purging its own corruption under the direction
of the Church. This was not to be a moderate Church, but one
led by priests who regarded themselves as modern prophets charged
with bringing the people of God back to their senses to recreate
a theocratic society in which religious and moral values were par¬
amount. Preachers dwelt on the comparison between Spaniards
and the stiff-necked people of Israel in the Old Testament: “The
Lord has punished you for your sins. Oh Spain! do you not think
that you are as deserving as Judea of punishment? Have you not
provoked the just wrath of the Lord with your sins and crimes?
This is the cause of your calamities and misfortunes.”12
   The prophetic and theocratic tone of traditionalist thought after
 1793 was incompatible with the plans of the ecclesiastical reform¬
ers for a Church more rationally organized and attentive to pas¬
toral responsibilities. For clerics opposed to change, the Church
and its institutions formed the last line of defense against the
forces threatening to overwhelm Christian Spain. But it was an
aggressive and militant spirit, raising as its symbol the spiritual
patron of Catholic Spain’s long struggle against the Moors, Saint
James, that inspired this view of the Church’s role. The battle to
save Christian Spain from what preachers called the “execrable
philosophy” of the eighteenth century and from the secularism
and “libertinism” propagated by the French Revolution was for
many clerics a modern crusade out of which a morally regenerated
Spain would emerge.
   This crusade was directed not only against the enemy without
but increasingly against one within the Church itself. The more
radical direction of the reforming movement and the rising sus¬
picions of conservative ecclesiastics plunged the Church into a
state of civil war. The first skirmishes between reformers and
traditionalists occurred with the promulgation of the papal bull
Auctorem Fidei (1794) which condemned the propositions of the
  82                                             The First Shocks




Synod of Pistoia. The Inquisition had begun an inquiry into the
orthodoxy of the Spanish version of the Synod’s proceedings pub¬
lished in 1788, but it had taken no action and had virtually dropped
its investigation during the tenure of the reforming inquisitor
general Manuel Abad y Lasierra (1792-1794).13 This changed
with the appointment of Cardinal Lorenzana to the inquisitorial
post in 1794. Lorenzana, in spite of his earlier sympathy for as¬
pects of the reforming movement, was hostile to the program of
Pistoia and urged the Council of Castile to approve the bull’s
publication. Opponents of Auctorem Fidei, however, enjoyed enough
influence to prevent its publication in Spain until 1801. What is
significant about the decade-long conflict over the bull is less the
ecclesiastical and bureaucratic infighting than the fact that it moved
the debate over reform to a polemical stage in which hope of
compromise steadily diminished.
   As controversy intensified between 1793 and 1808, it revealed
the full extent of divisions within the Church. For traditionalists,
the survival of a Catholic society depended on the maintenance
of the institutions and privileges of the Church before the threat
of internal and external enemies. For reformers, who also doubted
the ability of Catholic Spain to survive, the Church needed to
adjust its organization and methods to new realities. No differ¬
ences of doctrine separated the opposing forces. Although the
reformers adopted a more moderate attitude, for example on the
question of censorship, they firmly maintained their commitment
to Catholicism as the official religion of the State. It was a sign of
the widening breach within the Church that the traditionalist
counterattack took the form of an indictment charging the ad¬
vocates of change with heresy.
    In 1798 a Spanish translation of an antireform work originally
published in 1789 by an Italian ex-Jesuit, Rocco Bonola appeared;
his League of Modern Theology with Modern Philosophy provided tra¬
ditionalists with the specific line of attack they would use over and
over again during the next three decades. Bonola attacked what
he called the “new theology” as an expression of the rational,
“secular” philosophy of the eighteenth century, which was bent
on the destruction of the Church and the creation of a “natural”
religion based on reason. He declared that the time had come to
expose “the pernicious doctrines appearing in the books of many
     The First Shocks                                            83




modern theologians who are furiously combatting the Catholic
Church under the specious pretext of reforming it.” For Bonola,
clerical advocates of reform were co-conspirators with modern
“philosophers” in a subtle plot to undermine the unity and power
of the Church from within.14 The Church had allowed these cor¬
rupt theories to develop, and although Bonola did not provide a
specific plan of action, his implication was clear: reform had to
be eliminated if the Church was to regain the strength and dis¬
cipline necessary to survive the threat to its existence.
   Neither side triumphed in the continuing and increasingly bit¬
ter debate over reform before 1808. The balance of forces shifted
constantly, to the reformers between 1790 and 1792, to the tra¬
ditionalists between 1793 and 1795, to reform again during the
progressive ministry of 1797-1800, and then in the other direc¬
tion with the promulgation of Auctorem Fidei in 1801. Given the
range of opinion in both camps, it is difficult to establish precise
lines of division. The regular clergy and a majority of the hier¬
archy, though circumspect, were either hostile to or at least uneasy
about aspects of the movement for change. Reform drew its strength
less from the hierarchy—in spite of the support of several prelates,
such as Bishop Tavira—than from the secondary levels of the
Church’s elite—cathedral canons, ecclesiastical bureaucrats, and
university professors. They were the cultivated clerical intelli¬
gentsia formed at Salamanca and other universities where the
ideas of Pistoia had exercised a profound intellectual effect since
the mid-1780’s. The mass of the secular clergy, living isolated in
country parishes, scarcely participated in the struggle. Among
those involved, traditionalists composed a clear majority, but the
reformers enjoyed a significant advantage; their ideas on change
and their acceptance of secular intervention in ecclesiastical affairs
won the support, firm or weak depending on prevailing political
circumstances, of the strongly regalist state administration. But
neither side was able to win a total victory by the eve of Napoleon’s
intervention in Spanish affairs.
   The civil war within the Church between 1790 and 1808, the
State’s aggressive regalism, financial demands on ecclesiastical in¬
stitutions, and the militant and theocratic mentality encouraged
by the French Revolution upset the equilibrium that Charles III
had imposed on the Church. The Caroline formula, based on a
  84                                              The First Shocks




high degree of state control designed to promote the enlightened
objectives of absolute monarchy, proved increasingly unworkable
as the kingdom entered a period of political, economic, military,
and diplomatic crisis. By 1808 it was clear that many churchmen
were disenchanted with the monarchy of Charles IV and the gov¬
ernment of Godoy. There was no question of the Church assum¬
ing a direct political role because of its own divisions and the State’s
enormous power over ecclesiastical affairs. But simmering clerical
resentment against the royal favorite and a monarchy whose fiscal
demands and interference were becoming more onerous, as well
as the conviction that Spain was submerged in a morass of spiritual
degradation and libertinism, created a mood of frustration and
suspicion that made the Caroline ideal of a pastoral and public-
spirited Church impossible. For the majority of the clergy, only
lightly touched by the critical introspection of the progressive
elements of the ecclesiastical elite, reform receded before a deep
and primitive sense that the Church was about to enter a final
struggle between Christianity and irreligion.
   In these circumstances there was no possibility of bringing about
either ecclesiastical reform or the spiritual regeneration desired
by both reformers and traditionalists. The fundamental problems
of the Church grew more serious. Between 1790 and 1808, a
period of rampant inflation, the economic situation of the parish
clergy deteriorated significantly. The cura of Boceguillas in Se¬
govia complained that parochial revenues had declined so severely
between 1796 and 1805 that many parish priests of the diocese
lacked the funds “either to feed or dress themselves decently.”15
The clerical elite and the regular clergy, though affected adversely
by the financial demands of the State, survived with their wealth
largely intact; the distance between the upper and regular clergy
and parish priests widened.
   The orders, in fact, experienced an increase in vocations be¬
tween 1800 and 1808.16 This was not, however, accompanied by
any reform of the factionalism and lack of religious commitment
characteristic of the regulars during the eighteenth century. Dis¬
sension within the orders reached epidemic proportions just be¬
fore 1808. Accusations against tyrannical superiors poured into
the Council of Castile from monks and frairs throughout the
kingdom. In 1804, for example, the Franciscans of Ledesma com-
    The First Shocks                                         85




plained against “an inhuman and despotic” superior whose ar¬
bitrary conduct had left the friary on the verge of open revolt.17
Godoy regarded the problem of the orders as so serious that in
1804 he secured a brief from Pius VII authorizing a general in¬
spection of the regular clergy as a prelude to reform, but nothing
was done. The Spanish Church thus arrived at the critical year
of 1808 with none of its problems solved, some aggravated, and
new ones created.


A New Crusade, 1808—1814

   By 1808 the monarchy of Charles IV had drifted toward the
final stages of disintegration. Years of economic and financial
crisis, widespread dissatisfaction with the French alliance Godoy
had accepted, and mounting resentment against the favorite among
supporters of the heir to the throne, Ferdinand, finally produced
the explosion that ended for all practical purposes the absolute
monarchy of the eighteenth century. Godoy began to fear Na¬
poleon’s intentions. Although French garrisons across northern
Spain were ostensibly stationed to maintain communications with
the Napoleonic army fighting the English in Portugal, they were
not docile guests. Godoy’s suspicion of them led him to transfer
the court to the royal palace at Aranjuez south of Madrid as a
prelude to a further move either to southern Spain or perhaps
to one of the American colonies. Seizing the opportunity created
by the apprehension and confusion surrounding the court’s re¬
moval, supporters of Ferdinand, whose relations with his father
and Godoy had been strained for years, played on popular fears
to provoke a riot. The Tumult of Aranjuez (March 17-19, 1808)
brought about the fall and arrest of Godoy and forced a frightened
Charles IV to abdicate in his son’s favor.
   The accession of Ferdinand VII was welcomed by the Church
save for a few clerics, such as the archbishop of Zaragoza, Ramon
de Arce, who owed his career to the favorite’s influence. Through¬
out the kingdom the clergy held services of thanksgiving for the
new monarch, while denunciations of Godoy for having “de¬
graded and debased” Spain poured from clerical pens.18 But na¬
tional rejoicing was short-lived. Napoleon, whose troops were
established in the important cities of the north and in Madrid
  86                                             The First Shocks




itself, had no intention of accepting Ferdinand as king. Although
the emperor did not name his brother Joseph to the Spanish
throne until June 6, after compelling Charles and Ferdinand to
renounce their rights, it was becoming evident that the French
had arrived to stay.
   Growing resentment against the presence of what was seen as
an army of occupation exploded in the patriotic rising against the
French in Madrid on May 2, 1808. The revolt was easily quelled,
but news of it spread quickly. Juntas de defensa were formed in
numerous cities during May and June to rule, theoretically in the
name of the absent Ferdinand. Although many bishops had ac¬
cepted the change of dynasty with little or no protest, the wide¬
spread nature of the rising moved the ecclesiastical establishment
to active participation. Bishops served as presidents of local juntas
in Cuenca, Santander, Toledo, Seville, Zamora, and other cities,
while in Cadiz, Valencia, Murcia, and Huesca they attended as
members.19 In Santiago de Compostela the local junta was com¬
posed of twenty-one members, including Archbishop Rafael de
Muzquiz as president, a canon of the cathedral as vice-president,
and several other ecclesiastics. The archbishop donated 300,000
reales to the junta, as did prelates of many other dioceses.
   Surprised by unexpected resistance, the recently installed mon¬
archy of Joseph Napoleon seemed doomed when a French army
under Dupont suffered a humiliating defeat at Bailen in Anda¬
lusia on July 19, 1808. The disaster forced the new king to aban¬
don his capital and endangered the French presence in the Iberian
Peninsula. The triumph at Bailen, however, marked the beginning
of a long struggle. Napoleon himself came to Spain to command
his armies, and by December the French has reoccupied Madrid.
In 1809 they pushed southward in a victorious campaign that by
early 1810 left only the city of Cadiz, protected by its natural site,
and the Balearics, guarded by an English fleet, free of French
control. Guerrilla warfare continued, however, in the occupied
zone.
   The 1808 Constitution of Bayonne, the fundamental document
of the Bonaparte monarchy in Spain, proclaimed Catholicism as
the official religion of the State. Napoleon himself appreciated
the importance of not provoking the Church, at least as far as the
secular clergy were concerned. The new regime hoped to establish
     The First Shocks                                           87




normal relations with the hierarchy. But bishops who had sup¬
ported the rising of 1808 through pastoral letters and donations
fled their dioceses as the French armies advanced in late 1808 and
throughout 1809. Even the eighty-year-old bishop of Segovia, Jose
Saenz, left his diocese in the dead of winter and crossed the snowy
Guadarrama Mountains to escape. Bishop Aguiriano of Calahorra
dressed as a simple priest fled his diocese in a region of intense
military campaigning and moved on foot over back roads toward
Murcia in the south, while Archbishop Muzquiz of Santiago and
Bishop Pedro Quevedo y Quintana of Orense abandoned their
sees in Galicia for Portugal. The steady progress of the French
advance kept the bishops on the move, although most proceeded
in the end either to Cadiz or Mallorca.
   The episcopal exodus prevented normalization of the Church’s
position in regions dominated by French arms, and this included
most of the kingdom by the end of 1809. The new regime tried
unsuccessfully to persuade prelates such as Quevedo y Quintana
to remain in their dioceses and then turned to the few churchmen
sympathetic to the monarchy of Joseph Napoleon. In May-June
1810 the secretary of state, Mariano Urquijo, deposed the bishops
of Osma, Calahorra, Astorga, and Toledo, who had all left their
dioceses to support the national rising. Their nominated replace¬
ments included Fray Miguel de Santander, once auxiliary bishop
to Ramon de Arce in Zaragoza, for Seville; Alfonso Aguado, aux¬
iliary bishop of Madrid, for Calahorra; and Felix Amat, one of
the most distinguished intellectual figures among clerical reform¬
ers, for Osma.
   This policy, however, proved unworkable. The nominee for
Astorga declined; Amat expressed reservations about his appoint¬
ment; and Fray Miguel de Santander, though willing to accept his
elevation to Seville, never occupied the diocese. The fate of Aguado,
one of the few prelates who attempted to take up his appointment,
revealed how little control the government exercised over the
Church, even in regions under its power. From his sanctuary in
the south, the deposed bishop, Aguiriano, was able to maintain
contact with his cathedral chapter through messengers. When the
new prelate arrived in Calahorra, he found a recalcitrant chapter
refusing cooperation and the financial support he needed to live
as well as popular hostility. Recognizing that his position was hope-
  88                                            The First Shocks




less, the new bishop finally abandoned the city. The government
in Madrid, realizing that its policy had been a failure, revoked its
episcopal nominations in the summer of 1811.20
   Joseph Napoleon’s government attempted to come to terms
with the hierarchy, but its policy toward the regular clergy was
openly hostile. From its early days monks and friars had taken an
active part in the resistance against the French. Indeed, no group
was more vehement and determined in its opposition to the new
regime—hence the term frailada, applied by historians to the re¬
sistance of the orders. Throughout the kingdom members of the
regular clergy supported the initial risings of May and June 1808.
In Catalonia the Franciscans served as members of local juntas in
Lerida, Reus, Tarragona, and Gerona. In La Coruna the order
opened its friary to conspirators plotting against the French. In
churches where the Catalan friars preached against the invaders,
congregations became so aroused that they shouted: “Long live
Jesus! Death to anything contrary to his Divine Love!”21
   During the military campaigns of late 1808 and 1809 religious
played a significant part as support troops and soldiers in the
heroic defenses of Zaragoza and Gerona. In the siege of Gerona
the Franciscans, the most numerous order in the city, assumed
defense of the Merced Fort and repulsed numerous attacks. As
the French armies advanced southward, members of the regular
clergy joined the irregular army of guerrillas harassing French
lines. In Baeza the superior of the Franciscan friary and a lecturer
in theology took to the hills and commanded a unit of guerrillas;
in Galicia another member of the order, “Lieutenant” Pego, won
fame for his military exploits.22 The orders also served as effective
instruments of propaganda against the French. A Dominican
chronicler writing shortly after the war thus recalled with satis¬
faction: “in the sacrament of penance and in their sermons, the
friars aroused the greatest hatred against our enemies by showing
that they had violated the religion of our fathers and persecuted
the Church of Jesus Christ.”23
   The new regime was in any event hostile to the orders. The
Spanish ministers of Joseph Napoleon, such as Urquijo, who had
been a member of the reforming government of 1797-1800, shared
the aversion to the regulars already widespread in official circles.
As the French secured their position in 1809, the government
    The First Shocks                                           89




dealt with the regular clergy. On February 11 Urquijo instructed
religious superiors to dismiss all novices. On August 18 the State
ordered the suppression of monasteries and friaries. In Septem¬
ber monks and friars began to leave their houses, although some,
the Benedictines of Samos and the Franciscans of El Ferrol, sur¬
vived throughout the war. The suppression, however, proved
counterproductive. Living in their residences, monks and friars
could be controlled to a limited extent, but in the autumn of 1809
they moved through the countryside, spreading opposition to the
government in towns and villages. The Franciscans of Montblanch
in Catalonia, according to a contemporary account, “withdrew to
the neighboring hills and fanned the flames of that holy war in
the towns they passed through.” They were imitated by other
friars of the province ousted from their houses.24 And the suppres¬
sion aroused the regulars to new heights of fury against the French.
The prior of the Carmelites in Logrono thus exhorted his friars
to become “religious warriors” prepared to give up their lives “on
the battlefield of a Holy Crusade.”25
   For the majority of the secular and regular clergy, the struggle
against Napoleon was a sacred war, a “Holy Crusade” against an
invader for whom no epithet was too harsh. Churchmen poured
out a stream of violent rhetoric depicting the emperor as worse
than the infidels and heretics of old. He was “the thief of Europe,
the Attila of the present century, the enemy of God and of his
Holy Church,” “the most heretical of all heretics.”26 Spaniards
taking arms in the holy cause under the banner of the Virgin of
the Pillar, officially proclaimed commander in chief of the armies,
were assured of a celestial reward. Preaching in Malaga at a fu¬
neral service for the dead of Bailen, a friar thus addressed the
fallen: “you who have died on the field of battle have flown from
there to be united to God ... to receive the eternal prize in the
home of the just.” For good measure he called upon the Lord to
cover “the arid bones, the corrupted cadavers of the conquerors
of Marengo, Jena and Austerlitz . . . with opprobrium and igno¬
miny.”27 Such rhetorical flights were common between 1808 and
 1813 and revealed the depths of clerical hostility toward Napoleon
and the Bonaparte monarchy in Spain.
   In retrospect, these assaults seem excessive. Whatever the em¬
peror’s own religious convictions, he believed that the Church was
  90                                            The First Shocks




necessary in a stable social order; he had reestablished the link
between Church and State in France after the break imposed by
the Revolution. In Spain Joseph Napoleon realized the impor¬
tance of winning ecclesiastical support. Even the suppression of
the regular clergy, though a radical step, was not moved by an¬
tireligious sentiment. But a realistic perception of the Napoleonic
regime’s attitude toward the Church never entered the minds of
ecclesiastics, who had developed a distinct moral and philosophical
interpretation of the place of France and the French in the mod¬
ern world. For many, the French Enlightenment began the process
of undermining faith, and the excesses against the Church during
the Revolution represented the triumph of corrupt philosophy
and moral license. Bishop Aguiriano of Calahorra put the issue
simply in 1809: “From France all evil, all pestilence, all ruin has
come to us. We should have no communication with that coun¬
try . . . and we must eliminate the French language from our soil
and forbid its teaching.”28 Moreover, churchmen perceived Na¬
poleon’s fundamental indifference to religion and his conviction
that the individual should not be persecuted for his beliefs as long
as the interests of the State were protected. How could “the man
of all religions” be “the conservator of our religion,” asked one
preacher. The Napoleonic commitment to maintain Catholicism
as the only religion in Spain was dismissed as the promise of a
“sophist imposter.”29 Preachers suggested that the new regime
would introduce religious toleration, a prospect they attacked in
no uncertain terms.
   Specific grievances against the French encouraged clerical re¬
sistance, but as Martinez Albiach has shown in his brilliant study
of the ecclesiastical mentality during these years, the attitude of
many churchmen toward Spain’s national crisis reflected a theo¬
logical interpretation of the kingdom’s history. In one sense, Na¬
poleon was only the accidental agent of an impatient deity striking
down a people who refused to repent of their sins. “Spain is
suffering the lash of punishment because it provoked against itself
the terrible hand of God,” stated a preacher in a sermon given in
the cathedral of Valencia in 1809.30
   Long before the war clerics had believed that the nation was
sinking into moral dissolution. Refusing to heed the first signs of
divine wrath—the great epidemics of yellow fever in 1803 and
     The First Shocks                                            91




1804, which were considered the “first sparks of the consuming
fire”—Spaniards had rushed on blindly until the final catastrophe,
for “far from appeasing the anger of God, they acted to provoke
it.” But if Providence had acted to punish, it also offered the
chance of repentance. “The Most High, who is the God of fury
and vengeance, is reaching out anew to Spaniards to convert them,”
declared a preacher stressing a theme repeated over and over
again in the sermons of 1809. Despite all the kingdom’s trials and
tribulations, the war offered an opportunity for spiritual regen¬
eration. For many churchmen the conflict seemed a purifying
instrument that opened the prospect of a new age of morality and
religion linked to a glorious national revival. Preaching in Cervera
in 1809 at a service for the victims of the second of May, Agustfn
Torres told his congregation, “Spain . . . will fix its attention on
the foundations of a new order, generation and century; it will
improve its laws and correct the vices which have led it to the
precipice; ... it will erect a wall of bronze against the greed, vices
and perfidy of our wicked neighbour [France] and will proscribe
its dress, fashions, customs and impiety ... In the midst of most
confused and terrible convulsions, a golden century of prosperity
and grandeur will be born. May God finish this great work.”
    Ideas on sin and repentance, and spiritual and national reno¬
vation inspired the extravagant and violent rhetoric against Na¬
poleon and the Bonaparte monarchy in Spain. Many churchmen
were convinced that Joseph Napoleon and the French army had
to be driven out if the religious and national “revolution” they
preached was to succeed. Clerics were vague about the specific
content of the revolution, but they saw the Church as the directing
force in a great national transformation. Customs were to be re¬
formed, moral corruption extirpated, philosophical dissent sup¬
pressed, and religious values exalted. Society was to be transformed
along theocratic lines so that a repentant nation might fulfill its
destiny as the “chosen people” of the New Testament.


Theocracy and Liberalism, 1810—1813

   Realization of this emotional and messianic vision was not to be
easy. Political circumstances in unoccupied Spain during 1808 and
1809, particularly the weakness of the Junta Central as a national
  92                                             The First Shocks




government, resulted in the convocation in 1809 of Spain’s tra¬
ditional but long dormant parliamentary assembly, the Cortes.
The election of a Cortes to save the nation from the disasters
multiplying on all sides initially won support even from those
committed to the survival of the traditional monarchy. Responses
of ecclesiastical notables to a questionnaire dispatched to the king¬
dom’s civil and religious elite in 1809 revealed strong support for
the summoning of a Cortes. The clerics felt it would prevent what
they considered abuses committed by absolute monarchy under
the influence of Godoy. The bishop of Orihuela stressed the ne¬
cessity of imposing restraints on capricious and arbitrary govern¬
ment through a Cortes in which “all the deputies should possess
entire liberty to speak and petition the King not only with respect
to . . . the reforms necessary in their respective provinces . . . but
also in that which touches upon . . . the Government of the King
and his Ministers.”31
   The ecclesiastical responses also show that the Church expected
the reformed monarchy to free it from the regalist controls im¬
posed by successive Bourbon monarchs—controls that had re¬
duced the bishops to being “deaf and dumb dogs” according to
the prelate of Orihuela.32 Bishops and cathedral chapters also
expressed resentment at the disamortizing legislation of Charles
IV directed against pious and charitable endowments in which
the Church had a large interest. The responses of 1809 were
straws in the wind indicating that the Church had a clear idea not
of the nature of political reform but of what it expected its own
position to be under the new order.
   The later differences between the Church and the Cortes could
only be dimly perceived in 1809, for as the elections took place it
was unclear what specific direction the new assembly would take.
Every group could nourish the hope that the Cortes would satisfy
its wishes. But even before the Cortes met at Cadiz in 1810, de¬
fenders of the Church as a highly privileged corporation within
the framework of absolute monarchy suffered a setback. The Cortes
was not divided into chambers representing the hierarchical es¬
tates of Old Regime society. It took the form of a unicameral
assembly of deputies elected through a complicated system of
indirect voting by a single group of voters. These arrangements
diminished the electoral possibilities of the bishops, only three of
     The First Shocks                                            93




whom won election. One of the most influential groups in the
Church, the regular clergy, was excluded entirely; they com¬
plained that they had been denied what “the most lowly of the
populace and the mulattos of America” were given.33 Ecclesiastical
participation in the Cortes, however, was substantial; 97 priests
from the ranks of the secular clergy were elected among the 308
deputies. The majority of the clerical deputies were drawn from
the secondary levels of the ecclesiastical elite—particularly from
the ranks of university professors and cathedral canons, whose
education and prominence had converted them into political not¬
ables in the confusing circumstances of 1808 and 1809.
    The ecclesiastical deputies, however, did not form a monolithic
block. Some of the leading clerical figures identified with eccle¬
siastical reform over the preceding decades won election. Joaquin
 Lorenzo Villanueva, former professor of theology in Salamanca,
 member of the Royal Academy of History, and chaplain of honor
 to Charles IV, won a seat and became a persistent advocate for
 reforming the abuses of the eighteenth-century Church. Diego
 Munoz Torrero, former professor of philosophy and rector of
 the University of Salamanca, emerged early in the sessions as a
 leading partisan of political and ecclesiastical change. But, as the
 later crucial votes on the fate of the Inquisition and liberty of
 expression would reveal, clerical deputies committed to far-reach¬
 ing political and ecclesiastical reform were a distinct minority among
 their fellow clergymen. Priests determined to defend the Church’s
 traditional privileges—Inguanzo, Ostolaza, Canedo, Ros, Agui-
 riano, and others—became the leading opponents of the liberal
 revolution elaborated by the Cortes of Cadiz between 1810 and
 1813.34
    The election of deputies took place in the midst of the French
 offensive that pushed the Spanish army southward throughout
 1809. The resulting confusion as well as the indirect system of
 voting allowed the election of a parliamentary majority that re¬
jected the fundamental principles on which the eighteenth-cen¬
 tury State and society had rested. Formal political parties in the
 modern sense did not exist at Cadiz. The first manifestation of
what came to be known as liberalism arose from a broad and
 sometimes shifting alliance in the Cortes that was willing to sup¬
 port profound change in the traditional order. Deputies drawn
  94                                             The First Shocks




from the civil administration (36.5 percent of the membership)
and the military (13.6 percent) were joined by a minority from
the clergy to form the basis of a liberal majority.35 The political
origins of liberalism at Cadiz arose from diverse sources—the
utilitarian emphasis of state reform during the eighteenth century,
the critical spirit that had swept through educated opinion from
the 1780’s on, the influence of the French revolutionary consti¬
tution of 1791, simple disgust with the performance of absolute
monarchy in its recent history, and more individualist patterns of
economic thought. All these contributed to the creation of a pow¬
erful sentiment in favor of fundamental changes in government
and the development of society.
   The Cortes of Cadiz did not challenge the existence of the
monarchy itself. It early recognized Ferdinand VII as the king¬
dom’s legitimate sovereign. But the assembly undermined the basis
of absolute monarchy and the hierarchical social structure of the
Old Regime through legislation. The Cortes proclaimed the doc¬
trine of national sovereignty, abolished seigneurial and jurisdic¬
tional privileges held by the nobility and the Church, established
the principle of equality before the law, and ended legal privileges
based on social class. In 1812 the Cortes passed a constitution that
severely limited the authority of the executive power vested in the
king and established a clear division of powers, giving the legis¬
lature a dominant voice in the conduct of political affairs.
   The legislation of the Cortes represented the triumph of those
educated groups within Old Regime society that had been ex¬
cluded from direct participation in political power and from the
benefits enjoyed by a small minority of the socially privileged. The
liberal revolution was radical insofar as it dismantled absolute
monarchy and the hierarchical society associated with it; it was
conservative in its determination to avoid creating an open-ended
political system with significant popular participation.
   The relationship of the liberal revolution to the Church would
influence the course of Spanish history into the twentieth century.
In the eyes of generations of clerical apologists, the decisions of
the Cortes on ecclesiastical matters began the erosion of the Church’s
influence. In spite of the brickbats hurled at the liberal deputies
of Cadiz even before the assembly dissolved, nothing was further
from their minds than a program designed to undermine the place
     The First Shocks                                          95




of religion in Spanish life. Villanueva expressed the sentiments
of the proreform deputies in a motion presented in October 1810:
“we are Catholics and we must give proof ot it.” He moved that
the session should open with the hymn Veni Creator and prayers
to the Holy Spirit.36 Shortly later, a motion worthy of the most
zealous missionary preacher of the eighteenth century was passed.
Proposed by the bishop of Leon, it called for a campaign to im¬
prove public morality in which prostitution and gambling would
be forbidden; it demanded further that women should dress prop¬
erly so “that sins and public scandals” might be avoided.37 More¬
over, Article 12 of the Constitution of 1812 (approved unanimously)
declared without equivocation: “the religion of the Spanish nation
is and will be forever the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman, the only
true religion.”38
   In spite of this clear affirmation, conflict with the Church was
inevitable. The liberal reformers and their largely clerical oppo¬
nents in the Cortes expected very different consequences from
the parliamentary process begun in 1810. The Church, long re¬
sentful over the degree of control exercised by the Bourbon State
before 1808, saw in the summoning of a Cortes an opportunity
to secure freedom from government interference while maintain¬
ing the legal and financial privileges it had enjoyed for centuries.
The liberal majority never presented a comprehensive plan of
ecclesiastical reform. Its concerns with expelling the French and
drafting a constitution were more than enough to occupy its time.
However, liberal policies in three important areas—the status of
the Inquisition, the question of liberty of expression, and the
future of the religious orders—posed a direct challenge to clerical
interests determined to defend the privileged Church of the Old
Regime. The question posed at Cadiz and repeated in the later
history of liberal Spain was never whether the Church should or
should not exist, nor whether it should be separated from its
official relationship with the State. The question was whether the
kingdom’s ecclesiastical elite would accept a redehnition of the
Church’s role within a new political society molded by a Catholic,
educated middle class with a more secular and individualistic ide¬
ology than that underlying the old monarchical and hierarchical
order.
   The attitude of the liberal majority—both lay and clerical dep-
  96                                            The First Shocks




uties—in its conflict with the Church did not rest on any new and
radical perception of the Church’s role. Liberal ecclesiastical pol¬
icies can be traced directly to the regalist tradition of the Bourbon
monarchy, which had clearly established the right of the State to
exercise significant control over Church affairs save in the realm
of doctrine. These policies reflected, too, the alliance between
regalism and the movement toward ecclesiastical reform that had
developed within the eighteenth-century Church, particularly after
 1780. Many of the liberal deputies at Cadiz had studied in Spanish
universities during the 1790’s, when the regalist-reform program
as embodied by the Synod of Pistoia was widely considered as a
model of what might be accomplished by effective cooperation
between government and an enlightened clergy.39 The emphases
of Pistoia on pastoral concerns, on the exaltation of the parish
clergy, and on the corresponding diminution of the religious or¬
ders’ role exercised a powerful appeal in a country where serious
problems were evident in all three areas. This is not to say that
practical considerations were lacking among the liberal deputies.
The continued existence of the Inquisition seemed an obstacle to
true national sovereignty, and the property of the religious orders
offered a tempting way out of the financial exigencies created by
the war against the French.
   Whether the Church would accept limited reform imposed by
legislative decree was not entirely clear in 1810. From the begin¬
ning some ecclesiastics were uneasy about the direction of the
Cortes. In October 1810 Bishop Quevedo y Quintana of Orense
refused to take the obligatory oath of loyalty to the Cortes because
of his doubts over whether sovereignty should reside in the nation
rather than in the king. The cardinal primate, Luis de Borbon,
however, warmly accepted this revolutionary decision and swore
the oath in a public session of the assembly. The other bishops in
Cadiz took the oath with a noticeable lack of enthusiasm. Eccle¬
siastical concern deepened with a decree of November 15, 1810,
that appropriated the income of vacant benefices and one-half
the revenues from the tithes of bishoprics, cathedral chapters, and
monasteries. The unease was only somewhat tempered by the
decree’s character as an emergency measure to raise money for
defense.
    Ecclesiastical irritation with the new regime, although evident
     The First Shocks                                           97




in 1810 and 1811, did not grow into outright hostility until 1812
and 1813. The drift from vague disaffection to opposition did not
come from any particular outburst against the Constitution of
1812. The constitution’s affirmation of the Catholic nature of the
State and its designation of four ecclesiastics to sit on the forty-
member Council of State assuaged the clerical establishment. The
bishops of Jaen and Avila issued pastoral letters urging their flocks
to accept the constitution; the archbishop of Santiago ordered a
Te Deum sung in his cathedral to celebrate proclamation of the
constitutional text. Only one bishop openly rejected the consti¬
tution by refusing to take the oath to uphold it. Quevedo y Quin¬
tana of Orense, already suspect in the eyes of the liberal deputies,
provoked them still further by instructing his cathedral chapter
that swearing the oath did not signify approval of the constitution.
The liberal majority, after declaring the bishop “unworthy to be
considered a Spaniard” ordered him dismissed from his post, and
the prelate fled to Portugal.40 Members of the regular clergy took
the oath either reluctantly or not at all. In Catalonia, according
to a Franciscan chronicler, the friars, who believed the constitution
contained provisions “contrary to religion,” made it “an object of
execration and covered it with a hatred which was never extin¬
guished.”41
   Clerical disenchantment with the new regime deepened in the
spring of 1812 in the face of what conservative churchmen saw
as unbridled discussion in books, newspapers, and pamphlets of
the fate of the kingdom. Ecclesiastics supporting the restoration
of absolute monarchy were scandalized by the liberty of political
debate. In March 1812 the bishops resident in Cadiz complained
to the Cortes of “the scandalous torrent of pernicious opinions”
appearing in the local press.42 Clerical anger intensified in the
following month with the publication of a biting satire against the
Church written by the librarian of the Cortes. The bishops living
on Mallorca issued a pastoral letter calling the book “impious,
blasphemous, sacriligious, impure” and heretical “in spirit and
letter”; other churchmen called on the Cortes to take action against
the author.43 The decision of the Cortes in favor of legislation
establishing freedom of the press, although with certain limits,
further alienated defenders of the Old Regime Church.
   The decisive break between the majority of the Cortes and the
  98                                              The First Shocks




kingdom’s ecclesiastical elite occurred over the question of the
Inquisition.44 Hostility toward the Holy Tribunal was not new.
Reform-minded ecclesiastics of the eighteenth century had dis¬
liked its ability to operate outside episcopal jurisdiction; secular
reformers, such as Gaspar de Jovellanos, saw the Inquisition as
an obstacle to cultural progress. But the inertia of the absolute
monarchy under Charles IV as well as the State’s increasing re¬
liance on the Inquisition as a kind of political police kept the
institution alive. The enormous disruption created by the French
occupation in most of the kingdom by early 1810 destroyed the
 Inquisition as a functioning body over the national territory. The
liberal deputies of Cadiz could be grateful to the French for having
destroyed the institutional power that time and time again had
allowed the Inquisition to act with a high degree of autonomy and
 resist measures designed to weaken its authority.
     No longer having to fear inquisitorial reprisal, the liberal ma¬
jority at Cadiz was free to debate whether the Holy Tribunal
 should be fully restored upon the conclusion of hostilities. A par¬
 liamentary commission presented a report advocating abolition to
 the full Cortes in April 1812. Clerical deputies defending the
 Inquisition attacked the proposal at every turn; twenty-two bish¬
 ops and thirty-two cathedral chapters petitioned the Cortes for a
 restoration. The arguments advanced by the Inquisition’s foes
 were many and varied. In a long speech on January 9, 1813, the
 assembly’s most brilliant orator, Agustin Argiielles, stated them
 all. He rejected the argument that the Inquisition was necessary
 to preserve religion because the faith had survived without dif¬
 ficulty for fifteen centuries before the fateful decision of Ferdi¬
 nand and Isabella. He maintained that the Cortes had every right
 to decide on the Inquisition’s fate because it had originally been
 imposed on Castile by Crown and papacy without consulting the
 Cortes. He attacked its intolerance against the conversos of an ear¬
 lier age and called it an institution that had won “the universal
 hatred of enlightened man.” But for Argiielles the question of
 the Inquisition was more straightforward. “The Government of
 the nation is not a theocracy,” he declared, and the Cortes, “using
 the right inherent in its sovereign authority,” could decide “to
 abolish or not the Tribunal of the Inquisition.”45 The Cortes could
 not permit, in effect, the existence of a state within a state. In the
     The First Shocks                                          99




heated debates other liberal deputies expressed their views bluntly.
The conde de Toreno declared, “the very name of the Inquisi¬
tion . . . must be erased from among us.”46
    In the end it was the belief of the liberal deputies that the
Inquisition was incompatible with the new constitutional order
that justified abolition. The bishop of Calahorra sought to counter
this argument by alleging that Article 12 of the constitution sup¬
ported the Inquisition’s survival because it was an institution en¬
gaged in protecting religion. In an increasingly embittered
atmosphere the crucial vote was taken on January 22, 1813. Of
the 150 deputies present, 90 voted for abolition, 60 against. Of
the ecclesiastical deputies in the chamber, 32 voted against the
motion, only 11 in favor, a clear sign of diminishing clerical sup¬
port for the regime.47
    The bishops deluged the Cortes with letters of protest, although
most grudgingly fulfilled an order of February 23 commanding
that the decree of abolition be read from the pulpit of every
church. But the foot-dragging of the archbishop of Santiago, who
delayed until May and then refused to announce the abolition in
his diocese, led the Cortes to order his arrest and eventually con¬
demn him to exile. From Portugal the bishop of Orense forbade
his chapter from publishing the decree, but the authorities acted
vigorously in that case too, arresting the entire chapter and rip¬
ping the bishop’s edict from church doors. The bishops of San¬
tander, Oviedo, and Astorga chose to abandon their dioceses rather
than publish the decree of abolition. There was also resistance
among the regular clergy, one of whom declared that he would
leave his church in the middle of Mass rather than announce the
decree to his congregation. In the end the Cortes broke the re¬
sistance of conservative churchmen, but at the price of strength¬
ening clerical hostility against the liberal constitutional system.
   The suppression of the Inquisition angered the traditionalist
clerical elite, which had come to look upon its restoration as in¬
dispensable to the realization of the religious revolution of which
it dreamed. The abolition of the Holy Tribunal did not, however,
threaten the organization and wealth of the Old Regime Church.
The Bourbon State had always taken its share of ecclesiastical
revenues and had even ventured onto the dangerous ground of
disamortization under Charles IV. But the vast property holdings
  100                                            The First Shocks




of the secular and regular clergy were left untouched. The cir¬
cumstances of the war against the French created an entirely new
situation. The suppression of monasteries, friaries, and convents
by the government of Joseph Napoleon in occupied Spain raised
the question of what ought to be done with their property as more
of the national territory was freed from the enemy. For the Cortes
the question took on immediate urgency because of the desperate
condition of state finances.
   These fiscal considerations, moreover, were joined for the first
time to pressures for the reform of the regulars. Criticism of the
religious orders had long figured in the program of ecclesiastical
reformers. But eighteenth-century suggestions for change fo¬
cused on reducing numbers, directing religious into socially useful
pursuits such as education and charity, and improving the quality
of religious life in monasteries and convents. No royal official or
clerical reformer dared to suggest that reform should include
massive closing of religious houses and the sale of their property
for the benefit of the State.
   Any suggestion that the reform of the regulars should be tied
to dispositions relative to their property was rejected out of hand
by conservative deputies. Simon Lopez, later to serve as arch¬
bishop of Valencia, summed up the unalterable opposition of the
Church to any changes in this area: “As far as the few or many
properties of the regulars are concerned, it is no business of Your
Majesty [the Cortes] to dispose of them . . . these are ecclesiastical
possessions, dedicated to the cult, consecrated to God . . . they are
the possessions of God.”48 In spite of the efforts of traditionalist
deputies to halt discussion of the question, extensive debate took
place in parliamentary committees during 1811 and 1812 about
a comprehensive program of reform for the regulars. The ar¬
guments that had been used by advocates of reform for decades
were again brought forward. Manuel Cano, who served as the
secretary of grace and justice for the Cortes, argued that the
number of religious should be tied closely to the kingdom’s pas¬
toral, educational, and charitable needs. Orders not meeting this
utilitarian test, particularly the purely monastic foundations and
the mendicants, were clearly to suffer. Cano also advocated the
suppression of religious houses with fewer than twelve professed
     The First Shocks                                          101




members and declared that no order should have more than one
establishment in any given town. And mindful of the orders’ role
in opposition to the new constitutional order, Cano urged that no
monastery or convent be reestablished until its political conduct
had been examined and legal proceedings begun against “the
treasonous.”49
   A special committee on reform of the regular clergy presented
its report to the full Cortes in 1813. It called for limits on the
number of convents of women (350) and monasteries (60) and
stipulated that the number of houses of the nonmonastic orders
such as the Franciscans should depend on the size of a town’s
population and the quantity of its secular clergy. The report broke
new ground in the long debate over the role of the regulars by
forbidding authorized religious houses from acquiring new prop¬
erty. It went further by recommending that the property of the
suppressed foundations under the plan “be used for the benefit
of the State until the Cortes should decide that it is convenient to
arrange the appraisal and sale of said property.”50
   Political circumstances during 1813 prevented the Cortes from
addressing the committee’s proposal. The Cortes dealt with the
regulars, who expected to recover their property and revenues as
the French abandoned the country, on a piecemeal basis. The
authorities found it difficult to carry out the terms of a law passed
September 13, 1813, that ordered sale of the property of mon¬
asteries and convents in a ruinous state as a result of the war.
Efforts to prevent the reoccupation of religious houses, whether
ruined or not, failed with few exceptions as the regulars began to
return to their residences, often in defiance of government offi¬
cials. The reestablishment of religious communities soon led to
disputes between the returning regulars and the residents of cities
and towns, who resented the reimposition of monastic rights and
dues from which they had been free for years. The municipality
of Ripoll thus protested to the Cortes against the return of the
Benedictines to their monastery in the town. It objected partic¬
ularly to the order’s intention to resume collection of the tithe.51
These disputes were common in 1813 and were examples of rising
feeling against the regulars, which would surface later with a
vengeance.
  102                                            The First Shocks




   Proposals for the reform of the secular clergy did not receive
the same attention given to those focusing on the regulars. Yet
suggestions were advanced that would figure in the programs of
later liberal governments. The Asturian deputy Calello, after not¬
ing “the poverty and misery of most parish priests,” urged the
abolition of surplice fees (the charges exacted for baptisms, mar¬
riages, funerals, and so on) and the redirection of tithes away
from the ecclesiastical elite to the parochial clergy.52 Calello fur¬
ther urged a fundamental parish reorganization that would guar¬
antee every parish priest a decent income and would provide
improved religious services to the population. Discussion also took
place in the Cortes and in the press about the necessity of a thor¬
ough reform of Church financing. One deputy suggested that the
State had every right to use the Church’s immense wealth for the
public good “because Jesus Christ himself said that his kingdom
was not of this world.” Several liberal political writers went further
and advocated the sale of Church property to reduce the national
debt, although on condition that other means be found to pay the
clergy. Such suggestions never reached the stage of serious par¬
liamentary discussion, but their mere appearance led to clerical
counterattacks. The Cortes had no right “to rob God Himself,”
declared one defender of the Church.53
   The achievements of the Cortes of Cadiz in ecclesiastical affairs
were essentially negative. The destruction of the Inquisition and
of the Church’s traditional right to control intellectual life as well
as the uncompleted reform of the regulars predominated over
those aspects of the old regalist-reform program that looked to
improve the quality of the kingdom’s religious life. Liberal dep¬
uties at Cadiz, such as Villanueva, did not abandon their concerns
for improving religion in Spain, but the fierce resistance of de¬
fenders of the Old Regime Church made comprehensive reform,
both organizational and moral, an impossible task. It was only
after liberal governments in succeeding decades had broken the
institutional back of the privileged eighteenth-century Church that
the ecclesiastical establishment accepted a limited degree of in¬
ternal reform. The struggle would be long and difficult and would
leave a legacy of bitterness toward the liberal State among many
clerics that would endure into the twentieth century.
     The First Shocks                                           103




A Weakened Church, 1808—1814

    The prospect of Ferdinand VII’s restoration led conservative ec¬
 clesiastics to look on the return of the king as the salvation of the
 religious revival they had been preaching. Clerical anger once
 directed against the French was now turned on the liberals of the
 Cortes. Far from being seen as moving the kingdom toward re¬
 pentance and religion, the liberals were accused of being ac¬
 complices in spiritual degeneration. Preaching in La Coruna in
 May 1813, a friar posed a question often repeated in later years:
 “Spaniards! Where do we stand? In a Catholic nation or among
 deserters of the gospels? Our unfortunate nation is covered by
 impious newspapers and other writings designed to rob us of our
 religion in exchange for deceitful liberty.”54
    The campaign against liberalism was as violent and emotional
 as the one against the French—and for the same reasons. The
 new constitutional system and its adherents appeared as obstacles
 to realization of the grand providential design for Spain. Church¬
 men thus exalted Ferdinand VII as an avenging angel who would
 purify the nation of its corruption and allow the Church to pro¬
 ceed with its spiritual revolution. With the arrival of the king,
 declared one preacher: “these philosophers who have declared
 war on the Church, persecuted its ministers, hated friars, cor¬
 rupted morality and shown aversion to its dogmas will no longer
 walk upon the earth.”55 Clerics, however, did not wish to see the
 restoration of a royal Church subject to state control at every level
 of administration and discipline. The Crown had once used the
 Church for its own ends, but the Church proposed to turn the
 tables and manipulate the restored monarchy to create a theocratic
 society. Religious values would be paramount, and the Church
 would function with independence. By 1813 the absent Ferdinand
 appeared as a savior for an angry Church frustrated in its gran¬
 diose plans.
    In March 1814 Ferdinand VII returned from exile in France.
 Once the king perceived that he could count on popular support
 and elements of the army for a coup d’etat, he undid the work
 of the Cortes of Cadiz. His return was everywhere greeted with
jubilation by churchmen expecting a new age of piety. The Church,
  104                                           The First Shocks




however, was ill prepared to undertake a vast movement of spir¬
itual revival. The war had exacted a heavy material toll.
    Unfortunately, there are no studies of the impact of the war
on ecclesiastical finances, but the evidence suggests that it was
enormous. Both sides in the conflict turned to clerical wealth as
a source of revenue. In each zone the government appropriated
most of the tithes of the secular clergy.56 Whatever was left proved
impossible to collect because of military conditions and the re¬
sistance of the peasantry, who easily evaded payment without the
pressure of the agents and lawyers once employed to keep them
in line. Both governments also extracted large amounts from the
clergy. In 1808 the numerous donations of bishops and chapters
to the national rising were followed by the heavy impositions of
the French. In March 1809 the government of Joseph Napoleon
imposed a loan on the secular and regular clergy of Galicia of 10
million reales and followed it with other demands in the spring
and summer. The authorities also seized the gold and silver or¬
naments of the regulars’ churches in Barcelona in the summer of
 1810. Suppression of the religious orders in the French zone forced
abandonment of numerous monasteries and friaries and led to
substantial material destruction.57 Monasteries were converted into
stables, barracks, and munitions dumps or simply allowed to fall
into decay. The destruction, however, was not universal. In Cat¬
alonia some monasteries, such as the Benedictine abbey of San
 Pedro de Besalu, were completely ruined, but another house
 of the order, San Pedro de Comprodon, escaped unscathed.
 Although the regular clergy paid the heaviest price, the en¬
 tire financial structure of the Old Regime Church was under¬
 mined by the war. Declining revenues and the closing of mona¬
 steries led to the collapse of the traditional system of charity and
 prevented the Church from providing employment to urban
 artisans.
    Together with declining resources between 1808 and 1814, the
Church experienced a decline in ecclesiastical population. Accu¬
rate numbers are not available for the period, but one authority
has estimated the loss at more than a third from the figures re¬
ported in the 1797 census. The decline may not have been this
disastrous, but it was nonetheless extensive, particularly among
     The First Shocks                                               105




the regular clergy. The Dominican province of Aragon lost one-
fourth of its members during the war, with deaths outnumbering
new entrants by two to one. The Franciscans of Andalusia saw
their numbers fall from 1,544 in 1808 to 520 by 1820, with most
of the loss occurring during the war; a similar decline took place
in the order’s province of Cartagena.58 Monasteries and friaries
in Andalusia, an area well populated with religious houses, suf¬
fered more than elsewhere because of the epidemics of yellow
fever that swept through that region and the Mediterranean lit¬
toral as far as Valencia in 1811 and 1812. The Carmelites of
Orihuela were annihilated: “all perished in the epidemic even the
servants who tolled the bells,” recorded the order’s chronicler.59
   There is less precise information on the secular clergy, but they
too suffered losses. In Zamora many parishes had no priest. The
bishop of Lerida declared that in his diocese “the number of
secular priests has declined notably.”60 The demographic crisis
also affected the hierarchy, although for other reasons. The pope’s
refusal to approve the episcopal appointments of either Joseph
Napoleon or the Cortes of Cadiz created twenty-one vacancies by
 1814, and it fell to Ferdinand VII to make the nominations. He
did so by appointing bishops—Arias Tejeiro, Inguanzo, Creus,
Strauch, and others—who were among the most active opponents
of the liberal revolution and were far removed from the model
bishop of the eighteenth-century royal Church. Bishops ap¬
pointed before the war survived, of course, but the king created
a new episcopal generation whose concerns differed from those
of the prelates of Charles III. The new bishops looked to the
regular and secular clergy to be the shock troops of the long-
heralded religious revival, but the clerical army was no longer the
militia of apostles and prophets that had crusaded against the
French and the Cortes of Cadiz. It was a tired, aging, and im¬
poverished force capable of vindictiveness but not of evangeli¬
zation.
   How greatly the war affected traditional patterns of religious
practice is difficult to establish. It is at least clear, though, that for
the first time in centuries pastoral routine and ecclesiastics’ ability
to exercise moral control over their flocks suffered disruption.
The bishops of many dioceses fled from their sees during the
  106                                             The First Shocks




French occupation; parish priests, who generally remained at their
posts, consumed much of their energy trying to survive in difficult
economic circumstances. The suppression of the regulars in Na¬
poleonic Spain brought to an end the missionary campaigns so
important to the Church of the eighteenth century. At the close
of hostilities the bishops were convinced that the weakening of
clerical vigilance caused by the war had led to widespread im¬
morality. The bishops attacked the “relaxation of customs” they
believed to be universal throughout the kingdom. The king him¬
self summed up the moral effects of the war as he saw them in a
royal order of 1815 designed to restore the old standards of con¬
duct. Public scandals caused by “the voluntary separation of mar¬
ried couples and the licentious life of either one or the other
partner, ... by the inobservance of religious feast days, obscene
words, injuries to the ministers of religion, . . . irreverences in the
churches,”—were to be punished by the civil authorities working
with parish priests.61
   The diminished institutional presence of the Church as a result
of the war may have allowed some individuals to indulge in be¬
havior that once would have led to prompt clerical censure. But
ecclesiastical laments about the spread of impiety and immorality
must be taken with a grain of salt. There is no evidence that the
peasant regions of the north, esteemed for their Catholicism, were
inundated by a wave of irreligion and moral depravity. Even Bishop
Arias Teijeiro of Pamplona, one of the most vociferous accusers
of the war’s destructive moral effects, admitted that in his diocese
the population had given repeated proof of “its docility and con¬
stant religion.”62 The reproaches of the clergy in many cases were
directed not against the population as a whole but against the
minority of intellectuals, progressive noblemen, journalists, law¬
yers, and their clerical allies who had made the liberal revolution.
   The liberal deputies of Cadiz proclaimed Catholicism the of¬
ficial religion of the State. Conservative ecclesiastics dismissed this
declaration as a subtle ruse disguising a plot to undermine the
Church and destroy religion. Clerical suspicions were unfounded,
although extreme liberal apologists expressed anticlerical and, in
some cases, vaguely antireligious sentiments. These ideas did not
circulate widely beyond the liberal elite, although there are in-
     The First Shocks                                         107




dications that in the large cities, Madrid and Barcelona particu¬
larly, anticlerical and skeptical opinion had made progress among
groups such as merchants, government employees, physicians,
military cadets, and a handful of artisans. An inquiry carried out
in 1815 and 1816 by the reestablished Inquisition led to accusa¬
tions of “offenses against religion” against a small number of
persons, including a tailor, a library worker, a physician, a sur¬
geon, two sergeants and a captain in the Cantabrian regiment,
and several others from urban groups sympathetic to the liberal
cause. Most of the accused had done nothing more than make
irreverent remarks about the clergy: “all Capuchins are supersti¬
tious” and “friars beg alms so that they can keep women.” But a
few had expressed skepticism about religious belief: “confession
is useless,” “there is no hell,” “our souls are like those of dogs
which perish with the body.” Such statements scandalized church¬
men and confirmed their view of the growth of irreligion.63 These
cases were not numerous and in any event were confined to the
cities, although they did indicate a drift away from the Church in
urban centers.
   Between 1808 and 1814 the Church also failed to repair the
division between ecclesiastical reformers and traditionalists. Cler¬
ical progressives supporting the limited reforms of the Cortes of
Cadiz aroused the hostility of conservative churchmen. In a pas¬
toral letter of December 1812 the bishops declared that Spain was
not only engaged in a battle against a foreign enemy but also in
an “internal war.” They lashed out against “ecclesiastics who pre¬
sume themselves reformers . . . this class of tonsured philoso¬
phers.”64 And in the same year an apologist of the Old Regime
Church took up the charges laid against reforming clerics by Bo-
nola years before. Priests advocating change within the Church
were accused of participating in a great “philosophical” conspiracy
of secularism, materialism, and libertinism that had arisen first in
France and then elsewhere to destroy Catholicism. This made the
ecclesiastical reformers all the more dangerous. They were, in the
words of one preacher, “rapacious wolves propagating perverse
dogmas, false doctors promising liberty when they are slaves of
corruption.”65
   As the Anglo-Spanish armies freed more of the national ter-
  108                                            The First Shocks




ritory in 1812 and 1813, the civil war within the Church spread
from Cadiz to the liberated areas. In Seville during the autumn
of 1812, reformers led by the cathedral dean, Lopez Cepero,
attacked the friars flocking back to the city as an idle class of
slackers and criticized the excessive riches of monasteries. Con¬
servative clerics replied in kind, accusing the reformers of plotting
“to hang friars and burn inquisitors, thereby ending the misfor¬
tunes of Spain and, as a result, bring enlightenment to the villages,
improve the arts, [and] purify morality under the cover of every
kind of insult to religion and its dogmas.”66



   The struggle within the Church changed its character during
the war of independence. The reforming movement in its first
and second phases had arisen from a vital clerical culture tied to
the broader intellectual currents of the age. Pressure for reform
came from a vigorous minority in the Church. Reform had always
been tied to state intervention, even during the reign of Charles
III, and this tendency became more pronounced under Charles
IV, as clerical reformers looked increasingly to the State rather
than the Church for support. With the Cortes of Cadiz advocates
of change identified the cause of ecclesiastical reform with the
liberal State, hence the violence of the attacks on churchmen who
supported the modest reforms instituted between 1810 and 1813.
The identification of reform with liberalism, however, signaled
the decline of the movement for change within the Church. The
militant ideology of the conservative Church backed the reformers
into a corner. The bishops and most of the clergy, even those
once vaguely sympathetic to reform, were swept up in the fervor
of the crusade first against the French and then against the liberals.
Enthusiasm for renovation fell by the wayside except among a
diminishing minority who, ironically, turned to the liberal State
to save reform just as traditionalist clergymen looked to Ferdinand
VII to rescue their spiritual revolution. Reform, once a manifes¬
tation of the intellectual vitality of a progressive minority within
the Church, became primarily a political issue caught up in the
conflict between the liberal State and absolutism.
   Few periods were more critical for the development of the
    The First Shocks                                        109




modern Spanish Church than the years between 1808 and 1814.
The material prosperity and relative internal peace of the royal
Church of Charles III eroded under his successor, and events
during the war of independence accelerated institutional decline.
By 1814 the great royal Church of the eighteenth century had
ceased to exist, although some of its external trappings remained.
4    /    The Struggle Intensifies, 1814—1833




   The end of the liberal experiment in 1814 did not resolve the
fundamental constitutional and ecclesiastical questions posed for
the first time at the Cortes of Cadiz. The struggle between lib¬
eralism, determined to mold the Church to fit the demands of a
new secular outlook within the framework of a parliamentary
system, and ecclesiastical interests, as firmly committed to recover
every particle of clerical authority and privilege, continued with
even more intensity. The balance shifted first to the Church, dur¬
ing the initial period of Ferdinand VII’s absolute rule from 1814
to 1820, and then against it during the second liberal revolution
from 1820 to 1823. Although the Church recovered its position
following the second restoration of Ferdinand, political and dy¬
nastic circumstances between 1823 and the king’s death in 1833
finally ended ecclesiastical hopes for the reestablishment of the
Old Regime Church in all its splendor. The clergy, at least the
vast majority, struggled to recreate the past with the same fierce
energy it had directed against the French and the constitutionalists
of Cadiz. But the consensus that had sustained the eighteenth-
century monarchy and the Church itself could not be resurrected.
The Church threw its resources into a losing contest for which it
would pay a heavy price.



The Church Restored, 1814—1820

   After the return of Ferdinand VII ecclesiastics vied with one
another to exalt the sovereign and his presumed commitment to
a religious restoration. With his accession, said a preacher in the
cathedral of Seville: “religion has triumphed over the horrendous
monster of impiety.” A Carmelite friar declared: “Oh! sweet Fer¬
dinand! . . . our beloved Ferdinand! . . . We owe everything to
Ferdinand . . . Long live the King for the greater brilliance and


    110
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  111




splendor of the Catholic religion!”1 The clergy looked to the king
to realize the theocratic revolution it had been preaching and to
free the Church from its traditional dependence on the State.
During the years of Ferdinand’s enforced exile in France, con¬
servative ecclesiastics were able to embroider their fantasies with¬
out considering whether the king accepted them. Between 1814
and 1820, the first period of Ferdinand’s absolute rule, however,
the king showed that he was his own man, and that he could use
the Church to buttress his own power as effectively as any monarch
before him.
   Few sovereigns were called upon to rule in more difficult cir¬
cumstances.2 The war of independence against the French ended
victoriously, but in 1814 the general condition of the realm bor¬
dered on the catastrophic. The economic and financial decline of
the nation that had begun in the 1790’s accelerated during the war
and continued after its close. Commerce with the overseas empire,
once the foundation of the kingdom’s economy, had collapsed,
and the independence movement in the colonies, although not
yet completely successful, had built a momentum the mother country
was unable to halt. At home the purges, exiles, and prison terms
inflicted on liberals did not eliminate political opposition; several
conspiracies took place between 1814 and 1820. Ferdinand VII
lacked the character and intelligence to dominate the situation,
but he did possess a certain cunning, which enabled him to survive
exile, plotting, and a revolution to die in bed still an absolute
monarch in 1833.
   In 1814 Ferdinand reestablished the administrative institutions
of the eighteenth-century State, but their restoration was more
nominal than real. The political, social, and economic changes of
the preceding two decades made revival of the Old Regime mon¬
archy a difficult if not impossible task, a fact that Ferdinand re¬
alized with the primitive intuition which always saved him from
losing the power he cherished. Between 1814 and 1820, in spite
of the institutional forms of the past, the monarchy of Ferdinand
was a personal, albeit royal dictatorship. The king paid little at¬
tention to the institutions he had restored, relying instead on a
small group of personal advisers. Power rested neither in the
constitutional consensus that had supported the eighteenth-century
monarchy nor in the overwhelming prestige of the royal institu-
  112                                      The Struggle Intensifies




tion itself, but in a combination of forces—conservative elements
in the army, the Church, ambitious politicians, and ideological
zealots who believed the survival of absolute power would serve
their interests.
   Ferdinand was a popular monarch, although in a very personal
way. His aversion to the aristocracy and the elaborate ceremony
of his father’s court, as well as his modest style of life and general
accessibility, kept him from being isolated from his subjects by the
social trappings of the old monarchy. However, the king lacked
a clear vision of what he wished to do with the power that had
become his in 1814. The government’s record between 1814 and
 1820 was a sorry one. But Ferdinand managed to hold together
the disparate forces supporting him until the revolution of 1820
returned the liberals to power.
   The king, realizing that his survival partially depended on the
support of the Church, quickly abrogated the ecclesiastical legis¬
lation of the Cortes of Cadiz. The religious orders were allowed
to reoccupy their houses if they had not already done so. A decree
of July 21, 1814, ordered the restoration of the Inquisition; an¬
other on May 29, 1815, authorized the reestablishment of the
Jesuits.3 In 1814 and 1815 royal orders dealing with the improve¬
ment of moral standards and the necessity of evangelization cam¬
paigns set in motion a vast effort to end what the bishop of Pamplona
called “an era of confusion, disorder and crimes.”4 At royal com¬
mand, bishops organized missions in their dioceses and enlisted
the services of the religious, who sallied forth, according to a
Franciscan chronicler, “with a truly apostolic spirit as they ripped
from the ground most of the seeds which evil genius had sown
in towns and villages.”5 The clergy thundered against the “relax¬
ation of customs” and dissent from the doctrines of the Church,
which they believed had spread during the period of liberal rule.
The realization of the theocratic revolution seemed near at hand,
and ecclesiastics joyfully celebrated the coming triumph. When
the archbishop of Santiago reentered his diocese in 1814 after
having been exiled by the Cortes of Cadiz, he arrived in a solemn
procession including two groups dressed in sinister garb, chained,
and carrying placards labeled “Impiety and Heresy,” “Iniquity
and Persecution.”6
   Ferdinand’s campaign against liberalism and the Church’s de-
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  113




termination to destroy what it saw as libertinism provided the
common ground for a new alliance between Throne and Altar.
The revived Inquisition went about its business with a political as
much as a religious purpose. In July 1815 it prohibited a series
of books of no doctrinal significance on the grounds that it was
necessary “to root out as soon as possible every kind of publication
in any way contrary to the doctrine of holy religion and to the
fidelity owed to the Sovereign.”7 The Church showed its loyalty
to Ferdinand more concretely during the abortive liberal risings
of these years. When Brigadier Porlier attempted to induce the
garrisons of Galicia to rebel in 1815, the cathedral chapter of
Santiago donated 50,000 reales to the governor and celebrated a
Te Deum after the revolt’s suppression. In Barcelona a timely gift
from Bishop Pablo de Sichar to the captain general, whose unpaid
troops appeared ready to desert to General Lacy’s revolt, saved
the day for the royalist forces.
    Cooperation between the king and conservative ecclesiastics ex¬
tended to the purging of clerics who had supported or simply
shown sympathy for the reforms of Cadiz. In a decree of May
 1814, Ferdinand ordered that competition for benefices should
be confined to persons free of “dangerous and erroneous” opin¬
ions who had given proof of “their adhesion to healthy princi¬
ples.”8 Cathedral chapters were purged of canons suspected of
supporting liberalism. The most fortunate escaped abroad, but
others, such as Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva, one of the most prom¬
inent clerical reformers at Cadiz, suffered the harsher fate of
arrest and imprisonment.9
    Both Throne and Altar profited from the alliance against lib¬
eralism and libertinism, but Ferdinand got the better of the bar¬
gain. The king never intended to install the kind of theocratic
regime clerical visionaries had conjured up during the war of
independence. He had not acquired absolute power to relinquish
it to the Church.10 He insisted on retaining the rights traditionally
held by the Crown over ecclesiastical appointments and revenues.
Ferdinand used his powers of patronage to fill the episcopacy and
cathedral chapters with clerics sympathetic to his rule and hostile
to liberalism. Between 1814 and 1820 the king was presented with
an unrivaled opportunity to exercise his right of appointment. He
named sixty bishops and converted the hierarchy into a responsive
  114                                      The Struggle Intensifies




protector of his personal power.11 The appointment of Fray Rafael
de Velez, author of a celebrated defense of the alliance between
the Church and Crown, to the bishopric of Ceuta in 1817 sym¬
bolized the new episcopacy completely identified with the interests
of the absolutist State. Although the average age of the new prel¬
ates was sixty-three, Ferdinand appointed a number of younger
bishops on whom he could count in the future, and he turned
increasingly to the regular clergy, whose antiliberalism was pro¬
verbial, as an episcopal recruiting ground.12 The personal quality
and educational level of the hierarchy was not far below the
eighteenth-century standard, but the direct use of royal patronage
on a massive scale for an immediate political purpose endowed
the Church for a generation with an episcopacy ill prepared to
grapple with ecclesiastical problems.
   The clergy expected the restored monarchy to rebuild the eco¬
nomic foundations on which the eighteenth-century Church’s
prosperity had rested. There are few studies of ecclesiastical wealth
for this period, but the evidence suggests that the decline which
had begun early in the century was irreversible. The agricultural
and commercial depression, which had deepened during the war,
continued unabated; the State was close to bankruptcy. Revenues
from the tithe, dependent on a flourishing agriculture, did not
reach prewar levels. Moreover, peasant evasion of the tithe con¬
tinued in spite of the efforts of civil and ecclesiastical authorities.
An inquiry of 1817 in the diocese of Cartagena revealed such
deep hostility to the tithe among the peasantry that collection
agents dared not press their demands too aggressively. Peasant
resistance could be broken, declared one collector, only if the State
made examples of the recalcitrant through vigorous judicial ac¬
tion.13 A similar pattern of resistance prevailed among those owing
money to the Church through the loans known as censos. The
Church received virtually nothing from this source during the
war and found it difficult to reestablish its claims after 1814 be¬
cause of the complexity of these financial arrangements. No overall
figures document the decline in wealth, but the income of the
kingdom’s bishoprics fell from 52,042,000 reales in 1802 to
34,274,279 by 1820.14
   The Church’s financial problems were aggravated by the de¬
mands of the State. The desperate condition of the royal treasury
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  115




 forced the king to turn to ecclesiastical revenues as extensively as
 had both his father and the Cortes of Cadiz. In 1815 Ferdinand
 appropriated the income of benefices held by absentee clerics and
 forbade bishops from granting pensions on their incomes so that
 any surplus could be assigned to the treasury. In 1817 the king
 imposed a special levy of 30 million reales on the secular and
 regular clergy to be paid over a six-year period. The financial
 pressure of the Crown on the archdiocese of Santiago was so great
 that 60 percent of its revenues between 1814 and 1820 went into
 the State’s coffers. Royal policy in other areas also affected the
 financial situation of ecclesiastical institutions. In 1814, for ex¬
 ample, Ferdinand’s suppression of feudal baronies in Catalonia
led to a decline in income among the great monastic houses of
 the region such as Poblet, which depended in part on the payments
 from the surrounding countryside over which it exercised juris¬
diction. The subjects of Poblet welcomed the abolition of the mon¬
astery’s rights with jubilation and for good measure refused to
pay the tithe and other obligations they had traditionally paid to
the monks.15
    Economic conditions and the financial demands of the State
also affected the regular clergy. Josep Fontana’s study of monastic
revenues in Menorca and Catalonia between 1814 and 1820 has
called attention to the crisis suffered by religious houses forced
to consider selling some of their property to raise badly needed
income.16 Whether the crisis was general among the communities
of religious is less certain. In Catalonia monasteries dependent
on the tithe and other payments in kind were caught in difficult
circumstances. But the mendicant orders, particularly the Fran¬
ciscans, the most numerous in the region, fared better. When the
provincial chapter met in 1818 it noted with satisfaction that “in
only six years the province had been restored to a very flourishing
condition” and that the extensive material damage suffered dur¬
ing the war had been entirely repaired.17 Even the Carthusian
monastery of las Cuevas in Seville, which had seen its fertile,
irrigated gardens destroyed during the war, managed to secure
enough income to rebuild its ruined church and enjoy a brief
prosperity between 1818 and 1820. Although the recovery of the
orders was uneven, resources committed to rebuilding as well as
the pressures exerted by monasteries and convents on local pop-
  116                                    The Struggle Intensifies




illations to recover income in a time of general economic stag¬
nation may well have contributed to the popular hostility to the
orders, which would take violent form between 1820 and 1823.
   Caught between economic problems and the political cunning
of Ferdinand VII, the Church was as far from realizing its dreams
in 1820 as in 1814. Clerical hopes outstripped the reality of the
Church’s position in Fernandine Spain. The persecution of reli¬
gious and political dissent was no doubt satisfying, but it was not
the great spiritual revolution expected from the restoration of the
“Desired One” to the throne.
   The weaknesses of the eighteenth-century Church remained,
whether in the form of an archaic organizational framework or
the imbalanced distribution of material resources. Conservative
ecclesiastics displayed some interest in reform, but their obsession
with the danger of a liberal revolution and the purging of re¬
formers within the Church meant for all practical purposes the
abandonment of any prospect for change. One of Ferdinand’s
earliest actions had been to secure a brief from Pius VII revoking
the authorization of 1804 that had ordered a general inquiry into
the state of the regular clergy as a prelude to necessary reform.
In 1816 the bishop of Jaen complained to the king of “the la¬
mentable state of monastic observance” he had found after an
inspection of the monasteries and convents of his diocese. The
state of the secular clergy seemed no better to the bishop of Ca-
lahorra, who issued a scathing indictment of his priests in the
same year. Some had earned “public infamy” for living with their
housekeepers or female servants; others were “drunkards and
dealers at fairs and markets.” Although the bishop admitted that
only a minority of the clergy were guilty of such conduct, he
claimed that many of their better-living fellows said Mass “without
devotion or any awareness of what they were doing” and were
“idlers . . . who never took a spiritual book in hand, nor even knew
that such works existed.”18
   The economic difficulties of ecclesiastical institutions also un¬
dermined the Church’s traditional social role. Bishops, chapters,
and monasteries gradually resumed distribution of charitable as¬
sistance, but on a reduced scale. Limited resources meant that the
massive charity efforts of the eighteenth century were no longer
possible. Moreover, the number of vocations between 1814 and
    The Struggle Intensifies                                   117




1820, especially among the regular clergy, failed to replace the
losses suffered during the war. By 1820 the bishops were la¬
menting the crisis in recruitment as one of their gravest problems,
although the pastoral problems could have been resolved through
efhcient use of existing personnel.19 And within the Church the
purge of reforming clerics did not eliminate sympathy for change.
The reformers, although silenced, did not disappear, and they
would emerge again with the triumph of the liberal revolution.
By 1820 the Church had failed to resolve its problems in spite of
the alliance between Throne and Altar. A conservative ecclesias¬
tical leadership produced no new initiatives and tied the fate of
the Church to the fortunes of Ferdinand VII.


Christ or the Constitution, 1820—1823

   Repression and the ineptness of the liberal opposition allowed
the king to cling to power, but the government’s lack of coherent
policies, the continued deterioration of the State’s finances, and
the persistence of unfavorable economic conditions, combined
with frustration among officers of the expeditionary army Fer¬
dinand assembled to recover Spain’s disintegrating American em¬
pire, finally produced the revolution that restored the Constitution
of 1812. Discontent among young officers and the rank and hie,
reluctant to abandon their quarters in the province of Cadiz for
the bloody battlefields of Venezuela and New Granada, combined
with the conspiratorial activity of the masonic lodges that had
proliferated both in the army and in the city of Cadiz to launch
the second liberal revolution of the nineteenth century.
   On January 1, 1820, the young commander of the regiment of
Asturias, Rafael de Riego, proclaimed the restoration of the Con¬
stitution of 1812 and attempted to rally the officers and men of
the expeditionary army to the revolutionary cause. The rising
initially followed the same dismal course that had led to the failure
of earlier attempts to restore the liberal regime, but the king’s
indecisiveness, the opportunism of his high command, and the
spread of the revolution to other regions—particularly Zaragoza
and Barcelona—forced the monarch, anxious to preserve his throne
at any cost, to announce on March 7 that he would accept the
constitution. Two days later Ferdinand took the oath to the con-
  118                                      The Struggle Intensifies




stitution he had refused to accept in 1814, and on March 22 a
provisional government called for elections to a new Cortes, which
would meet on July 9.
   The success of the revolution of 1820 caught the Church by
surprise. Only the bishop of Cadiz, Francisco Javier Cienfuegos,
came forward to condemn the conspirators and to assure his flock
that their loyalty to the king would be rewarded with “peace and
tranquility in this life and eternal life in the next.”20 The sudden
triumph of the revolution, the king’s decision to accept the con¬
stitution, and the appointment of a moderate liberal ministry dom¬
inated by former members of the Cortes of Cadiz led the hierarchy
to view the new regime with something less than the hostility that
might have been expected. In April, May, and June the bishops
published pastoral letters urging the faithful to “observe the law
of Jesus Christ, to trust in the constituted authorities,” and to live
“beneath the sweet empire of the Constitution,” while diocesan
authorities everywhere ordered the celebration of Te Deums.21
   The abrupt about-face of a Church that had lavished praise on
absolute monarchy was understandable. Ferdinand VII’s accept¬
ance of the new order deprived the Church of the ideological
ammunition it had once fired against liberalism. Moreover, the
spring and early summer of 1820 corresponded in some respects
to the situation in 1809 and 1810 before the meeting of the Cortes
of Cadiz. A moderate government ruled, and the direction of the
new Cortes was as yet unclear. But the substantially different
political circumstances of 1820 ensured that the Cortes would be
able to undertake a more comprehensive program of reform than
had been possible ten years before. The revolutionary government
held firm control over the national territory, and the liberals’
superior political tactics gave them a dominance in the assembly
they had not enjoyed at Cadiz. The stunning and sudden success
of the revolution as well as the opposition of upholders of absolute
monarchy to participation in the new regime reduced the tradi¬
tionalist representation in the Cortes.22 The eloquent defenders
of the old order who had directed steady fire against reform at
Cadiz were missing in the parliament of 1820.
   It was not clear in the early days of the revolution how far the
new regime would go in its efforts to reform the Church. On
March 9 the government decreed the abolition of the Inquisition,
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  119




but with nothing like the passionate debate that had taken place
in 1813. Even the clerical leadership reacted with unusual torpor.
The bishop of Tortosa, Manuel Ros de Medrano, a committed
supporter of absolutism at Cadiz, informed his diocese that the
suppression of the Holy Tribunal should not be interpreted as a
blow against the faith because Catholicism had survived in Spain
for centuries before the Inquisition’s creation. His argument was
similar to that advanced by the liberal Arguelles in the parlia¬
mentary debate of 1813. The archbishop of Toledo and primate
of Spain, Luis de Borbon, whose moderation had earned him the
enmity of Ferdinand VII, went further and welcomed abolition
because it reinforced episcopal authority within the Church.
    Tension developed between the civil and ecclesiastical author¬
ities over the State’s insistence that all members of the secular and
regular clergy should take an oath to uphold the constitution and
that the parish clergy should explain it to their congregations
during Mass. Most of the hierarchy swore the oath, though with¬
out enthusiasm, as did the superiors of the religious orders. Cirilo
de la Alameda, the general of the Franciscans, told his friars that
they must accept “the new principles of the new government.”23
Two bishops, Pedro Inguanzo of Zamora and Alonso Canedo of
Malaga, resisted but ceded in the end before the counsel of the
papal nuncio, Giacomo Giustiniani.24 The nuncio’s moderation
reflected the attitude of Pius VII, who published a brief on April
30 urging the Spanish Church to preserve its tranquillity before
the political changes. But members of the regular clergy and some
parish priests were not as cooperative. Among the Franciscans of
Catalonia news of the revolution’s triumph so shocked some friars
that they took to their beds in fits of melancholy; the able-bodied
absented themselves from their friaries on the day the oath was
to be administered or kept silence when the fatal words of loyalty
were pronounced.25 The issues of the oath and the teaching of
the constitution from the pulpit, however, were only irritants in
a generally calm situation.
   Ecclesiastical prudence in the face of changing political circum¬
stances was also dictated by the reemergence of the liberal Church.
Partisans of reform along the lines of the Synod of Pistoia, such
as Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva, Felix Amat, Jose d’Espiga, and
others, returned from retirement, exile, or imprisonment to lead
  120                                     The Struggle Intensifies




discussion on the Church’s fate. The basic outline of reform had
changed little since the 1790’s. Advocates of change still looked
to the civil authorities and an alliance between Constitution and
Altar to impose reform on the Church. Issues such as the size and
role of the regular clergy, improvement in the status of the parish
priest, and reduction of papal authority in favor of the bishops
formed the core of the reforming program, as they had for three
decades. Reform received limited support from the episcopacy.
Some prelates—the cardinal primate, Luis de Borbon; Pedro Gon¬
zalez Vallejo, the former bishop of Mallorca deposed by Ferdinand
VII; and the auxiliary bishop of Madrid, Luis Lopez del Cas-
trillo—favored change, but the majority of the episcopacy re¬
mained firm in its opposition. As before, the strength of the
reformers was concentrated in the secondary levels of the eccle¬
siastical elite, among cathedral canons and university professors.
With the election to the Cortes of fifty-four priests, including the
leading figures of the reforming movement, a moderate program
of ecclesiastical renovation seemed close to realization.
   The issue of Church reform surfaced in the Cortes scarcely a
week after its opening. Clerical deputies called for legislation to
improve the economic condition of the parish clergy, who lived
“in shameful misery” compared with the “unmeasured opulence”
of the clerical elite.26 On August 20 the Cortes named a parlia¬
mentary committee to draft reform legislation for the Church.
Although some lay deputies sat on the committee, it was domi¬
nated by priests long identified with reform, such as Villanueva,
Diego Munoz Torrero, Pedro Gonzalez Vallejo, and others. They
worked for four months to produce a plan of reform that would
“conciliate the decorum of our holy religion and the necessary
endowment of its ministers” with “the kingdom’s state of pov¬
erty.”27 The committee produced a series of legislative proposals
that represented a common-sense compromise which recognized
political and financial reality while attempting to buttress the po¬
sition of the parish clergy. It made clear at the outset that its
projects would guarantee to “the ecclesiastical ministry in all its
ranks that it would be assisted and provided for by the Spanish
people, as it has been until now.”28 In one set of proposals the
committee recommended that the enormous disparities of income
among the kingdom’s bishops be eliminated through a simplified
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  121




system of episcopal salaries that would depend on the size and
importance of each diocese. It called for a reduction in the number
of cathedral canons and urged that one-half the places in chapters
be reserved for parish priests with at least twelve years’ parochial
service.
   The committee directed particular attention to improving the
condition and income of the parish clergy. Its recommendations,
far more complete than anything discussed at Cadiz, sought to
endow parish priests with what the reformers believed to be their
rightful place within the organization of the Church. The com¬
mittee thus called for a restructuring of the parochial system to
create parishes that reflected the size of local populations; it pro¬
posed the elimination of benefices unconnected to pastoral work;
and it suggested a range of salaries to provide the parish clergy
with decent incomes. The proposals attached equal importance
to improving the quality of the parochial clergy. Parish priests’
obligation to teach knowledge of the faith to their congregations
was stressed. The committee also stipulated that in the Balearic
Islands, Catalonia, Valencia, Navarra, and the Basque Provinces
parish priests and their assistants would be required to know and
speak the languages of their regions.29
   The parliamentary committee on ecclesiastical reform ad¬
dressed the fundamental problems arising from the imbalanced
organizational structure of the Old Regime Church. Its proposals
were not radical or extreme, but their acceptance by the kingdom’s
bishops and endorsement by the papacy were doubtful. Some of
the committee’s recommendations, such as that on the parish clergy,
eventually became law. The initiative for implementing the law’s
provisions, however, rarely came from the Church itself. In Bar¬
celona, for example, municipal authorities undertook to ration¬
alize the organization of parishes. New parishes were created to
serve districts that had been badly served; some parishes in dis¬
tricts with too many churches were suppressed. The reform won
at worst the open hostility of the diocesan administrators, at best
their unenthusiastic tolerance.30
   The tense but workable spirit of accommodation between a
conservative Church and the liberal State began to sour when, on
August 15, 1820, the Cortes ordered the suppression of the Jesuits
and the sale of their property to benefit the public treasury. The
  122                                     The Struggle Intensifies




Jesuits had not recovered their old preeminence, but their special
loyalty to the king, whom they regarded as a savior, and the tra¬
ditional hostility of progressive opinion sealed their fate.31 The
radical elements of the liberal press began attacking the order in
the spring, and the first signs of the popular anticlericalism that
characterized urban society in nineteenth-century Spain surfaced
against the Jesuits. Cries of “Death to the Jesuits!” were heard on
the streets of Madrid; members of the order venturing out were
insulted by angry crowds.32 Although the Cortes treated ex-mem-
bers of the order more gently than had Charles III, allowing them
to remain in the kingdom with government pensions, the suppres¬
sion elicited an angry protest from Pius VII and moved the Church
closer to a break with the new regime.
    The Cortes of 1820 also took up the question of reforming the
regular clergy. A parliamentary committee including Bishop Cas-
trillo produced a legislative proposal for the full Cortes in Sep¬
 tember. There was nothing particularly new in the project, which
 reflected many of the ideas that had circulated at Cadiz. But the
 proposal went beyond earlier suggestions for reform in calling
 for the suppression of all monasteries (that is the foundations of
 the strictly monastic orders, such as the Benedictines and Cister¬
cians) save eight to be reserved for monks unable to become sec¬
 ular priests because of age or infirmity. Opposition to the
 monasteries arose from the widespread belief that these com¬
 munities, devoted to contemplation and prayer, contributed noth¬
 ing to the pastoral or economic benefit of the kingdom. The
 nonmonastic orders, particularly the mendicants, were treated
 more leniently. Friaries with more than twenty-four ordained priests
 were to survive, although a prohibition on reception of novices
 would assure their eventual demise. The committee’s proposal
 received overwhelming endorsement from the Cortes (107 dep¬
 uties in favor, 32 against) and became law.33
    The ley de monacales became another source of dissension be¬
 tween the liberal State and most of the ecclesiastical leadership.
 But the reform of 1820 did not envisage total suppression of the
 regular clergy. It represented an attempt to rationalize the dis¬
 tribution and numbers of both religious houses and their mem¬
 bers. By 1822, 801 monasteries and friaries had been closed. But
 860 continued to function. The Cortes, moreover, tried to assure
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  123




the material survival of religious forced to leave their residences
by voting pensions to monks and friars who wished to be “secu¬
larized,” that is, to become members of the secular clergy. And
to a considerable extent the reform went a long way toward re¬
solving the problems it was designed to address. Regions such as
Asturias and Galicia, where the numbers of monasteries and fri¬
aries were small, lost fewer houses than Andalusia, where one-
half of the numerous religious communities suffered closure.34
But the process was not always logical. Subsequent legislation or¬
dered the suppression of monasteries and friaries in towns with
fewer than 400 inhabitants, thereby depriving many small com¬
munities of religious and educational services.
   The reform of the regulars and other legislation—the abolition
of the special judicial exemptions of the clergy, for example—
altered the Church’s position, but the changes fell within the mod¬
erate limits acceptable to the deputies of 1812, who occupied gov¬
ernment ministries until March 1821. Their influence, however,
declined progressively before the pressure of young, urban rad¬
icals, or exaltados, who demanded more far-reaching political re¬
form. The growing influence of the radicals was expressed through
a vigorous press, political clubs known as “patriotic societies” and,
on occasion, mob violence manipulated with considerable skill. All
these created a climate of instability that undermined the fragile
liberal consensus and made any accommodation with the Church
impossible on the basis of the reforms already carried out. Eccle¬
siastical legislation in the autumn of 1820 left the bishops angry
but disoriented and unsure of a course of action. Even the reform
of the regulars failed to evoke a massive episcopal reaction, save
for a few representations sent to the Cortes, such as that of the
archbishop of Valencia, Arias Teijeiro, who was promptly expelled
from the kingdom for his temerity. Between a conservative Church
resentful of the changes imposed on it and the liberal State sus¬
picious of clerical sincerity an atmosphere of mutual exasperation
developed by the end of 1820 that could not be dissipated.
   Growing political instability throughout 1821 and early 1822
as well as urban violence encouraged by the exaltados made the
new ministry formed in March 1821 ineffective from its begin¬
ning. Harassed by radicals and street violence on the left and by
the intrigues of the king and his supporters on the right, the
  124                                      The Struggle Intensifies




second liberal government staggered from crisis to crisis without
a sense of direction. It lacked a clear policy with respect to the
Church other than to expel prelates it judged subversive—those
of Cadiz, Ceuta, and Malaga—and to fill important ecclesiastical
positions with liberal clerics. But its nominations of Jose d’Espiga
for Seville, Diego Munoz Torrero for Guadix, Felix Torres Amat
for Barcelona, and Manuel Abad y Queipo for Tortosa—all known
for their support of moderate ecclesiastical reform—were refused
by Pius VII, although the pope approved one reformer, Antonio
Posada Rubin de Celis, for the bishopric of Cartagena. Failing to
fill episcopal vacancies with its own men, the State used pressure,
including mob violence and the threat of force, to compel cathe¬
dral chapters to elect interim diocesan administrators well dis¬
posed to the regime. In Orihuela the direct intervention of the
city’s mayor and council caused the chapter to retract its first
choice and elect a canon sympathetic to liberal views. In Oviedo
the presence of armed men at the electing chapter was sufficient
to persuade the canons to choose a progovernment administrator.
    Open resistance by ecclesiastics to the liberal State began in
1821 on a limited scale. Jeronimo Merino, an ex-parish priest in
the province of Burgos whose guerrilla exploits against the French
in the war of independence had earned him a canonry in Palencia
from a grateful Ferdinand VII, took to the hills against the liberals.
However, massive clerical participation in armed opposition to the
regime did not begin until 1822. The election of a more radical
Cortes in that year destroyed whatever possibility remained for
an accommodation with the Church.
    The declining influence of the reformers who had inspired the
ecclesiastical changes of 1820 left initiative on Church matters
with a group of exaltado clerics, including Juan Antonio Llorente,
an old reformer of the 1790’s whose views had become more
extreme.35 The new Cortes decided to take up the question of a
sweeping reform of the Church. After forbidding bishops to or¬
dain priests until the question had been resolved, the assembly
named a commission with a substantial representation of parish
priests to draft a general plan for the clergy. The proposals, pre¬
sented in January 1823, went far beyond the reform of 1820.36
They called for radical restructuring of the dioceses to accord
with provincial boundaries, reduction of the pope’s role in epis-
     The Struggle Intensifies                                   125




copal appointments to that of an adviser, abolition of the tithe,
and creation of a special tax to pay the clergy’s salaries. The reform
plan was never passed by the Cortes, because of opposition to the
scheme and perhaps because of a tacit recognition that changes
so radical would do the regime little good in what had become a
civil war between liberalism and its opponents.
   The radical drift of the liberal revolution in 1822 as well as the
obvious insincerity of the king, who was doing everything possible
to bring down the constitutional system, led to a series of uprisings
against the regime from Galicia to Catalonia. The most ambitious,
an invasion into northwestern Catalonia financed and encouraged
by the conservative government of Louis XVIII of France, began
successfully by capturing the city of Urgel in the summer of 1822.
The royalists were unable to follow up their initial victory, al¬
though sporadic fighting continued in the countryside for a year.
   Royalist revolts did not pose an immediate danger to liberal
military dominance, but they won extensive support from con¬
servative churchmen, particularly intransigent opponents of the
regime living in exile in France, and from disaffected members
of the regular clergy angry over their treatment by the liberal
State. Two ecclesiastics known for their commitment to absolut¬
ism—Juan de Cavia Gonzalez, bishop of Osma; and Victor Saez,
canon of Toledo and ex-confessor of Ferdinand VII—formed
part of the five-member regency council established in Urgel in
August 1822 to rule in the name of the king, who was by then a
virtual prisoner in Madrid.
   The ceremony proclaiming the regency revealed the extent of
clerical support for the campaign to restore absolute monarchy.
Canons of the Urgel cathedral chapter attended, carrying their
ceremonial cross and religious standards, while a large group of
friars wearing swords on their clerical dress looked on. Priests,
particularly from the regular clergy, did not hesitate to take arms
against the liberals in Catalonia; over 100 perished in the royalist
assault on the city of Cervera. An ex-Trappist lay brother, Antonio
Maranon, terrorized rural districts with a band of unruly troops
exhorted into battle with the cry: “Long live the King and Religion!
Death to the Constitution!”37 For every friar who took up arms,
many more gave the royalist cause their support through preach¬
ing. The Franciscans of Catalonia later boasted that they had
  126                                     The Struggle Intensifies




pronounced “constant invectives against triumphant impiety” when
they preached during the war against liberalism.38 The active par¬
ticipation of ecclesiastics in the revolts of 1822—1823 revealed how
deeply the conservative Church was committed to the restoration
of absolutism.
   Clerical involvement in royalist rebellions moved the liberal
State, increasingly under the influence of its most radical elements,
to reprisals. The executions, burnings, and sackings of religious
institutions, and the general harassment of the clergy during 1822
and 1823 were not carried out on a massive scale nor did they
occur throughout the country. But the attacks on the persons and
property of the clergy represented the first example in modern
Spanish history of a violent anticlericalism. Liberal exasperation
was greatest in Catalonia, where the Church was suspected of
conspiring with the royalists of Urgel.
   In Barcelona the Franciscans were accused of hiding arms and
signaling from their windows to royalist agents. The authorities
carried out periodic searches for arms in the order’s friaries
throughout the region, even opening tombs in Lerida. Between
September and November 1822 the friars’ position grew more
precarious. Not daring to venture onto the streets, they heard
cries of “traitor,” “enemies of the nation,” “death,” and “let them
die and be drawn and quartered.”39 Individual friars judged most
suspect by the authorities were arrested; others fled rather than
await whatever fate was in store for them. The friars of Horta
thus abandoned their friary on October 16. The buildings, in¬
cluding the church, were set on fire after their departure. The
monks of the great monastery of Poblet, one of the few monastic
houses allowed to remain open after the 1820 legislation on the
regular clergy, left on November 26. Local residents, long re¬
sentful of the monks’ financial exactions, then invaded the mon¬
astery, burned the choir and organ, and carried off everything of
value including the locks on the doors.
   The campaign against the regular clergy culminated in the
suppression on November 25 of all friaries and monasteries in
Catalonia. By that time hundreds of religious had already aban¬
doned their houses. Those remaining either adopted the status
of secular priests or went into exile. Two boat loads of Franciscans
from Barcelona were sent to Malaga and Cartagena; another two,
     The Struggle Intensifies                                    127




composed of the most recalcitrant friars, were dispatched to Cuba.
   The second liberal revolution and its ecclesiastical policies deep¬
ened the antagonisms within the Church that had existed since
Cadiz. In Lerida the cathedral chapter divided between the priests
who avidly supported the constitutional regime and those who
continued to place their confidence in absolute monarchy. Among
the liberal canons were Antonio Forriol, who was accused in the
later royalist reaction of having shouted “Constitution or death!”
from the cathedral pulpit, and Martin Laguna, whose ardent de¬
fense of the constitution in a local periodical led to his exile in
1824.40 On the other side stood Canon Domingo Cossio, who was
exiled to Avila by the liberal authorities, and Doctor Jose Vidal,
former administrator of the diocese, who was arrested in February
1823 along with Bishop de Renteria. In Barcelona the liberal cause
received support from several ex-members of the religious orders
who had taken advantage of the legislation authorizing seculari¬
zation. Eudaldo Jaumeandreu, an ex-Augustinian, accepted a chair
established by the local junta de comercio for the explanation of
the constitution; Alberto Pujol, a former Carmelite, published a
political catechism “to instruct the Catalans in the rights, privileges
and advantages which the Political Constitution of the Spanish
Monarchy provides.”41 Apart from a handful of prelates, such as
Gonzalez Vallejo, the liberal cause won little support among the
bishops, however. Occasionally, the government could rely on the
adherence of lesser diocesan authorities, as in Tarragona where
the vicar general of the archdiocese condemned the regency of
Urgel as a “criminal insurrection” designed to “change the actual
system of government which the entire nation has embraced.”42
   But the situation of ecclesiastics committed to liberalism became
untenable with the destruction of Church property and the exe¬
cutions carried out in Catalonia by increasingly undisciplined troops.
The execution of more than fifty priests in the diocese of Bar¬
celona—including the bishop of Vich, Raimundo Strauch, who had
been arrested for his proabsolutist views—along with wide-spread
indiscriminate violence—such as the sacking of the cathedral of
Solsona by liberal soldiers in June 1823—deprived priests still loyal
to the regime of whatever remained of their credibility. Even Felix
Amat, the grand old man of the reforming movement and its
leading intellectual exponent for two decades, finally welcomed the
  128                                    The Struggle Intensifies




return of Ferdinand VII to power as the only way of ending the
disorders characteristic of the liberal revolution’s later stages.43
   The conflict between the Church and the liberal State rein¬
forced the bishops’ tendency to look to Rome for defense. Al¬
though Pius VII had urged moderation on the hierarchy following
the revolution of 1820, he vigorously attacked the ecclesiastical
legislation of the Cortes. Prelates, such as Pedro de Inguanzo of
Zamora, maintained close contacts with the papacy, which was
increasingly seen as one of the few bulwarks of a Church under
siege.44 The regalism of the episcopacy during the eighteenth
century became a thing of the past. The rancors and jurisdictional
disputes that had once inspired an anti-Roman attitude among
bishops disappeared before the much graver threat posed by the
liberal State.
   In April 1823 an invasion mounted by the French with the
approval of the European powers put an end to the liberal ex¬
periment. The regime, weakened by divisions within its ranks and
unable to reestablish its authority in the face of continued mob
action and military indiscipline, succumbed virtually without a
struggle. The French army moved easily through the kingdom
and was welcomed by a population weary of anarchy and violence.
The conservative Church, which had resisted the Napoleonic in¬
vasion with fervor, looked to the “100,000 sons of St. Louis” as
saviors. In Santiago the cathedral chapter, although nearly bank¬
rupt, donated 30,000 reales to help finance the campaign against
the liberals; when the French arrived in the city, the canons sent
a special delegation to receive the commander with expressions
of gratitude. The rapid triumph of the invasion led quickly to the
reestablishment of Ferdinand VII’s absolute power. The Church
again looked to the king to restore its traditional place within
Spanish society, but events between 1820 and 1823 had given the
Church a shock as shattering as the one it had received during
the war of independence.


A Church Besieged, 1820—1823

  The economic decline of the Church, only partially halted be¬
tween 1814 and 1820, accelerated during the period of liberal
     The Struggle Intensifies                                     129




rule. The Cortes elected in 1820 did not carry out a thorough
restructuring of Church financing, although it received petitions
from peasant proprietors asking for an end to the “slavery” of
the tithe. In 1821 the Cortes ordered the tithe reduced by one-
half and set a salary scale for the secular clergy designed to reduce
expenditures on the upper levels of the ecclesiastical establish¬
ment. The reform was intended to redistribute income from bish¬
ops and canons to the parish clergy. It was in accord with liberal
exaltation of parish priests as a civic and religious elite engaged
in educating a rural population in public and spiritual virtues.
Parish priests were “the natural educators of the people,” said a
liberal periodical in 1820. They would plant “the seeds of virtue”
among their flocks by assisting the poor, explaining the law, and
teaching the constitution.45 The reform of 1821 attempted to re¬
solve an obvious problem, and it promised a political return by
appealing to the group that had suffered most from the in¬
equalities of the Old Regime Church.
   The hopes raised by financial reform and discussion of other
projects to improve the status of parish priests were quickly dis¬
appointed. The “half-tithe” (medio diezmo) did not yield what was
necessary to pay clerical salaries. In rural districts the pattern of
tithe evasion established during the war of independence contin¬
ued. Moreover, the 300-ducats-a-year salary established for parish
priests still left them badly paid relative to the ecclesiastical elite,
and there is evidence that in some dioceses—Palencia and Oviedo,
for example—the real income of the parochial clergy declined
substantially between 1820 and 1823. Diocesan revenues based on
the half-tithe continued their downward spiral. By 1823 the in¬
come of Toledo, once the most opulent diocese of the Spanish
Church, had fallen by one-half, compared with 1800. The reve¬
nues of the cathedral chapter of Avila declined to their lowest
level since 1764.46 The financial reform of 1821 irritated the ec¬
clesiastical elite of bishops and canons, who saw their incomes
reduced and were resentful, in any event, of special levies, such
as the 2 million reales demanded by the authorities from the
chapter of Santiago in 1820. Nor did the reform satisfy the parish
clergy, whose situation was as bad as ever.
   In spite of declining revenues the secular clergy at least retained
  130                                     The Struggle Intensifies




ownership of the rural and urban property on which its survival
depended. The regular clergy was less fortunate. The 1820 re¬
form of the regulars provided for the sale of the property of
suppressed monasteries and friaries, with the proceeds to relieve
the State’s desperate finances. The disamortization ordered in
1820 represented the straightforward reaction of a government
that saw the wealth of the orders as a convenient remedy to its
own fiscal crisis; it also reflected liberal belief in economic indi¬
vidualism as opposed to the collective ownership of land by the
traditional corporations of Spanish society. Although the State
had auctioned off the property of charitable institutions and re¬
ligious endowments of certain types during the reign of Charles
IV, it had not directly attacked the property of either the secular
or regular clergy.
   Between 1820 and 1823 the government seized monastic prop¬
erty and began to sell it to individual buyers in a preview of the
massive disamortization after 1835. Unfortunately, sale of the reg¬
ulars’ property after 1820 has not been studied extensively, but
it is known that the State realized over 700 million reales from
public auctions.47 In 1821 alone the State disposed of the property
of forty monasteries, including cloisters, churches, and ancillary
buildings. Not all the holdings of the suppressed houses were sold,
however. Some monastic buildings were taken over by local and
military^ authorities for use as hospitals, barracks, asylums,
and the like. The property of other religious communities—
particularly of the mendicants, who depended less on tithes
and rental income for financing—was often judged unattractive
by prospective buyers, who offered less than the official
appraisal values. Difficult economic and political conditions kept
the sale of Church property within limits during the liberal re¬
gime, but it established the guidelines for a similar policy that
later would destroy the economic base sustaining the religious
orders.
   The origins of the deeply rooted hostility against the clergy and
ecclesiastical institutions that has so troubled modern Spain have
not been satisfactorily explored. The proverbial anticlericalism
characteristic of sectors of Spanish society in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries is difficult to explain as a simple, fixed phe¬
nomenon unrelated to political, economic, and social transfor-
     The Struggle Intensifies                                     131




 mations. The term anticlericalism itself is a catchall that contributes
 little to understanding the distinct and changing anticlericalisms
 of Spain’s recent history. At least as far back as the sixteenth
 century, an anticlericalism of sorts developed from the critique of
 the regular clergy by literary satirists and from the questioning
 of certain aspects of the Church’s economic role. But criticism of
 the Church was cautiously expressed and, in any event, confined
 to a small group of writers and bureaucrats. A popular anticler¬
 icalism also occasionally appeared in violent form in rural areas
 that were dominated by great monastic foundations with extensive
jurisdictional and financial rights over the surrounding country¬
 side. Chronic and sometimes extreme tension was common enough
 between monasteries and local inhabitants during the eighteenth
 century and left a residue of bitterness in the wake of lawsuits
 and occasional armed confrontations. The rural anticlericalism of
 the eighteenth century, limited in geographic extent and episodic,
 did not pass to the cities, where the charitable, educational, and
 economic activities of the regular and secular clergy ameliorated
 the lot of the masses and made the Church a necessary social
 institution.
     During the first quarter of the nineteenth century the prestige
 and popularity of the Church and the clergy began to wane. The
 Church’s inability to play its traditional social role, as well as the
 political struggle between absolutists and liberals in which clerics
 were deeply involved, contributed to this process. But it was not
 until the second liberal regime that hostility against the Church
 spread so extensively that it assumed broader significance. The
 anticlericalisms of the past surfaced again and with a vengeance.
 A flood of satires, more pointed than their predecessors, ridiculed
 aspects of ecclesiastical life. One of the most popular, written by
 a priest, Salvador Minano Bedoya—Political Laments for a Poor Little
Idler Accustomed to Live at Someone Else’s Expense (1820)—ridiculed
 priests living off the tithe as freeloaders whose demands were
 ruining the peasantry. In Minano’s work as in others, monks and
 friars—“the fat fathers” as one author described them—were sub¬
ject to particularly intense criticism as parasitic loafers contrib¬
 uting nothing to society.48 The satires of the liberal period appealed
 not to a restricted and cultivated elite but to a broader audience
of intellectuals, reforming clerics, lawyers, bureaucrats, army of-
   132                                     The Struggle Intensifies




ficers, journalists, and others supporting the liberal cause. Min-
ano’s work, for example, went through several editions.
   Political circumstances between 1820 and 1823 lay behind the
popularity of these satirical attacks on the Church. Similar works
in the eighteenth century made fun of the foibles and shortcom¬
ings of the clergy, but they dared not question the position of an
institution enjoying immense prestige and royal favor. By 1820
the consensus that once protected the Church no longer existed.
The Church had become the focus of political controversy. Lib¬
erals resented the support it had given to Ferdinand VII, and
they questioned the retention of its social and economic privileges
in the new society.
   It should be stressed, however, that at no point did liberal opin¬
ion envisage a campaign against either religion or the idea that
Spain must be a Catholic State. In 1821 a decree of the Cortes
left no doubt on this score. “Anyone who conspires ... to establish
any other religion in . . . the Spains or that the Spanish nation
should abandon its profession of the Catholic, Roman and Ap¬
ostolic Religion will be persecuted as a traitor and will suffer the
death penalty.”49 As at Cadiz liberals sought to adapt the Church
to new political and social conditions while leaving intact its po¬
sition as the official religion of the nation. Even the most radical
liberals, the exaltados who formed the revolutionary patriotic so¬
cieties, tried “to reconcile religion and the Constitution.”50 Dis¬
cussion on ecclesiastical reform in the Madrid club, one of the
most active, took an essentially moderate course designed to show,
according to one orator in 1820, “that the liberals are the true
Christians,” while the opponents of change are “the enemies of
Jesus Christ.”51
   Both liberal moderates and extremists wished to remodel the
Church in their own image—to create a Church with a public-
spirited clergy, a kind of religious civil service to spread knowledge
and progress to the illiterate masses, a Church to contribute to
economic improvement rather than drain the kingdom of its pro¬
ductive capabilities. The obstinacy of the hierarchy and many
clerics in clinging to their memory of the privileged Church of
the eighteenth century should not have surprised liberal opinion,
and perhaps it did not. But successive liberal governments did
not know how to deal with the Church’s refusal to accept this new
     The Struggle Intensifies                                   133




role. As a result a political anticlericalism developed, which took
the form of rhetorical attacks on the Church in parliamentary
debates and a press campaign that grew in intensity as the liberal
experiment followed a more radical course. Liberals looked to
 public opinion to force the Church to mend its recalcitrant ways.
    The unrest of local populations, irritated by the financial and
jurisdictional demands of monasteries, surfaced again during the
 period of liberal rule. The sacking of the Cistercian monastery of
 Poblet in November 1822 and the invasion of the Carthusian
 house of Santa Maria de las Cuevas near Seville by a crowd that
 “profaned” the Church “with irreverent excesses” are examples
 of the “monastic,” rural anticlericalism of the past.52 Popular re¬
 action to monasteries depended on local conditions and the nature
 of the exactions they imposed. Smaller foundations with modest
 resources that performed real services for isolated peasants often
 won their affection, as in Batuecas, where a small community of
 fifteen monks, “the principal source of religious information, of
 spiritual assistance, and of medicinal relief,” was so esteemed by
 the shepherds of the district that they petitioned for the monas¬
 tery’s survival after the 1820 decree of suppression.53 Hostility
 directed against the monasteries was still sporadic and uneven in
 extent, but it was expressed more violently than ever before. More¬
 over, it reflected the deep antagonism between the corporate
 property characteristic of Old Regime society and the interests of
 local peasants.
     Between 1820 and 1823 resurgent popular opposition to and
 violence against monastic foundations represented the settling of
 decades-, perhaps centuries-old rural scores. The appearance of
 a distinctly popular urban anticlericalism, however, was new. We
 know little of its nature, its geographic extent, or the social back¬
 ground of its adherents. There is no study similar to that of George
 Rude on the urban masses during the French Revolution. Few
 areas of research would be more useful for an understanding of
 the urban lower classes’ contribution to Spanish revolutionary pol¬
 itics between 1820 and 1873. It is at least clear that the remarkable
 docility characteristic of urban populations during the eighteenth
 century gave way by 1820 to a mood of unrest and agitation in
 which hostility toward the Church was prominent. The crowds
 that surged through the inquisitorial prisons of Barcelona and
  134                                      The Struggle Intensifies




Madrid in March 1820 scattering papers and freeing inmates, the
threats and insults directed against the Jesuits and the regulars
in both cities, as well as occasional physical attacks—such as that
inflicted on a Franciscan friar in the town of Mora who was dragged
through the streets by an enraged mob and hurled into the river
Ebro in 1822—reveal how the situation had changed. The cry
“Death to the friars!” entered the vocabulary of the urban masses.
   The new anticlericalism of the cities, however, was neither uni¬
versal nor indiscriminate. It was most visible in Madrid, the center
of the nation’s political life, where the attitudes of liberal politi¬
cians could hlter down to the streets through pamphlets, broad¬
sheets, and simple word-of-mouth propaganda. But it was also
important in Barcelona, where feeling against the Church ran
high because of royalist activity in the region.
   The specific contours of violent, urban anticlericalism in liberal
Spain before 1874 remain to be studied. But it is at least clear
that the declining charitable capabilities of the Church, the long
and painful crisis of city economies after 1808, and the gradual
conquest of the urban masses by liberalism destroyed the social
contract that had protected the Church during the eighteenth
century. Although it is tempting to see the historic origins of the
massive anticlerical outbursts of the twentieth century in the vio¬
lence of 1820—1823, the assassinations of the regular clergy that
took place in Madrid and Barcelona in 1834 and 1835, and the
episodic attacks occurring after the revolution of 1868, violent
anticlericalism in liberal Spain developed within a narrower con¬
text than did its counterpart in the twentieth century. The most
serious attacks took place early in the period, during the second
liberal revolution and at the beginning of the third (1834-1835),
and they focused largely on the regular clergy and its property.
Once the issue of the regulars was resolved with the suppression
of most of the male orders in 1836, urban violence against the
Church declined noticeably. There was little during the govern¬
ment of General Espartero (1840-1843) and even less under the
revolutionary government of 1854 to 1856.
   Violence against the Church in the cities reflected the state at
any given moment of the conflict between liberalism and abso¬
lutism. Attacks on the Church generally increased when the strug¬
gle was going badly for the liberals and decreased when their
     The Struggle Intensifies                                135



cause was prospering. This may explain the lack of violence be¬
tween 1854 and 1856, when the Church’s threat was not perceived
as serious, and the presence of violence, although with nothing
like the virulence of 1822-1823, following the outbreak of the
Carlist War in 1872. Although the occasional violence against
the Church in the cities reflected the inchoate resentment of the
urban masses against an apparently powerful economic insti¬
tution, it arose more directly from the political struggle between
liberalism and ecclesiastical interests. In the twentieth century
hostility to the Church in the cities had deeper roots in the re¬
action of the dispossessed against the excesses of a conservative
social order arising from the development of an industrialized
economy.
   Clerics themselves perceived that the Church was losing influ¬
ence; hence their frequent attacks on the cities as “modern Bab-
ylons.” Whether hostility toward the Church indicated the spread
of dechristianization in large urban areas is less clear, although
evidence suggests that this may have been the case, at least in
Madrid, where the desertion of men from religious services was
being noted by observers.54 The development of popular anti¬
clericalism in the cities between 1820 and 1823 was limited, but
it signaled a significant change in the Church’s relationship to
urban populations. The eighteenth-century Church had been urban
in a rural society, but by the 1820’s the Church began to turn
slowly away from the cities and large towns toward a more reliable
Catholic countryside. The foundations were already being laid for
the divorce between the Church and the cities, which would be
as significant for the nineteenth-century Church as the isolation
of its eighteenth-century predecessor from the rural world had
been.
   By 1823 the reforming movement that had developed in the
Church decades before was a spent force. The moderate clerical
reformers of 1820, nourished in the vital ecclesiastical culture of
the late eighteenth century, were an aging group incapable of
producing a second generation to carry on the struggle. The death
of Felix Amat in 1824 deprived them of their last figure of in¬
tellectual significance, and absolutist purges did the rest. A few
reformers lingered on, Pedro Gonzalez Vallejo and Antonio Po¬
sada Rubin de Celis, for example, to reappear after 1835, but the
  136                                      The Struggle Intensifies




religious and intellectual atmosphere that had allowed the move¬
ment to flourish had dissipated long since.
   The reformers of 1820 looked to the liberal State to transform
the Church so that they might realize their lofty, moral vision of
the institution. By the end of 1820 their hopes lay in ruins because
of their own miscalculations about the reform of the regulars, the
growing antagonism between conservative ecclesiastics and the
Cortes, and, not least, the radical direction of the liberal revolu¬
tion. By 1822 the question for liberal exaltados and the minority
of clerics supporting them was no longer the purification of the
Church so that it might fulfill its spiritual mission more effectively,
but the domestication of an institution refusing to cooperate with
the State. Caught between the recalcitrance of the conservative
Church and the frustration of liberal politicians, the reforming
ideal that had inspired a select and cultivated clerical minority
since the 1780’s was doomed.
   The declining influence of the ecclesiastical reformers at least
clarified the problem of the Church for both liberals and the
ecclesiastical leadership. By 1823 neither side accepted the idea
of reform that had emerged from within the royal Church of the
late eighteenth century. The alliance between the regalistic policies
of the old monarchy and the liberalism of a new political elite had
obscured, if anything, the problem of a Church intent on pre¬
serving its traditional situation in a time of rapid political change.
The ground was clear for a straightforward conflict between a
Church that was increasingly ultramontane in its sympathies and
allied with Ferdinand VII and the diverse currents of liberal
opinion determined to force it into line.


Throne and Altar, 1823—1833

   The conservative Church welcomed the restoration of Ferdi¬
nand VII to absolute power. As in 1814 the king hastened to
satisfy the Church by annulling liberal ecclesiastical legislation,
allowing the regulars to reoccupy their houses, and appointing
his ex-confessor, Victor Saez, a clerical ultra of the first order, to
an influential ministry. Saez quickly commanded that devotions
to the Blessed Sacrament be held throughout the kingdom to
appease divine wrath for the injuries inflicted on the Church dur-
     The Struggle Intensifies                                     137




ing liberal rule. He also dispatched missionary friars to preach
against what he saw as erroneous and heretical opinions. On the
surface the situation appeared similar to that of 1814; in fact, the
measures taken to appease the Church did not satisfy a growing
body of intransigent clerics. The illusion that once led ecclesiastics
to trust Ferdinand to inaugurate a golden age of religion had long
since dissipated. Instinctively, churchmen realized that the king
had cleverly used them for his own ends; they did not intend
allowing him to play the same game again. Moreover, clerical
participation in two years of conspiracy and armed revolt against
the liberal State gave some ecclesiastics a taste for political intrigue
that they did not abandon when their cause triumphed.
    The vague, theocratic hopes that had inspired the Church in
its crusade against the Cortes of Cadiz gave way to a more straight¬
forward objective—the eradication of liberalism from Spanish soil.
Royalist periodicals under clerical influence demanded that all
“apostles of irreligion” should leave the country and that civil and
ecclesiastical posts should be held only by the “truly Catholic.”55
The Church set about purging liberal sympathizers from its ranks.
Bishops such as Gonzalez Vallejo and Rubin de Celis were sent
packing, and cathedral canons turned on colleagues who had sup¬
ported liberalism. In Oviedo the canons accused Domingo So-
moza, the diocese’s administrator during the liberal regime and
a prominent exaltado cleric, of being guilty of “perversion”; they
stripped him of his canonry and benefices. Miguel de Riego, an¬
other canon of Oviedo and brother of the hero of 1820, suffered
the same fate; in Badajoz the chapter purged one of its members
for criticizing the king and displaying “implacable hatred” against
the Inquisition. The purge even reached down to the parish clergy;
in San Roque in Cadiz the parish priest was ousted simply for
having baptized a child with the name “John of the Constitution.”56
    Conservative ecclesiastics and the king shared an aversion for
liberalism, hence the campaign of repression carried out by Church
and State against dissidents. But the Church, or at least its most
ultra representatives, who had learned a thing or two about po¬
litical pressure and manipulation during the liberal period, were
determined to force Ferdinand VII to conform entirely to their
demands. Their campaign centered on restoring the Inquisition.
Even before the liberal regime’s end, the bishops living in exile
  138                                     The Struggle Intensifies




had petitioned Pius VII for revival of the Holy Tribunal as the
“strongest bulwark of the faith.”57 An intransigent royalist press
under clerical influence insistently demanded the reestablishment
of the Inquisition during the summer and autumn of 1823. The
dismissal of Saez in December and a royal proposal drafted under
French pressure for a limited amnesty in 1824 aroused the ap¬
prehension of the ultras, who redoubled efforts to force the king
into line. A letter the bishop of Urgel sent to Ferdinand in January
1824 reveals how aggressive and independent the conservative
Church was becoming. Bishop Bernardo Frances Caballero de¬
nounced the monarch for timidity in not having restored the
Inquisition and accused the new ministry, composed of more mod¬
erate figures than the deposed Saez, of being masons and Jan-
senists in disguise.
   During 1824 Church opposition to even the slightest concession
to the vanquished liberals became more threatening. “Do not for¬
get what Isaiah said,” declared the bishop of Leon, “you should
not have union with the impious even in the grave.” Secret royalist
societies in which ecclesiastics were represented proliferated. Al¬
though historians previously doubted the existence of these so¬
cieties, Tejada has proven through the use of police records that
they formed the nucleus of conspiratorial activity designed to
bring the government under their control.58
   Societies in Madrid, Valencia, Murcia, Tortosa, Barcelona,
Oviedo, Extremadura, Granada, and Jaen included prominent
churchmen. The intendant general of police in Valencia reported
to Madrid that the administrator of the archdiocese, Jose Maria
Pujol, and members of the religious orders—such as Fray Serafino
de Penaquilla, a Capuchin known for his preaching abilities—
were engaging in conspiratorial activity. In Murcia the cathedral
dean, Bias Ostolaza, an ex-traditionalist deputy at Cadiz, was
implicated; in Tortosa the bishop and many of the canons were
involved. The appearance of these “apostolic juntas” as well as of
a group of intriguers in Madrid, who suitably named themselves
the Society of the Exterminating Angel, created a climate of ag¬
itation and coercion not unlike that with which the liberals had
pressured Ferdinand VII between 1820 and 1823.
   The activity of these conspiratorial groups did not pose a serious
threat to the government, however. Police spies, including some
     The Struggle Intensifies                                  139




ecclesiastics such as Canon Solera in Madrid, kept the king fully
informed of what was transpiring. Suspected clerics, like the gen¬
eral of the Franciscans, Fray Cirilo Alameda, later cardinal and
archbishop of Toledo, were closely watched by the authorities. An
attempted ultra rising at Manresa in 1825 was easily quashed, as
was a more serious revolt, la guerra de los agraviados, in rural Cat¬
alonia two years later.
   The ultra Church, frustrated by the king’s refusal to reestablish
the Inquisition and deal as severely as possible with dissenters,
began to turn in 1825 toward the king’s brother and heir to the
throne, Charles. The unimaginative and reactionary prince had
won clerical approval by voting in the Council of State to rees¬
tablish the Inquisition. To what extent Charles was involved in
the widespread intrigues of the mid-1820’s is not entirely clear,
but the authorities suspected that conspirators in Madrid main¬
tained contact with him through Cirilo Alameda using the cover
of Franciscan friaries. How much support the clerical ultras had
within the Church is also difficult to establish. The papal nuncio,
Giustiniani, and Rome counseled Spanish ecclesiastics to follow a
policy of moderation, and many did so though they continued to
support royal absolutism. In fact, a division took place within the
conservative Church between a minority of bishops, canons, and
friars who were deeply involved in efforts to impose their will on
the king and a “silent” majority who were as docile as ever to
governmental authority. The ultras had a following among the
parish clergy in certain regions, notably Catalonia, where the
memory of liberal attacks on the Church was still fresh, and Cuenca,
where a government circular to the bishop urging civil peace was
read “through gritted teeth” by local priests according to police
reports.59
   Confronted by aggressive clerics, Ferdinand VII did not have
the luxury available to him in 1814 to deal with a Church un¬
equivocally committed to the maintenance of his absolute power.
The king, aware of clerical complicity in the risings of 1825 and
1827, mistrusted the ultras and regarded their campaign to re¬
establish the Inquisition as a threat to the Crown’s independence.
He could not, however, afford to alienate the segment of the
Church most hostile to liberalism by a policy of repression against
ecclesiastical extremists. Ferdinand chose instead to follow a dan-
  140                                    The Struggle Intensifies




gerous but shrewd course—balancing the respective interest groups
supporting his regime. He hemmed and hawed on the Inquisition,
occasionally leaning in favor of reestablishment but in the end
successfully resisting ultra pressure on the question.
    The king was faced with a more difficult problem beginning in
 1824, episcopal inquisitions organized without Madrid’s approval
in Valencia, Tarragona, and Orihuela. These “Juntas of Faith,”
operating with the sanction of local authorities and eventually with
 the tacit but grudging approbation of the central government,
were designed to secure, according to Simon Lopez, the arch¬
bishop of Valencia, “correction, salutary penitences, retractions
and the return of a thousand who have repented to the bosom
of the Church.”60 The juntas never enjoyed official standing, but
 they went about their work with inquisitorial thoroughness. The
junta of Valencia sentenced a liberal canon to ten years’ impris¬
onment after forcing him to denounce the constitution as “de¬
 testable, sacrilegious, [and] contrary to divine and human law.”61
    The independent action of the juntas troubled the king, who
unsuccessfully ordered their dissolution in 1825. The junta of
Valencia continued and in 1826 secured the execution of a liberal
school teacher, Cayetano Ripoll. Although the central government
through the minister of justice had no choice but to approve the
sentence, Madrid knew very little of the judicial process until it
was nearly completed. Moreover, the government’s police officials
increasingly resented the juntas’ autonomy and raised obstacles
to their operation. The king, fearing that the juntas could be as
dangerous to him as the Inquisition, kept them from spreading,
and by 1827 those already established had ceased to function.
Their brief existence, however, revealed the delicacy of the po¬
litical balance in the mid-1820’s.
    Until his death in 1833 Ferdinand successfully frustrated ultra
hopes for the establishment of a totally repressive regime. Al¬
though the king occasionally had to recognize their strength, as
he did following the attempted liberal rising of 1830, he relied
on moderate ministers—such as Francisco de Cea Bermudez—
who, though committed to absolutism, fell within bureaucratic
traditions much like those of the Old Regime monarchy. Ferdi¬
nand’s suspicions of ultra intentions lay behind his moderate di¬
rection during his later years. The birth of a daughter, the future
    The Struggle Intensifies                                  141




Isabella II, in 1830 to the elderly monarch and his young wife,
Maria Cristina of Naples, reinforced these tendencies. The king’s
resolve, encouraged by the queen’s insistence, to secure the acces¬
sion of Isabella, setting aside Charles’s claims, created an atmos¬
phere of political intrigue at the court. Partisans of Charles and
Isabella struggled to influence Ferdinand’s decision. The king
vacillated under intense ultra pressure, but in the end held to his
original intention. The need to broaden the base of support for
Isabella’s controversial succession led to the beginnings of an un¬
certain and tentative policy of accommodation, designed to per¬
suade liberal opinion to support a more moderate royal absolutism
against Charles’s ultra tendencies.
   Between 1824 and 1830 the Church experienced a recovery
similar to that of 1814-1820. The religious orders repossessed
their property from purchasers, who were unceremoniously ex¬
pelled from their holdings.62 But there were indications that nei¬
ther the secular nor the regular clergy could recover their
prerevolutionary prosperity. Christian Hermann has noted the
catastrophic decline in income suffered by certain episcopal
households (Table 4). The continuing crisis of agriculture as well
as the destruction of buildings between 1820 and 1823 placed
monasteries and convents in economic difficulties from which they
never recovered. Wealthy foundations, such as the monastery of
Guadalupe, were forced to sell property to survive. The friaries
of the mendicants, which depended heavily on pious donations
to meet expenses, were caught in even more difficult circumstan¬
ces. The Minims of Andalusia found themselves so hard-pressed
that they refused to accept novices who could not pay for their
own food and lodging.
   There are indications that some monasteries and friaries re¬
versed the long downward trend in recruitment, but overall the
orders’ demographic decline continued.63 Statistics gathered in
1835, before the final dissolution of the regulars, set their number
at 30,906, a loss of more than 3,000 since 1820 and of over 18,000
since the census of 1787.64 Declining numbers, however, did not
reverse the deteriorating quality of religious life. Superiors con¬
stantly lamented departures from the norms of conventual prac¬
tice, and the chronic factionalism that had characterized the orders
since the eighteenth century continued unabated. Disputes be-
   142                                          The Struggle Intensifies




Table 4. Revenues of selected episcopal households, 1813—1827 (in reales).

                                  Revenues in the year-

City            1813           1815          1823          1826        1827

Granada       1,786,897                    834,666                   528,153
Jaen          1,106,093                    873,815        535,104
Malaga                       1,404,497     759,819        674,722

   Source: Christian Hermann, “Les revenus des eveques espagnols au dix-huit-
ieme siecle (1650—1830),” Melanges de la Casa de Velazquez, 10 (1974), 196.




tween friars and their superiors troubled many convents, as in
Almagro, where in 1833 the prior appealed to the civil authorities
for assistance in restoring order after discovering one of his nov¬
ices carrying a pistol under his habit.65
   Nor did any fundamental changes in the situation of the secular
clergy occur. The episcopacy continued to be dominated by a
clerical minority of well-educated prelates, but they had less in¬
tellectual breadth than their predecessors of the eighteenth cen¬
tury. Pedro de Inguanzo, named archbishop of Toledo and primate
of Spain in 1824, was typical of the members of the Fernandine
hierarchy. An able canon lawyer and polemicist, Inguanzo de¬
voted himself primarily to defense of the Church’s rights and
support of Ferdinand VII rather than to the cultural and social
projects common under the Caroline bishops.
   The clerical elite of cathedral canons and university professors
produced few figures to recall the public-spirited and cultivated
clergy of the eighteenth century. One of the handful of distin¬
guished intellectual figures in the Church of the 1820’s was Felix
Torres Amat, nephew of the celebrated Jansenist intellectual. Torres
Amat undertook a new translation of the Bible, held membership
in the Royal Academy of History and other learned societies, and
gathered a fine collection of Catalan books and manuscripts in
Barcelona. The fate of his translation of the Bible, however, re¬
veals the intellectual decline of the clergy. Although Torres Amat
devoted years to his work, he had to struggle against the oppo¬
sition of the archbishop of Toledo, Inguanzo, and the papal nun¬
cio, Giustiniani, to the translation’s publication. Only the financial
     The Struggle Intensifies                                     143




assistance of Anglican friends in London allowed the work to
appear between 1833 and 1835 after numerous delays.66
   There was no indication that the condition of the lower clergy
had improved as the reign of Ferdinand VII drew to a close. In
1831 the papal nuncio, Francesco Tiberi, reported to Rome that
ignorance and moral irregularities were still common among the
secular clergy.67 Moreover, the fundamental problems of the
eighteenth-century Church remained—the imbalanced distribu¬
tion of resources, a large number of benehced clergy who did no
pastoral work, and the reluctance of priests to accept posts in poor
rural districts.
   In 1824 the Church turned again to traditional pastoral meth¬
ods to maintain its religious position. The reestablishment of the
regulars allowed the missions to resume. Although some mission¬
aries compared favorably with the great figures of the eighteenth
century, notably the Franciscan Fray Jose de Areso, the missionary
effort was no longer an effective instrument of popular evange¬
lization. The increasingly political character of preaching as well
as the lack of religious vitality and commitment in the orders
reduced the missions to formal exercises, which contrasted with
the emotional fervor of both priests and congregations during the
eighteenth century.
   Within the ritual life of the Church, the old chasm between
extravagant ceremonial and the practices of “popular” religion
persisted. In spite of declining ecclesiastical wealth, cathedrals still
held Masses of Baroque splendor. A visitor to Toledo in 1830
thus marveled at the “heavenly” music of the high Mass, sung to
the accompaniment of “a variety of bassoons, viols, and violins
and a powerful choir of voices.” At the shrine of Begona in the
Basque Provinces, the clergy still went to the portico of the church
at the beginning of every thunderstorm to sprinkle the sky with
holy water.68 Devotionalism encouraged by the Church—partic¬
ularly the cult of the Sacred Heart, which began to develop into
the nineteenth century’s most popular devotion—suffocated the
modest efforts of eighteenth-century reformers to create a sim¬
pler, more interior faith. The Scriptures, although available in
various vernacular editions, were not widely read, even by the
clergy.69 The combination of popular religion and devotions pro-
  144                                     The Struggle Intensifies




moted by the Church completely dominated forms of religious
expression and would do so well into the twentieth century.
    Between 1823 and 1833 the Spanish Church enjoyed for the
last time the privileges and power it had accumulated over the
centuries, despite their diminution over the preceding four dec¬
ades. In retrospect, these years can be seen to have formed a brief
interlude in the struggle between a Church determined to pre¬
serve its institutional position within the State and society and new
political forces bent on modifying the Church to conform to their
ideology and economic principles. It was in the end an unequal
struggle. With its material resources depleted and its intellectual
and spiritual vitality sapped, the Church had few inner resources
to sustain it in the long conflict with liberalism. Increasingly po¬
liticized and factionalized, it continued to place its hopes on the
survival of absolute monarchy, whether that of Ferdinand VII or
the more extreme version propounded by supporters of Charles.
Both would prove incapable of saving the Church from the rev¬
olution imposed on it by a triumphant liberalism.
5   /   The Destruction of the Old Regime
        Church, 1833-1843



   Upon the death of Ferdinand VII in 1833 the struggle between
the Church and liberalism entered its decisive phase. Although
Spanish liberals were divided into factions whose commitment to
reform ranged from moderate to extreme, they were agreed at
least on the necessity of redefining the Church’s position within
a new political and social order. There was no question of allowing
the eighteenth-century Church to transfer its privileges intact into
a society with political, economic, and intellectual assumptions so
different from those that had characterized absolute monarchy.
In the end the conflict between liberalism and the Church was an
uneven contest, which the latter could not hope to win. By 1843
the institutional base of the Old Regime Church had been largely
dismantled. And in response to the changes imposed by the State,
the Church began to acquire a new character that in one form or
another would survive until the ferment produced in Spain by
the reforms of the Second Vatican Council.
   Between the death of Ferdinand VII in September 1833 and
the departure into exile in July 1843 of General Espartero, whose
radical policies seemed to threaten the survival of the Church, a
battered ecclesiastical organization collapsed before a final liberal
assault. Institutions, functions, and intellectual assumptions that
had long sustained the Church disappeared before a new wave
of reforms. For Catholic apologists the events of this decade pro¬
vided convincing evidence of a “great undertaking to decatholicize
Spain.”1 But the struggle between the Church and liberalism was
too complex to allow for easy generalizations. The kingdom re¬
mained officially Catholic even in the most radical phase of the
extended liberal revolution. The Constitution of 1837 proclaimed:
“the religion of the Spanish nation is the Catholic and Roman.”2
But in this still confessional State, monks and friars were mur-


                                                               145
  146                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




dered, priests assaulted, churches and monasteries sacked, and
dioceses left without bishops. Yet the faith continued to be prac¬
ticed, and successive governments accepted financial responsibility
for support of the parochial clergy. At the height of legislation
seen by many churchmen as a direct attack on Catholicism itself,
a provincial governor of Toledo imposed fines and prison sen¬
tences on citizens failing to fulfill the Easter Communion obli¬
gation, while the bishop of Cadiz secured funds to complete the
city’s enormous Neoclassic cathedral, which had stood unfinished
for forty years.3
   This apparent confusion arose from a simple fact; the issue
between 1833 and 1843 was not Catholicism or anti-Catholicism.
No politician suggested the separation of Church and State or
advocated a campaign to destroy religion. Longares Alonso, in his
recent study of the liberal press in Barcelona during the 1830’s,
noted that atheistic or openly irreligious sentiments rarely found
their way into local newspapers.4 For Spanish liberals, religion was
as important to the progress of the new society as for traditionalists
committed to the old social order. Liberalism and Catholicism
would remain identified, though admittedly in a difficult rela¬
tionship, for over a century until the Second Republic disasso¬
ciated the Church from the State for the first time in the nation’s
history. Liberal opinion demanded that the Church adjust to the
needs of a changing society dominated by an emerging bourgeoi¬
sie, a society secular in its concerns and committed to the doctrines
of economic individualism and human progress.
   Liberalism rejected the theocratic ideology of the Old Regime
Church, with its mingling of the sacred and the secular, and re¬
sented the Church’s economic structure and judicial privileges.
Clerical support for absolutism intensified liberal determination
to eliminate the Church as a source of political opposition, but
this was to be accompanied by an effort “to reduce . . . be¬
liefs ... to the grave and mysterious simplicity of primitive Chris¬
tianity, to the contemplation of divine morality and the progressive
development of its perfections.” The Church, then, was to be
confined to a purely spiritual and vaguely philanthropic role in
which religion was “pure, peaceful and perfect,” a natural com¬
plement to a secular society in control of its own destiny.5 Conflict
inevitably arose between these opposing interpretations of the
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                 147




Church’s place within Spanish society. The traditional ecclesiasti¬
cal order, though deeply scarred by the battles of 1810-1813 and
1820—1823, yearned for a return to the glories, wealth, privileges,
and piety of the past.


Gradual Reform and Carlism, 1834—1835

   The dynastic preoccupations of Ferdinand VII, who had twice
saved the Church from revolution, opened the way to liberalism’s
triumph. The arrangements for Isabella’s orderly succession rested
on the ability of the queen regent, Maria Cristina, and the chief
minister, Francisco Cea Bermudez, to continue the moderate ab¬
solutism of Ferdinand’s later years. These hopes were quickly
frustrated. The monarch’s death on September 29, 1833, stimu¬
lated reforming demands from within the regime by aristocrats,
courtiers, generals, and bureaucrats wishing to broaden the base
of the Crown’s support to avoid a return to the popular radicalism
of the early 1820’s. Cea Bermudez’s obstinate refusal to contem¬
plate changes weakened the government, but the decisive blow
came from another source, the general rising in diverse parts of
the peninsula of those supporting the dynastic claims of the king’s
brother, Charles. The government’s failure to dominate the revolt
endangered the fragile succession of Isabella II and forced the
queen regent to turn to the moderate liberals of 1812 for the
support that would destroy Carlism and save the throne. In Jan¬
uary 1834 Maria Cristina called a former deputy at Cadiz to head
the government, Francisco Martinez de la Rosa. The third liberal
revolution within a quarter of a century had begun.6
   With few exceptions, the hierarchy recognized the young prin¬
cess as heiress to the throne in a long ceremony at the church of
the Hieronymites in Madrid in June 1833. The crusty archbishop
of Toledo, Pedro de Inguanzo, who had fought many an absolutist
battle, refused to attend on the grounds of health, although he
later took the oath of loyalty under pressure. The most prominent
episcopal absentee, Joaquin de Abarca, bishop of Leon and a
fervent supporter of the pretender, had fled his diocese for the
mountains of Galicia. From there he urged his fellow prelates to
refuse their loyalty to Isabella in a letter promptly burned by most
of the bishops receiving it. Superiors of the religious orders pub-
  148                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




lished statements praising the young queen throughout the au¬
tumn of 1833.7
   The adhesion of the clerical establishment to Isabella arose in
part from a profoundly conservative mentality, which would allow
no questioning of the succession established by a legitimate sov¬
ereign. But it also developed from many bishops’ sincere convic¬
tion that only Isabella’s succession could prevent the horrors of
civil war. “To recognize, love and obey the Queen,” said Pedro
Martinez de San Martin, bishop of Barcelona, “was the only way
to assure the peace, the unity, the felicity, the mutual love which
we owe to one another . . . and so necessary for the prosperity of
states, particularly our beloved country which is unfortunately
divided into diverse opinions and parties.”8 On the practical side,
the continuation of Cea Bermudez in office soothed a clergy un¬
easy about the future. But there were early signs of clerical par¬
ticipation in the Carlist rising that began in October. The priestly
veteran of two previous campaigns against liberalism, Jeronimo
Merino, immediately joined the revolt. He assisted at the cere¬
mony in Aranda that proclaimed the pretender as Charles V, as
did several Franciscans from a nearby friary in Aguilera. Even
the papal nuncio admitted in December that clerics were partic¬
ipating in the rising.9 Yet the prevailing tendency among the clergy
was to wait uneasily on events.
   The government of Martinez de la Rosa (January 1834-June
 1835) rested on an alliance between the Crown and the moderate
elements of liberalism—the landowners, merchants, prosperous
lawyers, and noblemen committed to restoration of a parliamen¬
tary regime dominated by an enlightened elite. Its fundamental
constitutional document, the Estatuto Real of April 1834, provided
for a narrow franchise designed to exclude the exaltados who had
taken control of the revolution of 1820. But oligarchic liberalism
proved unworkable. The proliferation of the exaltado press, al¬
lowed by the government itself, and the eventual return to political
life of the radicals combined with military failure against the Carl-
ists to undo the settlement of 1834 and move the revolution in a
more extreme direction.
   The ecclesiastical policy of the oligarchic liberals resembled that
of 1820; it emphasized reform of the regular clergy, improvement
in the economic condition of parish priests, and elimination of
    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   149




“superstition” from the Church. The most influential advocate of
reform, the minister of justice, Nicolas Garelli, believed from his
experience as a member of the commission that had drafted the
ley de monacales in 1820 that the government had erred then by not
seeking the Church’s cooperation. Having been burned once by
clerical reaction to its legislation, the government approached the
problem in 1834 with greater caution and, from a tactical point
of view, some common sense. In April it appointed a royal com¬
mission, the Real Junta Eclesiastica, composed of ten bishops and
four laymen to study the question of the regulars.10 Garelli, how¬
ever, did not intend to rush headlong into reforms. The com¬
mission was instructed to gather statistical information on the
orders before drafting a comprehensive plan of reform. The com¬
mission went about its work thoroughly and gathered the most
accurate statistics on the regulars since the census of 1797.
    If political events had not undermined oligarchic liberalism, the
government would have reduced the number of religious houses
to the same extent as in 1820. Whether the Church would have
accepted such a reform is doubtful. The government appointed
bishops to the commission known for their “sincere adhesion to
legitimacy.” They included the handful of liberal prelates who
had previously supported reform: the bishop of Sigtienza, Manuel
Fraile; the bishop of Astorga, Felix Torres Amat; the bishop of
Cartagena expelled by Ferdinand VII, Antonio Posada Rubin de
Celis; and Pedro Gonzalez Vallejo, who had been ousted from the
diocese of Mallorca in 1823. Although the commission survived
until 1836, the disintegration of the government in 1835 revealed
that a limited reform of the regulars would not satisfy either the
Church or liberal exaltados. Ecclesiastical change based on reform
of the orders was either too much or too little. It satisfied no one.
    An ecclesiastical policy based on a cautiously implemented re¬
form might have succeeded in 1820; it was swept aside by events
in 1834 and 1835. For the government restraint became difficult
beginning in the spring of 1834 as friars and monks joined the
Carlist rising. Monasteries and convents in isolated mountain areas
of the Basque Provinces, Navarra, Galicia, Toledo, Cuenca, and
Andalusia furnished food, supplies, and quarters to passing Carl¬
ist bands. The wealthy monastery of Sobrado in Galicia was said
to have donated 22,000 reales to local Carlist troops; similar ac-
  150                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




cusations were directed against the Benedictine monastery of Ona
in the Burgos Mountains and the Capuchins of Casares in the
Ronda hills of Andalusia. The extent of support varied enor¬
mously. In some cases religious provided help because they had
no choice. “Let those live whom God wishes,” said the superior
of a Dominican priory in the Santander Mountains when he learned
that he had just given supplies to a group of Carlists.11 Other
houses were more deeply implicated. The Franciscans of Bilbao
were rumored to have manufactured 2 million cartridges for the
Carlist army.
   The contribution of the regulars to the rising, however, should
not be exaggerated. Although the regions where Carlism enjoyed
considerable military success between 1833 and 1839—a long swath
running from the Basque Provinces through Navarra and moun¬
tainous Aragon to the hills of Catalonia—were known then as now
for their Catholicism, there were relatively few monasteries and
friaries in these districts of small, peasant proprietors. The urban
character of the Old Regime Church came to haunt the regulars,
for the cities were firmly under liberal control. Revuelta Gonzalez
in his study of the religious orders has shown that the vast majority
of the regulars, though sympathetic to the cause of Carlism, re¬
mained passive and fearful as they awaited the fate the liberal
State was preparing for them. The secular clergy was also rep¬
resented in Carlist ranks. At the end of 1834 the governor of
Logrono drew up a list of clerical conspirators including twenty-
five secular priests as well as fifteen monks and friars. Although
only a minority of the regular clergy actively supported Carlism
and seculars were as deeply implicated, liberal opinion, which had
not forgotten the orders’ earlier defense of absolutism, concen¬
trated its hostility against them. In March 1834 Martinez de la
Rosa ordered the closing of all religious houses left vacant by the
desertion of at least a sixth of their residents to the rebellion. This
led to the suppression of fifty, such as the Capuchin house of
Pamplona, which the authorities found empty on the morning of
August 6 after the friars had carried off sacred vessels, vestments,
small statues, and supplies during the night.
   The closing of abandoned or subversive monasteries and fri¬
aries affected an insignificant number of the kingdom’s 1,940 male
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  151




religious houses, but it irritated clerical opinion. Legislation mak¬
ing novices liable for military service and suspension of appoint¬
ments to canonries and other benefices without pastoral functions
also aroused ecclesiastical tempers. The archbishop of Seville, as
early as January 1834, wrote that the new government’s policies
“presaged a fatal future for the Spanish Church.”12 But during
its first six months in office, the ministry of Martinez de la Rosa
moved with such caution that no comprehensive plan of Church
reform was either drafted or implemented. Measures taken against
the rebel clergy were limited in character and imposed by political
circumstances as even the papal nuncio, Francesco Tiberi, rec¬
ognized when he informed Rome that the “perversity and malice”
of some priests had moved the “Catholic, pious and just Queen”
to take action against some regulars.13
   The political strategy of the liberal elite controlling the gov¬
ernment proved as unworkable as it had been fourteen years
earlier. Ecclesiastical reform was postponed because the ministry
feared that the Church would desert en masse and contribute to
the victory of Carlism. The relationship of the Church to Carlism
is a complex topic as yet inadequately studied, but it is clear that
while Carlism was identified with the Church, the Church was not
exclusively identified with Carlism. Charles V proclaimed his in¬
tention to respect the organization and privileges of the Old Re¬
gime Church. His propaganda dwelt on the Catholic nature of
his monarchy and the persecuting character of the liberal State.
Perhaps a decisive majority of the clergy sympathized with the
objectives of Carlism, but this did not mean they actively partic¬
ipated in the struggle against liberalism. The Church, with its
resources and personnel concentrated in the liberal cities, lacked
the freedom of action to contribute in any practical way to the
triumph of a movement that failed to establish itself outside its
northern, rural strongholds. Relations between the Church and
the liberal regime would deteriorate rapidly after 1835, but even
then, in spite of clerical rhetoric, the Church could do nothing
other than survive as well as possible and await better times. With
a sense of the possible, the episcopacy did not rush to identify
itself with Carlism even in the most difficult moments. Prelates
such as Joaquin de Abarca, later Charles V’s chief minister, were
  152                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




unusual; most bishops at odds with the liberal State preferred
prudent exile to a journey to the northern mountains of the Carlist
domain.
   The situation of the Church in absolutist Spain was not as com¬
fortable as Carlist apologists maintained. Charles V might attend
Mass and participate in processions giving testimony to his Ca¬
tholicism, as he did when he visited the Jesuits of Loyola in 1835,
but the reality of the Church’s position was harsher. The Carlist
kingdom of the north desperately required financial resources
and did not hesitate to appropriate parish tithes in areas under
its control. Nor did the Church escape the violence inevitable in
a relatively undisciplined army. The religious press complained
about the depredations of Carlist troops as bitterly as it did about
liberal exactions: “the advocates of Charles,” said a Catholic paper,
“did not recognize any limits, any subordination or discipline,” as
they moved through the rural districts of the archdiocese of Tar¬
ragona “trampling upon the unfortunate inhabitants.”14 The ec¬
clesiastical leadership, by avoiding direct support of the Carlist
cause, implicitly recognized that, whatever the movement’s ideo¬
logical appeal, it could not guarantee the Church’s institutional
survival.
    The government of 1834 overestimated the extent to which the
Church could contribute to a Carlist victory, and it underestimated
the strength of a new generation of liberal exaltados. The radi¬
cals—drawn from the less affluent sectors of the middle classes,
lawyers, journalists, minor government employees, and others—
demanded a less restrictive constitution, a total reform of the
Church, and economic policies less favorable to an oligarchy dom¬
inated by landowners and financial and commercial interests. The
exaltados were committed, however, as firmly as their liberal op¬
ponents to the principle of private property. But unlike them,
they were prepared to use extraparliamentary methods to achieve
their political goals. Secret societies, masonic lodges, a forceful
and flamboyant press, manipulation of lower class discontent
through mob violence, and resort to military intervention—all had
a place in the exaltado arsenal. To realize his objective of political
stability administered by the liberal elite, Martinez de la Rosa
desperately required victories over the Carlists. His generals, foiled
by the brilliant tactics of Colonel Zumalacarregui in the north, did
    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  153




not produce them, and liberal politics entered a turbulent period
of municipal revolution, popular rioting, and exaltado ascend¬
ancy.
   Hopes for a limited ecclesiastical reform came to an end on a
hot summer day in 1834. On July 17 rioting mobs in Madrid left
seventy-eight Jesuits, Franciscans, Dominicans, and Mercedarians
dead and their residences devastated. Never in Spanish history
had there been such a savage, collective attack on the clergy. For
generations of clerical historians, July 17 was the “day of infamy”
initiating the violent anticlericalism of the nineteenth and twen¬
tieth centuries. Whether the attack on the regulars resulted from
a carefully planned conspiracy by the exaltados is unclear to this
day. Martinez de la Rosa believed that his extremist opponents
had fomented the riots through the secret societies, using their
influence in the city’s militia. The most recent study of the events
of July 17, by Revuelta Gonzalez, argues for the idea of a radical
conspiracy instead of “spontaneous combustion.” The truth may
lie somewhere between.
   Conditions in Madrid on the eve of the rioting formed an ex¬
plosive mixture ready for ignition. In the oppressive heat of the
summer rising food prices aroused popular resentment; rumors
of impending Carlist attacks heightened tension, and the appear¬
ance in the city for the first time of the dreaded disease of the
nineteenth century, cholera, created a mood of terror. To the
high cost of bread, fear of attack, and the pervasive presence of
death must be added an intense atmosphere of political propa¬
ganda and intrigue. The fatal link of death and misery with the
regulars took the form of a rumor that monks and friars allied
to Carlism were poisoning the wells, and that this had caused the
epidemic ravaging the city. On the afternoon of July 17, crowds
drawn from the lower classes, but with the significant participation
of urban militiamen, gathered in three of Madrid’s squares, the
Plaza Mayor, the Puerta del Sol, and the Plazuela de la Cebada.
At the cry “Poison! poison! Death to the Jesuits! Death to the
friars!” the mobs converged on the Jesuit church of San Isidro
and the adjoining Colegio Imperial.15
   Scenes of bloodletting and violence followed that no conspiracy
could have planned. The crowd invaded the Jesuit house and
murdered fourteen priests, including several who had escaped to
  154                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




the streets only to be identified immediately because they wore
hats in the heat to disguise their tonsures. Religious objects were
smashed and the bones of saints kept in reliquaries were ground
into dust as the mob surged through the buildings. After sacking
the Colegio Imperial, the crowd moved to other religious houses.
The same scenes were repeated at the Dominican priory of Santo
Tomas, although most of its friars escaped at news of the earlier
assault. The Franciscans of San Francisco were less fortunate;
forty perished in a’ferocious attack that saw some stabbed, some
drowned in the wells, some hanged, and others hurled to their
deaths from the rooftops where they had taken refuge. On the
streets women danced a macabre ballet in stolen religious vest¬
ments. The bloody scenes did not end until well into the night.
    During the rioting the authorities were less than vigorous. The
captain general of Madrid, present for an extended time in the
Colegio Imperial, failed to take action, and a sizable contingent
of troops outside San Francisco watched the destruction passively.
But a small band of soldiers succeeded in saving the Carmelite
friary from assault. The paralysis of the local military and police
may have reflected simple confusion and indecision rather than
complicity. The government of Martinez de la Rosa condemned
the violence; dismissed the captain general, provincial governor,
and superintendent of police; and took steps to preserve public
order in the days following the rioting. Neither the government
nor the liberal press attached particular importance to the matanza
de losfrailes. Liberals of both camps saw the rioting as a regrettable
breakdown of law and order and a lapse from the norms of civ¬
ilized behavior but as an event somewhat understandable given
the state of popular passions.
    The disturbances of July 17 resembled the traditional urban
riot of the eighteenth century rather than later attacks on the
clergy and Church property. Arising from a popular mood of
resentment and fear, the rioting took the form of a brief, violent
outburst, which died down more of its own accord than through
official intervention. The local character of the disturbances, the
absence of any statement of goals, and the terrible savagery of
the assaults make it dubious that July 17 represented a radical
conspiracy to bring about a political revolution at the expense of
the regular clergy, although liberal exaltados were willing to ex-
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   155




ploit popular animosities. But these events marked a turning point
in the history of the Spanish Church. Although the royal com¬
mission charged with drafting a moderate reform of the regulars
continued its work, the possibility of implementing such a policy
was remote in the face of the indifference or hostility of liberal
opinion and the fury of popular feeling against monks and friars.
July 17 revealed beyond a shadow of a doubt that the esteem the
orders had once enjoyed among the urban lower classes was a
thing of the past. It was only a question of time before the final
assault would begin against this bulwark of the Old Regime Church.
   Between July 1834 and Martinez de la Rosa’s departure from
office in June 1835, political stability became increasingly difficult
to sustain. A limited electoral franchise failed to keep the radicals
from winning substantial representation in the Cortes elected under
the terms of the Estatuto Real. Exaltado criticism of the government
in parliament and the press grew more intense in the face of a
deteriorating military situation. Popular riots in Zaragoza in April
 1835 against Archbishop Frances Caballero, known for his ab¬
solutist views, provided a reminder of the continuing danger from
the urban crowd. The ministry’s inability to control the country
and the Cortes became evident in the spring 1835 parliamentary
debate over the fate of the property of the regulars that had been
sold to private purchasers between 1820 and 1823 and returned
to the orders by Ferdinand VII in 1824. The government’s proj¬
ect, to compensate the purchasers with state bonds and delay a
final decision on the property until the Real Junta Eclesiastica
presented its recommendations, initiated furious debate. The issue
went beyond the disposition of the property holdings involved in
the disamortization of 1820-1823. It signified nothing less than
the fate of the orders.
   The radicals, assisted by some ex-deputies of 1812, such as
Agustin Argiielles, quickly took the offensive. Their attack on the
orders was unrelenting. Martinez de la Rosa’s argument that re¬
form must come with “firm and measured steps, although they
appeared slow,” was swept aside by a torrent of criticism.16 The
regulars, said a radical deputy, were only state employees, and
the government could dispose of their jobs and property as it
wished. Deputies contrasted the “useful citizens” who had pur¬
chased clerical property with the idle monks and friars and goaded
  156                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




the ministry with accusations of timidity before the power of the
orders accused of rebellion and treason. “The clergy, gentlemen,
as a class, is fighting the principles of liberty in every nation, and
it is combating them in Spain,” said the prominent deputy, An¬
tonio Alcala Galiano. The regulars were compared to “a robust
plant which extends its branches through all Spain,” a plant that
could not be trimmed but must be deprived of “the water which
irrigates and feeds it.”17 The ministry’s project suffered a humil¬
iating defeat. The prime minister’s days in office were numbered.
    The brief ministry of the conde de Toreno (June-September
 1835) represented a final, desperate effort to preserve the dom¬
inance of the liberal elite. Toreno hoped to win at least the ac¬
quiescence of the radicals through a policy of concessions—namely,
the restoration of clerical property to the purchasers of 1820-
 1823, the suppression of the Jesuits, and the appointment of a
reputed financial wizard and exaltado sympathizer, Juan Alvarez
Mendizabal, to the ministry of finance.18 Toreno, however, still
clung to the basic premises of his predecessor’s ecclesiastical policy.
The Real Junta Eclesiastica finally produced its long-awaited rec¬
ommendations, which were a good deal more moderate than the
 1820 legislation on the religious orders. The commission rec¬
ommended the decree, and the queen regent formally assented
to it, appropriately enough on July 25, the feast of Saint James,
patron of Spain. It suppressed male monasteries and friaries con¬
taining fewer than twelve religious and ordered the sale of their
property with the proceeds to be used to reduce the national debt.
The Junta Eclesiastica envisaged the closing of 892 houses; the
remainder would survive. The decree, however, was not worth
the paper it was written on. A radical revolution had already begun
in the provinces that sealed the fate of both the ministry and its
ecclesiastical policy.
    The provincial risings of July-August 1835, beginning in Za¬
ragoza and spreading to Catalonia, Valencia, Andalusia, Old Cas¬
tile, and Galicia, were directed in their initial stages against the
regular clergy.19 The revolutionary movement, resting on an un¬
easy alliance of urban mobs, militiamen, and local radicals, quickly
became an attack on the government itself as Madrid lost control
of entire regions. The disturbances in Zaragoza (July 5-6) fol¬
lowed the same course as the matanza de los frailes in Madrid a
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                     157




year earlier; three friaries were sacked and burned. From Aragon
the antireligious wave swept into Catalonia. The Carmelite house
of Riudoms was assaulted on the twenty-third, the celebrated Car¬
thusian monastery of Scala Dei on the twenty-fifth, and Poblet a
few days later. Barcelona, with its twenty-six friaries and 800 re¬
ligious, provided a natural focus for radical and popular discon¬
tent. On July 25 the attacks began. The victims were not as numerous
as in Madrid during the previous year; friars escaped through
sewers, on ropes from the rooftops of their burning residences,
or simply disguised as civilians. Confronted with violence, the
authorities could do nothing other than take nearly 300 religious
under protective custody in the fortress of Montjuich. Through¬
out Catalonia monasteries and friaries were abandoned either
under the pressure of municipal authorities or because the terror-
stricken religious themselves sought permission to leave. For all
practical purposes the religious houses of men were empty by the
first of August.
   Although the wave of violence was directed primarily against
the regulars, the secular clergy also suffered. Parish priests began
to abandon their churches in some towns. The archbishop of
Tarragona, fearing for his life as the attacks reached his diocesan
seat, fled to a ship in the harbor, although not before a mob
threatened to hurl him into the sea and seized trunks containing
his episcopal regalia. Flaving failed to detain the prelate, the rioters
contented themselves by parading about the town in his miters
and capes. There too the government authorities were impotent
before the fury of the revolutionary crowds.
   Urban risings elsewhere were less violent but no less damaging
to the regulars. The revolutionary juntas formed in many cities
by local exaltado politicians after the initial manifestations of pop¬
ular discontent demanded the expulsion of all religious from their
houses. In August the junta of Valencia ordered suppression of
all monasteries and friaries in the provinces of Valencia, Alicante,
Castellon, Murcia, and Albacete. This pattern was repeated in
Malaga, Cadiz, Salamanca, Valladolid, Zamora, and throughout
Galicia. Only in a few areas—Burgos, Logroho, Soria, Palencia,
Leon, Asturias, Santander, and Ciudad Real—was the govern¬
ment able to maintain a semblance of authority and proceed with
a more limited closing of religious houses under the terms of the
   158                     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




July 25 decree. The policy of moderate ecclesiastical reform was
irrelevant. Revolutionary events had closed the vast majority of
the kingdom’s friaries and monasteries by September, when To-
reno recognized political reality and stepped aside for the great
hope of the radicals, Mendizabal.


Domestication of the Church, 1835—1840

   Juan Alvarez Mendizabal (1790-1853) took power in the midst
of revolutionary agitation in the country, a worsening situation in
the civil war with the Carlists, and severe hscal problems that had
burdened the nation with enormous debts. He represented the
hopes of the exaltados, who demanded a fundamental revision of
the Estatuto Real in the direction of the Constitution of 1812;
reform of taxation, particularly through elimination of the tithe;
and profound changes in the administration of justice and the
organization of provincial and municipal governments. The pro¬
gram of Mendizabal sought to obliterate the vestiges of Old Re¬
gime privilege that Martinez de la Rosa and Toreno had tried to
eliminate through a slow legislative process. The political unrest
of 1834 and 1835, moreover, had made evolutionary reform from
above directed by a narrow political elite chosen by a highly re¬
stricted body of voters impossible.
   Mendizabal shrewdly saw that the character of liberal politics
itself was changing from the struggle of parliamentary factions to
a more complex conflict of interest groups at both the local and
national levels. The old ideal of liberal unity still found its ad¬
herents, however. Martinez de la Rosa indignantly rejected the
suggestion that he belonged to any party.20 In fact, the differences
among the liberal factions on such issues as freedom of the press,
jury trial, civil rights, and taxation policy, as well as greater political
awareness in the country as a whole created the circumstances
 that favored the appearance of the two great parties of liberal
 Spain.21 Mendizabal saw the importance of presenting a compre¬
 hensive program of reform that would win the support of parlia¬
 mentary exaltados and at the same time respond to the intense
politicization that had taken place at the local and regional levels.
By the end of the decade, according to a history of liberal Spain
written shortly afterward, “the militant factions” had taken on
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  159




“their exclusivistic denominations: the more ardent defenders of
the revolution were called progresistas, its more moderate and slow
[defenders] were given the name of moderados.”22
   Martinez de la Rosa hoped to resolve the problem of the reli¬
gious orders that had preoccupied liberal opinion since Cadiz with
a compromise that would have lowered the number of foundations
while reducing the national debt through sale of suppressed mon¬
asteries and friaries. Neither the prime minister nor his supporters
objected in principle to the sale of the orders’ holdings. But the
government’s solution, embodied in the recommendations of the
Real Junta Eclesiastica, continued to rest on a combination of
reform of the regulars with partial disamortization. The exaltado
press of 1834 and 1835 made clear that it wished to go further.
One writer suggested that the dissolution of the regulars would
be “very useful and necessary.”23 Another declared that the sale
of the orders’ property would allow the liberal regime to build up
a body of supporters tied to it by self-interest; yet another argued
that the vast, unworked lands of the Church raised obstacles to
agricultural progress.
   It fell to Mendizabal, himself a believer who never doubted that
the liberal State should be Catholic, to break the connection be¬
tween reform and disamortization. A decree of October 11, 1835,
suppressed the kingdom’s monasteries save for a handful, such
as El Escorial and Poblet, which were allowed to remain open
temporarily; another of February 19, 1836, ordered the sale at
public auction of the property of the suppressed communities to
beneht the public treasury. On March 8 the government dealt the
final blow to the millennial history of the orders in Spain. In a
decree of fifty-seven articles, the State argued from a premise
dear to the liberal mind. “The force of civilization is no less ir¬
resistible than that of time,” the decree declared, as it ordered the
suppression of all religious communities of men save for three
seminaries in Valladolid, Ocana, and Monteagudo responsible for
training missionaries for Spain’s colonies; the houses of the teach¬
ing Order of the Pious Schools (Piarists); the hospitalers of the
Order of St.John of God; and a small number of friaries providing
clergy for Spanish churches in the Holy Land.24 The orders of
women, untouched by liberal legislation between 1820 and 1823,
were treated more gently, perhaps because of the assumption that
  160                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




women who had spent their lives cut off from the world in con¬
templative communities could not adapt easily to a secular life.25
The State agreed to pay modest pensions to the religious being
expelled from their houses, and it took measures to open eccle¬
siastical appointments to former religious who became members
of the secular clergy.
   Mendizabal’s motives were straightforward, and he established
them clearly in the decree of October 11. The monasteries were
“useless and unnecessary . . . for the spiritual assistance of the
faithful”; their vast property holdings were “prejudicial” to the
kingdom; and it would serve “the public convenience ... to place
these in circulation to increase the resources of the State and open
new sources of wealth.”26 In the decree of February 19, Mendi-
zabal spelled out the benefits—fiscal, economic, and political—
that he expected to flow from the disamortizing legislation. It
would open “a most abundant source of public felicity, giving new
life to moribund wealth, removing obstacles to the channels of
industry and the circulation [of wealth]”; and it would create “a
copious family of proprietors . . . whose existence will rest prin¬
cipally on the complete triumph of our actual institutions.”27
   The sale of the regulars’ property proceeded slowly at first.
Prospective buyers may have feared the fate suffered by the pur¬
chasers of 1820—1823 upon the collapse of the liberal regime. But
by 1837 such fears had given way to a feverish desire to buy. By
the beginning of 1839 more than 15,000 separate parcels had
been sold at auction for 792,459,390 reales.28 The sales of 1836-
 1839 formed the first stage of an extensive process that would
last until 1860. It would later include the sale of the property of
the secular clergy, municipal common lands, and the holdings of
charitable institutions.
   The massive transfer of wealth away from the Church and other
corporations possessing property acquired during the Old Regime
profoundly affected the development of both the economy and
society. Mendizabal’s hopes of creating a body of property owners
whose interests were linked to the survival of the liberal State were
realized. The removal of property from the “dead hands” of the
Church also made possible the more efficient exploitation of land
and the later commercialization of agriculture within a modern
market economy. The disamortization did not resolve the State’s
    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   161




fiscal problems, however, and over the long term it created social
problems as serious as those it was designed to solve. Critics of
the time noted that the auction process limited purchasers to those
with sufficient capital, thereby excluding the peasantry and land¬
less agricultural workers. The purchase of Church property by
the urban middle classes substituted one form of unbalanced land-
holding for another. Its social consequences would reach into the
twentieth century.
   The suppression of the male religious orders and the subse¬
quent sale of their property undermined one of the fundamental
institutions of the Old Regime Church. Although the number of
regulars had declined significantly since the late eighteenth cen¬
tury and the internal problems of the orders had not disappeared,
their elimination deprived the Church at a stroke of its most active
evangelizers, educators, and propagandists. The vacuum left could
not easily be filled by a secular clergy ill prepared to assume ex¬
panded responsibilities. The disappearance of most of the male
orders, moreover, allowed the liberal State to extend its authority
over two areas, charity and secondary education, in which the
regulars had played a decisive role during the eighteenth cen¬
tury.29
   The long-term effects of the suppression and disamortization
of 1835-1839 would influence Church-State relations well into
the twentieth century. The Church retained a bitterness over de¬
struction of the orders that would lead to persistent efforts to
bring about their restoration. These had limited success during
the 1850’s and 1860’s, when a handful of orders received gov¬
ernment authorization to reestablish themselves. After 1874 suc¬
cessive governments allowed the orders to return on a massive
scale but in circumstances that made the problem of the regulars
as serious in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as
it had been during the Old Regime. Post-1874 conservative min¬
istries refused to recognize any financial obligation to the restored
orders, insisting that they should be entirely self-sufficient. This
policy, reflecting the residual liberalism of the new Liberal-
Conservative party of Canovas del Castillo, meant that the revival
of the regulars depended on massive donations from the urban
Catholic upper classes, which saw the orders as a bulwark against
social revolution. No study has been done of the financing of the
  162                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




regulars after 1874 by the conservative nobility and bourgeoisie,
but there is no doubt that it was extensive enough to recreate,
albeit in a slightly different form, the imbalanced distribution of
resources between the regulars and the parish clergy that had
characterized the Church before 1836.30 The regulars, moreover,
quickly resumed their traditional role as ecclesiastical shock troops
combating secularism, liberalism, freemasonry, socialism, repub¬
licanism, and Protestantism, thereby reviving the bitter contro¬
versy over the orders that had seemed to be resolved once and
for all by Mendizabal.
   Between 1834 and the successful progresista revolution of Sep¬
tember 1840, the two families of Spanish liberalism struggled for
dominance in an atmosphere of popular agitation, intense political
debate, and military intervention. Political instability during these
years arose in part from the failure of the progresista and mode-
rado parties to reach agreement on how far the revolution should
go. It also came from the nature of the parties themselves. Each
was clear enough about its objectives, at least in relation to those
of the opposition. But internal coherence and discipline were miss¬
ing in both parties. Each represented a parliamentary and elec¬
toral alliance of diverse groups that cooperated uneasily in the
unstable political maneuvering of the late 1830’s.31 The inability
of the parties to reach even a minimal constitutional accord and
the factionalization afflicting both moderados and progresistas
burdened liberal Spain with a damaging political liability for which
it would pay dearly. The political struggle tilted in favor of the
moderados in May 1836, only to reverse direction shortly after¬
ward as the progresistas resorted to the tried and true formula
of urban disturbance and revolutionary conspiracy to regain power.
   Once the problem of the regular clergy had been resolved (even
the moderados were unwilling to reverse the sale of the orders’
property), the issue of ecclesiastical reform receded before the
debate on the nation’s political future. Government ecclesiastical
policy focused on the domestication of the Church through leg¬
islation designed to punish churchmen opposing the regime and
create a Church organization subordinate to the State. During the
radical Calatrava ministry (August 1836-August 1837), the State
deprived bishops absent from their dioceses for political motives
of their incomes and ordered that clerics caught opposing the
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  163




government’s military plans be treated as conspirators. Ecclesias¬
tics were forbidden to leave their customary places of residence
without the consent of their bishop and the local governor. To
reduce the size of the clergy, long a fond aspiration of liberalism,
the government reaffirmed legislation suspending the provision
of benefices and forbidding bishops from ordaining more priests.
A radical reform of the secular clergy presented to parliament in
 1837 was, however, rejected by the queen regent and fell by the
wayside as the moderados returned to power.
   The liberal State did not directly attack the property of the
secular clergy, but it established absolute control over its finances
through legislation declaring such holdings “national.” A decree
of July 29, 1837, undermined one of the Church’s traditional
sources of income by abolishing the tithe, although the govern¬
ment undertook to pay the salaries of the clergy.32
   Between 1834 and 1840 the organization and direction of the
Church were thrown into confusion. The deadlock between the
papacy and the liberal State prevented the appointment of new
bishops to replace the twenty-five who died during these years.
Eleven prelates fled into exile; four others were confined with
limited freedom of movement to their dioceses. For all practical
purposes only eleven of the kingdom’s sixty dioceses were being
administered by their bishops as 1840 drew to a close, and all eight
of the metropolitan sees were vacant because of the death or exile
of their incumbents.33 In these circumstances the few bishops still
governing their sees scarcely knew where to turn. “Observing the
furious interference of the revolution, they were usually ignorant
of how they could salvage the ship of the Church in the midst of
such shocks,” said Bishop Romo Gamboa of the Canaries, one of
the few prelates to remain in his diocese.34
   The liberal State sought to win support in the Church by nom¬
inating prelates favorable to liberalism. It named Pedro Gonzalez
Vallejo to the primatial see of Toledo, although the pope refused
to approve the appointment, and it nominated Antonio Posada
Rubin de Celis for the archbishopric of Valencia. The regime was
also able to rely on the support of Felix Torres Amat who, curi¬
ously, had been named bishop of Astorga by Ferdinand VII shortly
before the latter’s death. Both Torres Amat and Gonzalez Vallejo
served as members of the Real Junta Eclesiastica in 1834-1835;
  164                   The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




the former accepted a seat in the Senate in 1837. The liberal
prelates did not necessarily accept all the measures the State im¬
posed to reform the Church, but they represented the vestiges of
the old alliance of Constitution and Altar from 1810 and 1820
between liberal politicians and reforming ecclesiastics. The re¬
forming bishops of the 1830’s were few in number, however; they
were aging figures from an earlier time who were given a nearly
impossible task. Torres Amat thus tried to convince Rome that
the real state of affairs in the Spanish Church had been obscured
“because of the exaltation of dominant passions which blind rea¬
son.”35 The bishop of Astorga defended the measures taken against
the regulars and attacked the fanaticism, superstition, and ig¬
norance of the Spanish as the causes of the nation’s difficulties.
But Torres Amat’s long identification with attempts to reform the
Church with State support rendered him suspect in Rome’s eyes
as “an instrument of the Government for ecclesiastical innova¬
tions.”36
   Blocked by Rome from appointing new bishops for vacant
dioceses, the State turned to a device that rekindled the civil war
which had ravaged the Church between 1810-1813 and 1820-
 1823. Cathedral chapters traditionally enjoyed the right to elect
diocesan governors until new incumbents had been approved by
the State and the papacy. The government instructed chapters to
elect as governors those priests whose episcopal nominations were
being refused by Rome. “Her Majesty the Queen Regent invites
and exhorts . . . the chapter ... to name as governor of this miter
its bishop-elect D.N. . . . and it is the pleasure of H.M. that the
chapter should proceed to this election as soon as possible.”37
Although Gonzalez Vallejo, who benefited from this measure by
being elected governor of the archdiocese of Toledo after the
death of Inguanzo, defended the procedure, it provoked a storm
of protest within the Church. Critics alleged that force was used
to compel chapters to elect administrators desired by the govern¬
ment.38 The revived civil war within the Church also reached the
diocesan level. In Astorga, Torres Amat clashed frequently with
a cathedral chapter sympathetic to Carlism and expelled a third
of his seminary students, who were accused of trying to set the
seminary on fire as part of a Carlist plot to seize control of the
city.39
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   165




   The rapid dissolution of the orders served the liberals well in
a tactical sense, for it removed the possibility, however remote, of
any threat from this source. Ex-friars and monks scrambled for
a living. Some found employment as parish priests and assistants,
but the majority depended on the modest pensions from the State,
and these were paid infrequently, like “a bone thrown to a dog”
according to a petition sent to the Cortes in 1840.40
   The parish clergy were only slightly better off. Although the
State’s financial arrangements for the clergy in 1837 took different
forms, none of them was effective; clerical incomes fell drastically.
In the diocese of Jaca, the secular clergy—from bishop to parish
priests—received only 37 percent of the amount theoretically as¬
signed by the government for their salaries in 1837. The average
revenue of a parish priest in the diocese between 1836 and 1839
ranged from nothing to 1,300 reales in a time when a minimum
clerical salary was set at 3,000. Over the short term, the misery
of the parochial clergy threw the Church into such disarray that
no coherent opposition to the State’s policies could arise. Nearly
half of the parishes of the Tarragona archdiocese lacked priests
by 1840. In poor villages of the Toledo archdiocese, some clergy,
deprived of any income, abandoned their parishes, leaving the
population without religious services. In many dioceses parish
priests remained on duty, working at secular occupations while
attending to their congregations as best they could.41
   The Spanish Church had suffered dislocation after 1808 and
1820, but had not lost its militant spirit. In the 1830’s it reeled
under shocks so disruptive that it thought not of victory but of
survival. The Church’s disarray prevented a significant movement
of opposition to the State’s ecclesiastical policies. Few bishops pro¬
tested the suppression of the Jesuits in 1835. Only the aged arch¬
bishop of Seville, Francisco Xavier Cienfuegos, pleaded with the
queen regent for the order’s survival. The decree suppressing the
regulars evoked episcopal protests, but even these representations
to the Crown, respectful in tone and legalistic in argument, lacked
the fire and theocratic vision of earlier defenses of the orders.
   Between 1810-1814 and 1820-1823 the Church struggled vig¬
orously against liberalism. After 1834 it looked not to itself but
to Rome for protection. Relations between Pope Gregory XVI
(1831-1846) and the liberal State had been tense since Martinez
   166                   The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




de la Rosa took office. The pope, alleging the necessity of a neutral
 stance between Isabella II and Charles V, refused to recognize
 either claimant, thereby irritating the government and creating
 an impasse over the appointment of bishops to vacant sees.42 The
 suppression of the Jesuits led to a strong papal protest, and a
 further deterioration of relations between Madrid and Rome
 prompted the withdrawal of the nuncio in August 1835. Liberal
 ecclesiastical legislation in 1836 produced the final rupture. On
 February 1 the pope spoke to a secret consistory of cardinals and
justified the break in diplomatic relations with a sharp attack on
 the progresista government. Gregory XVI could do little to protect
 the Church, but his decisiveness strengthened the bond between
 Rome and Spanish ecclesiastics that had been developing since
 1810. Henceforth, predicted a supporter of the Church, Catholic
 Spaniards must look to the “Vicar of Christ” who “will comfort
 the weak and console all, stimulating them to maintain themselves
 firm in their faith and to defend themselves against the diabolic
 spirit of the revolutionary government of Madrid.”43 Rome had
won another battle in the war for control of the Church.


The Liberal versus the Roman Church, 1840—1843

   At the end of the decade pressure on the Church began to ease.
The return of the moderados to power and the end of the Carlist
War in 1839 produced an uneasy atmosphere of conciliation. The
government dealt with the Church in a less heavy-handed manner
and reestablished the tithe, primarily to save its own bankrupt
finances rather than to pay ecclesiastical expenses. But the mode¬
rados succumbed again to revolution in September 1840.
   The revolution, the most successful progresista rising until 1868,
rested on the old alliance of radical parliamentary and municipal
politicians, local militias, and the urban lower classes. But a new
force in the turbulent political world of liberal Spain, the military,
gave the revolution its backbone and allowed it to survive until
1843. The hero of the final Carlist campaigns, General Baldomero
Espartero, an immensely popular figure supported by officers and
soldiers of the army that had ended the civil war, seized the ini¬
tiative—which forced the resignation of the government and the
abdication of the queen regent—and eventually installed himself
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   167




as regent. The revolution was not a simple military coup d’etat,
nor was the regency a purely personal dictatorship. The new re¬
gime allowed political institutions to function with relative free¬
dom and depended for its survival on the continuing support of
radical politicians, the army, and the urban masses.44 By its very
nature the alliance was too unstable and the interests of its con¬
stituent groups too diverse to permit permanent consolidation of
the revolution.
   The regime, although vaguely populist in character, lacked a
coherent program of revolutionary action. The regent never con¬
templated economic or social changes to benefit the urban masses
who had supported the September rising. But the State had clear
plans for the Church. Between 1841 and 1843 the government
attempted to realize the progresista vision of a national Church
subordinate to the civil authorities. The movement to create a
Church in the service of liberalism reached its logical conclusion.
   In May 1841 the minister of grace and justice presented the
most ambitious reform project yet advanced. The proposals re¬
flected the long-held liberal view that the organization of the Span¬
ish Church required overhaul. The State called for redrawing of
the ecclesiastical map to alter boundaries that had remained un¬
changed for centuries. Two new archdioceses were created, Ma¬
drid (designated as the primatial see) and Barcelona. Toledo, seat
of the primate since Visigothic times, was relegated to the status
of a simple diocese. Seventeen dioceses located in small and un¬
important towns were suppressed in favor of thirteen new sees in
larger population centers—including Ciudad Real, Alicante, Soria,
Vitoria, La Coruna, and Guadalajara.
   All collegiate churches staffed by the secular clergy were to be
closed. The State also reduced the size of the clerical elite by
eliminating over 3,000 canonries and chaplaincies in cathedral
chapters and ordered a parish reorganization that required elim¬
ination of at least 4,000 of the kingdom’s 19,000 parishes. The
number of priests with cure of souls was set at 22,000, all to receive
fixed salaries according to a schedule ranging from 2,000 to 8,000
reales for the parochial clergy and 50,000 to 90,000 reales for the
hierarchy.45 A proposal submitted to the Cortes in January 1842
exalted the apostolic mission and authority of the bishops and
limited contacts between the Church and Rome to the purely
  168                   The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




ceremonial. The project stopped short of a complete denial of a
link with the papacy, although many churchmen regarded the
plan as schismatic. The long tradition of Spanish regalism, once
widely supported within the Church itself, had come full circle.
The Church was to be reformed not by the alliance of Constitution
and Altar that the liberals of 1810 and 1820 had espoused, but
by the State alone.
   The regency’s undertaking to pay decent salaries to the secular
clergy according to an equitable and fixed scale promised to rem¬
edy the imbalanced distribution of resources characteristic of the
Old Regime Church. In return, the government exacted a heavy
price. On September 2, 1841, parliament passed a law ordering
sale of the secular clergy’s holdings, with the proceeds to service
the national debt. The liberal State had possessed effective control
over Church finances for some time. But the regency’s decision
to dispose of the seculars’ property represented a significant break
with the policies of the past. Liberal idealization of the role of
parish priests had saved the secular clergy until this time from
the fate of the religious orders.
   Clerical support for Carlism during the 1830’s as well as eccle¬
siastical resistance to government reform of the Church may have
diminished the old enthusiasm for the seculars. But the State left
no doubt that it was moved primarily by fiscal considerations.
Interest on a large foreign debt had gone unpaid for months.
The regency, said the minister of finance, “could not lose a single
moment proclaiming to the face of the world that the most sacred
as well as the most imperious obligation of the Spanish nation is
the payment of interest due or about to fall due. . . . The honor
of the entire nation,” he declared, was at stake.46 The disamortiz-
ing legislation was passed by the Cortes without extensive discus¬
sion. Prospective buyers rushed forward to take advantage of a
new round of public auctions. By the end of the year nearly 10,000
parcels had been sold for 320 million reales. Sales continued at a
brisk level until the summer of 1844. By the time they were halted,
62 percent of the secular clergy’s property had been sold. Al¬
though some Church property remained by the mid-1840’s, the
massive sales, which had yielded more than 3 billion reales, broke
the back of the imposing structure of ecclesiastical wealth that had
sustained the Church for centuries.47
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                   169




   The State also attempted to take firm control of the ecclesiastical
administration. Priests aspiring to clerical appointments needed
to possess a certificate of loyalty (atestado) from the local governor
attesting to “their good conduct and adhesion to the legitimate
government.”48 Working in cooperation with the ministry of grace
and justice, the principal governmental agency responsible for
clerical reform, the elite of the liberal Church attempted to purge
politically unacceptable priests. Gonzalez Vallejo, the ex-bishop
of Mallorca placed in charge of the Toledo archdiocese in 1836,
removed most of the parish priests of the diocesan capital and
several officials of its administration for being “little devoted to
the actual institutions of the kingdom.”49 In Valencia the admin¬
istrator of the diocese suspended all priests from hearing confes¬
sions who could not produce loyalty certificates, an example imitated
by his counterpart in Lugo, where thirty-four churchmen lost their
canonical licenses to preach and hear confessions because they
lacked the atestado.
   The government acted vigorously to punish priests whose ser¬
mons questioned state policy. Local authorities maintained con¬
stant vigilance over preaching, as in Leon where an ex-Franciscan
was arrested after giving a sermon in the cathedral “alarming the
consciences of the faithful” and censuring “the conduct of the
supreme government of the Regent.”50 Three bishops protesting
the ecclesiastical reforms—Juan Diaz Merino of Menorca, Pablo
Garcia Abella of Calahorra, the Judas Romo Gamboa of the Ca¬
naries—were hauled before the courts. At a local level the activities
of the clergy were subject to close scrutiny. The parish priests of
Romanones in Guadalajara thus complained that they could not
travel the three and a half leagues to the provincial capital’s market
“because here there is much vigilance.”51
   Between 1841 and 1843 the State—using the instruments of
power at its command, supported by a minority of proregime
priests, and facing a leaderless clerical opposition—seemed on the
verge of completely implementing its ecclesiastical plans. The cre¬
ation of a national Church, however, was decisively checked by a
spontaneous and widespread campaign of civil disobedience among
the clergy hostile to the government’s program. The sudden re¬
covery of the Church from its mood of fatalistic resignation arose
from a grass roots movement among the parochial and cathedral
   170                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




clergy. The hierarchy, decimated by deaths and exile and domi¬
nated by a handful of bishops sympathetic to the regime, could
not provide leadership. But protests among parish priests were
ignited by a discourse of Gregory XVI on the condition of the
Spanish Church (March 1, 1841). The pope attacked the course
of liberal legislation since 1834, imposed canonical sanctions on
those responsible for it, and spoke harshly of the clergy cooper¬
ating with the State.52 The papal speech did not directly incite
open resistance, but its publication in the Catholic press evoked
a deep, emotional reaction among the mass of the lower clergy,
who had hitherto been on the margins of the debate concerning
civil authority over the ecclesiastical order.
    The battle cry “Rome is our end! Rome is our hope!” swept
 through the Church.53 Priests across the length and breadth of
 the kingdom, in cities and remote country villages, flooded Cath¬
olic journals with fervent expressions of support for the papal
 interpretation of recent events. The parochial clergy, for so long
 the silent and uncertain element in the struggle to control the
 kingdom’s ecclesiastical organization, spoke forcefully in favor of
 papal supremacy and a Church in control of its own destiny.54
 The unexpected outpouring of support for Rome and the deep
 hostility of the majority of the clergy to the progresista design for
 the Church revealed beyond a doubt that the regalism of the past
was dead. The clergy, declared a Catholic review, “prefers poverty,
jail, exile, expatriation, every humiliation, before denying its faith,
before separating itself from Rome, before consenting to the di¬
 vision of the seamless tunic of Jesus Christ.”55
    The revolt of the clergy focused on resistance to liberal bishops
and diocesan administrators. Incidents between the progovern¬
 ment clergy and the “Roman” opposition multiplied following the
 papal statement of March 1841. Forty-three priests were arrested
 in Toledo for refusing to give up their licenses to preach and hear
confessions; thirty curas of the Alcarria district were taken to court
 for having supported Gregory XVI’s declaration. The ecclesias¬
 tical governor of the archdiocese of Zaragoza, Manuel La Rica,
engaged in a conflict with his chapter—still loyal to the exiled
 archbishop—so bitter that he carried the dispute to the courts
and secured the exile of all the canons to the Balearics for eight
years. Members of the collegiate chapter of Daroca suffered a
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                 171




similar fate for daring to question La Rica’s right to his office.
 Five parish priests of Miranda del Ebro were arrested and accused
of having given “subversive counsel to the faithful in the act of
sacerdotal confession.” In the village of Requejo in Astorga, the
 cura was exiled from his parish and his property confiscated for
 having read Gregory XVI’s address to his congregation.56 Exile,
trial, and imprisonment failed to break clerical resistance. Priests
hostile to the liberal Church did not always express their senti¬
ments as dramatically as did those of Toledo and Alcarria, but
they often gave silent albeit no less forceful manifestations of
opposition. In Malaga, for instance, the newly appointed diocesan
administrator arrived at the cathedral for the customary reception
by the local clergy only to find it shuttered and empty. Even the
lowly bell ringer refused to appear to sound the chimes of wel¬
come.
   The resilience of a clergy deprived of episcopal leadership, cast
upon its own resources, and subject to intense pressure from the
State, marked a significant development in the evolution of the
modern Church. It should be remembered that the regency’s pol¬
icies were not directed to the destruction of religion, nor even to
the separation of Church and State. The regent, personally devout
to the point of superstition, and the ministers of justice most
intimately involved with ecclesiastical reform—Alonso and Be¬
cerra—stressed the importance of religion in the progresista State.
The organization, finances, and social role of the Church were to
be different from the ecclesiastical order of the Old Regime, but
the regent and his ministers were as fully committed to the con¬
tinued existence of an official Church as Ferdinand VII had been.
   The bishops and priests to whom the regency looked to direct
the Church found themselves in a difficult, ultimately impossible
position. The liberal clerical elite formed a rump church domi¬
nated by a handful of elderly bishops first appointed between
1820 and 1823 and by a group of younger priests—such as Miguel
Golfanguer, successor to Gonzalez Vallejo as governor of the To¬
ledo archdiocese in 1842, and Manuel La Rica, the diocesan ad¬
ministrator of Zaragoza. The liberal bishops were not the ogres
their clerical opponents pictured them to be. Although committed
to realizing the old ideal of ecclesiastical reform in alliance with
the State, they rejected out of hand the accusation often levied
  172                     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




against them of advocating a break with Rome. Moreover, their
views on public morality and the condition of the kingdom’s in¬
tellectual life were identical to those of their clerical foes. No
bishop, for example, attacked “the prideful impiety” and “the
absurd and delerious” rationalism of the times as vigorously as
Felix Torres Amat.57
   The situation of ecclesiastical reformers whose ideas went back
to the “Jansenism” of the eighteenth century and the attempts at
change undertaken at Cadiz was untenable; it became clear that
reform would be brought about not by the alliance of Constitution
and Altar but by diplomatic agreement between the State and the
papacy. Although bishops such as Torres Amat believed that a
concordat with Rome would resolve the problem of the Church
in liberal Spain, the hostility they evoked in Rome prevented them
from playing a role in the process. Torres Amat’s controversial
pastoral letter of 1842 defending the “Jansenist” views of his dis¬
tinguished uncle led to a papal prohibition on its publication and
a long campaign of harassment that followed the aged prelate to
his deathbed.58 The rising prestige of Rome among the rank and
hie of the clergy also undermined the already tenuous position
of the liberal clerical elite, as did its failure to persuade the regency
to put ecclesiastical finances on a sound basis. The aggressive
conduct of diocesan governors appointed under state pressure
further alienated the liberal clergy from the mass of their fellow
clergymen. The liberal ecclesiastical reformers of 1834-1843, in¬
tellectually mediocre with few exceptions, identified too closely
with a government seen as repressive by most of the clergy, and
unable to bring about any amelioration in the Church’s material
condition, could not extend their influence over the Church as a
whole. Their failure made impossible the creation of a Church
intimately allied to the liberal State.
   The regency’s inability to resolve the chronic problem of Church
finances eliminated what little hope remained of winning support
among the lower clergy. In return for suppression of the tithe
and sale of the secular clergy’s property (the “sacking of the pat¬
rimony of Jesus Christ,” according to ecclesiastical critics),59 the
State undertook to pay clerical salaries. The method of raising
and paying the necessary funds varied between 1840 and 1843
but rested on a combination of surplice fees paid by parishioners
    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                 173




for marriages, funerals, and baptisms and a national Church tax,
the latter amount being set by Madrid but its assessment left in
the hands of local authorities. The difficult situation of the na¬
tional treasury as well as cumbersome bureaucratic procedures
slowed transfer of funds to the diocesan commissions charged
with paying parish priests. Delays were aggravated by the resist¬
ance of provincial and municipal authorities to the tax. In 1842
the provincial government of Barcelona complained to Madrid
that the tax was “oppressive and unnecessary” and that only those
benefiting personally from the services of the clergy should be
expected to pay it.60 Municipal governments often took matters
into their own hands by refusing to levy the tax. Complaints poured
into the Catholic press from aggrieved priests throughout the
kingdom; one alleged that “all the municipalities of the region
are asleep and look with the greatest indifference on the fulfill¬
ment of the law on financing the cult and the clergy.” A priest in
rural Galicia reported the situation had reached such desperate
straits in his town that “we do not know, if anyone will even give
us a mouthful of bread.”61 Espartero’s inability to honor the gov¬
ernment’s pledge to the clergy deepened cynicism and destroyed
what little confidence remained in liberal politicians among parish
priests.
   The Church recovered from the confusion and uncertainty of
the six years preceding 1840 because circumstances forced a fun¬
damental readjustment of its relationship to the political power.
Few ecclesiastics believed that Carlism had the capacity to destroy
liberalism and restore the old alliance of Throne and Altar. But
as long as the rebellion continued, a faint hope lingered that the
union of absolutism and religion might sweep to a final, apoca¬
lyptic victory. Carlism’s defeat in 1839 ended that illusion. Sym¬
pathy for the Carlist cause continued among the clergy—particularly
in regions such as the Basque Provinces where the interests of the
Church were identified with the defense of local traditions—but
in general the ecclesiastical commitment to Carlism receded before
reality. The liberal State had triumphed and imposed on the na¬
tion a new set of institutions.
   Between 1840 and 1843 a Church deprived of episcopal lead¬
ership and any means of collective expression (the regency even
forbade the recently established Society for the Propagation of
  174                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




the Faith, fearing that its ostensible purpose, the support of for¬
eign missions, would allow the clergy to meet together for sub¬
versive activities) slowly began to learn the techniques of survival
in a world of parliaments, newspapers, political debate, and pop¬
ular agitation. Realizing that no savior waited in the wings, the
Church began to use the weapons of liberalism, which it had for
so long feared and attacked, for its own defense. Only in 1840,
for example, did a truly effective Catholic press emerge.
   The Church had previously used newspapers and journals, as
after 1824, but the early press, filled with triumphalist and long-
winded tracts against liberalism, served a totally polemical pur¬
pose. The new press—La Revista Catdlica of Barcelona, El Catolico
of Madrid, and La Cruz of Seville—had a different character.
Through publication of the State’s ecclesiastical legislation, de¬
tailed news of government harassment, and simple letters to the
editor, the Catholic press provided an isolated clergy with a sense
of unity and purpose. El Catolico thus defied the government by
publishing Gregory XVI’s address of March 1841 and launched
a distinctly modern campaign to elicit expressions of support from
the parish clergy. The torrent of replies from cities, distant towns,
and villages illustrated the force of the new journalism. The priests
of Puebla de Sanabria in Astorga wrote to the paper, whose very
existence had been unknown to them a few weeks before, that it
had inspired them to speak out and write an endorsement of the
papal statement.62 The emerging press also produced a breed of
tough, aggressive journalists as skilled in the struggle to win public
opinion as their liberal counterparts. The Catholic press could not
match liberal journals in either numbers or circulation, but more
than any other force it inspired resistance to the grand design for
a state Church.
   The shattering of the Carlist illusion also forced the Church to
reassess its traditional identification with absolutism. The dream
of a theocratic society resting on the alliance of Throne and Altar
never entirely disappeared, but between 1840 and 1843 the Church
perceived that its own self-interest was not necessarily that of
absolute monarchy. Defense of the faith became the rallying cry
of ecclesiastics who realistically assessed the situation of the Church
in a liberal State. El Catolico, in the significant issue of February
26, 1841, published a proposal for formation of a Catholic As-
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                      175




sociation, revealing the new tendency within the Church to secure
its position in the existing political order. The association was to
have a single purpose: “to defend the Catholic religion which is
designated as the religion of the Spains in the fundamental code
of the nation,” and to do so “by the means authorized by law.”
The project envisaged a voluntary association of a million mem¬
bers organized through the efforts of the parish clergy and di¬
rected by the newspaper’s editors. The proposal reflected a shrewd
awareness of the transformation of the nation’s political life. The
Church must see to its own interests by building an organization
capable of mobilizing public support to influence government pol¬
icy.
   Although the plan was intelligent in its perception that the
Church must struggle as an interest group in the arena of parlia¬
ment and public opinion, it was ahead of its time. Not for another
quarter-century would anything resembling the Catholic Associ¬
ation come into being. But the revolt of the clergy in 1841 and
 1842 was an example of the new, realistic tactics. Devoid of any
advocacy of Carlism, the clerical reaction to the scheme for a state
Church represented in a limited way an ecclesiastical strategy that
in one form or another would survive until 1931.
   The new realism of the Church during the early 1840’s arose
not only from a pragmatic reaction to the events of the Espartero
regency. One group of clergy came to realize that the wealth and
privileges of the past could not be restored. The movement owed
a great deal to the most brilliant intellectual figure of the nineteenth-
century Church, the young Catalan priest Jaime Balmes (1810—
 1848). Philosopher, social thinker, journalist, and political essayist,
Balmes possessed the historical sense to see that the struggle of
liberalism against absolutism in the form of Carlism marked a
decisive stage in the nation’s history. It was a conflict “between
the old society and the new; between the society of beliefs and
religious customs . . . and a society of innovation and the devel¬
opment of material interests.”63 Balmes had no use for the pro-
gresistas or the moderados; he regarded the former as being moved
by destructive passion; the latter he saw as “detestable.”64 Although
his proposal for a Catholic-Monarchical party rising above the
divisions between Carlists and supporters of Isabella II was im¬
practical given the circumstances of the time, he urged the clergy
  176                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




to remove themselves entirely from partisan politics. And he be¬
lieved that political controversy focusing on the Church could only
be eliminated through a formal agreement between the liberal
State and the papacy. The suggestion for a negotiated settlement
to establish the place of the Church within a regime that for good
or ill dominated the country implied abandonment of historic
claims to the ecclesiastical riches and privileges of the past—claims
upon which some clerics continued to insist.65
   The realism of Balmes found a counterpart in the attitude of
some members of the hierarchy. Bishop Romo Gamboa of the
Canaries declared in 1843: “reason dictates that prescinding from
rights which have been swept away forever, and submerged ... at
the bottom of the sea, we should content ourselves with saving
those which, floating to the beaches, are still capable of being
saved ... we find ourselves with certain losses which it is impos¬
sible to re-establish without new sacrifices.” Like Balmes, Romo
Gamboa believed that only realistic negotiations between the lib¬
eral State and the papacy would be able “to assure the future of
the Church.”66
   Such a settlement seemed impossible as long as the Espartero
regency survived. But the regency proved no more durable than
the governments preceding it; in July 1843 it fell. The revolution
began as a general movement of protest against a government
increasingly isolated from its own supporters and unpopular be¬
cause of its economic and fiscal policies. Division within the mil¬
itary and progresista ranks made the success of the rising possible.
A series of local disturbances, usually initiated by dissident radicals
and some partisans of a republic, were soon dominated by the
more conservative liberal bourgeoisie, who for the first time suc¬
ceeded in turning the provincial revolution to its advantage.
   Clerics participated in the revolutionary juntas of Tarragona,
Tortosa, Gerona, Valencia, and Teruel. Elsewhere the clergy did
nothing “to block the march of the national rising nor lend support
to the insolent Regent.”67 Espartero’s fall was greeted with ill-
disguised enthusiasm by the clergy. In Seville Canon Manuel Lopez
Cepero preached a violent sermon exulting in the failure of “the
miserable little tyrant, the bastard fungus of fortune.”68 Clerical
expectations that a new day had arrived for the Church rose with
the measures taken by provincial juntas to reverse the regency’s
    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  177




ecclesiastical legislation. In July the juntas of Tarragona, Teruel,
Lugo, Santiago, Palencia, Caceres, and Mallorca abolished the
hated certificates of loyalty; others suspended the sale of the sec¬
ular clergy’s property.
   During the summer of 1843 the groundwork was laid for the
compromise between the Church and a bourgeoisie fearful of
social revolution that would give nineteenth-century Spanish Ca¬
tholicism its distinctive character. For if the Church had become
aware of the advantage of working within the liberal State, the
latter’s more conservative elements began to see the Church as a
bulwark of stability and order within a turbulent society. Under
the banner “Mother of God, Liberatrix of Spain,” the revolution¬
ary junta in Valencia affirmed its loyalty to the Constitution of
1837, the guarantor of “the religion of our ancestors, the throne
of our kings and the liberty of our persons.”69 To the cry “Long
live religion and liberty!” the junta added an appeal for measures
to provide financial support for the clergy and a concordat to end
the long estrangement of official Spain from Rome. The circum¬
stances were present for an accommodation between liberalism
and the Church. The process of adjustment would take longer
than a euphoric clergy expected in 1843, but it had begun.


A New Church, 1834—1843

   By 1843 the framework of the eighteenth-century Church had
collapsed under the weight of liberal reform. The religious orders
of men had disappeared with few exceptions; many dioceses lacked
bishops, and the number of cathedral canons fell from 1,738 to
1,079 because of the State’s refusal to fill benefices unconnected
to pastoral work. The parochial clergy maintained its strength at
approximately the eighteenth-century level, with nearly 25,000
priests engaged in the cure of souls.70 This did not mean that
overall the number of clerics increased, for the ex-regulars pro¬
vided a pool of manpower for the parishes. In addition, 10,000
priests from the suppressed orders survived on government pen¬
sions. The effective clerical personnel of the Church composed
no more than a third of the number of priests reported in the
last censuses of the Old Regime. In this respect the liberal State
achieved one of its objectives. The decline in priestly numbers
  178                     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




was not, however, accompanied by a more rational distribution of
resources and personnel. Southern dioceses continued to be badly
understaffed compared with the northern, and the suppression
of parishes decreed by the State, though begun in some dioceses—
Valladolid, Salamanca, and Toledo—did not lead to the ration¬
alization of parish size and resources the authorities desired.71
Moreover, the destruction of the orders and the reduced numbers
of the clerical elite accentuated the shift from the urban Church
of the Old Regime to the rural Church of the nineteenth century.
The parish clergy, profoundly conservative, devoted to Rome, and
concentrated in an isolated countryside, became the dominant
group within clerical ranks. The demographic and organizational
transformation of the Church after 1834 contributed to a reo¬
rientation of the ecclesiastical mentality that would create serious
difhculties in a later period of industrial growth and urbanization.
   The destruction of the religious orders, the penury of the sec¬
ular clergy, and liberal legislation ended the charitable and edu¬
cational activities vital to the social role of the Old Regime Church.
Clerical influence over education rested on the secondary schools
maintained by the regulars. On the whole the orders were not as
deeply involved in primary teaching. Village schools were nu¬
merous in the Old Regime and catechetical instruction obligatory,
but the latter was the responsibility of the parish priest, who
appeared for perhaps an hour a week to put the pupils through
the rudimentary memory questions of the catechism. The schools
of the orders catered to local elites, although Ferdinand VII had
attempted to direct the regulars into elementary teaching. The
quality of these schools varied enormously—from the classical
education of the Jesuits and the modern instruction given by the
Piarists to that provided in smaller towns, where lay students sat
side by side with friars pursuing their clerical studies in arts courses.
The general quality of the orders’ schools declined during the
first third of the nineteenth century, but they continued to educate
the small minority dominating intellectual, political, and social life
until the disamortization of Mendizabal.
   By destroying the orders and reducing the income of the secular
clergy, the liberal State also diminished the Church’s traditional
charitable function. The charity of the Old Regime, widespread
and diffuse in character, included a priest’s donation of a few
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  179




reales to passing beggars, the distribution of bread and soup at
episcopal gates, and the administration of hospitals, orphanages,
and other institutions. Religiously inspired poor relief had not
functioned well since at least 1800, but it received the coup de
grace after 1834. Liberal opinion had little use for the apparently
chaotic and indiscriminate distribution of alms by ecclesiastics. A
royal order (July 1, 1836) established local commissions to assume
responsibility for aiding the poor, and charitable institutions, such
as hospitals, fell directly under government control as charity be¬
came public assistance. For churchmen the change seemed a scan¬
dalous departure from the centuries-old norms of a Christian
society. In spite of clerical laments, however, removal of eccle¬
siastical institutions from their decisive place in poor relief was
another step in the liberal policy of reducing the Church to an
exclusively pastoral function.
   To what extent the collapse of the material and social foun¬
dations of the Old Regime Church affected levels of religious
practice between 1834 and 1843 is difficult to assess because there
are few studies of observance. Churchmen compared their situ¬
ation to that of the persecuted Christians of ancient Rome. “Nero,
Tiberius and Domitian could not have been worse,” said a Catholic
periodical of Espartero.72 The disintegration of the traditional
ecclesiastical organization diminished the Church’s ability to pro¬
vide religious services on an eighteenth-century scale. Monaster¬
ies, convents, and their churches were closed and either sold to
speculators, who often pulled them down in favor of new resi¬
dential and commercial construction, or converted them to public
use. The urban concentration of the regulars meant that their
disappearance inevitably reduced the number of churches open
for services in the cities. In Madrid, for example, the number fell
from 100 to 70 within five years.
   By destroying the orders the State shifted the entire burden of
ministering to the population to parish priests. But the geographic
distribution of the parochial clergy widened the gap between well-
served areas—Old Castile, Leon, Aragon, the entire Cantabrian
coast—and the chronically understaffed dioceses of Andalusia
and Extremadura, where traditionally a small body of priests ad¬
ministered large parishes and depended on the religious orders
for pastoral assistance. The disappearance of the regulars in Se-
  180                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




ville, Cordoba and Jaen, where they had once formed at least half
the clerical population, placed the secular clergy under pressure
that could have been relieved only by creation of new parishes
and recruitment of priests to fill them. This was not done, and
the imbalances inherent in the southern Church’s infrastructure
were magnified.
   Forms of religious expression central to the life of the Old
Regime Church were compromised by both legislation and the
clerical establishment’s poverty after 1834. The disappearance of
the orders—the most important agents of popular evangelization
as well as the most avid propagators of devotions, such as the
Sacred Heart and the Stations of the Cross—threw the burden of
sustaining faith on a secular clergy ill prepared for the task. More¬
over, the emergence of a highly individualistic society ensured the
decline of the collective manifestations of religious sentiment that
had characterized the eighteenth-century Church. The old con¬
fraternities, reflections of the traditional social categories of a hi¬
erarchical order, were transformed into simple associations of
pious individuals. Social changes had already made the cofradias
superfluous in the old sense, but the State accelerated their decline
by ordering the sale of their property in May 1841 along with
that of the secular clergy. Thus, the governor of Salamanca sup¬
pressed the confraternities of that city in May 1842. The devout
continued to pay homage to their patrons, but they did so as
private citizens willing to donate the funds necessary for services.
   Religious processions, however, did not disappear during the
decade of liberal revolution. They survived because the State wished
them to. An impoverished Church could no longer afford its taste
for religious spectacle. But the progresistas were as committed to
the great processions of Holy Week and Corpus Christi as the
absolutist monarchs of old. Municipalities willingly donated the
necessary funds, as in Cuenca where the authorities gave 20,000
reales in March 1842 for the traditional rites of Holy Week. Es-
partero presided over the Corpus Christi procession in Madrid
in June 1841.73 This attitude, so different from later anticlerical
manias against processions, reflected the government’s commit¬
ment to the Church it was attempting to create. Religious proces¬
sions, in which the National Guard and army invariably participated,
had been transformed from displays of ecclesiastical wealth and
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                    181




grandeur into manifestations of the unity between Church and
State in the new social and political order.
    In spite of clerical laments that irreligion was leading society to
its ruin, there is no convincing evidence that a massive desertion
from the Church occurred between 1834 and 1843. The disrup¬
tion of the ecclesiastical organization, the effects of the Carlist
War in some regions, and the Church’s general poverty may have
accelerated the slippage of practice in the cities and magnified the
weaknesses of the Church in areas where faith rested on uncertain
foundations, but no massive drift into dechristianization took place.
One of the few statistical studies of religious practice for the pe¬
riod, an analysis of the number of persons fulfilling the Easter
Communion obligation in the parish of Santiago El Real in the
city of Logrono in La Rioja, shows that the rate of observance
changed only marginally between 1828 and 1843. The proportion
of nonobservants was uniformly low, ranging between 1.0 percent
and 6.0 percent of the parochial population falling under the
obligation, with the higher percentages being reached in only two
years (1836, 6.0 percent and 1841, 4.5 percent). The Logrono
statistics cannot be used to generalize about the kingdom as a
whole, but they are significant given the extremely large number
of parishioners failing to fulfill the Easter duty during the last
third of the nineteenth century (in 1887 the nonobservants formed
58.3 percent of the total). The statistics reveal that dechristiani¬
zation made rapid progress in the city during the century, but it
is clear that this transformation had not yet begun between 1834
and 1843.74
    The matanza de los frailes in 1834 and 1835 combined with the
dismantling of the structure of the Old Regime Church led to the
myth, assiduously promoted by ecclesiastics, that unbridled anti¬
clericalism fostered by the State was threatening the survival of
religion itself. But liberalism, either in its progresista or moderado
version, had no such intention, and in fact there was a noticeable
decline of anticlerical violence once the question of the religious
orders was resolved and the Carlist revolt ended. Between 1840
and 1843, years of revolutionary upheaval and economic unrest,
few physical attacks were made on ecclesiastical buildings or the
clergy. Incidents did continue to occur which revealed that the
Church was still losing ground in the cities. In Tarragona a group
  182                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




of youths invaded the cathedral on Wednesday of Holy Week in
1842; they threw the service into confusion by breaking into “noisy
and disorderly sounds”; in Cadiz masked figures attired in litur¬
gical garments appeared on the streets during carnival “to ridicule
the august ceremonies of our religion,” according to the Catholic
press. In Madrid drunken revelers attending the Christmas mid¬
night Mass scandalized the devout with their irreverent singing
and general conduct. But if these incidents revealed a lack of
respect for religion unthinkable a half-century before, they did
not constitute a violent, frontal assault on the Church. Moreover,
the progresista authorities intervened energetically to curb such
excesses. Even the Catholic press had to praise the intervention
of the municipal officials of Tarragona for having “punished se¬
verely the disturbers of public tranquility” and caused “the mys¬
teries of our religion to be respected.”75
    As an institution with its roots deep in a noble, agrarian, and
absolutist past, the Church fared badly at liberal hands; as a re¬
ligious body it survived better than ecclesiastical observers be¬
lieved. Clerics bemoaned the effects of the liberal decade. But by
maintaining the link between Church and State—indeed by en¬
couraging religious observance—successive governments, whether
moderado or progresista, provided the means for the Church to
adapt to changing political and social circumstances with some
success. This pattern would survive with one exception until 1931.
    Whether a religious revival took place after 1840, as churchmen
of the time maintained, is unclear. The Catholic press gloried in
publishing reports of massive attendance at services during the
regency. The lack of statistical evidence on religious practice makes
it impossible to establish the accuracy of these claims. It is clear,
however, that the Church, deprived of its traditional educational,
charitable, and seigneurial functions, began to redefine the sig¬
nificance of observance. Eighteenth-century practice, the collec¬
tive manifestation of the pious sentiments of a hierarchical society,
gave way to a religion of testimony, to individual professions of
faith promoted by a Church believing itself the victim of perse¬
cution. The faithful no longer attended services or participated
in the processions of Holy Week as members of artisan guilds or
noble confraternities, but as individuals testifying to belief in a
Church under siege: “What a victory against unbelief! What a
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                     183




triumph for religion!” said the correspondent of La Cruz of mas¬
sive attendance at services in the town of Vinaroz.76 The liberal
ideal of a Church reduced largely to the spiritual and pastoral
had triumphed. But it also destroyed any possibility of a Church
in the service of liberalism, for in religious observance the Church
found an effective weapon against the regime’s ecclesiastical re¬
forms.
    Having learned the rules of the new politics and preserved a
sense of identity by developing a defensive mentality, the Church
could not adapt as easily to the emergence of a society with new
norms of economic behavior and sociability. The liberal revolution
of 1834-1843 was primarily political in character. Although the
old society of orders, hierarchical and seigneurial, was effectively
dismantled, the social base of liberal Spain rested on a landowning
oligarchy of aristocrats and a conservative urban bourgeoisie eager
to lay its hands on the spoils of Church property. To them must
be added a sprinkling of Catalan industrialists, prospering from
the growing cotton textile industry of Barcelona, and Madrid fin¬
anciers and speculators. The oligarchy was more open than the
noble society of the past. Aristocrats, generals, bankers, mer¬
chants, and manufacturers mingled in salon, parliament, literary
society, and business in a fashion unthinkable a few years before.
The new social order was as profoundly conservative as the one
it replaced, but its undisguised acquisitiveness, its penchant for
ostentatious display, and its secular cultural tastes clashed with an
ecclesiastical mentality deeply rooted in the quasi-medieval, scho¬
lastic interpretation of social organization that had long domi¬
nated clerical thinking.
   For churchmen imbued with an ideal of society organized around
the subordination of individual interest to the collective good and
the pervasive influence of religion in every aspect of life, forms
of liberal sociability seemed shocking departures from standards
of Christian civilization. Even Balmes, the most perceptive ob¬
server of what was happening to the Church in the early 1840’s,
lamented the disappearance of an idealized Catholic Spain where
“religion, piety, faith, and hope . . . filled the streets, squares, and
byways” of the kingdom in favor of a society “occupied with its
industrial progress, its mercantile circulation, its hunger for gold,
its thirst for pleasure, its ostentatious luxury, its dissipation, its
  184                    The Destruction of the Old Regime Church




scientific and literary vanity, its political delirium and its refined
egoism.”77 For clerics still attached to the anticapitalist and cor-
poratist social preoccupations of the Old Regime Church, the sale
of ecclesiastical property, the destruction of traditional charity,
and the emphasis on economic development were signs of a society
in the midst of dissolution. Thus, a Catholic periodical com¬
plained: “What license! In the capital of Spain we constantly see
in the press these announcements: Money to Loan. Money lent
at moderate interest.” Another lamented that “in Madrid, the
capital of Catholic Spain, . . . commerce continues on its daily course
even on Sundays and feast days” in the name of “utility and prog¬
ress,” thus delivering the nation to “the most ferocious customs”
calculated to make Spaniards “as barbarous and slavish as the
English.”78
   For the Church the sale of the regular and secular clergy’s
property provided the supreme example of a society dominated
by acquisitive passion, hence the frequent denunciations of the
purchasers as “infamous egoists” who built “colossal fortunes” at
ecclesiastical expense.79 In fact, the infrastructure of the national
economy had not changed dramatically by 1843. Still agrarian
save for a developing Catalonia and a handful of manufacturing
towns scattered across the kingdom, Spain maintained its prein¬
dustrial character. The most significant change was the sale of
ecclesiastical property, which left a legacy of resentment that would
survive through generations of churchmen. Moreover, the con¬
nection between the sale and the freewheeling economic activities
of the liberal State reinforced clerical hostility toward a developing
capitalist society.
   Nor did the Church contemplate the proliferation of newspa¬
pers, literary reviews, theaters, and other cultural institutions of
the new society with anything less than horror. Although the State
retained the power of censorship, it deprived the bishops of the
authority to impose legal sanctions on offending works other than
through purely canonical means. The relatively free expression
of ideas after 1834 led to what many churchmen considered a
wave of antireligious and indecent publications. Reports from local
correspondents poured into the Catholic press alleging that the
nation was being swept by a wave of libertinism that “attacks re¬
ligion and is opposed to good customs.” In Santiago the clergy
     The Destruction of the Old Regime Church                  185




called the construction of a theater in the town “most prejudicial
to the decorum of the religion which the Spanish profess.” There
is no evidence that the nation was being submerged by the de¬
pravity clerics believed they saw about them. What they were la¬
menting was the collapse of the controls used for centuries by
Throne and Altar to preserve the purity of faith. Obsessed since
the middle of the eighteenth century with the danger of “liber¬
tinism”—the wanton expression of individual tastes and pleasures
beyond clerically defined moral standards—the Church saw in
liberal social and intellectual expression “a rebellion against God
and against human society.”80
    Political circumstances forced the Church into a pragmatic reas¬
sessment of its role in the liberal State; ecclesiastical perceptions
of economic and social changes after 1834, however, strengthened
its traditional foreboding view of what was happening to Spanish
society. Church leaders had no choice but to yield the theocratic
ambitions that had dominated clerical thinking since at least 1808.
But clerics had not abandoned the moral and philosophical prin¬
ciples that provided the rationale for earlier attempts to convert
absolute monarchy into an instrument for creating the kingdom
of God on earth. A new political order had come into being, and
the Church proposed to use it to realize its aspirations. To do so
in new economic, social, and intellectual conditions would be no
easier than before. Indeed, the process would create problems
and controversies that have survived to this day.
6    /    The Conservative Church, 1844—1868



   With the collapse of the Espartero regency in 1843 the liberal
balance of power shifted from the progresistas to the moderados,
who monopolized the government until 1868 save for the inter¬
lude between 1854 and 1856. Although committed to maintaining
the political, economic, and social gains made at the expense of
the hierarchical order of the past, the moderado program re¬
flected the basic conservatism of its supporters. Fearful of the
popular radicalism exploited by the progresistas, the moderados
wished to slow the pace of change and consolidate a regime to be
dominated by a small elite chosen by a restricted body of electors.
Above all, the moderados wished to enjoy the economic benefits
of possessing power and to avoid a revolution demanding wider
participation in the political process and redress of popular griev¬
ances. The progresistas were no less terrified of social revolution,
but their willingness to use lower-class unrest to further their
objectives made them suspect in moderado eyes.
   Moderado dominance of government between 1844 and 1868
provided the Church with an opportunity to recover from the
shocks it had suffered since 1834. The moderados saw the Church
as a useful ally in the struggle against radicalism and possible
revolution; ecclesiastics, abandoning their commitment to abso¬
lutism, saw the possibility of employing the conservative-liberal
State to recoup their losses. But the accommodation between the
moderados and the Church was essentially a marriage of conven¬
ience. A tense and difficult union in the best of times, it did not
resolve the fundamental problem of the Church’s relationship to
the new political and social order.


Recovery and Resentment, 1844—1854

   The failure of progresista ambitions to create a liberal clergy
as well as moderado fears of revolution produced an accommo-


    186
     The Conservative Church                                    187




dation between Church and State that would endure save for brief
periods until the proclamation of the Second Republic in 1931.
The successful uprising against Espartero in July 1843 heightened
Catholic expectations for “a new era, one of hope and consolation
for the Spanish Church.”1 These aspirations were not immediately
fulfilled. The provisional government, representing an uneasy
coalition of moderados and progresistas disenchanted with the
regency, dared not alienate its supporters on the delicate issue of
halting the sale of the secular clergy’s property. The suspension
of auctions by some local juntas during the summer so threatened
the government’s stability that on August 7 the prime minister,
J. M. Lopez, ordered that the sales should continue. The State’s
action irritated clerical opinion, which had expected an immediate
transformation of the Church’s position in the new political cir¬
cumstances. The government’s unwillingness to take decisive ac¬
tion led the Catholic press to pose the question: “will the moderado
party have enough nerve ... to repair the infinite evils which the
Church has suffered in ten years ... of revolution and upheaval?”
   Political developments rather than strong nerves finally made
possible the easing of tensions between Church and State. The
disintegration of the coalition of 1843 and the emergence of an
exclusively moderado government in 1844 opened a long period
of conservative rule. The new order suffered from serious weak¬
nesses: the exclusion of the opposition from acquiring power
through parliamentary means, a narrow electoral franchise de¬
nying the vast majority of the population any voice in the political
process, an imperfectly developed party system encouraging fac¬
tionalism even within moderado ranks, and a monarch, Isabella
II (“she has a great deal of willfulness, but no will of her own,”
said a contemporary observer), with both the constitutional pre¬
rogative and the disposition to be drawn into the intrigues gen¬
erated by a turbulent political system.2 The moderados preserved
their hegemony by creating the strongly centralized State that in
one form or another would survive until the 1970’s and by re¬
sorting to force to repress dissent. Provincial radicalism and lower-
class unrest were held in check; political life was controlled through
the manipulation of elections and restrictive press laws. Successive
moderado governments, however, carried out certain important
reforms, such as codification of the criminal law and creation of
  188                                     The Conservative Church




a relatively efficient tax system. In the end, the inflexible political
character of the regime and the narrow social base on which it
rested caused its collapse, but for more than two decades it was
strong enough to impose its model of government on the king¬
dom.
   For the moderados, intent on excluding the progresistas from
power and determined to preserve the gains made from destruc¬
tion of the old social order, an accommodation with the Church
seemed tactically sound. The failure of the regency’s ecclesiastical
policy and the prestige of the papacy among Spanish clerics re¬
vealed that a unilateral settlement of the problems between Church
and State was out of the question. Moreover, the moderados, who
had profited handsomely from the sale of ecclesiastical property
and continued this policy for fully a year after the 1843 revolution,
could contemplate halting the process because the best holdings
had been auctioned to private purchasers.3 An arrangement with
the Church also promised clerical support for the regime and an
undermining of Carlism in regions where it enjoyed popularity.
For the Church the necessity of a settlement was even more ob¬
vious. In 1846 twenty-nine of the kingdom’s sixty-one dioceses
lacked bishops because of the impasse between the State and Rome
over episcopal nominations; the number of capitular clergy had
fallen drastically, and the irregular support provided by successive
governments for the priests and the maintenance of church fabrics
had left an impoverished clergy and deteriorating ecclesiastical
buildings.
   In early 1844 the State embarked on a deliberate policy of
improving civil-ecclesiastical relations. A royal order of January
 19, designed “to bury ... all the quarrels, aggravations and re¬
criminations which might serve as obstacles to a new era of be¬
neficence and reparation,” authorized the return from exile of
two aged prelates once known for their intransigent defense of
absolutism—Cardinal Cienfuegos of Seville and Archbishop Velez
of Santiago.4 Subsequent decrees allowed other exiles to resume
the administration of their dioceses. In March Cardinal Cienfue¬
gos and the bishops of Calahorra and Plasencia were invited to
visit the queen at the royal palace. The bishops knelt and kissed
the royal hand in a traditional ceremony symbolizing the hier¬
archy’s acceptance of Isabella II. Other measures—the abolition
     The Conservative Church                                  189




of the controversial certificates of loyalty, government affirma¬
tions of its commitment to pay clerical salaries, and the reestab¬
lishment of the ecclesiastical marriage tribunal, the Rota—also
created a climate of opinion favorable to more substantial changes.
    The accession to power in May 1844 of the strong man of
 moderado politics, General Ramon Narvaez, opened the way for
 more concessions to the Church. Narvaez, a “daring, energetic,
obstinate and iron-nerved soldier of fortune,”5 by no means en¬
joyed the total support of the moderado political factions. But his
 toughness and determination together with his prestige among
conservative generals allowed the government to implement a
 vigorous policy along a broad front including the Church.6 In
 spite of progresista hostility and some grumbling among mode¬
 rado politicians, the State suspended the sale of the secular cler¬
 gy’s property that summer. As the government consolidated its
 position, it acted more decisively. In April 1845 it ordered the
 return of all property as yet unsold. And a new constitution in
 1845, going beyond the terms of the charter of 1837, affirmed
 that “the religion of the Spanish nation is the Apostolic Roman
 Catholic religion. The State binds itself to maintain the cult and
 its ministers.”7 Such measures were welcomed by clerical opinion,
 but the State did not give all its cards away. Until a definitive
 settlement with Rome, the government continued to apply the
 restrictions imposed during the 1830’s on ordinations and parish
 appointments. Nor was it prepared to oust the proregency dioc¬
 esan administrators who had taken office under Espartero, al¬
 though some resigned their posts voluntarily.
     Both moderado and clerical opinion recognized that only a
 formal agreement with the papacy could end the deadlock be¬
 tween the liberal State and the Church. Less than a month after
 taking office, the Narvaez government sent a diplomatic agent to
 Rome to negotiate with Gregory XVI on the following basis: (1)
 papal recognition of Isabella II as the kingdom’s legitimate sov¬
ereign; (2) suspension of sale of the property of the secular clergy
and the female orders; and (3) recognition of the pope’s role in
episcopal appointments subject to the traditional right of royal
 patronage stipulated in the Concordat of 1753.8 The anxiety of
both sides to reach agreement led to the rapid conclusion of ne¬
gotiations. By January 1845 the convenio worked out between the
  190                                   The Conservative Church




papal secretary of state and the Spanish representative in Rome
was being discussed in Madrid. Although the agreement met the
State’s original terms, a new provision authorizing the reestab¬
lishment of the male religious orders at an “opportune” time aroused
controversy in the cabinet. Further, rumors of the convenio, which
had been negotiated secretly without reference to parliament, pro¬
voked the ire of both moderado and progresista newspapers, as
well as that of moderados resentful of the government’s heavy-
handed tactics and covert diplomacy. Although the ministry might
have forced acceptance of the agreement, parliamentary and press
uproar following publication of the convenio’s text in The Times of
London revealed that the government underestimated the extent
of opposition, even among its own supporters, to a definitive set¬
tlement with the Church. Faced with open hostility to other aspects
of its policy, particularly in the area of tax reform, the Narvaez
ministry elected prudence by refusing to sanction the convenio.9
   The government’s unwillingness to ratify the convenio of 1845
irritated Catholic opinion, but it did not end the modus vivendi
worked out between the secular and ecclesiastical authorities. The
election of a new pope in 1846 again raised hopes for a settlement.
Pius IX, whose moderately liberal views were regarded with sym¬
pathy by the government in Madrid, showed his good intentions
by recognizing Isabella as queen of Spain in 1848 and by agreeing
to cooperate in filling episcopal vacancies. Negotiations for the
long-awaited concordat were finally resumed, as before in secrecy
so extreme that a Catholic paper complained that “neither the
clergy nor even the illustrious prelates of the Church . . . know
what it will contain.”10 The complex and at times difficult nego¬
tiations were finally concluded during the ministry of Juan Bravo
Murillo on March 16, 1851. Rome and Madrid had reached an
agreement that would determine the place of the Church within
Spanish society for generations.
   The concordat’s terms were received with open hostility by the
progresistas, discreet reserve by the moderados who always feared
being tarred with the brush of ultramontanism by the opposition,
and quiet acquiescence by clerics.11 Few were enthusiastic in their
support of a document that offered neither startling innovations
nor the prospect of a certain end to the difficulties between the
civil and ecclesiastical authorities. The settlement of 1851 was a
     The Conservative Church                                    191




practical arrangement designed to regularize the position of the
Church within the liberal State. At first glance it offered conces¬
sions to both sides. Pius IX accepted the sale of Church property
carried out until that time, confirmed the traditional rights of the
Crown in episcopal appointments, endorsed the principle of par¬
ish reorganization, and authorized a modest revision of diocesan
boundaries.12 The State formally accepted responsibility for suste¬
nance of the secular clergy and church fabrics, recognized the
right of the bishops to exercise their pastoral functions inde¬
pendently, committed itself to the support of seminaries, author¬
ized the Church to hold property, and consented to a limited
reestablishment of religious orders of men in an ambiguous clause
soon to arouse controversy.13 Article 1 affirmed that Catholicism
“to the exclusion of any other cult continues being the only religion
of the Spanish nation,” and that it was to enjoy “all the rights and
prerogatives” corresponding to it “according to the law of God
and the sacred canons.” Article 2 declared that teaching at all
educational levels must conform to the “purity of the faith’s doc¬
trine.”14
   In spite of the rhetoric of Article 1 and progresista outrage at
certain provisions of the concordat—particularly those involving
religious orders and education—the moderado State played a
shrewd hand in its dealings with the papacy. The concessions made
to the Church were neither substantial nor costly. The Catholic
press pointed out that the affirmations of Articles 1 and 2 were
illusory, because they were not accompanied by specific recom¬
mendations for implementation.15 Moreover, the government’s
declaration of its willingness to support the Church financially was
only a restatement of intentions made by every liberal ministry
since 1834. The terms of the financial settlement (an annual budget
for culto y clero of approximately 153 million reales), although
more generous than the expenditures of Espartero on the Church,
fell short of the 265 million reales clerics thought necessary to
meet the cost of ecclesiastical salaries and the upkeep of churches.16
In addition, papal recognition of the traditional patronage rights
of the Crown gave the State significant leverage in its relations
with the Church. Rome also accepted a reduction in the number
of capitular clergy and a limited degree of internal reorganiza¬
tion—reforms demanded by liberal reformers since the Cortes of
  192                                     The Conservative Church




Cadiz. Finally, papal acceptance of the sale of Church property
put to rest the fears of liberal supporters who had acquired ec¬
clesiastical holdings since 1834.
   The settlement of 1851 did not allow the moderados to fulfill
the old hope of a Church in the service of liberalism. Interna^
reform of the Church was to take place with the cooperation of
the ecclesiastical authorities, hence the dilatory pace of parish
reorganization and the creation of new dioceses. And opposition
to the liberal political order by no means disappeared among the
clergy and those committed to Carlism. The moderados, however,
could count on a hierarchy loyal to Isabella II with few exceptions,
and they maintained control over the mechanisms of finance and
patronage necessary to keep the Church in line.
   Certain provisions of the concordat, particularly those recog¬
nizing the right of ecclesiastical institutions to own property, brought
immediate advantages to the Church. But the principal benefit of
the settlement rested less on specific concessions than on the cre¬
ation of a legal framework allowing the Church to function nor¬
mally for the first time since 1834. The clergy was not happy with
an agreement worked out secretly between Rome and Madrid.
Objections were soon voiced to its financial terms, particularly
those establishing low salaries for the rural clergy.17 Such reser¬
vations were justified. In spite of a rhetorical campaign carried
on by figures such as Donoso Cortes—a conservative Catholic
thinker, writer, and orator—that advocated the alliance between
Church and State against the danger of revolution, both sides
expected different consequences to flow from the agreement of
 1851.18 Fear of revolutionary agitation provided a weak ideological
glue incapable of binding the secular and ecclesiastical authorities
to a specific program of action.
   If the official Church accepted Isabella II as queen and the
liberal regime as the established political order, it also believed
that the affirmation of Spain’s Catholicism in the concordat de¬
manded that the State take initiatives in the fields of religious
dissent, education, social customs, and censorship that would re¬
store the nation to a new age of piety and morality. The Church
expected as much from the liberal State as it had demanded of
Ferdinand VII. The ecclesiastical and secular authorities were to
function as supreme moral censors to purge a society regarded
     The Conservative Church                                    193




as fundamentally corrupt. The objectives of the moderado State
were more practical. The moderados were willing to placate the
Church within limits as one of the many interest groups sup¬
porting the regime, but they had no intention of allowing the
Church to dictate public policy. The Concordat of 1851 amelio¬
rated the tense relations between Church and State prevailing
before 1844, but it laid the groundwork for a continuing struggle
over the Church’s determination to install its vision of the kingdom
of God on earth in a secular and economically changing society.
    The moderado accommodation with the Church diminished a
possible threat to the survival of the regime, but it moved the
clergy into more immediate involvement in the turbulent world
of liberal politics. Churchmen no longer worried about survival
as they had done during the decade of revolution between 1834
and 1843. The Concordat of 1851 recognized the Church as an
official interest group along with the landowners, industrialists,
bankers, and generals already forming the backbone of the mode¬
 rado State. Within the framework of unstable and factionalized
 party struggles, a strong and meddlesome royal power, and the
give and take of the struggle to influence public opinion through
the press, the Church was ready to advance its fortunes through
the mechanisms of the new political order.
    The Concordat of 1851 accelerated the institutional recuper¬
ation that had begun in 1844. The Catholic press observed with
satisfaction what it believed to be signs of a religious revival.
From Pontevedra in Galicia came a report of a notable increase
in “religious enthusiasm,” and a correspondent in Cordoba noted
 “the marvelous turn of events” that had seen “indifference” turn
 to “fervor, devotion and care for the cult.”19 At the level of eccle¬
siastical organization, the normalization of relations between Church
and State allowed vacancies to be filled in both parishes and ca¬
thedral chapters, the latter still decimated on the eve of the con¬
cordat’s signing. The government’s decision in 1852 to authorize
a Jesuit seminary to train missionaries for the colonies in the old
Jesuit college at Loyola permitted the order to resume its activities
in Spain. The order staffed several diocesan seminaries at the
invitation of local bishops and provided the vanguard for a new
campaign of domestic missions.20 Jesuit missionaries moved through
Catalonia, Andalusia, and the Basque Provinces during the early
  194                                   The Conservative Church




1850’s in the most ambitious effort at popular evangelization since
the late eighteenth century.
   The concordat did not bring about a massive reintroduction of
the male religious orders, whose members numbered only 1,683
in 1860. But the State permitted the selective reestablishment of
certain houses, such as that of the Hieronymites in the monastery
of El Escorial in the spring of 1854. More substantial was the
development of orders of women engaged in charitable and ed¬
ucational work. The moderado State deliberately encouraged fe¬
male orders engaged in charity and teaching, perhaps in tacit
recognition of its own inadequate efforts in the realm of public
assistance. The Sisters of Charity, though present in Spain since
the late eighteenth century, expanded their activities at midcen¬
tury; they were often invited by municipal and provincial au¬
thorities to staff local hospitals, asylums, and orphanages. Between
 1844 and 1854 several new orders of women were established—
the educational orders of the Sacred Heart (1846) and Jesus and
Mary (1850)—while other congregations engaged in active work
expanded. The feminine branch of the Order of Pious Schools
(Piarists), particularly active in Catalonia, increased its convents
from two in 1843 to seven, with new houses being established in
Sabadell (1846), Igualada (1849), Vendrell (1850), Masnou (1852),
and Gerona (1853).21 The recovery of the Church was also evident
in the revival of the liturgical ceremonial, last seen in its glory
during the days of absolutism. Services held in Seville during the
spring of 1854 to mark the beatification of three Jesuits would
have satisfied the most demanding eighteenth-century partisan of
Baroque liturgy as processions, sermons, illuminations, and fire¬
works succeeded one another in a dazzling display.22
   In spite of the regularization of the Church’s position between
 1844 and 1854 and obvious signs of institutional recuperation, the
ecclesiastical leadership and the confessional press were anything
but content. It became evident that the religious and moral trans¬
formation that clerical opinion expected from the alliance with
the moderado State was not to be realized. The moderados made
their gestures toward the unbending theocratic demands of the
clergy (the penal code of 1848 called for jail terms and fines on
those daring “to mock the mysteries or sacraments of the Church”),
but they had too many troubles from divisions within their own
     The Conservative Church                                     195




ranks to yield to ecclesiastical pressure except in a haphazard way.
During the early 1850’s churchmen poured out a stream of articles
and pastoral letters railing against the continued existence of Spain’s
tiny Protestant minority, the corruption of social customs, and the
unwillingness or inability of the civil authorities to curb the op¬
position press from questioning the theocratic ideology vigorously
promoted by the episcopacy. In a circular to the clergy of the
archdiocese of Toledo dated March 1, 1854, the vicar general
lamented “the excesses . . . and the frightening relaxation of cus¬
toms spreading through all classes . . . like gangrene” and ex¬
pressed disappointment at government inaction, because the State
alone had the “coercive force” to compel “the rebels” to fulfill
their obligations toward Church and society.23
   Ecclesiastical resentment exploded in the winter of 1853-54
during the last stages of the first period of moderado government,
following announcement of the publication of a literary series
under the title “The Library of the Free Man.” It included works
by Rousseau, Lamennais, and others the Church condemned. Jose
Domingo Costa y Borras, the bishop of Barcelona, took the lead
in promoting an aggressive campaign against the series and the
progresista press, which published excerpts of some of the of¬
fending works in spite of ecclesiastical authorities’ censure. A stri¬
dent public controversy, embarrassing to a semiauthoritarian
government beset by internal divisions, followed. Although the
State tried to restrain clerical intemperance by summoning Costa
y Borras to Madrid and forbidding the publication of ecclesiastical
condemnations of the books to prevent the conflict from fueling
the fires of opposition discontent, controversy continued.
   The dispute was more than a debate over a specific issue; it
provoked a clerical indictment of society and, by implication, of
the moderado State’s refusal to heed ecclesiastical demands for
the creation of a rigid Catholic culture and standards of conduct
reminiscent of the Old Regime. In the midst of the struggle, Costa
y Borras issued a pastoral letter, perhaps the most long-winded
in the history of the Spanish Church, that won the endorsement
of the Catalan bishops.24 The prelates of Catalonia fulminated
against Protestantism, secular culture, religious toleration, liberty
of expression, and “theatres, dances, cafes,” and sundry other
evils. The sentiments expressed by the Catalan episcopacy were
  196                                      The Conservative Church




not immediately political. The bishops vehemently denied the ac¬
cusation of Carlism hurled against them by the opposition press.
The controversy revealed, however, the still ambiguous nature of
the relationship between the Church and the moderado State.
And it showed that the Church intended to push its case aggres¬
sively. “Catholic Spain is passing through a religious crisis more
serious than ... in previous years” claimed La Cruz. Costa y Borras
called on Catholics to embark upon a “holy crusade, peaceful and
inoffensive, in favor of virtue and religious truth.”25 The battle
lines for a long struggle were falling into place.


Revolution to Revolution, 1854—1868

   The clerical ambitions so vociferously expressed during the
spring of 1854 were curbed by a summer revolution that even¬
tually restored Espartero to power.26 Moderado political domi¬
nance collapsed because of the severe internal divisions that had
developed among its supporters since 1851. Isabella’s taste for
power, encouraged by her mother and a camarilla of the most
conservative politicians, produced a succession of ministries gov¬
erning in semiauthoritarian fashion in defiance of parliament and
the broad currents of moderado opinion. Discontented moderado
politicians and generals, of whom the most prominent was Leo-
poldo O’Donnell, allied with cooperative progresistas to topple
this thinly disguised royal dictatorship through a confusing series of
military encounters of no great consequence combined with pop¬
ular agitation in Madrid and Barcelona. In spite of the participa¬
tion of the lower classes of the kingdom’s two largest cities, the rev¬
olution soon lost its popular character. The new regime, though
committed to a modest expansion of the electoral franchise and a less
authoritarian constitution, rested still on a narrow liberal elite, whose
main concerns were protection of private property, promotion of
economic development, and avoidance of social revolution.
   The revolution of 1854 was primarily a political upheaval car¬
ried to a successful conclusion without massive violence. In Ma¬
drid, the site of the most serious disorders, four days of popular
rioting culminated in the sacking and burning of the queen moth¬
er’s palace and the houses of several ministers. Churches and
     The Conservative Church                                    197




ecclesiastical buildings escaped untouched. There was no recur¬
rence of the popular anticlericalism that had set monasteries to
the torch in 1834 and 1835.27
   But the Church would not emerge unscathed from the hands of
the new government. In the midst of the revolutionary events
of July 1854, provincial juntas took action anticipating the policy of
the Constituent Cortes to be elected in the autumn. The junta
of Burgos, after accusing the Jesuits of “fanaticizing spirits,” or¬
dered them to leave the city within two days; the junta of Seville
demanded that the archbishop dismiss officials of the diocesan
administration who had shown themselves “opposed to the na¬
tional rising.”28 Other measures followed from the provisional
government, in which a veteran of the ecclesiastical wars of the
early 1840’s, Jose Alonso, sat as minister of grace and justice. The
government expelled the Hieronymites from the monastery of El
Escorial in September, only a few months after they had unpacked
their bags, and ordered that no parish vacancies should be filled
until the parochial reorganization so long demanded by liberal
reformers was carried out. The fundamental question of the place
of the Church within the new regime, however, awaited the elec¬
tion of a new parliament in October.
   In these circumstances there was little possibility of the Church
conserving the advantages bestowed by its accommodation with
the moderados. La Cruz suggested that a Catholic Electoral Union
should be formed to contest the elections on a program of “de¬
fending the Catholic religion and sustaining the dispositions of
the last Concordat.”29 This suggestion for the creation of a political
party committed to the defense of the Church’s interests, a dream
of clerical apologists well into the twentieth century, did not pros¬
per then, nor would it later, because of the antagonism between
Catholics who accepted the liberal State and those who did not.
Moreover, the terms of the electoral franchise worked against the
election of deputies favoring the ecclesiastical status quo. The
electorate of approximately 700,000, though significantly larger
than the minority allowed to vote before the revolution, was too
small to permit the election of pro-Church deputies in regions
known for their religious observance—the Basque Provinces, Na¬
varra, and Old Castile—where a vastly enlarged electorate would
  198                                     The Conservative Church




have benefited proclerical candidacies. Some progresistas and the
small party of Democrats toyed with the idea of universal suffrage,
but set their theories aside fearing a Carlist electoral success. A
few deputies ready to defend the Church were elected, notably
Tomas Jaen from Navarra and the sharp-tongued Candido No-
cedal, a moderado from Pontevedra. But the new assembly was
dominated by the progresistas allied to a sprinkling of reform
moderados led by O’Donnell, who became minister of war.
   The revolutionary coalition proved as unstable as any govern¬
ment before it. It was not without accomplishment during the two
years of its existence, particularly in economic policy, but its
grander projects, such as the implementation of a new constitu¬
tion, were never realized as internal factionalism, the poor quality
of leadership, and the watchfulness of an intriguing queen finally
led to the disintegration of the progresista government.
   The policies of the new regime had a familiar ring. The Jesuits
were as usual the first to suffer. The State closed the missionary
college in Loyola in the heart of the Carlist domain and removed
the order to Mallorca, where presumably it could be kept from
mischief. Bishops were instructed to proceed with the task of
reorganizing parishes in accord with population size (one of the
terms of the 1851 concordat), and convents with fewer than twelve
nuns were ordered closed. In December 1854 the authorities,
stung by clerical criticism of their ecclesiastical policies, felt their
regalist oats by forbidding the publication of Pius IX’s bull pro¬
claiming the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, an order im¬
mediately defied by El Catdlico of Madrid, which published the
document in the midst of acrimonious controversy with the pro¬
government press. The State struck early against episcopal cen¬
sorship by ordering bishops to refrain from publishing censures
until their requests had received government approval. This, too,
was defied; the archbishop of Santiago, for example, condemned
as “impious” a book by Francisco Pi y Margall, a future leader of
Spanish republicanism.30
   These conflicts were minor compared with the furor generated
by the clauses on religion in the proposed constitution. There was
no question either in the commission charged with drafting the
constitutional project or in parliament of separating Church and
State. The progresistas and their allies were as loathe as the mode-
     The Conservative Church                                     199




rados to let the Church escape from their vigilance. The consti¬
tutional text reaffirmed the Catholicism of the State, albeit by the
back door: “The nation is obliged to maintain and protect the cult
and the ministers of the Catholic religion which the Spanish pro¬
fess.” The following sentence, however, provoked controversy:
“But neither Spaniards nor foreigners can be persecuted for their
opinions or beliefs as long as these are not manifested by public
acts contrary to religion.”31 Although there was considerable sym¬
pathy for a firm statement of religious toleration among pro-
gresistas and Democrats (an amendment establishing liberty of
conscience and full toleration was defeated by only 138 to 72
votes), the majority elected the path of discretion. The deputies
feared that anything more substantial would encourage a revival
of Carlism and political machinations by the queen, who had ex¬
pressed firm opposition to breaking the Church’s religious mo¬
nopoly on the day before the constitutional debate opened.32
   For clerical opinion, obsessed with the danger of Protestantism
since its appearance in Spain in the 1830’s under the influence of
the English Bible societies, any suggestion of concessions was a
red flag certain to arouse a vitriolic reaction. Thirty-three bishops
sent representations to the Cortes asking that “Catholic unity” be
preserved; the confessional press lamented parliamentary action
as a violation of the concordat and a betrayal of the nation’s her¬
itage. One conservative and proclerical paper predicted that Prot¬
estants “would form numbers superior to those of the Catholics
and that Catholicism would be ruined legally in Spain” as a result
of the legislation.33 In fact, recognition of the right to hold private
religious beliefs was a modest concession giving formal sanction
to what had been practiced under moderado and progresista gov¬
ernments for two decades. Moreover, passage of the controversial
text did not lead the authorities to turn a blind eye to Protestant
evangelization; in Seville, for example, the governor issued “the
most severe orders to repress with a strong hand” the sale of books
by religious dissenters.34
   The passions aroused by the constitutional discussions had
scarcely cooled when debate opened in March on a proposed law
to resume sale of the remnants of the secular clergy’s property.
The progresistas, determined “to finish the work undertaken by
don Juan Alvarez Mendizabal of glorious memory,” easily passed
  200                                   The Conservative Church




the law of May 1, 1855. It was the most ambitious disamortization
of the nineteenth century, which included not only religious hold¬
ings but the property of educational and charitable institutions as
well as municipal common lands.35 Ecclesiastical property com¬
posed only about a third of the holdings made available for public
auction. Although the law exempted the residences and adjoining
gardens of bishops and parish clergy in addition to the property
of the Piarists, whose work in education had won progresista es¬
teem, it led to the sale of most of the Church’s remaining property,
nearly 25,000 separate plots, which brought the treasury over 300
million reales. Clerical reactions to another disamortization were
vigorous. The bishop of Osma wrote directly to the Cortes and
defended “the right of the Church ... to possess property” and
cited the “anathemas hurled by canon law against those who try
to disturb it in its possessions or to seize its goods violently.”36
Other bishops passively resisted by refusing to cooperate with
government officials examining ecclesiastical land titles before the
public auctions.37
   A deterioration in relations between Church and State followed
the legislation of early 1855. In July the papal charge d’affaires
left Madrid for Rome, although not until he had said Mass in the
chapel of El Escorial before Isabella II and the court. He prayed
for the victims of the cholera epidemic then ravaging the country
and, appropriately, for the clergy who had perished in 1834 under
the assault of “popular fanaticism.”38 The government followed
with a note to Spanish embassies abroad for distribution to the
states to which they were accredited affirming that “the Govern¬
ment of the Queen, who is honored with the title of Catholic, has
not ceased being Catholic for a single instant, nor has it given the
least offense to the dogmas of religion and the most sacred doc¬
trines of the Church” and throwing the blame for the crisis on
the papacy. Pius IX, who had long since abandoned his liberal
sympathies, riposted by claiming that Spain had violated the con¬
cordat and given “new injuries to the Church and its rights.”39
The conflict with Rome led the State to close the ecclesiastical
marriage tribunal and to press its reforming demands, such as
parish reorganization, more aggressively; the authorities began to
enforce the order to suspend priestly ordinations until such re¬
forms were carried out. In Oviedo government officers entered
     The Conservative Church                                   201




the cathedral after an ordination ceremony, marched the new
priests off in a body, and seized the certificates attesting to their
new status.40
   Progresista ecclesiastical legislation and the break with Rome
signaled the beginning of another wave of persecution for Catholic
opinion. But the Church suffered less between 1854 and 1856
than during the revolution of 1834-1843. The State continued
to finance the Church, although the 124 million reales appropri¬
ated for 1855 was less generous than the subvention provided by
the moderados in 1851.41 The progresista government sold clerical
property and denied ecclesiastical institutions the right to own
land and buildings in the future, but it allowed the Church to
receive gifts and bequests as long as these were converted into
interest-bearing treasury notes. The Church, however, saw the
exile imposed on the bishops of Barcelona and Osma and a royal
order of May 1855, occasioned by a flurry of Carlist agitation in
the north, that commanded the removal from their parishes of
priests “designated as dangerous by the civil authorities,” as a re¬
turn to the harassment of the early 1840’s.42
   These measures were exceptional, however. The State had the
sense to see that the Church did not pose a threat to its survival.
Most bishops either kept silent or affirmed their loyalty to Isabella
II. In a circular to his diocese the bishop of Badajoz protested
that his criticism of government policy was not moved by lack of
respect for the constituted authorities nor by a spirit contrary “to
obedience of the law and the loyalty and love which all display to
Her Majesty the Queen.”43 The civil authorities did not repeat the
regency purges of clergy unsympathetic to their aims. Churchmen
smarted under constant barrages from the progresista press, vig¬
orously expressed criticism that showed the continuing strength
of anticlericalism among the politically aware. But the sentiments
expressed in newspapers and often in parliamentary sessions did
not translate into a revival of the popular and violent anticleri¬
calism that had led to physical attacks on Church property and
priests during the mid-1830’s. Agitation among the industrial
working class of Barcelona, though frequent during the two years
of progresista rule, was not directed against the Church but against
a regime with economic and financial policies plainly opposed to
workers’ interests. The Catholic press lamented displays of what
  202                                   The Conservative Church




it saw as government-inspired anticlericalism—the prohibition of
religious processions in Seville and Lebrija, for example—but on
other occasions the authorities cooperated with the Church. The
governor of Huelva thus took action against residents of the
mountain town of Jabugo who had refused to remove their hats
as a procession passed through the streets. Although the Church
was affected adversely by the sale of its remaining property hold¬
ings and by measures against the religious orders, its position
within both State and society was not fundamentally altered. The
 progresistas undertook no new or spectacular initiatives in eccle¬
 siastical reform.
    The events of 1854-1856 were perceived in a different light
by churchmen and Catholic apologists. The State’s legislation was
 seen as another example of the rising sea of corruption, materi¬
 alism, and rationalism threatening to engulf the nation. “The days
 of danger have arrived, the black flag of persecution has been
 raised; war has been declared against God, against Christ and
 against His mother. The hour of the Lord’s battle has arrived,”
 declared La Cruz.44 The Church of the 1830’s struggled to survive,
 that of the early 1840’s to defend itself; the Church of the 1850’s
 saw itself called to combat. “Today,” said the bishop of Avila, “it
 is not possible to be silent knowing what the apostles of impiety
 are doing to extend their prejudicial works.”45 In a mood remi¬
 niscent of the messianic prophetism that had swept through the
 Church following the French Revolution and the Napoleonic in¬
 tervention, clerics preached their harsh message convinced, like
Jose Domingo Costa y Borras, that religion “is the only thing
 capable of bowing the necks of men who have generally forgotten
 or are ignorant of their duties.”46
    The most conservative members of the hierarchy, such as Costa
 y Borras and Horcos Sanmartm of Osma, gave the pastoral letter
 a new dimension. Their admonitions moved from theocratic gen¬
 eralities to denunciations of specific newspapers questioning epis¬
copal pronouncements on censorship and moral standards. Catholic
journals, such as La Cruz and El Catolico, gloried in defying the
 government. Both were hauled into court for publishing state¬
 ments the authorities regarded as provocative. Not all bishops
were as forthright as the prelates of Barcelona and Osma, but
 many inundated the civil authorities with requests for state action
     The Conservative Church                                  203




against those who had offended the Church through their state¬
ments or conduct. The new spirit of combat reached down to the
lower clergy. In the province of Lerida the governor began judicial
proceedings against parish priests refusing baptism to the children
of parents who had not fulfilled their Easter Communion obli¬
gation.47 The principal legacy of the bienio progresista for the
Church—one that would make its presence felt until the mid¬
twentieth century—was the deepened conviction that the clergy
must enter into a new struggle, exerting pressure on the State to
meet clerical demands and engaging in what was regarded as a
necessary and heroic effort to defeat the enemy through polemical
combat.
   Internal divisions, particularly the disaffection of O’Donnell
and the centrist moderados who had supported the revolution of
 1854, brought the period of revolution to an end. Between this
change in July 1856 and the “Glorious” Revolution of September
 1868, a measure of political stability was achieved. A short-lived
moderado government was followed by a ministry of Liberal Union
(1858—1863) led by O’Donnell, who attempted to create a broadly
based coalition. Although this “long” ministry governed with a
spirit of political tolerance and pragmatism, it had come into being
because of the failure of both moderados and progresistas to cre¬
ate a constitutional regime based on effective party politics. The
Liberal Union was itself an amalgam of factions engaged in con¬
stant struggle for influence. As time passed the inevitable tensions
within the coalition grew stronger and ensured its collapse. O’Don¬
nell saw clearly enough that the union had not resolved the fun¬
damental dilemma of liberal politics—its inability to devise a
mechanism for the peaceful transfer of power from government
to opposition. His suggestion for a way out of the impasse—his
resignation and the formation of a progresista government while
he led a party of loyal opposition—foundered on the implacable
hostility of the queen toward a progresista ministry.48
   The resignation of O’Donnell in 1863 opened a new period of
instability marked by the return of Narvaez to power (1864-1865),
a final and desperate attempt to create a workable Liberal Union
(1865), and, finally, the installation of a semidictatorial regime
(1866-1868) with Narvaez serving as prime minister until his death
in the spring of 1868. The ministerial shifts of the mid-1860’s
  204                                   The Conservative Church




arose from the glaring weaknesses of moderado politics: a queen
who increasingly showed that she was her father’s daughter in the
desire for personal power; the lack of an effective party system,
which created an opposition hostile to the monarch and the po¬
litical order; and the continuing importance of praetorian poli¬
ticians such as O’Donnell and Narvaez. In the end all led to the
breakdown of the moderado State.
    In spite of ministerial changes the Church prospered between
1856 and 1868. The ecclesiastical legislation of the progresistas
was undone by the Narvaez ministry between 1856 and 1857. The
government halted the sale of Church lands and passed a law on
public instruction (the Moyano Law) in 1857 recognizing the im¬
portance of religion in education at all levels. The accession of
O’Donnell in 1858 aroused clerical apprehensions, but the new
ministry reached a settlement with the papacy on the sale of ec¬
clesiastical property in 1859, and its imperialist adventures in In¬
dochina and Morocco evoked enthusiasm among churchmen, who
regarded these expeditions as new crusades. (The joint French-
Spanish campaign in Cochin China in 1858 was described as “a
war of religion” designed “to conquer the holy liberty of preaching
the gospel.”)49
    The Church’s ability to function within the kaleidoscope of
liberal politics during the hnal decade of the moderado State
benefited directly from clerical ascendancy over Isabella II. The
queen, whose private life alternated between illicit amours and
religious devotion, regarded the Church as one of the bulwarks
of her personal power. The appointment in 1857 of the arch¬
bishop of Santiago (Cuba), Antonio Claret, as royal confessor
brought close to the throne a shrewd and intelligent cleric, the
supreme example of the theocratic apoliticization characteristic of
the mid-nineteenth- and early twentieth-century Spanish Church.50
Claret, a former domestic missionary and religious propagandist
who had revolutionized popular evangelization techniques, ac¬
cepted a post at court believing that providence had called him
to a charge from which he could advance the welfare of the Church.
Although progresistas, Democrats, and Republicans saw Claret as
a sinister gray eminence, the confessor’s influence was circum¬
scribed by political reality. He could not, for instance, prevent
recognition of the kingdom of Italy in 1865, a move that threat-
     The Conservative Church                                     205




ened the remnants of Pius IX’s temporal power. But his position
at court gave him considerable influence over episcopal appoint¬
ments and the authorization of new religious orders.
   Claret, though personally loyal to Isabella and hostile to Carlist
adventurism, believed himself above partisan politics (“I have never
involved myself in factions nor political parties, but have occupied
myself with my ministry”), but his deep disdain for political life
was itself a form of politics.51 “Spain is like a gamblers’ table,” he
once remarked, “the gamblers are the two parties; . . . the moving
force of all politics is nothing more than ambition, pride and
greed.” Claret saw that the moderado State could be used to aid
the Church in its mission, which he conceived in theocratic terms
worthy of the Middle Ages, but in the end he expected little from
the moderados. “Spanish politics is to be compared to an elephant
hunt in which the hunters first dig a hole; others cover it so that
the elephant will not see it . . . and when it has fallen into the trap,
others arrive and give it a good whack; finally, the last to arrive
on the scene pull it from the hole and lead it with ropes where
they wish, . . . since the elephant always recognizes those who have
done it a favor. This last is what is being done to Religion in Spain
by the political parties, if we except the Catholic [those committed
to a narrow defense of ecclesiastical interests]. The Republican
party is the one which digs the hole; the liberal [progresista] covers
it and prepares the trap, then whacks the Church while, finally,
the conservative [moderado] . . . ties it with deceitful ropes.”
   The ecclesiastical elephant stepped more adroitly than Claret
believed. Between 1856 and 1868 the institutional recovery in¬
terrupted by the revolution of 1854 resumed. The Jesuits, as re¬
silient as ever, possessed twenty-five houses by 1863. The moderado
State, although willing to authorize new religious foundations,
continued to limit the introduction of male religious orders. But
the Redemptorists, later prominent in the great missionary cam¬
paigns of the early twentieth century, established their first Span¬
ish house at Huete in 1864; the Order of Saint John of God, well
known for its work in hospitals during the eighteenth century,
began its modern history at Barcelona in 1867. The Benedictines,
expelled from their monasteries during the 1830’s, were allowed
to reoccupy the famous Marian shrine of Montserrat in Catalonia,
which was raised to the status of a full abbey in 1862. The growth
  206                                    The Conservative Church




of female orders engaged in charitable and social work continued.
Established congregations, such as the Piarists in Catalonia, opened
more convents, and new orders, often of local origin—such as the
Dominicans of the Annunciation (Vich, 1858) and the Daughters
of Our Lady of Sorrows and Saint Philip Neri (Seville, 1859)—
spread throughout the kingdom.
   The Church also pursued its evangelizing work with renewed
determination through the publication and distribution of thou¬
sands of catechisms and aggressive missionary campaigns. More¬
over, the ecclesiastical authorities, assisted by a combative Catholic
press, urged the State to take firm action against Spain’s Protes¬
tants. Between 1860 and 1863 provincial governors in Andalusia,
the center of Spanish Protestantism in the nineteenth century as
it had been in the sixteenth, subjected dissenters to a persecution
recalling the rigors of the Inquisition. One of the victims, Manuel
Matamoros, became a hero to Protestant Europe when he was
sentenced to eight years of hard labor for having opened a church
in Granada.52
   In spite of the benefits secured by the Church from the mode-
rado State, particularly after 1865, Catholic opinion became in¬
creasingly resentful of a society refusing to fit into a theocratic
mold. Bishops and Catholic laymen committed to the realization
of old dreams rushed onto the battlefield of polemic prepared to
strike their enemies with words and harass them with deeds. The
ranks of Catholic apologists included figures, such as the deeply
conservative Candido Nocedal and the Carlist Antonio Aparisi,
whose ability at polemic in parliament and the press made them
effective rhetorical champions in the bruising propaganda wars
carried on without respite between defenders of narrowly con¬
ceived ecclesiastical interests and advocates of new intellectual cur¬
rents.
   Controversy followed controversy. In 1857 the inaugural lec¬
ture given in the Universidad Central of Madrid by the philoso¬
pher Julian Sanz del Rio, advocating a secular and scientific system
of education, provoked a bitter public dispute.53 The degree of
ecclesiastical influence over education remained a sore point for
ecclesiastics in spite of the Moyano Law and Article 3 of the con¬
cordat, both of which churchmen considered to be virtually ig¬
nored. In 1863 the bishops began a public campaign for “the
     The Conservative Church                                       207




 greater Christianization of public teaching and the direct, preven¬
 tive and continuous intervention of the Spanish episcopacy in
 plans of study, textbooks and . . . with respect to any books . . . which
 could offend Religion and the traditional customs of the coun¬
 try.”54 In 1865 the Catholic press, led by the pro-Carlist El Pen-
samiento Espanol, began a successful campaign for the dismissal of
 university professors who had not directly questioned religious
 dogma but whose commitment to the free expression of ideas
 shocked the theocratic sensibilities of conservative Catholic think¬
 ers derisively labeled “neocatholics” by their opponents.
    Episcopal censures of books judged “immoral, dissolute and
 incompatible with all social order” multiplied. The bishops of the
 metropolitan province of Valencia believed that such publications
 were being “introduced in a fabulous way even into the smallest
 towns.” In 1863 state authorization of Victor Hugo’s Les miserables
 aroused episcopal resentment both for its contents, thought hostile
 to religion, and because the government had dealt “a serious blow
 to the essential rights of the episcopacy” by refusing to heed cler¬
 ical censures.55 Ecclesiastical frustration with the moderado State
 deepened with the publication of Pius IX’s celebrated indictment
 of secularism and liberalism, the Syllabus of Errors, in 1864 (even
 Narvaez initially refused to allow its publication). Although Car¬
 dinal Primate Alameda and other bishops were reluctant to defy
 the government by publishing the Syllabus in Spain, they even¬
 tually did so under the pressure of a determined episcopal faction
 led by the archbishop of Burgos, Fernando de la Puente y Primo
 de Rivera. The hesitant bishops at least succeeded in limiting
 publication to a Latin version printed in diocesan bulletins.56 The
 recognition of the kingdom of Italy by the last government of
 Liberal Union in 1865 further antagonized Catholic opinion and
 led to disenchantment with Isabella II, who was suspected, not
without justification, of agreeing to the recognition to save her
shaky throne.57
    The Church chose to nibble at the moderado hand feeding it
just at the moment when the survival of the regime itself came
into doubt. The hierarchy knew enough not to break with Isabella
II, although segments of Catholic opinion sympathetic to Carl-
ism—increasingly vociferous during the 1860’s—were prepared
to consume the dynasty and the liberal State at a single sitting. As
  208                                    The Conservative Church




the regime plunged deeper into political impasse from 1865 on,
the Church was incapable of forming a united front to maintain
the gains won since 1844. In the midst of resentments and frus¬
trations, the ecclesiastical leadership continued to place its hopes
on the willingness of a discredited monarch and a widely disliked
semiauthoritarian government to realize the old clerical dream of
a pious, Catholic Spain. The Carlists, divided into several factions,
were agreed on the necessity of restoring an absolutist and theo¬
cratic state; Catholics belonging to the political groups opposed
to the small clique of moderados governing the nation between
1866 and 1868 resented clerical support for the existing govern¬
ment. Divisions within Catholic ranks reduced the Church to being
a bystander as the moderado State entered its death throes, al¬
though loud clerical and Carlist rhetoric might lead to the opposite
conclusion. The dictatorial ministry of Narvaez rested on little
save a small circle of extremely conservative politicians and a queen
desperate to keep her throne. Under the impact of economic
depression, intense political opposition, and military intervention,
the regime finally succumbed in September 1868. The “Glorious”
Revolution opened a six-year period of upheaval that soon led
the Church to regard the years between 1856 and 1868 as a re¬
gretted silver age.
7   /   Church and Society, 1844-1868



   The definitive triumph of Spanish liberalism over royal abso¬
lutism after 1833 not only transformed the political organization
of the kingdom, it also ensured the demise or decline of institu¬
tions that had been essential to the hierarchical order of the eight¬
eenth century. The Church faced the task of adapting both to a
new political reality and to a society hostile to the traditional role
of religious institutions under the absolute monarchy. The re¬
sponse to this challenge—whether in the form of the reaction to
social problems in town and country, the intellectual defenses
mounted against the progress of secular culture, or the elaboration
of new pastoral techniques to solidify belief in a time of change—
created an institution very different from the Church of the Old
Regime.



The Organization of the Church, 1844—1868

   In spite of the transformation of the Church’s relationship to
the State after 1834, the ecclesiastical organization varied little
from that of the Old Regime. Although the Concordat of 1851
envisaged a limited rationalization of diocesan boundaries, only
three new dioceses were created—Vitoria (1861), Ciudad Real
(1875), and Madrid (1885). A stipulation that dioceses in small
provincial towns should be amalgamated with sees in larger cities
was only partially fulfilled, although successive governments tried
to move a reluctant Church to action. As late as 1902 a proposal
to suppress the diocese of Tortosa provoked a popular demon¬
stration after placards appeared urging the local inhabitants to
protest this threat to municipal pride. The reluctance of the arch¬
bishops of Toledo to lose Madrid delayed the creation of a diocese
there for more than a quarter of a century.1
   The liberal State, even in periods of moderado rule, continued


                                                                209
  210                                         Church and Society




to insist on a reduction in the number of parishes. The authorities
were less concerned with devising a rational parochial organiza¬
tion than with the financial savings anticipated from parish re¬
form. According to the Concordat of 1851 the number of parishes
in a given town had to correspond to population size. Thus, Sala¬
manca’s twenty-four parishes in a city with 15,000 inhabitants
were to be reduced to three according to the formula set out in
a royal directive of 1854. Reductions in the number of parishes
were begun in many dioceses, but local bishops resisted through
effective foot-dragging techniques. In Salamanca, for example,
the diocesan authorities spun out negotiations through successive
governments in an effort to strike a better deal. Only in 1868 was
agreement reached with the ministry of Narvaez, which consented
with great reluctance to a compromise establishing the number
of parishes in the city at six. The reform was not carried out, in
fact, until the 1880’s.2
   The concordat also met liberal demands to the extent that the
extreme differences of wealth among the bishops disappeared in
favor of a salary scale established according to the importance and
size of dioceses. The archbishop of Toledo, as incumbent of the
primatial see, received the largest salary, 120,000 reales; the arch¬
bishops of Seville and Valencia received 100,000; the income of
the remaining prelates ranged from 70,000 to 90,000 reales.3 A
reduction in the number of cathedral canons satisfied a long-held
liberal aspiration to diminish the size of a clerical elite whose
contribution to pastoral work seemed questionable. Although re¬
duced in size, the capitular clergy continued to exist as a class
apart within the ecclesiastical establishment through eligibility re¬
quirements that excluded the vast majority of the parish clergy.
Successive governments well into the twentieth century believed
that the Church had not gone far enough with internal reform.
But by abandoning any pretension to state-inspired reorganiza¬
tion, a price the moderados willingly paid in 1851, the authorities
had to depend on the goodwill of both Rome and the bishops to
carry out changes neither wished to implement, laying the ground¬
work for later controversy.
   Between a demographic low point during the Espartero re¬
gency and the revolution of 1868, the ecclesiastical population
grew moderately. The census of 1860 reported a secular clergy
     Church and Society                                         211




of 42,765 (approximately 4,000 more than in the early 1840’s).
The increase was reflected in seminary enrollments, which rose
from 16,077 in 1853 to 24,376 in 1862. The functional role of
the seculars, moreover, differed from the eighteenth-century pat¬
tern, in which only a minority of priests were engaged in the cure
of souls. A decline in the size of the capitular clergy and in the
number of priests holding benefices (the effect of liberal legislation
and the loss of Church property) created a clerical population
devoted in the vast majority to parish work. In spite of the overall
reduction in priestly numbers during the first decades of the nine¬
teenth century, then, the ratio of clergy with pastoral responsi¬
bilities to the general population improved dramatically. There
was one priest for every 1,745 persons in the archdiocese of Seville
in 1768, but only a minority of the clergy were engaged in the
cure of souls; by 1859 there was one clergyman active in pastoral
work for every 428. This proportion was repeated for other dioceses,
although in some cases the change was less spectacular.4 Church¬
men would have been loathe to admit it, but the liberal revolution
forced a reorientation of clerical activities in a pastoral direction.
   Other problems, however, remained. Disparities in parish size
from one region to another continued. Average parochial pop¬
ulations in Andalusia (7,493 in Cadiz; 2,594 in Seville; 3,090 in
Cordoba) contrasted with those of the smaller parishes of the
north (458 in Oviedo, 618 in Santiago, 488 in Salamanca).5 The
State’s financial commitment to support the parish clergy did not
allow for the support of all ordained priests. In 1860 only two-
thirds were eligible for government salaries, continuing the cen¬
turies-old problem of a floating population of clerics whose con¬
duct often gave rise to scandal. As late as 1885 the first bishop of
Madrid tried to curb the activities of unsalaried clergy moving
from church to church in quest of Mass stipends, a reform that
so enraged one unemployed and unstable cleric that he assassi¬
nated the prelate on Palm Sunday in 1886.6
   In spite of ecclesiastical pressure for a general restoration of
the male religious orders, the liberal State, whether in moderado
or progresista hands, refused to authorize expansion beyond a
handful of orders including the Piarists, an educational order
surviving the suppression of the 1830’s; the Oratorians and Vin¬
centians, authorized by the Concordat of 1851; and the Francis-
  212                                        Church and Society




cans, Jesuits, Augustinians, and Dominicans, who were allowed to
establish a small number of houses to train priests for Cuba, Puerto
Rico, and the Philippines. Even the progresistas set aside their
customary hostility to the orders on the assumption that they
contributed to the maintenance of Spanish rule in the remnants
of the colonial empire. By 1860 male religious numbered only
 1,683, distributed in sixty-two houses. The orders, aside from the
Jesuits whose domestic missions contributed to renewed efforts
at popular evangelization, did not play an important part in the
mid-nineteenth-century Church’s recovery. The expansion of the
orders after 1874 in more favorable conditions from an eccle¬
siastical point of view (by 1923 the male orders contained 17,210
members) would make the regular clergy as burning an issue in
the twentieth century as in the nineteenth.7
    Of all groups within the Church none survived better than the
religious orders of women. The 1860 census reported a total of
 18,817 nuns, compared with 22,000—25,000 estimated for the
later years of Ferdinand VII’s reign. Although the majority of
nuns belonged to cloistered communities devoted to prayer and
contemplation—activities regarded as socially useless by the sec¬
ular reformers who destroyed the male orders on these grounds—
the liberal State, even during periods of progresista rule, treated
nuns more gently than male religious. To force women from
convents where they had passed their lives isolated from the world
offended the humanitarian sentiments of the liberals, who at their
most radical did little more than close smaller houses and restrict
the admission of novices in the hope that such measures would
bring about the eventual disappearance of the female orders.
    The moderados encouraged communities such as the Sisters of
Charity, whose services were required to staff hospitals, asylums,
orphanages, and old-age homes falling under state administration
after the poor relief reform of the 1830’s. Between 1854 and 1868
the order expanded from 887 members to 1,657.8 The develop¬
ment of the Sisters of Charity, along with the appearance of other
active communities—such as the Little Sisters of the Poor, intro¬
duced into Spain for the first time at Barcelona in 1863—was not,
however, extensive enough to alter the traditional monastic char¬
acter of the female orders.
  The Church emerging from the ordeal of liberal revolution
     Church and Society                                        213




also differed from its eighteenth-century predecessor in the extent
and nature of its material resources. Abolition of the tithe and
sale of the regular and secular clergy’s property undermined the
twin pillars that had supported the finances of the Old Regime
Church. Although ecclesiastics regarded disamortization as a fatal
blow, the Church may not have suffered as catastrophically as
clerical lamentations would suggest, at least as far as the secular
clergy were concerned, leaving aside the fluctuations in income
caused by political instability. By assuming responsibility for sal¬
aries and the maintenance of church fabrics, the liberal State might
well have saved the Church from the consequences of the long
deterioration in traditional sources of income evident since the
1790’s.
   The Church of 1860 was poorer than the Church of 1760 but
not so badly off compared with the Church of 1830 given the
shrinking of the ecclesiastical establishment after 1834. Between
 1829 and 1833 the annual income of the secular clergy averaged
253 million reales. The budget of culto y clero in 1851 provided
 153 million reales, which rose to nearly 180 million on the eve of
the revolution of 1868.9 Although the decline in revenue was
substantial, it must be placed in the context of the Old Regime
Church’s heavy expenditures on building and decoration as well
as on charitable activities later administered by the State. With its
range of activity constricted largely to the religious sphere after
 1834, the Church did not require such enormous resources, how¬
ever much churchmen lamented their passing. And there were
advantages to state financing. The Church could rely with some
assurance during periods of stability on regular payments from
the treasury in contrast to the extreme fluctuations of income
inherent in the old system’s dependence on levels of agricultural
production.
   Ecclesiastics resented the refusal of the liberal State, always
watchful of its purse strings under both moderado and progresista
governments, to subsidize nonpastoral activities. To supplement
their income they turned to private donations, a development that
later would have serious consequences through the identification
of clerical and middle-class interests. How extensively the pros¬
perous contributed to the Church before 1868 is difficult to es¬
tablish. But the process was clearly under way by the 1860’s.
  214                                         Church and Society




Collection of “Peter’s Pence,” an annual donation sent to the pope,
in the diocese of Vitoria rose from 8,788 reales in 1862 to 864,392
in 1868; a fund-raising campaign for the cathedral of Zaragoza
produced 7 million reales between 1863 and 1872.10 Although a
complete study of ecclesiastical wealth following the liberal re¬
forms is yet to be made, there is some evidence that by 1868 the
Spanish Church had weathered its fiscal storms.
   Along with changes in the configuration of the religious pop¬
ulation and ecclesiastical wealth, other transformations made the
Church a very different institution from its eighteenth-century
predecessor. The disappearance of traditional sources of wealth,
as well as the complementary relationship between Crown and
episcopacy characteristic of the royal Church of the eighteenth
century, forced the hierarchy to descend from the “high lookout
point” described by Charles Ill’s archbishop of Toledo to a more
limited held of action. Bishops no longer enjoyed the autonomous
revenues that had allowed them to build bridges, establish voca¬
tional schools, and indulge in other secular benefactions. The
liberal State was ofhcially Catholic, but its financial arrangements
for the Church as well as its unwillingness, even in periods of
moderado rule, to accept the corpus of theocratic assumptions
promoted by the bishops left the latter constantly restless and
frustrated, dreaming always of return to an idealized Catholic
Spain of the past. Chronic dissatisfaction with liberal policies con¬
verted the episcopacy into an ecclesiastical lobby using the pres¬
sure tactics common to any politicized society to persuade the
government to accept its vision of Spain’s future.
   The bishops found their role circumscribed from the ample
episcopal responsibilities of an earlier age, but they saw their au¬
thority within the Church considerably expanded. And they did
not shrink from declaring their determination to exercise their
powers to the full. “Place the Cross of Jesus Christ at the gate of
the sacred held of the Church,” declared Bishop Costa y Borras
of Barcelona, “the bishops shall guard it without ever letting any¬
one penetrate it save those who come, whatever their situation,
to humble themselves before an offended God ... If any audacity
of word or deed is found within, it shall be excluded with supreme
and unanimous authority.”11 The disappearance of most of the
male religious orders eliminated the exempt jurisdictions enjoyed
     Church and Society                                       215




by monasteries and convents during the Old Regime as well as
the difficulties of exercising episcopal control over a large pop¬
ulation of friars. The Concordat of 1851, moreover, represented
a limited victory for the bishops, for the moderado State, while
keeping ecclesiastical finances and patronage in its hands, aban¬
doned the regalist tradition of interfering in the internal life of
the Church. After 1860 the government permitted the convoca¬
tion of diocesan synods for the first time in decades to allow bish¬
ops to remedy “abuses . . . and the corruption of customs”
introduced into ecclesiastical discipline.12
   The reinforcement of episcopal authority brought advantages
to the liberal State. Both moderados and progresistas relied on
the hierarchy to restrain the Carlists and the closely related neo¬
catholics from using the Church to challenge the very existence
of the regime. Bishops, Carlists, and neos often joined in de¬
nunciations of government policy, but in the end the hierarchy
maintained its loyalty to the Isabelline monarchy, whatever its
misgivings.
   The decimation of the episcopacy between 1834 and 1843 per¬
mitted the creation of a new hierarchy beginning in 1847. The
appointment process, based on procedures outlined in the Con¬
cordat of 1753, rested on royal nomination of three candidates
to the pope, who selected one. But as Cuenca Toribio has shown,
being chosen a bishop was far from simple. Political circumstances
and the influence of ministers, deputies, the papal nuncio, and
others entered into the complex game of selection before the
ministry of grace and justice produced a list of names for royal
consideration. After 1857, under the influence of Antonio Claret,
Isabella II assumed greater responsibility for the final choice, as
“she listened to the interior inspiration which she asks from God
in order to know whom she should choose.”13
   The queen’s selections were far from inspired. Episcopal ap¬
pointments fell generally to churchmen whose principal qualifi¬
cations were loyalty to the sovereign or who were perceived as
not being openly hostile to the liberal State. There were occasional
exceptions. Fray Cirilo de Alameda, a Franciscan and old absq-
lutist conspirator of the 1820’s, was named to the archbishopric
of Toledo in 1857; a handful of Carlist prelates filtered through
the screen, such as Jose M. Caixal, later episcopal chaplain to the
  216                                          Church and Society




rebel forces during the second Carlist war.14 Bishops known for
their opposition to the regime were relegated to unimportant
sees—Caixal to Urgel, Pedro Lagiiera to Burgo de Osma, Cosme
Marrodan to Tarazona, and Pedro Casas Souto to Plasencia—and
were denied promotion to larger dioceses. Although the modera-
dos abandoned the progresista tactic of trying to create a pro¬
liberal hierarchy by force, they preferred candidates known for
their support of the regime. But the disintegration of the liberal
Church left few suitable candidates; one was Miguel Salva, a man
of letters and historian, named bishop of Mallorca in 1851.15 The
range of choice was limited, therefore, to those candidates, often
of deeply conservative views, who accepted the liberal State as the
established political order. Episcopal appointments thus reflected
the ambiguities of the Church’s position in Isabelline Spain.
   The mid-nineteenth-century hierarchy resembled the episco¬
pacy of the eighteenth century, but more in its vices than its vir¬
tues. The bishop continued to live in a world apart from that of
his parochial clergy. Although episcopal revenues had declined,
a prelate enjoyed an income twenty times that of the urban priest,
forty times that of the rural cura. For all practical purposes parish
priests stood little chance of penetrating the barriers of education
and influence that excluded them from episcopal nominations.
Social class, namely noble status, was no longer an important con¬
sideration in recruitment, largely because of the disappearance of
the lesser nobility, which had furnished the majority of the epis¬
copacy during the Old Regime. There were some bishops of aris¬
tocratic birth, but the proportion of prelates drawn from the clases
modestas increased substantially according to the recent analysis of
recruitment carried out by Cuenca Toribio.16 In spite of the hi¬
erarchy’s more open character, excessive educational qualifica¬
tions reminiscent of those prevailing during the eighteenth century
favored candidates with advanced degrees in theology and canon
law. Membership in a cathedral chapter or, increasingly, in di¬
ocesan administration formed the cursus honorum indispensable
for fulfillment of episcopal ambitions.17
   The bishops were as highly educated, at least in a formal sense,
as their Old Regime counterparts, but, having been trained in the
conservative setting of the Fernandine university, they lacked the
intellectual vitality of the episcopacy of the Caroline Church. Bishop
     Church and Society                                         217




Salva of Mallorca—fluent in English, French, and Italian, active
in the royal economic society of the island, and responsible along
with Martin Fernandez de Navarrete for the publication of a fun¬
damental collection of texts (Coleccion de documentos ineditos para la
historia de Espana) still used by historians—was an isolated survivor
of the broader ecclesiastical culture of a vanished era.
   The career of one of the new bishops of the Isabelline Church,
Antolin Monescillo (1811 — 1897), reveals how far the episcopacy
had drifted from the eighteenth-century model. Ordained at the
height of the liberal revolution, in 1836, Monescillo went succes¬
sively to the bishoprics of Calahorra (1861), Jaen (1865), Valencia
(1877), and Toledo (1892). His career in the Church came about
because of the liberal social changes, which made it possible, through
the disappearance of the lesser nobility, for the son of poor peas¬
ants to attain the episcopacy. Monescillo’s ascent was also a result
of his abilities as an ecclesiastical politician who knew how to profit
from the uncertainties of the Church’s situation under liberalism.
He appreciated the importance of journalism and its effect on
public opinion from the beginning of his career. He first came to
prominence as a young priest for his editorial crusades in Toledo
against Miguel Golfanguer, the diocesan administrator appointed
during the Espartero regency.18 Forced into exile because of his
involvement in the campaign against Golfanguer, Monescillo re¬
turned to Spain when Narvaez took power and began his rise in
the Church with canonries in Granada and Toledo while contin¬
uing his journalistic efforts, particularly as a contributor to La
Cruz, which his longtime friend and Carlist supporter Leon Car-
bonero y Sol edited and published.
   In spite of his association with La Cruz, which was openly Carlist
in its sympathies, Monescillo remained a firm supporter of Isabella
II, whom he repeatedly praised in pastoral letters, journalistic
articles, and official representations during his years as bishop of
Calahorra and Jaen. Along with loyalty to the queen, Monescillo’s
ideology rested on hostility to government interference in Church
affairs even during periods of moderado rule, absolute devotion
to the Holy See, and intransigent opposition to religious toleration
as well as to the secular intellectual trends of the day. Thus, he
participated in the episcopal campaign against Victor Hugo’s Les
miserables in 1863 and defied the Narvaez government by pub-
  218                                          Church and Society




lishing the text of the Syllabus of Errors in his diocesan bulletin.19
Yet in the midst of the polemics in which he was constantly in¬
volved, Monescillo remained a nimble politician. He had no par¬
ticular enthusiasm for the government of Liberal Union (1858-
1863), which he believed had not gone far enough in recognizing
the Church’s claim to be the nation’s supreme moral censor, but
he behaved respectfully toward it. He felt more at home with the
moderado ministry of Narvaez, although he was by no means
completely satisfied with it.20 As a bishop Monescillo was consci¬
entious enough, but his real interests lay elsewhere—as a polem¬
icist, publicist, and lobbyist seeking to defend and advance the
fortunes of the Church within the liberal political order. In him
were combined the pragmatism and ideological intransigence
characteristic of the Church’s position in Isabelline Spain.
   The majority of bishops at midcentury were graduates of the
ecclesiastical faculties of the universities, but they supported one
of the most significant changes in the Isabelline Church—the shift
of priestly education from universities to diocesan seminaries.
During the eighteenth century the kingdom’s clerical elite flocked
to the universities rather than to seminaries, which they regarded
as second-rate institutions reserved for a socially inferior lower
clergy. During the decade of liberal revolution, students began to
abandon the universities for seminaries. After discovering that
theological students in the former numbered only 300, with nearly
as many professors, in 1845 the moderados ordered suppression
of the faculties of Barcelona, Granada, Salamanca, Santiago, and
Valencia, leaving open only Madrid, Oviedo, Seville, Valladolid,
and Zaragoza. The Concordat of 1851, by assuring state support
for seminaries, sealed the fate of a centuries-old tradition of the¬
ological education in the universities. In 1852 the government
ordered the closing of faculties surviving the 1845 suppression.21
Few changes were more enthusiastically welcomed by the bishops,
who saw the universities as centers of moral and intellectual dec¬
adence threatening to impressionable clerical students. The Church
must begin sacerdotal education, said the rector of the seminary
of Seville, “by separating the young from the corruption of the
world.”22
   The triumph of the seminary served another purpose; it rein¬
forced the authority of the bishops over their clergy. By bestowing
     Church and Society                                       219




complete authority over seminaries on the hierarchy, the concor¬
dat gave the bishops a measure of control over their priests they
had never enjoyed before. Bishops imposed regulations for the
governance of seminaries that reached draconian proportions.
The bishop of Cuenca, for example, forbade parents from visiting
 their sons save in the presence of a seminary official. Nor would
 the episcopacy tolerate opposition to its administration. In 1858,
when the seminarians of Segovia rebelled against a harsh regimen,
 the bishop expelled sixty-three, leaving behind a corporal’s guard
 of only seven students.23
    The physical separation of seminarians from the world about
 them accentuated the clergy’s intellectual isolation. Although an
 1852 reform of clerical education introduced the sciences into the
curriculum, the course of study, taught in Latin, was narrowly
 ecclesiastical in focus.24 If students were made aware of the ex¬
 istence of a secular culture apart from the theocratic preoccu¬
 pations of the Church, it was only as a dangerous threat to the
 survival of the faith. The seminary revolution of the mid-nine¬
 teenth century resolved one of the problems of the Old Regime
 Church by providing a standardized education for all candidates
 for holy orders. But even this advantage was compromised by the
 introduction of the camera breve, an abbreviated course of study
designed to produce as many priests as possible within a short
time. The camera breve occasionally produced capable priests, such
as Cardinal Sancha, the archbishop of Toledo at the end of the
century, but more often it graduated poorly educated clerics doomed
to spend their lives in rural parishes and abandon any hope of
advancement.25
    Nor did the reform eliminate the social distinctions character¬
istic of the eighteenth-century clergy. The distinction became sim¬
pler and more brutal—between students who could pay tuition
 fees and those who could not. The latter, known as sopistas or
famulos, earned their keep by serving as janitors and waiters in
the seminaries; they developed, understandably, a keen sense of
social inferiority. In the end the seminary reform of the Isabelline
Church created as many problems as it solved. Culturally narrow
and weak on pastoral training (as late as 1913 seminarians in
Madrid received scarcely any instruction in preaching tech¬
niques),26 the seminary produced generations of priests facing the
  220                                          Church and Society




challenges of changing social, political, and economic conditions
with inadequate preparation.
   Parish priests, perennial victims of the unequal distribution of
resources within the Church, found that their position at the bot¬
tom of the ecclesiastical ladder had changed scarcely at all as a
result of the Concordat of 1851. They had heard, said a group
of rural clergymen from Galicia, “a mysterious voice telling them
continuously: your ills will end; a new concordat will drag you
from the abjection to which Providence has submitted you to prove
your virtue and constancy.”27 But there was no mystery in the
financial arrangements worked out between Madrid and Rome.
Parish salaries ranged from a minimum of 2,200 reales for rural
curas to a maximum of 10,000 for the highest paid urban clergy.
In an age when the average yearly income of an industrial worker
was estimated at 2,827 reales and the minimum thought necessary
for a modest clerical style of life was 4,300 a year, the vast majority
of the clergy did not prosper. Of the 19,820 priests eligible to
receive government salaries in 1851, over 11,000 received under
3,500 reales; 3,706 reached the watershed figure of 4,300; 2,042
exceeded 5,500; and only 1,268 attained incomes of 7,000 reales.28
   For the parochial clergy, the Concordat of 1851 was a deception
leading to bitter protests, such as that sent to the papal nuncio by
a group of priests from Santiago de Compostela, and criticism in
the Catholic press. The papacy’s failure to insist on more equitable
treatment of parish priests in comparison with the generous terms
meted out to the clerical elite perpetuated the social evils not
uncommon among the clergy of the eighteenth century—the con¬
stant pressure on resentful parishioners to pay stipends for ser¬
vices such as baptisms, marriages, and funerals as well as the
temptation to engage in business activities—which inevitably aroused
local hostility. And the continuation of the eighteenth-century
system of competitive examinations to fill parish vacancies (con-
cursos de curatos) contributed at worst, according to one clerical
critic, to spreading “envy, avarice, ambition, detraction and de¬
nunciation” among priests and at best to a constant drain of the
most qualified clergy from poorer to richer parishes.29
   Financial disadvantages aside, the prospect of a priestly career
appealed to well-off peasant families in certain dioceses—Leon,
Burgos, Pamplona, Solsona, Barcelona, Valencia, and Orihuela—
     Church and Society                                          221




with the best record of seminary recruitment in the mid-nineteenth
century. The opportunity to secure an education in a world lack¬
ing decent rural schools and to enter an occupation endowed with
modest social prestige made a clerical career seem attractive to a
conservative peasantry. Moreover, it was not a difficult goal to
attain. An analysis of seminary registrations revealed that virtually
all students who began their studies survived to ordination, a
commentary in itself on the lack of intellectual selectivity in re¬
cruitment.30
   In spite of the increasing importance of the rural clergy in the
nineteenth-century Church, little is known of the mentality and
personal circumstances of parish priests. Until studies of their role
and influence were undertaken with particular reference to re¬
gional differences, it is possible to assess their position only in
general terms. It is clear that the life of the rural cura was far
from comfortable. Poorly paid in relation to his superiors, an
outsider in a closely knit community, a representative of distant
civil and ecclesiastical authorities, an educated man in the midst
of an often illiterate peasantry, the parish priest faced the difficult
task of establishing himself as an effective force.
   A manual written by Father Juan Planas on the organization
and administration of parishes at midcentury provides some clues
to the problems and pitfalls facing the cura. The parish priest was
first of all to confine himself to the spiritual direction of his con¬
gregation, “for the material interests of the parishioners have not
been entrusted to you by God.” Yet the cura depended of necessity
on the support of the local notables raised up by decades of liberal
social and economic change to carry out his pastoral mission. He
was to treat rich and poor alike, but he was bound to cooperate
with the powerful and influential in his village: “the parish priest
should live in good intelligence and harmony with the most no¬
table personalities of the town,” for “to repress scandal ... a slight
sign from the mayor or some other proprietor serves better at
times than all the efforts ... of the cura” The priest specifically
required the support of local notables represented on the junta
of studies controlling primary education. According to law the
parish priest sat ex officio on the junta. He was urged to use his
influence to persuade his fellow board members to choose “the
most moral and religious” for appointment to teaching posts, even
  222                                         Church and Society




at the cost of naming teachers who were “inferior to the other
candidates in literary attainments.”31
   The cura also needed the cooperation of the local authorities
to carry out one of his most important functions, that of “pastoral
vigilance.” The cura vigilante was encouraged to move “continually
through all the parish . . . examining everything well, houses, tav¬
erns, shops, schools, dance halls, etc., attempting to ascertain what
is being said in such places, what is being done or not done, sure
in the conviction that in all he will find abuses to correct and
scandals to reprove.” As the supreme moral censor of his parish,
the priest was urged to do everything within his power to remove
occasions of temptation for his congregation. He should forbid
dancing completely if possible; if not, he should at least eliminate
those dances that “carried the greatest danger of perversion.” He
must act to prevent flirting among youth, “the greatest danger
which can be presented to human weakness,” and he must attack
at every turn “the impurity which has come to be the ordinary
sauce of conversations” among the young.32 The cura was also
expected to fulfill a variety of pastoral responsibilities—teaching
the catechism, conducting religious services with decorum,
preaching with care and thoughtfulness, visiting the sick, and
assisting the poor.
   The negative aspects of the parish priest’s life were treated with
circumspection by Father Planas. Yet his veiled warnings to his
clerical readers rested on his observations of actual problems. The
cura was warned that “he could not abandon his parish without
abandoning the most sacred of his duties,” a reference to priests
who absented themselves from their congregations for personal
gain and comfort or to seek advancement. Planas admonished
churchmen who became involved in political controversy or the
personal quarrels of their parishioners, the former almost cer¬
tainly directed against clerical involvement in the constant and
bruising polemic between Carlists and the supporters of liberal¬
ism. He also emphasized the necessity of upright moral conduct.
The cura must not support relatives in his residence, “for parish¬
ioners do not look favorably upon this, . . . because they think,
and at times they are right, that these are rewarded with the goods
of the Church.” “Gossip becomes general, and discontent reaches
its height,” Planas maintained, when the cura spends much of his
     Church and Society                                        223




time advancing the fortunes of his relatives. The priest was warned
to exercise special care in the selection of a housekeeper. He
required a woman who was “religious and discreet” both to avoid
scandal and to avoid interference in parish administration, “for
nothing is more of an affront for an ecclesiastic than to allow
himself to be dominated by a woman.”33
    The ideal parish priest necessarily stood aloof from the com¬
munity to which he was assigned. He was to take every precaution
to avoid the gossip and innuendos endemic to the isolated rural
village. The cura was to fulfill a lofty spiritual mission, yet he
required the support of the politically and socially influential. It
was a difficult life, one “of dangerous loneliness” in which there
were times when “not even the devil will call at his door,” as a
later authority on the parish clergy expressed it.34 Personal iso¬
lation made boredom an ever-present risk for priests whose nar¬
row education deprived them of intellectual support in the midst
of an often unlettered peasantry. It led also to the cases, cited
with vehemence by anticlerical writers, of priests maintaining li¬
aisons with women. How extensive this problem was is impossible
to say, but the problem existed, as it had for centuries. Thus,
Father Juan Villada, the parish priest of Cardenadijo in Burgos
in the late 1880’s, declared that he had been living with his house¬
keeper for twenty-six years and that the situation was not un¬
common among the rural clergy of his day.35 Given the dearth of
knowledge on the parish clergy of the mid-nineteenth century,
it is impossible to provide a detailed profile of its role within the
Church. There were certainly regional differences between, for
example, Andalusia with a religiously indifferent population and
the more devout countryside of the north. It is at least clear that
the lot of the parish priest was anything but easy.


The Church and the New Society

   Liberal ecclesiastical policies after 1834 made it impossible for
the Church to play the pervasive social and cultural role it had
had in the eighteenth century. The sale of clerical property, the
near disappearance of the male orders, and the assumption by
the State of activities once the preserve of religious institutions
set the midcentury Church adrift. The economic developments
  224                                          Church and Society




churchmen deplored during the 1840’s followed an even more
expansive course beginning in 1854. Between 1855 and 1868,
5,000 kilometers of track were laid down in a frenetic railway
boom equal to the capitalist excesses of more advanced countries.
Banks, trading companies, and factories flourished in a heady
atmosphere of uncontrolled speculation. The transfer of agricul¬
tural lands from the Church and municipalities, whatever its social
consequences for peasants without the resources to participate in
the disamortization, pushed agriculture in a more capitalist di¬
rection. More land was placed under cultivation to meet the de¬
mands of an expanding population and international' markets.
Spain’s midcentury economic revolution was, however, incom¬
plete. The kingdom remained agrarian in character; industrial
development was confined largely to Catalonia and the Basque
Provinces; agriculture was only imperfectly modernized.
   But economic changes further transformed society. The new
elite of bankers, financiers, industrialists, generals, and large land-
owners consolidated its position during the 1850’s and 1860’s.
Flamboyant and extravagant, the new rich did not shrink from
displaying their wealth with as much bravado as any eighteenth-
century aristocrat. But if the alliance of capitalism and liberalism
made fortunes, it also created paupers. The sale of Church and
common lands to those with money to buy them reduced the vast
landless population of Andalusia and Extremadura to even greater
misery, for the new proprietors managed their holdings with ruth¬
less efficiency compared with religious institutions. Even in re¬
gions of peasant ownership, a lack of capital spread the ubiquitous
curse of moneylending at exorbitant rates of interest. In the cities,
particularly Madrid and Barcelona, population growth and the
decline of traditional artisan trades created a new class of poor.
But the condition of workers in industrial centers, such as Bar¬
celona (over 100,000 were employed there in the textile industry
in 1861), was no better. Working-class discontent exploded in
Catalonia in serious form for the first time between 1854 and
 1856, and thereafter it became a constant feature of social life.
Resentment among the landless of the south, already manifested
in a series of local revolts in 1840, became more intense after
 1855.36 Risings in the province of Seville in 1857 and at Loja in
     Church and Society                                         225




1861 revealed the full extent of the rural poor’s hostility to the
society liberalism had created.
   The pragmatism with which the Church adjusted to political
reality vanished when it confronted an expansive capitalism and
secular culture existing beyond the reach of clerical supervision.
In the eyes of churchmen, liberalism had created a society out of
control in which individual passions were allowed to run riot at
the expense of morality and religion. Whether moderados or pro-
gresistas governed the country made no difference. In a sermon
preached in the cathedral of Valladolid in 1847 with the moderado
ministry of Narvaez in power, Canon Garcia Mazo began with a
Latin text from Saint Paul, “dies mali sunt,” as he painted a picture
of unrelieved moral corruption in Spanish society. “Faith nearly
extinguished, charity frozen or deadened offers nothing more to
our eyes than Christians without souls and without life. The times
are obscured by clouds of vice and the dark mists of error.”37
Antonio Claret expressed the same sentiments more directly in
1857: “the world is evil, very evil.”38
   The pervasive sense of being surrounded by corruption lay
behind the chronic tensions that characterized interactions be¬
tween the Church and the liberal State beyond the level of simple
civil-ecclesiastical relations. Ecclesiastics were exasperated by what
they perceived to be the moderado State’s refusal to take the steps
necessary “to save the nation from a sure and inevitable ruin.”39
Bishop Costa y Borras’ frequent clashes with both moderado and
progresista governments during the 1850’s over liberty of expres¬
sion and public morality provide the most spectacular examples
of the struggle between this theocratic vision and the realities of
the new society. A polemicist of the first order, the bishop of
Barcelona provoked official wrath in a series of incidents in which
he gave “the voice of alert. . . against the torrent of evil doctrines
emerging from the press, against evil books, obscene pictures,
immoral theatrical presentations and dances.”40 The bishop took
the extreme step on one occasion of having an episcopal order
forbidding a certain play posted on the church doors of Barcelona.
The provincial governor responded promptly by sending the local
police to cut the posters down with their swords.
   During the late 1840’s and 1850’s, few aspects of liberal society
  226                                         Church and Society




moved the clergy to more rhetorical paroxysms than the economic
changes that had produced wealth in abundance for the kingdom’s
elite. Clerical hostility to the economic order through the 1850’s
 reflected in part the sour-grapes resentment of the Church against
 liberals, whether moderados or progresistas, who had profited from
 the sale of ecclesiastical property. But it went deeper. The Church
continued to adhere to an organic view of human society derived
 from a centuries-old scholastic tradition. Such a philosophy de¬
 manded that the individual curb his natural acquisitive passions
 for the common good. It required that the rich restrain their taste
 for luxurious living in order to help the poor through charity.
What churchmen saw about them was a consumer society, ad¬
 mittedly confined to a minority, which defied this traditional view
of social organization.
    Antolin Monescillo expressed the prevailing sentiments of
churchmen concerning the profound changes taking place before
 their eyes: “Mathematics, the natural sciences, discoveries, ma¬
chines, the invention of steam and its application to every kind
 of industry serve only to enrich entrepreneurs to the prejudice
of the working classes, to encourage tyrannical egoism, ... to
 form a feudalized aristocracy enemy of the poor when religion
 does not enter into progress.”41
    Another clergyman stressed the corrosive effects of acquisi¬
 tiveness on the population as a whole: “There is not only avarice
 among the great but also among the rich, not only among the rich
but also among the poor who, deprived of temporal goods, burn
with desire to have them; there is avarice among those who have
jobs, among merchants and artisans . . . There is no estate in which
 in one form or another the avaricious cannot be found.”42
    The ingrained hostility of the Church to the burgeoning cap¬
italism of the mid-nineteenth century contributed to the chronic
tension between it and the liberal State, even when the latter was
controlled by its more conservative elements. The alliance between
ecclesiastical interests and liberalism could never develop into any¬
thing more than a tactical arrangement until the Church was will¬
ing to accept the social transformation brought about by economic
change. It never did so completely, but by the 1860’s a process of
uneasy accommodation with the new economic system was under
     Church and Society                                          227




way that would develop still further after the revolutionary period
between 1868 and 1874.
   In one sense the Church’s stubborn adherence to its traditional
interpretation of society allowed the clergy to see the destructive
social effects of economic change with some clarity. Already in
1840 Jaime Balmes had warned of the dangers that would flow
from a disamortization excluding the peasantry. Balmes also saw
that relations between workers and employers in his native Cat¬
alonia were changing in a fundamental way as traditional artisan
enterprises gave way to a factory system in the first stages of Spain’s
industrial revolution. Balmes himself witnessed the earliest con¬
flicts between capital and labor during the Espartero regency,
developments “most alarming to the eyes of every thinking man.”
Balmes concluded that one of the causes “of this evil” was that
men had discovered “the means of producing and increasing this
production indefinitely, without at the same time having found
the art of distributing its products in a convenient way, and with¬
out having established a system capable of confronting the press¬
ing necessities which the excessive multiplication [of production]
has brought with it.”43 The triumph of industrial capitalism and
the impoverishment of a working class forced to work long hours
under iron discipline scarcely spread beyond the borders of Cat¬
alonia during the 1840’s and 1850’s, but there the Church first
confronted the social problem that would be crucial to its later
history.
    The moderado ministries ruling the country since 1844 re¬
pressed the Catalan industrial workers’ attempts to come together
in associations designed to protect their interests. The progresista
revolution in 1854 gave the workers an opportunity to organize
in support of their demands, although, in fact, the progresistas
were no better disposed toward the workers than the moderados.
Indeed, the revolutionary government quickly repented of its early
tolerance of working-class associations. The spread of labor unrest
in the early months of 1855 evoked a harsh reaction from Madrid,
which suspended the workers’ associations and confiscated their
funds. This led, in turn, to the first general strike in Spanish
history, which took place in the industrial towns of Catalonia on
July 2.
  228                                          Church and Society




   In the absence of Bishop Costa y Borras of Barcelona, who had
been summoned to Madrid by an irritated progresista govern¬
ment, it fell to the bishop of Vich, Antonio Palau, to publish a
pastoral letter, widely reproduced in the press, that expressed the
Church’s position on the course of events. Palau refused to enter
into an analysis of the causes of the conflict; he urged the workers
to “return to work ... to your factories where with the honored
work of your hands you can gain sustenance for your families. If
in spite of all you cannot satisfy all your necessities; . . . religion
will console you promising the most abundant felicities in the life
to come.”44 Whether Palau was simply naive or urged resignation
on the workers because he feared social revolution is unclear. But
by 1858, when he had succeeded to the see of Barcelona, he sang
a different tune. He told the rich of his diocese: “Your pride will
cause the disbelieving masses to rise up; your banquets will irritate
the appetite of the naked and hungry crowds, and neither laws,
courts, gallows nor armies will be sufficient to contain the outburst
of the unbridled multitude.”45
   Confronted with social conflicts of unfamiliar intensity and
character, the Church was unsure what course it should follow.
Clerical dislike of the capitalist extravagance and arrogance of the
new society was sincere enough. But churchmen were even more
frightened by the prospect of a social revolution directed against
private property. As early as 1840 the Catholic press vigorously
attacked the utopian socialist doctrines making their way into Spain.46
These denunciations were repeated with increasing insistence
during the 1850’s and 1860’s. Antonio Palau, along with his warn¬
ing to the rich, also admonished the workers of Barcelona against
“the golden dreams of modern Utopians,” who pretended to es¬
tablish “a perfect equality of fortunes among all men.”47
   If at one level the clergy perceived the serious social problem
created by economic change, at another it failed to see that grow¬
ing class consciousness among industrial workers alienated from
the institutions of the liberal State contained dangerous implica¬
tions for the Church itself. Having allied itself to the new political
order, however reluctantly, and operating with an ingrained re¬
spect for authority, the Church in the end came down on the side
of law and order against possible revolution. The ecclesiastical
response to social unrest was little more than the worn-out formula
     Church and Society                                          229




of charity, although Balmes had seen the necessity of some kind
of mutual benefit associations for workers. Thus, Costa y Borras
told the faithful of Barcelona in 1852: “the sacred books recom¬
mend and prescribe almsgiving, and this . . . can only be practiced
if there are rich and poor to a greater or lesser degree.”48
   The Church at midcentury dwelt on the importance of char¬
ity as fully as its eighteenth-century predecessor. Clerics re¬
proached the liberal State for having “beheaded charity” by
depriving the Church of the wealth that had once allowed it to
help the poor.49 In spite of the ink poured from clerical pens on
this issue, the Church lacked the resources to furnish significant
assistance to the victims of economic change. The charitable ac¬
tivities of religious groups, such as the Sisters of Charity and the
Society of Saint Vincent de Paul, introduced to Spain in 1849,
could not equal the massive and diffuse charity of the Old Regime.
The Church failed to see that the problem itself had changed.
Charity appeared meaningless in a society in which economic
grievances were keenly felt and class consciousness was rising. It
might be argued that the nature and rapidity of the social trans¬
formation of Catalonia between 1840 and the late 1850’s was such
that no clerical initiative in the realm of social policy would have
succeeded.50 In any event, no such initiatives were undertaken.
In the end the Church was puzzled by a society in ferment. As a
result, it fell between two stools. Its dream of a return to the charity
of the past was impractical; its horror of radical social forces made
it a defender of private property and the existing social order in
an economic system the clergy fundamentally disliked.
    The triumph of liberalism also transformed the role of the
Church in education. The nearly complete destruction of the male
religious orders during the 1830’s swept away the vast majority
of the regulars’ schools save those of the Piarists, whose progres¬
sive methods won the admiration of even liberal reformers. And
the decline of the ecclesiastical faculties in the universities, par¬
ticularly those of theology and canon law (the latter were abolished
in 1842) considerably diminished the once formidable religious
character of higher education.
    Although liberal educational legislation was not especially co¬
herent and changed in accord with political circumstances, the
three fundamental laws governing education before 1868—the
  230                                             Church and Society




Law on Primary Education (1838), and the Laws on Public In¬
struction (1845 and 1857)—did not seek to eliminate religion from
state schools.51 All three laws, reflecting moderado concern with
the importance of religious teaching as a foundation of civic and
moral conduct, included religion as a mandatory subject at every
level. Primary school students received instruction in the cate¬
chism and religious history and marched in a body, at least in
 theory, to attend Sunday Mass under the watchful eye of the local
 schoolmaster. Secondary school students in the state institutos of
 1850 were obliged to take a course in “Religion and Morality” in
 four of their five years of instruction. Moreover, the Church en¬
joyed a limited supervisory role over state schools. Parish priests
 served as members of local school boards under the terms of the
 1838 law, and teachers hoping for appointments had to produce
certificates of good conduct signed by their curas. After 1845 the
 State tolerated a modest expansion of private Church schools staffed
by the religious orders. After 1851 moderado governments rec¬
 ognized diocesan seminaries as secondary schools qualified to pre¬
 pare students for university entrance.
    The Church did not fare badly at liberal hands in education,
 particularly during periods of moderado rule. The Concordat of
 1851 and the Moyano Law of 1857 recognized the Church’s gen¬
 eral right of supervision over education, although both were vague
 about how this was to be exercised. Between 1857 and the revo¬
 lution of 1868 the Church waged a persistent and ultimately suc¬
cessful campaign to exert greater control over instruction. Changes
 introduced just before the collapse of the moderado State in 1868
 gave the Church a greater role in the authorization of school texts
 and more substantial representation on provincial and local school
boards.52 Clerical objectives were straightforward. The Church
 wished absolute freedom to establish schools of its own, and it
 demanded the right to supervise curricula and teacher recruit¬
 ment in the state schools. Although the liberal State made sub¬
 stantial concessions to the Church in education, ecclesiastical interests
 were never satisfied with these arrangements.
    Clerical discontent arose from the State’s insistence, whether it
was in moderado or progresista hands, on its right to control
education at every level, from university to primary school. The
 University Law of 1845, passed when the moderado government
     Church and Society                                         231




of Narvaez was in full flood, established the highly centralized
university system that in one form or another survived through
the 1970’s. In spite of concessions made to the Church in partic¬
ular aspects of educational policy, clerical interests resented a sys¬
tem in which their plans for a rigidly Catholic instruction depended
ultimately on the suffrance of the civil authorities.
   Hostility to the state monopoly of education was closely linked
to clerical fears that schools would be used to propagate secular¬
izing ideas opposed to the Church’s still essentially theocratic vi¬
sion of the organization and purpose of human society. Julian
Sanz del Rio’s inaugural lecture in the Universidad Central in
1857 confirmed the worst fears of Church defenders. Sanz del
Rio, an intellectual of little originality who had taken up the views
of the minor German philosopher Karl Krause, expounded the
philosophy of his mentor, a “curious blend of subjective mysticism
and vague modernism,” from his university chair.53 Although Sanz
del Rio tried to avoid an open confrontation with the Church, his
views were immediately attacked as “pantheistic” by a chorus of
Catholic detractors. That a university professor taught such a
philosophy from an official post in a centralized state university
system outraged the Church. The Catholic apologist Orti y Lara
warned his readers that unless steps were taken to put an end to
the “freedom of the chair” in universities the Church stood to lose
future generations for the faith. The philosophy of Sanz del Rio,
he maintained, was “the fountain from which the future teachers of
Spanish youth would have to drink. What more powerful enemy
is being prepared against the Catholic faith!”54 The polemic ini¬
tiated in 1857 raged on for a decade, until the purge of university
professors undertaken by Narvaez in 1867. The conflict revealed
again the fundamental ambiguity of the Church’s position within
the secular State liberalism had created.


Was Spain Catholic?

   Whether a religious revival took place after 1843 is unclear in
spite of the obvious signs of the Church’s institutional recovery.
Until socioreligious studies of the incidence and quality of ob¬
servance are available, a definitive assessment of the extent of a
“spiritual” recovery cannot be made. But the Church produced a
  232                                         Church and Society




successful amalgam of religious devotions and evangelization tech¬
niques that appealed to broad sections of the population, from
the peasantry to the urban bourgeoisie. On the surface religious
life at midcentury appeared similar to that of the Old Regime.
The folkloric customs of “popular” religion—placatory in nature
and connected to the fears and preoccupations of an uneducated
peasantry—continued in the forms of local shrines, pilgrimages,
and rites designed to evoke intercession to remedy specific ills.
The nineteenth-century traveler could still describe folk beliefs
depicted by visitors to the peninsula a century before: the Murcian
peasant who believed “that no disease can affect him or his cattle
if he touches them with the cross of Caravaca, which angels brought
from heaven,” the hermit of Manresa who showed tourists the
cave in which Saint Ignatius Loyola did penance and sold them
the dust “of its pulverized stones” to cure a variety of infirmities,
and those who went to the shrine of Santa Engracia in Zaragoza
hoping to be cured of scrofula by the smoke of its holy lamps.55
    During the eighteenth century the practices of “popular” reli¬
gion evoked the disapproval of bishops and Inquisition alike. For
the clerical elite of the Caroline Church, the excesses of “popular”
religion appeared an obstacle to their ideal of a simple, interior
Christianity. With a certain intuitive brilliance the nineteenth-
century Church realized that the appeal of primitive beliefs had
deep roots that could be turned to advantage. “Popular” religion,
once rejected or at best tolerated as a necessary evil, entered fully
into the life of the Church. Extraordinary claims of miraculous
happenings that once would have led to inquiries by the Inquis¬
ition were given credence in clerical circles. In 1853 the official
bulletin of the Toledo archdiocese referred approvingly to the
excited crowds flocking to the funeral of a pious woman in An-
tequera, “the little saint,” whose fame was such that the congre¬
gation, believing in her miraculous powers, struggled to touch the
body with their handkerchiefs. Six months later the bulletin re¬
ported with similar confidence on the appearance of a dead uncle
to his nephew in the small town of Villanueva de Alcolea in Tor-
tosa.56
  Although the ecclesiastical authorities followed the usual pro¬
cedure of canonical inquiry in these cases, they were more dis¬
posed to accept claims than their eighteenth-century predecessors,
     Church and Society                                         233




and for a straightforward reason. Years of liberal criticism of the
“superstitious” character of Iberian Catholicism elicited the op¬
posite reaction from churchmen, who saw in these occurrences a
divine confirmation of the Church’s mission. Thus, a report from
Valencia in 1854 of a miraculous cholera cure in a man who had
drunk water from a well at the house of Saint Vincent Ferrer pro¬
voked a controversy between the local liberal press and the clergy.
A priest challenged the miracle’s journalistic detractors to drink
part of a glass of water from the well while he drank the rest,
assuring his foes that they would die from an attack of the disease
and he would escape unharmed.57 “Popular” religion had become
acceptable testimony to faith.
   The triumphal sweep of devotionalism in religious practice also
extended the appeal of the midcentury Church. Cults associated
with the divine in various manifestations were as old as Christianity
itself, but the appearance in the seventeenth and eighteenth cen¬
turies of devotions emphasizing the personal and sentimental as¬
pects of petitioning for divine intercession differed from the
corporate, community-oriented devotions of earlier periods. These
“new” devotions, directed and spread by the Church largely through
the religious orders, had already attained popularity in Spain, but
they suffered a setback with the extinction of the regular clergy.58
Yet the liberals also created the conditions necessary for the de¬
votions’ recovery by destroying the hierarchical society around
which Old Regime religious life revolved. Cofradias continued to
exist, but they lacked social meaning. The great processions of
Holy Week and Corpus Christi did not disappear, but they were
no longer miniature collective expressions of an entire society.
Many had become popular spectacles designed, said one critic in
 1858, “to satisfy curiosity . . . and to serve for recreation and dis¬
traction.”59
   The official liturgy of the Church offered little competition to
devotionalism. Cathedral services were as grandiose as ever and
were often conducted with full orchestras and operatic singing
that paid little attention to religious significance. The parish lit¬
urgy was in an even more dismal state. The official ecclesiastical
bulletin of Toledo published a series of articles describing each
and every gesture the priest should make during Mass, an indi¬
cation that some clerics lacked even this basic knowledge. In 1858
  234                                         Church and Society




the bishop of Guadix threatened to suspend priests saying “hasty
Masses lacking in devotion,” that is, Masses said in less than twenty
minutes.60 The problem had scarcely changed four decades later.
Ramon Sarabfa a well-known Redemptorist missionary of the early
twentieth century, recalled the impoverished parish life of the
small Asturian town where he had grown up in the early 1880’s.
Sunday after Sunday passed without anyone receiving Commun¬
ion. Sermons were preached only twice a year, on Corpus Christi
and the feast of Saint Martin, the village patron.61 Revived devo-
tionalism thus filled a liturgical vacuum and marked the character
of the Spanish Church for generations.
   By 1868 an immense range of devotions appealed to every
religious taste. Older cults, such as those of the Sacred Heart and
the Eucharistic Forty Hours, took on new life, as did that of the
rosary, largely through the efforts of Antonio Claret, who pro¬
moted it with great enthusiasm. By 1860 it was not uncommon to
hnd entire congregations telling their beads during Mass.62 Pro¬
clamation of the dogma of the Immaculate Conception by Pius
IX in 1854 reinvigorated the Marian devotion that had been part
of the Spanish Church’s tradition for centuries. Pious groups com¬
mitted to the cult of the Virgin multiplied; the Devotion to the
Heart of Mary organized by Claret and the Court of Mary founded
by Ramon Garcia Leal with over 50,000 members by 1865 are two
examples. In addition, specific religious celebrations—the “Flow¬
ers of Mary” held during May and ceremonies marking Saturday
as the day of the Virgin—attained great popularity. Marian de¬
votions from abroad, such as the Virgin of Lourdes, quickly made
their way into Spain and attracted the attention of the devout.63
Devotions to individual saints also flourished in the new atmos¬
phere.
   A pious visitor to Madrid on a single day (September 7, 1851)
could satisfy his religious needs by choosing from a bewildering
array of devotions: the Forty Hours in the parish of Santa Maria;
the novena of Jesus Nazareno in the church of the same name;
a service in honor of the Sacred Heart in the church of the Salesian
nuns with full orchestra; or novenas to the Most Pure Heart of
Mary (San Cayetano), Our Lady of Mercy (San Sebastian), and
the Virgin of Guadalupe (San Millan). At San Sebastian the novena
began with solemn Mass at ten in the morning followed by the
     Church and Society                                        235




Stations of the Cross and the rosary at 4:45 with sermon. The day
ended with a solemn service in which the Salve Regina was cele¬
brated with full musical accompaniment. Devotional associations,
such as the Archconfraternity of Our Lady of Grace and Our
Lady of Carmen, held special ceremonies for their members. On
the following day, a novena to Our Lady of Zarza began in the
chapel of the convent of San Pascual, and another service to the
Sacred Heart opened in the oratory of the Santisimo Sacra¬
mento.64
    The mid-nineteenth-century revival of piety was encouraged
by the Church. Scruples that led some eighteenth-century bishops
to restrain cults were set aside in favor of an effort to spread them
like seeds thrown upon the fields. The devotionalist resurgence
has not been adequately studied, but it may explain the Church’s
ability to survive as a popular institution during this period. To
the peasantry, for whom religion warded off disaster and secured
good fortune, the intercessionary aspects of devotion comple¬
mented rituals of traditional “popular” religion, which often had
little to do with formal belief. Moreover, the character of these
devotions, individual acts of piety directed toward a specific pur¬
pose and requiring little intellectual effort, made them easy to
understand. And their individualist emphasis may have appealed
even to the educated middle classes of moderado persuasion. De-
votionalism’s concern with the relation of the individual rather
than the collectivity to the divine provided a convenient means
for the man who had bought Church property to prove his reli¬
gious worth with ease of conscience and to overcome Catholic
social thought and its medieval, corporate preoccupations with
personal acts of piety. Revived devotionalism may have been one
of the bridges leading the more conservative elements of liberalism
not back to the Church, because they had never left it, but toward
more emotional forms of religious practice. The growth of per¬
sonal devotions owed something to the individualistic character
of the new society, as liberalism and Catholicism came together
again in curious alliance.
    The increasing acceptance of “popular” religion by the official
Church, the revival of devotionalism, and the reintroduction of
the missions traditionally used by the ecclesiastical authorities to
preserve faith among the population, contributed to the devel-
  236                                          Church and Society




opment of religiosity in the liberal era. The destruction of the
regular clergy during the 1830’s ended for the time being the
Church’s long missionary history, although much of the fire and
brimstone of popular evangelization had vanished before the death
of Ferdinand VII. Without the front-line troops provided by the
orders and preoccupied with the struggle to survive, the Church
could do little to marshal its evangelistic forces.
    In 1841 Antonio Claret, still a young and unknown secular
priest in rural Catalonia, received the title of apostolic missionary
from Rome and began to preach in Catalan throughout the coun¬
tryside. Although Claret followed the time-honored techniques of
generations of missionaries, using processions, sermons, and pious
devotions, he believed that traditional methods, though they aroused
temporary religious enthusiasm, were insufficient to conquer the
masses “in a more efficacious and lasting way.”65 For Claret, mis¬
sions must form part of a more comprehensive program of evan¬
gelization involving permanent catechetical instruction, parochial
schools, parish libraries, and charitable associations, such as the
Saint Vincent de Paul Society.
    In Claret’s eyes, the more sophisticated purpose of the modern
mission required a team approach involving a high degree of
coordination and functional distribution of responsibilities. Claret
applied his ideas on popular evangelization through the formation
during the late 1840’s of an effective team with himself as director
of missions; Francisco Coll, another indefatigable missionary, as
director of spiritual exercises; and Jose Caixal.66 Caixal’s title, di¬
rector of propaganda, revealed how much Claret had learned
about the necessity of abandoning the messianic preaching of the
traditional mission in favor of modern methods of influencing
opinion. From Caixal came the idea of distributing massive quan¬
tities of religious books, simply written and cheaply produced.
Claret welcomed the suggestion, believing that only such a large-
scale effort could counter the effect “of the evil and pestilential
books” distributed by the “impious.”67 Between 1848 and 1866
the publishing house Claret established printed 2,811,100 books;
 1,509,600 pamphlets; and nearly 5,000,000 posters and broad¬
sheets. Claret’s adaptation of the mission and his appreciation of
the importance of religious propaganda within the new society of
liberal Spain provided the Church with an instrument of popular
     Church and Society                                         237




evangelization that to some extent compensated for the near dis¬
appearance of the proselytizing religious orders.
   The resurgence of the missions, particularly after 1851, arose
from the determination of the Isabelline bishops to deal with
“immorality and indifference” through direct combat.68 The epis¬
copacy could rely on the members of the restored male orders,
who threw themselves into the work of popular evangelization
with an enthusiasm that made up for their limited numbers. The
missionaries, of whom the Jesuits were the most important, made
a point of living austerely. The Jesuits active in Seville in 1858
took pains to move on foot from parish to parish, rejecting offers
to ride in carriages, and they tailored their activities to the social
situations of their congregations. Services in the parish of San
Bernardo—with a population of agricultural workers, bullfight¬
ers, and employees of the famous Seville tobacco factory—began
at five in the morning rather than the usual eight so that “without
ignoring their material occupations, the residents could devote
themselves to the care of their souls.”69
   The missions still followed the traditional formula. They usually
opened with a procession of children intoning the hymn “The
Mission Calls You” in an effort to touch adult sensibilities. Missions
generally lasted for two weeks; included Masses, sermons, devo¬
tions such as the rosary, and confessions; and ended with a general
Communion. Preachers were not above using sensationalism in
the old flamboyant style. An earthquake in Seville in October 1858
in the midst of a round of missions was seen as a divine admonition
against “the faults and crimes of which this society, today more
corrupt than ever, is filled.” The clergy used the natural disaster
to warn the inhabitants to repent. But missionaries in this period
paid more attention to catechetical instruction than their prede¬
cessors had. In the little town of Mairena del Alcor near Seville, for
example, the Jesuits preaching the mission enlisted thirty laymen
to teach catechism to both children and adults; a house in each
street was set aside for this purpose. Wherever they went mis¬
sionaries also distributed “little books” on the truths of religion
written “in language which even the most rude and ignorant can
understand.”
   The Church believed that the missions provided the best means
of realizing “a complete moral and religious restoration” that would
  238                                         Church and Society




“bring morality to the people, and extinguish the hatreds . . . which
the passions of parties and families sustain and propagate.” They
would thus lead to “that good faith, those Christian and gentle¬
manly customs which have been the characteristics of our nation¬
ality.”70 At least over the short term, the missions enjoyed some
success. In 1851 the clergy of Catalonia congratulated itself on
the “happy results” of the missionary campaign just concluded in
the region; in 1858 more than 20,000 received Communion dur¬
ing the missions of Seville. And in 1866 Jesuit preachers carried
off one of their most impressive evangelical triumphs with a series
of missions in the Basque Provinces. Reports from parish priests
of small towns and villages recorded nearly universal participation
in the services; in Zaldivia, for example, 2,500 people received
Communion, while only 6 residents did not.71
   The success of the missions arose in part from the support they
received from moderado notables, the prosperous men of prop¬
erty dominating local governments. At a mission in Organa in
Lerida, the preachers were received by a delegation of “clergy,
municipal councillors and the most select part of the population,”
and this pattern was repeated elsewhere.72 There were solid rea¬
sons for moderado support of the missions. The absolutist tirades
that had been a stock in trade for the missionaries of the 1820’s
and early 1830’s yielded to sermons teaching respect for the gov¬
ernment and warning against social unrest. The missions of Se¬
ville, declared La Cruz in 1858, “had destroyed in their foundation
the antisocial ideas that had spread in Andalusia. Charity was
inculcated in the rich, resignation in the poor. All were led to the
faithful observance of the Commandments, to love of God . . . and
respect for the clergy and submission to the constituted authori¬
ties.”73 Bishop Costa y Borras similarly praised missions, “because
only the salutory influence of religion can make the Catalan char¬
acter docile and governable and avoid insurrections.”74 For the
moderados, obsessed with the danger of social revolution, the
preaching of submission from missionary pulpits offered a sooth¬
ing remedy. At Eibar in the Basque Provinces, factory owners
allowed their workers to attend a mission without loss of pay;
Isabella II, upon being urged to dispatch more troops to repress
the peasant rising at Loja in 1861, was said to have remarked:
     Church and Society                                         239




“you are mistaken. Soldiers are not required in Loia. Missions
are.”75
   Claret’s dream of broadening the base of popular evangeliza¬
tion was partially realized by 1868. A revived interest in religious
instruction led to the publication of new catechisms to replace the
texts used for centuries. Garcia Mazo’s Catecismo explicado (1837),
Claret’s work of the same title (1848), and Costa y Borras’ Cate¬
cismo de la doctrin cristiana (1858) replaced the rote memorization
of questions and answers with clear and simple exposition. Claret,
for example, abandoned the traditional technique of organizing
a catechism around the Ten Commandments in favor of one re¬
volving around the themes of faith, hope, charity, and good works.76
Each section was preceded by an engraving to illustrate the brief
explanation following. The new catechisms were easy to compre¬
hend and for the first time attached importance to the explanation
of doctrine. Claret also recognized the necessity of making cate¬
chisms available to non-Castilian readers. His own text in its Cat¬
alan version was already into its third printing by 1850.
   In addition, a new devotional literature, which differed sub¬
stantially from that produced during the eighteenth century,
flourished. The excessively detailed texts of the Old Regime, larded
with scriptural citations, were replaced by short and straightfor¬
ward works with an almost exclusive emphasis on private devo¬
tions. Garcia Mazo’s Diario de lapiedad (1839) stressed the importance
of individual acts of piety, the rosary, confession, Communion,
visits to altars, and the Blessed Sacrament.77 Concern with the
collective expression ofreligious sentiment so important to the
earlier literature had virtually disappeared. Claret’s contribution,
the Camino recto y seguro para llegar al cielo (1843), was an instant
success; it would become the most widely published work of its
kind in the history of Spanish devotional writing. Claret, too,
emphasized the quest for salvation as an individual affair. The
sense of mutual obligation, albeit within the framework of a hi¬
erarchical society, typical of similar works in the eighteenth cen¬
tury found no place in the Camino recto. Claret’s advice to workers
must have been welcomed by the new liberal society: “Do not waste
time”; “Do not cause expenses or damage to your employers”;
“Work with all diligence and exactitude.”78 The emphasis of the
  240                                          Church and Society




new devotional literature on specific acts of piety as well as the
publishing success of works such as the Camino recto reveal again
that the Church was able to adapt its propaganda techniques to
the individualistic society created by liberalism.
   The individualistic emphasis of devotionalism found its coun¬
terpart in the proliferation of voluntaristic religious associations
very different from those of the Old Regime. During the eight¬
eenth century lay participation in the life of the Church had been
channeled through corporate groups reflecting the divisions of a
hierarchical society. The voluntaristic associations spreading through
the Spanish Church after 1840 were open in theory to all with a
sincere commitment to religion and good works. These societies
covered a wide range of charitable and educational activity. The
Society of Saint Vincent de Paul devoted its attention to assisting
the impoverished; the Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, founded
at Madrid in 1842, provided religious instruction in hospitals,
prisons, and orphanages. The new voluntarism also made it pos¬
sible for women to take a much more active role. In 1858 a group
of women, drawn largely from the ranks of the nobility, founded
the capital’s first Sunday schools and thereby began one of the
most successful catechetical initiatives of the nineteenth-century
Church. Escuelas dominicales were established in large numbers
throughout the country.79
    In addition, countless devotional associations were founded.
Thus, Francisco Coll, the celebrated missionary of the 1840’s,
established throughout rural Catalonia a number of such associ¬
ations—the Congregation of Minerva, devoted to the cult of the
Blessed Sacrament; the Congregation of the Unworthy Slaves of
Jesus in the Sacrament; the Confraternity of the Most Holy Ro¬
sary; and the Congregation of the Virgin of Sorrows.80 The pro¬
liferation of voluntaristic groups within the Church arose in part
from the institution’s recovery from its paralysis of the 1830’s.
But it also developed from the widespread appeal of associations
stressing individual works of piety and charity. Such an emphasis
fit neatly into the mentality of the politically liberal but socially
conservative elite dominating Spanish society during the middle
years of the century.
   Popular religion, devotionalism, improved evangelization tech¬
niques, and the increasing importance of voluntaristic associations
     Church and Society                                          241




allowed the Church to adapt to the configuration of liberal society
with surprising ease, clerical laments about the corruption of the
times notwithstanding. But how successful was the Church in
maintaining its religious influence? The question is no easier to
answer for the mid-nineteenth century than for the eighteenth.
Studies of religious practice are, if anything, more difhcult to find
for the later period. It is at least clear that sometime between 1850
and 1900 a process of accelerated dechristianization left Spanish
Catholicism with a highly regional character. There were abun¬
dant signs of losses in the south by the 1880’s. Visiting the town
of Villanueva del Rosario in February 1886, the bishop of Malaga
found a population in which “indifference and even apostasy”
had made deep inroads.81 The missions of the “Apostle of An¬
dalusia,” Francisco Tarfn, in 1889 revealed as gloomy a picture.
In the parish of San Roque in Seville, with 16,000 inhabitants,
only 30 appeared for the first service of the mission. In Andujar,
Tarfn found “estrangement from the Church”; in the mining town
of Linares, a “focal point of corruption and perversion,” the mis¬
sionary was chased along the streets by young boys who shouted
curses and threw stones.82
   There is similar impressionistic evidence for the decline of re¬
ligious observance in cities with a growing working class. The Cat¬
alan priest Josep Gatell, recalling the religious state of Barcelona
around 1850, believed it was still “a Christian town” in which
“factories closed a half-hour before the celebration of the last Mass
during which our churches were filled with men in their workers’
shirts.” But for Gatell, “the day arrived when this people, who
until then appeared Catholic, abandoned religious practices little
by little.”83 The dechristianizing aspects of the modern city, so
frequently observed by religious sociologists, were already being
noted by Bishop Palau of Barcelona in 1858: “Who can doubt
that people from all parts of the world, of all religions . . . flow to
the great centers of manufacturing and commerce, and com¬
municate . . . their religious indifference.” Of his own diocese, Palau
remarked: “the faith has grown languid, charity has gone cold
[and] religious sentiment has grown weak.”84
   In spite of the lack of serious study on nineteenth-century de¬
christianization in Spain, there are some partial indications of the
religious state of the kingdom. In 1869 opponents of religious
  242                                         Church and Society




toleration organized an ambitious and highly successful campaign
for a protest petition to be presented to parliament. Although the
provincial and local authorities who had come to power with the
revolution of 1868 did their best to discourage the collection of
signatures, the results were impressive given the organizational
problems involved; 2,837,144 people signed the petition. Analysis
of the geographic distribution of the signatures reveals that in
1869 the regional character of Spanish Catholicism was already
in place (see Map 2). There are, to be sure, anomalies in the 1869
results, and it should be remembered that the number of signa¬
tures gathered in a given province depended on the efficiency of
local organizers. The cartography of the petition campaign, how¬
ever, shows the lowest levels of support in Andalusia, Extrema¬
dura, and La Mancha. The two provinces standing at the very
bottom of the list, Albacete and Malaga, were both located in the
south. The greatest levels of support were in Old Castile—Sala¬
manca, Avila, Valladolid, Zamora, Burgos—Santander; Leon; the
Basque Provinces, particularly Vizcaya; Navarra; Aragon; and the
Balearic Islands. The Mediterranean littoral produced mixed re¬
sults, with a strong showing in Alicante (perhaps because of the
Catholic hinterland around Orihuela) and Valencia. The Catalan
provinces did less well but were by no means among those with
the lowest level of response. The support provided by the province
of Madrid, seat of the national capital, placed it near the bottom
of the list.
   The cartography of the 1869 campaign shows an interesting
and surprising resemblance to the map of religious practice drawn
in 1972.85 In spite of the massive demographic and economic
changes after 1950, the latter shows a clear line of division running
approximately through the center of the Iberian Peninsula along
the Guadarrama Mountains. Regions below the line—New Castile,
Extremadura, La Mancha, Andalusia, and the Mediterranean lit¬
toral save for rural Valencia and Orihuela—record the lowest
levels of observance. Areas above the line—Old Castile, Leon, the
Basque Provinces, and Aragon—show a high level of practice.
The correspondence between the 1869 and 1972 maps is not
exact. Catalonia, for example, had clearly slipped over the course
of the century, save for the high rate of practice observed in the
dioceses of Solsona and Vich. But the rough north-south division
           Church and Society                                               243




 2. Geographic distribution of signatures in the petition campaign of 1869 against
ious liberty.
  244                                        Church and Society




evident in 1869 was still clearly visible more than a century later.
The Church was strongest in areas of large peasant populations
who had reasonable security of land tenure and lived in numerous
small villages with a strong sense of communal life. It was weakest
in the great latifundia lands of Extremadura, La Mancha, and
Andalusia, where a rural proletariat lived in desperate economic
circumstances. And already by 1869 the weakness of the Church
in metropolitan centers was becoming evident.
   The results of the 1869 petition campaign provide a general
overview of the strength of the Church in the kingdom as a whole.
They do not provide guidance on the equally important question
of differences within regions. Such local variations were certainly
important, between, for example, an industrialized Barcelona
and the more Catholic Catalan hinterland. Until detailed re¬
gional studies of religious practice are undertaken, no adequate
cartography of nineteenth-century Catholicism can be drawn. The
limited study of observance in the province of Logrono carried
out for the period illustrates the importance and necessity of re¬
search in this Held. It reveals that by the end of the century de-
christianization had made rapid progress among the poorly paid
workers in the expanding vineyards that engaged in a market-
oriented wine trade; among railway workers along the Zaragoza
and Bilbao line, which opened for traffic in 1861; and among
industrial workers in small industrial towns such as Munilla, En-
ciso, and Haro.86 The regions of the province where traditional
agriculture conducted by a secure peasantry persisted—the dis¬
tricts adjacent to Alava and Navarra—were untouched by the drift
away from the Church. The statistics gathered by Saez de Ocariz
for the parish of Santiago el Real in Logrono suggest that the
critical period for the spread of declining observance occurred
between 1867 and 1875.87 The percentage of those who did not
fulfill the Easter Communion obligation, which hovered between
5 percent and 10 percent during the early 1860’s, rose dramati¬
cally beginning in 1867. (Table 5)
   The limited example of a single parish cannot be applied to
the kingdom as a whole. The chronology and pace of dechris-
tianization certainly varied depending on social and economic cir¬
cumstances, the degree of industrialization and urban growth,
changes in agriculture, the condition of rural workers, and other
       Church and Society                                              245




Table 5. Nonobservants of the Easter Communion obligation in the parish of
Santiago el Real, 1860-1890.


Year                                                Nonobservants (percent)

1860                                                            6.68
1867                                                           15.50
1868                                                           17.70
1869                                                           29.90
1870                                                           28.30
1871                                                           21.80
1872                                                           28.10
1873                                                           41.00
1874                                                           45.00
1875                                                           54.80
1880                                                           45.00
1890                                                           57.80

   Source: M. Saez de Ocariz y Ruiz de Azua, “El cumplimiento pascual en la
ciudad de Logrono a lo largo del siglo XIX,” Berceo, no. 76 (1965), 275-279.




factors. There may have been historic conditions in certain regions
to account, at least in part, for the religious crisis evident by the
end of the century. The inadequate parochial structure of An¬
dalusia and the imperfect evangelization efforts of past centuries
may have contributed to the nearly universal alienation of the
south’s rural, landless population.
    The Church’s failure to hold its own in the growing urban
centers during the second half of the century arose in part from
its inability to increase the number of parishes in the face of
massive population growth. The State’s unwillingness to finance
new urban parishes beyond a bare minimum created serious pas¬
toral problems. The bishop of Madrid asked the government to
create forty new parishes in the mid-1880’s but received funding
for only thirty. In succeeding years the number of parishes in¬
creased only marginally while the population doubled. The dis¬
tricts most badly served in the capital were the working-class suburbs,
where impoverished and understaffed parishes were the rule.
Father Herranz Estables, parish priest of San Sebastian in Cara-
banchel Bajo during the early twentieth century, served a parish
of 16,000 with one assistant. From one end to the other the parish
  246                                         Church and Society




extended six kilometers and embraced an unstable population
employed “in the least dignified occupations.” Ministering to those
“atomized socially, without any civil, social or religious structure,”
absorbed “by the struggle for life” presented the parish clergy
with insuperable problems.88 Nearly all parishioners died without
the last sacraments. By the eve of the civil war in 1936 the failure
of the Church in the working-class parishes of the Madrid suburbs
had reached catastrophic proportions. In the parish of San Ramon
in Vallecas, with 80,000 residents, 10 percent of the terminally ill
died without receiving the sacraments, 20 percent of the marriages
were civil, 40 percent of those about to be married in the parish
did not know the Our Father, and 90 percent of the children
educated in the parochial school “neither confessed nor went to
Communion” once they had left.89 Statistics for other Madrid par¬
ishes were equally grim.
   Historic conditions and organizational weaknesses may have
contributed to dechristianization in certain regions and urban
centers. It is unlikely, however, that these were the decisive causes.
Ecclesiastics in the mid and late nineteenth century insisted that
Spain was resolutely Catholic. Even the pessimistic Antonio Claret
declared: “the people are bad generally speaking; but their evil
is superficial; they still have faith.”90 In fact, the commitment to
Catholicism as an ideology faced a serious challenge with the ap¬
pearance of radical social doctrines. The revolutionary period
between 1868 and 1873 allowed anarchist and socialist ideas to
spread unrestrained, in spite of bitter clerical complaints. It was
not yet completely evident that the new doctrines would emerge
triumphant among industrial workers and the landless of the south,
but it is clear that the Church had not the slightest idea of how
to proceed other than to lament: “the popular classes are deaf to
religion.”91 Indeed, the increasingly individualistic character of
Spanish Catholicism as it developed under liberalism left the Church
particularly unprepared to deal with the collectivist aspirations
that were already exercising great appeal by 1870. In the end, the
Church would pay a heavy price for its tenuous alliance with the
liberal State and the society that government had created.
   The institutional recovery of the mid-nineteenth-century Church
as well as its ability to adapt its devotional and pastoral norms to
the new society allowed the Church to hold its own in the peasant
    Church and Society                                        247




regions of the north and to enlist the support of the more con¬
servative elements of liberalism in the cities. But the Church’s
inability to perceive, much less face, the serious social problems
created in town and country foretold the massive losses that were
not far off. Clerical responses to religious indifference and unbe¬
lief did not differ substantially from those made to the dislocating
effects of the French Revolution and the work of the Cortes of
Cadiz. Ecclesiastical energies were not directed to reforming the
Church from within but to blaming an array of external forces
for attempting to “decatholicize” Spain—the liberal State for hav¬
ing sold Church property, politicians for disregarding the Church’s
theocratic admonitions, and intellectuals for advocating cultural
innovation.
   The Church’s failure to perceive the necessity of changes deeper
than those provided by devotionalism, “popular” religion, and
new forms of religious propaganda would prove costly in the long
run. Between 1843 and 1868 the Church enjoyed a breathing
space created by its accommodation with the liberal State and the
inchoateness of radical social forces. Anticlericalism, although al¬
ready a stock-in-trade of some politicians and intellectuals, had
not yet been translated into the popular violence of a later period.
(The bloody events of 1834 and 1835 were not repeated.) But,
unable to take advantage of the respite, the Church entered the
revolutionary period beginning in 1868 ill prepared to encounter
the most secular and radical of Spain’s nineteenth-century political
and social upheavals.
8    /    From Revolution to Restoration, 1868—1874




   Between the revolution of 1868 and the restoration of the Bour¬
bon monarchy in 1874 the Church faced the most serious threat
to its privileged situation since the 1840’s. Clerical identification
with the discredited moderado State exposed the Church to a
revival of the more extreme ecclesiastical policies associated with
the progresistas and later to a project (under the First Republic) to
separate Church and State for the first time in the nation’s history.
The Church’s difficulties were magnified by the outbreak of an¬
other Carlist revolt in 1872 and by chronic social disorders in town
and country. In spite of organizational disruption and some an¬
ticlerical violence, the Church survived this new onslaught in bet¬
ter condition than ecclesiastical laments of the time would suggest.
Moreover, for the first time some clerics, whether from the con¬
servative or revived liberal Church, began to question the wisdom
of maintaining constitutional ties to the State. In the end, the
establishment of a reformed version of moderado government,
which promised a restoration of some, though by no means all,
ecclesiastical privileges, swept aside clerical reservations. The Church
entered again into an alliance with the civil authorities that would
last, at least in terms of ecclesiastical policy, until the Second Re¬
public disestablished this historic union.



Revolution and the Church, 1868—1869

   At a ceremony held in the royal palace early in 1868 Isabella
II received from the papal nuncio the Golden Rose, traditionally
bestowed by popes on monarchs contributing to the progress of
the faith. Conferral of the papal decoration symbolized the com¬
fortable relationship between Rome and Madrid as the era of the
semiauthoritarian moderado State drew to a close. The glitter of


    248
     From Revolution to Restoration                                 249




ritual, however, could not disguise the growing unpopularity of
the sovereign and her ministers before rising public criticism and
conspiratorial activity. The forces opposing Isabella, a disparate
grouping of Liberal Unionists, progresistas, and Democrats en¬
couraged by Carlists and Republicans, finally coalesced in Sep¬
 tember to launch the military revolt and popular local risings that
sealed the queen’s fate. After the defeat of loyal government troops
at Alcolea on September 28, Isabella abandoned her summer res¬
 idence in the Basque Provinces to take refuge in France; she was
 followed by the architect of her ecclesiastical policy, Antonio Claret.
    The revolution of 1868 was launched by the coalition of liberal
 generals and urban radicals responsible for Spain’s major political
 upheavals since 1834. But the contribution of local revolutionary
juntas to the success of the 1868 rising led the provisional gov¬
ernment, whose dominant personalities were Generals Francisco
 Serrano of the Liberal Union and Juan Prim of the progresistas,
 to accede to demands for a broad democratic program including
 universal suffrage, freedom of the press, and freedom of asso¬
ciation. The troublesome question of who, if anyone, should oc¬
cupy the democratic throne was left aside for the moment, but
 those in power were determined that it should not be given to a
 Bourbon. From its inception the new regime was beset by severe
internal difficulties, which in the end caused its collapse and paved
 the way for proclamation of the First Republic in February 1873.
Tension among the partners in the governmental coalition con¬
stantly threatened its stability. Only the forceful and determined
leadership of Prim, a popular and astute politician, warded off
disintegration. Prim’s assassination on a Madrid street in Decem¬
ber 1870 just days before the arrival of the new king, Amadeo of
Savoy, stimulated the divisive tendencies of the coalition parties
and began the process of political fragmentation that made a
republic possible.
    The regime also had to contend with a deep economic crisis,
made all the worse by the strain of efforts to break the colonial
revolt that had broken out in Cuba in 1868. And from the begin¬
ning the new government faced opposition from the Carlists, con¬
fident at last that their hour was near. Carlist armed agitation
began in isolated fashion in 1869 and developed into a full-scale
revolt in 1872. The Republicans were no less restive. Resentful of
  250                               From Revolution to Restoration




the promonarchist provisional government, they directed steady
fire against it while zealots in Cadiz and Malaga revolted even
before the Cortes elected by universal suffrage met in early 1869.
In addition, the revolution opened a Pandora’s box of social agi¬
tation in the industrial cities and the southern countryside. Unrest
was too sporadic to threaten social revolution, but it contributed
to the climate of instability, sometimes verging on anarchy, that
characterized the democratic monarchy during its short existence.
   The rapidity with which the September revolution was accom¬
plished (only ten days separated the initial rising and the battle
of Alcolea) prevented any large-scale assault on a Church iden¬
tified closely with the Isabelline monarchy. But the action of local
revolutionary juntas showed that the Church was not forgotten.
The Jesuits, perennial first victims of revolution, were ousted from
their residences in several towns. In Oviedo the junta closed the
diocesan seminary; in Vich the authorities expelled priests be¬
longing to an order founded by the now vilified Claret. Local
measures against the Church, however, varied according to the
strength of urban radicalism. The junta of Seville, one of the most
extreme, closed six of the city’s churches and assigned some to
revolutionary groups for political purposes. The sight of the re¬
publican flag hanging from the high altar of the church of the
Minims left the local clergy fuming. But in other cities—Carta¬
gena, Murcia, and Lorca, for example—the juntas acted with mod¬
eration toward the Church.
    The autumn of 1868 also saw the resurgence of the popular
anticlericalism previously held in check by the moderado State.
Although the Catholic press dwelt on “sacrileges and attacks”
directed against the Church in the weeks following the revolution,
the incidents reported did not reveal massive violence against
either the clergy or ecclesiastical buildings. Occasional acts of vio¬
lence did occur, such as the assassination of a Claretian priest in
La Selva in Tarragona early in October, but this was an isolated
event. More common were flamboyant manifestations of defiance
designed to provoke clerical anger. In some towns revolutionaries
fired their guns at religious statues; in others groups of radicals
invaded church services and intimidated the faithful by shouting
political slogans. In Salamanca a small band wearing the red hats
of revolution entered a church and scandalized those present by
     From Revolution to Restoration                               251




smoking cigars and proclaiming “vivas” to liberty.1 Although not
a serious threat, popular anticlericalism, always emotional and
easy to arouse, showed that the issue of the Church could still
provoke a reaction among the urban lower classes.
   The first measures taken by the provisional government against
the Church in October 1868 seemed familiar manifestations of
the vigorous regalism associated with the radical elements of lib¬
eralism since 1820. Successive decrees suppressed religious com¬
munities introduced since 1837, forbade the legally authorized
orders from owning property, and announced a reduction in the
number of convents by one-half save those belonging to the Sisters
of Charity and other congregations engaged in teaching and hos¬
pital work. As usual the Jesuits received special treatment. A de¬
cree of October 12 ordered them to leave their residences within
three days and expropriated their wealth for the benefit of the
State. The government declared that it was acting to punish the
Church for its intimate ties with the Isabelline monarchy. Religious
communities, a decree asserted, “formed an integral and principal
 part of the shameful and oppressive regime which the nation has
just overthrown with so much glory.” It was, therefore, “necessary
and urgent” to deal with them “to consolidate . . . the revolution
and construct new institutions.”2 The reaction of the hierarchy to
these attacks was surprisingly moderate, although some prelates,
notably Bishop Monescillo of Jaen, complained of “a cabinet filled
with a malign fever and suspicious of the Church.” But Manuel
Garcia Gil, archbishop of Zaragoza, considered events with more
equanimity and urged his clergy not to become disturbed or dis¬
couraged. He counseled his priests to avoid political activity, be¬
cause it “contributed nothing to piety,” and to devote their attention
“to conciliate, attract, win and save souls.”3
   The provisional government faced the task of elaborating a
long-term ecclesiastical policy. Opinion on what ought to be done
with the Church varied among and within the parties of the ruling
coalition. Republican demands for an outright separation of Church
and State received little support. The coalition partners continued
to adhere to the liberal tradition that the State should maintain
official ties with the Church, but they also nourished the hope
that the ecclesiastical establishment could be persuaded to aban¬
don its theocratic preoccupations and its willingness to support
  252                                 From Revolution to Restoration




semiauthoritarian governments disposed to uphold its privileges.
The Church, said Eugenio Montero Rios, a devout Catholic and,
as minister of grace and justice in 1870, the author of a plan of
ecclesiastical reform, might have a brilliant future but this would
depend “on the acceptance on its part of the great principles and
political rights which form the patrimony of free peoples.”4
    The patrimony to which the Church was expected to subscribe
was considerably larger than the one it attacked so vehemently in
1854. On October 25 the provisional government issued a man¬
ifesto to the nation affirming rights, such as freedom of the press
and association, unpalatable to the ecclesiastical elite. But the gov¬
ernment struck a harsher blow by declaring its intention to intro¬
duce religious liberty. Although the manifesto asserted that the
proposal would improve the Church by encouraging it to attend
to its pastoral responsibilities, it left no doubt that the project arose
from “a protest against the theocratic spirit introduced with such
insidious persistence in the essence of our institutions by the pre¬
vious regime.”5 Acceptance of the principle of religious liberty
represented a significant departure from the identification of po¬
litical reform with the maintenance of “Catholic unity” since the
Cortes of Cadiz a half-century before.
    The willingness of the ruling coalition to abandon a basic tenet
of Spanish liberalism arose primarily from the leftward drift of
the progresista party since the revolution of 1854. The progre-
sistas, who had then turned aside proposals for religious liberty,
took a harder line on the issue of the Church, because they re¬
sented its support for the semidictatorial moderado State of the
1860’s and because they feared the danger on the left from the
Democrat and Republican parties, both committed to the creation
of a purely secular State. The conversion of the great progresista
parliamentarian Salustiano de Olozaga to the cause of religious
liberty after having opposed it in 1854, ensured its acceptance.
The October manifesto proposed a second change certain to arouse
clerical opposition: “freedom of education is another of the cardinal
reforms which the revolution has demanded” to counter “the un¬
bridled and blind reaction against spontaneous manifestations of
human understanding” taking place before 1868.
    Clerical protests against the October manifesto soon appeared
in print, although the intensity of episcopal sentiment was not
     From Revolution to Restoration                              253




uniform. Miguel Garcia Cuesta, the archbishop of Santiago, re¬
stated in restrained language the traditional case against religious
liberty while accepting the use of universal suffrage in the coming
elections and declaring that he did not intend “to condemn any
form of government.”6 Bishop Lagiiera of Osma, a prelate known
for his Carlist sympathies, bred a rhetorical shot reminiscent of
an earlier era when he accused the provisional government of
wishing “to undermine the unity of religion by introducing false
religions and laying the foundations of temples which will not be
dedicated to the true God.” Manuel Garcia Gil of Zaragoza showed
the same common sense he had displayed in an earlier pastoral
letter. Although he lamented the government’s actions, he saw no
point in levying accusations against the authorities. Deprived of
the support of the State, the Church must depend on its own
inner resources to survive. The Church “lives and will live its own
life . . . although all governments abandon it.” He urged his clergy
to concentrate their efforts on evangelization to remedy “the great
ignorance of religion [existing] among a great part of the popu¬
lation.”
   The Church’s place in the new order would not be determined
by episcopal protests to the authorities. On December 6 the pro¬
visional government called elections in mid-January to choose
deputies for a Constituent Cortes. It was symbolic of the changes
that had taken place since 1843 that defense of the pre-1868
ecclesiastical settlement fell primarily to laymen. In December a
group of Catholic notables linked to the conservative moderados
and the Carlists established the Association of Catholics in Spain
“to propagate and defend the doctrines, institutions and social
influence of the Church, particularly its liberty and the Catholic
unity of Spain . . . through peaceful means and under the pro¬
tection of the law.”7 The association, modeled on similar bodies
in Belgium and Germany, won episcopal and papal approval and
spread to twenty-eight cities, including Barcelona, Seville, Segovia,
Santiago, Salamanca, and Palma de Mallorca. Local associations
were invariably dominated by men of substance holding deeply
conservative political views. In Palma, for example, a wealthy land-
owner, Fausto Morell, served as president; other notables, such
as merchants, manufacturers, and landowners, filled the remain¬
ing offices.
  254                              From Revolution to Restoration




    From the beginning the association declared that it had no other
purpose than to defend the interests of the Church. This theo¬
retical neutrality, although regarded as desirable by the pope and
the bishops, really arose from the divisions within the organization
among moderados, the more extreme neocatholics, and the Carl-
ists, who wished “to see Charles VII sit on the throne of his ances¬
tors.”8 At a meeting in early January the junta superior of the
association prudently declared that it would not propose candi¬
dates for the coming elections. Local associations, however, did
not always follow these instructions. Over a thousand members
filled a hall in Toledo and nominated Antolin Monescillo, bishop
of Jaen, the fierce neocatholic Candido Nocedal, and the conde
de Cedillo to stand for the province. Where the directives of the
association were observed, ad hoc Catholic-Monarchist associa¬
tions were formed to present candidates. The avowedly political
character of the latter, as well as the obvious hostility of the As¬
sociation of Catholics to the revolutionary government, soon led
to clashes with supporters of the regime. In Tortosa a crowd of
Liberal Unionists and progresistas surrounded a meeting of
Catholic-Monarchist electors and forced them to desist from nomi¬
nating candidates; conservative defenders of the Church awoke
in the morning to find gallows painted on their doors.9
    Incidents between defenders of the ecclesiastical status quo and
supporters of the government multiplied with the approach of
the elections. The shouts and whistles of proregime sympathizers
disrupted a Catholic-Monarchist meeting in Barcelona; a group
of liberals armed with sticks invaded a similar meeting in Toledo.
To the cries of “Long live liberty!” and “Long live Charles VII!”
the two bands waged a pitched battle in the hall. During the days
set aside for the elections further clashes took place. In Palencia
Catholic opponents of the regime ran a gauntlet of progresistas
and Republicans uttering threats and shouting “neos, priests and
sacristans do not have voting rights” before they could reach the
polling station.10 Harassment of Catholic-Monarchist candidates
and voters was bitterly attacked by the Catholic press, but it con¬
tributed little to the overwhelming victory of the government par¬
ties. Neither the Association of Catholics nor the ad hoc Catholic-
Monarchist groups possessed the organization and resources that
     From Revolution to Restoration                             255




would have allowed them to struggle on equal terms with their
opponents.
   The electoral results further inflamed relations between the
government and defenders of the pre-1868 Church. The junta
superior of the Association of Catholics issued an intemperate
statement declaring its intention “to struggle in hand to hand
combat against the impious revolution” and accusing advocates of
religious liberty of being “renegades” who were not truly Span¬
ish.11 A more violent reaction took place in Burgos on January
25. A Carlist mob invaded the cathedral cloister and assassinated
the provincial governor to the cry of “Long live religion and
Charles VII!” After stabbing the governor innumerable times, the
crowd dragged the bloody and half-naked body down the church
steps and abandoned it in the cathedral square. The authorities
arrested the dean and several other canons on suspicion of com¬
plicity, although they were later released for lack of evidence.
News of the Burgos assassination set off anticlerical demonstra¬
tions. In Madrid a crowd proclaiming “priests have murdered the
governor of Burgos,” rushed to the residence of the papal nuncio
and toppled the pontifical crest on its facade, and the government
press attacked the Church with particular ferocity. The brutal
violence of the event in Burgos, however, checked the rising pas¬
sions of proclerical forces. The Catholic press, taken aback by the
savagery of the murder, condemned it, and the archbishop of
Burgos issued an emotional appeal for calm and respect for the
authorities.12


Church, State, and Secularization, 1869-1873

    With the opening of the Cortes on February 11, 1869, public
attention shifted to parliamentary discussion of a new constitution.
The poor electoral showing of advocates of the 1851 ecclesiastical
settlement left the resolution of the Church question in the hands
of the government parties, faced by a vigorous Republican op¬
position. Defense of clerical interests fell to three churchmen who
had won election: the polemical bishop of Jaen, Antolin Mones-
cillo; the more moderate archbishop of Santiago, Miguel Garcia
Cuesta; and an intransigent canon of Vitoria, Vicente de Man-
  256                               From Revolution to Restoration




terola. The ecclesiastical deputies presented their case as best they
could in a chamber that was not about to heed their arguments
in any case. The tone of debate was remarkably civil; there were
few savage anticlerical onslaughts save for the speech of the Re¬
publican deputy Suner y Capdevila, who shocked the Cortes and
provoked services of reparation in the churches by calling the
doctrine of the Trinity nothing more than a “gabble.”
   From the beginning the Republicans pressed for the formula
“a free Church in a free State,” meaning the separation of the
civil and ecclesiastical orders, the end of government financing of
the Church, and the corresponding termination of the State’s
traditional regalian rights. Although the Republican leaders,
Francisco Pi y Margall and Emilio Castelar, argued forcefully for
the separation of Church and State, the coalition parties were not
yet ready to break with liberal tradition. After considerable dis¬
cussion they agreed on a constitutional provision similar to that
in the draft constitution of 1856. The text avoided an explicit
statement of the confessionality of the State but committed the
government to pay clerical salaries and provide for the mainte¬
nance of churches.13
   With the preservation of its official relationship with the State,
the Church had little cause for complaint. Indeed, it fared better
than might have been expected in the days following the Septem¬
ber revolution. But this modest gain was forgotten in the midst
of the emotional reaction aroused by parliamentary discussion of
the principle of religious liberty. In spite of the insignificant size
of Spain’s Protestant minority, churchmen saw the prospect of
toleration as certain to destroy Catholicism, endanger society, cor¬
rupt families, and lead to a host of other ills. Defenders of the
ecclesiastical status quo were unable to organize satisfactorily to
contest the elections, but they galvanized themselves to prevent
the Cortes from accepting religious liberty. The Association of
Catholics launched a massive petition campaign on the grounds
that deputies would be moved “not by faith, religion nor by the
fear of God but only by the fear of public opinion.”14 The faithful
were urged to sign because the petition deliberately did not refer
to “a republic or a monarchy, nor to this or that person; it speaks
only of religion.” By divorcing the lobbying effort from the div¬
isive issue of the Carlist pretender, the association assured that its
     From Revolution to Restoration                               257




campaign would appeal to the different currents of Catholic opin¬
ion united only by their commitment to uphold the Church’s priv¬
ileged situation. The success of the petition (2,837,144 signatures)
in the face of considerable opposition testified to the strength of
 proclerical forces in certain regions. In one Old Castilian town
 municipal councillors adhering to the government parties pri¬
vately threatened members of the local Association of Catholics
but dared not ban the gathering of signatures lest “they appear
as Jews to the people.”15
    The petition, suitably bound and tied with ribbons, was osten¬
 tatiously carried to the Cortes in carriages, but it failed to affect
 the outcome of the parliamentary debate. Republican support for
 the constitutional provision establishing toleration enlarged the
already substantial support for the measure among the coalition
 partners. Castelar’s emotional and eloquent speech on April 12
 in defense of religious liberty (“Great is the religion of power, but
 the religion of love is greater; great is the religion of implacable
justice, but the religion of merciful pardon is greater”) evoked
 thunderous applause from the chamber, which overwhelmingly
approved the constitutional text on May 5.16
    Parliamentary action in favor of toleration was a foregone con¬
clusion, but news of the final vote provoked an outpouring of
 resentment among ecclesiastics and defenders of religious unity.
The pro-Carlist, Catholic newspaper El Pensamiento Espanol, made
 the announcement on a front page bordered in black; bishops
ordered services of atonement in the churches. These ceremonies
 (over a thousand were conducted by mid-June) became militant
testimonies to faith and a form of protest against the government.
At a service attended by hundreds of Madrid’s notables in the
church of the Carmen, the patriarch of the Indies asked the con¬
gregation to take an oath: “Do you swear by God and these Holy
Gospels to believe, observe and sustain the profession of faith
which you have heard?” The congregation replied with “a unan¬
imous cry, ‘Yes, yes, until death!’ ”17 The authorities regarded
these services as provocations; in some cities they prevented them
from being held. In Madrid they ordered the arrest of a noted
preacher whose fiery sermons led aroused congregations to cry:
“Let the heretics die who voted for the liberty of cults!”18 Religious
ceremonies of reparation against toleration led inevitably to coun-
  258                              From Revolution to Restoration




terdemonstrations by supporters of the government; in Oviedo
youths invaded a procession and shouted “indecent” slogans at
the bishop, whom they struck before being restrained.
   The introduction of religious toleration led to a marked dete¬
rioration in relations between the civil and ecclesiastical authori¬
ties. In Soria the governor could not find a single priest to sing a
Te Deum upon the proclamation of the constitution. A govern¬
ment order in 1870 commanding bishops and priests to take an
oath of loyalty to the constitution met a hostile reception. The
parish clergy of Barcelona refused the oath on the grounds that
they could not give their “adherence to the undermining of our
Church”; only 24 of the 189 parish priests of the diocese of Al-
meria swore the oath, although eleven of the cathedral’s thirty-
eight canons did so.19
   The higher proportion of capitular clergy supporting the con¬
stitution arose from the modest revival of the liberal Church after
three decades of silence. Priests openly favoring the government
were few in number, perhaps only 2,000 of the kingdom’s more
than 40,000 clergy.20 They included at least one bishop, Andres
Rosales of Almeria, who refused to imitate many of his episcopal
colleagues in their hostility toward the constitutional oath. In a
pastoral letter Rosales justified his moderation by declaring that
he did not wish “to throw more wood on the fires of discord
burning in this unfortunate country.” He criticized his episcopal
brethren for encouraging “resentment and great confusion” by
refusing to take the oath. The duty of the bishops, he maintained,
did not involve “taking on the very grave responsibility of fo¬
menting the disobedience of their subjects toward the existing
powers.”21 Most of the bishops, however, remained firm in their
rejection of the constitutional oath.22
   The majority of liberal priests were drawn from the ranks of
clergy in cathedral chapters and parishes. Through their journal,
appropriately named The Harmony of Catholicism and Liberty (La
Armonia), they defended the Cortes for its action in favor of re¬
ligious liberty: “the Spanish Cortes have not committed a her¬
esy . . . but have rather consecrated an eminently Christian
principle”; they argued that the defense of Catholic Spain could
be achieved only if the clergy would “confirm our brothers in faith
through instruction and example.”23 By defending toleration as a
     From Revolution to Restoration                                259




positive good and endorsing democratic institutions, liberal priests
anticipated the stand taken by progressive groups within the Span¬
ish Church nearly a century later following the Second Vatican
Council.
   The prospect of reestablishing the liberal Church as an effective
force was remote. Clerics taking the oath to the constitution were
reviled by their colleagues. Two canons in Cordoba (where the
chapter refused to celebrate an anniversary Mass for the dead of
the battle of Alcolea) were totally ostracized by their fellows and
subjected to sarcastic comments even from the choirboys. But the
greatest obstacle to reform from within the Church was the in¬
difference of the government. With a few exceptions, the State
did not attempt to repeat the tactic of forcing appointment of
bishops and canons sympathetic to its aims, nor did it listen to the
pleas of liberal priests for improvements in the career opportun¬
ities and financial situation of the lower clergy. Parish priests,
declared La Armonia, hoped for “a more open horizon”—by which
it meant access to canonries, bishoprics, and other positions still
monopolized by a small elite—lest their “knowledge be buried in
a small village and their expectations of life murdered.”24 But the
government paid no heed. A reform project presented by the
minister of grace and justice, Montero Rios, in March 1870 passed
over the institutional discrimination still as much a part of the
Church as during the eighteenth century. Moreover, the govern¬
ment, by reducing the budget for culto y clero and by falling into
arrears in its payments to the lower clergy, repeated the mistake
of the 1830’s and early 1840’s by alienating the one group within
the Church that might have become a natural ally.
    No one within the Church was more disillusioned than the
liberal clergy. The State, they held, was in a position “to fulfill the
promises which it had made over fifty years ago with priests
who . . . continued being loyal to the flag of progress.” But with
what result? “Has the importance of cathedral chapters been re¬
duced?” “Has [the State] attempted to increase their [the clergy’s]
salaries?” To these questions posed by La Armonia came the reply:
the government has not responded “in any way to the necessities
of this suffering and working clergy.”25
    Resentment among conservative priests unhappy with the di¬
rection of the government grew with the introduction of an ex-
  260                              From Revolution to Restoration




tensive body of secularizing legislation. In this respect post-1868
governments went beyond the initiatives of previous revolutionary
regimes. Abolition of the ecclesiastical fuero (the right of priests
to be tried in Church rather than state courts) and creation of
civil registers to record births, deaths, and marriages—a function
previously exercised by the clergy—irritated ecclesiastical opinion.
But these measures were pinpricks compared to 1870 legislation
establishing civil marriage and assigning the administration of
cemeteries to the State. Although churchmen reproached the na¬
tional government for replacing canonical marriage as the only
legal form with “public concubinage,” the initiative for breaking
the Church’s monopoly frequently came from municipalities.26
Already in the autumn of 1869 radical town councils were allowing
civil marriages; in a village of Almeria, for example, a couple knelt
before the mayor and received his “benediction” according to an
enraged Catholic press.
   The spread of civil marriage from 1870 onward and the attempt
of the authorities to control cemeteries provoked attacks from the
hierarchy and resistance from the parish clergy, as incidents mul¬
tiplied that added a new dimension to popular anticlericalism.
Priests refused to allow those married civilly to stand as godparents
at baptisms or to receive Christian burial. The clerical argument
that civil marriage removed those who had entered it from the
ranks of the faithful was not appreciated in small towns and vil¬
lages where baptisms and funerals were ritualistic rites of passage
for the entire community. In one town after the cura refused to
baptize a child because the godparents had been married civilly,
an indignant crowd invaded the parish house and threatened to
murder the priest if he did not carry out the ceremony. In another
town a cleric would not baptize a child whose parents declared
they wished General Prim to be the godfather. In Huelva a parish
priest provoked controversy by declaring that “he could not admit
into his church the body of a man who during his life never
entered it” and who had married civilly. An angry family appealed
to the municipal authorities, who seized the keys to the cemetery
and then “took the body with great ceremony and solemnity”
through the streets to the burial place.27 The multiplication of
such conflicts embittered the clergy against the regime and led to
     From Revolution to Restoration                               261




increased tension between priests and residents of local commu¬
nities.
   Religious liberty and the secularizing tendencies of the govern¬
ment created a climate of ecclesiastical opinion hostile to a work¬
able accommodation with the State. The Constitution of 1869 had
left the task of elaborating the specific terms of the relationship
between the civil and ecclesiastical orders to the ordinary parlia¬
mentary process. A reform project presented to the Cortes in
March 1870 by the minister of grace and justice, Montero Rios,
offered the Church an arrangement not unreasonable given the
political circumstances. In return for modest internal reforms,
such as parish participation in the nomination of curas and the
integration of the territory of the old military orders into existing
dioceses, the State offered to abandon its traditional right to in¬
tervene in the Church’s internal affairs except for the right of
patronage over appointments financed by the government. The
project provided for the ownership of property by the Church
subject to expropriation only in cases of “public utility” through
the courts and with proper indemnization. It also offered an an¬
nual budget of approximately 130 million reales for clerical sal¬
aries and church maintenance. Although these terms were not
ideal from an ecclesiastical point of view (the budget of cultoy clero
was 50 million reales less than in 1868), they partially satisfied
clerical ambitions for freedom from government interference and
preserved the State’s commitment to finance the Church, albeit
in reduced form. The bishops, however, objected to the proposals.
Cardinal Garcia Cuesta of Santiago complained of the financial
terms and the planned participation of parishioners in the selec¬
tion of their priests; the bishop of Osma called the provisions
“execrable . . . pernicious and lamentable.”28 The scheme was also
opposed by the Republicans and the more radical elements of the
governmental coalition, and it came to nothing.
   Tension affecting relations between Church and State after the
revolution of 1868 did not lead to the nearly complete break that
had occurred during the 1830’s and early 1840’s. With the papacy
embroiled in the final stages of its struggle with the kingdom of
Italy and in the work of the First Vatican Council, there was little
Pius IX could do to help the Spanish Church. Relations between
  262                               From Revolution to Restoration




Rome and Madrid were not easy, but they at least survived at a
minimal level.29 Moreover, it was far from clear to the ecclesiastical
leadership what course should be taken to reassert the Church’s
position. By nature cautious, the hierarchy avoided committing
itself to the Carlist cause after sporadic outbreaks of rebellion in
1869. A majority of the bishops responded favorably to a gov¬
ernment order of March 1869 requiring them to take action against
priests who were “preaching a war without truce” against the
State.30 The minister of grace and justice, Manuel Ruiz Zorilla, a
radical progresista known for his anticlerical views, even con¬
gratulated the prelates who “had responded worthily and satis¬
factorily” to the State’s order, although he initiated judicial
proceedings against Garcia Cuesta of Santiago and two openly
Carlist bishops, Caixal of Urgel and Lagiiera of Osma, for their
defiant replies.31 Given the extreme division of opinion among
Catholics willing to defend the pre-1868 status of the Church on
the issue of the Carlist pretender, the hierarchy could not afford
to compromise its position by supporting Charles VII. The gov¬
ernment continued to support the Church financially, although
it fell into arrears paying the clergy, and it seemed the only force
capable of restraining the outbreaks of disorder that appeared to
threaten social revolution.
    During the final year and a half of the democratic monarchy
(July 1871-February 1873), relations between the civil and eccle¬
siastical authorities became more difficult. With the collapse of
the governmental coalition in the summer of 1871, power alter¬
nated between the progresista faction headed by Ruiz Zorilla and
that led by Praxedes Sagasta. In general, progresista ministries
adopted a harsher attitude on ecclesiastical resistance than had
previous governments. In January 1872 the State attempted to
break clerical hostility toward civil marriage by declaring that chil¬
dren born to couples married only in a religious ceremony would
be regarded as legally illegitimate; in March the minister of grace
and justice announced the reimposition of the exequatur, the right
of the State to approve all papal bulls and briefs before their
publication in Spain. And the transformation of what had been
an ineffective Carlist revolt into dangerous rebellion in April 1872
increased government suspicions against the clergy in mountain¬
ous zones of the Basque Provinces, Navarra, and Catalonia.
     From Revolution to Restoration                               263




   The Church expected little from the government. “Let us not
entertain illusions,” said a clerical journal, “the civil power is no
longer Catholic.”32 Ecclesiastical rhetoric notwithstanding, the State
had not lost its Catholic character. The Supreme Court, for ex¬
ample, upheld a judgment imposing a two-and-one-half-year prison
sentence on a godfather for shouting: “In the name of the Father,
Son, Holy Spirit and the Federal Republic,” as a priest attempted
to pronounce the customary words of the baptismal ritual.33 And
amicable relations between the Church and local officials were
sometimes possible. Bishop Joaquin Lluch of Salamanca con¬
ducted the affairs of his diocese so skillfully that not a single
religious building was closed during the stormy years of revolu¬
tion.34 Nor did the difficult relationship between Church and State
prevent a pilgrimage in October 1872 to the shrine of Our Lady
of the Pillar in Zaragoza attended by more than 60,000. The old
association of liberalism with the Church survived, though in bat¬
tered form.


The Republic and the Church, 1873—1874

    The disintegration of the coalition of 1868, the unpopularity
of King Amadeo, the failure to break the Carlist rebellion, as well
as social and economic difficulties combined to end the democratic
monarchy. In 1872 ministry succeeded ministry as fragmentation
of the parties made stable government impossible. By February
1873 the king, recognizing that he was personally unpopular and
had lost the confidence of the politicians, decided to abdicate. On
February 11 he did so, leaving the Cortes responsible for deciding
any change in the form of the State. The deputies, having tried
one constitutional experiment and lacking enthusiasm for a Bour¬
bon restoration, turned to a republic as the only solution to their
dilemma.
    Proclamation of the First Republic on February 11 was greeted
with an indifferent shrug by much of the clergy and the Catholic
press. Even the prospect of separating Church and State evoked
little more than ritualistic protests. “How can anyone speak of
separation?” asked a clerical periodical, when “it is already an
accomplished fact.”35 The bishops contemplated the republic with
a suspicious neutrality best expressed by Archbishop Monzon Martin
  264                               From Revolution to Restoration




of Granada: “the Church does not reject in principle any of the
known forms of government including the republican,” although
he added the proviso, as long as “the laws of God and the Church”
are respected.36 Among some defenders of the old ecclesiastical
order, there was a curious uncertainty over the meaning of the
republic. In Medina Sidonia, for example, a proclerical city coun¬
cil, upon receiving the news sent “an attentive letter” to the clergy
of the town inviting them “to the proclamation of the Catholic,
Roman and Apostolic Republic.”37
    Successive republican ministries, although committed to the
separation of Church and State, felt no scruples about using the
same regalist tools employed by preceding governments in their
relations with the ecclesiastical authorities. The unilateral abolition
of the medieval military orders with their network of parishes
outside the control of local bishops provoked an early conflict with
the Church. An order of the ministry of grace and justice on May
23 instructing provincial governors to assess the value of churches
led to widespread clerical protests. Although the State claimed
the measure was designed only to provide information necessary
for financial negotiations with the Church, this was insufficient to
calm a rising wave of extraordinary rumors: that the government
intended to sell the churches in a new disamortization; that Cath¬
olics would be forced to ransom their parish churches or else see
them demolished; that the State intended to use the churches as
collateral for a loan to be floated in Germany.38
    In spite of the tension produced by these conflicts, the Church
was less central to republican concerns than to those of previous
governments. Republicans believed that they had a simple and
direct solution at hand, the separation of Church and State. And
they had enough troubles of their own to be unduly preoccupied
by the ecclesiastical question. Severe internal disagreements on
the exact nature of the republic’s constitutional structure (how
federal should it be?) prevented the formation of stable ministries.
In less than a year the republic had four presidents. The outbreak
of a revolt in the summer of 1873 designed to establish virtually
independent republican city-states (cantons) and a succession of
Carlist military victories made surviving more important to the
central government than resolving the problem of the Church.
    The Church and the republic shared an uneasy common ground
     From Revolution to Restoration                              265




of self-interest before the pressures for autonomy generated by
extremist partisans of federalism, who were also regarded as rabid
anticlericals, although not always with justification. The federal
principle won general acceptance from Spanish Republicans, but
the question of how it was to be applied provoked disagreement.39
Local politicians, drawn generally from the ranks of the lesser
urban bourgeoisie, wished a degree of independence that would
have reduced the national government to a figurehead. Even be¬
fore the outbreak of the cantonalist revolt in July 1873, church¬
men contemplated the actions of certain municipalities and signs
of republican anticlericalism with deep unease. In Seville youths
dropped red dye into the holy water fonts of the churches so the
faithful would emerge with brows tinted the color of revolution;
in Cadiz a musical band irritated Catholic opinion by striking up
the march of Garibaldi outside a chapel where a solemn benedic¬
tion was taking place. The republican municipality of Cadiz, one
of the most anticlerical, ordered the demolition of the Candelaria
convent to provide work for the unemployed and changed tra¬
ditional religious street names to those of the republican litany—
Voltaire, Fourier, Garibaldi, Mazzini, Juarez, and Lincoln.40
   As long as the apostle of federalism Francisco Pi y Margall
continued as president of the republic, the restless forces of local
autonomy were partially restrained. But Pi’s departure from office
in mid-July because of the factionalization of republican politics
was followed by declarations of virtual independence by cities and
towns from Salamanca to Cadiz. The emergence of the cantons
threatened the already weak authority of the central government,
under the presidency of Nicolas Salmeron, and led to outbursts
of anticlericalism in Cadiz, Malaga, Sanlucar de Barrameda, Jerez,
and Cordoba. In Cadiz the cantonal government, formed into a
committee of public safety in imitation of the French Revolution,
prohibited the teaching of religion in the schools in favor of “uni¬
versal morality,” abolished religious orders in the city “since cel¬
ibacy is a state contrary to nature,” proclaimed the immediate
separation of Church and State, and took possession of churches
and parish archives.41 Gold and silver objects from the churches,
particularly the great monstrance of the cathedral, were put up
for sale at public auction. At Sanlucar the revolutionaries expelled
the Piarists and closed parish churches; in Malaga the canton
  266                               From Revolution to Restoration




suppressed convents and ordered the bishop to vacate his palace.
    News of these events was reported with horror by a Catholic
press that saw the cantonal movement as nothing less than irre¬
ligious Jacobinism bent on the destruction of the Church. In fact,
anticlericalism was not synonymous with cantonalism. In Sala¬
manca the authorities maintained good relations with the Church;
in Cartagena, the canton to survive longest, priests were able to
walk the streets in clerical dress even during the siege of the city
maintained by the central government. In Granada the committee
of public safety released the archbishop from jail, where he had
been placed by an overzealous militiaman, with effusive apolo¬
gies.42 Even in the radical cantons there was little direct physical
violence against the clergy.43 The central government had no sym¬
pathy for the anticlerical excesses of some cantons, perhaps be¬
cause it wished to avoid giving Carlism another propaganda stick
with which to beat the regime. The minister of grace and justice
during the presidency of Pi y Margall assured the bishop of Ma¬
laga: “the government of the Republic is completely divorced from
the measures taken by the municipality; it understands and la¬
ments the trouble to which you have been put.”44
    If Church and State agreed on the necessity of ending the
cantonalist rebellion, they concurred no less in their hostility to¬
ward the social disorders sweeping the southern countryside. The
seizure and distribution of land by a dispossessed peasantry seemed
to herald the terrible day of revolution so long predicted by
churchmen and just as feared by republican politicians in Madrid.
With the rising of the textile workers of Alcoy on July 9, clerical
fears of impending disaster deepened.45 The Catholic press was
filled with tales of violence in Alcoy and what was seen as the
wanton seizure of property by peasants in the southern provinces.
Although there was a dose of anticlericalism present in the dis¬
turbances, they were not directed primarily against the Church.
It possessed little agricultural property and the economic situation
of the clergy, many of whom had not received salaries in three
years, made the Church less attractive as an object of popular
resentment than the monasteries had been during the 1830’s.
    Agitation focused more on the liberal bourgeoisie, who had
profited from the acquisition of ecclesiastical lands. In at least one
town, Morera in Badajoz, peasants seizing property from land-
     From Revolution to Restoration                                267




owners insisted that the parish priest bless the redistribution in a
formal ceremony. Even in Alcoy, where revolutionaries inspired
by the First International put the houses of prominent residents
to the torch and assassinated others, the parish priest of Santa
Maria, Manuel Benlloch, remained in the city at the height of the
disturbances assisting the victims without ever being troubled.46
 In the end there was no danger that either the cantonalist revolt
or social unrest would lead to revolution. But the Church wel¬
comed the suppression of both by the central government. This
did not mean reconciliation with the republic, but churchmen
were not ungrateful for its protection of the existing social order.
    The most serious physical attacks on the Church during 1873
 did not take place in Andalusia and the Levante, where social and
 political revolution threatened, but in the battle zones of the north.
 Carlist military victories in the Basque Provinces, Navarra, and
 Catalonia provoked the same violent reaction among troops and
 supporters of the government that had characterized the war of
 the 1830’s. The second great Carlist rebellion, feeding on peasant
 resentment at the centralizing policies of successive governments
 in Madrid and on the disgust created by the religious legislation
 of the democratic monarchy, broke out in 1872 under the personal
 direction of the young and dashing pretender Charles VII. De¬
 fense of religion again formed one of the cornerstones of Carlist
 propaganda. The pretender’s brother told the troops under his
 command: “in you is represented the glorious traditions of Cath¬
 olic Spain,” when “the religion of our fathers is oppressed.”47
 Carlist soldiers, often without regular uniforms, entered battle
 with a badge of the Sacred Heart on their chests bearing the words:
 “Halt enemy, the Heart of Jesus is with me.”48
    The identification of Carlism with militant Catholicism won the
 revolt support among the parish clergy of the north. Several curas
joined the rebellion at its beginning. The most feared, Manuel de
 Santa Cruz, the parish priest of Hernialde, gained an unfavorable
 reputation even among his compatriots with his guerrilla exploits
and cold-blooded tactics. Although assiduous in the daily reading
of his breviary, Santa Cruz felt no scruples at having twenty pris¬
oners shot without benefit of confession.49 Only a minority of the
clergy, of course, took arms, but priests in the north sympathized
with the rebellion and contributed what they could to its success.
  268                              From Revolution to Restoration




When Charles VII visited the sacred town of the Basques, Guer¬
nica, in August 1873, he was received by the local clergy in cere¬
monial splendor and led into the church for the singing of a Te
Deum; a well-known Capuchin preacher, Esteban de Adoain, in¬
terrupted the mission he was giving in Lastaola to exhort Carlist
troops demoralized by a surprise attack.50
   The hierarchy maintained its usual caution before the rebellion.
Some bishops, such as Landeira of Cartagena, hoped for the triumph
of Charles VII, but few lent the rising active support save for
Caixal of Urgel, who became chaplain general to the pretender’s
armies. Events would reveal the prudence of episcopal circum¬
spection. The second rebellion stood little more chance of success
than the first, and for similar reasons. Although Carlist outbreaks
occurred in other regions—near Cuenca, Orihuela, in the south¬
ern hills, and in Galicia—the movement rested still on the narrow
base of the northern peasant provinces, which had a strong sense
of grievance against Madrid. It was no more successful in breaking
the hold of the central government over the cities than four dec¬
ades before. It suffered, too, from serious internal divisions, in¬
cluding the opposition of a significant body of Carlist opinion to
armed insurrection itself.
   Successive Carlist victories in the spring and summer of 1873
exasperated opponents of an absolutist restoration and deepened
hostility toward the clergy in regions where military operations
were being carried on. At Elgueta in Guipuzcoa the authorities
arrested all the town’s parish priests who were suspected of con¬
spiring with the enemy.51 Anticlerical passions rose most fiercely
in Catalonia because of the character of the war there. The Carlists
failed to take the large cities—Barcelona, Tarragona, Gerona—
but they operated with considerable success in the countryside
and against the smaller valley towns of the interior from bases in
the Catalan hills.52 Both sides moved over the same terrain and
took, lost, and recaptured towns in an atmosphere conducive to
mutual reprisals.
   Political conflict within anti-Carlist ranks added more fuel to
the fires of popular resentment against the clergy. Extremist fed¬
eral Republicans and revolutionaries of the First International
challenged the authority of the national government in Barcelona
and seemed on the verge of establishing an independent canton
     From Revolution to Restoration                             269




with a distinctly radical character. During a series of disturbances
between March and July, the partisans of revolution invaded re¬
ligious services shouting anticlerical slogans and occupied some
churches.53 A number of priests abandoned their parishes and
sought protection on ships lying in the city’s harbor. The Catholic
press believed that the disorders would lead to even worse ex¬
cesses, assassinations, church burnings, and the like, but forces
loyal to the national government were able to maintain control of
the situation and prevent widespread physical attacks on the clergy
and on ecclesiastical buildings. There was no repetition of the
bloody events of 1835.
   At Reus the republican authorities acted with similar vigor and
took possession of the town’s churches upon hearing that a mob
was about to seize them. At Graus a revolutionary crowd set one
church ablaze, but even there the republican city council, domi¬
nated by moderates, earned the praise of the Catholic press for
bringing the disturbances to an end.54 Restraint was less evident
among the soldiers, the “Volunteers of the Republic,” actively
engaged in armed conflict with Carlist forces. In the districts near
Igualada, the plains of Molins de Rey and Vendrell, troops as¬
sassinated three priests and harassed others with frequent searches
of churches and parish houses. By midsummer many clergy had
abandoned their posts and taken refuge in France.55 Although
anticlerical violence in Catalonia led to clerical denunciations,
moderate Republicans had no interest in encouraging a massive
wave of attacks on the Church, because such a campaign might
well get out of hand, given the revolutionary exaltation of extre¬
mists, and redound to the benefit of Carlism. The ecclesiastical
leadership in Catalonia realized that a break with the republic in
favor of Charles VII would expose the Church to even greater
danger. Neither the Church nor moderate Republicans could af¬
ford the luxury of completely antagonizing each other.
   The turbulent events of the summer of 1873 did not prevent
the introduction of the long-awaited proposal for separating Church
and State. While Pi y Margall still held office, the government
presented its project for a new constitution providing for sepa¬
ration (Article 35). On August 1 (under the presidency of Sal-
meron), the minister of grace and justice brought forward a draft
law spelling out the State’s intentions in greater detail. The re-
  270                              From Revolution to Restoration




public’s plan for ending the historic union between the civil and
ecclesiastical orders was not the radical, anticlerical document
that critics perceived it to be. The State renounced its powers over
ecclesiastical patronage and the other regalian privileges Spanish
governments had enjoyed for centuries in ecclesiastical matters.
It recognized the right of the Church to conduct its affairs “with
complete independence” and to hold property subject to the gen¬
eral laws of the nation; it agreed to continue the pensions paid to
nuns under the terms of the Concordat of 1851 and to honor
legal contracts already made for the repair of churches. Although
Article 37 of the proposed constitution forbade any state financial
support for the Church, the draft law was ambiguous on this point,
perhaps deliberately, declaring simply that further legislation would
be introduced. The Church was also assured that all buildings
being used for religious purposes would continue to be so em¬
ployed, although those declared artistic monuments were to fall
under the supervision of the government.56
   The announcement of legislation proposing separation pro¬
voked an immediate reaction from clerics, who called it a plan “to
erect persecution of the Church into a system of government.”57
But the Church stood to gain something from separation—free¬
dom from the state interference under which ecclesiastics had
chafed for generations. The prospect of losing financial sup¬
port was disturbing, but the irregularity of payments since 1868
had already forced the Church to rely on its own fund-raising
efforts.
   Clerical opinion attacked the proposed law on separation, but
for the first time in the history of the Spanish Church it also began
to question the utility of the traditional connection with the State.
The exhortation of Archbishop Garcia Gil of Zaragoza in 1868
for the Church to rely on its own resources and devote its energies
to pastoral work in a time of revolutionary upheaval was received
with greater sympathy by ecclesiastics disenchanted with the slim
benefits the Church had derived from its ties to the government.
A conservative and anti-Carlist periodical widely read by the par¬
ish clergy declared: “the faith has lost much ground among us.
To reconquer it, we do not need the civil power in any
way . . . Society needs apostles, and apostles are sent by God not
by governments.” Even an avowedly pro-Carlist newspaper in
     From Revolution to Restoration                              271




Madrid asserted: “we Catholics must have nothing to do with the
government; we must conduct ourselves only by the laws of the
Church, and we ourselves must carry out the separation of
Church and State.”58
   This flirtation with reality created by the possibility of “a free
Church in a free State” did not develop into a serious affair.
Improved relations with the fourth and last president of the re¬
public, Emilio Castelar, removed any temptation for the Church
to venture on its own. The sudden twists and turns of factionalized
republican politics brought Castelar to power in September 1873.
His eloquent defense of religious liberty in April 1869 had not
endeared him to Catholic opinion. But he was the least anticlerical
of the republic’s presidents, and his determination to break the
last remnants of the cantonalist revolt as well as to crush social
agitation calmed a Church uneasy about the danger of revolution.
There were points of strong tension between the civil and eccle¬
siastical authorities, but the draft law on separation remained un¬
passed as Church and State stayed united during the republic’s
short history.
   Castelar hoped to win support for the regime by opening ne¬
gotiations with the papacy to fill the numerous episcopal vacancies
that had occurred since 1868. The successful outcome allowed
the president of the republic to do what King Amadeo had never
been able to do. Both the Catholic and opposition press expressed
irritation at the unlikely sight of a president engaged in the busi¬
ness of negotiating episcopal appointments with Rome. “Castelar
has turned himself into a sacristan,” complained one newspaper.59
Castelar’s suggestions included some of the ablest figures of the
late-nineteenth-century episcopacy: Victoriano Guisasola, later as
archbishop of Toledo one of the few Spanish bishops to appreciate
the extent of the working class’s alienation from the Church; Cef-
erino Gonzalez, a Dominican intellectual responsible for reviving
the study of the philosophy of Saint Thomas Aquinas; and Joaquin
Lluch, recommended for the diocese of Barcelona, who had shown
as bishop of Salamanca that it was possible for the Church to
conduct itself with moderation in a time of political change. Even
a hostile Catholic press had to admit that Castelar had suggested
priests “worthy for their virtue and orthodoxy.”60
   Castelar’s attempt to create a conservative republic acceptable
  272                                From Revolution to Restoration




in some measure to the Church and to the classes fearful of rev¬
olution foundered, however, on the divisions within republican
ranks as well as on the failure to end the Carlist rebellion and the
Cuban war. When a political crisis forced the president’s resig¬
nation on January 3, 1874, the captain general of Madrid, Pavia,
executed a mini—coup d’etat, ending the republican experiment.
As a result of this upheaval, a government of national union
emerged, still nominally republican and supported by many par¬
tisans of the discredited democratic monarchy. The new regime
continued efforts to conciliate the Church. It issued a statement
declaring that the “State . . . cannot ignore nor offend the Church.”61
The undisguised conservative nature of the new government,
however, could not save it from its own constitutional uncertainties
(should it be a unitary republic or again attempt a monarchical
solution?) nor from growing sympathy within the army for a Bour¬
bon restoration in the person of Isabella’s son, Alfonso. Political
support for a restoration in a nation exhausted by six years of rev¬
olution and war was also forming through the astute efforts of a
centrist moderado, Antonio Canovas del Castillo (1828-1897).
Although Canovas was opposed to installing Alfonso through yet
another military intervention, the rising on December 29, 1874,
by a young general, Martinez Campos, in the name of Alfonso
XII forced the issue. The interim republic, to which its own sup¬
porters were not committed, collapsed easily. A Bourbon sat again
on the Spanish throne.



   The Church suffered disruption between 1868 and 1874. The
number of vocations declined, sixteen dioceses lacked bishops by
1873, and ecclesiastical finances had fallen into disarray because
of the near bankruptcy of successive governments. Yet clerical
laments about the devastating effects of “revolution” must be taken
with a grain of salt. When the clergy spoke of “persecution,” they
were referring as much to the impact of secularizing legislation
as to actual interference with the Church’s religious mission. No
government between 1868 and 1874 endorsed a national policy
of antireligious harassment and violence. Physical attacks on ec¬
clesiastical buildings and priests did occur in local settings but
were not universal. Religious services were conducted normally
     From Revolution to Restoration                             273




in most dioceses throughout the period; few bishops were exiled
from their sees. There are even examples of new religious houses
being established, particularly by the orders of women engaged
in charitable work. The Little Sisters of the Poor founded two
convents (Huesca and Salamanca) in 1872; the Sisters of Charity
opened a house in Valladolid during the republic.62 And in spite
of the collapse of state financial support, the Church was able to
compensate partially for the loss of income through direct con¬
tributions of the faithful.63 The Church fared less well than during
the 1854-1856 revolution but far better than in the decade 1833—
 1843.


Toward New Conflicts

   The political system designed by the constitutional architect of
the Bourbon restoration, Canovas del Castillo, would endure until
it was overthrown by General Primo de Rivera in 1923. Its eccle¬
siastical policy would survive until 1931, when the Second Re¬
public separated Church and State for the first time in Spanish
history. Canovas created what was essentially a more open and
flexible version of the moderado State in its less authoritarian
moments. The ability of the monarch to interfere in politics was
minimized; a mechanism was found to guarantee the opposition
a chance to hold power, thus denying the army the leverage that
had made it a political force. Moreover, the regime respected
within certain limits traditional liberal rights, such as freedom of
the press, and avoided on the whole the excesses committed against
intellectual dissent characteristic of its pre-1868 predecessor. Al¬
though the restoration settlement suffered from internal weak¬
nesses that eventually would cause its disintegration, it offered a
workable system to a nation exhausted by six years of war and
constitutional experimentation.
   The success of the restoration over the short term rested on its
ability to attract support from those opposed to republicanism,
Carlism, and social agitation. Canovas saw the necessity of reach¬
ing an accommodation with the Church to undercut the appeal
of the Carlists and to strengthen the forces of order and stability
on which the regime depended. The Church appeared to profit
handsomely from the State’s policy of conciliation. The Consti-
  274                              From Revolution to Restoration




tution of 1876 affirmed the confessionality of the State and re¬
duced religious toleration to narrow limits; the government
undertook to honor the financial commitment made in the Con¬
cordat of 1851 for support of the clergy, and it freed the Church
from the restrictions imposed after 1868 on establishment of new
schools. The restored monarchy also sought papal support by
improving diplomatic relations with Rome in 1875.64
    But Canovas had no intention of yielding to clerical pressure
for full recovery of the privileges the Church had enjoyed before
1868. Although the Church had official status and the new con¬
stitution provided for nineteen episcopal seats in the Senate, Ca¬
novas sought to reduce the clergy’s direct political influence by
excluding them from the more influential Congress of Deputies.
The State retained its traditional powers over ecclesiastical finance
and patronage and generally resisted demands for the persecution
of Spain’s tiny Protestant minority. Moreover, the restoration po¬
litical settlement permitted the emergence of a two-party system,
which made a policy of wholesale concessions to the Church im¬
possible. The two parties, eventually known as Liberal and Liberal-
Conservative, lacked the internal unity and political honesty nec¬
essary for long-term stability, but they were agreed at least on
preserving the principal gains nineteenth-century liberalism had
made at the expense of the old absolutist order. Canovas mis¬
trusted the more democratic program of the Liberals but re¬
mained committed to the idea of a constitutional, parliamentary
regime. And he recognized the necessity of winning Liberal sup¬
port to guarantee its survival. As the political heirs of the pro-
gresistas, the Liberal party, under its brilliant and opportunistic
leader Praxedes Sagasta (1827-1903), viewed the Church with
considerable suspicion. But both parties followed similar eccle¬
siastical policies based on the need to conciliate the Church within
the limits of a constitutional and parliamentary state based on
nineteenth-century liberal principles. Successive restoration gov¬
ernments pursued a delicate policy designed to balance ecclesiast¬
ical demands for greater privileges against the political realities
of the new regime.
    The attempt of Canovas to neutralize the Church as a political
force and to win its support for a socially conservative but polit-
     From Revolution to Restoration                              275




ically liberal government was only partially successful. Clergy and
laity attached to Carlism or to the neoabsolutist Integralism of
Ramon Nocedal remained firmly opposed to the restored consti¬
tutional monarchy. As the architect of the new system, Canovas
was mercilessly pilloried by the Carlist and Integralist press until
his assassination in 1897. The enormously successful pamphlet
(over sixty editions had appeared by 1960) Is Liberalism a Sin?
published in 1884 by a Catalan priest, Sarda y Salvany, symbolized
the hostility of the most traditional elements of Spanish Catholi¬
cism toward the restoration State.65
   The ecclesiastical leadership, however, had long since learned
the necessity of compromise. With few exceptions the hierarchy
supported the regime. The bishops welcomed the restoration of
the male religious orders, state financial support, and a political
system that appeared to offer protection against the danger of
social revolution. Yet the attitude of the official Church remained
as ambiguous as it had been toward the moderado State of the
 1840’s and 1850’s. The Church resented the refusal of successive
restoration ministries to increase substantially the budget for culto
y clero; it complained bitterly of the government’s failure, even
when Canovas was in office, to enforce strictly the constitutional
provisions against public manifestations of Protestantism, and it
regarded the State’s unwillingness to repress intellectual dissent
in favor of religious orthodoxy as either betrayal or weakness.66
    In spite of the hierarchy’s support for the constitutional mon¬
archy, the Church was as determined as ever to bring about a new
golden age of religion and morality. It viewed the advantages
secured from the restoration State as insufficient and pressed
relentlessly for more concessions in the realms of education, fi¬
nance, censorship, and public morality. Although the ecclesiastical
leadership recognized the benefits obtained from the State, it did
not fully appreciate how closely the survival of its privileged sit¬
uation was linked to the delicate political balance of the restora¬
tion. The deaths of Canovas and Sagasta stimulated the inherent
factionalism of the two governing parties. And the rise of Catalan
regional sentiment coupled with the growing strength of Repub¬
licans and Socialists after 1900 undermined still further the fragile
consensus that had allowed the constitutional monarchy to func-
  276                               From Revolution to Restoration




tion as an effective political system. The progressive disintegration
of the restoration State demanded caution from the Church. In¬
stead, the Church moved aggressively to preserve its position,
while vigorously attacking the new social and political movements
that appeared to threaten revolution. The neutralization of the
Church as a political force that Canovas expected thus only par¬
tially materialized. The disintegration of the restoration settle¬
ment in the first two decades of the twentieth century exposed
the Church as a powerful lobby committed to the maintenance of
its own privileges and the survival of a conservative social order.
The searing anticlerical battles of the early twentieth century were
signs of even greater struggles ahead.



    In spite of an outward appearance of strength, the Church was
ill prepared for a new round of struggles over its place within the
State and society. Its privileged situation as a state church could
not disguise glaring internal and moral weaknesses: the mediocrity
of ecclesiastical intellectual life, the inability to adapt to an in¬
creasingly urban and secular society, the corresponding incapacity
to appeal to the economically dispossessed, and the dominance of
a sugary devotionalism without deep spiritual roots. Perceptive
clerics came to see that the Church, outside its bastions in the
northern Catholic countryside, had failed to realize its fond dreams
for the recreation of Catholic Spain. Writing in 1909, Father Pera¬
les y Gutierrez lamented the religious indifference of the south:
“the masses who labor in the fields of Andalusia and Extremadura
are not in general indoctrinated in the mysteries of the faith. They
live in nearly complete paganism.” And he noted the catastrophic
failure of the Church among the workers: “today there are great
concentrations of workers who do not practice a religious life; in
fact, they hate it.”67 In 1914 the Augustinian Bruno Ibeas com¬
plained that even among churchgoers the practice of faith was
nothing more than “the mingling of ritualistic and routine de¬
votion and unconscious incredulity . . . Our Christian society,” he
maintained, is “a pagan society covered by the appearances of
Christianity.”68
 This spirit of self-criticism was not shared, however, by the vast
majority of bishops and priests. Frustrated by the Church’s ob-
    From Revolution to Restoration                             277




vious failures and by the increasing virulence of anticlerical at¬
tacks, they blamed their misfortunes on the impious conspiracy
that had obsessed the ecclesiastical mind since the 1790’s. In the
end, the Spanish Church began to look for another Ferdinand
VII, another “Desired One,” who would lead it to a new religious
promised land. In 1936 it found such a figure in Francisco Franco.
i   ’
Notes

1. The Organization of the Church, 1750—1790

        1. For a more detailed discussion of the eighteenth-century reforming
 monarchy, see Jean Sarrailh, LEspagne eclairee de la seconde moitie du XVIIIe siecle
 (Paris, 1954); Richard Herr, The Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Spain (Princeton,
 1958); and Antonio Dominguez Ortiz, Sociedad y Estado en el siglo XVIII espahol
 (Madrid, 1976).
        2. Isidore Martin, “En el segundo centenario del concordato espahol de
 1753,” Revista Espahola de Derecho Canonico, 8 (1953), 754—755.
        3. C. C. Noel, “Opposition to Enlightened Reform in Spain: Campomanes
 and the Clergy, 1765-1775,” Societas, 3, no. 1 (1973), 30-32.
        4. Francesc Tort Mitjans, El Obispo de Barcelona: Josep Climent i Avinent,
 1706-1781 (Barcelona, 1978), 362-367.
        5. Alfredo Martinez Albiach, Etica socio-religiosa de la Espaha del siglo XVIII
 (Burgos, 1960), 16.
        6. Pedro de Valdes, El padre de su pueblo o medios para hacer temporalmente
felices a los pueblos con el auxilio de los sehores parrocos, 2nd ed. (Barcelona, 1806),
 73.
        7. Ibid., 14. On the attempt to direct the clergy into broader social and
 economic concerns, see C. C. Noel’s excellent Princeton University dissertation,
 regrettably unpublished, “Campomanes and the Church.”
        8. For a discussion of the imbalanced ecclesiastical structure of the
 eighteenth-century Church, see Antonio Dominguez Ortiz, La sociedad espahola
 en el siglo XVIII (Madrid, 1955), 133—134.
        9. Antonio Lopez Ferreiro, Historia de la Santa A. M. Iglesia de Santiago de
 Compostela, 11 vols. (Santiago, 1898—1909), X, 28—29.
        10. Joseph Townsend, A Journey through Spain in the Years 1786 and 1787,
 3 vols. (London, 1791), III, 326.
        11. Alexandre Laborde, A View of Spain, 5 vols. (London, 1809), V, 14.
        12. “Demografia eclesiastica,” in Diccionario de historia eclesidstica de Espaha,
 4 vols. (Madrid, 1972-1975), II, 733. The kingdom of Naples thus had nearly
 50,000 secular priests in a population of approximately 5 million. Mario Rosa,
 “The Italian Churches,” in Church and Society in Catholic Europe of the Eighteenth
Century, ed. W. J. Callahan and D. C. Higgs (Cambridge, 1979), 69.
        13. Censo de la poblacidn de Espaha de el aho de 1797 (Madrid, 1801).
        14. Juan Saez Marin, Datos sobre la Iglesia espahola contemporanea, 1768-
 1868 (Madrid, 1975), 294.
        15. Expediente sobre aumento de dotacion del Curato de Cavanas de la
 Dormilla y Cubillinos (1800), Archivo Historico Nacional (hereafter AHN), Con-
sejos, leg. 15578, exp. 8.
        16. Saez Marin, Datos sobre la Iglesia, 298—299.
        17. Representation of the bishop of Cadiz to the Camara of Castile, Feb¬
ruary 15, 1788, AHN, Consejos, leg. 15647, exp. 4.
        18. Quoted by Noel in “Campomanes and the Church,” 47.
        19. Ibid., 43.


                                                                                 279
   280                                                     Notes to Pages 10-18




      20. Townsend, A Journey through Spain, II, 150-151.
      21. Laborde, A View of Spain, V, 34. This view, however, was not universal.
A midcentury critic, Gregorio Mayans, attacked the bishops of his time as “very
ignorant men who had obtained miters through ambitious solicitude and perhaps
worse means.” Antonio Mestre Sanchis, Ilustracion y reforma de la Iglesia: Pensa-
miento politico-religioso de Don Gregorio Mayans y Siscar, 1699-1781 (Valencia, 1968),
220.
       22. There is an excellent recent biography of the early life of Lorenzana:
Luis Sierra Nava-Lasa, El Cardenal Lorenzana y la Ilustracion (Madrid, 1975).
       23. Townsend described the oposiciones he attended in Seville and noted
the extraordinary importance of these examinations for the candidates: “Ve¬
hemence, on such occasions, is not only sanctioned by custom, but is certainly
excusable in men who are contending, not merely for fame, but bread.” A Journey
through Spain, II, 315.
       24. Historia eclesidstica de la ciudad y obispado de Badajoz, 2 vols. (Badaioz,
1945), II, 89.
       25. Jean Francois Bourgoing, Tableau de I’Espagne moderne, 3 vols. (Paris,
1797), III, 4-5; Antonio Rodriguez Mas. El arzobispo urbanista: D. Joaquin de
Santiyan y Valdivielso, 1779—1783 (Tarragona, 1956), 55.
       26. Townsend, A Journey through Spain, III, 56.
       27. For a detailed institutional study of a cathedral chapter, see Juan Ramon
Lopez-Arevalo, Un cabildo catedral de la Vieja Castilla: Avila (Madrid, 1966).
       28. Sebastian Padron Acosta, “El Dean Don Jeronimo de Roo,” Revista de
Historia, 16, nos. 90—91 (1950), 179—198.
       29. Escrito sobre los parrocos, ms., n.d., n.p., Fundacion Universitaria, leg.
17/16; Maximiliano Barrio Gozalo, Estudio socio-economico de la Iglesia de Segovia
en elsiglo XVIII (Segovia, 1982), 128. Another study of Segovia assigns a somewhat
lower portion of the tithe (24 percent) to the parish clergy. Angel Garcia Sanz,
Desarrollo y crisis del antiguo regimen en Castilla la Vieja: Economia y sociedad en tierras
de Segovia, 1500-1814 (Madrid, 1977), 312.
       30. Juan Perez, Directorio de sacerdotes (Madrid, 1733), 45.
       31. Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva, De la obligacion de decir Misa con circun-
speccidn y pausa (Madrid, 1790), prologue.
       32. Father Pedro de Calatayud, Juizio de los sacerdotes: Doctrina practica y
anatomia de sus conciencias (Valencia, 1736), 10, 62, 87. The Capuchin Father
Juan de Zamora, author of a manual for the guidance of the parish clergy, also
believed that the problem of parish priests engaged in business activities had
reached serious proportions. Such a priest, he held, was worse than “the most
greedy farmer of the place” where he served as cur a. El eclesiastico perfecto (Ma¬
drid, 1781), 398-399.
       33. Leandro Higueruela del Pino, El clero de Toledo desde 1800 a 1823
(Madrid, 1979), 43.
       34. Ibid., 54.
       35. Ibid., 72.
       36. There is an excellent monograph on eighteenth-century seminaries:
Francisco Martin Hernandez and Jose Martin Hernandez, Los seminarios espaholes
en la epoca de la Ilustracion (Madrid, 1973).
       37. Higueruela del Pino, El clero de Toledo, 45.
       38. Metodo que se observa en el arzobispado de Toledo para la celebracion de los
concursos de curatos (n.p., n.d.). The examinations were to be held every two years.
      Notes to Pages 18-26                                                    281




In Toledo this meant the appointment of fifty new parish priests and the pro¬
motion of sixty more, a good indication of the constant movement within the
ranks of the parish clergy.
       39. Representation of the bishop of Osma to Charles IV, July 15, 1790,
AHN, Consejos, leg. 15980, exp. 1.
       40. Leandro Higueruela del Pino, El clero de la diocesis de Toledo durante el
pontificado del Cardenal Borbdn (Madrid, 1973), 14—15.
       41. Tort Mitjans, El Obispo de Barcelona, 216 n. 7.
       42. Miguel Segarra Roca, “Un parroco modelo,” Boletin de la Sociedad Ca-
stellonense de Cultura, 23 (1947), 5—16. See, for example, the account of an active
parish clergy in Cardona: J. Serra Vilaro, Historia de Cardona, 4 vols. (Tarragona,
1962), IV, 275-309.
       43. Barrio Gozalo in his study of ecclesiastical finances in the diocese of
Segovia notes that the 4,168 reales of annual income received by the parish
priests of the vicarate of Riaza in the early 1770’s compared favorably with the
salaries of royal administrators in the district. He also notes, however, that tithe
income varied substantially from one parish to another over the diocese as a
whole. Between 1771 and 1775, 22.5 percent of the parishes received more than
5,000 reales a year in tithe income; 38.79 percent received less than 2,000 a
year; and 46.03 percent received between 2,000 and 5,000. Only 6 of the diocese’s
219 parishes attained a handsome annual income from the tithe (exceeding
 10,000 reales), in contrast to 20 parishes that received less than 500 a year.
Estudio socio-economico de la Iglesia de Segovia, 153, 438—439, 402—403.
       44. L. de Amoros, “Estadistica de los conventos y religiosos de las provincias
franciscanas de Espana en el ano de 1768,” Archivo Ibero-Americano, 16, no. 64
(1956), 424.
       45. Historia del Real Monasterio de Poblet, 6 vols. (Barcelona, 1947-1955),
VI, 32.
       46. Ibid., VI, 68-69.
       47. B. Cuartero y Huerta, Historia de la Cartuja de Santa Maria de las Cuevas
de Sevilla, 2 vols. (Madrid, 1950—1954), II, 359.
       48. E. Corredera, “Caresmar y Barcelona,” Analecta Sacra Tarraconensia,
37 (1964), 111; M. Ferotin, Histoire de I'abbaye de Silos (Paris, 1897), 249-250.
       49. Proyecto para hacer los establecimientos de los religiosos mas perfectos,
ms., n.p., n.d., Fundacion Universitaria, leg. 15/20.
       50. Amoros, “Estadistica de los conventos y religiosos,” 432.
       51. M. R. Pazos. “Provinciales Compostelanos,” Archivo Ibero-Americano, 28,
no. 112 (1968), 270-271.
       52. Francisco Aragones, Los frailes franciscos de Cataluha, 2 vols. (Barcelona,
 1891), I, 143.
       53. M. R. Pazos, “Provinciales Compostelanos,” Archivo Ibero-Americano, 31,
nos. 122-123 (1968), 405.
       54. Rafael Garcia, “Recuerdos y presencia de los Agustinos en Agreda,”
Archivo Agustiniano, no. 172 (1964), 53—85.
       55. Libro en que se escriben los decretos y preceptos . . . de esta provincia
de Andalucia (1735—1779), AHN, Clero, libro 3749.
       56. Fray Melchor de Pobladura, Seminarios de misionerosy conventos deperfecta
vida comun (Rome, 1963), 36-37, 89. Life in the reformed Capuchin convents
was to be carried on with the “complete practice of evangelical poverty.”
       57. Libro en que se prosiguen sentando los decretos . . . de el Oratorio de
   282                                                   Notes to Pages 26-38




Granada, 1761-1804, AHN, Clero, libro 3835; J. Mesenguer Fernandez, “El P.
Antonio Jose Salinas, Comisario General de los Franciscanos y Obispo de Tor-
tosa, 1732-1815,” Archivo Ibero-Americano, 6, no. 21 (1946), 64—65; A. Barrado
Manzano, “Division bipartita de la provincia de San Miguel en Extremadura,”
Archivo Ibero-Americano, 19, no. 75 (1959), 340.
       58. Proyecto para hacer los establecimientos de los religiosos mas perfectos.
       59. Antonio Astrain, Historia de la Compahia de Jesus en la asistencia de Espaha,
8 vols. (Madrid, 1902-1925), VIII, 48.
       60. For discussion of the struggle between the Jesuits and the Augustinians,
see Herr, The Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Spain, 15—18.
       61. Quoted in Jose Navarro Latorre, Hace doscientos ahos: Estado actual de
los problemas historicos del Motm de Esquilache (Madrid, 1966), 28. For a pro-Jesuit
interpretation of these events, see C. Eguta Ruiz, LosJesuitasy el motm de Esquilache
(Madrid, 1947). There is a summary of the recent bibliography on the motin in
Dominguez Ortiz, Sociedad y Estado en el siglo XVIII espahol, 308.
       62. Bartolome Bennassar et al., L’Inquisition espagnole, XVe-XIXe siecle (Paris,
 1979), 33-39.
       63. See the fine study of Gustav Hennigsen, The Witches Advocate: Basque
Witchcraft and the Spanish Inquisition (Reno, 1980).
       64. Bennassar et al., L’Inquisition espagnole, 21.
       65. Ibid., 31-32.
       66. Marcelin Defourneaux, L’Inquisition espagnole et les livres frangais au
XVIIIe siecle (Paris, 1963), 62.
       67. Joel Saugnieux, Les jansenistes et le renouveau de la predication dans VEs-
pagne de la seconde moitie du XVIIIe siecle (Lyon, 1976), 200—202.
       68. Townsend, A Journey through Spain, III, 336.
       69. Marcelin Defourneaux, Pablo de Olavide ou VAfrancesado, 1725—1803
(Paris, 1959), 293.
       70. Saugnieux, Les jansenistes, 201. Saugnieux suggests that Bertran was
incapable of resisting the pressure of his fellow inquisitors in the Olavide case.
He succeeded, however, in having the sentence reduced to a less severe penalty
than that demanded by his colleagues. Alvarez de Morales argues that the case
should not be seen as a single, spectacular blow designed to restore the Inquisition
to its old authority. He contends that the Olavide case was one of many launched
by the Holy Tribunal against leading reformers, but that it was the only one to
have progressed to the stage of formal prosecution. In this context the sentencing
of Olavide was a minor triumph that could not hide the overall weakness of the
Inquisition in the struggle against reforming tendencies in the highest circles of
government. Antonio Alvarez de Morales, Inquisicion e Ilustracion, 1700—1834
(Madrid, 1982), 130-132.
       71. Defourneaux, L’Inquisition espagnole et les livres frangais au XVIIIe siecle,
73.
       72. Ibid.



2. Prosperity and Religion, 1750—1790
      1. Information on the cadastral register of Ensenada is drawn from An¬
tonio Matilla Tascon, La unica contribucion y el Catastro de Ensenada (Madrid 1947),
92-95, 535-543.
       Notes to Pages 39-53                                                    283




       2. Gonzalo Anes, Las crisis agrarias en la Espana moderna (Madrid, 1970),
292.
       3. Alfonso Lazo Diaz, La desamortizacion de las tierras de la Iglesia en la pro-
vincia de Sevilla, 1835-1845 (Seville, 1970), 50; Jose Maria Mutiloa Poza, La
desamortizacion eclesiastica en Navarra (Pamplona, 1972), 156-157; and Barrio
Gozalo, Estudio socio-economico de la Iglesia de Segovia, 82.
       4. Laborde, A View of Spain, II, 271.
       5. Juan Jose de la Inmaculada, El desierto de la provincia de San Joaquin
(Vitoria, 1956), 118.
       6. Lazo Diaz, La desamortizacion . . . en Sevilla, 65.
       7. Julio Porres Martln-Cleto, La desamortizacion del siglo XIX en Toledo (To¬
ledo, 1966), 82-83.
       8. Ibid., 103.
       9. The Hermandad del Refugio of Madrid spent an average 25 percent
of the income received in rents on repairs to its urban property. Archivo de la
Hermandad, leg. 148.
        10. Christian Hermann, “Les revenus des eveques espagnols au dix-huitieme
siecle (1650—1830),” Melanges de la Casa de Velazquez, 10 (1974), 189; Antonio
Dominguez Ortiz, “Las rentas episcopales de la corona de Aragon en el siglo
XVIII,” in Agricultura, comercio colonialy crecimiento economico en la Espana contem-
poranea, ed. J. Nadal and G. Tortella (Barcelona, 1974), 20.
        11. Sierra Nava-Lasa, El Cardenal Lorenzana y la Ilustracion, 91.
        12. Jacques Soubeyroux, Pauperisme et rapports sociaux a Madrid au XVIII erne
siecle, 2 vols. (Lille, 1978), I, 135. Townsend, A Journey through Spain, III, 16—
 17, 183.
        13. Francisco Bocanegra, Sermones, 2 vols. (Madrid, 1773), I, 190.
        14. W. J. Callahan, “The Problem of Confinement: An Aspect of Poor
Relief in Eighteenth-Century Spain,” Hispanic American Historical Review, no. 1
(1971), 2.
        15. Income increased from 784,076 reales in the decade 1710-1719 to
4,347,750 between 1790 and 1800. Archivo de la Hermandad, Cuentas Gene-
rales, 1700-1800.
        16. Townsend, A Journey through Spain, III, 57.
        17. A. Meijide Pardo, “El hambre en Galicia y la obra asistencial del es-
tamento eclesiastico compostelano,” Compestellanum, 10 (1965), X, 222-238.
        18. W. J. Callahan, La Santa y Real Hermandad del Refugio y Piedad de Madrid,
1618-1832 (Madrid, 1980), 22-23, 106.
        19. Mariano Peset and Jose Luis Peset, La universidad espahola: Despotismo
ilustrado y revolucion liberal (Madrid, 1974), 566.
       20. Sarrailh, L’Espagne eclairee, 45—46.
       21. Ibid., 186.
       22. Thus, the Dominicans of Alicante rushed forward to take control of
secondary teaching in the town after the expulsion of the Jesuits to prevent
laymen from filling the educational vacuum. The order’s College of the Rosary
then dominated secondary teaching for the rest of the century. M. Mateos Car-
retero, La ensehanza en Alicante en el siglo XVIII (Alicante, 1967), 158-161.
       23. Jean Dedieu, “Christianisation en Nouvelle Castille: Catechisme, com¬
munion et confirmation dans l’archeveche de Tolede, 1540-1650,” Melanges de
la Casa de Velazquez, 15 (1979), 277—293.
       24. Mercedes Mauleon Isla, La poblacion de Bilbao en el siglo XVIII (Valla-
   284                                                     Notes to Pages 54-65



dolid, 1961), 166; Angel Bergada i Escriva, Vimbodi: Estudi historic, sociologic i
religios (Vimbodi, 1978), 192; Jose Goni Gaztambide, “El cumplimiento pascual
en la diocesis de Pamplona en 1801,” Hispania Sacra, 26 (1973), 367; Gabriel
Llompart, “La catequesis en Mallorca en 1747,” Hispania Sacra, 25 (1972), 439.
       25. Townsend, A Journey through Spain, II, 149.
       26. Jose Bermejo y Carballo, Glorias religiosas de Sevilla o noticia historico-
descriptiva de todas las cofradias de penitencia, sangre y luz (Seville, 1882), 78, 84, 99.
       27. Luis Batlle Prats, “El marianismo en las asociaciones gremiales ge-
rundensesf Analecta Sacra Tarraconensia, 30 (1957), 323.
       28. Segundo Congreso de misiones parroquiales (1938) (Madrid, 1961), 201.
       29. Townsend, A Journey through Spain, II, 318-319.
       30. Ibid., I, 107-109.
       31. Laborde, A View of Spain, III, 238.
       32. Farid Abbad, “La confrerie condamnee ou une spontaneite festive
confisquee,” Melanges de la Casa de Velazquez, 13 (1977), 366.
       33. Defourneaux, Pablo de Olavide, 269. Confraternities and brotherhoods
also existed in rural villages, but they played a somewhat different social role
given the narrower range of class differences in the countryside. For a discussion
of the rural association, see Jean-Luc Jamard, “Confreries religieuses et dicho¬
tomic sociale,” Melanges de la Casa de Velazquez, 8 (1972), 474-488.
       34. Farid, “La confrerie condamnee,” 369.
       35. Tort Mitjans, El Obispo de Barcelona, 217 n. 11.
       36. Calatayud, Juizio de los sacerdotes, 87; Higueruela del Pino, El clero de
Toledo, 182.
       37. Pastoral Letter, February 19, 1765, in Coleccion de las cartas pastorales y
edictos del Exmo. Sehor Don Felipe Bertran, 2 vols. (Madrid, 1783), I, 31.
       38. Higueruela del Pino, El clero de Toledo, 183.
       39. For the introduction of this devotion into Spain, see Jose Eugenio
Uriarte, Principios del reinado del Corazon de Jesus en Espaha (Madrid, 1880).
       40. G. Segui, “La devocion a los Sagrados Corazones de Jesus y Maria en
Mallorca,” Boletin de la Sociedad Arqueologica Luliana, 21 (1955—56), 286—291;
F. Marti, “Nota historica acerca de las devociones mas populares en Menorca,”
Analecta Sacra Tarraconensia, 28 (1955), 273-278.
       41. J. I. Tellechea Idigoras, “La Congregacion del Sagrado Corazon de
Jesus de Deva,” Boletin de la Real Sociedad Vascongada de los Amigos del Pais, 19,
no. 2 (1963), 133-146.
       42. Antonio Arbiol, La familia regulada con doctrina de la Sagrada Escritura
(Barcelona, 1746); Francisco Larraga, Promptuario de la theologia moral (Madrid,
 1780).
       43. Larraga, Promptuario, 507.
       44. Arbiol, La familia regulada, 66.
       45. Larraga, Promptuario, 508.
       46. For a general discussion of the missions in Europe as a whole, see Jean
Delumeau, Le Catholicisme entre Luther et Voltaire (Paris, 1971), 274-279.
       47. Astrain, Historia de la Compahia de Jesus, VIII, 90.
       48. Fray Serafin de Ardales, El misionero capuchino: Compendio historico de
la vida del. . . M.R.P. Fr. Diego Josef de Cadiz (Cadiz, 1811), 36.
       49. Fray Buenaventura de Carrocera, La provincia de Frailes Menores Ca-
puchinos de Castilla, 1701-1836 (Madrid, 1973), 193-194.
       50. Ardales, El misionero capuchino, 11.
      Notes to Pages 65-75                                                    285




       51. In 1800 the Capuchin was investigated by the Inquisition for several
sermons in which he questioned governmental interference in ecclesiastical af¬
fairs. Expediente formado en el Consejo sobre los sermones de Fray Diego de
Cadiz. AHN, Inquisicion, leg. 4449, exp. 1.
       52. The Council of Castile ruled in favor of the consulado and placed a
ban on the circulation of Calatayud’s published works in the Basque Provinces.
The Jesuit, however, remained convinced that he had spoken “with equity and
reason according to God and the truth.” Respuesta a una consulta que me hace
un comerciante de Bilbao sobre la compra de lanas, 1764. Biblioteca Nacional,
ms. 5809.
       53. William Christian, Local Religion in Sixteenth-Century Spain (Princeton,
 1981), 23-33.
       54. Justino Matute y Gaviria, Anales eclesiasticos y seculares de la Muy Noble
y Muy Leal Ciudad de Sevilla, 1701-1800, 3 vols. (Seville, 1887), II, 123-124.
       55. Townsend, A Journey through Spain, II, 21.
       56. Laborde, A View of Spain, 238.
       57. Ibid.
       58. Higueruela del Pino, El clero de Toledo, 186.
       59. Coleccion de las cartas pastorales . . . del. . . Felipe Bertran, I, 56.
       60. Ibid.
       61. For the intense efforts of Climent against what he saw as superstition,
see Tort Mitjans, El Obispo de Barcelona, 275—278.
       62. Ibid., 275 n. 18.
       63. There are two general surveys of the reforming movement: Emile
Appolis, Les jansenistes espagnols (Bordeaux, 1966); and Maria Giovanna Tomisch,
El jansenismo en Espaha (Madrid, 1972).
       64. Joel Saugnieux, Unprelat eclaire: Don Antonio Tavira y Almazan, 1737-
1807 (Toulouse, 1970), 52-53.
       65. In 1771, for example, the king ordered the removal from the former
churches of the Jesuits of all statues and pictures of the Sacred Heart. Jose
Eugenio Uriarte, “La fiesta del Corazon de Jesus y la Corte de Espana el ano
de 1765 f RazonyFe, 33 (1912), 174.
       66. The diocesan Synod of Pistoia was called by Bishop Ricci at the order
of Grand Duke Leopold, the brother of Joseph II of Austria. The synod sought
to strengthen episcopal authority at the expense of the papacy, purify the liturgy,
and restrain the growth of the religious orders. Rome’s opposition to these
reforming efforts produced bitter controversy within the Church.
       67. Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva, De la leccion de la Sagrada Escritura en
lenguas vulgares (Valencia, 1791), prologue.



3. The First Shocks, 1790—1814

      1. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, Sociologia de una elite de poder de Espaha e
Hispanoamerica contemporaneas: La jerarquia eclesiastica, 1789—1965 (Cordoba, 1976),
91. Thus, Jose Diaz, named vicar general of the Dominicans in 1805, secured
the appointment through influence at court in spite of opposition from within
the order. J. Cuervo, Historiadores del convento de San Esteban de Salamanca (Sa¬
lamanca, 1914—1916), 678.
     2. Consulta hecha por la Rl. Camara de Castilla sobre la causa hecha contra
   286                                                    Notes to Pages 76—85




el Exmo. Illmo. y Revmo. Sr. Dn. Francisco Fabian y Fuero, Arzobispo que fue
de Valencia, 1795. Biblioteca Nacional, ms. 18110.
       3. For an account of the ministerial change of 1797, see Herr, The
Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Spain, 398—400.
      4. Luis Sierra Nava, La reaccion del episcopado espahol ante los decretos de
matrimonios del ministro Urquijo de 1799 a 1813 (Bilbao, 1964), 1—2.
       5. A study of the income of the Catalan monastery of Poblet between 1783
and 1799 notes that the rising prices of agricultural products contributed to the
institution’s prosperity during these years. Josep Recasens i Comes, “Les rendes
del Mestir de Poblet a l’arqubisbat de Tarragona a finals del segle XVIII,” /
Colloqui d’Histdria del Monaquisme Catala (Santes Creus, 1967), 307.
       6. For a discussion of the State’s fiscal crisis, see Richard Herr, “Hacia el
derrumbe del antiguo regimen: Crisis fiscal y desamordzacion fiscal bajo Carlos
IV,” Moneda y Credito, no. 118 (1971), 37-100.
       7. Lopez Ferreiro, Historia de la . . . Iglesia de Santiago, XI, 97—99.
       8. Juan Marichal, “From Pistoia to Cadiz: A Generation’s Itinerary, 1786—
 1812,” in The Ibero-American Enlightenment, ed. A. Owen Aldridge (Urbana, 1971),
102-103.
       9. Alfredo Martinez Albiach, Religiosidad hispana y sociedad borbonica (Bur¬
gos, 1969).
       10. A 1751 sermon of a prominent preacher, Nicolas Gallo, began the late-
eighteenth-century obsession with “libertinism,” described as a spirit of “disso¬
lution corrupting the morality and customs of the entire nation.” Ibid., 156.
       11. Ibid., 24.
       12. Ibid., 21.
       13. Tomisch,Eljansenismo enEspaha, 86-88. For a more detailed discussion
of the civil war within the Church, see W. J. Callahan, “Two Spains and Two
Churches, 1760—1835,” Historical Reflections, 2, no. 2 (1975), 158—181.
       14. Javier Herrero, Los origenes delpensamiento reaccionario espahol (Madrid,
1971), 86-87.
       15. Garcia Sanz, Desarrollo y crisis del antiguo regimen en Castilla la Vieja, 451.
The worsening financial situation of the parish clergy in this period is also noted
by Barrio Gozalo, Estudio socio-economico de la Iglesia de Segovia, 439—440.
       16. How extensive this increase was is difficult to establish given the absence
of a census after 1797. There are indications of an increase even in the monastic
orders, where an earlier decline had been substantial. Entrants in the Cistercian
monastery of Sobrado, for example, increased by a third between 1800 and 1808
over the preceding decade. Similar increases occurred among the male Car¬
melites of Avila and the male Mercedarians of Granada. The number of new
members in the Dominican house of Santo Tomas in Madrid, which had averaged
eleven to thirteen per decade between 1760 and 1789, rose to an average of
twenty per decade between 1790 and 1808. AHN, Clero, libros 479, 3052, 3797;
Antonio Martinez Escudero, Historia del convento de Santo Tomas de Madrid (Ma¬
drid, 1900), 84-101.
       17. AHN, leg. 4025, exp. 79. The picture of extreme internal tensions in
the religious orders is confirmed by later historians. In his history of the Cap¬
uchins, Fray Buenaventura de Carrocera observed that the period 1793-1808
was characterized by the “insubordination” of the order’s members in Castile.
La provincia de Frailes Menores Capuchinos, 1701—1836, 299.
       18. Martinez Albiach, Religiosidad hispana, 59.
      Notes to Pages 86-101                                                    287




      19. Isidoro de Villapadierna, “El episcopado espanol y las Cortes de Cadiz,”
Hispania Sacra, 8 (1955), 276.
      20. Sierra Nava, La reaccion del episcopado, 226-235.
      21. Aragones, Los frailes franciscos, I, 42—44, 35. Juan R. Legisima, Heroes
y mdrtires gallegos: Los Franciscanos de Galicia en la guerra de la Independencia (San¬
tiago de Compostela, 1912), 207-208.
      22. The superior, Fray Rienda, operated around the city of Jaen with
thirty-four guerrillas who killed 58 of the 450 French soldiers pursuing them.
Juan R. Legisima, “Las ordenes religiosas en la guerra de la Independencia,”
Archivo 1hero-Americano, 22, no. 118 (1935), 204.
      23. Mariano Rais and Luis Navarro, Historia de la Provincia de Aragon, Orden
de Predicadores, desde el aho 1808 hasta el de 1818 (Zaragoza, 1819), 15.
      24. Aragones, Los frailes franciscos, I, 49—50.
      25. Legisima, “Las ordenes religiosas,” 197.
      26. Ibid., 202.
      27. Martinez Albiach, Religiosidad hispana, 138.
      28. Sierra Nava, La reaccion del episcopado, 86.
      29. Martinez Albiach, Religiosidad hispana, 61.
      30. This quotation and those in the next paragraph are from ibid., 32,
 145.
      31. Informe of Antonio Cebrian y Valdes, October 3, 1809, in Cortes
de Cadiz: Informes of dales sobres Cortes: Valencia y Aragon (Pamplona, 1968),
 100.
      32. Ibid., 87.
      33. Rais and Navarro, Historia de la Provincia de Aragon, 34.
      34. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, D. Pedro de Inguanzoy Rivero, 1764—1836:
Ultimo prelado del antiguo regimen (Pamplona, 1965), 112—113.
      35. Raul Morodo and Ellas Diaz, “Tendencias y grupos politicos en las
Cortes de Cadiz y en las de 1820,” Cuadernos Hispanoamericanos, 201 (1966), 644.
      36. Ramon Solis, El Cadiz de las Cortes (Madrid, 1969), 267.
      37. Ibid.
      38. Ibid., 269.
      39. Marichal, “From Pistoia to Cadiz,” 104.
      40. Villapadierna, “El episcopado espanol,” 305.
      41. Aragones, Los frailes franciscos, I, 263.
      42. Villapadierna, “El episcopado espanol,” 309—311.
      43. Ibid. The impact of this work by Bartolome Jose Gallardo has been
studied by C. Torra, “Bartolome Jose Gallardo y el Diccionario Critico Burlesco,”
in Estudios sobre Cortes de Cadiz (Pamplona, 1967), 209—272.
      44. Miguel Artola, Los origenes de la Espaha contemporanea, 2 vols. (Madrid,
 1959), I, 452.
      45. Adas de las Cortes de Cadiz, 2 vols. (Madrid, 1964), II, 1058, 1067.
      46. Francisco Marti Gilabert, La abolition de la Inquisition en Espaha (Pam¬
plona, 1975), 153.
      47. Morodo and Diaz, “Tendencias y grupos politicos,” 645.
      48. Artola, Los origenes de la Espaha contemporanea, I, 530.
      49. Ibid., 531.
      50. Ibid., 534.
      51. Joan Brines Blasco, La desamortizacion eclesiastica en el Pais Valenciano
durante el trienio constitutional (Valencia, 1978), 17; Cayetano Barraquer y Rovi-
   288                                                Notes to Pages 102—113




ralta, Los religiosos en Cataluna durante la primera mitad del siglo XIX, 4 vols. (Bar¬
celona, 1915-1917), I, 54.
       52. Artola, Los origenes de la Espana contemporanea, I, 507.
       53. Ibid., 598, 603.
       54. Martinez Albiach, Religiosidad hispana, 184.
       55. Ibid., 192.
       56. Manuel Garzon Pareja, Diezmos y tributos del clero de Granada (Granada,
1974), 43.
       57. There were important regional variations in the level of destruction.
In Catalonia it was substantial, although a certain number of religious houses
escaped, but in Guadalajara, close to the capital and the main supply route to
Aragon and Catalonia, it was almost universal. Thus, the richest convent of the
city, Santa Clara, was converted into a barracks for French troops; the chapel
was made a storehouse. Most of the convent’s statues and religious objects were
lost or destroyed, and the fabric was damaged by the numerous fires soldiers lit
inside to keep warm in the chill Castilian winter. Francisco Layna Serrano, Los
conventos antiguos de Guadalajara (Madrid, 1943), 104—105.
       58. Cuenca Toribio, D. Pedro de Inguanzo, 181; Rais and Navarro, Historia
de la Provincia de Aragon, 64; J. Mesenguer Fernandez, “Notas para la historia
de la Provincia de Cartagena,” Archivo Ihero-Americano, 11, no. 43 (1951), 288.
       59. Libro en el qual se escriven las elecciones que se hacen en este convento
de N. Sra. del Carmen de la Ciudad de Orihuela (1683—1833), AHN, Clero, libro
355.
       60. Cuenca Toribio, D. Pedro de Inguanzo, 180.
       61. Higueruela del Pino, El clero de Toledo, 193.
       62. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, “Arias Teijeiro ante la restauracion re-
ligiosa,” Principe de Viana, 26 (1965), 349.
       63. AHN, Inquisicion, legs. 4490-4491.
       64. Villapadierna, “El episcopado espanol,” 315-316.
       65. Martinez Albiach, Religiosidad hispana, 185.
       66. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, “La Iglesia sevillana en la primera epoca
constitucional, 1812—1814” Hispania Sacra, 15 (1962), 155-156.



4. The Struggle Intensifies, 1814—1833

      1. Martinez Albiach, Religiosidad hispana, 577, 610.
      2. For an excellent general study of this period, see Josep Fontana, La
quiebra de la monarquia absoluta, 1814—1820 (Barcelona, 1971).
      3. Manuel Revuelta Gonzalez, Politica religiosa de los liberates del siglo XIX:
Trienio constitucional (Madrid, 1973), 4. Ironically, the Jesuits expelled from Spain
by royal absolutism in 1767 had supported the Cortes of Cadiz, hoping that the
constitutional regime would allow them to return. Revuelta Gonzalez, “La supre-
sion de la Compania de Jesus en Espana en 1820.” Razon y Fe, 182, nos. 170—
171 (1970), 104.
      4. Cuenca Toribio, “Arias Teijeiro ante la restauracion religiosa,” 344.
      5. Aragones, Los frailes franciscos, II, 319.
      6. Lopez Ferreiro, Historia de la . . . Iglesia de Santiago, XI, 283.
      7. Revuelta Gonzalez, Politica religiosa, 10.
      8. Martinez Albiach, Religiosidad hispana, 464-468.
      Notes to Pages 113—122                                                     289




       9. Ignacio Lasa, “Las confesiones de Joaquin Lorenzo Villanueva,” Scrip¬
torium Victoriense, 17 (1970), 320.
       10. Within the royal administration bureaucrats imbued with the legalist
ideals of the past continued to press for extensive state control over the Church.
Thus, the proposal to reestablish the Jesuits received an unenthusiastic response
from two of the three Crown attorneys responsible for recommending a policy to
the Council of Castile. The third advocated the order’s return with an argument
that surely must have appealed to the king: “since the destruction of the Company
the unfortunate era began which has weakened the empire of religion, authority
and knowledge of Catholic dogmas; unbelief and heresy have made terrible prog¬
ress.” Francisco Gutierrez de la Huerta, Dictamen del Fiscal Don . . . presentado y leido
en el Consejo de Castilla sobre el restablecimiento de los Jesuitas (Madrid, 1845), 288.
       11. Pedro Antonio Perlado, Los obispos espanoles ante la amnistia de 1817
(Pamplona, 1970), 49; Revuelta Gonzalez, Politico religiosa, 15.
       12. Cuenca Toribio, Sociologia de una elite de poder, 67.
        13. G. Lemeunier, “La part de Dieu: Recherches sur la levee des dimes au Dio¬
cese de Cartagene-Murcie,” Melanges de la Casa de Velazquez, 12 (1976), 379—380.
        14. Hermann, “Les revenus des eveques espagnols,” 196; Revuelta Gon¬
zalez, Polttica religiosa, 31—32.
        15. Historia del Real Monasterio de Poblet, VI, 107.
        16. Fontana, La quiebra de la monarquia, 202—210.
        17. Aragones, Los frailes franciscos, I, 319—321.
        18. Cristobal Perez Biala, bishop of Jaen, to the King, July 17, 1816. AHN,
Consejos, leg. 15884, exp. 1; Manuel Revuelta Gonzalez, “Clero viejo y clero
 nuevo en el siglo XIX,” in Estudios historicos sobre la Iglesia espanola contemporanea,
ed. J. Andres Gallego et al. (El Escorial, 1979), 162-163.
        19. “Exposicion del Senor Obispo de Pamplona” (1820), in Coleccion ecle¬
siastica espanola, 14 vols. (Madrid, 1823), III, 173.
       20. Francisco Xavier Tapia, “Las relaciones Iglesia-Estado durante el primer
experimento liberal en Espana, 1820—1823,” Revista de Estudios Politicos, no. 173
 (1970), 69.
       21. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, “La Iglesia espanola en el trienio con-
 stitucional, 1820—1823,” Hispania Sacra, 18 (1965), 338.
       22. Morodo and Diaz, “Tendencias y grupos politicos,” 655.
       23. Revuelta Gonzalez, Politica religiosa, 130-131.
       24. Juan Mercader Riba, “Origenesdel anticlericalismo espanol,” Hispania,
 123 (1973), 109.
       25. Aragones, Los frailes franciscos, II, 30, 47.
       26. Manuel Revuelta Gonzalez, “Los planes de reforma eclesiastica durante
el trienio constitucional,” Miscelanea Comillas, nos. 56—57 (1972), 13—15.
       27. Dictamen de la Comision Eclesiastica sobre el nuevo plan de Iglesias metro-
politanas y catedrales de la Monarquia espanola (Madrid, 1821), 4.
       28. Ibid., 85.
       29. Proyecto de deereto acerca de nueva demarcacion de parroquias y dotacion de
parrocos (Madrid, 1821), 115—122.
       30. Francesc de Colldeforns, Les parrdquies Barcelonines en el segle XIX (Bar¬
celona, 1936), 47.
       31. Only 500 Spanish Jesuits had survived from the expulsion of 1767,
but the order quickly won new recruits between 1814 and 1820 in spite of the
 general decline of vocations among the regular clergy. L. Frias, Historia de la
   290                                                Notes to Pages 122—132




Compania de Jesus en su asistencia moderna de Espana, 2 vols. (Madrid, 1923), I,
103; Revuelta Gonzalez, “La supresion de la Compania de Jesus,” 110.
       32. Ibid., 108. The return of the Jesuits was by no means welcomed by all
the clergy. The canons of the collegiate church of San Isidro, a capitular com¬
munity created by Charles III to occupy the former Jesuit church of San Isidro,
the city’s largest, resented the order’s return. So did other groups of priests,
secular and regular, forced to move from quarters repossessed by the Jesuits.
       33. Morodo and Diaz, “Tendencias y grupos politicos,” 659.
       34. Thus, Asturias retained all 6 of its religious houses; Galicia lost only
7 of 48. Moreover, the orders suffered in different proportions. The Caked
Mercedarians lost 61 of their 80 houses, the Dominicans 133 of 220, the Cap¬
uchins 76 of 114. But the Franciscans as a whole lost only 143 of 454 friaries.
Revuelta Gonzalez, Politico, religiosa, 246. There were also differences in the
geographic distribution of monastic closings within regions. In Valencia, for
example, closings were extensive in some districts, but none took place in Alcoy
during the entire period of liberal rule. There, as in certain other jurisdictions,
local magistrates and officials with responsibility for implementing the govern¬
ment’s decrees refused to act and got away with it. Brines Blasco, La desamorti-
zacion eclesiastica en el Pais Valenciano, 99, 101.
       35. Juan Antonio Llorente (1756—1823) had been active among ecclesias¬
tical reformers since the 1780’s. He enthusiastically supported the suppression
of the regulars and the Inquisition by Joseph Napoleon and published a cele¬
brated critical history of the Inquisition, Histoire critique de VInquisition d’Espagne,
4 vols. (Paris, 1817-1818). A list of 355 ecclesiastics accused of being addicted
to the exaltado Church drawn up in 1823 and forwarded to Rome is dominated
by clerics occupying posts in cathedral chapters and by parish priests. Vicente
Carcel Orti, “Masones eclesiasticos espanoles durante el trienio liberal, 1820-
 1823,” Archivum Historiae Pontificae, 9 (1971), 269—277.
       36. Revuelta Gonzalez, “Los planes de reforma,” 40-45.
       37. Historia del Real Monasterio de Poblet, VI, 107.
       38. Aragones, Los frailes franciscos, II, 76.
       39. Ibid., 54-55.
       40. Ramiro Viola Gonzalez, “Incidencias religiosas durante el periodo con-
stitucional (1820-1823) en la diocesis de Lerida,” Anthologica Annua, 20 (1973),
756, 778-781.
       41. Vicente Conejero Martinez, “El clero liberal y secularizado de Barce¬
lona (1820-1823),” Revista Internacional de Sociologia, no. 34 (1976), 32-35.
       42. Historia del Real Monasterio de Poblet, VI, 128.
       43. Felix Torres Amat, Vida del Ilmo, Senor Felix Amat, Arzobispo de Palmyra
(Madrid, 1835), 368; Caspar Feliu i Montfort, La clerecia catalana durant el trienni
liberal (Barcelona, 1972), 176.
       44. Cuenca Toribio, D. Pedro de Inguanzo, 222.
       45. Revuelta Gonzalez, Politico religiosa, 103.
       46. Higueruela del Pino, El clero de la diocesis de Toledo, 11; Lopez-Arevalo,
Un cabildo catedral de la Vieja Castilla, 201.
       47. Revuelta Gonzalez, Politico religiosa, 283. One of the few good studies
on the disamortization of 1820-1823 is that of Brines Blasco, La desamortizacion
eclesiastica en el Pals Valenciano.
       48. Revuelta Gonzalez, Politico religiosa, 60—74.
       49. Barraquer y Roviralta, Religiosos en Cataluna, I, 602-603.
      Notes to Pages 132—141                                                  291




       50. Alberto Gil Novales, Las sociedades patrioticas, 1820—1823, 2 vols. (Ma¬
drid, 1975), I, 43.
       51. Ibid.
       52. Cuartero y Huerta, Historia de la Cartuja de Santa Maria, 512.
       53. Michael J. Quin, A Visit to Spain (London, 1824), 94.
       54. Writing in 1830, that is seven years after the restoration of absolutism
and clerical influence, an English visitor remarked on the predominance of
women at church services in Madrid’s largest church, San Isidro: “I do not believe
there were 300 listeners to the discourse, and of these at least five-sixths were
women.” He noted, however, that although in Madrid “there is little attention
paid to the ceremonials of religion”; in Valencia by contrast he had never ob¬
served “so great a number of persons at devotion.” H. D. Inglis, Spain in 1830,
2 vols. (London, 1831), I, 167, 159; II, 329.
       55. Luis Alonso Tejada, Ocaso de la Inquisicion en los ultimos anos del reinado
de Fernando VII (Madrid, 1969), 88. Upon his return to power in 1823, Ferdinand
VII launched a campaign of persecution against freemasonry. Since 1814 the
king had seen the sinister hand of the masons behind the conspiracies directed
against him. The king’s intense preoccupation with freemasonry as an instrument
of revolution and irreligion began that obsessive identification of masonry and
liberalism by conservative forces that would contribute to ideological warfare in
Spain well into the twentieth century. Jose A. Ferrer Benimeli, who has studied
the origins of Spanish freemasonry, argued, however, that Ferdinand vastly
overestimated the masons’ role in the revolutionary politics of the time. Masoneria
espanola contemporanea, 2 vols. (Madrid, 1980), I, 134—141.
       56. The indictment against Somoza, one of the members of the commission
that proposed radical reform of the Church to the Cortes in 1823, charged him
with having been a leading member of the “partido de exaltacion”; Riego was
accused of being the “general agent” of the constitutionalists in Oviedo. The
parish priest of San Roque, Manuel Villalba, was said to have been one of the
individuals of “greatest exaltation and scandal” in the town as well as being “head
of the liberals.” AHN, Consejos, legs. 16036, exps. 1, 2; 15600, exp. 1; 15649,
exp. 3.
       57. Tejada, Ocaso de la Inquisicion, 50.
       58. Ibid., 96, 116-123.
       59. Ibid., 140-141.
       60. Ibid., 150.
       61. Ibid., 151.
       62. A visitor in Catalonia recalled the process of repossession: “Those who
had paid for the land were dispossessed with little ceremony, and the materials
which they had been collecting to erect stores were now fastened upon by the
returning fugitives [Capuchins] to renew the demolished combination of church
and cell, and cloister.” A. S. MacKenzie, A Year in Spain, 2 vols. (London, 1831),
I, 38.
       63. Individual religious houses did succeed in recruiting new members,
such as the Franciscan nuns of Cosentaynal, who received twelve recruits between
1824 and 1833 compared with four between 1814 and 1820. But the male
Franciscans were less fortunate. Membership in the province of Cartagena
fell from 530 in 1820 to 469 in 1834; a similar decline took place in the province
of San Gabriel in Extremadura. AHN, Clero, libro 283; J. Mesenguer Fernandez,
“Notas para la historia de la Provincia de Cartagena,” 288; A. Barrado, “La
   292                                                Notes to Pages 141—153




provincia descalza de San Gabriel y sus libros de patentes, 1824-1835,” in Archivo
Ibero-Americano, 28, nos. 109-110 (1968), 149.
      64. Saez Marin, Datos sobre la Iglesia espanola, 200.
      65. Although Manuel Revuelta Gonzalez in his recent work, La exclaustra¬
cion, 1833-1840 (Madrid, 1976), 69-79, points out that many religious observed
a respectable standard in their convents and monasteries, there had in fact been
no serious reform of the problems troubling the orders since the eighteenth
century.
      66. Julian Barrio Barrio, Felix Torres Amat, 1772—1847: Un obispo reformador
(Rome, 1976), 67, 82, 102-106.
      67. Vicente Carcel Ortl, Politica eclesial de los gobiernos liberales espanoles,
1830-1840 (Pamplona, 1975), 85—86.
       68. MacKenzie, Year in Spain, II, 32; Inglis, Spain in 1830, I, 30.
       69. Baldomero Jimenez Duque, La espiritualidad en el siglo XIX espanol (Ma¬
drid, 1974), 140-143.

5. The Destruction of the Old Regime Church, 1833—1843

       1. La Revista Catolica (1842), 141.
       2. Diego Sevilla Andres, El derecho de libertad religiosa en el constitucionalismo
espanol hasta 1936 (Valencia, 1972), 5.
       3. La Voz de la Religion (1837), 167; (1838), 180.
       4. Jesus Longares Alonso, Politica y religion en Barcelona, 1833—1843 (Ma¬
drid, 1976), 182.
       5. Ibid., 207.
       6. For discussion of the political history of this period, see Carlos Marichal,
Spain, 1834-1844 (London, 1977); and Raymond Carr, Spain, 1808—1939 (Ox¬
ford, 1966), chaps. 5, 6.
       7. Revuelta Gonzalez, La exclaustracion, 99.
       8. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, Iglesia y burguesia en la Espana liberal (Jaen,
1979), 91-92 n. 4.
       9. Carcel Orti, Politica eclesial, 111 — 112, 215; Revuelta Gonzalez, La ex¬
claustracion, 93.
       10. Revuelta Gonzalez in La exclaustracion, 180—190, provides the most
detailed treatment of the work of the junta. The government’s caution was reflected
in the slow pace of change in other areas of ecclesiastical policy. Its initiatives
in 1834 were few and far between—the formal suppression of the Inquisition,
which had last functioned in 1819, and a decree of March 9 suspending the
filling of vacant benefices unconnected to the cure of souls. Income from the
canonries, chaplaincies left vacant, was used to reduce the national debt.
        11. Revuelta Gonzalez, La exclaustracion, 140.
        12. AHN, Consejos, leg. 3951, exp. 6.
        13. Carcel Ortl, Politica eclesial, 238.
        14. “Actual estado del arzobispado de Tarragona,” El Catolico, no. 139
(1840), 377.
        15. Revuelta Gonzalez, La exclaustracion, 208. This work provides the most
detailed modern account of the events of July 17 along with the older work of
L. Frias, Historia de la Compania de Jesus, I, 610—650. There is not, however, a
good study of the social aspects of the matanza. A British visitor present in the
city during the disturbances noted the role of the militiamen, the Urbanos, in
       Notes to Pages 154-164                                                      293




the violence. When they reached the scene, “many of them joined the assassins,
instead of helping to deliver them into the hands of justice.” Madrid in 1835:
Sketches of the Metropolis of Spain and Its Inhabitants, 2 vols. (London, 1836), II,
365.
       16. Revuelta Gonzalez, La exclaustracion, 265.
       17. Ibid., 276-277.
       18. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, La Iglesia espanola ante la revolucion liberal
(Madrid, 1971), 28-30.
       19. The following section on the suppression of the regular clergy is drawn
from Revuelta Gonzalez, La exclaustracion, 361-372.
       20. Peter Janke, Mendizabal y la instauracion de la monarquia constitucional en
Espana, 1790-1853 (Madrid, 1974), 274.
       21. Antonio Colomer Viadel, “El enfrentamiento de intereses en la division
del movimiento liberal, 1833-1836,” Revista de Estudios Politicos, no. 186 (1972),
 109-142.
       22. Cristina: Historia contemporanea escrita por los primeros literatos de la Corte,
2 vols. (Madrid, 1844-1845), I, 252.
       23. Janke, Mendizabal, 237.
       24. Francisco Simon Segura, La desamortizacion espanola del siglo XIX (Ma¬
drid, 1973), 87.
       25. Convents with more than twenty nuns were allowed to remain open,
although they were forbidden to receive novices. Nuns actively engaged in char¬
itable work, such as the Sisters of Charity, were permitted to continue their
activity in hospitals, old age homes, and orphanages, but only as private citizens
engaged by local governments.
       26. Segura, La desamortizacion, 85.
       27. Ibid.
       28. Ibid., 110.
       29. See pp. 229-231.
       30. In the restoration and expansion of the male orders after 1874, the
contributions of private donors were indispensable. Thus, the Jesuit expansion
in the order’s province of Toledo after 1880 was largely funded by aristocratic
donations. The property of their novitiate in Granada was given by a distin¬
guished family, the Perez de Pulgar, and the cost of the chapel was borne by
the marquesa de Blanco Hermoso. The Jesuit college of Chamartin in Madrid,
opened at the request of the aristocracy, was located on land donated by the
duque de Pastrana, whose wife later sold a Rubens painting to Baron Rothschild
to finance the cost of construction. Manuel Cadenas, La provincia de Toledo de la
Compania de Jesus, 1880-1914 (Madrid, 1916), 16, 38.
       31. Manuel Tunon de Lara, Estudios sobre el siglo XIX espanol (Madrid, 1972),
56-58.
       32. The State quickly realized that its financial difficulties would prevent
paying the clergy from general revenues. On an annual basis, therefore, collec¬
tion of the tithe was authorized for 1837, 1838, 1839, and 1840, although con¬
tinued evasion and the appropriation of some tithe income by the government
meant that the Church received only a portion of the revenue generated.
      33. Carcel Ortf, Politica eclesial, 416-417.
      34. Judas Jose Romo Gamboa, Independencia constante de la Iglesia hispana
y necesidad de un nuevo concordato (Madrid, 1843), 341.
      35. Carcel Ortf, Politica eclesial, 415.
   294                                               Notes to Pages 164-175




       36. Barrio, Felix Torres Amat, 127.
       37. Pedro Gonzalez de Vallejo, Discurso canonico-legal sobre los nombramientos
de gobernadores hechos por los cabildos en los presentados por S.M. para obispos de sus
iglesias (Madrid, 1839), 89.
       38. Severo Andriani y Escofet, bishop of Pamplona, Juicio analitico sobre el
discurso canonico-legal que did a luz elExmo. SenorD. Pedro Gonzalez Vallejo (Madrid,
 1839), xiii.
       39. Barrio, Felix Torres Amat, 137.
       40. El Catolico, no. 52 (1840), 412.
       41. Ibid., no. 54 (1840), 429; no. 30 (1840), 235-236; no. 63 (1840), 501—
502.
       42. Nancy Rosenblatt, “The Spanish Moderados and the Church,” Catholic
Historical Review, 57, no. 3 (1971), 409.
       43. Carcel Ortl, Politica eclesial, 303.
       44. Marichal, Spain, 1834-1844, 151-153.
       45. The text of the proposed law reorganizing the Church, derisively called
“Project to enslave and make Protestant the Spanish Church,” was reproduced
in El Catolico in its issue of June 21, 1841, no. 478, 649-652.
       46. Segura, La desamortizacion, 116.
       47. Ibid., 163, 152.
       48. “Circular sobre atestados o certificados de adhesion,” December 14,
 1841, reproduced in La Revista Catdlica (1842), 29—31.
       49. La Cruz (1842), 26.
       50. Ibid. (1842), 518.
       51. Ibid. (1842), 26.
       52. In spite of a government prohibition, the papal discourse was repro¬
duced in the Catholic press, see “Alocucion de Nuestro Santi'simo Padre Gregorio
XVI habida en el consistorio secreto de 1 de Marzo de 1841,” in El Catolico, no.
385 (1841), 631-635.
       53. La Cruz (1842), 98.
       54. Under the heading “Catholic Sentiments of the Spanish Clergy,” El
Catolico in successive issues of the spring and summer 1841 published letters of
support for the pope and against the government’s ecclesiastical policies. Thus,
a letter of the clergy of Medina del Campo, published on July 19, declared: “we
protest. . . that we are united . . . with the chair of St. Peter who speaks through
Gregory” and announced that the writers wished to join the priests “gloriously
fighting the battles of the Lord” against the danger to the Church posed by
liberal reforms.
       55. La Revista Catdlica (1842), 141.
       56. El Catolico, no. 469 (1841), 577.
       57. Barrio, Felix Torres Amat, 189.
       58. Ibid., 165.
       59. La Revista Catdlica (1842), 126.
       60. Ibid., 575-577.
     61. El Catolico, no. 644 (1841), 513\ La Cruz (1842), 182. Thus, in Astudillo
and Ciudad Real, the municipal governments refused to assess the Church tax
on local residents, thereby leaving the clergy without income of any kind.
     62. El Catolico, no. 494 (1841), 49-51.
     63. Antoni Jutglar, Ideologias y closes en la Espaha contemporanea, 2 vols.
(Madrid, 1968), I, 105.
      Notes to Pages 175—188                                                    295




      64. Ignasi Casanovas, Balmes: La seva vida, el seu temps, les seves obres, 3 vols.
(Barcelona, 1932), II, 473.
      65. Ibid., 368.
      66. Romo Gamboa, Independencia constante de la Iglesia hispana, 329, 336.
      67. La Revista Catolica (1844), 11, 13.
      68. Manuel Lopez Cepero, Sermon improvisado en la Santa Iglesia Catedral
de Sevilla, el dia 30 de julio de 1843 (Seville, 1843), 20.
      69. “Manifiesto y exposicion de la Junta de Salvacion de Valencia al Go-
bierno de la Nacion,” July 30, 1843, in La Revista Catolica (1844), 331-335.
      70. Accurate statistics for this period are difficult to find. Saez Marin es¬
timates the number of priests with cure of souls at 19,206, beneficed clergy at
6,013, and cathedral clergy at 1,815; Saez Marin, Datos sobre la Iglesia espanola,
327-333. The total of 27,034 compares in approximate terms with the 28,009
reported in the Boletin del clero espanol en 1848 (Madrid, 1849), 150.
      71. The suppression of parishes, another issue of contention between the
government and churchmen opposed to its plans, was carried out on a limited
scale—as, for example, in the diocese of Salamanca, where the bishop agreed
to the suppression of four of the six parishes in the town of Ledesma—but more
often as the result of unilateral action by the civil authorities. In Valladolid the
municipal government planned closure of seven of the city’s fourteen parishes.
The rationalization of parish structures progressed furthest in Old Castile, where
for historic reasons the number of churches often exceeded minimal pastoral
necessities. The reform, however, did not bring about any substantial reduction
in the overall number of parishes.
      72. La Revista Catolica (1842), 130.
      73. La Cruz (1842), 266, 78; El Catolico, no. 468 (1841), 569.
      74. M. Saez de Ocariz y Ruiz de Azua, “El cumplimiento pascual en la
ciudad de Logrono a lo largo del siglo XIX,” Berceo, no. 76 (1965), 275-279.
      75. La Cruz (1842), 170.
      76. Ibid. (1842), 178.
      77. J. Balmes, “La religion en Barcelona,” April 1, 1843, in La Sociedad,
4th ed. (Barcelona, 1873), 153.
      78. La Voz de la Religion (1837), 179; El Catolico, no. 620 (1841), 321. Jose
Antonio Portero has noted the difficulty the midcentury Church experienced
in adapting its moral code to the needs of the bourgeoisie. Pulpito e ideologta en
la Espana del siglo XIX (Zaragoza, 1978), 193—214.
      79. La Revista Catolica (1843), 31.
      80. El Catolico, no. 125 (1840), 168; no. 307 (1841), 7; no. 159 (1841), 537-
539.

6. The Conservative Church, 1844—1868
      1. This and the following quotation are drawn from La Revista Catolica
(1844), 109, 102-103.
      2. Terence McMahon Hughes, Revelations of Spain in 1845, 2 vols. (London,
1845), I, 106.
      3. Manuel Gonzalez Ruiz, “Vicisitudes de la propiedad eclesiastica en Es¬
pana durante el siglo XIX,” Revista Espanola de Derecho Canonico, 1 (1946), 403.
Royal decrees of July 26 and August 8, 1844, suspended the sales of the property
of secular clergy and convents of nuns. La Revista Catolica complained bitterly
of the frenetic pace of the sales in the months immediately preceding the sus-
  296                                              Notes to Pages 188-191




pension, even after the ministry of Narvaez, firmly committed to an accom¬
modation with the Church, took office in May 1844. La Revista Catolica (1844),
108.
      4. La Revista Catolica (1844), 17—21.
      5. Hughes, Revelations of Spain, I, 120.
      6. For a discussion of the political history of this period, see Carr, Spain,
227-246.
      7. Nancy Rosenblatt, “Church and State in Spain: A Study of Moderate
Liberal Politics in 1845,” Catholic Historical Review, 62, no. 4 (1976), 591.
      8. Federico Suarez, “Genesis del Concordato de 1851,” Ius Canonicum, 3
(1963), 98-99.
      9. Rosenblatt, “Church and State,” 594—598.
       10. El Catolico, no. 3672 (1851). For a general discussion of the political
significance of the 1851 settlement, see Nancy Rosenblatt, “The Concordat of
1851 and Its Relation to Moderate Liberalism in Spain,” Iberian Studies, no. I
(1978), 30-39.
       11. Jose Luis Cornelias, Los moderados en elpoder, 1844—1854 (Madrid, 1970),
298.
       12. The concordat provided for the creation of three new dioceses—Ciu¬
dad Real, Madrid, and Vitoria—and the union of several dioceses with small
populations to larger ones—Albarraci'n to Teruel, Barbastro to Huesca, Ceuta
to Cadiz, Ciudad Rodrigo to Salamanca, Ibiza to Mallorca, Solsona to Vich,
Tenerife to Canarias, and Tudela to Pamplona. Article 5 of the concordat,
reproduced in Suarez, “Genesis del Concordato,” 234.
       13. The question, still unresolved when the Second Republic was pro¬
claimed in 1931, arose from the interpretation of Article 29: “In order that in
the entire peninsula there should be sufficient number of ministers and evan¬
gelical workers whom Prelates may use to conduct missions in the towns of their
dioceses, to aid parish priests, to assist the sick, and for other works of charity
and public utility, the Government of Her Majesty . . . will soon take convenient
measures in order to establish where necessary, having heard the diocesan prel¬
ates, religious houses and congregations of the orders of St. Vincent de Paul,
St. Philip Neri and another order approved by the Holy See.” (my italics). Whether
the phrase “another order” meant simply that one additional order for the entire
country would be added to the two already authorized or that each bishop might
invite whatever order he deemed necessary to work in his diocese provoked
dispute from the moment of its publication. The Church, of course, accepted
the second interpretation; opponents of the orders, the first. Ibid., 243.
       14. Ibid., 233-234.
       15. In its issue of May 13, 1851, no. 3726, El Catolico remarked: “it should
not be regarded as strange that there should be lively fears that . . . what appears
favorable to the Church in this Concordat will not be fulfilled, . . . and even that
what is favorable to the Church will be turned to its disadvantage.”
       16. Jaime Balmes believed that 125 million reales was the minimum nec¬
essary for the salaries of the parish clergy and that the expenditures on culto y
clero in the years preceding his calculation (made for 1840) could not satisfy
“even the most urgent necessities.” He believed that his estimate of 265 million
reales was barely adequate. Observaciones sociales, politicos y economicas sobre los
bienes del clero (Vich, 1840), 83. The State budgeted 75,784,806 reales for the
parish clergy in 1851. El Catolico, no. 3659 (1851).
      Notes to Pages 192—201                                                     297




       17. El Catdlico, no. 3726 (1851).
       18. For a detailed study of the thought of Cortes, see John T. Graham,
Donoso Cortes (Columbia, Missouri, 1974).
       19. El Catdlico, nos. 3658, 3710 (1851).
       20. L. Frias, La Provincia de Espana en la Compania de Jesus, 1815—1863
(Madrid, 1914), 120-121.
       21. C. Rabaza, Historia de las Escuelas Pias en Espana, 4 vols. (Valencia, 1917),
IV; A. M. Alonso Fernandez, Historia documental de la Congregacion de las Hermanns
Carmelitas de la Caridad (Madrid, 1968), 393.
       22. La Cruz (1854), 737-738.
       23. Boletm Eclesiastico del Arzobispado de Toledo, March 4, 1854.
       24. The entire pastoral letter (April 5, 1854) was printed in La Cruz (1854),
516-604.
       25. Ibid., 266, 545.
       26. The best study of the revolution of 1854 is V. G. Kiernan, The Revolution
of 1854 in Spanish History (Oxford, 1966).
       27. La Cruz observed with a certain grim satisfaction: “The thirst for de¬
struction . . . which sacked and burned the luxurious residences of some min¬
isters, not only respected buildings devoted to the cult but also the residences
of prelates and priests. Most of the towns where the insurrection spread con¬
ducted themselves in the same manner; and although it is no great merit to
destroy churches and burn rectories and religious houses, such is the ordinary
nature of revolutions that it is necessary to take into account the excesses that
are not committed” (1854), 414.
       28. Ibid., 416.
       29. Ibid., 404.
       30. The work in question was La Reaccion y la Revolucion. La Cruz (1855),
 101.
       31. This and the preceding quotation are from the constitutional text
reproduced in La Revista Catolica (1855), 361.
       32. Kiernan, Revolution of 1854, 126—128. According to La Revista Catolica,
Isabella II called O’Donnell and the minister of war, Luzuriaga, to the palace
on February 7 and declared “her explicit desire that in the religious section of
the new Constitution the religious unity of Spaniards should be preserved”
(1854), 195.
       33. Ibid., 197; La Estrella, July 16, 1855.
       34. La Cruz (1855), 114.
       35. Segura, La desamortizacion, 175 n. 97.
       36. La Cruz (1855), 410.
       37. Thus, the bishop of Plasencia instructed his clergy that “they should
not resist the orders of the government; but they should refuse absolutely to
take direct or indirect part in the sale of ecclesiastical property.” La Revista Catolica
(1855), 173.
       38. Ibid. (1855), 177.
       39. “Despacho dirigido al Ministro Plenipotenciario de S. M. cerca de la
Santa Sede y circulado a todos los Representantes de Espana en el extranjero,”
June 21, 1855, in ibid., 225; “Alocucion de nuestro Santo Padre Pio
IX, . . . pronunciada en el consistorio secreto del dia 26 de Julio de 1855” in La
Cruz (1855), 249.
       40. Ibid., 474. A government circular to the bishops (April 12, 1855) com-
   298                                               Notes to Pages 201-208




 plained that only six prelates had submitted plans for the restructuring of par¬
 ishes. La Revista Catolica (1855), 430.
        41. “Presupuesto general eclesiastico, aprobado por las Cortes en 20 de
junio ultimo,” in ibid., 46-48.
        42. “Real orden circular, sobre separacion de curas parrocos y economos
 por circunstancias politicas,” May 27, 1855, in ibid., 45.
        43. “Circular al venerable clero de la diocesis de Badajoz,” June 11, 1855,
 ibid., 98-99.
        44. La Cruz (1855), 199.
        45. Pastoral Letter of Fray Gregorio Sanchez Rubio, February 2, 1854, La
 Cruz (1854), 67.
        46. Pastoral Letter, April 5, 1854, in ibid., 530—531.
        47. La Revista Catolica (1855), 175.
        48. Nelson Duran, La Union Liberaly la modernizacion de la Espana isabelina:
 Una convivencia frustrada, 1854—1868 (Madrid, 1979), 130-131.
        49. La Cruz (1858), 592—593; Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, Estudios sobre
 la Iglesia espanola del XIX (Madrid, 1973), 78. Extravagant rhetoric comparing
 the campaigns abroad to the great battles of the Spanish past such as Las Navas
 and Lepanto passed far beyond the practical implications of the modest military
 victories achieved.
        50. Antonio Claret (1807-1870), the son of a Catalan textile manufacturer,
 was ordained in 1835. After serving as a parish assistant, he began a successful
 career as a missionary in Catalonia during the 1840’s, His success as an evangelist
 as well as his initiatives in religious propaganda, catechesis, and the foundation
 of new orders made him one of the most prominent clerics in the Spanish
 Church. He served in Cuba as archbishop of Santiago before becoming royal
 confessor, a post he held until the fall of Isabella II in 1868. He died in exile
 in France in 1870. The standard biography of Claret is Cristobal Fernandez,
 San Antonio Maria Claret (Madrid, 1950).
        51. This quotation and the following are drawn from the perceptive study
 of Jose Maria Vigil Gallego, “San Antonio Maria Claret: La poh'tica de un apoli-
 ticismo,” in La politica de la Iglesia apolitica (Valencia, 1975), 88—89.
        52. The case reached the British House of Commons, where it was the
 subject of parliamentary debate. Sir Robert Peel even visited the victim in a
 Spanish jail. Bonifas Aime, Matamoros: L’Aube de la seconde reforme en Espagne
 (Pau, 1967), 29. In spite of the Church’s obsession with the Protestant threat,
 the number of religious dissenters was still insignificant by 1870—2,500 formal
 church members, 8,000 who attended services. C. J. Bartlett, “Religious Tol¬
 eration in Spain in the Nineteenth Century,” Journal of Ecclesiastical History, 8
 (1956-57), 210.
        53. Alberto Jimenez, Ocasoy restauracion: Ensayo sobre la universidad espanola
 moderna (Mexico, 1948), 132.
        54. La Cruz (1863), 167.
        55. “Esposicion dirigida a S. M. por el . . . Sr. Arzobispo de Valencia en
union de sus sufraganeos,” August 19, 1863, in ibid., 200.
        56. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio and S. Miranda Garda, “Notas para el
 pontificado burgales de Fernando de la Puente y Primo de Rivera (1858-1867),”
in Estudios historicos sobre la Iglesia espanola contemporanea, 294—296.
        57. J. M. Goni Galarraga, “El reconocimiento de Italia y monsenor Claret,”
Anthologica Annua, 17 (1970), 379-380.
      Notes to Pages 209-218                                                      299




7. Church and Society, 1844—1868

       1. La Cruz (1902), 570.
       2. Angel Riesco Terrero, Evolucion historica de las parroquias en Salamanca
(Salamanca, 1966), 44—54.
       3. El Catolico, no. 3659 (1851), 361.
       4. Censo de la poblacion de Espana, 1860 (Madrid, 1863), 756-759; Saez
Marin, Datos sobre la Iglesia espanola, 291, 356. The seminary figures, however,
include many students who did not intend to pursue a clerical career but were
simply obtaining an education.
       5. Ibid., 143.
       6. A. Garda Figar, Vida del Exmo. e Ilmo. Sr. Doctor Don Narciso Martinez
Izquierdo (Madrid, 1960), 156—157, 163.
       7. Estadistica de las communidades religiosas existentes en Espana el 1 de abril de
1923 (Madrid, 1923), xxiii.
       8. Saez Marin, Datos sobre la Iglesia espanola, 286.
       9. “Datos estadisticos relativos al personal y a la dotacion del clero y del
culto,” La Cruz (1870), 400-402.
       10. F. Rodriguez de Coro, El obispado de Vitoria durante el sexenio revolucicmario
(Vitoria, 1976), 315—323; El Consultor de los Parrocos, no. 25 (1872), 195—196.
       11. La Cruz (1854), 569.
       12. Ibid. (1863), 44.
       13. Cuenca Toribio, Sociologia de una elite de poder, 165.
       14. J. M. de Nadal, El Obispo Caixal (Barcelona, 1959), 72.
       15. Salva was a native of Mallorca who had supported the liberal cause in
 1810 and 1820. In 1820 he willingly took the required oath to the constitution
and supported the proliberal bishop of the diocese, Gonzalez Vallejo. The res¬
toration of Ferdinand VII to absolute power in 1823 forced Salva into exile in
France, from where he returned in the 1830’s. His brother was elected a pro-
gresista senator in 1846. A. Ramos Perez, El Obispo Salva: Un capitulo en la historia
de Mallorca del s. XIX (Palma de Mallorca, 1968), 35-53.
       16. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, El episcopado espanol en el pontificado de
Pio IX (Valencia, 1974), 26. Of the sixty-eight prelates for whom information
on social status is available, sixteen were noblemen, nine were from wealthy
families, eleven from the middle classes, and thirty-two from the lower classes,
including many of peasant origin.
       17. Differences of wealth and prestige among the dioceses of the Spanish
Church, although less glaring than in the eighteenth century, were still strong
enough to encourage the movement of bishops from lesser to more important
sees. The career ambitions of many bishops affected diocesan government ad¬
versely in the opinion of Cuenca Toribio. Ibid., 66.
       18. Rafael Maria Sanz de Diego, Medio siglo de relaciones Iglesia-Estado: El
Cardenal Antolm Monescillo y Viso, 1811—1897 (Madrid, 1979), 11.
       19. Ibid., 182-183.
       20. Monescillo objected, for example, to the arrangement reached between
the Narvaez government and the papacy without any episcopal consultation to
reduce the number of holy days of obligation. He also complained of a govern¬
ment order in 1866 imposing a reduction in clerical salaries, which he declared
was “contrary to the desire of the Church to conserve good harmony with the
civil power.” Ibid., 181.
   300                                               Notes to Pages 218—228




       21. Vicente Carcel Orti, Segunda epoca del Seminario Conciliar de Valencia,
1845-1896 (Castellon de la Plana, 1967), 8-9; A. Martin, “La supresion de las
facultades de Teologia en las universidades espanolas (1852),” Anthologica Annua,
18 (1971), 609—615. In 1854 the progresistas restored these faculties. They
survived until 1868, but played a minor role in clerical education.
       22. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, Notas para el estudio de los seminarios es-
panoles en el pontificado de Pio IX (Valencia, 1973), 67.
       23. La Cruz (1858), 265.
       24. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, “Notas para el estudio de los seminarios
espanoles en el pontificado de Pio IX,” Saitabi (1973), 61-62.
       25. I. Garcia Herrera, El Cardenal Sancha, 1833—1909 (Madrid, 1969), 47.
       26. Kodasver (pseud.), Medio siglo de vida diocesana matritense, 1913—1963
(Madrid, 1967), 34.
       27. El Catdlico, no. 3832 (1851), 610.
       28. Miguel Izard, Industrializacion y obrerismo (Barcelona, 1973), 87; La Cruz
(1870), 409; El Catdlico, no. 3659 (1851), 361.
       29. Juan Villada, El matrimonio del clero (Valladolid, 1896), 38. Villada, a
parish priest in the diocese of Burgos, provides one of the few highly critical
though biased accounts of the condition of the lower clergy in the nineteenth
century. Villada’s advocacy of marriage for the clergy and his own avowal that
he had been living with his housekeeper for many years led the ecclesiastical
authorities to expel him from his parish.
       30. J. Vicens Vives, Historia de Espanay America, 5 vols. (Barcelona, 1961),
IV2, 150; Cuenca Toribio, “Los seminarios espanoles en el pontificado de Pio
IX,” 70.
       31. Juan Planas, Arte pastoral o metodo para governar bien una parroquia, 2nd
ed., 3 vols. (Barcelona, 1860), I, 55, 11, 174.
       32. Ibid., 54, 163-167.
       33. Ibid., 57, 59, 33, 27.
       34. Hilario Herranz Estables, El parroco y la parroquia en los tiempos presentes
(Barcelona, 1923), 44, 47.
       35. Villada, El matrimonio del clero, 21, 24.
       36. Antonio Calero, Movimientos sociales en Andalucia, 1820—1936 (Madrid,
 1976), 14-17.
       37. Santiago Jose Garcia Mazo, “Sermon sobre la corrupcion de co-
stumbres,” in Sermones (Valladolid, 1847), 97.
       38. Antonio Maria Claret, Epistolario, ed. J. M. Gil, 3 vols. (Madrid, 1970),
I, 1389-91.
       39. Jose Domingo Costa y Borras, Obras, ed. R. de Ezenarro, 6 vols. (Bar¬
celona, 1865), editor’s introduction, I, 33.
       40. Ibid., 24.
       41. Antolin Monescillo, Manual de seminarista (Madrid, 1848), 19.
       42. Portero, Pulpito e ideologia, 215.
       43. Casimir Marti, “Datos sobre la sensibilidad social de la Iglesia durante
los primeros 30 anos del movimiento obrero en Espana,” in Aproximacion a la
historia social de la Iglesia espahola, ed. M. Andres et al., 128.
       44. Ibid., 133-134.
       45. Pastoral Letter, January 30, 1858, in La Revista Catolica (1858), 401-
402.
       46. El Catdlico, no. 213 (1840), 225.
      Notes to Pages 228—238                                                 301




      47. La Revista Catolica (1858), 401.
      48. Josep Benet and Casimir Marti, Barcelona a mitjan segle XIX: El moviment
obrer durante el Bienni Progresista, 1854-1856, 2 vols. (Barcelona, 1976), I, 205-
206.
      49. La Cruz (1856), 83.
      50. There was one apparent exception to the lack of ecclesiastical imagi¬
nation before the problem of working-class discontent. In 1851 a former Car¬
melite friar, Francisco Palau, founded in Barcelona the School of Virtue (Escuela
de Virtud) in the church of San Agustin. The school provided instruction on
social questions to the workers. During its three-year history it attracted nu¬
merous students. In 1854 the progresistas accused Palau of fomenting unrest.
The government closed the school and arrested its director. There is, however,
no evidence that the School of Virtue was a source of working-class agitation.
H. J. Pastor Miralles, “La obra socio-religiosa del P. Francisco Palau en Barcelona,
1851—1854,” in Una figura carismatica del siglo XIX: El P. Francisco Palau y Quer,
O.C.D., Apostol y Fundador (Burgos, 1973), 507—512.
      51. Peset, La universidad espahola, 461—479, 557—566.
      52. Ibid., 577-578.
      53. Carr, Spain, 303.
      54. A. Ollero Tassara, Universidad y politico: Tradicion y secularizacion en el
siglo XIX (Madrid, 1972), 85.
      55. Richard Ford, A Handbook for Travellers in Spain, 2 vols. (London, 1845),
II, 158-159.
       56. Boletin Eclesiastico del Arzobispado de Toledo, no. 22 (1853), 143; no. 48
(1853), 335-336.
       57. La Cruz (1854), 644-645.
       58. William Christian has noted the connection of religious shrines in
northern Spain with monasteries and friaries and the corresponding decline in
specific devotions following the suppression of the regulars during the 1830’s.
Person and God in a Spanish Valley (New York, 1972), 53, 55.
       59. La Cruz (1858), 383-384.
       60. “Circular del Senor Obispo de Guadix sobre la dignidad con que ha
de celebrarse la Santa Misa,” La Cruz (1858), 162.
       61. Pedro R. Santidrian, El Padre Sarabia escribe su historia, 1875—1958
(Madrid, 1963), 31.
       62. La Cruz (1858), 298.
       63. Jimenez Duque, La espiritualidad en el siglo XIX espanol, 146—160.
       64. “Gacetilla devota de la Corte,” El Catolico, no. 3819 (1851), 475.
       65. Fernandez, San Antonio Maria Claret, 58, 121.
       66. Jose Maria Garganta, Francisco Coll: Fundador de las Dominicanas de la
Anunciata (Valencia, 1976), 155.
       67. Claret, Epistolario, I, 175—178.
       68. El Catolico, no. 3710 (1851), 163.
       69. La Cruz (1858), 876. The material following is drawn from an extensive
report on the Seville missions in ibid., 870-888.
       70. Ibid., 7-8, 88.
       71. El Catolico, no. 3642 (1851), 201; La Cruz (1858), 886; Rodriguez de
Coro, El obispado de Vitoria durante el sexenio revolucionario, 102—103.
       72. El Catolico, no. 3661 (1851), 379.
       73. La Cruz (1858), 887.
   302                                                Notes to Pages 238-253




       74. Costa y Borras, Obras, I, 25.
       75. La Cruz (1863), 252. The hostility of the progresistas to the missions
confirms their identification with the moderados. The Jesuit missions in San
Sebastian in 1854 provoked a war of opinion between their supporters, known
as “Russians,” and their opponents, called “Turks”—labels drawn, of course,
from the contending parties in the Crimean War, which had just begun. Ibid.
(1854), 707-708.
       76. Antonio Marfa Claret, Catecisme de la doctina cristiana, 2nd ed. (Bar¬
celona, 1850).
       77. Santiago Jose Garcia Mazo, Diario de la piedad o breve reglamento espiritual
dirigido a una alma deseosa de su salvacion (Valladolid, 1839).
       78. Antonio Marfa Claret, Camino recto y seguro para llegar al cielo, 181st ed.
(Madrid, 1955), 81.
       79. La Cruz (1858), 459.
       80. Garganta, Francisco Coll, 137.
       81. Boletin Oficial Eclesiastico del Obispado de Malaga (Malaga, 1887), 42.
       82. Pedro Marfa Ayala, Vida documentada del Sieruo de Dios, P. Francisco de
Paula Tarin de la Compania de Jesus (Seville, 1951), 217, 292.
       83. Benet and Marti, Barcelona a mitjan segle XIX, 203—204.
       84. La Revista Catolica (1858), 393, 397.
       85. R. Duocastella, “El mapa religioso de Espana,” in Cambio socialy religion
en Espana (Barcelona, 1975), 137.
       86. Eliseo Sainz Ripa, “La religiosidad en La Rioja durante el siglo XIX,”
Berceo, no. 83 (1972), 165, 181.
       87. Saez de Ocariz, “El cumplimiento pascual en la ciudad de Logrono,”
277-279.
       88. Herranz Estables, El parroco y la parroquia, 315.
       89. Francisco Peiro, El problema religioso-social de Espana, 2nd ed. (Madrid,
1936), 14-15.
       90. Claret, Epistolario, I, 691.
       91. Revista Popular, no. 109 (1873), 37.

8. From Revolution to Restoration, 1868—1874
       1. P. Mendez Mori, El Emmo. Sr. Cardenal Sanz y Fores, Obispo de Oviedo,
1868-1882 (Oviedo, 1928), 40-41; La Cruz (1869), 124-129; Juan Bautista Vilar,
El obispado de Cartagena durante el sexenio revolucionario (Murcia, 1973), 22.
      2. “Decreto del Gobierno Provisional,” October 12, 1868, in La Cruz (1868),
347.
      3. “Esposicion de el Obispo de Jaen al Exmo. Senor Ministro de Gracia y
Justicia.” October 25, 1868; “Carta circular del Arzobispo de Zaragoza al vene¬
rable clero de esta diocesis sobre la revolucion,” October 16, 1868, in La Cruz
(1868), 372, 365.
      4. Santiago Petschen, Iglesia-Estado: Un cambio politco: Las Constituyentes de
1869 (Madrid, 1974), 208.
      5. “Manifiesto del Gobierno Provisional a la nacion,” October 25, 1868, in
La Cruz (1868), 357-358.
      6. The quotations in this paragraph are drawn from ibid., 457, 464-469,
500.
      7. Ibid., 504. The first president of the association was the marques de
Viluma, a moderado and supporter of Isabella II. Of the two vice-presidents,
      Notes to Pages 254-260                                                    303




one, the conde de Vigo, was a moderado; the other, the conde de Orgaz, was a
Carlist. Jose Andres Gallego, LapoUtica religiosa en Espana, 1889—1913 (Madrid,
1975), 1.
      8. El Pensamiento Espanol, January 15, 1869.
      9. Ibid., January 12, 16, 1869.
      10. Ibid., January 11, 19, 1869.
      11. La Cruzada, February 6, 1869.
      12. La Cruz (1869), 270-278.
      13. The debates in the Cortes are extensively analyzed in Petschen, Iglesia-
Estado.
       14. El Pensamiento Espanol, February 4, 1869.
       15. Ibid., January 22, 1869.
       16. Carmen Llorca, Emilio Castelar: Precursor de la Democracia Cristiana (Madrid,
 1966), 142. Article 20 of the proposed constitutional text, “the Nation is obliged
to maintain the cult and the ministers of the Catholic Religion,” was approved
by a vote of 178 to 75; Article 21 establishing toleration was approved 164 to
40. Vicente Carcel Orti, Iglesia y revolucion en Espana, 1868-1874 (Pamplona,
 1979), 197.
       17. La Cruz (1869), 690-694.
       18. El Pensamiento Espanol, May 12, 1869.
       19. La Cruz (1869), 706—710, 141. The resistance of the bishops to the
oath has been treated in detail by Carcel Orti, Iglesia y revolucion, 412—437. In
the end, a face-saving formula was approved by the papacy to end the impasse
with the State over the oath for churchmen.
      20. This estimate was made by the journal of liberal clerics, La Armonia del
Catolicismo y Libertad, April 11, 1871. It may well have been an exaggeration.
      21. “Pastoral del Sr. Obispo de Almeria sobre eljuramento” June 15, 1870,
in La Cruz (1870), 140-141.
      22. “Esposicion de los Prelados espanoles residentes en Roma,” April 26,
 1870, in ibid., 465-467.
      23. La Armonia, December 17, 1870.
      24. Ibid., November 15, 1870.
      25. Ibid., October 19, 1871. La Armonia complained bitterly of the favors
the government dispensed toward clergy whose views were “anathema to liberty,”
while loyal priests were ignored. In the issue of November 19, 1870, the journal
published a pathetic letter from the parish priest of a village of eighty residents.
A cura for more than thirty years, he had not received the salary promised by
the State in a year even though he had sworn the oath to the constitution. “And
I have taken the oath so that I and my parish can die of hunger?” he asked
rhetorically.
      26. Jose Antonio Ortiz Urruela, La Iglesia catolicay la revolucion de septiembre
(Madrid, 1869), 27; “Esposicion del metropolitano y sufraganeos de Tarragona
a las Cortes Constituyentes contra el matrimonio civil,” June 19, 1869, in La Cruz
(1869), 183-187.
      27. El Consultor de los Parrocos, September 12, May 16, 1872. This journal
for the guidance of the parish clergy was explicit in its denunciation of civil
marriage. “The person married civilly, since he rejects the benediction of the
Church, is nothing more than a heretic and guilty of public concubinage.” Ibid.,
June 6, 1872. Similar conflicts took place between parish priests and local au¬
thorities over the ringing of church bells, which the latter claimed could be used
   304                                             Notes to Pages 261-266




in nonreligious situations, as, of course, they traditionally had been in many
villages.
       28. The text is reproduced in La Cruz (1870), 380; “Esposiciones de los
Senores Obispos sobre los proyectos de ley de 22 de marzo 1870,” in ibid., 471 —
479. Pressure to reduce the ecclesiastical budget had been constant since 1869
but was not initially successful. In the waning months of the democratic mon¬
archy, Montero Rios, again serving as minister of grace and justice, proposed
legislation, eventually passed by parliament, that reduced the budget for culto y
clero substantially. By this time, however, the issue was academic given the des¬
perate fiscal plight of the government, which had long since fallen behind in its
financial support of the Church. The terms of the law of December 26, 1872,
on ecclesiastical finances are discussed by Carcel Orti, Iglesia y revolucion, 282—
290.
       29. The delicate negotiations in 1870 over the candidacy of the duke of
Aosta for the Spanish throne further complicated relations between the Vatican
and Madrid. The government, however, urged Pius IX not to abandon Rome
upon its occupation by the kingdom of Italy. Jesus Pabon, Espana y la cuestion
romana (Madrid, 1972), 101. News of the occupation produced fervent expres¬
sions of support for the pope among Spanish Catholics. The Association of
Catholics appealed “for a collective manifestation of sorrow” because of the
“unjust despoliation” suffered by the pope when he lost his temporal power. La
Cruz (1870), 664. For a general discussion of relations between the papacy and
the Spanish government during this period, see Jeronimo Becker, Relaciones
diplomdticas entre Espana y la Santa Sede (Madrid, 1908), chap. 15.
       30. Decree, August 4, 1869, in La Cruz (1869), 225.
       31. Ibid., 378. Thus, Bishop Uriz, who presided over the diocese of Pam¬
plona in the heart of a region sympathetic to Carlism, preached on the “necessity
of peace and the horrors of civil war,” in effect repudiating the Carlist cause as
a reasonable political option for the Church. Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, So-
ciedad y clero en la Espana del XIX (Cordoba, 1980), 166—171.
       32. El Consultor de los Parrocos, October 16, 1872.
       33. La Cruz (1872), 485.
       34. M. T. Aubach Guiu, “El Instituto Catalan de artesanos y obreros: Obra
del Obispo Lluch y Garriga,” Salamanticensis, 22, no. 1 (1975), 124.
       35. El Consultor de los Parrocos, February 20, 1873.
       36. “Contestacion del Senor Arzobispo de Granada al Gobernador Civil
sobre el establecimiento de la Republica,” February 12, 1873, in La Cruz (1873),
296.
       37. Revista Popular, March 8, 1873, 114.
       38. El Consultor de los Parrocos, June 19, 1873.
       39. The best study on the Republic is C. A. M. Hennessy, The Federal
Republic in Spain: Pi y Margall and the Federal Republican Movement, 1868—1874
(Oxford, 1962).
       40. El Pensamiento Espahol, April 5, 21, 1873.
       41. The program of the Committee of Public Safety in Cadiz is reproduced
in ibid., July 19, 1873.
       42. La Cruz (1873), 246.
       43. The bishop of Cadiz, Felix Marla de Arrieta y Llano, remained in the
city during the height of the anticlerical campaign of the canton. He protested
against the measures being taken, but with moderation. After the short-lived
      Notes to Pages 266—272                                                  305




republican rising of December 1868, he opened a subscription to aid those
wounded during the struggle and petitioned the head of the provisional gov¬
ernment, General Serrano, to grant clemency to Republicans placed under arrest
upon the rebellion’s suppression. Carmen Llorca, Cadiz y la Primera Republica
(Cadiz, 1973), 25. Another reason for the lack of violence against the clergy may
have been the opposition of the cantonalists, save for those in Sanlucar, to social
revolution. The “political” character of the cantonalist movement in Andalusia
has been noted by Temma Kaplan, Anarchists of Andalusia, 1868-1903 (Princeton,
 1977), 108.
      44. The minister further assured the bishop that he would take the nec¬
essary action so that “the legitimate rights of the Church might be safe-guarded.”
Minister of Grace and Justice to Bishop Perez Fernandez, July 7, 1873, in La
Cruz (1873), 242.
      45. See the article “Los horrores de Alcoy” in ibid., 242—244.
      46. El Pensamiento Espanol, March 17, July 15, 1873.
      47. Ibid., suplemento, February 6, 1873.
      48. Ibid., September 6, 1873.
      49. E. Carro Celada, Curas guerrilleros en Espaiia (Madrid, 1971), 218, 224.
      50. Ildefonso de Ciaurriz, Vida del Siervo de Dios P. Fr. Esteban de Adoain,
capuchino (Barcelona, 1913), 356.
      51. El Pensamiento Espanol, April 17, 1873.
      52. Jaime Vicens Vives, Cataluna en el siglo XIX (Madrid, 1961), 419-421;
Roman Oyarzun, Historia del Carlismo (Madrid, 1969), 375—396.
      53. The congregation leaving the Carmelite church in Barcelona after
services marking the feast of the Sacred Heart found a hostile crowd shouting
accusations against the preacher for having “acclaimed Charles VII from the
pulpit.” El Pensamiento Espanol, July 10, 1873.
      54. El Pensamiento Espanol (April 15, 1873) declared: “the city government,
which is Republican, has conducted itself honorably. We acknowledge this with
great pleasure, since we have good friends in that body.”
      55. Ibid., April 24, 1873.
      56. From the text of the draft law reproduced in Semana Catolica (1873),
510-511.
      57. El Consultor de los Parrocos, July 31, 1873. Episcopal protests, however,
were less vitriolic. The bishops of the ecclesiastical province of Valladolid wrote
to the Cortes and argued that separation was another step on the road to moral
dissolution and social revolution. They also stressed the identification of Spain’s
past glories with the Church: “Spain cannot live separated from the Church.
Formed by Catholicism, it owes to the Church whatever it has accomplished in
the development of its civilization.” “Protesta de los Sres. Prelados de la provincia
eclesiastica de Valladolid a las Cortes,” August 1, 1873, in La Cruz (1873), 234-
238.
      58. El Consultor de los Parrocos, February 27, 1873; El Pensamiento Espanol,
August 5, 1873.
      59. El Pensamiento Espanol, December 22, 1873. Castelar, however, did not
exercise the traditional regalian rights of the State over ecclesiastical patronage.
The list of episcopal appointments was worked out through careful and cour¬
teous negotiations with the papacy. Becker, Relaciones diplomaticas, 264.
      60. Ibid.
      61. El Consultor de los Parrocos, February 8, 1874; “Decreto de la Republica
   306                                              Notes to Pages 273—277




restableciendo las ordenes militares,” April 11, 1874, in La Cruz (1874), 636-
640.
      62. J. M. Amenos, “El fomento de vocaciones eclesiasticas en Espana dur¬
ante la segunda mitad del siglo XIX,” Seminarios, 1 (1955), 61; La Espana Catolica,
April 20, 1875; El Pensamiento Espanol, November 11, 1873.
      63. Fund-raising efforts often followed the model devised by the bishop
of the Canaries, Bernardo Martinez. Parish juntas formed by the cura and four
laymen sought long-term subscriptions payable on a monthly basis from the
faithful. “Obra para el sostenimiento del culto y clero, creada por el Sr. Obispo
de Canarias,” May 4, 1873, in La Cruz (1873), 677—683. The success of these
efforts varied from region to region. In Jaen, located in the dechristianized
south, they produced so little that the diocesan authorities believed they would
have to close the cathedral; but in Toledo the results of a subscription campaign
based on the Canaries model “completely fulfilled expectations”; some parishes
contributed more than was necessary. El Pensamiento Espanol, October 10, 1874;
El Consultor de los Parrocos, October 1, 1873.
      64. The process of adjusting Church-State relations, however, was not
without difficulties, which have been described in detail in the recent study of
Maria F. Nunez, La Iglesiay la restauracion, 1875—1881 (Santa Cruz de Tenerife,
1976); and by G. Barberini, “El articulo 11 de la Constitucion de 1876: La
controversia diplomatica entre Espana y la Santa Sede,” Anthologica Annua, 9
(1961), 279-412.
      65. Felix Sarda y Salvany, El liberalismo especado? 2nd ed. (Barcelona, 1884).
      66. See, for example, the complaints about inadequate state financing from
two bishops of the early-twentieth-century Church, Antolin Lopez Pelaez, arch¬
bishop of Tarragona, El presupuesto del clero (Madrid, 1910); and Enrique Reig
y Casanova, archbishop of Toledo, Presente y porvenir economico de la Iglesia en
Espana (Madrid, 1908).
      67. Jose de los Perales y Gutierrez, El problema religioso en Espana (Madrid,
1909), 97.
      68. Bruno Ibeas, “Nuestro Cristianismo,” Espana y America, 12, no. 3 (1914),
514.
Bibliographic Essay




   The literature dealing with the Spanish Church from the eighteenth
century to the present is extensive. On the whole the history of the
Church has been written by clergymen or laymen sympathetic to its
religious mission. Histories of dioceses and religious orders, episcopal
biographies, and works on the state of civil-ecclesiastical relations dom¬
inate traditional writing on the subject. Its quality varies from simple
hagiographies or polemics to documented institutional studies, such as
Lopez Ferreiro’s fine history of the diocese of Santiago de Compostela.
The quality of historical writing from within the Church has improved
dramatically in the past two decades with the emergence of a new gen¬
eration of ecclesiastical historians. Their publications are characterized
by solid archival work and a new spirit of self-criticism made possible,
perhaps, by the liberating effects of the Second Vatican Council. The
books of Antonio Mestre Sanchis, Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, Vicente
Carcel OrtI, Manuel Revuelta Gonzalez, and others quickly come to mind.
The study of the Church has also benefited from attention by social and
economic historians, who are less interested in it as a religious institution
than as an essential part of the broader society and economy. The work
of Gonzalo Anes on the eighteenth-century economy, Pablo Fernandez
Albaladejo on Guipuzcoa, Angel Garcia Sanz on Segovia, and a number
of scholars who have studied the disamortization process of the nine¬
teenth century has made possible a more complete analysis of the Church’s
economic role within Spanish society.
   In spite of the progress these studies represent, this division of re¬
search has left important gaps in our knowledge. Research originating
within the Church, whether done by clerics or laymen, still tends to
follow the path of traditional ecclesiastical history, with heavy emphases
on the relations between Church and State, episcopal biographies, and
the development of institutions. The study of popular religion—which
Catholic sociologists of religion have developed successfully in France,
Italy, and Poland—has scarcely appeared in Spain, apart from several
studies of contemporary religious practice and William Christian’s fine
examination of popular beliefs in a region of northern Spain. Little has
been done on the social history of the lower clergy in spite of their


                                                                      307
  308                                  Harvard Historical Monographs




obvious importance, although a recent study on the priests of Toledo
in the early nineteenth century by Leandro Higueruela del Pino partially
remedied this deficiency. Nor is there an adequate general study of the
Church’s role in education. And work on the charitable function of the
Church, so crucial to its position within Old Regime society, is just be¬
ginning.
   The contribution of social and economic historians, who are indiffer¬
ent to the religious aspects of the Church’s history, has been useful. But
their work has focused largely on the period before the sale of eccle¬
siastical lands beginning in 1836. The question of Church wealth after
that, so controversial in the great anticlerical battles of the twentieth
century, has been generally ignored. Historians of pronounced secular
views tend to be uninterested in the Church save in a limited economic
and social context that is frequently Marxist. But it is unlikely that any
convincing study of nineteenth-century anticlericalism can be written
without the contribution of historians of popular movements willing to
explore the radicalization of the urban masses that was clearly taking
place during the first four decades of the century. The history of the
Spanish Church, then, offers abundant opportunities for further work
to historians of different outlooks—whether of the right, left, or center.
   The following is a brief, select bibliography designed to call attention
primarily to recent literature on the Spanish Church.

Bibliography and General

   Two standard bibliographies, B. Sanchez Alonso, Fuentes de la historia
espahola e hispanoamericana, 3rd ed., 3 vols. (Madrid, 1952) and the bib¬
liographic periodical Indice Historico Espahol (1953-1976), continue to be
useful, although the historian interested in the Church will find more
manageable bibliographic information following each entry in the Dic-
cionario de historia eclesiastica de Espaha, 4 vols. (Madrid, 1972—1975) as
well as the bibliographic essay in Vicente Carcel Orti, ed., La Iglesia en
la Espaha conte?nporanea, 1808-1975 (Madrid, 1979), xxv—xxxvii. Jose
Manuel Cuenca Toribio and Jesus Longares Alonso have surveyed recent
periodical literature in Bibliografia de historia de la Iglesia (Valencia and
Cordoba, 1976).
   There are few good general histories of the Spanish Church. Of sev¬
eral nineteenth-century attempts the best is Vicente de la Fuente, Historia
eclesiastica de Espaha, 6 vols. (Madrid, 1873-1875). An attempt to remedy
this deficiency has been undertaken by the Biblioteca de Autores Cris-
tianos under the direction of R. Garda Villoslada. Volume 5 of this
general history (Carcel Orti, ed., cited above) contains essays on the
Church since 1808 by several authors. Inevitably in a collective work the
     Harvard Historical Monographs                                   309




emphasis varies from piece to piece, but in general the essays concentrate
on the political struggle between the Church and liberalism in the nine¬
teenth century and on the great social and political conflicts of the twen¬
tieth century. Two studies on more precise themes, Juan Saez Marin,
Datos sobre la Iglesia espanola contemporanea, 1768-1868 (Madrid, 1975)
and Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, Sociologta de una elite de poder de Espana
e Hispanoamerica contemporaneas: Lajerarquia eclesiastica, 1789—1965 (Cor¬
doba, 1976), provide overviews of ecclesiastical demography and the
hierarchy respectively.

The Old Regime Church

   The best general descriptions of the organizational, social, and eco¬
nomic structure of the eighteenth-century Church are to be found in
Antonio Dominguez Ortiz, La sociedad espanola en el siglo XVIII (Madrid,
 1955) and Sociedad y Estado en el siglo XVIII espahol (Madrid, 1976). A
survey of the eighteenth-century Church is W. J. Callahan, “The Spanish
Church,” in Church and Society in Catholic Europe of the Eighteenth Century,
ed. W. J. Callahan and D. C. Higgs (Cambridge, 1979), 34-50. Both
Richard Herr, The Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Spain (Princeton, 1958),
and Jean Sarrailh, L’Espagne eclairee de la seconde moitie du XVIIIe siecle
(Paris, 1954), devote considerable attention to the relationship of the
Church to the Spanish Enlightenment. C. C. Noel focuses on the op¬
position within the Church to the reforming tendencies of the Bourbon
State in two fine articles: “Opposition to Enlightened Reform in Spain:
Campomanes and the Clergy, 1765-1775,” Societas, 3, no. 1 (1973), 21—
43; and “The Clerical Confrontation with the Enlightenment in Spain,”
European Studies Review, 5, no. 2 (1975), 103—122. The struggle between
the Bourbons and Rome for control of the Spanish Church has been
considered in detail by Rafael Olaechea, Las relaciones hispano-romanas en
la segunda mitad del siglo XVIII, 2 vols. (Zaragoza 1965).
   The reforming movement in the late-eighteenth-century Church has
produced an abundant literature. Emile Appolis, Les jansenistes espagnols
(Bordeaux, 1966), provides a general treatment of the so-called Jansenist
movement within the framework of a reforming spirit in eighteenth-
century Catholicism. In a short but interesting study Maria Giovanna
Tomisch, El jansenismo en Espana (Madrid, 1972), analyzes the doctrinal
and philosophical content of Spanish Jansenism. This theme is treated
in greater detail by Joel Saugnieux, Le jansenisme espagnol du XVIII siecle:
Ses composantes et ses sources (Oviedo, 1976). The same author’s biography
of a leading Jansenist reformer, Un prelat eclaire: Don Antonio Tavira y
Almazan, 1737-1807 (Toulouse, 1970), offers a case study of reform in
action at the diocesan level. Saugnieux has also studied the reform of
   310                                   Harvard Historical Monographs




 sacred oratory to which the Jansenists attached great importance: Les
jansenistes et le renouveau de la predication dans I’Espagne de la seconde moitie
 du XVIIIe siecle (Lyon, 1976). Antonio Mestre Sanchis has studied an
 earlier reformer in Ilustracion y reforma de la Iglesia: Pensamiento politico-
 religioso de Don Gregorio Mayansy Siscar, 1699—1781 (Valencia, 1968). The
 controversy over the Jesuits, so closely connected to the issues of regalism
 and ecclesiastical reform, has produced an extensive literature, of which
 there is a general review in the perceptive introduction of Jorge Cejudo
 and Teofanes Egido to Pedro Rodriguez de Campomanes, Dictamen fiscal
 de expulsion de los Jesuitas de Espana, 1766—1767 (Madrid, 1977).
     In spite of an abundance of literature on ecclesiastical institutions
 during the eighteenth century, much remains to be done. There are few
 good diocesan histories. Antonio Lopez Ferreiro’s massive history of the
 archdiocese of Santiago, Historia de la Santa A. M. Iglesia de Santiago de
 Compostela, 11 vols. (Santiago, 1898-1909), still has few competitors for
 completeness and faithfulness to documentary sources. Episcopal biog¬
 raphies are slightly more numerous, but on the whole not satisfactory
 save for the recent study of Cardinal Lorenzana, one of the key figures
 in the Caroline Church, by Luis Sierra Nava-Lasa, El Cardenal Lorenzana
y la Ilustracion (Madrid, 1975), and the biography of Bishop Tavira by
 Saugnieux (cited above). The recent biography of Jose Climent, one of
 the leading reformers of the reign of Charles III, is based on solid
 research although rather uncritical of its subject: Francesc Tort Mitjans,
 El Obispo de Barcelona: Josep Climent i Avinent, 1706—1781 (Barcelona, 1978).
     The important topic of episcopal recruitment has been largely ne¬
 glected save for the brief treatments of Dominguez Ortiz and Cuenca
 Toribio (cited above), although C. C. Noel’s forthcoming study on the
 subject should remedy this deficiency. Recent work on the capitular
 clergy has produced a more complete view of the role of cathedral canons
 in the eighteenth-century Church. Juan Ramon Lopez-Arevalo’s Un ca-
 bildo catedral de la Vieja Castilla: Avila (Madrid, 1966) provides a detailed
 account of an Old Regime chapter. There is a good general history of
 eighteenth-century seminaries: Francisco Martin Hernandez and Jose
 Martin Hernandez, Los seminarios espanoles en la epoca de la Ilustracion
 (Madrid, 1973). The condition of the secular clergy below the level of
 the ecclesiastical elite has been largely ignored. Leandro Higueruela del
 Pino’s short pamphlet summarizing his doctoral thesis, El clero de la
 diocesis de Toledo durante el pontificado del Cardenal Borbon (Madrid, 1973),
 provides one of the few glimpses of the social and cultural condition of
 the parish clergy. A more complete view is given in the same author’s
 monograph on the subject: El clero de Toledo desde 1800 a 1823 (Madrid,
  1979).
     Harvard Historical Monographs                                     311




   There is an enormous literature on the history of the religious orders,
but much of it is narrowly institutional in focus and neglects the broader
social and economic role of the regulars. Among the better institutional
histories are Historia del Real Monasterio de Poblet, 6 vols. (Barcelona,
1947-1955); and Antonio Astrain, Historia de la Compania de Jesus en la
asistencia de Espaha, 8 vols. (Madrid, 1902-1925). Two more recent works
on the Franciscans are more successful in relating the history of the
order and its branches to cultural and social conditions: Fray Melchor
de Pobladura, Seminarios de misioneros y conventos de perfecta vida comun
(Rome, 1963); and Fray Buenaventura de Carrocera, La provincia de
Frailes Menores Capuchinos de Castilla, 1701—1836 (Madrid, 1973).
   There is an extensive bibliography on the Inquisition. Henry Kamen
provides a brief overview of its role in the eighteenth century in The
Spanish Inquisition (London and Bloomington, 1965), and Marcelin De-
fourneaux has described its ambiguous relationship to the Spanish En¬
lightenment in his excellent biography Pablo de Olavide ou I’Afrancesado,
1725—1803 (Paris, 1959) and in LTnquisition espagnole et les livres frangais
au XVIIIe siecle (Paris, 1963). A collaborative work by Bartolome Ben-
nassar and others analyzes the Inquisition in the light of recent research:
LTnquisition espagnole, XVe—XIXe siecle (Paris, 1979). Although Antonio
Alvarez de Morales gives too much attention to the juridical procedures
of the eighteenth-century Inquisition, he provides one of the few useful
studies devoted to the institution in its period of decline: Inquisicion e
llustracion, 1700-1834 (Madrid, 1982).
   There is as yet no general study of ecclesiastical finances and the
impact of the Church on the economy, but a number of well-researched
studies in the past ten years have substantially enlarged knowledge of
the topic. The best'overview of Church wealth is in Gonzalo Anes, Las
crisis agrarias en la Espaha moderna (Madrid, 1970). The revenues of in¬
dividual bishoprics have been studied for Castile and Aragon respectively
by Christian Hermann, “Les revenus des eveques espagnols au dix-huitieme
siecle, 1650—1830,” Melanges de la Casa de Velazquez, 10 (1974), 169-201;
and Antonio Dominguez Ortiz, “Las rentas episcopales de la corona de
Aragon en el siglo XVIII,” in Agricultura, comercio colonial y crecimiento
economico en la Espaha contemporanea, ed. J. Nadal and G. Tortella (Bar¬
celona, 1974), 13-43. The best and most complete study of ecclesiastical
finances in the Old Regime, although limited to a single diocese, is Maxi-
miliano Barrio Gozalo, Estudio socio-economico de la Iglesia de Segovia en el
siglo XVIII (Segovia, 1982). Several regional studies have ably illuminated
the impact of the Church on local economies. Pablo Fernandez Alba-
ladejo, La crisis del antiguo regimen en Guipuzcoa, 1766—1833 (Madrid,
 1975); Angel Garcia Sanz, Desarrollo y crisis del antiguo regimen en Castilla
   312                                    Harvard Historical Monographs




la Vieja: Economia y sociedad en tierras de Segovia, 1500—1814 (Madrid,
1977); and Jaime Garda Lombardero, La agricultura y el estancamiento
economico de Galicia en la Espana del antiguo regimen (Madrid, 1973) are
among the best.
   Study of the Church’s role within the context of Spanish society is
only beginning. Save for the occasional article, popular religion has been
largely ignored in spite of its obvious importance. There is nothing
comparable to Julio Caro Baroja’s study of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries: Las formas complejas de la vida religiosa: Religion, sociedad y caracter
en Espana de los siglos XVI y XVII (Madrid, 1978). Although only mar¬
ginally concerned with the eighteenth century, William Christian’s Local
Religion in Sixteenth-Century Spain (Princeton, 1981) provides an inter¬
esting interpretation and a wealth of information on this important but
relatively unstudied theme.
   There is no single study of the crisis of the Church during the two
decades preceding the events of 1808. The impact of the French Rev¬
olution has been studied by Francisco Marti Gilabert, Lalglesia en Espana
durante la revolucion francesa (Pamplona, 1971), although more remains
to be done for the period from a broader perspective. There are two
interesting studies of the increasingly conservative nature of the Church
through the early nineteenth century. Fundamental in spite of its dense
quality is Alfredo Martinez Albiach, Religiosidad hispana y sociedad bor-
bonica (Burgos, 1969). Also useful is Javier Herrero, Los origenes del pen-
samiento reaccionario espahol (Madrid, 1971). Luis Sierra Nava-hasa discusses
the regalist conflicts of the late 1790’s in La reaccidn del episcopado espahol
ante los decretos de matrimonios del ministro Urquijo de 1799 a 1813 (Bilbao,
 1964). The tensions within the Church over the issue of internal reform
are considered in W. J. Callahan, “Two Spains and Two Churches, 1760—
 1835,” Historical Reflections, 2, no. 2 (1975), 158-181. Richard Herr’s
analysis of the first disamortization, which had serious implications for
the Church, illuminates a hitherto obscure area of financial and economic
history at the end of the Old Regime: “Hacia el derrumbe del antiguo
regimen: Crisis fiscal y desamortizacion fiscal bajo Carlos IV,” Moneday
Credito, no. 118 (1971), 37-100.

The Conflict with Liberalism, 1808-1833
   For general background the work of Miguel Artola on the period
1808-1814 is valuable: Los origenes de la Espana contemporanea, 2 vols.
(Madrid, 1959). Juan Marichal describes the debt of the reformers of
Cadiz to the ideas advanced at the Synod of Pistoia in “From Pistoia to
Cadiz: A Generation’s Itinerary, 1786-1812,” in The Ibero-American En¬
lightenment, ed. A. Owen Aldridge (Urbana, 1971), 97—110. The effect
      Harvard Historical Monographs                                         313




on the Church of the long crisis that began in 1793 is discussed in
W. J. Callahan, “The Origins of the Conservative Church in Spain, 1793-
 1823,” European Studies Review, 10 (1980), 199-223. The hostility of the
hierarchy toward the ecclesiastical policies of the Cortes has been de¬
scribed from the Church’s point of view by Isidoro de Villapadierna, “El
episcopado espanol y las Cortes de Cadiz,” Hispania Sacra, 8, no. 16
(1955), 275-335. The struggle at Cadiz over the fate of the Inquisition
has been studied in detail by Francisco Marti Gilabert, La abolicion de la
Inquisicion en Espana (Pamplona, 1975).
   Also useful for clerical opposition to reform is the work of Martinez
Albiach (cited above). Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio’s biography of one
of the leading defenders of the Old Regime Church until the early 1830’s
is one of the few studies of this kind for the period: D. Pedro de Inguanzo
y Rivero, 1764—1836: Ultimo prelado del antiguo regimen (Pamplona, 1965).
For the conflict between the Church and liberalism during the revolu¬
tionary period 1820-1823, the fundamental work is Manuel Revuelta
Gonzalez, Politica religiosa de los liberales del siglo XIX: Trienio constitucional
(Madrid, 1973). Three articles treating the same theme are also useful:
Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, “La Iglesia espanola en el trienio con¬
stitucional, 1820-1823,” Hispania Sacra, 18, no. 36 (1965), 333-362;
Francisco Xavier Tapia, “Las relaciones Iglesia-Estado durante el primer
experimento liberal en Espana, 1820—1823,” Revista de Estudios Politicos,
no. 173 (1970), 69-89; and Juan Mercader Riba, “Los origenes del an-
ticlericalismo espanol,” Hispania, 123 (1973), 101—123. Of particular value
is a regional study of the impact of the revolution of 1820 on the clergy
of Catalonia: Gaspar Feliu i Montfort, La clerecia catalana durant el trienni
liberal (Barcelona, 1972). A well-researched study of the disamortization
of 1820—1823, although regional in emphasis, is Joan Brines Blasco, La
desamortizacion en el Pais Valenciano durante el trienio constitucional (Va¬
lencia, 1978).
   The final period of Ferdinand VII’s absolute rule has been less stud¬
ied. But Luis Alonso Tejada describes the conflict over the Inquisition
among supporters of absolute monarchy and its impact on the conserv¬
ative direction of the Church during the late 1820’s and early 1830’s in
Ocaso de la Inquisicion en los ultimos anos del reinado de Fernando VII (Madrid,
1969). There is very little on the financial, social, and economic role of
the Church, although it is clear that the institution experienced changes
during this period that were fundamentally important for its later con¬
dition under liberalism. Studies of declining Church wealth, clerical de¬
mography and recruitment, the erosion of ecclesiastical charity, and
changes in evangelization methods are needed, perhaps for this period
more than any other.
   314                                   Harvard Historical Monographs




The Conflict with Liberalism, 1834—1874

   The period after the death of Ferdinand VII has received more ex¬
tensive study. There are several good books on general background.
Raymond Carr provides an interpretive overview of the complexities of
liberal politics in Spain, 1808—1939 (Oxford, 1966). Excellent studies of
specific periods are Carlos Marichal, Spain, 1834—1844 (London, 1977);
V. G. Kiernan, The Revolution of 1854 in Spanish History (Oxford, 1966);
and C. A. M. Hennessy, The Federal Republic in Spain: Pi y Margall and
the Federal Republican Movement, 1868—1874 (Oxford, 1962). Several col¬
lections of essays provide useful information about the nineteenth-century
Church: Jose Manuel Cuenca Toribio, La Iglesia espahola ante la revolucion
liberal (Madrid, 1971); Iglesia y burguesia en la Espaha liberal (Jaen, 1979);
Estudios sobre la Iglesia andaluza modernay contemporanea (Cordoba, 1980);
Sociedad y clero en la Espaha del XIX (Cordoba, 1980); and J. Andres
Gallego et al., Estudios historicos sobre la Iglesia espahola contemporanea (El
Escorial, 1979) and Aproximacion a la historia social de la Iglesia espahola
contemporanea (El Escorial, 1978).
   The struggle between the Church and the liberal State of the 1830’s
has received considerable attention in a number of well-researched works
written from a proecclesiastical perspective. Manuel Revuelta Gonzalez’
study of the nearly complete extinction of the regular clergy, La exclau-
stracion, 1833—1840 (Madrid, 1976), is impressive, although it does not
sufficiently emphasize the weaknesses of the Old Regime religious or¬
ders. Vicente Carcel Ortf describes in detail the condition of civil-
ecclesiastical relations during the 1830’s in Politica eclesial de los gobiernos
liberates espaholes, 1830—1840 (Pamplona, 1975). Jesus Longares Alonso
considers the impact of liberalism in a local setting in Politica y religion
en Barcelona, 1833—1843 (Madrid, 1976). The same author has written
an interesting, though sketchy, general essay on liberal ideas on the
Church: La ideologia religiosa del liberalismo espahol, 1808—1843 (Cordoba,
 1979). Jose Antonio Portero applied the techniques of Martinez Albiach
to analyze the Church’s difficult adaptation to the new bourgeois society
created by liberalism in Pulpito e ideologia en la Espaha del siglo XIX (Zara¬
goza, 1978). Nancy Rosenblatt studied the politics of accommodation
worked out between the Church and the moderate elements of liberalism
in three articles: “The Spanish Moderados and the Church,” Catholic His¬
torical Review, 57, no. 3 (1971), 401—420; “Church and State in Spain:
A Study of Moderate Liberal Politics in 1845,” Catholic Historical Review,
62, no. 4 (1976), 589-603; and “The Concordat of 1851 and Its Relation
to Moderate Liberalism in Spain,” Iberian Studies, no. 1 (1978), 30-39.
Jeronimo Becker’s older work on Spanish-Vatican relations is still useful
     Harvard Historical Monographs                                       315




for this topic: Relaciones diplomaticas entre Espana y la Santa Sede (Madrid,
1908). Regrettably, there is no good study of the relationship between
Carlism and the Church.
   The situation of the Church during the revolutionary period 1868-
 1874 has been studied by Vicente Carcel Orti with particular emphasis
on relations between the State and Rome and civil-ecclesiastical relations
within Spain in Iglesia y revolucion en Espana, 1868-1874 (Pamplona,
1979). Santiago Petschen has analyzed debates on the Church and the
question of religious liberty in the revolutionary Cortes of 1869 in Iglesia-
Estado: Un cambio politico: Las Constituyentes de 1869 (Madrid, 1974). Jesus
Pabon’s Espanay la cuestion romana (Madrid, 1972) deals with the impact
of the occupation of Rome by Victor Emmanuel and its effect on Spanish
politics. Maria F. Nunez describes the initial stages of the Church’s ad¬
aptation to the new political circumstances of the restoration in La Iglesia
y la restauracion, 1875—1881 (Santa Cruz de Tenerife, 1976). The impact
of the revolution on the Church in regional settings is discussed in Juan
Bautista Vilar, El obispado de Cartagena durante el sexenio revolucionario
(Murcia, 1973); and F. Rodriguez de Coro, El obispado de Vitoria durante
el sexenio revolucionario (Vitoria, 1976).
    Although the relationship between the Church and the liberal State
has received considerable attention from historians, the social and eco¬
nomic role of the mid-nineteenth-century Church has not, with one
exception. A substantial literature on the sale of Church lands from 1836
to 1859 has adequately described the disamortization process both at the
national and regional levels. Francisco Simon Segura, La desamortizacion
espanola del siglo XIX (Madrid, 1973) and F. Tomas y Valiente, El marco
politico de la desamortizacion en Espana (Barcelona, 1971) provide the best
general assessments. Peter Janke has ably analyzed the political impli¬
cations of the disamortizing legislation of 1836 in Mendizabal y la instau-
racion de la monarquia constitucional en Espana, 1790—1853 (Madrid, 1974.
There are numerous regional studies of the sale of ecclesiastical lands.
A good recent bibliography of the disamortization in local settings can
be found in Vicente Carcel Orti, “El liberalismo en poder, 1833-1868,”
in Historia de la Iglesia en Espana (cited above), 137—138.
    The extensive literature on the sale of Church property, although
useful to the historian interested in the structure of ecclesiastical holdings
in the Old Regime, is less valuable for the study of its impact on the
Church itself. Tittle has been done on the financial state of the Church
following disamortization, and less on how this revolutionary change in
ecclesiastical financing transformed traditional social functions, such as
charity. A recent article by J. M. Palomares Ibanez, “Fa Iglesia espanola
y la asistencia social en el siglo XIX,” in Estudios historicos sobre la Iglesia
  316                                  Harvard Historical Monographs




espanola contemporanea (cited above), 119—149, begins to explore this topic,
but more remains to be done.
   Studies of the nineteenth-century clergy are still lacking. The hier¬
archy has received some attention, although as yet there is nothing com¬
parable to the biographies of Cardinal Lorenzana and Bishop Tavira
for the eighteenth century. Two biographies, however, are particularly
useful: Julian Barrio Barrio, Felix Torres Amat, 1772-1847: Un obispo
reformador (Rome, 1976); and Rafael Maria Sanz de Diego, Medio siglo
de relaciones Iglesia-Estado: El Cardenal Antolin Monescillo y Viso, 1811—
1897 (Madrid, 1979).
   There is even less on the lower clergy, although a recent article by
Manuel Revuelta Gonzalez, “Clero viejo y clero nuevo en el siglo XIX,”
in Estudios historicos sobre la Iglesia espanola contemporanea (cited above),
 153—197, explores the topic in general terms. How effectively the Church
conducted its religious mission is another topic left largely unexplored.
There is a brief review from the standpoint of the Church in Baldomero
Jimenez Duque, La espiritualidad en el siglo XIX espanol (Madrid, 1974).
William Christian’s fine study of religious devotion in contemporary
Spain, Person and God in a Spanish Valley (New York, 1972), contains
useful background information for the earlier period. The relationship
of the Church to the new industrial working class of the period deserves
much fuller treatment given the importance of the workers’ alienation
from the Church during the twentieth century. A collection of essays
on Francisco Palau, a Carmelite active in attempts to preserve the Church’s
influence over the working class of Barcelona in the 1850’s, suggests that
there were at least some efforts to view the problem from a modern
perspective: Una figura carismatica del siglo XIX: El P. Francisco Palau y
Quer, O.C.D., Apostol y Fundador (Burgos, 1973).
   The work of Mariano Peset and Jose Luis Peset, La universidad espanola:
Despotismo ilustradoy revolucion liberal (Madrid, 1974), is indispensable for
the history of education before 1868, although its focus is primarily on
higher education. Also useful for an appreciation of clerical attitudes
toard intellectual freedom in education is Yvonne Turin, La educacion
y la escuela en Espaha de 1874 a 1902: Liberalismo y tradicion (Madrid,
 1967).
Index




Abad y Lasierra, Agustin, 79                    Arbiol, Antonio, 61—63. See also Spiritual
Abad y Lasierra, Manuel, 79, 82                   guides
Abad y Queipo, Manuel, 124                      Arce, Ramon de, 85, 87
Abarca, Joaquin de, 147, 151                    Areso, Jose de, 143
Academic freedom, 207, 231                      Argiielles, Agustin de, 98, 119, 155
Adoain, Esteban, 268                            Arias Tejeiro, Veremundo, 105, 106, 123
Agreda, 25                                      Arnau, Jose, 80-81
Aguado, Alfonso, 87                             Association of Catholics in Spain, 253,
Aguiriano, Francisco Mateo, 87, 90, 93            254, 255, 256-257
Alameda, Cirilo de, 119, 139, 215               Associations, religious, 57-59, 61, 240. See
Alava, 10, 244                                    also Confraternities
Albacete, 157, 242                              Astete, Caspar, 61
Albarraci'n, 6                                  Astorga, 87, 99, 164
Alcala Galiano, Antonio, 156                    Asturias, 51, 123, 157
Alcaraz, 59                                     Atestados, 169, 177, 188—189
Alcarria, 170                                   Auctorem Fidei, 81—82, 83
Alcolea, battle of, 249                         Augustinians, 23, 24, 25, 27, 29, 212
Alcoy, 266-267                                  Autos defe, 31—32
Alfonso XII, 272                                Avila, 39, 47, 97, 129
Alicante, 48, 157, 167, 242
Almagro, friary of, 142                         Badajoz, 137
Almerfa, 6                                      Baeza, 88
Alonso, Jose, 171, 197                          Bailen, battle of, 86, 89
Amadeo of Savoy, 249, 263                       Balearics, 86, 121, 242. See also Mallorca;
Amat, Felix, 87, 119, 127-128, 135                Menorca; Ibiza
Andalusia: parish clergy and organization       Balmes, Jaime, 175-176, 183-184, 227,
  in, 10, 16, 179, 180, 211; regular clergy       229
  in, 21, 24, 105, 123; ecclesiastical wealth   Barbastro, 6
  in, 39, 41-42, 43, 44-45; dechristiani-       Barcelona: clergy of in 18th century, 8,
  zation of, 54, 241, 242, 244, 276; mis¬          19, 24; dechristianization of, 107, 241,
  sions in, 64, 193, 237—238; Carlism in,         242; revolution of 1820 in, 117, 126;
   149; rural unrest in, 224-225, 266             ecclesiastical reform in, 121, 167;
Andujar, 241                                      anticlericalism in, 133, 134, 268-
Anes, Gonzalo, 41                                 269; social tensions in, 224. See also
Anticlericalism; in 1820-1823, 122, 126—          Catalonia
   127, 130-135;in 1834-1835,153-155;           Basque Provinces, 21, 121; religious prac¬
  in 1854, 196-197; in 1868, 250-251,             tice in, 53, 242; Carlism in, 149, 173,
  255;in 1873, 265, 269                           262, 267; missions in, 193, 238
Aparisi, Antonio, 206                           Batuecas, monastery of, 133
Aragon, 44-45, 105, 157, 179                    Benedict XIX, 3
Aranda, conde de, 58—59                         Benedictines, 7, 21, 23, 101, 122, 205
Aranjuez, Tumult of, 85                         Benlloch, Manuel, 267



                                                                                    317
   318                                                                      Index




Bertran, Felipe, 11, 13, 33-35, 59, 67, 68,   Carmelites, 23, 89, 105
  69                                          Carrera breve, 219. See also Seminaries
Bible societies, 199                          Cartagena, 24, 45, 105, 114, 250, 266
Bilbao, 6, 53, 65, 150                        Carthusians, 7, 22, 27, 42
Bishops, 86-88, 97-99; responsibilities of,   Carvajal y Lancaster, Jose, 3
  7-8, 10, 12-13, 142, 214-215; recruit¬      Casas Souto, Pedro, 216
  ment of, 10-12, 113-114, 215-216; in¬       Castelar, Emilio, 256, 257, 271—272
  comes of, 43-44, 114-115, 120-121,          Castellon, 19, 157
  142, 167, 210; and the papacy, 128,         Castile, kingdom of, 39—41, 45. See also
  167, 168; and Carlism, 151-152, 262,          Finances, ecclesiastical
  268; and the State after 1834, 163-164,     Catalonia, 10, 45, 53, 115, 125-126, 139,
  215-216, 251, 253, 258, 261, 262, 263.        268-269; regular clergy in, 21, 88, 89,
  See also Dioceses                             104, 115, 126-127; Carlism in, 150,
Bocanegra, Francisco, 4                         262, 267, 268; economy of, 184, 224;
Bonaparte, Joseph, 87—89, 105                   social tensions in, 224, 227-228; de-
Bonaparte, Napoleon, 73, 85—86                  christianization of, 241, 242
Bonola, Rocco, 82—83, 107                     Catechisms, 61, 237, 239
Borbon, Luis de, archbishop of Toledo,        Catholic Association (1841), 174—175
  60, 75, 76, 96, 119, 120                    Cavia Gonzalez, Juan, 125
Borbon, Luis de, prince, archbishop of        Cazorla, 16
  Seville, 11                                 Cea Bermudez, Francisco de, 140, 147,
Bossuet, J.-B., 68                              148
Bravo Murillo, Juan, 190                      Cedillo, conde de, 254
Burgos, 21, 39, 48, 157, 255                  Celma, Francisco, 19, 60
Burriel, Andres, 28                           Cemeteries, 260
                                              Censorship, ecclesiastical, 33, 36, 195,
Caceres, 177                                    198, 207
Cadiz: 47, 86, 87, 108, 117, 137, 265;        Censos, 41, 43, 114
  Cortes meets in, 92-97                      Cervera, 91, 125
Cadiz, Diego de, 26, 64-65                    Chapters, cathedral, 7, 14, 17, 18; fi¬
Caixal, Jose M., 215, 236, 262, 268             nances of, 15, 46, 47, 77-78, 129;
Calahorra, 6, 87-88                             purges of, 113, 137; and revolution of
Calatayud, Pedro de, 15, 28, 59, 64, 65         1820, 121, 124, 127, 128; under liberal¬
Calatrava ministry, 162-163                     ism, 164, 167
Calello, deputy in Cortes of Cadiz, 102       Charity, ecclesiastical, 48—51; under liber¬
Camara of Castile, 11. See also Council of      alism, 178-179, 194, 212, 229
  Castile                                     Charles III, 2-3, 4-5, 51-52, 70, 73-74,
Cano, Manuel, 100-101                           83-84, 108; and the Jesuits, 29—31; and
Canovas del Castillo, Antonio, 161, 272,        the Inquisition, 33—36
  273, 274, 275, 276                          Charles IV, 36, 74-76, 77, 78, 85, 108
Canons, cathedral, 7, 12, 14, 127; demog¬     Charles V (I of Spain), 2
  raphy of, 11, 121, 177. See also Chap¬      Charles V, Carlist pretender, 139, 141,
  ters, cathedral                               147, 148, 151, 152, 166
Cantonalism, 264, 265—266                     Charles VII, Carlist pretender, 254, 267,
Canedo, Alonso, 93, 119                         268
Capuchins, 24, 25, 35, 63-65, 107. See        Christian, William, 65, 66
  also Franciscans                            Cienfuegos, Francisco Javier, 118, 165,
Carbonero y Sol, Leon, 217. See also La          188
  Cruz                                        Cistercians, 7, 21, 22, 122
Caresmar, Jaime, 23                           Ciudad Real, 16, 157, 167, 209
Carlism, 135, 140-141, 147, 166, 201,         Ciudad Rodrigo, 57
  208, 249; clerical support of, 148, 149,    Civil marriage, 260, 262
  150, 267-268; regional character of,        Claret, Antonio, 204-205, 225, 234, 246,
  150, 173, 268; policy of toward the           249; as missionary and propagandist,
  Church, 151, 152, 267                         236, 239-240
      Index                                                                        319




Clement XIII, 3                               Cordoba, 6, 15, 21, 39, 40, 45
Clement XIV, 3, 28                            Cortes of Cadiz, 97-101, 103-104; and
Clerics Minor, order of, 25                     the Church, 92-93, 95-96, 102
Clergy, liberal: at Cortes of Cadiz, 93-94,   Cortes: of 1820, 120-123; of 1822, 124—
  95—96, 99; as source of controversy            125; of 1854, 197; of 1869, 253, 255-
  within Church, 107-108, 127-128; per¬         257
  secuted by Ferdinand VII, 11, 137; in       Cortes, Donoso, 192
  revolution of 1820, 119-121, 124, 136;      Cossio, Domingo, 127
  after 1834, 149, 163-164, 171-172,          Costa y Borras, Domingo, 195, 196, 202,
  216-217, 258-259                              214, 225, 228, 229, 238
Clergy, regular, 7, 22, 24-25, 28, 122—       Council of Castile, 5, 9, 10, 27, 30, 33, 46,
   123; demography of, 8-9, 21-22, 28,          58-59, 75, 82, 85
  104-105, 116-117, 141, 212; in rising       Council of State, 97, 139
  against Napoleon, 88-89; oppose             Council of the Supreme and General In¬
  Cortes of Cadiz, 93, 97; and the revolu¬      quisition, 31, 32, 35. See also Inquisition
  tion of 1820, 119, 122-123, 125-126;        Council of Trent, 17, 63
  violence against in 1834-1835, 153—         Creus y Marti, Jaime, 105
   155, 156—157. See also Religious orders    Cuba: revolt of, 249
Clergy, secular: demography of, 8—9, 20,      Cuenca, 39, 45, 86, 139, 180
  105, 116-117, 177, 210-211; education       Cuenca Toribio, Jose Manuel, 215, 216
  and careers of, 14-20, 59-60, 116, 216,     Culto y clero, budget of, 191, 201, 213,
  218-221; finances of, 20, 84, 129, 211;       259, 261, 275. See also Finances, eccle¬
  and the Cortes of 1820, 120-122, 129;         siastical
  sale of property of, 141, 189, 200; and     Culture, secularization of, 184—185, 195—
  Carlism, 150, 267, 268. See also Bishops;      196, 206-207, 217-218, 225
  Canons, cathedral; Disamortization;
  Parish priests                              Daroca, 170
Climent i Avinent, Jose, 4, 19, 67-68, 69,    Daughters of Our Lady of Sorrows and
  70                                            St. Philip Neri, 206
Cofradias, see Confraternities                Dechristianization, 53—54, 106-107; un¬
Colegio Imperial, 28, 153—154                   der liberalism, 181-182, 241-246, 276
Coll, Francisco, 236, 240                     Delgado y Venegas, Francisco, 49
Committee of Public Safety: in canton of      Democrats, 198, 199, 249, 252
  Cadiz, 265; in canton of Granada, 266       Democratic monarchy, 249, 262, 263
Concordat of 1753, 3, 189                     Devotions, 55, 60-61, 64, 136, 180, 233—
Concordat of 1851, 209-210, 215, 230;           235, 239; to the Sacred Heart, 19, 25,
  preliminaries to, 176, 177, 189—190;          61, 64, 69-70, 143, 180
  terms of and reaction to, 190—191, 192      Diaz Merino, Juan, 169
Concursos de curatos, 18, 220                 Dioceses, 6—8, 43-44, 114—115; projects
Confession, 171                                 for reform of, 124, 167, 191; interim
Confraternities, 57—59, 180, 233                administrators of, 164, 170, 171, 172
Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, 240      Disamortization: until 1835, 78, 120, 130,
Confraternity of the Holy Trinity, 54           141, 156; of Mendizabal, 159—162; of
Congregation of the Churches of Castile         1841, 168, 187, 189; of 1855, 199-200,
  and Leon, 8                                   204. See also Land, ecclesiastical
Congregation of San Felipe Neri, 50           Dominicans, 88, 154, 212; demography
Constitutions: of 1808 (Bayonne), 86; of        of, 23, 105
  1812, 94, 95, 97, 117, 118; of 1834 (Es-    Dominicans of the Annunciation, 206
  tatuto Real), 148, 155, 158; of 1837,
  145, 189; of 1845, 189; of 1856 (pro¬       Ecija, 65
  posed), 198-199; of 1869, 255, 258,         Economic conditions: in 18th century, 47—
  261; of 1873 (proposed), 269; of 1876,        48, 50, 77; under Ferdinand VII, 111,
  273-274                                       114, 141; under liberalism, 183—184,
Convenio of 1845, 189, 190                      223—225; clerical reaction to, 183—184,
Coria, 43                                       225-227
   320                                                                         Index




Economic societies, 14, 26, 65                  Floridablanca, conde de, 36, 74
Education, 230, 252; role of Church in          Fontana, Josep, 115
  during 18th century, 24-25, 28, 51-52;        Forriol, Antonio, 127
  role of Church in under liberalism, 178,      Frailada, 88. See also Clergy, regular
   191, 206-207, 221, 229-231                   Fraile, Manuel, 149
Eibar, 238                                      France: alliance with Charles IV, 77, 84,
Elections, parliamentary, 92—93, 197-198,         85; clerical hostility toward, 86-91; in¬
  253-255                                         tervention of, 85—87, 128, 138
El Catolico, 174-175, 198, 202                  Frances Caballero, Bernardo de, 138, 155
Elgueta, 268                                    Franciscans, 7, 27, 88, 89, 101, 119, 125—
El Pensamiento Espanol, 207, 257                   126, 154; recruitment and demography
Enlightenment, French, 90                         of, 21-22, 23, 24-25, 105; dissension
El Escorial, monastery of, 159, 194, 197          among, 25-26, 84-85
El Ferrol, 89                                   Franco, Francisco, 1, 277
Ensenada, marques de, 29; cadastral reg¬        French Revolution, 36, 74, 80, 81, 83
  ister of, 38-41, 46
Escuelas dominicales, 240                       Galicia, 9, 21, 39, 40, 43, 49, 88, 125, 157;
Espartero, Baldomero, 134, 169-172,               Carlism in, 149, 268
   180, 196; regency of, 166-169, 173           Garda Abella, Pablo, 169
Espiga, Jose d’, 119, 124                       Garcia Cuesta, Miguel, 253, 255, 261, 262
Espolios y vacantes, 41                         Garcia Gil, Manuel, 251, 253, 270
Esquilache, marques de, 29—30. See also         Garcia Leal, Ramon, 234
  Society of Jesus                              Garcia Mazo, Santiago Jose, 225, 239
Estella, 42                                     Garelli, Nicolas, 149
Exaltados: in revolution of 1820, 123, 136,     Gatell, Josep, 241
   137; from 1834, 148, 152, 154-156,           General Plan for the Clergy (1823), 124—
   158                                            125
Excusado, 41                                    Gerona, 54, 88, 176, 194
Exequatur, 262                                  Gijon, 51
Extremadura, 9, 19, 21, 39, 75, 179; de-        Giustiniani, Giacomo, 119, 139
  christianization of, 242, 244, 276            Godoy, Manuel de, 74—76, 78, 85, 92
                                                Golfanguer, Miguel, 171, 217
Fabian y Fuero, Francisco, 11, 68, 69, 75       Gonzalez, Ceferino, 271
Feijoo, Benito, 23                              Gonzalez Vallejo, Pedro, 127, 135, 137,
Ferdinand and Isabella, 1, 2, 31                  163: as reformer, 120, 149; in conflicts
Ferdinand VI, 2, 29                               within the Church, 164, 169
Ferdinand VII, 85, 86, 94, 106, 108, 116;       Granada, 6, 21, 39, 45, 48, 142, 266
  recovers power in 1814, 103—104, 110—         Graus, 269
   112; recovers power in 1823, 128, 136—       Gregory XVI, 165-166, 170, 189. See also
   138, 139-140; episcopal appointments           Papacy
  of, 105, 113—114; clerical support for,       Guadalajara, 6, 39, 167
  110-111, 124—126; and revolution of           Guadalupe, monastery of, 141
  1820, 117-118, 124; succession to, 147—       Guadix, 6, 43
   148                                          Guernica, 268
Fernandez de Navarrete, Martin, 217             Guerra de los agraviados, 139
Finances, ecclesiastical: in 18th century, 6,   Guerrillas, clerical, 88, 124, 267
  38, 41, 43-46; demands upon after             Guipuzcoa, 268
  1790, 77—78, 84, 104; under Ferdinand         Guisasola, Victoriano, 271
  VII, 114-116, 129-130; under liberal¬
  ism, 167, 172-173, 191, 201, 213-214,         Hermandad del Refugio, 49, 50. See also
  259; under First Republic, 273. See also       Charity
  Disamortization; Tithe                        Hermann, Christian, 44, 141
First International, 267, 268—269               Herranz Estables, Hilario, 245-246
Fleury, Claude, 61, 68                          Hieronymites, 22, 194, 197
Florez, Enrique, 24, 68                         Horcos Sanmartin, Vincente, 202
      Index                                                                      321




Horta, friary of, 126                         La Cruz, 174, 197, 202, 217
Hospitalers of St. John of God, 159, 205      Lacy, Luis de, 113
Hoyos, Bernardo de, 61. See also Devo¬        Laguera, Pedro, 216, 253, 262
 tions to the Sacred Heart                    Laguna, Martin, 127
Huescar, 16                                   La Mancha, 16, 19, 39, 242, 244
Huete, Redemptorist house of, 205             Land, ecclesiastical, 39-42, 78, 100, 102,
Hugo, Victor, 207, 217                           129—130, 159. See also Disamortization;
                                                Finances, ecclesiastical
Ibeas, Bruno, 276                             Landeira, Francisco, 268
Ibiza, 7, 43                                  La Revista Catolica, 174
Igualada, 194                                 La Rica, Manuel, 170—171
Immaculate Conception, dogma of, 198          La Rioja, 181, 244
Inguanzo y Rivero, Pedro de, 93, 105,         Larraga, Francisco. See also Spiritual
   119, 128, 142, 147                           guides
Inquisition, 2, 34—35, 52, 70, 76; organi¬    Larramendi, Manuel de, 28
   zation and powers of, 31—32, 33, 36;       Le Bras, Gabriel, 52
   suppression of, 98—99, 118—119; resto¬     Ledesma, 84
   ration of in 1814, 107, 112, 113; at¬      Leon, 10, 21, 39, 157, 179
   tempts to reestablish after 1823, 138,     Leopold, grand duke of Tuscany, 70. See
   139, 140                                     also Synod of Pistoia
Integralism, 275                              Lerida, 88, 126, 127
Inquisitors-General, 33—34, 35, 79, 82        Levante, the, 43, 45, 267
Isabella II, 139-140, 147-148, 166, 187,      Ley de monacales, 122-123, 149. See also
   190, 192, 199, 203; clerical support of,     Clergy, regular; Religious orders
   201, 217; influence of Antonio Claret      Liberalism, 73, 1 17, 129: at Cortes of
   over, 204—205; declining popularity of,      Cadiz, 93—95; regalism of, 96, 136;
   207—208; role of in episcopal appoint¬       clerical hostility toward, 99-100, 106—
   ments, 215-216; fall of, 248-249. See         107, 112-113, 124, 125-126, 137-138;
   also Claret, Antonio                         projects of for ecclesiastical reform at
Isla, Jose Francisco de, 28                     Cadiz, 100-102, in 1820, 120-121,
Italy, kingdom of, 204—205, 207, 261             122-123, in 1834-1835, 148-149, 156,
                                                 157-158, in 1836-1840, 162-163, in
Jaca, 165                                        1841, 167-168, in 1870, 261
Jaen, 6, 39, 45, 97, 142                      Liberal party, 274
Jaen, Tomas, 198                              Liberal-Conservative party, 163, 274
“Jansenism,” 30, 33, 68, 70—71, 142; and      Liberal Union, government of, 203, 204,
  conflict within the Church, 79—83; sup¬       249
   porters of after 1820, 127-128, 172. See   “Libertinism,” 80, 185
  also Regalism                               “Library of the Free Man,” 195
Jaumeandreu, Eudaldo, 127                     Linares, 241
Jesuits, see Society of Jesus                 Literature, devotional, 239
Jesus and Mary, order of, 194                 Little Sisters of the Poor, 212, 273
Jovellanos, Gaspar de, 76, 78, 98             Liturgy, 55; views of clerical reformers
Junta Central, 91                               on, 69—70, 71; under liberalism, 194,
Juntas de defensa, 86                           233-234
Juntas of Faith, 140                          Llorente, Juan Antonio, 71, 79,
Juntas, revolutionary, 157, 176—177, 197,       124
  250                                         Lluch, Joaquin, 263, 271
                                              Logrono, 89, 157, 181, 244-245
Krause, Karl, 231                             Loja, 224, 238-239
                                              Longares Alonso, Jesus, 146
La Armonia, 258, 259                          Lopez, J. M., 187
Laborde, Alexandre, 10                        Lopez, Simon, 100, 140
La Concepcion, monastery of, 42               Lopez del Castrillo, Luis, 120, 122
La Coruna, 88, 103, 167                       Lopez Cepero, Manuel, 108, 176
   322                                                                      Index




Lorenzana, Francisco, 10, 11, 13, 75, 82;      Molins de Rey, 269
  as clerical reformer, 68, 69                 Mondonedo, 15
Lozano, Pedro, 28                              Monescillo, Antolfn, 217-218, 226, 251,
Louis XVI, 80                                   254,255
Louis XVIII, 125                               Montblanch, friary of, 89
Loyola, Jesuit house of, 152, 193              Montero Rios, Eugenio, 252, 259, 261
Lugo, 177                                      Montes de Toledo, 16
                                               Montserrat, abbey of, 205
Madrid, 29—30, 39, 196; ecclesiastical or¬     Monzon Martin, Bienvenido, 263
 ganization of, 6, 209, 245; dechristiani-     Morell, Fausto, 253
 zation in, 53—54, 107, 135, 246;              Morera, 266
 anticlericalism in, 133—134, 153—155,         Moyano Law, 204, 206, 230. See also Edu¬
  182                                           cation
Mairena del Alcor, 237                         Munoz Torrero, Diego, 93, 120, 124
Malaga, 48, 89, 157, 171, 250; diocesan fi¬    Murcia, 6, 10, 18, 86, 157, 250
 nances of, 45, 142; dechrisdanization in,     Muzquiz, Rafael, 86, 87
 241, 242; cantonalist movement in, 265,
 266                                           Navarra, 33, 42, 121; Carlism in, 149,
Mallorca, 53, 87, 97, 177, 253                  262, 267
Manterola, Vicente de, 255                     Narvaez, Ramon, 189, 203—204, 208; pol¬
Maranon, Antonio, 125                           icy of toward the Church, 189-190,
Marcos de Llanos, Antonio, 77                   204, 207
Maria Cristina, 141, 147, 163, 166-167         Neocatholics, 207, 254
Marla Luisa, queen, 75                         New Castile, 6, 44-45, 52-53, 54, 242
Marrodan, Cosme, 216                           Nobility: and ecclesiastical recruitment,
Martinez Albiach, Alfredo, 79, 90                11, 216
Martinez Campos, Arsenio, 272                  Nocedal, Candido, 198, 206, 254
Martinez de la Rosa, Francisco, 147, 148,      Nocedal, Ramon, 275
  152—153, 156, 158, 159; ecclesiastical
 policies of, 148—149, 150—151, 155—           Oaths, constitutional, 119, 258
  156; and the martanza de los frailes, 153,   O’Donnell, Leopoldo, 196, 198, 203,
  154                                            204
Martinez de San Martin, Pedro, 148             Olavide, Pablo de, 34—36. See also Inquisi¬
Masonry, 117, 152                                tion
Matamoros, Manuel, 206                         Old Castile, 19, 21, 39, 44-45, 242; parish
Martanza de los frailes, 153—155                 reorganization in, 178, 210
Media annata, 41                               Olozaga, Salustiano de, 252
Medina Sidonia, 264                            Ona, monastery of, 150
Mendizabal, Juan Alvarez, 156, 158, 159—       “100,000 Sons of St. Louis,” 128
  161                                          Oratorians, 25, 211
Menorca, 7, 115                                Orense, 87, 97, 99
Merino, Jeronimo, 124, 148                     Organa, 238
Merino, Malaguilla, Amador, 12                 Orihuela, 92, 105, 124, 140, 220-221,
Mesada, 41                                       242, 268
Military: political role in liberal Spain,     Ortl y Lara, Juan Manuel, 231
  117, 166-167, 180, 189                       Osma, Burgo de, 18, 87
Minano Bedoya, Salvador, 131                   Ostolaza, Bias, 138
Missions, domestic, 63—65, 193—194; po¬        Oviedo, 14, 66, 99, 124, 129, 137
 litical character of, 112, 143; liberal
 hostility toward, 236-239                     Palafox, Antonio, 71
Missions, foreign, 28, 29, 159, 211-212        Palafox y Mendoza, Juan de, 29
Moderados, 158-159, 186-187, 203, 230-         Palau, Antonio, 228, 241
  231; and the progresistas, 162, 186;         Palencia, 39, 129, 157, 177
 policy of toward the Church, 192-193,         Palma de Mallorca, 253
  194-195                                      Pamplona, 53, 66, 150
      Index                                                                         323



Papacy, 3, 76, 189-190, 200, 261-262,           Primo de Rivera, Miguel, 273
  271; and episcopal appointments, 3,           Processions, 8, 54, 55-57, 180, 233
   105, 124, 163, 188, 215, 271; and revo¬      Progresistas, 158-159, 166-167, 196, 249;
  lution of 1820, 119, 128; and clergy,           policies of, 167-169, 171, 186-189,
   119, 128, 164, 217; relations of with lib¬     198—199; views of on religious liberty,
  eralism (1835-1843), 165-166, 170;               199, 252
  loses temporal power in Italy, 207, 261       Propaganda, religious, 236
Paraguay, 28, 29                                Protestants, 32, 195, 199, 206, 274, 275
Paramo, Antonio de, 14                          Puebla de Sanabria, 174
Parishes, 9, 20; size and organization of,      Puente y Primo de Rivera, Fernando
   10, 20, 121, 178, 180, 211, 245-246;           de la, 207
  liberal projects to reform, 102, 120—         Pujol, Alberto, 127
   121, 167, 198, 210                           Pujol, Jose Maria, 138
Parish priests: responsibilities and quality
  of, 15-16, 59-60, 116, 143, 221-223;          Quevedo y Quintana, Pedro, 87, 96, 97
  finances of, 15, 16, 84, 129, 165, 167—       Quintano Bonifaz, Manuel, 33. See also
   168, 220; education of, 17—18, 218—           Regalism
   220; liberal policy toward, 102, 120—
   121, 129, 132. See also Clergy, secular      Rajoy y Losada, Bartolome, 29
Pastoral letters, 118, 195—196                  Ravago, Francisco, 29
Patriotic societies, 123, 132                   Real Junta Eclesiastica, 149, 155, 156,
Peasantry: hostility of toward monasteries,       159, 163
   22, 133; strength of Church among in         Regalism, 3—5, 264; under Charles IV,
   nothern Spain, 53, 106, 242, 244; “pop¬        76, 79, 83; clerical hostility toward, 92,
   ular” religion among, 66—68, 232; re¬           128; inherited by liberalism, 96, 136,
   sistance to the tithe among, 101, 114          215.251
Penaquilla, Serafino de, 138                    Regency Council, 125, 127
Perales y Gutierrez, Jose de los, 276           Religion, “popular,” 65—68, 143, 232—233
Perez Bayer, Francisco, 68                      Religious liberty, 195, 198—199, 252, 253,
Philip II, 2                                      256-258
Philip V, 2-3                                   Religious orders, female: in 18th century,
Pi y Margall, Francisco, 198, 265, 266; fa¬       27; under liberalism, 159—160, 194,
  vors separation of Church and State,            212.251
   256, 260, 269                                Religious orders, male: in 18th century,
Piarists, 159, 211; feminine branch of,           21-27; educational role of, 24, 28, 51-
   194, 200, 206                                  52, 178; proposed reform of, 24, 25,
Pius VI, 3                                        85, 100—101, 116; suppression of, 88—
Pius VII, 85, 119, 122, 128                       89, 122—123, 159—161; after Concordat
Pius IX, 190—191, 207. See also Papacy            of 1851, 190, 205-206, 211-212, 250,
Planas, Juan, 221—223                             251
Poblet, monastery of, 7, 159; popular hos¬      Religious practice, 52—53, 105—106, 242-
  tility toward, 115, 126, 133, 157               243; under Ferdinand VII and liberal¬
Pontevedra, 193                                   ism, 179, 181, 193, 231. See also De-
Porlier, Juan, 113                                christianization
Portugal, 85, 87, 99                            Renteria, Simon, 127
Posada Rubin de Celis, Antonio, 124, 135,       Report on an Agrarian Law, 78
   137, 149, 163                                Republic, First, 249, 263; ecclesiastical
Preaching, 69, 219, 234; in missions, 64,         policies of, 264, 266, 269-270, 271-272
  236—237; political use of, 88, 89, 90—        Republicans, 249, 250, 275; support of
   91, 169, 176                                   for religious liberty, 253, 256, 257
Premonstratensians, 23                          Restoration, 273—274
Press, Catholic, 207, 257; as defender of       Reus, 88, 269
  the Church, 174, 197, 198                     Revolutions: of 1820, 117-125; of 1840,
Prim, Juan, 249. See also Revolution of            166-167; of 1843, 176-177, 186; of
   1868                                           1854, 196-199; of 1868, 248-253
   324                                                                      Index




Revuelta Gonzalez, Manuel, 150, 153           Santiago de Compostela, 6, 86, 97, 99,
Ricci, Scipione de’, 68, 70. See also Synod      177; ecclesiastical finances in, 43, 44—
  of Pistoia                                    45, 47, 113, 128, 129
Riego, Miguel de, 137                         Santiyan y Valdivielso, Joaquin de, 13
Riego, Rafael de, 117                         Sanz de Rio, Julian, 206, 231
Ripalda, Jeronimo, 61                         Sarabla, Ramon, 234
Ripoll, Cayetano, 140                         Sarda y Salvany, Felix, 275
Ripoll, monastery of, 101                     Scala Dei, monastery of, 157
Riudoms, Carmelite house of, 157              Scio, Felipe, 70
Rodriguez de Arellano, Jose Xavier,           Scriptures, 70, 71, 142—143
  30                                          Segorbe, 43
Romo Gamboa, Judas, 163, 169, 176             Segovia, 15, 20, 39, 42, 58, 84
Roo, Jeronimo de, 14                          Seminaries: reformed by Charles III, 5,
Rosales, Andres, 258                             17—18; under liberalism, 218—220; stu¬
Ros de Medrano, Manuel, 93, 119                 dents of, 211, 220-221
Rota, the, 189                                Seminario de Nobles: in Madrid, 28; in
Rude, George, 133                               Barcelona, 51
Ruiz Zorilla, Manuel, 262                     Senate, 164, 274
                                              Separation of Church and State, 256,
Sabadell, 194                                    269-271
Sacred heart, order of, 194                   Serrano, Francisco, 249
Saez, Victor, 125, 136-137, 138               Seville, 10, 34-35, 55-56, 197, 211, 224;
Saenz, Jose, 87                                  ecclesiastical finances in, 39, 42, 44—45;
Sagasta, Praxedes, 262, 274                     confraternities of, 54, 57, 58; missions
Saint Alphonsus Liguori, 60, 63                  in, 237, 238
Saint Antonio Claret. See Claret, Antonio     Sichar, Pablo de, 113
Saint Francis de Sales, 60, 61                Sierra Morena, 34, 35
Saint Gregory Osdense, 66                     Sigiienza, 6, 45
Saint Ignatius of Loyola, 28                  Silos, monastery of, 7, 23, 47
Saint James, 81                               Sisters of Charity, 27, 194, 212, 273
Saint John of the Cross, 2                    Sobrado, monastery of, 149
Saint John Eudes, 61, 63                      Socialism, utopian, 228
Saint Leonard of Port Maurice, 63             Socialists, 275
Saint Margaret Alacoque, 61                   Societies, conspiratorial: patriotic, 123,
Saint Teresa of Avila, 2                          132; clerical, 138—139
Saint Vincent Ferrer, 56-57                   Society, clerical interpretations of: in 18th
Saint Vincent de Paul, 63                        century, 62-63; under liberalism, 183—
Saint-Maur, monastery of, 23                      185, 225-229
Salamanca, 180, 263; ecclesiastical fi¬       Society of Jesus, 28, 29-31, 51, 112, 152,
  nances in, 39, 43, 115                         205; as missionary preachers, 63—64,
Salinas, Antonio Jose, 25                         193—194, 237, 238; suppressed in 1820,
Salmeron, Nicolas, 265, 269                       121 — 122; violence against in 1834, 153—
Salva, Miguel, 216, 217                           154; after 1852, 193-194, 197, 198,
Samos, monastery of, 89                          205,251
San Antonio Abad, order of, 27                Society for the Propagation of the Faith,
Sanlucar de Barrameda, 265                        173-174
San Pedro de Besalu, abbey of, 104            Society of Saint Vincent de Paul, 229, 240
San Pedro de Comprodon, abbey of, 104         Solera, canon, 139
San Pedro Martir, priory of, 42               Solis Folch Cardona, Francisco, 11
Sancha y Hervas, Ciriaco, 219                 Solsona, 127, 220
Santa Cruz, Manuel de, 267                    Somoza, Domingo, 137
Santa Marla de las Cuevas, monastery of,      Soria, 9, 39, 157, 167
  22-23, 26, 47, 115, 133                     Spiritual guides, 61-63, 239-240
Santander, 6, 86, 99, 157                     Strauch, Raimundo, 105, 127
Santander, Miguel de, 87                      Subsidio, 41
      Index                                                                        325



Suner y Capdevila, F., 256                     Urgel, 125, 127
Surplice fees, 20, 172—173                     Urquijo, Mariano Luis de, 76, 87, 88—89
Syllabus of Errors, 207, 217—218
Synods, diocesan, 215                          Valencia, 75, 86, 121, 140, 157, 242; ec¬
Synod of Pistoia, 70, 76, 79, 82, 83             clesiastical finances in, 44-45; process
                                                 sions in, 56—57; and the revolution of
Talavera de la Reina, 67                         1843, 176, 177
Tarazona, 6                                    Vales reales, 77, 78
Tarin, Francisco, 241                          Valladolid, 6, 10, 39, 157
Tarragona, 6, 88, 127, 140, 152, 165, 176;     Vatican Council, first, 261
  anticlericalism in, 157, 181 — 182           Velez, Rafael de, 114, 188
Tavira y Almazan, Antonio, 71, 76, 79,         Vendrell, 194, 269
  83                                           Vernacular languages: use of by the
Tejada, Luis Alonso, 138                         Church, 19, 71, 121, 239
Teruel, 176, 177                               Vidal, Jose, 127
Tiberi, Francesco, 143, 151                    Villada, Juan, 223
Times, The, 190                                Villanueva, Joaquin de, 71, 95, 102, 113;
Tithe, 15, 120; in war of Independence           supports ecclesiastical reform in 1810
  and after 1814, 104, 114, 115; suppres¬        and in 1820, 93, 119, 120. See also
  sion of, 163, 166. See also Finances, ec¬      Clergy, liberal
  clesiastical                                 Villanueva del Rosario, 241
Toledo, 86, 87, 149, 167; ecclesiastical fi¬   Vimbodi, 22, 53
  nances in, 39, 42, 43, 44—45, 129; qual¬     Vincentians, 211
  ity of clergy in, 16—17, 18—19, 233;         Vitoria, 167, 209, 214
  cathedral chapter of, 46, 47                 Volunteers of the Republic, 269
Toreno, conde de, 99, 156, 158
Toro, 10, 39                                   War of Independence, 90—91, 104—106;
Torres, Agustin, 91                             clerical participation in, 86, 88—89
Torres Amat, Felix, 124, 142-143, 172; as      Wealth, ecclesiastical, 39—41; government
  supporter of ecclesiastical reform, 149,      demands upon, 41, 76—78, 104, 115;
  163-164. See also Clergy, liberal             spending patterns of, 46—48, 213—214.
Tortosa, 176, 209                               See also Finances, ecclesiastical
Townsend, Joseph, 8, 10, 12—13, 34, 48,        Working class, 201, 224-225, 276; policy
  53                                            of Church toward, 183-184, 227-228,
Trinitarians, 23, 27                            229
Tudela, 6, 7
Tuy, 43                                        Yermo y Santivanez, Jose del, 7

Ugarte, friary of, 42                          Zaldivia, 238
Universities, 17-18, 24, 218; conflicts be¬    Zamora, 39, 86, 157
  tween Church and State over, 228—229,        Zaragoza, 14, 26, 88, 117, 155—157; eccle¬
  231                                            siastical finances in, 45, 214
Urebal, Jose de, 23                            Zumalacarregui, T., 152—153
Harvard Historical Monographs




Out of Print Titles Are Omitted
 1. W. S. Ferguson. Athenian Tribal Cycles in the Hellenistic Age. 1932.
 3. J. B. Hedges. The Federal Railway Land Subsidy Policy of Canada. 1934.
 9. Crane Brinton. French Revolutionary Legislation on Illegitimacy, 1789-1804.
     1936.
11. C. S. Gardner. Chinese Traditional Historiography. 1938. Rev. ed., 1961.
21. 0. H. Radkey. The Election to the Russian Constituent Assembly of 1917.
     1950.
27. Marius B. Jansen. The Japanese and Sun Yat-sen. 1954.
31. Robert L. Koehl. RKFDV: German Resettlement and Population Policy, 1939-
     1945. 1957.
32. Gerda Richards Crosby. Disarmament and Peace in British Politics, 1914—1919.
     1957.
33. W. J. Bouwsma. Concordia Mundi: The Career and Thought of Guillaume
     Postel (1510-1581). 1957.
34. Hans Rosenberg. Bureaucracy, Aristocracy, and Autocracy: The Prussian Ex¬
     perience, 1660-1815. 1958.
36. Henry Vyverberg. Historical Pessimism in the French Enlightenment. 1958.
38. Elizabeth L. Eisenstein. The First Professional Revolutionist: Filippo Michele
     Buonarroti (1761-1837). 1959.
40. Samuel P. Hayes. Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency: The Progressive
     Conservation Movement, 1890—1920. 1959.
41. Richard C. Wade. The Urban Frontier: The Rise of Western Cities, 1790—
      1830. 1959.
42. Harrison M. Wright. New Zealand, 1769—1840: Early Years of Western Con¬
     tact. 1959.
44. Jere Clemens King. Foch versus Clemenceau: France and German Dismem¬
     berment, 1918-1919. 1960.
46. James Leiby. Caroll Wright and Labor Reform: The Origin of Labor Statistics.
     1960.
47. Albert M. Craig. Choshu in the Meiji Restoration. 1961.
48. Milton Berman. John Fiske: The Evolution of a Popularizer. 1961.
49. W. M. Southgate. John Jewel and the Problem of Doctrinal Authority. 1962.
50. Edward W. Bennett. Germany and the Diplomacy of the Financial Crisis, 1931.
     1962.
51. Thomas W. Perry. Public Opinion, Propaganda, and Politics in Eighteenth-
     Century England: A Study of the Jew Bill of 1753. 1962.
52. Ramsay MacMullen. Soldier and Civilian in the Later Roman Empire. 1963.
53. Charles Montgomery Gray. Copyhold, Equity, and the Common Law. 1963.
                                           Harvard Historical Monographs



54. Eugene Charlton Black. The Association: British Extraparliamentary Political
    Association, 1769-1793. 1963.
55. Seymour Drescher. Tocqueville and England. 1964.
56. Mack Walker. Germany and the Emigration, 1816—1885. 1964.
57. Stephen Lukashevich. Ivan Aksakov (1823—1886): A Study in Russian Thought
     and Politics. 1965.
58. R. C. Raack. The Fall of Stein. 1965.
59. Charles T. Wood. The French Apanages and the Capetian Monarchy, 1224—
     1328. 1966.
60. James Holt. Congressional Insurgents and the Party System, 1909-1916.
     1967.
61. Keith Hitchins. The Rumanian National Movement in Transylvania, 1780—
      1849. 1969.
62. Louis M. Greenberg. Sisters of Liberty: Marseille, Lyon, Paris and the Reaction
     to a Centralized State, 1868—1871. 1971.
63. Alan B. Spitzer. Old Hatreds and Young Hopes: The French Carbonari
     against the Bourbon Restoration. 1971.
64. Judith M. Hughes. To the Maginot Line: The Politics of French Military
     Preparation in the 1920’s. 1971.
65. Anthony Molho. Florentine Public Finances in the Early Renaissance, 1400—
      1433. 1971.
66. Philip Dawson. Provincial Magistrates and Revolutionary Politics in France,
     1789-1795. 1972.
67. Raymond Callahan. The East India Company and Army Reform, 1783-1798.
     1972.
68. Francis Godwin James. Ireland in the Empire, 1688—1770: A History of Ire¬
     land from the Williamite Wars to the Eve of the AmericanRevolution. 1973.
69. Richard Tilden Rapp. Industry and Economic Decline in Seventeenth-Century
     Venice. 1976.
70. Hock Guan Tjoa. George Henry Lewes: A Victorian Mind. 1977.
71. Marjorie O’Rourke Boyle. Rhetoric and Reform: Erasmus’ Civil Dispute with
     Luther. 1983.
72. Jon Butler. The Huguenots in America: A Refugee People in a New World
     Society. 1984.
73. WilliamJ. Callahan. Church, Politics, and Society in Spain, 1750-1874. 1984.
         ■




V


    ,v
'I




     V\
FEB. 1 8 1986             _
                Date Due




BRODARl, INC.   Cat. No. 23 233   Printed in U S A
fflp“Si^l^»aPfe^«p?i;i^S#B}r.

     a™iiM
     ^Sp'llIJilSigiiL,

                 js:-ui‘V
            IjSSa
          pmm»
  WMM»i|ii
       liiliiifeiasiiis
            ^!pft«3»a|5WfeKSiW-
