20 P. E. TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

don and Washington, it is not intuitively obvious that a tripolar world com-
posed of the Soviet Union, the United States, and Britain would have been
less stable than the actual bipolar world.

(2) Shifting to economic history, Gould (1969) complains about the coun-
terfactual, “If the Industrial Revolution had not occurred, the British stan-
dard of living would have been lower than it was.” He observes:

We cannot decide what we must subtract from the real past along with the Indus-
trial Revolution. . . . In order to know what would have happened to income per
head had the Industrial Revolution not occurred we need to know, amongst other
things, what in such circumstances, would have happened to population, But to
know what, in those same circumstances, would have happened to population we
need to know, amongst other things, what would have happened to income per
head.

It is not clear that we can escape this “vicious circle.” At a minimum, we
need to clarify the counterfactual antecedent by creating a “compound”
(€.g., if the Industrial Revolution had not occurred and if British population
‘grew at the same rate between 1750 and 1850, then . . . ) and by specifying
what else would have to be different about this hypothetical Britain from
which we have now “subtracted” two fundamental causal processes: indus-
trial growth and rising population.

These arguments are grist for the wholists mill. But in other cases, causal
interconnectedness seems much thinner. Perhaps one reason why assassina-
tions attract so much counterfactual attention is that it is so easy to imagine
“getting away with” changing only a few causal antecedents and producing
‘consequential result. It requires little rewriting of history to posit hypotheti-
cal worlds in which Oswald missed his target or in which Kennedy chose to
ride through Dallas in a car with a bulletproof roof. These possible worlds
are only a muscle twitch or nightmare removed from the actual world.

‘We run into similar conceptual problems on the consequent side of coun-
terfactuals. Consider a variation of Pascal's conjecture on the causal impact
of Cleopatra's nose on the course of Western history. Fearon (Chapter 2)
concedes that “if Cleopatra had an unattractively large nose, World War I
might not have occurred” but argues that the counterfactual hardly belongs
in any reasonable explanatory account of World War I. If Cleopatra's nose
were that consequential, the hypothetical world of 1914 is almost certainly
not just a minor variant of the actual world of 1914, but rather a radically
different world in which the nonoccurrence of World War I is but one of
countless points of difference that go back 2,000 years. There might also be
‘no Germany or Great Britain. Fearon proposes, as a pragmatic rule of evi-
dence, that we seriously consider only those counterfactuals in which the
antecedent seems likely to affect the specified consequent and very little
else. This argument invokes a surgical-strike model of counterfactual infer-

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS a

ence in which we not only manipulate one thing at a time, we give priority
attention only to those causes specifically relevant to the consequent of inter-
est (if and only if the hypothesized causal variable takes on the value x’,
then the effect occurs and everything else in the hypothesized world is pretty
much identical to the actual world),

Fearon’s proposal is open to challenge on the ground that it arbitrarily
rules out causes that, because of their location in complex systemic networks
of causation, do not have effects that can be conceptually isolated. For our
part, we see no easy resolution of the tension between the desire of meth-
odologists to “hold other things equal” and the insistence of latter-day Leib-
nizians that once we tamper with one element from the past, we have to
trace through the causal implications for all other elements, in effect creating
a full-fledged alternative world for each counterfactual. The argument is best
engaged on a case-by-case basis, with a minimum of metaphysical postur-
ing. Investigators should obviously be sensitive to systemic effects and be
precise about the implications of implementing their hypothesized causes in
hypothetical worlds. In some cases, the grounds for suspecting systemic
effects will be weak and the counterfactual exercise can approximate the
austere parsimony of the thought experiment; in other cases, the grounds for
suspecting systemic effects will be powerful and counterfactual exercises
will acquire the rich narrative trappings of scenario generation, with detailed
stories and subplots elaborated around why certain historical paths were not
taken and what would have had to be different to activate them (Chapter 12,
Weber).

2. Cotenability: Logical Consistency of Connecting Principles

Every counterfactual is a condensed or incomplete argument that requires
connecting principles that can sustain, but not imply, the conditional claim
(Goodman 1983). When explicitly articulated, these connecting principles
are often complex, even in the case of such seemingly simple counterfac-
tuals as “If the match had been scratched, it would have lighted.” The con-
necting principles specify, within reasonable limits, everything else that
would have to be true to sustain the counterfactual, including the necessary
amount of friction generated by the scratch, the chemical composition of the
match, the absence of water, the presence of oxygen, and so forth.

In our view, connecting principles should satisfy three minimal criteria.
‘They should be specified reasonably precisely, be consistent with each
other, and be consistent with both the antecedent and consequent. Unfor-
tunately, as several contributors point out, counterfactual arguments in
world politics often fail the first test so badly that it is impossible to tell how
well they might have fared against the second and third tests. Focusing on

