

                                         ■’         '. ■•            »                  ■#                                                                ' ‘’1
                                                                                                                              bi
                                                     V                                   * •<
V-                                                                                  ■
                                                                                                                                                             s
     V
                                          ■*                  ■ /           ♦       *'■*.                                         <* i- •                     I

                                                    * •>             *. ■           '           - .1

                   '   -4 *^)» 4 -




     »
                           Preface




While the French Revolution convulsed Europe, the Ottoman
Empire also reached a crucial point in its long history. Centuries
of decay had brought it to a point where internal stresses and
forefgn dangers threatened its very existence. Previous efforts
to rescue the empire by internal reform had been entirely un¬
successful, and it was continuing to survive more as a result
of its enemies’ inability to agree on a division of the spoils than
anything else. Even the most intelligent Ottomans were hardly
aware of the extent of the danger and conceived reform to be no
more than a sterile restoration of the institutions and practices
which had brought success in the past. Starting in the second
quarter of the nineteenth century, however, and continuing into
modern times, a new concept of reform arose which enabled the
Ottomans to restore their empire from within —the idea that
the old institutions had to be entirely abolished and replaced
by new ones, largely imported from the West and far better
suited to meet the problems and needs of modern times. This
new concept is usually identified with the Tanzimat movement,
which lasted from 1839 until the accession of Sultan Abd ul-
Hamid II in 1876. It actually was inaugurated in 1826, when
Sultan Mahmud II destroyed the Janissary corps, the military
pillar of the old order. Yet, in many ways, it was during the
reign of his predecessor, Selim III, that conditions arose which
made this new idea of reform inevitable in the years which fol¬
lowed. In most ways Selim was a failure. His reforms were limited
and were eventually dissipated in foreign conflicts and internal
revolts. He went little beyond strictly military and technical
innovations to the more fundamental political, social, economic,
and judicial developments which had'provided the necessary
context for their successful operation in Europe. Yet in his efforts,
and in the factors which defeated them, lay the seeds of modern
Turkish reform.
 The great detail of this study, particularly in its description
of diplomatic and political affairs, may seem anachronistic
in an age in which historians have turned to synthesis and
interpretation and to emphasis on social and economic develop¬
ments. Yet I have felt my approach to be the correct one for
the study of nineteenth-century Ottoman history because of
the absence of previous studies of the kind that historians of
Europe and America have been able to rely on for two genera¬
tions. The historian must walk before he can run. It is not pos¬
sible to describe Selim’s reforms and the reasons for their fail¬
ure without placing them in the context of the political, military,
and diplomatic events of their time. The momentous events of
the era of the French Revolution and of Bonaparte have been
touched on in numerous studies, but never with the Ottoman
Empire as their focus, never in relation to Ottoman problems,
Ottoman conditions, and Ottoman policies, and—most important
of all —never on the basis of Ottoman sources. An attempt has
been made here to remedy these defects by giving a balanced
account of events in all parts of the empire during this period:
internal conditions and revolts in southeastern Europe, Ana¬
tolia, and the Arab provinces; European diplomacy in relation
to the Eastern Question; and the various military campaigns
and diplomatic maneuvers in which Selim was involved with
the powers of Europe. The results of previous European research
on these subjects have been incorporated. At the same time,
I have added new information from Ottoman Turkish sources in
an effort to provide a more balanced and objective account than