




                        Prelude to Reform
panded the new artillery corps into a group of two hundred           11
and fifty men able to use modern cannons. They continued to
practice until 1781, when they were dissolved and the French
officers went home.“ Under Grand Vezir Halil Hamid Pasha
(1782-1785),   strenuous   though   largely   unsuccessful efforts
were made to reform the traditional Ottoman bureaucracy, the
financial system, the Janissaries, and the feudal cavalry, with
particular attention paid to weeding out the corrupt and those
who would not or could hot perform the duties assigned to
them. The old press originally established by Ibrahim Miite-
ferrika was revived, and books were once again produced, in¬
cluding important Turkish translations of European technical
texts for use in the new schools. The foreign advisers were re¬
called to resume their work not only on the rapid-fire artillery
corps, but also on the older artillery corps, and a new fortifica¬
tions school was established. The rapid-fire cannon corps grew
into a force of 2,000 men, and it was provided with the highest
possible salaries in order to attract into its service the best
fighting men of the empire. This work continued until 1787,
when the new Ottoman war with Russia and Austria led Louis
XVI to recall the French instructors on the pretext of retaining
his neutrality.
  But in the end, these reforms succeeded only when they did
not harm the interests or monopolies of the established army
corps. Only the navy, the artillery corps, and the new cannon
corps were affected; here, new corps were induced to use new
weapons, but the older corps were left without reform, living in
the past, no longer able to fight the enemy successfully but still
strong enough to resist the reforms at home and to prevent
their application on a wide enough scale for them to be really
effective. Here, then, was traditional Ottoman reform as applied
during the eighteenth century. The main question we must
examine in this study is whether Selim III merely carried on
this tradition, or whether it was he who forged the new paths
which led to its replacement by the much more radical mid¬
nineteenth-century Tanzimat reform in which the old institu¬
tions were entirely destroyed and replaced by new ones imported
from the West.




                   Decline of the Ottoman Empire
                            II. Education
                              of a Prince




This was the world of young Prince Selim. What was his role in
the momentous events swirling around him? What circumstances
of his childhood made him different from his father and uncle?
The beginnings were not promising. During the first five years of
his life, Selim’s education was handled entirely by the Ulema* in
the traditional way. He concentrated on memorizing the Koran
and learning the traditional religious sciences. After 1770, how¬
ever, during the later years of his father’s reign, Selim was allowed
far more freedom than was customary for Ottoman princes at that
time. Mustafa began to prepare his son for affairs of state as the
Ottoman sultans had done in the sixteenth century and before.
Father and son attended meetings of the Imperial Council and,
more important, went to watch the new artillery and rifle corps
training under the direction of Baron de Tott and others. ^ Selim
grew up in the company of a number of young palace slaves who
shared his adventures and who, with him, planned to revive and
rejuvenate the empire when he came to power. These were his