




                              Preface
would have been possible in a study based solely on European
sources.
  Recent Turkish studies of Selim’s reign have been supple¬
mented by detailed original research in all the source materials
from his reign remaining in the Ottoman archives and libraries.
The materials used in this work were gathered during a series
of trips to Istanbul, Ankara, London, Paris, and Vienna between
1957 and 1967, made possible by fellowships and grants from
the Harvard Center for Middle Eastern Studies, the Harvard
Foundation for Advanced Study and Research, the Rockefeller
Foundation, and,the Royal Institute of International Affairs,
London. I would like to express my gratitude to the friends and
colleagues who gave me every possible assistance and encour¬
agement during the course of my research; in particular to
Midhat Sertoglu, Director of the Ba§ VekMet Ar§ivi in Istanbul;
the late Haluk Y. §ehsuvaroglu, former director, and Hayrullah
Ors, present director of the Topkapi Saray Museum and Archives
in Istanbul; Aziz Berker, former Director of the Department
of Libraries in the Ministry of Education, Ankara, who made
available the vast resources of manuscripts in the Turkish
national library system; and to the directors and staffs of the
Belediye Library and Archaeological Museum Library in Istan¬
bul; the Tiirk Tarih Kurumu Library in Ankara; the Public
Record Office and British Museum in London; the Archives
Nationales, Archives du Ministere des Affaires Etrangeres,
and Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris; the Archives du Ministere
de la Guerre, Chateau de Vincennes; the Haus-Hof- und Staats-
Archiv, Vienna, and the Harry Elkins Widener Library at
Harvard.
 My special thanks go to Sir Hamilton A. R. Gibb, who origin¬
ally suggested this study, and to whom it is dedicated as a small
token of appreciation for the advice, encouragement, and stimu¬
lation he has given me during the course of my work.
  Because the sources used in the research were in various
languages, and the provinces included in the Ottoman Empire
at the time of the study have been replaced by a number of
independent states, each with its own system of spelling and
transliteration as well as its own place names, this work had a




                             Preface
number of peculiar problems in this regard. For example, the
city of Plovdiv (Bulgarian) used to be called Philippopolis (Greek)
and Filibe (Turkish). The letter c is pronounced j in modern
Turkish and ^ in Serbo-Croat. In addition, the sound ch is
rendered by 5 in Turkish and by c or c in Serbo-Croat; and the
sound ^ becomes § in Turkish and Rumanian and s in Serbian.
The letter for j in Arabic represents g in Egypt and ^ in the
Lebanon, and so forth. For this reason, the following system has
been employed in this work: in the t,^xt itself, all proper nouns
and technical words have been transliterated in a way to make
them easily pronounceable by the English-speaking reader.
In most cases, the traditional Western-language names for
cities, towns, and provinces have been preferred to those cur¬
rently used in the modern states; thus "Semendria” rather than
"Smederevo,” "Philippopolis” rather than "Plovdiv”, "Cairo”
rather than "al-Kahire,” and so forth. But when the modern
names have achieved common usage in English, these have
usually been accepted, along with their current spellings, in
place of the traditional ones: thus "Istanbul” rather than "Con¬
stantinople,” "Edirne” rather than "Adrianople,” and "Skopje”
rather than "Uskiip.” On the other hand, in the footnotes and
bibliography, because of the need to cite recent publications
in the various Balkan and Middle Eastern languages, current
spelling systems had to be preserved, so all references and
citations were made according to the transliteration systems
currently in use for the language in which each of them was
written. As a result, while the text reads "Jevdet,” "Chorbaji,”
and "Nish,” in the footnotes and bibliographies the same names
are spelled "Cevdet,” "Corbaci,” "Ni^” This change seemed
necessary to satisfy the needs of readers and researchers alike
and to prevent the text from becoming a morass of different
spelling and transliteration systems. A complete glossary of
all the names applied to each important city or town mentioned
in the text is included in the index.