




                            Prelude to Reform
they felt —quite rightly—that the new techniques threatened            9
their old established privileges, security, and status. The new
bombardier corps was no more than a mercenary body hired for
a special purpose, and it was eliminated soon after its creator
died. Yet its influence lived on. During the next decade,,one of
the school’s instructors, Mehmed Said, wrote a geometry book.
Other books    appeared on medicine,      military sciences, and
European affairs — mostly translations, but important beyond
measure for Ottomans never before even aware of the existence
of such things.®
  During Selim’s/childhood, these limited reform efforts con¬
tinued on an ever-increasing scale. Under Grand Vezir Ragib
Pasha (1757-1763), Bonneval’s modern bombardier corps was
revived. His geometry school was secretly reopened and enlarged,
with its teachers mainly coming from among the men trained
in Bonneval’s time.^ Ambassador Ahmed Resmi visited Vienna
(1757) and Berlin (1763) and sent back enlightening accounts
of European events and conditions.® The Sultan himself had a
special passion for astronomy and secured various works on
astronomy and mathematics from the French Academy. Some
of them were translated into Turkish and made available in
manuscript and in printed form.®
  But starting late in Mustafa’s reign and continuing into that
of his brother and successor, Abd ul-Hamid I (1774-1789),
the external and internal dangers again became acute. A dis¬
astrous war with Catherine’s Russia began in 1768. In addition
to the army’s defeats on land, the Ottoman navy was almost
                                                                   V
entirely destroyed with a single blow at the Battle of Cheshme
(1770). A Russian fleet from the Baltic, under Admiral Orloff,
cruised the waters of the Adriatic and Mediterranean urging the
Greeks and other subject peoples to rise against their masters.
The fateful Treaty of Kiichuk Kaynaija (1774), which concluded
the war, gave to Russia the lands west of the Black Sea between
the Dnieper and the Bug. The Ottoman vassals living to the north
and east and the Tatars of the Crimea, Koban, and Bujak were
left in a precarious independence which made them virtually
defenseless against the expanding Russian power. At the same
time, Russia gained dominant influence in the empire through




                   Decline of the Ottoman Empire
treaty clauses allowing the use of the Black Sea and the Straits
for its shipping, giving its merchant^ privileges equal to those
of Britain and France, and permitting it subsequently to claim
the right of intervention on behalf of the Sultan’s Orthodox
Christian subjects. Moreover, Russia was provided with the
means of extending that influence by establishing consuls and
agents anywhere it wished in the Sultan’s dominions.
  In the years which followed, the provincial anarchy became
worse. Anatolia and the Balkans w^fe infested by brigands and
autonomous notables who acknowledged little more than the
Sultan’s suzerainty at best. In the Arab lands, Zahir al-Omar
and Jezzar Pasha in Syria, and Ali Bey ul-Kebir in Egypt,
Suleyman Pasha in Iraq, and the Saudis of Arabia, were be¬
coming   virtually   independent,    thus   depriving the Sultan’s
Treasury of its most fruitful sources of revenue and Istanbul and
the other great cities of the empire of some of their principal
sources of grain. Russian intervention in the Danubian Prin¬
cipalities increased, and its occupation of the Crimea in 1783
had to be recognized by the Sultan in return for no more than the
vaguest provisions allowing him to retain a position as Caliph
there and for Russian promises — soon to be violated—to end
its intervention in the Principalities and elsewhere.
  In response to these dangers, Abd uI-Hamid I introduced
important reforms into the Ottoman armed forces. The navy
was rebuilt under the leadership of one of the few Ottoman heroes
to emerge from the Battle of Cheshme, Gazi Hasan Pasha, who
served as Grand Admiral from 1774 to 1789. Foreign naval com¬
manders and shipbuilders helped him develop the navy along
modern lines and to train its officers in a new naval engineering
school (Muhendishane-i     Bahri-i    Humayun),    established   at
Aynahkavak in 1784.*^’
  Starting in 1773 Baron de Tott, a Hungarian officer in French
service, formed a new corps of rapid-fire artillery men {Siiratji)
and engineers, built a gun factory to manufacture modern
cannons and rifles, modernized and rebuilt the fortifications
at the Dardanelles and along the Danube, established a new
army engineering school at Haskdy, and modernized and en¬
larged the mathematics school. A group of French officers ex-