

Interior of the New Gunpowder Works at Azadh.                     203
New Gunpowder Works at Azadh, constructed 1794.                   204

The New Drydock at the Ottoman Naval Arsenal under
  Selim III.                                                      205
The Ottoman Naval Arsenal under Selim III.                        206
Modern Ottoman Ship of the Line, Constructed under
  Sultan Selim III.                                                207
Reception of Foreign Ambassadors by Sultan Selim III in
  the Topkapi Saray, Istanbul. Topkapi Saray Portrait
  Collection, Istanbul.                                            208




                                   xiii
Part I. Introduction:
 Prelude to Reform
■   <*;
          V                 ‘ V-’         '‘ 4 ;»'n, ^


          •r . ■   •¥   k    ^   <




    ,C'
                                     ‘®
                   /. Decline of the
                   Ottoman Empire




On Thursday morning, December 24, 1761, Mustafa III, twenty-
sixth sultan of the Ottoman line, received the welcome news
that at long last, after almost five years on the throne, he had
been presented with a son and heir by his fifth wife, Mihrishah
Sultan. As the sound of celebrations reverberated throughout
the ancient capital, the young prince and heir was given the
name Selim, and his father rejoiced that the Ottoman lineage
had been preserved.
  The state which young Prince Selim came to rule twenty-
eight years later was a far cry from that which his ancestors
had controlled two centuries before. Ten great sultans had
built a mighty empire which stretched from Hungary and the
gates of Vienna south through the Balkan Peninsula and Ana¬
tolia, down the valleys of the Tigris, Euphrates, and Nile to the
Persian Gulf and Red Sea, and across Syria and Egypt almost
to the Atlantic. But starting in the reign of Suleyman the Mag¬
nificent (1520-1566), a long series of weak, incapable, and
dissolute rulers had gradually undermined the entire structure
of Ottoman society.* The Ottoman system had been developed
in a complicated series of overlapping and intertwined classes,
institutions, and organizations which depended largely on the
person of the sultan himself for cohesion as a workable whole
                                            1



4   as well as for successful operation within their own limited
    spheres. With such dependence on the rulers, it was inevitable
    that when the sultans became unwilling or unable to guide
    and direct the system, it should decay and decompose. At first,
    it was expected that strong grand vezirs* might rjgpl^ce the sul¬
    tans in this role, but they proved to be inadequate because
    they could not replace their masters in their most important
    role, as a focus of loyalty in the empire. S'q a vacuum of power re¬
    mained at the center, and struggled to fill it led to the rise of
    factions in the Palace and Porte, and to nepotism, inefficiency,
    dishonesty, and anarcj^„in all parts of the empire. Weakening
    central control and misrule and tyranny by the representatives
    of the sultanate led to increasing disorder and anarchy, and
    the rise of local brigands, autonomous notables,** and others
    who sought to use the situation for their own advantage. Because
    the provincial revenues gradually diminished and most of the
    revenues left to the central treasury fell into the hands of the
    ruling class, the whole structure of Ottoman military and civil
    organization weakened further, and the vicious cycle was repeat¬
    ed again and again over the centuries.
      Furthermore, to the internal causes of decay was added an
    external one —an increasing inferiority to the West. The great
    new nation states and empires of Europe were using their
    political unity to develop tremendous power; developments in
    science and technology during and after the Renaissance and
    Reformation were enabling them to build armies with weapons
    far more efficient than any known before; and the great gold and
    silver discoveries in the New World and the development of
    imperialism and international trade and commerce on a large
    scale were giving them the economic strength to support their
    new-found political and military power. In all of this activity
    the Ottoman Empire took no part. At best it remained stagnant,
    with a vast government unable to lead, hardly able to rule.
    As Europe became unified, the Ottoman Empire disintegrated;