


        *The Grand Vezir, called Sadr-i Azem by the Ottomans, was the chief exec¬
    utive and military officer in the traditional Ottoman state. See Gibb and Bowen,
    I/l, pp. 107-115.
       **Generally called Ayan; see chapter XV.




                                 Prelude to Reform
as Europe developed a new military technology, the Ottomans           5
relied on the weapons and techniques of the past; and European
economic developments were viewed by the Ottomans with
disdain. Ottoman merchants rarely participated in international
trade, and the precious metals coming from the New .World,
when combined with great population increases during the
sixteenth century and after, served only to fan the chronic
inflation, famine, and economic and political chaos, which were to
characterize Ottoman society during the remaining centuries
of its existence.^
  Much of the blame for these conditions must go to the peculiar
reaction of the Ottoman ruling class. The primary characteristic
of the Ottomans throughout these centuries was almost complete
isolation and a lack of awareness of developments outside
their own sphere, and the consequent assumption that the causes
of Ottoman decline and its remedies lay entirely within their
own practice and experience. Europe was wholly outside the
frame of reference of even the most well-educated Ottomans.
This was both cause for and manifestation of an unshakable
belief in the superiority of Ottoman ways to anything which
the infldel could possibly produce, an idea developed in an age
when the Ottoman world was, indeed, more advanced, but which
remained long after its basic assumption was entirely disproved
by developments in Europe. Consequently, when the new armies
of Europe beeran to defeat those of the Porte in the seventeenth
century, the Ottomans assumed that their defeat was caused not
by the superiority of Western armies but rather by their own
failure to apply fully the organization, weapons, and techniques
of warfare which had been so successful for them in the past.
Moreover, most of the ruling-class Ottomans actually benefited
from the abuses and stagnation. With revenues coming to them
from salaries, fiefs, and bribes, for which they were required to
do little or no work, and with their status and position in Ottoman
society directly dependent on continued adherence to the tech¬
niques and ways of the past, it was inevitable that they should
oppose any efforts to change, despite the consequent weakness
of the empire in relation to the West.
  During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, there-




                   Decline of the Ottoman Empire
 fore, when increasing dangers threatened the empire on which
 their privileges depended, the "reforms” which they introduced
 were merely efforts to restore the past, without the realization
 that what had been successful in the sixteenth century could not
 possibly succeed against the power developed in Europe since
 that time. The most famous of the seventeenth-century re¬
 formers were Sultan Murad IV (1623-1640) and the Kopriilii
 Grand Vezirs, Mehmed (1656-1661) and Ahmed (1661-1676).^
 Each rose to office as the result of external crises and military
 defeats accompanied by internal decay. Each temporarily saved
 the empire by forcing it back into the patterns of the past; each
 eliminated corruption, weeded out the corrupt and incompetent
 from the army and government, and ruthlessly restored honesty,
 efficiency, and order. But they were doomed by their very success,
 since they were able to act only against the results of the decay,
 not the causes. The selfish rule of the vested interests and their
 absorption in the glories of the past remained unbroken, and as
 soon as the immediate dangers were overcome, the reforms were
 forgotten and the old ways resumed. What saved the Ottomans
 more than anything else in the seventeenth century was Euro¬
 pean ignorance of the extent of their decay and the absorption
 of the West in its own internal wars so that it was unable or
 unwilling to take advantage of this weakness.
   Only with Kara Mustafa Pasha’s failure to take Vienna in
 1683 and the resulting collapse of his army did Europe become
 fully aware of the Ottoman situation and move to take advantage
 of it. Hapsburg Austria now sought to reconquer Hungary,
 Serbia, and the eastern Balkans, and to reach the Mediterranean.
 Venice hoped to regain its Adriatic colonies and the Morea.
-Russia worked to extend its lands through the Balkans and the
 Straits to the open sea. All of them fought the Porte by fomenting
 dissatisfaction among its non-Muslim subjects and by forcing
it into a series of wars which occupied most of its attention in the
closing decades of the seventeenth century and throughout the
eighteenth century: from 1683 to 1699 ending in the Treaty of
Carlowitz; a somewhat more successful war with Russia in
 1710 and 1711, ended by the Treaty of the Pruth (1711); the war
of 1714 through 1718 with Venice and Austria, ended by the