




                         Prelude to Reform
Treaty of Passarowitz (1718); and a war with Austria and Russia       7
from 1736 to 1739, ended by the Treaty of Belgrade (1739).
As a result, the Ottoman Empire lost Hungary, Serbia north of
Belgrade, Croatia, Slavonia, and Transylvania; its boundaries
in Europe were pushed all the way back to the Danube,- where
they had last rested before Suleyman the Magnificent’s conquests
early in the sixteenth century. Moreover, only a year after
Selim’s birth, Russia came under the rule of the dynamic Cath-
erine the Great (1762-1796), and it was not long before she was
undertaking new efforts to push her realm into the Ottoman
territories bordering the Black Sea and the Straits, and through
them to the open sea.
  As the danger signals became more and more apparent during
the eighteenth century, the isolation of the Ottomans was slightly
diminished. Ottoman ambassadors went to live in Europe for
a time, to sign peace treaties, arrange alliances and the like, and
their oral and written reports made at least a few Ottomans
aware of what had gone on in Europe during the preceding two
centuries. In addition, as large numbers of European merchants
and diplomats poured into the empire to take advantage of its
weakness, opportunities for contact between them and members
of the Ottoman ruling class greatly increased, and Ottomans
began to see at first hand the kind of life Europeans had made
for themselves. An increasing number of European "renegades”
now came to serve the empire, bringing with them considerable
information about developments in Europe. For the most part,
however, these channels of contact were simply ignored by the
vast majority of Ottoman rulers and subjects alike. Such infor¬
mation did not fit into the patterns of life and thought of even
the most well-educated Ottomans, so its effect was superficial
at best.
  But there were some changes — at first in manners and tastes.
During the "Tulip Period” (1717-1730), led by Sultan Ahmed
III and Grand Vezir Damad Ibrahim Pasha, many members
of the court and ruling class sought to imitate European archi¬
tecture, court life, and entertainment. Chairs and sofas began
to replace the lush pillows and divans of the past. The palaces
of the French kings provided models for buildings and gardens




                   Decline of the Ottoman Empire
8   built along the Bosporus and at the "Sweet Waters” at the head
    of the Golden Horn. The lavish entertainments of Versailles
    produced their direct counterparts in the Ottoman capital.
    The Tulip Period did show for the first time some awareness of
    Europe among upper-class Ottomans, but it was no more than
    this. The awareness was very limited, even for those who benefited
    from it at the time. Among the mass of rulers and subjects,
    European ways remained entirely foreign and unwanted and
    stimulated a violent revolt in 1730^ which swept away all the
    leaders and accomplishments of the period.^
      This defeat was only temporary, however. The increasing
    contacts with Europe, and numerous European victories during
    the century diminished the isolation of the Ottomans further.
    In 1727 a Hungarian renegade named Ibrahim Miiteferrika was
    allowed to establish the first Turkish-language printing press
    in the empire, and he and his successor issued a series of books
    from then until 1742, when it was closed. Most of the printed
    texts were on traditional themes, in the classical manner,
    with little or no attention to the problems and needs of the time,
    but there were a few exceptions, of which the most outstanding
    was a treatise written by Ibrahim Miiteferrika himself for
    Mahmud I (1730-1754) describing the countries and armies of
    Europe and emphasizing the importance of imitating them in
    order to save the empire.^
      There were more concrete effects in the army, where the most
    damaging consequences of the decline were felt. Some isolated
    efforts were made to introduce European cannons, rifles, and
    other weapons along with the organization, discipline, and tactics
    which they required. These were brought by foreign renegades
    in Ottoman service. One of the earliest and most famous of these
    was the French Count Alexander de Bonneval, known as Hum-
    barajibashi Ahmed Pasha, who between 1729 and 1742 built
    a bombardier corps along European lines and established the
    first engineering school in the empire to introduce some of the
    basic elements of the new science and technology of the West.
    His efforts had no effect at all on the main stream of Ottoman
    military development at this time. The older corps sternly
    opposed all attempts to extend his teachings to them, since