




                      The Campaigns of 1787-1789
34   the clothing worn by persons of different religions, classes, and
     professions and which imposed certain restrictions on non-Muslim
     subjects.2^ The reformer Selim thus had to undo many of the ad¬
     vances made by his predecessor in order to prosecute the increas¬
     ingly dangerous and difficult war.
       On April 20, Selim made his most important move. Gazi Hasan
     Pasha, the hero of Cheshme, who had directed the Ottoman fleet
     for two decades and who had been the leader of reform in the em¬
     pire ever since the death of Halil Hamid Pasha, was now relieved
     of his command.^® This important change was the result of many
     factors. Gazi Hasan, the reformer, was the leader of those opposed
     to the Grand Vezir Yusuf Pasha, who led the conservative, anti¬
     reform elements which had managed to eliminate Halil Hamid
     and slowly rise to ascendancy in the following years. Hasan had
     bitterly criticized the manner and timing of the Grand Vezir’s
     declaration of war as well as his conduct of the campaign of 1788,
     and he had argued with the new Sultan that a more honest and
     vigorous man was needed to lead the empire in difficult times.
     Yusuf Pasha and his supporters were determined to get the
     Grand Admiral out of Istanbul as part of the reward they were to
     get from the Sultan in return for their continued support of the
     war effort, and now they were able to use his failure to save Ocza-
     kov to accomplish this.
       In Gazi Hasan’s place as Grand Admiral, Selim appointed
     Giritli Hiiseyin Pasha, who had distinguished himself as acting
     fleet commander while his chief had been in Egypt. Even more
     important, Giritli Hiiseyin had been a close companion of the new
     Sultan while he was still a prince in his uncle’s palace. So while
     Selim sacriflced Gazi Hasan to the Grand Vezir, he used the occa¬
     sion to install in his place one of his own trusted confldants as a
     first step toward strengthening his personal power in preparation
     for the day when the war would be over, the conservatives could
     be driven out, and the contemplated reforms begun.
       But Selim was convinced that Gazi Hasan was in fact far too
     able and loyal a man for the empire to lose his services entirely,
     so he appointed him as governor of Ismail and commander of the
     land armies in Moldavia with the specific task of directing the
     effort to retake Oczakov and move to the Crimea by land, an im-




                        War with Russia and Austria
portant task, indicative of the Sultan’s continued high regard for   35
the former hero. The Grand Vezir was ordered to concentrate his
efforts more in Wallachia and in the defense of Belgrade against
the contemplated Austrian attack. Yusuf Pasha happily agreed
in the hope that the new campaign would even further diminish
the prestige of his enemy and make possible his complete elim¬
ination from the scene. Then Selim made preparations for a new
effort to remove the Russians from the Caucasus. Mehmed Kalga,
son and heir of the Crimean Tatar Han, was appointed commander
in the Kohan area with the task of raising all the Caucasian
Tatars against the Russians as well as supporting the Ottoman
effort to retake the Crimea.^^
  With this encouragement, Yusuf Pasha and Prince Mavrogeny
were ahle to resume their operations in Wallachia in mid-April.
But hy then the Russian and Austrian forces had been reinforced
and prepared so that it was impossible for the Ottomans to repeat
their earlier successes. An initial Ottoman effort to take Galatz
and clear the Russians from Moldavia was quickly foiled.^® In the
west, Joseph II devoted all his resources to preparation for an
attack on Belgrade, so the Banat and the Bosnian front remained
relatively quiet during the remainder of the summer.
  It was at this point that politics emerged to undermine the
Ottoman military effort, as the Sultan moved to secure a Grand
Vezir more to his liking. Selim actually had wanted to dismiss
Koja Yusuf Pasha as soon as he became Sultan, for Yusuf had
played an active part in suppressing the abortive attempt by
Halil Hamid Pasha to bring Selim to the throne in place of Abd
ul-Hamid. Selim also was unhappy with the unrivaled power
which Gazi Hasan’s transfer had given the Grand Vezir and his
associates, and he further wanted to secure in his place a man
who would be more sympathetic to his own reform plans. But
Yusuf had a good military reputation as a result of his Banat
campaign and a strong following among the conservatives in the
palace and government and among the Ulema, so for the moment
Selim did not dare to dismiss him. But the Austrian victories in
Moldavia gave Selim the pretext he needed. It did not take very
long to tear down the reputation Yusuf had built up. Selim stated
that his Grand Vezir had failed to make proper preparations for