



                                , ■ \ ■■'' ’•' •■•' -                           :       *'5‘   V   %

                                                                             '■c^         S
                                                                         .          n


              •■   •   ->                     ■>       '



’/
              >             ''2,',                 •


                                 ♦* ^i                 t       *                    itV
          f’
 ? ' M
^•jl 4f. I,". •                           '.'Wl ^
             •'•vjv,'


              . ‘ .;•■
            ■?• I* f«             •i.,    .
                                    f
                            I


                                                                         .»!» 1


                                         '■ .' "i..
                                         —Ca»»




                                                                                                                                                   •j-i




                                                                   • j                                 «           «•       ' f
                                                                                                       V                    f ■--

                                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                                       ** •••       ,

                                                                                                            'Wl                            y'
                                                                                                           sK'                          *,«-M


                                                                                      ■.A*                                          ?      ...1
Part II. War with Russia
and Austria, 1787-1792
             III. Origins of the War
             under Abd ul-Hamid I




When Selim III came to the Ottoman throne in April 1789,
he found the empire embroiled in a disastrous war with Russia
and Austria, already in progress for over a year, and his long-
nurtured plans for reform had to be subordinated to more press¬
ing military needs. It was only after peace was concluded in
1792 that he and his associates could move ahead to examine
the ills of the empire and attempt to solve them. The war itself,
the long campaigns and battles, and the complex workings of
European diplomacy which accompanied it are for the most
part outside the scope of this study, so they cannot be examined
here in detail. A brief account of the war must, however, be
included, for in the military frustrations and diplomatic triumphs
lay much of the background of Selim’s accomplishments and
failures during the years that followed.
  The origins of the war are well known. It evolved from the
peace of Kiichiik Kaynarja, concluded between the Porte and
Russia in 1774, but looked on by both as no more than a truce.
To Catherine II of Russia, it marked only one more step along
the road toward driving the Turk from Europe and the Straits !
and replacing him with Russian dominion, a dream nurtured
since the time of Peter the Great.* With singular energy and
devotion, the Russian Empress devoted the years following the
peace toward achieving her objective. Russian championship
of Byzantine revival was given its modern expression in Cath¬
erine’s "Greek Scheme,” embodied in a secret agreement of mon-
archs concluded with the Emperor of Hapsburg Austria in 1783.
The essential basis of the agreement was the expulsion of the
Ottomans from Europe and division of the spoils among the
signatories in a mutually satisfying way. Wallachia, Moldavia,
and Bessarabia would be united in a new independent Orthodox
state to be called Dacia. Russian influence over it would be
assured by the appointment, as its first prince, of Count Pot¬
emkin, Catherine’s old favorite and commander of her southern
armies, and in addition by Russian annexation of the great
fortress of Khotzim on the Dniester as ,well as the area lying
between the Dnieper and the Bug. In addition, the Russian
presence in the eastern Mediterranean would be established
by the occupation of a few strategic Ottoman islands. Austria
would take over the western part of the Balkans — Serbia, Bosnia,
Herzegovina, and the strips of land along the Dalmatian coast
still under the control of the dying Venetian Republic, which
in compensation would receive the Morea and the strategic
islands of Crete and Cyprus. Finally, and perhaps most important
of all in Catherine’s eyes, the great city of Istanbul would be
joined with Thrace, Macedonia, Bulgaria, and northern Greece
in a restored Byzantine state under the rule of Catherine’s
grandson Constantine, who since birth had been trained specifi¬
cally for this role.^
  Even France, the Porte’s chief defender in the councils of
Europe, was involved in the scheme. Since the accession of Louis
XVI and his Austrian queen, Marie Antoinette, France had
been turning toward a policy of cooperation with Austria and
Russia and abandonment of the Ottomans to their fate as part
of a general reversal of alliances which was transforming the
diplomatic alignment of Europe after the Seven Years War.
According to the Greek Scheme, France was to receive Syria
and Egypt and, thus, a virtual strangle hold on the Levant
trade, to be shared perhaps only by England in return for her
acquiescence in the plan. In consequence, France gradually
withdrew her support and assistance from the Porte. In 1786,