


        It appears to us, after a hard examination, that the late Em¬
        peror of France did not take it upon himself to cause your Glo¬
        rious father to attack the Russians, although he was per¬
        suaded that it was to his interest, and that sooner or later war
        between him and the Empress of Russia was inevitable. But
        without returning to an event so far removed, your Imperial
        Highness cannot ignore the fact that since we came to the
        throne, we have used all our efforts to prevent a new war
        which would cause only embarrassment to the Porte, and that
        we are convinced that before thinking of avenging injuries it
        has received, it should prepare some indispensable way for
        placing itself outside the possibility of all insult. We have done




                              Prelude to Reform
   more, we have sent at our cost to Istanbul officers and artisans   17
   to give the Muslims demonstrations and examples of all as¬
   pects of the art of war, and we are maintaining them so long
   as their presence is judged necessary. We are occupying our¬
   selves to set aside the subjects of dispute between the Sublime
   Porte and its neighbors. Our friendship can do nothing more
   in the circumstances, and we hope that on his side His High¬
   ness will take no step that might lead to a rupture. War has
   become a very difficult science. To undertake it without being
   put on the level of one’s adversaries is to expose oneself to
   certain losses. If God brings your Imperial Highness to the
   throne, the maturity of your spirit is a certain guarantee to us
   that you will not engage in any enterprise without putting in
   order all that can assure you of success.®


  Selim was bitterly disappointed by the answer, and only the
entreaties of Ebubekir Ratib prevented him from replying in a
manner which would have severed his relations with the French
court once and for all. But at this time, with the beginning of war
and the withdrawal of the French technicians, Selim was forced
to sit back and wait and see whether the limited reforms intro¬
duced during the previous two decades would serve to keep the
empire from suffering even more damage before he finally could
come to the throne.




                      Education of a Prince
                                                                                                                       „                ■ • - .•

                                         f{ „•. I .-. .                                                                    - #1
                                                                                                                                  is . '
                                , l.-^         t                         -ill        ,'r>                  ^   I       *    r


                                                                                                                                        ■T ’ •♦           *••(,
                                                           ■   V
                                                                                                                                                   >5
                                         Au                                                                                                                       I