




                  War with Russia and Austria
the French officers and technicians who for over a decade had
been training units of the Ottoman army were recalled. In
January of the next year, France signed a new treaty of friend¬
ship and trade with Russia, and allowed a similar one with
England to lapse, thus exposing her new orientation unmis¬
takably.^
  Against this background, Austria’s bitter rival in Germany,
the rising Prussian state, was moving closer and closer toward
an alliance with England iti order to make a joint effort to pre¬
serve their position in Europe by saving the Ottoman Empire
from its predatory neighbors. Prussia had become aware of
the full extent of Russian and Austrian intentions only a short
time before, when its effort to join them in alliance with the
Porte to preserve the provisions of Kuchiik Kaynarja was re¬
jected by Catherine.^ For England, rumors of the Greek Scheme,
when added to the first partition of Poland, had stimulated a
major re-examination of her eastern policy, a soul searching
which was still in progress. During the first half of the eight¬
eenth century and before, Russian advances at the expense of
the Porte had been looked on in London disinterestedly, if not
with outright pleasure at the thought of the terrible Turk
being pushed out of Christendom. Britain had originally wel¬
comed Russia’s entry into Europe both because of its use as a
counterweight to French pre-eminence on the continent and
as a reliable source of raw materials and markets for its newly
rising industries. But now for the first time Britain was be¬
ginning to see clearly how much it was to its own interest to
preserve the Ottoman Empire as a barrier against Russian            vX
expansion to the south and east. Britain’s nineteenth-century
role as defender of Ottoman integrity was evolving toward its
definitive form.^
  Furthermore, the Russian military threat to the Ottoman
Empire was becoming more immediate and alarming in the years
following Kiichiik Kaynarja. One of the most painful concessions
which the Porte had been forced to accept in the treaty had
been the establishment in independence of the Crimean Tatar
state which had long acknowledged Ottoman suzerainty and
made important contributions to the Ottoman army. In August




              Origins of the War under Abd ul-Hamid I
     J
                                            i
                                      %


24    1783, this state was annexed to the Russian Empire, and six
     months later the Porte was forced to recognize this annexation
     in the Treaty of Aynalikavak.® Soon after, Russian soldiers
     entered the Caucasian principality of Georgia under the pretext
     of protecting its prince from his Ottoman suzerain. The Crimean
     example left the Porte with little doubt as to ultimate Russian
     intentions east of the Black Sea as well.^
         In addition, Potemkin was beginning to undertake positive
     military measures north and west of the Black Sea. At the south¬
     ern tip of the Crimea, to which the Greek name Thauridia was
     now given, the great new port of Sevastopol was built to serve
     as the base of the Russian fleet created to challenge the Ottoman
     naval monopoly in the area. To the west, at the mouth of the
     Dnieper, a small but no less important base was built at the an¬
     cient Greek colony of Kherson to receive and store the ships and
     supplies being sent down the Dnieper and the Bug in ever-in¬
     creasing amounts for service in the Black Sea area.
         In May 1787 Russian ambitions were publicly demonstrated
     by Catherine’s triumphal tour through her new province. Accom¬
     panied by the chief personages of her court and the ambassadors
     of Austria, England, and France, the Empress traveled by land
     from St. Petersburg to Kiev, and then in a great fleet of galleys
     down the Dnieper to Kherson. Meeting Joseph II of Austria out¬
     side the city, she entered it on May 14, passing under a triumphal
     arch on which the Greek inscription "The way to Byzantium”
     made her objectives apparent to all who could see. From there,
     the two monarchs continued on to the Crimea, passing through
     hastily erected villages and assembled masses of apparently
     enthusiastic subjects arranged by Potemkin to give at least
     the appearance of growth and confidence. At Sevastopol, the
     tour was concluded with a lavish display of the new Black Sea
     fleet, and the Empress distributed honors and rewards to her
     southern commander in return for all he had done and would
     do to expand her empire even more.®
         Nor did Catherine neglect the Orthodox subjects of the Sultan,
     stirring them to rise against their master despite the failure
     of such efforts to produce lasting results in the previous war.
     The Treaty of Kiichiik Kaynarja had allowed Russia to establish