


   ■'* The Ulema, or "men of/Zm/knowledge” in Islamic society, were the members of
the Ilmiye institution of the Ottoman ruling class, which dealt with all matters of
religion, culture, education, and law for the ruling class and the Muslim millet.
See Gibb and Bowen, 1/2, pp. 81-164.
equerry, Hiiseyin Agha (later Kiichuk Htiseyin Pasha), his sec¬       13
retary, Ebubekir Ratib, Shakir Agha, Osman Efendi, Defteri
zade Izzet Bey, Sirri Selim Pasha, and a somewhat older boy
named Ishak Agha, stepson of Safiye Sultan, who had been a boy
on an Ottoman ship at Cheshme, and who on his return had en¬
tered into the palace service through the influence of his patron,
Gazi Hasan Pasha.^
  When Mustafa died and his brother, Abd ul-Hamid I, came to
the throne in 1774, Selim became the eldest male in the family
and therefore the ranking heir to the throne. In such a position,
he could no longer enjoy the relative freedom allowed by his
father, and he and his companions were shut into the traditional
palace cage. If he had remained there from birth, entirely under
the influence of the eunuchs and women who composed the harem,
he would never have been aware of the outside world, and so
would have made no more of an effort to break down the barriers
than had any of his predecessors. But because he had been ex¬
posed to the outside world during the first thirteen years of his
life, he was not content with the isolated, benign existence of the
harem, and through his uncle’s indulgence, he was allowed to
continue to read and study, thus making the cage more of a school
than anything else. While Selim himself had to remain in his
place, his companions were not restricted. They attended the new
schools, talked with foreign ambassadors and technicians, and
thus kept him in touch with what was going on in the empire and
the world. The foreign ambassadors sought to influence these
companions in the hope of using them to control the future sul¬
tan. Kiichuk Hiiseyin and Izzet Bey were influenced mainly by
the British and Austrian ambassadors, Shakir Agha and Sirri
Selim by the Russians, and Ishak Agha and Ebubekir by the
French, who in the end proved most active and successful. Am¬
bassadors Saint-Priest and Choiseul-Gouffier maintained contact
and influence with Selim also through his private physician. Dr.
Lorenzo, one of the few outsiders allowed to penetrate the harem
walls and enter the cage for the purpose of ministering to the
young prince and his companions. Lorenzo brought the prince
books and papers and spoke with him about the outside world in
a way which the Ottomans themselves never could have done.^




                       Education of a Prince
14      In 1785 disaster struck. Grand Vezir Halil Hamid Pasha tried
      to put Selim on the throne in place of Abd ul-Hamid, but through
      the efforts of Gazi Hasan Pasha, he failed and was then dismissed.
      Selim’s connection with the plot is not certain, but with Gazi
      Hasan’s encouragement, Abd ul-Hamid I now tightened the
      young prince’s conditions of confinement and for the most part
      cut off his connections with the outside world. Dr. Lorenzo alone
      maintaining some sort of contact.^ At the same time, Jshak Bey
     became friendly with Major Zorich^ d Russian officer just released
     from the prison at Yedikule, and this brought down on his head
     the wrath of his old patron, Gazi Hasan, whose anti-Russian
     fanaticism had been nourished through the years since Cheshme.
     Gazi Hasan now set out to punish his former protege by securing
     his demotion and execution. Ishak desperately sought to save
     himself by leaving the country, and Choiseul-Gouffier suggested
     that he go to France for an education. There he would not only
     come into direct contact with Europe so that he could advise his
     master on his return, but he also would be assimilated to French
     culture and become a firm and permanent friend of France in a
     way which would be impossible so long as he remained in Istanbul.
       It did not take much correspondence for the ambassador to con¬
     vince Foreign Minister de Vergennes of the value of his plan
     especially since de Vergennes himself had been ambassador at
     the Porte for a number of years under Selim’s father. The French
     government agreed to provide funds for Ishak Bey’s trip, living
     expenses, and education, and a young French orientalist named
     Pierre Ruffin was chosen to house him in Versailles and to guide
     his education. Selim readily accepted the idea. Unable to expe¬
     rience Europe for himself, he felt his young slave would be a good
     substitute. On his return he would be appointed to a chief position
     of government, where he could put his experience to good use. At
     the same time, Selim entrustedkhak with two letters, one for de
     Vergennes and the other for Louis XVI, who by now had become
     for hini. the model of the enlightened monarch he himself hoped
     someday to be. These letters are important clues to Selim’s state
     of mind at this time. While he mentioned reforms and asked for
     French assistance, his emphasis always was on revenge against
     Russia for the defeats of the past. Nowhere was there any indi-