




                    The Campaigns of 1787-1789
30     But the siege and capture of Oczakov were the only important
     actions in the east. On the whole, both the Russians and Otto¬
     mans remained quiescent, and most of the action during the sum¬
     mer of 1788 took place in the west. At first, the initiative was
     taken by the Austrians, who moved into Bosnia and gained com¬
     plete control of the Save up to Belgrade by the time summer had
     arrived.” At the same time, in April, a large Austrian force cap¬
     tured Jassy without resistance as the result of the help of the
     Ottoman Hospodar of Moldavia, 4^1exander Ipsilanti, who de-
     sorted the Grand Vezir at a crucial moment in the campaign.*^
     This broke the land connections of the great Dniestr fort of
     Khotzim with the main Ottoman army and enabled Marshal
     Coburg to take it on September 19, after a long siege.Ottoman
     rule in northern Moldavia thus came to an end, and a push against
     Bender during the next year’s campaign was made possible.
     While the Austrians were relatively successful in west and east,
     in the center the Grand Vezir achieved the most brilliant Otto¬
     man victories of the war. Koja Yusuf was emboldened to action
     by Emperor Joseph IFs failure to attack Belgrade as well as by
     the initial Russian failure to move against Oczakov. So in August
     the Grand Vezir led the main Ottoman army out of Wallachia,
     across the Danube, and into the Austrian Banat, where he took
     the key fortress of Mehadiye, on August 30. This gave the Otto¬
     mans control of the entire southern Banat and the whole length of
     the Danube from Orsova to Belgrade, and they quickly poured
     thousands of troops across the Danube.
       Joseph II moved to stop the surprise invasion, but his own con¬
     servatism and indecisiveness and the skillful moves of the Otto¬
     mans enabled the latter to rout the main Austrian army at
     Slatina, September 20, opening the entire Banat and parts of
     Hungary to Ottoman attack. Only the valiant efforts of the Em¬
     peror’s rear guard in defending the passes leading into Transyl¬
     vania kept the Ottoman army and raiding parties in check until
     the approach of winter forced their withdrawal back across the
     Danube.” Yusuf Pasha had bolstered the confidence of his men; he
     had defeated and disorganized the main Austrian army while
     securing huge stores of needed ammunition and supplies for his
     own forces; and he had held the Austrians and Russians far short




                       War with Russia and Austria
of their objectives. Yet his gains were ephemeral. As the new year       31
came, the Austrians were once again poised for an attack all
along the Danube and the Save, and the Russians, with Oczakov
in hand and with the Swedish diversion settled, were finally
ready to make a coordinated push in the east.^^
  Despite their relatively advantageous situation, Russia and
Austria were more anxious than ever to make peace with the
Ottomans as soon as possible. Joseph II faced new difficulties in
the Netherlands, where a revolution seemed about to break out.
Britain, Prussia, and the United Provinces were taking diplo¬
matic steps against the allies wherever they could, and in partic¬
ular they were helping Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden to prepare
a new attack on Russia. Negotiations also were begun for Polish
alliances with Prussia and the Ottomans, and for Ottoman finan¬
cial assistance to both the Swedes and the Poles if they attacked
Russia. In the face of all this, and especially in view of their rela¬
tive failure against the Porte in 1788, Catherine and Joseph
made overtures for peace, directly through agents sent to the
Grand Vezir’s winter camp at Ruschuk and indirectly through the
mediation of the French ambassador in Istanbul. But neither was
willing to give up the conquests already made, while Abd ul-
Hamid I still insisted that the Crimea and Oczakov be returned as
part of any peace settlement, a determination in which he was
encouraged and supported by the British and Prussian ambassa¬
dors in his capital. To strengthen this determination, Prussia at
long last began negotiations for a formal alliance with the Porte,
and Sweden followed suit shortly thereafter. With this sort of
backing, the Sultan felt it would be foolish for him to leave the
war without achieving his territorial ambitions.
 In the spring of 1789, the Russians planned to move through
Wallachia to the left bank of the Danube, with Kilya, Ismail, and
Ibrail as their main objectives. Austria planned to cooperate by
sending one army east from Galicia along the Sereth River to
Galatz and Ibrail, while the army of Transylvania would move
across the Carpathians into Wallachia toward Sistova and Rus¬
chuk in order to prevent the main Ottoman army from moving
north to defend against the Russian attack. To the west, the main
Austrian army would besiege and take Belgrade, while the army