




                             Prelude to Reform
cation that he had gone beyond Mustafa III or Abd ul-Hamid I in
his concept of reform.^ To Ishak Bey he wrote:


   Expose to him [Louis XVI] actively my intentions and my
   way of being and thinking. Tell him that Russia, our main
   enemy, victorious during the long war which it made on my
   late father, affronted this prince and his people and took by
   surprise, ruse, and treachery many of our provinces, and that
   it pursues more conquests by such illegitimate means . . .
   France has been our friend from times immemorial; when she
   reads my heart," she will understand that friendship shows it¬
   self especially in circumstances as critical as those of today. It
   is to her dignity to show us this sentiment while preparing
   for war. Russia believes itself superior to all other courts. It
   is not suitable for those which are older, especially as old as
   France, to allow Russia to maintain this pretension any longer.
   This is your mission.®


  The letters to Louis XVI and de Vergennes were even more spe¬
cific and hardly calculated to secure the favor of their recipients.
Selim declared that it was as a direct result of French encourage¬
ment that Mustafa III had entered the war with Russia in 1768,
despite contrary warnings from Britain and Prussia; that the
Ottoman defeat was due mainly to French failure to provide his
father with promised military and diplomatic assistance; and
that France therefore now had a duty to help the Ottomans re¬
build their strength and regain their possessions from the Czars.
"We are meditating in secret on the proper means to repair the
evils, damages, and losses that our enemies have caused us . . .
When by the grace of God, the predestined day comes for our ad¬
vancement to the throne of Suleyman, it will be for us to recognize
and pay in return for whatever friendship and courtesy we have
been given previously.”^
  While Abd ul-Hamid restricted the young prince’s movements \
more during 1786, he agreed to allow Ishak Bey to leave, appar¬
ently in order to save him from Gazi Hasan’s vengeance. Ishak
arrived in Paris in December 1786. He presented his masters
letters, began to receive his monthly allowance, and took up resi-




                        Education of a Prince
16   dence in Ruffin’s house. Repelled by Ruffin’s discipline and rigor¬
     ous lessons, however, and attracted by the pleasures of the French
     capital, it was not long before he moved to new quarters and be¬
     gan to participate fully in Parisian society. While largely ignor¬
     ing the original objects of his mission, he did occasionally visit
     French naval and military establishments and report on them in
     a series of somewhat vague letters to his master. He stated that
     he was delighted by the weapons, capnons, and powder that he
     saw, that he had become friendly with a number of French gen¬
     erals and officers, and that they would be happy to come to Turkey
     and help if the Sultan would give them only a little more salary
     than what they received at home. But he spent most of his time in
     debauchery, extorting money from the French foreign minister
     and others under the threat of turning his master against them
     when he returned home.®
       While Ishak Bey became increasingly troublesome to his hosts,
     Louis XVI largely ignored Selim’s letter, and when he finally
     delivered his answer on May 20, 1787, it was hardly of the type
     which the future sultan had envisaged. Selim had been blunt, and
     Louis was equally blunt. Denying that France had encouraged
     Mustafa to war with Russia or had promised his assistance, he
     urged Selim to avoid wars of revenge until he had the power to
     avgdd disaster and made only vague promises of the same kind of
     limited technical assistance which Abd ul-Hamid I had received
     for some time: