




                         War with Russia and Austria
consulates at Jassy, Bucharest, and Scutari, and these now           25
were being used as bases for Russian agents who spread through
the Balkans fanning the flames of dissatisfaction and revolt.
In the Mediterranean and Aegean seas, Greek pirates were at
least partially armed and financed by Russia, and their attacks
on Ottoman shipping and shores were increasing in frequency
and intensity.®
  In Turkey itself, the general, almost universal, reaction to
these events was an increasing hatred of the infidel and, in
particular, a desire for revenge and a determination to regain
the Crimea by force if necessary. But there was great disagree¬
ment among the Ottoman leaders as to how and when this could
be accomplished. Gazi Hasan Pasha, Grand Admiral of the
Sultan’s fleet, led those who felt that the time was not yet right
for an armed attack on the Russians. While Britain and Prussia
were encouraging the Porte to stand up against further Russian
encroachments, no firm commitments had been made for finan¬
cial and military support in case of war, and without such
assistance Gazi Hasan felt that a new war could only be useless,
if not ruinous. The military reforms which he was directing had
just begun. The bulk of the army and navy was in the same
disorganized and backward state which had led to defeat in
the previous war. However, as Catherine’s ambitions became
more apparent and her insults more frequent after 1783, the
partisans of war, led by the Grand Vezir Koja Yusuf Pasha,
rose toward ascendancy in the Sultan’s court. To them, as indeed
to the people of Istanbul, there was only one honorable solution,
one way to atone for past defeats, and that was war —forceful
reclamation of previous losses. This group felt confident that
the military reforms introduced during the past decade had
restored the Ottoman armed forces to a state in which they
could defeat anything the European powers could mount against
them, and restore Ottoman prestige and authority in Europe
to the position which they had held under Mohammed the
Conqueror and Suleyman the Magnificent. Their traditional
outlook led the Ottomans, still almost completely unaware of
the extent of European technical progress and seemingly un¬
affected by the defeats inflicted on the empire during the past




             Origins of the War under Abd ul-Hamid I
century, to assume that a revival of the old Ottoman institutions
and ways would be entirely sufficient to restore Ottoman suprem¬
acy over their neighbors. Yusuf Pasha argued that the informal
encouragements which he had received from the British and
Prussian ambassadors would inevitably be followed by open assist¬
ance if the Ottomans would only have the courage to throw down
the gauntlet and move openly against their tormentors.*®
  In the spring and summer of 1787, conditions in the dominions
of its enemies seemed to confirm the arguments of the "war
party” and make the time right for a new Ottoman move. Even
while Joseph II had accompanied Catherine through the Crimea,
news came of a revolt in his Netherlands possessions, where
he was forced to rush with most of the afmy which he had been
preparing to move south across the Danube into Ottoman
territory. In Russia, drought and famine were causing increas¬
ingly serious internal discontent which any foreign adventure
could only intensify. At the same time, in Istanbul, Gazi Hasan’s
departure for Egypt at the head of an expeditionary force in¬
tended to reduce the rebellious Mamluk rulers there left Ottoman
policy entirely in the hands of the advocates of immediate war.
The Porte’s demands that Russia evacuate Georgia and its re¬
fusal to accept Russian intervention in the Principalities strained
relations even further and made some sort of conflict inevitable.
When in August 1789 Grand Vezir Yusuf Pasha demanded re¬
moval of the Russian consuls in Egypt and the Principalities on
the grounds of their encouraging and assisting local revolts, and
ordered an inspection of all Russian merchant ships passing
through the Straits, the Russians were indeed startled, for the
Porte had long been the passive, although evasive, recipient of
similar Russian demands. Now for the first time the game was
reversed. In the absence of any Arm Russian reply, on August 14
the Grand Vezir pushed the Imperial Council to an open declara¬
tion of war together with a demand for immediate Russian evacu¬
ation of the Crimea and the Caucasus as the only way to avoid it.**
  Now it was Catherine’s turn to be perplexed. She wanted a
war with the Porte but only when she was ready, at a time and
occasion of her choosing. And although the declaration was
not directed against Austria, Joseph II was even more alarmed.