




                   War with Russia and Austria
He was fully occupied with internal discontent. He wanted to         27
keep the Russian alliance in order to secure support against
Prussia, but he did not want to be put in a position where he
could do this only by joining a war against the Porte. Aside
from the strain this would put on his own resources, it might
also drive England closer to his Prussian enemy and might even
lead to a war with both of them. So the allies entered into urgent
diplomatic efforts to avoid war by peaceful means. The Austrian
ambassador at the Porte,' Baron Herbert de Rathkeal, was
ordered to offer "disinterested” Austrian mediation, with the
implied threat of intervention on behalf of Russia if some kind
of peace was not made. The French ambassador at the Porte,
Choiseul-Gouffier, made similar representations for Catherine.^^
But the Sultan rejected all efforts at mediation and replied that
peace could be made only on the basis of the conditions set out
in his ultimatum, in particular by immediate Russian evacuation
of the Crimea and Caucasus. This Catherine refused to do, so
she finally issued a formal declaration of war on September ^
15, a full month after that of the Sultan. Joseph IPs entry was
delayed, both to enable him to move his armies back to the
Danube from the Netherlands and to try to get the Ottomans
to make the quick peace which he and his ally wanted at this
time. It was only because of his failure to move the Sultan that
Austria too finally declared war on February 19, 1788.




              Origins of the War under Ahd ul-Hamid I
                TV. The Campaigns
                   of 1787-1789




If the Ottoman army had been poised on the Danube waiting for
the signal to attack, it might well have achieved significant gains
and at least captured the important Danubian forts before the
surprised Russians and Austrians could organize themselves to
resist. However, one of the main reasons for the lack of prepara¬
tions north of the Danube was the certain knowledge in Vienna
and Saint Petersburg, on the basis of their efficient spy networks
in the south, that there had been no Ottoman build-up for such a
campaign. The Ottoman commanders were as surprised as their
enemies by Yusuf Pasha’s sudden war declaration, so they were
in no position to take advantage of the situation. ^ As a result,
what was left of the 1787 campaign season was devoted mainly to
preparations on both sides. The few engagements which did take
place were indecisive but indicative of what was to follow in sub¬
sequent years. In October an Ottoman effort to storm the great
Russian fort at Kinburn, located at the point where the Dnieper
and Bug join and flow into the Black Sea, was repulsed by the
vastly outnumbered Russian garrisons as a result of a series of
brilliant tactical moves on the part of their commander. General
Alexander Suvorov, combined with confusion and inefficiency on
the part of the Ottomans.^ In the Black Sea, Russian attempts to
supply Kinburn through a series of convoys were frustrated more
by storms than by the Ottoman fleet.^ The only allied initiative      29
came on December 2, when the Austrians tried to seize Belgrade
by a surprise attack in advance of their war declaration but were
repulsed as a result of their own blunders and lack of coordination
at the crucial time.^
  In 1788 both sides were diverted by bitter internal disputes and
consequent delays in war planning and preparations. Gazi Hasan
Pasha, now returned from Egypt, quarreled bitterly with the
Grand Vezir over the timing of the war declaration and manage¬
ment of the campaign.^ Russian preparations were delayed by
the sloth and indecision of Catherine’s commander in the east,
Potemkin, by the formation of a new Triple Alliance of Great
Britain, Prussia, and the United Provinces (June 13, 1788) di¬
rected mainly against Catherine, and by Sweden’s effort to take
advantage of Russia’s Ottoman diversion and regain Finland by
surprise attack. Catherine’s two naval commanders in the Black
Sea, the German Prince Charles of Nassau-Siegen and the Amer¬
ican revolutionary hero, John Paul Jones, continually fought
with each other and with Potemkin over who should take the lead
(and the credit), and as a result there was a complete absence of
coordination of the various Russian military groups in the area.®
The Austrian forces in the west, ready and waiting to move across
the Save, the Danube, and the Carpathians, were frustrated by
Russia’s consequent failure to divert the Ottomans in the east.^
  As a result neither side took the initiative until the summer
was almost over. On June 28, Gazi Hasan Pasha’s fleet was routed
by Nassau-Siegen and Jones at the mouth of the Bug, but the lack
of cooperation between the two Russian commanders made pos¬
sible an Ottoman withdrawal with relatively minor losses.® On
July 9, Gazi Hasan forced the return to Sevastapol of a Russian
fleet attempting to reinforce Kinburn, but his own effort to rein¬
force Oczakov was in turn beaten off by the Russians.® Sweden’s
collapse and withdrawal from the war in late July enabled Cath¬
erine to reinforce Potemkin, who as a result finally opened the
siege of Oczakov on September 1, taking it by storm on December
17.Although the season was too far advanced for the Russians
to take advantage of the victory, it prepared the way for an ad¬
vance to the Danube and beyond as soon as spring arrived.