




                     The Campaigns of 1787-1789
                                         %


32        of Croatia planned to move into Bosnia toward Sarajevo and Novi
         Pazar. It was hoped that a rapid victory on all fronts would force
         the Sultan to reconsider his decision and make peace so that the
         more pressing European problems could be dealt with.*’'
           But once again, it was the Grand Vezif who seized the initia¬
         tive. Leaving a large force on the lower Danube to guard against
         enemy activity in Moldavia, Yusuf Pasha moved toward the Car¬
         pathians with the intention of breaking through into Transyl¬
         vania and thus disrupting whatever' Offensive plans the Austri¬
         ans might have had. At the same time, the Hospodar of Moldavia,
         Prince Mavrogeny, moved north in Wallachia against the Rus¬
         sians and Austrians at Jassy, where the winter garrisons had
         not yet been reinforced for the spring. ^ Since the Carpathian
         passes were still blocked by ice and snow, Joseph II was unable to
         send reinforcements, and it seemed certain that Jassy would fall
         within a short time. But at this critical moment, the news came
         that a new sultan had come to the throne in Istanbul. Yusuf
         Pasha and Mavrogeny immediately pulled back their forces to
         await the orders of their new master. Once again the advantages
         of surprise were lost, and no advantage was taken of a very favor¬
         able situation.*®



                            Accession of Selim III
     ,     Abd ul-Hamid I fell ill of a stroke on the evening of April 6,
     r 1789, and died the following morning, at the age of sixty-eight.***
         Within three hours, Selim III came to the throne, and all the
         officials still in the capital swore their allegiance to him.^o Abd
         ul-Hamid in his later days had become increasingly addicted to
         the pleasures of the harem, and his prosecution of military and
         state affairs had become correspondingly lethargic and aimless.
         Much of the popular unrest which arose during the previous win¬
         ter had come in reaction to the Sultan’s luxurious and wasteful
         existence, which was contrasted unfavorably with the demands
         which the Grand Vezir was making for new sacrifices in order to
         prosecute the war. On the other hand. Prince Selim had already
         acquired a reputation for ability and energy, and his accession
         was therefore welcomed with enthusiasm by administrators.




                            War with Russia and Austria
soldiers, subjects, and foreign ambassadors alike.^' The various                  33
ceremonies associated with the new Sultan’s accession were
watched by masses of wildly cheering people who felt confident
that they finally had acquired a leader who would be able to pull
the empire out of the morass into which it had fallen.
  Selim’s initial moves seemed to confirm these hopes. As soon as
he was officially installed, he immediately sent an order to Yusuf
Pasha at Ruschuk confirming him and all his chief officials in
their positions and urging'them to resume the campaign against
the enemy as soon as possible and with all their energy.                What¬
ever desires Selim may have had to reform the empire, he saw
that he could not make very profound changes so long as the war
continued, and he determined to carry it on to a successful con¬
clusion by reviving and invigorating the old institutions and ways
without attempting to introduce anything new. His first effort
was to raise the spirit and morale of his people and soldiers. In
his accession speech, he glorified the past deeds of the Janissar¬
ies, attributed their current difficulties to a failure to obey their
traditional laws and regulations, and urged them to make new
efforts to return to their old ways. He stirred the emotions of all
by appealing for revenge against the infidel, who had taken the
lands of Islam and killed and imprisoned thousands of Muslims.
Selim told his soldiers to be brave as of old, to trust in God and
their leaders, and to fight on until the Crimea was retaken and
Ottoman honor avenged.^^ He rejected the efforts of the Spanish,
French, and Prussian ambassadors to secure a settlement and
determined to go to the Danube himself, if necessary, to assume
direct command of the army in the tradition of his illustrious
ancestors. To assure military support, he issued the regular
quarterly wages a month in advance and added substantial bo¬
nuses in observance of an old tradition which Abd ul-Hamid I
had allowed to lapse.        To get the support of the Ulema, he re¬
placed the reforming Mehmed Kamil Efendi as Sheyh ul-Islam*
with Mehmed Sherif Efendi, a favorite with most of the Ulema,
who had been sent into exile by Abd ul-Hamid three years before
because of corruption and lack of ability. In addition, he reim¬
posed and strengthened the old sumptuary laws which regulated
 *Head of the learned corporation of Ulema. See Gibb and Bowen, 1/2, pp. 84-86.