



                       The Winter of 1789-90
resolved to accept the proposal and sign the alliance despite the
anguished protests of his Grand Vezir. He allowed debate only on
the question of whether such an alliance with an infidel power
would be legal according to the Sharia. Ataullah Mehmed Shani-
zade, then an important member of the Ulema and later imperial
historian, said that such a pact would not be legal. But the Sheyh
ul-Islam, Hamidi zade Mustafa Efendi, managed to produce suffi¬
cient traditions to support the legality qf the move, and with the
backing of the Sultan this view wa!s accepted.
  The formal alliance was signed on January 31, 1790, by the
Reis ul-Kuttab, Mehmed Rashid Efendi, and the chief judge of
Rumelia, Mustafa Ashir Efendi, for the Porte, and Ambassador
Baron von Diez in the name of the King of Prussia. Prussia, "be¬
cause of the prejudice which enemies have brought to the desired
and necessary balance of power by crossing the Danube,” agreed
to declare war and move with all its power against Russia and
Austria in the spring of 1790, and to continue in the war until the
Porte secured a peace which would be satisfactory to it. In return,
the Sultan promised to do all he could to obtain the restoration of
Galicia to Poland. This would serve as a replacement for Danzig
and Thorn, whose cession by Poland to Prussia would also be sup¬
ported by the Porte. In addition, the Porte agreed to prevent at¬
tacks on Prussian trade ships by North African pirates in the
Mediterranean, and in return Prussia agreed to demand the re¬
turn to the Ottomans of Bender, Oczakov, the Crimea, and other
areas lost in the current war before it would make peace. The
Porte promised to make no peace in which Prussia, Sweden, and
Poland were not included, and once peace was concluded, to re¬
gard as an attack on itself any attack made by Austria and Russia
on any of those powers. The latter engagement was to be recipro¬
cal among the four courts, who thus were to be joined in a mutual
assistance pact once peace was concluded. It also was agreed that
the Porte would not make peace with Russia except through the
mediation of England and Holland. A relatively long term of five
months was set for ratification of the treaty in order to give Prus¬
sia a chance to use all possible means to get Russia and Austria to
accept a peaceful solution before it accepted the obligation to
attack them.^




                   War with Russia and Austria
  Although Selim III ratified the treaty at once, Prussian ratifica¬   47
tion experienced various delays and difficulties. The Prussian
government recalled von Diez soon after the treaty was signed
on the grounds that he had exceeded his authority, and he was
replaced as ambassador at the Porte by Knobelsdorf. Final rati¬
fication was postponed despite urgent Ottoman inquiries and re¬
quests for some definite statement on the subject.*® But in spite
of the delay, the treaty had a tremendous effect in Istanbul. The
peace talks, which had been carried out in Istanbul through
the mediation of the French embassy as well as in the camp of the
Grand Vezir, were'now suspended.** Orders were issued for the
levy of two hundred thousand additional men in Anatolia and
the Balkans. Work was resumed on several new ships. Rumors
were spread that Selim himself would go to Edirne to lead the
new campaign.*^ Orders were sent to the Grand Vezir in Shumla
to redouble his preparations for war but to keep the treaty secret
and continue his talks with the enemy representatives in order to
deceive them into foregoing their spring preparations.*^
  Although Gazi Hasan Pasha himself was bitter and disap¬
pointed, he resumed military preparations with his accustomed
vigor and made such strenuous efforts to discipline and reorgan¬
ize his army that the Janissary corps revolted against him on
February 15, forcing him to flee until the dispute was settled.*^
It was only on February 22 that the treaty was announced pub¬
licly, after which the Grand Vezir had to suspend his negotia¬
tions for peace. The Austrian and Russian representatives left
Shumla to return to their camps, and war preparations were in¬
tensified on both sides. Gazi Hasan sent large numbers of men to
strengthen his advanced posts, especially at Giurgevo, in Wal-
lachia, where the Hospodar of Wallachia was building up a large
force to defend his position against an Austrian offensive in the
spring.*^