


              Changes in the Grand Vezirate
  At this point, Selim’s war effort suffered a staggering blow.
Gazi Hasan had been under a great deal of pressure, not only be¬
cause of the effort involved in rebuilding his shattered army but




                       The Winter of 1789-90
                                           I




48   also because of criticism from his political enemies in Istanbul,
     who were trying to use the military failures of the previous cam¬
     paign to remove him from power before he could turn against
     them. The frustrations and anxieties resulting from his various
     disputes with the Sultan also took their toll, for the sincerely
     loyal and able minister desperately tried to satisfy his master
     while pursuing a course which he felt to be in the best interests of
     the empire. The final blows were inflicted by his own disorderly
     and rebellious men, who met every* order with sullen resentment
     and, sometimes, with open resistance. All these factors exhausted
     the energy and strength of the Grand Vezir, and left him an easy
     prey to illness. On March 24, he took to his bed with a bad cold
     and fever. Within five days he was dead, taking with him Selim’s
     last hopes for an efficient and successful campaign against the
     enemy. The British and French ambassadors in Istanbul circu¬
     lated reports that he had been poisoned by his political enemies
     or by the Sultan in an effort to offer up a scapegoat to the public
     for the defeats of the previous year.^® But most Ottoman and
     Western observers who were witnesses to his fatal illness re¬
     ported that it came from natural causes, and the rumors of foul
     play seem to have been without foundation in fact.'^
       The debates bn Gazi Hasan’s replacement were long and acri¬
     monious. For the first time, Selim’s confidants and ministers were
     beginning to group themselves into political factions, with the
     occupants of the harem and officials surviving from previous
     reigns gathering under the leadership of Yusuf Agha, the Lieu¬
     tenant of the Queen Mother, and those who had risen to power in
     company with the new Sultan accepting the leadership of his
     closest friend, Kiichiik Htiseyin Pasha. As was the case in pre¬
     vious centuries, these political groupings resulted more from con¬
     siderations of personal relationships and advantages than from
     matters of principle and policy. Each group struggled to secure
     the Grand Vezirate and as many of the other important govern¬
     ment positions and revenues as possible in order to increase its
     own power and prestige. The groups united only in a determina¬
     tion that whoever was chosen as grand vezir should be amenable
     to their direction and should not be a man like Gazi Hasan, with
     sufficient energy and strength to endanger their positions and




                        War with Russia and Austria
revenues. For three weeks, the factions argued, bickered, and           49
maneuvered for advantage without reaching any agreement.
Without a leader, the army languished, preparations for the new
campaign were halted, and the Treasury was rapidly emptied of
its last resources. Finally, despairing of obtaining any recommen¬
dation to which all parties would agree, the Sultan appointed the
obscure and incapable governor of Ruschuk, Chelebi zade Sherif
Hasan Pasha on April 16,1790.Son of the chief notable of Rus¬
chuk, the new Grand Vezir proved to be a tool not of the capital
factions surrounding the Sultan, but of the Balkan notables from
whose ranks he came. He also was incapable of carrying out the
difficult military and political tasks which fell to him. But for the
moment at least the political crisis was solved and the increas¬
ingly powerful and vocal factions were satisfied, if not contented.
Selim at once sent his new Grand Vezir a stern order to end brib¬
ery and misrule and prepare the army for the spring campaign.^®
  While Selim III was preparing to continue the war, events in
Europe were moving in the opposite direction; his allies and ene¬
mies alike were preparing for peace. On February 20, 1790, the
Hapsburg Emperor Joseph II died and was replaced by his able
and intelligent brother, Leopold II, who inherited an empire
racked by internal dissension and desperately needing peace so
that its house could be put in order. Prussia’s recent alliance with
the Porte had made an Austrian-Prussian war inevitable if the
Hapsburg armies moved south of the Danube into Ottoman ter¬
ritory, but with revolt threatening in both Hungary and the
Netherlands and dissatisfaction and disorder widespread in the
Austrian homeland, Leopold realized that Austria was not ready
or able to fight Prussia at that time. He was not dazzled by the
Russian Empress as his brother had been, and he was perfectly
willing to abandon his ally if that would bring peace. He shrewdly
perceived that Britain and Prussia had essentially different ob¬
jectives in their alliance. Britain’s main object was to limit Rus¬
sian advances, and it had no special quarrel with Austria. Prus¬
sia’s hostility was directed primarily toward its German neighbor
rather than against Russia; the effect of the Austrian alliance
with Russia was to push Britain into supporting Prussia against
Austria. Leopold therefore decided that the best way to counter