

  *By Ottoman financial reckoning, each "purse” (called kise or kese) contained
500 piasters (kurush) traditionally, but at the end of the 18th century, this had
been reduced to 416 piasters. The total promised therefore was approximately
832,000 piasters.




                       The Campaigns of 1787-1789
     \1
                                                  \
                                            \




38          mans as the battle of the Boza (Buzau) River and to the Austrians
            as the Battle of Martineshti, was the decisive encounter of the
            war. The vast new army gathered during the winter by the Grand
            Vezir was shattered. The inefficiency and disobedience shown by
            Ottoman commanders and men alike showed clearly that the
            untrained peasants and tribesmen who now formed the bulk of
          y the army were incapable of performing the simplest maneuvers
            and were no match for the well-trained and brilliantly led Allied
            forces. Once again, there were no imshediate results of the battle.
            Potemkin seemed to be jealous of the credit which Suvorov gained
            from the victory, and ordered him to return to his previous posi¬
            tions in Moldavia without occupying any new territory or pur¬
            suing the Ottomans.^^ Coburg had no pew instructions from
            Vienna, so he retired to Fokshani.^^® The Grand Vezir returned to
            Ibrail, where he hoped to re-form his army, but since most of the
            survivors had already crossed the Danube and fled before his
            arrival, he finally gave up and followed them across, broken in
            body and spirit.^^ The news of the disaster also had a demoralizing
            effect on the remaining Ottoman forces in Wallachia, Serbia, and
            Bosnia, so for all practical purposes, no organized Ottoman force
            remained to meet the enemy attack.^® The most immediate Allied
            benefit from the victory came to the west in Serbia, where a month¬
            long Austrian siege finally overwhelmed the defenders of Bel¬
            grade (October 8),^** the great bastion of the Danube defense line.
            The news electrified Europe and Istanbul alike. Only Nish re¬
            mained as a major fortress between the advancing allied forces
            and Istanbul itself. The way seemed open for a spring offensive
            which might drive the Turks out of Europe.
              The news of Belgrade encouraged the Russian and Austrian
            commanders in the Principalities to move forward and take ad¬
            vantage of the Ottomans’ helplessness following the battle at the
            Rimnik. The surviving Ottoman forces now saw it would be im¬
            possible for them to retain their positions on the left bank of the
            Danube, so they retired to Kilya, Ismail, and Vidin, which they
            hoped to hold to defend the Danube line in the east.^® Potemkin
            reached the Dniester on October 1, and soon was able to take the
            great forts of Akkerman (October 11)^* and Bender (November
            14),^^ both without resistance since shortages of men and supplies