




                                War with Russia and Austria
and the entreaties of the local populations to avoid bloodshed and   39
damage induced the local Ottoman commanders to surrender.
And in Wallachia, Coburg and the Austrian army came out of
winter quarters in mid-October upon the direct order of Joseph II.
They crossed back through the Carpathians and occupied Bucha¬
rest, again without resistance (November 9), while the Ottoman
garrison fled toward the south.   Thus concluded one of the most
disastrous campaigns in Ottoman history.




                   The Campaigns of 1787-1789
 V. The Winter of 1789-90: Diplomatic
 Activities and Internal Developments




                                     V




As the winter began, the Ottoman Empire was on the brink of
disaster. The new Grand Vezir was unable to administer the gov¬
ernment and the army at the same time, and both were falling
apart as a result. The Danube defense line had been broken by
Austria in Serbia and Bosnia, and by Russia in the Principalities,
and both were in a position to drive into the heartland of the
empire during the next campaign. But as the winter passed, the
diplomatic and political situation in Europe changed so radically
that by the time spring arrived, the danger was eased, at least for
the moment.


                     Diplomatic Factors
  The first and most important element which produced a change
in the situation was a greatly increased desire on the part of all
the European powers, including the belligerents, for the war to be
brought to an end. In Sweden, Gustav III had used popular anger
at the unpatriotic actions of the nobles to force through a new con¬
stitution which gave him supreme power, so he was ready and
able to resume his campaign against Russia in Finland. In Po¬
land, the nationalists were making new efforts to strengthen
their government and escape from foreign control. In the Neth-
erlands, there was widespread unrest and open revolt against the      41
Hapsburgs. In Hungary, separate racial and national interests
had been causing greatly increased antagonism toward Austrian
rule. Joseph II’s efforts to incorporate Hungary into a single
centralized administration had led to a situation approaching
open revolt.
  At the same time, the advent of the French Revolution and an
increasing desire to stifle its growth before its "seditious” doc¬
trines could spread over the entire continent led the members of
the Triple Alliance to try even harder to secure a peace with the
Porte as rapidly as possible. The Prussian foreign minister. Count
von Hertzberg, was attempting to follow a policy very much like
that of Frederick II at the time of the first partition of Poland —
to use an eastern war in order to get territory and prestige for
Prussia. Hertzberg hoped to act as a mediator who could dictate
terms to the belligerents in such a way as to secure advantages
for his master. He felt that the Ottomans had suffered such stag¬
gering defeats in 1789 that they would have to agree to make
some concessions to Austria in the Principalities in order to save
themselves. Austria, weakened by internal troubles, would have
to accept the dictates of the balance of power while enlarging her
territory at Ottoman expense. In return for her acquisitions
along the Danube, she would have to give all or part of Galicia
back to Poland. The Poles would reward Prussia by ceding it
Danzig and Thorn, which would give the Prussians complete
control of the Vistula.
  Von Diez, Prussian ambassador at the Porte, led a group which
advocated a far more aggressive policy than Hertzberg’s, involv¬
ing the cooperation of the Triple Alliance with the Porte, Sweden,
and Poland in order to dictate their will to Austria and Russia, by
force if necessary. Poland would be rewarded for its cooperation
by being freed from Russian control. With its new strong govern¬
ment, it would form a permanent bar against any further Russian
advance to the west, while the rescued Ottoman Empire would
perform the same function to the south. Austria would have to
give up the Netherlands as well as Galicia, and would submit to
Prussian ascendancy in Germany. Thus while Hertzberg’s policy
would avoid war, von Diez’s would almost certainly bring it about.