




                       The Winter of 1789-90
44   manders who had surrendered their posts without resistance. He
     appointed his predecessor as governor of Ruschuk, with the re¬
     sponsibility of preparing to resist any Austrian effort to push
     south across the Danube from Bucharest. Selim issued a decree
     giving his new Grand Vezir absolute authority in all matters and
     stating that no one else should interfere in state affairs or dispute
     what he ordered. In the middle of January, Hasan Pasha was so
     satisfied with his work that he left his camp, led a force of 10,000
     men into northern Bulgaria, and successfully wiped out the ban¬
     dits who had been interrupting his communications with the cap¬
     ital.^
       But despite his successes, despite his energy, despite the free
     hand which the Sultan had given him, it did not take long before
     Gazi Hasan and Selim III came into conflict. The first point of
     conflict came when the new Grand Vezir dismissed his successor
     as Grand Admiral, Giritli Htiseyin Pasha, and replaced him with
     the former Grand Vezir, Yusuf Pasha, then commander at Vidin.
     Hiiseyin had been Selim’s personal choice as Grand Admiral, so
     the Sultan refused to approve the change, stating that an able
     commander was needed at Vidin and that Yusuf Pasha was by
     far the best qualified man for this post.® Gazi Hasan deeply re¬
     sented this interference with the "full powers” which had been
     given him by decree, but he avoided an open conflict with the Sul¬
     tan by accepting his decision without protest and turning back to
     his military preparations at Shumla.
       But in the end, the most important area of conflict came over
     the question of war or peace. Gazi Hasan Pasha had opposed the
     war right from the start. While he still was commander at Ismail,
     he had sent the Sultan a long and detailed report describing in
     agonizing detail the plight of the army and strongly recommend¬
     ing that peace be made at once. Now that he was Grand Vezir,
     he continued to recommend strongly that the European offers be
     accepted as soon as possible. Soon after his arrival in Shumla, he
     received direct peace proposals from Potemkin based on the status
     quo ante bellum, with Russian evacuation of Bessarabia but
     retention of the Crimea and the island of Tamara in the Koban.
     Similar proposals were also received from the Hapsburg Marshal
     Loudon, and Gazi Hasan sent them on to Istanbul together with
     his strong recommendations that they be accepted. At the same



                         War with Russia and Austria
time, he sent his agents to Potemkin and Loudon, and thus started             45
peace negotiations on his own without waiting to hear from his
master.


                 The Alliance with Prussia
  On November 26, the Prussian ambassador in Istanbul, von
Diez, had offered a formal alliance to the Porte in order to keep it
in the war. He told Selim that a Prussian war with Austria would
divert Austria from the Ottoman front, and he supported this
argument by pointing out how the Prussian alliance with Eng¬
land had prevented the Russian Baltic fleet from passing to the
Mediterranean, and how recent Prussian purchases of large
quantities of supplies from Poland had already caused Field
                                                                       '1.   S'
Marshal Romanzov, Suvorov’s commander in Moldavia, consid¬
erable difliculties in getting his own supplies for the new cam¬
paign. Diez promised Selim that Prussia would declare war on
Russia and Austria in April if the Porte agreed to the alliance,
and that it would fight on until both the Crimea and the Cauca¬
sus, as well as all their gains in the current campaign, were evac¬
uated by the Russians. In return, he asked only for Ottoman sup¬
port of Prussian claims to Danzig and Thorn and for the return of
Galicia to Poland. Although Britain and Prussia were closely
allied, the British ambassador in Istanbul, Sir Robert Ainslie,
was not informed about these negotiations, since Britain now
preferred to end the war with the Porte as soon as possible by
peaceful means rather than by an enlargement of the conflict. The
French and Spanish ambassadors led the opposition to the Prus¬
sian proposal, telling Selim and his ministers that the Russians
were now in control of the Polish Diet, that Gustavus Adolphus
was losing his hold over the nobles in Sweden, and that Prussia
would surely desert the Ottomans and make a separate peace
just as soon as its own ambitions were satisfied. But Selim was
not moved. The news of Austria’s failure to take Ismail and
Orsova at the end of the campaign strengthened his resolve and
spirits.
  On January 15, he summoned a formal Imperial Council, in¬
cluding representatives of the Ulema and the various military
corps, to discuss the matter, but by this time he had definitely