


                   The Agreement of Reichenbach
       Political settlement came not as a result of the bilateral nego¬
     tiations, however, but in consequence of intervention on the part




                          War with Russia and Austria
of the concert of Europe. As a result of Frederick William’s assur¬   53
ances to the Ottomans that he would soon attack Austria, all of
Europe was alarmed at the specter of a general European war
over the Eastern Question. To prevent this possibility, a confer¬
ence was assembled on June 27 at Reichenbach, a small town
located only a few miles away from Frederick William’s camp at
Schonewalde. He agreed to forego his intended march against the
Austrians with the understanding that the conference would
achieve a settlement satisfactory to him. To Reichenbach came
representatives of the Triple Alliance powers and Poland. Rus¬
sia wished to treat separately with the Turks, so it refused to
participate. Although the Ottoman Empire was directly con¬
cerned with the deliberations, the Porte was neither notified nor
invited, since each of the participants hoped to "represent” its
interests in such a way that it would be forced to provide territo¬
rial and economic rewards in return. Prussia, as the only Otto¬
man ally, claimed the particular right to represent the Sultan in
all deliberations of this kind, but neglected to inform the Sultan
of this sudden change from military to diplomatic efforts to secure
their common ends.
  Prussia made the conference possible by modifying its previous
demands on Galicia, asking that only a part of it be returned to
Poland, although this still would be the compensation for Polish
cession of Danzig and Thorn to Prussia. Prussia also agreed to
leave the Ottoman areas of Orsova, Turnul, Giurgevo, and Ibrail
to Austria so long as the latter returned the remainder of its con¬
quests and agreed to the Polish cessions to Prussia. However,
Austria’s continued insistence that no part of Galicia be trans¬
ferred stalled the conference and threatened it with failure.
  At this point a number of relevant changes took place in Po¬
land. A party arose in the national parliament which opposed the
cession of Danzig and Thorn and chose to renounce the Galician
acquisition which Prussia was offering in return. This party man¬
aged to get Britain and Holland to persuade Frederick William
to abandon his plan. Despite his disappointment, he finally agreed
to drop the project until more propitious times and to adopt a
policy of securing a general settlement on the basis of the status
quo ante bellum so that some sort of union could be formed as




                       The Campaign of 1790
                                    1


54   soon as possible against the French Revolution. More than any¬
     thing else, it was the growing importance of events in France
     which caused him to reach this conclusion, the spread of revolu¬
     tionary agents throughout Europe with doctrines subversive to
     the existing social order. The sovereigns meeting at Reichenbach
     were now convinced that they had to forget their differences at
     once and unite against the menace emanating from the West, and
     a return to the status quo ante bellum seemed to be the best way of
     accomplishing this.               ^
       Finally on July 15, the Prussian Foreign Minister Hertzberg
     came forward with a plan which proved to be most acceptable to
     all, and it became the basis of the final agreement. He declared
     that his master would desist from the demand for a cession in
     favor of the Polish republic, but that in return he would demand
     that Austria renounce its claim to Wallachia in favor of the
     Turks. On July 25, Leopold IPs acceptance arrived from Vienna.
     Peace was to be re-established on the basis of a strict status quo
     ante bellum although he declared his hope that, in the course of
     the negotiations which were to follow, the Porte would agree to
     minor modifications needed to assure the security of the Austrian
     frontiers. He added that if a peace between Russia and the Porte
     was not achieved at the same time, he would retain the fortress of
     Khotzim, which had been taken by a joint Russo-Austrian attack,
     and would maintain it as neutral until a Russo-Ottoman peace
     allowed him to return it to the Porte. The same day, Frederick
     William gave his official agreement, stating that he understood
     that the modifications of the status quo ante bellum mentioned
     by the Austrians would be only those to which the Porte agreed of
     its own will, through the mediation of the European powers, and
     that Prussia was to be fully compensated for any Austrian terri¬
     torial gains made at Ottoman expense, however minor they might
     be. The ratifications of this agreement were exhanged at Reichen¬
     bach on August 5, and they were immediately transmitted to the
     Porte along with Prussia’s entreaties that they be accepted.^
       The agreement of Reichenbach marked an important turning
     point in European diplomatic affairs. The threats of a war be¬
     tween Austria and Prussia and of a general European conflict
     over the Eastern Question were averted. Austria escaped from