




                          The Winter of 1789-90
42   but it offered far more attractive rewards in the event of success.
       Selim III strongly favored von Diez’s plan; in fact, he had heen
     pushing for an open alliance with Prussia and England since
     1787. But after the defeat at the Rimnik, he reluctantly decided
     that if he could not get such assistance from his European friends,
     he would have to make peace without achieving the territorial
     ambitions for which Abd ul-Hamid had entered the war. He was,
     however, fully informed about events in France and elsewhere in
     Europe. The British ambassador insparticular pointed out to him
     how much the French Revolution was changing the diplomatic
     alignments of Europe and causing all its monarchies to end their
     foreign wars so they could join their forces against the contagion
     of revolution. As a result of this, by Febjruary Selim wanted to
     continue the war through another summer so that both his ene¬
     mies would become anxious enough that they would at least re¬
     turn their conquests of the current war in exchange for peace.
     He felt that he could not continue the war successfully without an
     alliance and active assistance from Prussia or Britain, and he
     issued an ultimatum to that effect in November—alliance or
     peace. At the same time, he moved to strengthen his govern¬
     ment by important changes of personnel.



                         Internal Preparations

       All through October and November 1789, the news of the suc¬
     cessive disasters at Galatz, at Fokshani, at the Rimnik, at Bel¬
     grade, and finally at Bender had produced a crisis of the first
     order in Istanbul. The loss of Wallachia also deprived the capital
     of a major source of grain, and as the winter approached shortages
     of food added to popular dissatisfaction. Crowds were coming into
     the streets, looting shops and homes, and setting fires to show
     their discontent and alarm. Demands for the deposition of the
     Grand Vezir and his associates were increasing in frequency and
     intensity.* While much of the enthusiasm which accompanied
     Selim’s accession had worn off, the anger of the crowd still was
     focused on the ministers rather than on the Sultan himself. In
     reaction to this popular protest, a large number of Selim’s chief
     ministers wanted to make peace, and on October 23 a Grand




                         War with Russia and Austria
Council met in the presence of the Sultan to consider the new         43
proposals. Because of the Sultan’s opposition, however, nothing
was decided, and instead orders were sent out to prepare for the
new campaign.^ To provide the money, Selim publicly sent his
own gold and silver plate to the Imperial Mint to be melted down
and made into coins, and he ordered all the notables of the empire
to do likewise. Orders were again sent out prohibiting the use of
gold or silver plate on houses, persons, and horses, and requiring
all persons to deliver their valuable utensils to the Mint as soon
as possible.^ All male subjects of the Sultan between the ages of
fifteen and sixty were ordered to prepare themselves to serve in
the army if they were needed. Decrees were issued to provide
regular provisions and pay for the army which was to be newly
created to go on the campaign. At the start of November, rumors
abounded that the Austrian forces were already heading for Nish,
and on the fifteenth, 5,000 Janissaries were sent from Istanbul to
Sofia to meet them, despite the critical need for their services to
keep order in the capital.^
  Selim also moved to restore order and discipline in his govern¬
ment and army. Said Ahmed Pasha, able commander of the for¬
tress at Sofia, was appointed governor of Rumelia, in place of
Abdi Pasha, who, it was widely rumored, had accepted Austrian
bribes to prevent the reinforcement of Belgrade at the critical
time. The Sultan’s brother-in-law, Mustafa Pasha, was sent to
replace him as governor of Sofia, with orders to prepare it for a
last ditch stand if necessary against the expected Austrian
attack.®
   On November 21, Selim made his most important move since
coming to the throne. He removed Hasan Pasha as Grand Vezir
and replaced him with the hero of Cheshme and Ismail, Gazi
Hasan Pasha, the only commander who had been able to resist
the Russian advance after the debacle at Fokshani and whose
continued resistance at Ismail was the only bright spot in the
otherwise dismal news that fiowed from the front.®
  Gazi Hasan now went to work with a ferocity and energy which
astonished his colleagues and European observers alike. Most of
the officers whom he considered responsible for the disasters of
the previous year were executed, including all the garrison com-