




                        The Winter of 1789-90
Prussian advances in Germany, while at the same time avoiding
war, was to conciliate Britain by coming to terms with the Otto¬
mans, thus suspending operation of the Russian alliance without
openly breaking it. During the spring, therefore, he initiated
proposals along those lines, with a general European peace set¬
tlement now seeming much closer at hand than before.
  The chief negotiations were now going on between the courts of
Berlin and Vienna. Frederick William'still had not ratified his
                                         A

alliance with the Porte, and he offered not to do so if Leopold
would agree to return to the lines established by the Treaty of
Passarowitz and give back Belgrade and parts of Moldavia and
Bosnia to the Ottomans. In return, Prussia would agree not to
recognize the independence of the revolt^ing Belgian provinces,
nor would it make any effort to stop Austria from forcing them to
submit. In return for the latter concession, Prussia demanded
that Leopold change his alliance with Russia into a purely defen¬
sive agreement and that he return to Poland all of Galicia except
for the border province of the Bukovina. Leopold rejected these
conditions, unwilling to cede anything to Poland. He did agree,
however, to return to the Ottomans all districts on the right
banks of the Save and the Danube as well as Belgrade on condi¬
tion that the Porte cede to him Khotzim and its surrounding area,
the portion of Wallachia lying on the right bank of the Aluta
River, and the part of Bosnia bounded by Croatia and the Unna.
To support these demands, he assembled a large army in Bohemia
under the command of Field Marshal Loudon. With the break¬
down of the negotiations, the Prussian armies in Silesia and east¬
ern Prussia likewise were ordered to move south and begin hos¬
tilities. Frederick William left Berlin at the start of April to put
himself at the head of his Silesian army, and all Europe braced
itself for a general war over the Eastern Question.^”




                   War with Russia and Austria
                 VI. The Campaign
                      of 1790




While the peace negotiations waxed and waned, the armies of the
belligerents moved back into the field. Sherif Hasan Pasha led
the Ottoman army out of Istanbul toward Vidin and Nicopolis
with the intention of fortifying the last remaining portion of the
Danube defense line against enemy attack. But he soon found
that it took more than good intentions to revive the army of the
Porte, which had received such a severe beating the previous
autumn. Weapons, ammunition, tents, and uniforms had been
lost to the enemy in large quantities, and after Gazi Hasan died,
his successor’s efforts to replace them had been swallowed up in
the struggles for positions and revenues on the part of the polit¬
ical parties in Istanbul. The new Grand Vezir had neglected his
military duties while trying to strengthen his political position in
the capital before embarking on the expedition, so little had been
done to fill the storehouses and send out the food and supplies
which the army would need. Moreover, the loss of Wallachia had
deprived both the capital and the army of their most important
source of grains remaining after Egypt had fallen to local usurp¬
ers. The frontier fortresses still in Ottoman hands were badly in
need of reinforcements and supplies if they were to meet new
enemy attacks; wagons and horses were needed to transport
them; men had to be mobilized and sent where they were needed;
52   but none of these things had been done. So the Grand Vezir had
     to stop his march only a few miles outside of Shumla while orders
     were sent out to fulfill the army’s needs. Various Balkan notables
     and bandit leaders had been ordered to send contingents of
     mounted men to the Grand Vezir as soon as possible, but almost
     no preparations had been made and the army remained immo¬
     bilized. ‘
       The British ambassador in Istanbul made a new effort to medi¬
     ate a peace, but Selim said he wouldMo nothing without the agree¬
     ment of his Prussian and Swedish allies. For the moment, however,
     neither the Austrians nor the Russians moved to take advan¬
     tage of the Grand Vezir’s difficulties. Leopold still was hoping
     that peace might be concluded, while the>Russians suffered from
     Potemkin’s annual spring lethargy. Selim was pouring hordes
     of Anatolian troops across the Bosporus with their own ammuni¬
     tion and supplies in the hope of reinforcing the Grand Vezir be¬
     fore it was too late.- In mid-May, Leopold II became aware of
     these activities and decided that a show of strength was needed
     to press the Ottomans toward an early settlement. He ordered
     Marshal Coburg to march toward Ruschuk, with the implied
     threat of crossing the Danube unless the Ottomans began to
     negotiate in good faith. When he reached Giurgevo on the Dan¬
     ube, however, the Ottoman garrison resisted so fiercely that the
     arrival of reinforcements from Ruschuk panicked the Austrians,
     who fled back toward Bucharest, leaving all their equipment and
     supplies behind.'^
       The news of Giurgevo strengthened Selim’s determination to
     resist, exactly contrary to Leopold’s intention. It also encouraged
     the Ottoman commanders to make a new push across the Danube
     in pursuit of the fleeing Austrians, but strong resistance by the
     Austrian rear guard at Kalafat caused the Ottomans to retire.
     For all practical purposes, military contact between Austria and
     the Porte was ended and awaited only a political settlement to
     confirm the fact.