




                        War with Russia and Austria
its most serious crisis since that which followed the death of         55
Maria Theresa. The Triple Alliance was now absorbed into the
more general European concert, which was rising to meet the
new problems imposed by the appearance of re volutionary France.
  In the meantime Selim III had had no word of the Reichenbach
conference. He continued to count on Prussian and Swedish mili¬
tary assistance for a new concerted attack on the enemy. Reports
that the Ottoman fleet had defeated a Russian squadron off Kafa
in the Black Sea and that'Prince Coburg was taking his army
back into Transylvania because of internal difficulties in Galicia
strengthened his resolve and led him to order the Grand Vezir to
march toward Bucharest at the beginning of August. At the same
time, he ordered that all peace negotiations be ended in Istanbul
and at the Grand Vezir’s camp, and the Austrian and Russian
agents were sent home. The Grand Vezir left a large force to
guard Ruschuk and Shumla, and on August 5 he set out toward
Bucharest with an army of about 50,000 men, mostly cavalry.
Strong forces were sent to reinforce the garrisons at Ibrail, Silis-
tria, Ismail, and Varna. On August 7, the Prussian ambassador
officially informed the Porte that the alliance finally had been
ratified in Berlin a month before, and he reassured the Sultan
that Prussian military operations would soon begin. Koja Yusuf
Pasha, the former Grand Vezir, was ordered to take his army
from Vidin and move north, crossing the Danube, in order to as¬
sist the Grand Vezir in Wallachia.®
  Then on August 18, the bombshell of Reichenbach was dropped
into the Ottoman camp. The Prussian ambassador in Vienna
came to the Grand Vezir, informed him of the European agree¬
ment, and stated that he would have to move back south of the
Danube and begin negotiations with the Austrians at once in
order to conform with it. On August 24, the Grand Vezir’s mes¬
senger arrived in Istanbul with the news, which left Sultan,
ministers, and people alike in a state of fury at the betrayal which
had been inflicted by the infidel ally. Seemingly Prussia had
joined the enemy to bring the Ottomans to their knees.
  Selim’s immediate reaction was to order the Grand Vezir to
ignore the Prussian order and attack the Austrians, and he deliv¬
ered to the Imperial Council a long speech bitterly criticizing the




                       The Campaign of 1790
56   Prussians for violating their agreement not to make a separate
     peace without Ottoman approval. During the next week, the
     Council discussed the matter, with a relatively even division
     arising between those who wished to fight to the bitter end and
     those who favored peace and acceptance of the agreement. A num¬
     ber of ministers and most of the Ulema felt that Austria was so
     burdened by internal difficulties that it would even give back
     Galicia and Bukovina as well as its conqpests in the current war
     if only the conflict was prolonged anti pressed. They seemed to be
     gaining the upper hand in the debates when the arrival of the
     news that Catherine had signed a separate peace with Sweden
     swung the Council in favor of peace, although not after hearing
     savage attacks on the infidel allies who had deserted the Porte in
     its time of need. The Ottoman government agreed to enter nego¬
     tiations with Austria on the basis of the Reichenbach agreement.
     Selim asked England and Holland to use all their power to pre¬
     vent the Russian Baltic fleet from passing into the Atlantic and
     Mediterranean, and he advised the new Prussian ambassador,
     Knobelsdorf, that Prussia would now be expected to live up to its
     obligations by attacking the Russians in order to force them to
     relinquish the Crimea and Oczakov. To push this demand, Ahmed
     Azmi Efendi was sent as Ottoman ambassador to Berlin with the
     rank of plenipotentiary. Selim also ordered the Grand Vezir to
     persuade Coburg to evacuate Wallachia before he entered nego¬
     tiations, or at least to obtain his permission for the Ottoman army
     to march through the Austrian-controlled areas of Wallachia so it
     could move against the Russians as soon as possible. But Prus¬
     sia and Austria both refused these requests, stating that their
     main aim was to secure an Ottoman peace with Russia as well so
     that it, too, could be brought into the European concert against
     France.®