




                   The Campaigns of 1787-1789
36   the campaign during the previous winter and that he spent most
     of his time with his concubines and cronies instead of caring for
     the affairs of state and of the army. On June 7, Yusuf Pasha
     was replaced as Grand Vezir and commander of the Ottoman
     armies hy Hasan Pasha, who had distinguished himself as com¬
     mander of Vidin during the previous year’s fighting against the
     Hapshurgs. Yusuf Pasha was given the choice of becoming com¬
     mander in Wallachia or at Vidin, and he chose Vidin.
       The new Grand Vezir set in motion a new series of military
     moves which led to the first major Ottoman disaster of the war
     and began the process by which the Ottoman army dissolved in
     the months which followed. In response to reports that Suvorov’s
     main Russian force in Moldavia was about to unite with the Aus-
                                                >

     trians under Coburg to attack Bucharest and occupy all Wal¬
     lachia, the Grand Vezir sent the bulk of his army and Mavrogeny’s
     to Fokshani to keep the two enemy forces apart. By means of a
     brilliant forced march, however, Suvorov managed to reach the
     Austrians at Martineshti, a few miles to the south, shortly before
     the Ottomans arrived. Then on the morning of July 30, the two
     surprised and completely routed the Ottoman army, which had
     been completely unaware of the arrival of the Russians. The
     Allied victory at Fokshani was itself of little strategic signifi¬
     cance since the routed Ottomans were still only auxiliaries and
     reserves of the main army of the Grand Vezir, which remained at
     Ibrail waiting for the order to move into Wallachia. Coburg and
     Suvorov had too few soldiers to follow up the advantage by pur¬
     suing the routed armies, completing their destruction, and occu¬
     pying new ground. But the rout was important in that it mani¬
     fested and stimulated a growing disorder and lack of discipline
     in the Ottoman ranks which began with Yusuf Pasha’s replace¬
     ment and which had first shown itself in the failure at Galatz.
     Following Fokshani, the disorder spread rapidly. The Ottoman
     army began to fall apart, with desertion and confusion spreading
     like a disease. The remainder of the year witnessed a series of
     increasingly serious routs which ended with the army entirely
     destroyed and the way open for a rapid enemy advance all the
     way to Istanbul.
       For the moment, Selim’s response was a desperate effort to




                        War with Russia and Austria
find more soldiers, while for the first time he began to consider                   37
the possibility of accepting the peace offers coming to him through
neutral channels. He still was determined to regain the Crimea
before peace was made, however, and he hoped he could get bet¬
ter terms by continuing the war until his enemies were desperate
enough to give him anything he wanted.^® So he raised new troops
in Anatolia and Bosnia and ordered the Grand Vezir to reform
his army and move to the attack once again. At the same time, on
July 11, Selim gained wKat seemed to be a major diplomatic
triumph when he signed a treaty of alliance with Sweden agree¬
ing to provide annual cash subsidies of 2,000 purses* over a pe¬
riod of ten years in return for a renewal of the Swedish land and
naval attacks against the Russians in the north. The allies bound
themselves to continue the war until both secured satisfactory
settlements, with neither making a separate peace without the
agreement of the other.The treaty was a victory for Prussia,
which had urged Selim to continue the fight, while it was a defeat
for France, which had taken the lead in trying to arrange a nego¬
tiated peace. Selim tried to follow up this alliance by securing
similar agreements with Prussia and Great Britain, but here he
was less successful. While they were willing to encourage and,
to a certain extent, assist continued Ottoman campaigns against
Austria and Russia, they were not willing to join the war openly
or to commit themselves to assisting the Ottomans in any formal
way.^^
  Although disappointed by his friends, Selim still was suffi¬
ciently encouraged by the Swedish alliance and Prussian prom¬
ises to order the Grand Vezir to attack the enemy in northern
Moldavia.^^ The Ottoman army moved through Wallachia and
Moldavia until on September 17 it reached the Rimnik River, the
last main barrier before the Austrian camp at Fokshani. But
once again, Suvorov and the Russians came to the rescue at the
last minute, and the Ottomans were routed after a fierce battle
(September 21).^^ The Battle of the Rimnik, known to the Otto-