




                       The Campaign of 1791
(captured on July 9) was the last straw, so on July 15, two weeks
before the powers presented their ultimatum, Selim instructed
his plenipotentiaries at Sistova to proceed to similar negoti¬
ations with the Russians as soon as their work was completed,
and he ordered the Grand Vezir to meet Repnin at once to arrange
a truce, which was signed at Galatz on July 31. Catherine
concealed these arrangements from the western allies until the
last minute in an effort to demonstrate that the essential peace
arrangement with the Ottomans had been made directly, with¬
out their pressure and mediation.*® Ahmed Vasif Efendi, official
court historian of the Sultan, who had accompanied the Grand
Vezir’s army during much of the previous year, was sent to Galatz
to continue the talks with the Russians in preparation for the final
peace conference. Vasif was instructed to try to get the Russians
to modify their demand to extend their boundary to the Dniester,
but in this he was entirely unsuccessful because the mediating
powers had previously agreed to this line.
  In order to show sincerity and good faith, Selim ordered the
immediate release of a large number of Russian merchants who
had been held as prisoners in Istanbul since the start of the war.
The Russians in turn released a number of Muslim war prisoners,
including Mehmed Pasha, grandson of Tepedelenli Ali Pasha,
who had been captured at the battle of the Rimnik. The main
terms of the truce agreement were that the Ottomans would
accept as the basis of negotiations the Treaty of Kiichuk Kaynarja
with the exception that the Russian boundary would be moved
up to the Dniester, thus including Oczakov and all of Bessarabia.
The Russians thus were able to dictate the principal territorial
arrangements in direct negotiations with the Ottomans and
present the mediators with a fait accompli when the actual peace
conference opened.**
  Negotiations were then transferred to Jassy, where Potemkin
set up his headquarters. After a delay due to Potemkin’s death,
discussions resumed on December 1. While the principal terri¬
torial arrangements had been agreed on in advance, the confer¬
ence dragged on, with disputes on Russian demands for war
compensation of 12,000,000 piasters and for territorial conces¬
sions east and west of the Black Sea preventing a final settle-




                   War with Russia and Austria
ment.*^ Finally, Russian submission on the former demands, and        67
Ottoman on the latter, led to an agreement, which was signed on
January 9, 1792J^
 A "perpetual and solid” peace was established between the
two empires, and a general amnesty and pardon was given to the
subjects of both. All those banished or exiled from one, because of
service for the other, were allowed to return to their former homes
if they wished. The Treaty of Kiichiik Kaynaija formed the basis
of the agreement, as amerided by the treaty of 1783, accepting
the incorporation of the Crimea into the Russian Empire and
fixing the Koban River as the frontier between the two north of
the Black Sea, thus also confirming the Russian protectorate
over Georgia. In accordance with the truce agreement signed at
Galatz, the Dniester was established as the perpetual boundary
between the two. Russia received the port of Oczakov as well as
the tongue of land extending between the Bug and the Dniester,
on which the great port of Odessa was soon to be built as the
center of the Russian naval establishment on the Black Sea.
Russia agreed to evacuate Moldavia, Akkerman, Kilya, Ismail,
and Bender by the end of May, and the Porte promised to restore
all former privileges to Moldavia, to exempt it from all taxes
for a time so it might recover from the damage caused by the
war, and not to demand from it any taxes in arrears or special
contributions to pay for war expenses. In addition the Porte
agreed to order the governor of Ahiska to prevent Ottoman
subjects from raiding across the Koban into the Russian prov¬
inces of Tifiis and Carthalina and to pay compensation for any
damage caused and booty taken in such raids as well as in North
African pirate attacks on Russian shipping in the Mediterranean.
All prisoners of war taken during the war were to be exchanged
except for those who voluntarily accepted the citizenship or re¬
ligion or both of the other and who wished to remain in their new
homes.
  One month later, ratifications were exchanged and the war
was officially over. The Ottoman Empire had entered the war
to regain the Crimea but instead had seen its boundaries driven
back to the Dniester and the Koban. Russia was finally and
definitively entrenched on the shores of the Black Sea, with