




                       The Campaign of 1791
68   Kherson and Sevastopol established as great naval bases and
     the territory provided for the emergence of Odessa as the new
     instrument of Russian naval supremacy. Russia now controlled
     the mouths of most of the major rivers empt5dng into the Black
     Sea. The Porte had been saved from even greater damage more
     by the grace of the French Revolution and the dictates of Euro¬
     pean concert diplomacy than by its own efforts. The war had re¬
     vealed the extent of Ottoman weakness not only to all of Europe
     but also to Sultan Selim and to many of his associates, and they
     emerged from it with a determination to reform the empire at
     once before it was too late.




                        War with Russia and Austria
Part III. The ''New Order”
        of Selim III
        %




            \




h

                1




    s
              VIII. Wartime Reforms,
                    1789-1792




What did "reform” mean to the Ottoman Sultan? The letters
which Selim wrote to the King of France and others while he
was still a prince as well as his actions after coming to the throne,
make it clear that at that time his concept of change and reform
was little different from that of his predecessors. As far as he was
concerned, the empire was in difficulty abroad because the tradi¬
tional institutions were not being operated properly; it could beJ)
saved only if they were restored to their original state. Abuses ,
and inefficiency had to be ended and discipline and obedience
re-established.   Only where military necessity required the
acceptance of modem weapons and techniques developed in the
West could new military organizations be created to make use
of them so that the equilibrium of traditional Ottoman society
would not be upset by damage to one of its intergral parts.
Throughout his reign Selim did little more than apply this
concept, although the conditions in which he found himself
caused its manifestations to be more grandiose, more signifi¬
cant, and more striking than ever before.
  The immediate, pressing needs of prosecuting a war against
powerful European enemies caused Selim to subordinate even
this limited concept of reform to the necessity of securing the
full cooperation of the established military and religious classes
                                               I
                                         1


72        until the war could be brought to an end. However inefficient
      these groups might be, however much they might ignore their
      own laws and regulations, they still provided the only administra¬
          tion and army which the empire had, and without them the enemy
      simply could not be held off at all. Selim understood quite well
      what his successor Mahmud II was to find out from bitter experi¬
      ence three decades later —that destruction of the old institutions,
      however bad they might be, would be disastrous if it was ac¬
      complished at a time when foreign anbmies were ready and wait¬
      ing to take advantage of every weakness. So for the moment, the
      emphasis had to be on restoring order and discipline in the regu¬
      lar military corps and the administration and on raising the
      morale and spirit of the people.