



                            Reform by Consultation
            The most important change which the Sultan introduced in the
          wartime period was less a reform than it was an elaboration of a
      /

          traditional process — consultation with all segments of the ruling
     X^lass on important matters facing the empire. In the past, all
          laws and regulations introduced in the Sultan’s dominions had
          been drawn up and applied by the Sultan and his ministers, who
      together constituted the Imperial Council (Divan-i HiXmayun).
          Legislation and administration thus were concentrated in a
      single all-powerful body composed of the appointees and assist¬
      ants of the Sultan. Other members of the ruling class had no voice
      in its deliberations and decisions beyond the right to submit
      petitions and to appear before it on request. When unusually
      important matters required wider support, the approval of spe¬
      cially assembled councils of notables, representing all the groups
      of the ruling class, was sought and obtained. But this was the
      exception not the rule, and for the most part, these assemblies
      did no more than sanction policies previously decided upon by
      the Imperial Council.
           They did provide Selim with a precedent, however, an existing
      body which could be developed to fill a new need without offend¬
      ing those who would be angered by open innovation. The need
      was simply obtaining the advice of those who were experts in




                            The "New Order” of Selim III
the areas of Ottoman life which the Sultan sought to reform.
The members of the Imperial Council could not be —and were
not —experts in all aspects of the Ottoman system, so they could
not draw up the kind of detailed regulations that the Sultan felt
were necessary preliminaries to, and parts of, reform. To obtain
the needed advice, the previously infrequent councils of notables
now were made regular, permanent parts of the legislative and
executive processes. Starting in 1789 and continuing throughout
Selim’s reigns, specialized 'councils were assembled to discuss
particular areas, to draw up regulations for them, and to see that
those regulations Were carried out. To these new bodies, the
Imperial Council in fact transferred most of its legislative and
administrative duties, with only the formality of legal assent
left to the ministers of whom it was composed. Thus a major
step was taken to secure more efficient and regular handling of
the affairs of state. By this device also, Selim was able to secure
the assistance and sanction of many members of the existing
ruling class for the program of restoration and reform which he
hoped to accomplish.^
  On May 14, 1789, a little over a month after Selim came to
the throne, he inaugurated his reforms by calling a general
consultative council {Mejlis-i Meshveret) of notables, which met
in the Revan Pavilion of the Imperial Palace three days later.^
To it came over two hundred leaders of the ruling class—judges
and administrators, scribes and teachers, active and retired
military officers and soldiers, all invited to discuss what could be
done to save the empire.
  The meeting was opened with a short speech by the Sultan,
who asked all those present to give him their frank evaluations
of the ills of the empire and the remedies which could be applied.
The Reis ul-Kuttab then read a list of subjects to be considered,
the areas of the Ottoman structure where the disorder was espe¬
cially apparent, in particular the army, the provincial adminis¬
tration, and the systems of justice and finance. Those in attend¬
ance were also asked to add any other subjects which they
thought appropriate. After the Reis sat down, there was a long
period of silence. Many of the officials who were present benefited
in some way from the abuses which the Sultan wanted them to