




                         Wartime Reforms
74        expose. Most of them were not accustomed to speaking out freely
          and frankly in the presence of their master. No one wanted to
          be the first to criticize the established order.
            Finally, the Sultan’s childhood tutor in the Imperial palace
          and now Rumeli Kadiasker (Judge of Europe), Hamidi zade
          Mustafa Efendi, rose to lead the discussion, apparently by pre¬
          arrangement with his master. Soon to be appointed as Sheyh
          u-Islam, known to be a close friend of tl(ie Sultan, he was a man
          who clearly was to be heard and thken as an example.^Mustafa
          Efendi pointed out that the subjects of the Sultan were being
          oppressed in innumerable ways, in violation of the religious and
          civil laws of the empire, that extralegal taxes were being collected
          from them for the benefit of corrupt officials, and that in such a
          situation it was impossible for them to provide the material and
          manpower which the empire needed in its time of crisis. He went
          on to describe in detail the disorder which was becoming wide¬
          spread in the army, the inferiority of its tactics and weapons,
          and the breakdown of its supply system. Diplomatically, he added
          that these conditions had developed long before the time of his
          master, but he emphasized that they would have to be corrected
          at once if the European enemies were to be defeated. This state¬
          ment set the tone for the discussion which followed. It indi¬
          cated to all those present the type of criticism which the Sultan
          would accept and the extent to which they could propose reform
          without incurring his wrath.
            Once the ice was broken and the lines of conduct made clean,
          similar statements came thick and fast. The commander of the
          fortress of Tirana, Niman Bey, described how judicial decisions
     j    in his district were given in favor of those who offered the largest
     \J   payments to the judges, how cultivators were turned out of their
          lands so the tax farmers could substitute persons paying them
          bribes and increased taxes, how the bulk of the military positions
          in the empire were held by persons unable or unwilling to per¬
          form their duties, and how as a result the army was composed
          primarily of untrained and undisciplined rabble plucked from
          the streets in times of crisis. Niman Bey was followed by Hakki
          Efendi, former Director of the Imperial Treasury, who gave de¬
          tails on how nepotism and corruption had destroyed the once




                              The "New Order” of Selim III
efficient administrative and financial systems of the empire and       75
deprived the Treasury of the bulk of its tax revenues. Other offi¬
cials recited similar tales of abuse and incompetence, supple¬
menting in detail the grim picture drawn by their predecessors.
But speaker after speaker offered as remedy no more than the
elimination of the abuses and restoration of the institutions to
their original state and mode of operation.
  For two days the statements continued. After all the notables
who wished to had spoken,' the Sultan himself rose once again
and read a prepared statement in which he appealed to all his
subjects to do what they could to end the oppressions, injustices,
and inefficiencies which had been described. Asking those present
to draw up detailed written statements containing their analyses
of difficulties and proposals for reform, he promised to receive
and consider their proposals and to cut off the heads of anyone
who dared to betray state and religion by opposing them.
  The great Imperial Council held in mid-May 1789 was a public
proclamation of the Sultan’s determination to reform the empire.
It was followed by similar councils held at periodic intervals in
the Imperial palace and in the quarters of the Sheyh ul-Islam.
So long as the war went on, their deliberations resulted in little
positive action. But various efforts were made to remedy at least
the principal sources of popular discontent, manifested in in¬
creasingly violent uprisings during 1790 and 1791.