

            *The Reis ul-Kuttab, or "chief of scribes” (sometimes called also Reis Efendi),
         was at this time not only the Director of the Scribes of the Treasury but also in
         charge of the technical aspects of foreign relations, including the conduct of nego¬
         tiations with foreign representatives as well as the dispatch of ambassadors and
         other emissaries. See Pakahn, III, 25-27; also Halil Inalcik, "Re’is ul-Kuttab,”
         L4, vol. IX, 671-683.




                                 War with Russia and Austria
         VII. The Campaign of 1791
         and the Conclusion of Peace




Negotiations continued at Sistova until February 10, 1791, when
they were broken off as a result of Austrian efforts to renege on
previous promises to restore the status quo ante bellum. At the
same time, Prussia encouraged new negotiations to renew the
Ottoman alliance with Sweden; the Porte was to agree to supply
at once the balance of the money it formerly had promised to pay
over a long period of time, and Sweden was to obligate itself to
attack Russia.^ Prime Minister William Pitt of England contin¬
ued to support the Ottomans in the negotiations, over the oppo¬
sition of the liberals, Edmund Burke and Charles James Fox,
who condemned the policy of "allying England with the barbarous
Turk.” Although Parliament agreed to increase naval forces to¬
ward this end, Pitt finally decided against going through with his
ultimatum to Austria because of the divided state of the country.
Pitt had clearly seen how much it was to the interest of Britain to
keep the Porte from falling into the hands of the Russians, but
public opinion followed far behind, and less drastic means had to
be used to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion.^
  While Yusuf Pasha remained at Shumla trying to restore his
battered army and Sultan Selim rapidly changed his ministers
in a futile effort to restore order at home, the Russian army, com¬
manded by Prince Repnin while Potemkin wintered in Saint
62   Petersburg, moved to surprise the Ottomans with an attack in the
     early spring of 1791. On April 4, Repnin routed the Turkish gar¬
     rison at Machin, a small town located about ten miles southwest
     of Ibrail, occupying a key position which controlled the passes
     through the mountains parallel to the Danube.^ Despite the large
     number of men in the Ottoman army it was clear even to Yusuf
     Pasha that their discipline, morale, and training were poor and
     that he lacked sufficient supplies and 'munitions for a serious
     campaign. But before the Ottoman al^my could retire to new posi¬
     tions, Repnin daringly recrossed the Danube and completely
     routed the Ottoman force (July 8), with only the opposing contin¬
     gent sent by Tepedelenli Ali Pasha of Epirus giving a good account
     of itself.^ But by now peace negotiations had come so close to suc¬
     cess that Repnin contented himself with destroying the Ottoman
     camp and then returning to his original positions across the Dan¬
     ube. For all practical purposes, the Ottoman army was gone —the
     defense line was smashed once and for all. With the defeat at
     Machin, the game was up.
       It was at this point that peace came between Austria and the
     Porte, largely as the result of the mediation of Britain and Prus¬
     sia, who forced the Sultan’s representatives to accept the Aus¬
     trian demands in order to secure peace and thus assure the pre¬
     servation of the European concert against revolutionary France.^
     The basis of the Treaty of Sistova,® which was signed on August 4,
     was the status quo which existed before the war, essentially a
     return to the Treaty of Belgrade as modified by the cession of the
     Bukovina to Austria in 1775. A full amnesty was given the sub¬
     jects of both powers who helped the enemy during the war, and in
     particular the Christians of Montenegro, Bosnia, Serbia, Walla-
     chia, and Moldavia who had assisted the Hapsburg armies. The
     Porte confirmed its previous orders, promising to protect Aus¬
     trian ships against attacks by North African pirates and to pro¬
     vide compensation for any damage resulting from such attacks,
     confirming freedom of trade and travel for Austrian subjects in
     the Ottoman Empire, and allowing fiocks coming from Transyl¬
     vania to pass the border freely and graze in Wallachia and Mol¬
     davia.
       In return Austria agreed to restore to the Porte in the condition