




                        War with Russia and Austria
in which they were taken all territories and forts conquered          63
during the current war, in particular Wallachia and the parts of
Moldavia which it occupied. Khotzim and its district were also to
be returned but only after the Porte made peace with the Rus¬
sians and under terms of evacuation agreed on with them. Until
that time, Austria would remain in Khotzim, which it specifically
promised to keep as a neutral place without giving any direct or
indirect assistance to the Russians. All prisoners of war and
slaves were to be exchanged without the payment of any pur¬
chase prices or ransoms. Subjects of either party who went to the
territory of the other before or during the war and lived there of
their own free will were not to be returned without their consent
but were required to take the citizenship of the country in which
they chose to reside and to dispose of their former properties
except insofar as they were allowed to retain them under condi¬
tions granted to all subjects of the country to which they now were
to be attached. All incursions on both sides were to be suppressed.
Article 12 confirmed the provisions of the Treaty of Belgrade,
allowing to Catholic priests and communicants in the Ottoman
Empire absolute freedom to practice their religion and maintain
and repair their churches and holy places and visit the latter
without any hindrance on the part of the Ottoman government or
its officials. The treaty was followed by a separate declaration by
the ministers of Britain, Prussia, and Holland stating that it had
been concluded by their mediation, thus satisfying their honor
without actually including a specific statement in the treaty.
  In a separate convention concluded the same day,^ the Porte
agreed that the town and area of Old Orsova would remain in the
possession of Austria so that the Czerna would form the perpet¬
ual frontier between the two countries, but under the condition
that the Hapsburgs would never fortify any part of the district
ceded under this convention. The small plain north of the fort of
the Island of Orsova was to remain neutral territory, as provided
in article 5 of the Treaty of Belgrade, with neither side laying
claim to it nor attempting to settle or use it in any way. The
district situated on the left bank of the Upper Unna was ceded to
Austria up to its western sources, where the Turkish, Austrian,
and Dalmatian boundaries came together, leaving Stemiza




                       The Campaign of 1791
64   under Ottoman control. The Austrian government promised not
     to build fortifications in any of the areas ceded to them by this
     agreement and to regard the settlement as definitive and not
     subject to futher claims or alterations. Ratifications were ex¬
     changed within a week, thus bringing to a conclusion a war which
     had cost both sides very heavily in manpower and resources and
     which left both near collapse. Selim immediately sent Ebubekir
     Ratib Efendi to Vienna as ambassador with the special task of
     restoring good relations between the two powers and getting
     Austrian assistance for the reforms which he was planning to
     introduce as soon as the Russian war was ended. Various dis¬
     putes on the exact boundary delimitations kept the boundary
     commissions working until late 1795, however, and it was only
     after that time that relations fully returned to normal.