


                         The Treaty of Jassy
       Shortly before the Treaty of Sistova was signed, a truce was
     finally agreed upon between the Porte and Russia. Immediately
     after the Agreement of Reichenbach, Frederick William II had
     urged Catherine to accept his mediation to secure peace with the
     Porte, but she refused on the grounds that she could make a
     peace with her enemies without any foreign intervention. This
     stirred Frederick William to prepare for possible military action
     in order to force Russian compliance. While peace negotiations
     went on at Sistova in December 1790, he gathered an army of
     90,000 men while Catherine prepared to meet his threat by re¬
     cruiting men in Livonia and White Russia. Britain gave its full
     support to Prussia, telling Catherine that while it would not
     demand that Russia accept its mediation, it would not allow a
     settlement which would impose undue sacrifices on the Porte,
     and it declared its determination to secure an agreement based on
     a strict status quo ante bellum arrangement. Britain had just
     completed its war in Spain, and its fleet was now released for
     action in the Baltic and Mediterranean if it should prove neces¬
     sary. In February 1791, the powers of the Triple Alliance were
     granted the good offices of Denmark in their effort to get Cather¬
     ine to return her conquests to the Porte, and while she rejected




                        War with Russia and Austria
the idea of status quo ante bellum, she finally accepted the Danish    65
mediation, declaring that the honor and security of her empire
would not permit her to accept the conditions which the powers
wished to impose but that she would be willing to accept a
modified status quo agreement by which she would return the
bulk of her conquests but would retain the town and district
of Oczakov. The Danes proposed that Russia be given Oczakov
and all the territory up to the Dniester, under the condition
that they remain without" fortifications, but all concerned ob¬
jected to this. The Porte was not consulted during these negoti¬
ations since the ihain object of the Tripartite Alliance was to
make a settlement at the Sultan’s expense.
  On May 26, the members of the Triple Alliance proposed a
peace settlement by which Oczakov would be ceded to Russia
on the principle that it was required for the security of Russia’s
frontiers. They elaborated this in a new plan by which the area
enclosed by the Bug and the Dniester, including Oczakov, would
become independent. On July 20, the Empress replied that
she could not agree to destroy the fortress of Oczakov because
that would leave her frontier unguarded, but she added that
she would agree to free navigation on the Dniester. The me¬
diating powers and Catherine finally agreed on the cession of the
area between the Bug and the Dniester with the condition that
all other Russian conquests be evacuated, adding that if the
Porte refused this arrangement, they would abandon it.® Thus the
basis for peace negotiations was laid, and only the Sultan’s
agreement was needed before the final talks could be begun.
  In Istanbul, Selim had continued to hold out for war in the
hope that Prussia would join the attack on Russia. But in early
July, a series of new disasters finally forced him to give in to the
inevitable. The news of Prussia’s desertion as a result of the
Reichenbach agreement was only the beginning. On July 5 Selim
received reports (subsequently learned to be false) that the
Wahhabi sect had captured and pillaged Mecca, the holiest place
in Islam.® Five days later, he learned that the Russian army which
had been besieging Anapa since the previous autumn finally had
taken it in April, thus eliminating the last Ottoman foothold
north of the Black Sea. The arrival of the news from Machin