


                          Peace Negotiations
       On September 17, the Grand Vezir and Coburg signed a nine-
     month truce at Giurgevo, and preparations for a formal peace con¬
     ference were begun.^ Feelers which had been received from Po¬
     temkin for a peace on the basis of the status quo ante bellum were
     rejected, and the main Ottoman army moved from Ruschuk toward



                         War with Russia and Austria
Silistria in order to meet the Russians.® Official Ottoman accept¬    57
ance of the terms of the Reichenbach conference was communi¬
cated to the ambassadors of England and Holland in Istanbul,
and they were subsequently asked to go to the peace conference
with the Prussian ambassador in order to mediate on behalf of
the Ottomans, as stipulated in the Reichenbach agreement. Prus¬
sia hoped to enhance its own prestige by having the congress held
on its territory as a "disinterested party.” But the British ambas¬
sador in Istanbul, Sir Robert Ainslie, encouraged the Ottomans to
insist on one of their own cities, and this view finally prevailed
with the choice of Sistova, in northern Bulgaria on the southern
bank of the Danube. The actual negotiations began in mid-
December, and they continued throughout the winter and spring
of 1791.®
  In the meantime, Ottoman-Russian negotiations foundered.
In April 1790, Potemkin had proposed peace on the condition that
Bender and Akkerman would be returned to the Ottomans as
well as the two Principalities. The Ottomans would be allowed to
appoint whom they wished as princes, but once appointed they
could not be changed so long as they ruled justly and well. The
fort of Oczakov would be destroyed, and the area between the
Dniester and Bug rivers would be left as a neutral zone occupied
by the subjects of neither power. Russia would agree not to inter¬
vene in Georgia and to respect whatever arrangements the Otto¬
mans were able to make with all the local princes in the Cauca¬
sus. There was no mention of war indemnities, but the Porte
would agree to use its infiuence to prevent Prussia from attacking
Russia. Selim, still unaware of the approaching European detente,
refused these proposals and continued to rely on the expected
assistance from Prussia and Sweden.*® So, while the negotiations
with Austria proceeded at Sistova, the war with Russia continued
and in fact was extended to a new front, the Caucasus, for the
first time.


                    New Military Actions
  According to the Treaty of Kuchiik Kaynaija, the Ottomans
had left the Kabartay area north of the Caucasus Mountains to
Russia, which had built up its military strength in the entire area



                       The Campaign of 1790
                                            {
                                      1


58   north of the Black Sea to facilitate a subsequent move into Geor¬
     gia as well as the Crimea. Starting in 1787, the Ottomans had
     stirred the people of Daghistan, Circassia, and Kabartay against
     the Russians and incited the Khan of Tiflis to move secretly against
     his new Russian protectors. In October 1787, the governor of
     Trebizond, Kdse Mustafa Pasha, was sent to Anapa with a force of
     about 10,000 men to aid the revolts which Ottoman agents had
     been fomenting among the Caucasian tribes. At this time Rus¬
     sian attention was focused in the Balkans, so no attempt was
     made to meet this Ottoman incursion until the spring of 1789,
     when a strong Russian force moved to attack Anapa, the base of
     the Ottoman activity. In response to this attack, in March 1790,
     Selim sent Battal Hiiseyin Pasha with a relief force of 5,000 men.
     Landing at Anapa, he successfully beat off the Russian attack,
     but he failed to aid the rebellious Kabartay and Caucasian tribes
     as he had been ordered to do. It was only in response to repeated
     orders from Istanbul that he finally left Anapa on August 8 with
     a large force, in the hope of helping the Kabartay tribes against
     the Russians. He seemed not at all anxious to fight the Russian
     army, and he moved as slowly as he could, not arriving at the
     Koban River until September 14. There he was met by the chief
     princes of the Kabartay, who told him that they had 30,000 men,
     who would join him when he attacked the Russians. Apparently
     Battal Hiiseyin was in correspondence with the Russian com¬
     mander, and in return for a large bribe he refused the Kabartay
     offer of cooperation. Instead he sent a small force of his own men,
     numbering between 4,000 and 5,000 against the main Russian
     army, which had retired from Anapa, but it was smashed and fell
     back toward Anapa with the Russians in hot pursuit. Although
     the rest of the Ottoman force remained undamaged and untried,
     Battal then surrendered to the Russians, in accordance with the
     secret arrangement which had been made. Left without a chief,
     the men of the Ottoman force fled in disorder.
       When the news of the betrayal and disaster reached the Sultan,
     he immediately sent San Abdullah Pasha to command at Anapa,
     but he also was not eager to reach his new post; and while travel¬
     ing from Erzurum to Trebizond, he stalled as long as he could on
     the pretext that he was putting down the various local rebels in