


                       Sumptuary Laws

  The rise of prices and scarcity of food, the spread of nationalism
among minorities, the arrival of bad news from the war fronts,
and the flight of peasants from provincial misrule into the
overcrowded cities, made the urban population an increasingly
uncontrollable and volatile mass ready to vent its frustrations
at the slightest provocation. The most numerous and in many
ways most successful of the wartime reform measures were those
which were introduced to end the resulting social ferment, which
was disturbing order and security in the large cities of the empire.
These measures were restrictive, rather than palliative. All
members of the subject class resident in Istanbul, Galata, Eyiib,




                         Wartime Reforms
                                                        4'




76     and Edirne, were registered by officials of the census department
       in 1790 and again in 1792. Those who could not show evidence of
       regular employment were required to leave the cities at once and
       return to their village homes. Only persons who could demon¬
       strate long-standing urban domicile and employment or, in the
       absence of these, could produce a guarantor among established
       urban residents willing to pay for their housing and food were
       allowed to remain. Lodging houses in working-class quarters
       were closed so that vagrants and vagabonds would have no place
       to stay, and persons harboring them were subjected to severe
       penalties. Guards stationed at the gates leading into the cities
       were instructed to admit only those peasants who could dem¬
       onstrate pressing business and prove that, they planned to return
       to their homes in a short time. In many cases, peasants were
       required to leave their children as hostages at the city gates to
       guarantee their prompt return. By driving the peasants back to
       the land, Selim hoped to restore large areas to cultivation while
       at the same time relieving the cities of the worst problems of
       overpopulation.^
          These efforts were at least partially successful, but ferment
       remained common in the towns, and more direct measures
       finally were introduced in an effort to control it. The most impor¬
       tant of these restored the laws of previous centuries regulating
       the dress and conduct of individuals in the streets and other
       public places. In the multinational and multireligious Ottoman
       Empire, social order traditionally had been preserved by a system
     \J of compartmentalization in society, that is, the isolation and sepa¬
       ration of the various social, religious, and economic groups. The
       basic division between ruling Ottoman and subject raya* classes
        was supplemented by guild organizations and milled* com-


           ‘qn Ottoman Turkish re'dya, or "protected flock” of the Sultan. In Ottoman
       usage, this name was applied to all subjects of the Sultan, not only non-Muslims,
       but also all Muslims who were not members of the ruling class. See Gibb and
       Bowen, 1/2, pp. 252-3.
         ‘‘"^n traditional Ottoman usage, all subjects of the Sultan were divided into
       autonomous communities called millet, each led by its own religious leader.
       Each millet was governed according to its own laws and maintained its own
       systems of education, justice, social security and the like, all of which were outside
       the scope of the central government. See Gibb and Bowen, 1/2, pp. 219-226.