




                        War with Russia and Austria
that area. In the meantime, Battal Pasha’s desertion, the flight of    59
the Ottoman army, and the failure of the new Ottoman com¬
mander to appear finally disquieted the Caucasian tribes, and
they dispersed to their homes, entirely giving up the fight against
the Russians. The Russians then were able to move against Anapa
once again in early 1791, finally taking it after a long siege. Thus
ended the last hope the Ottomans had of retaining their posses¬
sions north and east of the Black Sea."
  The summer of 1790 also saw the Russian army make impor¬
tant new gains against the Ottomans west of the Black Sea. The
original allied plan for 1790 had Potemkin crossing the Danube
at Ibrail and marching south along the Black Sea coast while
Coburg would cross at Ruschuk and then move to the east in
order to catch the Ottomans in a pincer movement. But with
Austria’s defection and the need to send large forces to watch the
Polish and Prussian frontiers, Potemkin was forced to make
much more limited plans for the campaign. As soon as the Austro-
Ottoman peace was announced, Suvorov, who had been sent to
Wallachia to coordinate operations with Coburg, was recalled.
He then occupied Galatz and worked to build up a fleet of armed
boats to assist Potemkin’s advance when it came.*^ Conditions in
the Ottoman army and navy also made the situation ripe for a
Russian advance. The army of the Grand Vezir became increas¬
ingly disorderly and disorganized while waiting at Giurgevo most
of the summer. After he moved to Silistria, at least half of his
force melted away as a result of desertion and the desire of the
feudal cavalry members to return to their fiefs for the winter. The
situation was very similar among the garrisons of the main Otto¬
man forts on the lower Danube —Kilya and Ismail —and as a
result there were not enough men to defend them against a deter¬
mined Russian attack.*^ At sea the Ottoman plight was almost
as bad. In July and again in early September, Ushakov’s Sevasto¬
pol squadron inflicted decisive defeats on the remnants of the
Ottoman Black Sea fleet, forcing it to retire to the Bosporus and
leave the sea entirely under Russian control. The Russian Danube
flotilla secured a similar supremacy, and this left the Danube
entirely open to Potemkin whenever he chose to move across it
and march to the south." But despite these advantages, he re-




                        The Campaign of 1790
     V




60       mained inactive most of the summer, and only in mid-October,
         when the campaign season was almost gone, did he attack and
         take the principal Ottoman forts remaining along the Danube—
         Kilya (October 30),*^ Tulcha (November 16),‘® and Ismail (Decem¬
         ber 22);*^ Ismail was of special significance since it was located at
         the intersection of the roads to Galatz, Khotzim, Bender, and
         Kilya, and was the storehouse for the entire Turkish defense
         system in the area.
            The news of Ismail’s fall in particular astounded Europe and
         was celebrated in verse by Byron. At Sistova, negotiations were
         suspended for three days by the Reis ul-Kuttab* for fear that
         Austria would refuse to negotiate on the same basis as before be¬
         cause of the disaster. In Istanbul, the news led to the usual popu-
     ^ lar tumults, with riots in the streets, fires, stonings, and the like.
         To restore calm and order, Selim sacrificed almost all his chief
         officers as scapegoats to popular feeling.On February 14,1791,
         the Grand Vezir, Sherif Hasan Pasha, was shot in Shumla on
         Selim’s orders. Two weeks later Koja Yusuf Pasha was made
         Grand Vezir for the second time because of his strong following in
         the army and among the Ulema. Sherif Hasan’s associates also
         were replaced, and the Ulema and politicians whom he had ban¬
         ished were returned to their posts with honor. In addition, to
         appease popular Muslim feeling, the new Grand Vezir prohibited
         the use of wine and spirits and closed all the cabarets in Istanbul,
         although he did try to soften the blow to the Christians by giving
         them a week to store up supplies before the order went into
         effect.*** Selim thus turned to the reactionary opponents of his
         internal policies in order to get the support needed to continue
         the external struggle.