




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
return. All fief-holders who refused to perform their duties were      83
to he dismissed. Efforts were to be made to assemble as many
Spahis as possible and to send them to the Balkan front.Selim
admonished all the corps to observe their old laws and customs, to
expel persons who violated them or could not perform their du¬
ties, and to accept new weapons when they were necessary.^®
  Special attention was paid to the mortar (Humbaraji) and
mine-laying {Lagimji) corps. New regulations were drawn up to
provide them with modern organization and techniques, and a
few officers came from France and Sweden to train them and help
build new weapons dnd wagons. A new barracks was built for the
mortar corps at Saadabad in order to end its previous fragmen¬
tation among the infantry barracks at Tophane, Haskoy, and the
Imperial Arsenal.The engineering school at Haskoy was en¬
larged and efforts were made to expand its curriculum and stu¬
dent body. Plans were drawn up for an entirely new building, and
funds were provided for its construction although this finally was
postponed until the conclusion of the war.‘* Members of both corps
as well as students in the school were subjected to regular exam¬
inations, and those receiving poor grades were removed from the
corps or retired, according to their age and experience.


                Results of Wartime Reforms
  All these wartime efforts barely touched the manifestations of
an illness whose origins lay far deeper in the Ottoman body pol¬
itic, far beyond the power of such limited measures to affect or
change. The conditions leading to disruption of Ottoman society
had been developing since the seventeenth century, and the war¬
time efforts were no more than pinpricks which hardly touched
the manifestations, let alone the causes. Exemptions from the
sumptuary laws were easily purchased by all those able to pay.
The efforts to cut down Istanbul’s population were similarly un¬
successful. Those who returned to their villages found only local
maladministration and disorder, and this drove them to join
marauding bands and maintain themselves by pillaging their
more fortunate brethren who remained on the land. In the end
even more peasants fled to the cities despite all the efforts of the




                         Wartime Reforms
   Sultan to stop them. In Istanbul in particular thousands of unem¬
   ployed men and women were hidden from the police and census
   takers by sympathetic friends and relatives and by innkeepers
   who stood to lose all if the decrees were effectively applied. Selim’s
   financial measures, when combined with the inevitable results of
   depopulation of the countryside, loss of fertile lands to the enemy,
   and the need to divert existing resources to feed the army, led to
   rapid inflation and increasing shortages of food and supplies,
   which in turn added to the difficulties. These conditions were a
   legacy of the war which was to plague the Sultan long after it
   ended.
     In addition, Mustafa Efendi’s stern efforts to restore the courts
   and schools created so much opposition on the part of the Ulema
   and religious students that Selim was forced to remove him in
   March 1791 and replace him by a man much more to their liking,
   Yahya Tevfik Efendi, who had been banished by Abd ul-Hamid I
   because of corruption and nepotism.^® The effort to reform the
   Ulema created such an intense reaction that Selim did not dare
   to resume it even after peace was finally attained.
     The provincial reforms restored some sort of order because they
s/ / recognized the fact that the notables were autonomous and en-
 \tirely ended the efforts of the central government to regulate
   them. By depriving the central government of any effective
   means of controlling the notables in peacetime, however, the
   reforms sowed the seeds for complete provincial autonomy and
   even independence, especially once the notables’ fear of foreign
   attack was ended and the Ottoman state, whose survival was a
   necessary prerequisite for their own existence, was made secure.
     Nor were the wartime military reforms any more successful.
   The Janissary corps absolutely refused to accept the Sultan’s
   decrees.^’ While its members were no longer capable of fighting
   the armies of Europe on an equal basis, they still had enough
   power to impose their will at home by force if need be. Selim’s
   agents were simply murdered whenever they tried to find out
   which members of the corps were serving and which were not,
   which of the officers and men were capable of further service and
   which should be removed. Whenever the Treasury cut off the
   salaries of Janissary members who were not performing their