




                    The "New Order” of Selim III
were much more serious; they will he dealt with in the next                81
chapter.
  Selim’s financial measures during the war were less reforms
than they were desperate efforts to secure sufficient money for
needed war expenditures. The drop in cultivation and, conse¬
quently, in land tax revenues, the subjection of large areas of the
empire to independent notables, and the loss of numerous tax-
paying provinces to the enemy reduced the revenues of the Im¬
perial Treasury just at the time when the needs of war raised its
obligations enormously. Each winter’s preparations for spring
operations consisted mainly of frantic efforts on the part of the
Sultan and Grand Vezir to scrape together all the money they
could find to secure the supplies which the army needed and to
provide pay for the men, who would and did revolt whenever their
salaries fell into arrears, even during the campaigns. The large
sums of money paid to the Swedish government in return for its
alliance only added to the Treasury’s difficulties.
  Selim tried various expedients to raise the money he needed,
but they were useless or self-defeating. He tried to borrow from
Holland, but its merchants refused because they considered the
risk to be too great in view of the Ottoman military defeats. He
then turned to Spain, which refused on the grounds that it would
violate its neutral position by giving money to any belligerent, a
decision which was determined and reinforced by dynastic con¬
nections with the Hapsburgs of Vienna. In desperation, Selim
turned to his own vassals, the King of Fez and the Deys of Algiers
and Tunis, whose treasuries were bulging from the profits of
pirate raids against Ottoman and European ships alike, but he
received in response only evasions and excuses." These rebuffs
forced him to turn to the more traditional Ottoman solutions for       ^
financial difficulties. Coins were clipped and debased so the Treas-   ^
ury would not have to pay the face value of its debts. Decrees were
issued prohibiting the manufacture or use of implements made of
gold and silver, except for women’s ornaments and rings, and
requiring all subjects of the Sultan and members of the ruling
class to sell their gold and silver objects to the Imperial Mint .j
at fixed prices considerably below those of the free market. These
objects were then melted down and made into coins, but at




                          Wartime Reforms
82   weights and alloys far inferior to those established by law.'^
       Military Reforms. Finally, efforts'were made to restore some
     sort of order and discipline in the Janissary corps and the other
     elements of the permanent Ottoman military establishment. The
     state of these corps was indeed lamentable. In 1790, it was esti¬
     mated that of the 12,000 names registered in the Janissary rolls,
     only 2,000 could or would perform service when needed in cam¬
     paigns. Most of the corps members actually were women, child¬
     ren, artisans, and merchants, urttrained in the military arts,
     holding their memberships only for their revenues, and com¬
     pletely unable and unwilling to perform the military services
     supposedly required of them in return for their salaries. The con¬
     sequent dependence of the Porte on contributions of men sent by
     the provincial notables and vassals and on rabble dragged from
     the streets of the major cities produced a body of untrained and
     undisciplined soldiers, better able to ravage friend and foe alike
     than to combat the disciplined, well-armed, and well-trained
     troops of the enemy. In addition, few of the officers were trained in
     the military arts. Most of them held their positions only for the
     revenues they brought. Officers often kept the salary and ration
     monies of their troops and sold the ammunition and supplies sent
     them by the Grand Vezir, further contributing to the lack of dis¬
     cipline of their men.’^ Disorder, desertion, and revolt were normal
     conditions in the Ottoman army, no matter how great the danger
     it faced.
       As the war went on, Selim did make some efforts to remedy
     these conditions. He ordered the immediate retirement of old and
     infirm members of the corps so their positions could be filled by
     young recruits able to perform the tasks expected of them. Inspec¬
     tors were sent to the army to compare the rolls of each corps with
     the men who actually reported for duty, and orders were issued
     for the dismissal of all those who did not appear or who sent sub¬
     stitutes. The Janissaries were ordered to wear their uniforms at
     all times and to drill regularly in their established techniques.
     Efforts were made to revive the feudal cavalry corps sent from the
     provinces. Inspectors were sent to the fiefs, and orders were issued
     for all those too ill or old to perform their duties to be retired, and
     their fiefs given to persons able to provide military service in