



                           The Reformers
90   of Rumelia, in 1789-90 and again in 1795. A firm advocate of
     reform in his own profession, he also became an expert on military
     matters and helped to direct the reorganization and moderniza¬
     tion of the Imperial cannon foundry as well as to instruct the
     soldiers of the artillery corps in the new ways until his death
     in 1797.»
       Ebubekir Ratib Efendi, son of a judge, was educated in the
     Treasury and became a close friend of young Prince Selim when
     assigned to train him in the scribal arts. During Abd ul-Hamid
     I’s later years, Ebubekir served as Selim’s personal scribe, and in
     fact composed the letters sent to Louis XVI and acted as his prin¬
     cipal adviser at the time. When Selim came to the throne, one of
     his first acts was to send Ebubekir as ambassador to Vienna to
     restore good relations with the Hapsburgs after the Peace of
     Sistova and to observe and report directly on the modem ways of
     Europe. On his return in May 1792, he presented a detailed re¬
     port on Austrian military, social, and governmental organization,
     which he had secured from personal observations and from con¬
     versations with various Austrians.® Ebubekir served as Reis
     ul-Kuttab between May 1795 and August 1796, and then as direc¬
     tor of provisions (Zahire Naziri) but he fell victim to the intrigues
     of his enemies and was executed by Imperial order in 1799.*®
       Ibrahim Nesim Efendi was the son of a former chief treasurer
     and one of Selim’s few close associates who did not enter the Otto¬
     man class as a slave. Called "gizli sitma” (meaning literally
     "itch” or "pruritus”) because of his merciless character and deter¬
     mination to push through reforms at all cost, he reorganized the
     Imperial Treasury and was also director of the shipyard of Istan¬
     bul. While he was an ardent reformer and promoter of Selim’s
     policies, he became a bitter political opponent of Mustafa Reshid
     and for that reason usually cooperated with the party led by
     Yusuf Agha.**
       Mehmed Rashid Efendi, son of a scribe in the offices of the
     Imperial Council, received his education as an apprentice in the
     Beylikji department* and rose through its ranks until he became

       *The main function of this department was the preparation and conservation of
     imperial orders and decrees. Gibb and Bowen, I/l, p. 121; Pakalin, I, 221. The
     Beylikji was under the supervision and control of the Reis ul-Kuttab.




                            The "New Order” of Selim III
its director in 1786. After 1787, he served as Reis ul-Kuttab three    91
times, in 1787-88, when he accompanied the Grand Vezir on his
successful campaign into the Banat, in 1792-1794, when he re¬
placed his bitter rival Abdullah Berri Efendi in that post, and
from early 1797 until his death in March 1798. In between these
terms, he also served for a time as director of the Imperial Arsenal
and energetically promoted reforms in the construction of ships
and the recruitment and training of sailors.
  Arabaji zade Ibrahim Efendi was the son of an Imam at
Khotzim. After his father’s death he was raised by the mother of
Arabaji Bashi Mehmed Agha, whose nickname (Arabaji Bashi)
he carried thereafter. Later he was sent to Istanbul and trained
in the offices of the Porte, rising until he became chief scribe
{Ser Halife) in 1793 and chief letter-writer (Mektubi) a year later.
After that he served several times as Lieutenant of the Grand
Vezir and secretary of Selim’s sister Beyhan Sultan, through
whom he gained a voice in the Sultan’s councils. Ibrahim Efendi
died less than a year later, while participating in a campaign
against Russia.*^
  While there were other men who planned or administered re¬
forms in one way or another, these were the leaders, the most
forceful and effective advocates of change, the men who deter¬
mined what would be done, and who drew up most of the legisla¬
tion pushed through the councils of state during Selim’s reign.