




                       The "New Order” of Selim III
duties, the entire corps revolted, whether at home or on the bat¬      85
tlefield, and the Grand Vezir usually was forced to yield to their
demands as the result of the exigencies of war. Efforts to make
the Janissaries use new weapons or even to train with the old
ones were met in the same way. Selim’s efforts to reform the mor¬
tar and mine-laying corps were somewhat more successful, but
the difficulty of obtaining experts from abroad combined with the
opposition of the Janissaries to every move limited their progress.
Fewer than 1,000 men were Enrolled under their banners, and the
Janissaries’ refusal to serve with them forced the Grand Vezir
to leave them at home whenever campaigns were undertaken.
  The experiences of the war thus showed the Sultan quite
clearly the difficulties involved in trying to reform or even change
the older corps. The lesson was not lost on him.




                          Wartime Reforms
                    IX. The Reformers




                                      N




  Much more significant than Selim’s limited and often frustrated
  wartime reform efforts were the plans he was drawing up for far
  more extensive and fundamental peacetime reforms and the ef-
V" forts he was making to huild up a cadre of reformers to carry them
  out. From the day of his accession, he began to surround himself
  with men who thought as he did about what was wrong with the
  empire and how it could be saved, men whom he felt he could
  depend on to carry out his wishes in more propitious times, and
  whom he gradually placed in key government and army positions
  as they became vacant. Most of the members of this new elite had
  grown up with Selim as his slaves, companions, and friends while
  he was still a prince in the palace. Some of them were young men
  recruited after his accession from among apprentices and lower
  officials in the scribal and military institutions, whose intelli¬
  gence and goodwill seemed to qualify them to join in the reform
  effort which was to follow. A few of them were older men who long
  had served in the institutions of state but who had broken out of
  the bonds of the traditional Ottoman beliefs sufficiently to see the
  extent of change which was needed in the established order if it
  was to be saved. But no matter what their origin, they agreed on
I certain common ideals. They shared with the Sultan the revela¬
  tion that what had strengthened the West might also revive the
East if wisely applied. They dared to hope that in him they had       87
found a champion who would give them the means of making fun¬
damental reforms and who would support them in the face of
opposition.
  While the war went on, these reformers met together with each
other and with the Sultan; they debated, discussed, and planned.
In the years that followed, some of them held important military
and administrative positions. Others influenced events from be¬
hind the scenes and were Poticed neither by Ottoman nor by
foreign observers. But together they provided the real directing
force in the Ottoman government regardless of who was Grand
Vezir and what were the decisions of the Imperial Council. They
formed a "Kitchen cabinet” which met informally with the Sultan
to formulate laws and regulations which later were submitted for
more open consideration by the official councils of state. They
were the driving force and backbone of the "New Order.”
  Never numbering more than twenty at a single time, often
falling to half that number as its members were removed by death
and the vagaries of political life, the elite was a vague, shadowy
institution whose existence was known to only a few. The most
important of the reformers by far was Chelebi Mustafa Reshid
Efendi, the spiritual teacher of the Sultan.' Like most of his col¬
leagues, Mustafa Reshid came into the Ottoman system as a
slave of Selim and rose to power with him. Between 1793 and
1798 he served as director of the Nizam-i Jedid infantry and
artillery men in the use of new weapons and maneuvers (see page
129). After that time, he served as Director {Defterdar) of the
Imperial Treasury, but regardless of his official position, he al¬
ways remained the Sultan’s closest confidant and the power be¬
hind the throne in his reform efforts. Of all the cabinet members,
he was the most sympathetic to England, depending on the Brit¬
ish ambassador’s physician for books and advice and on the am¬
bassador himself for gifts of various kinds. He always advocated
the use of British advisers and accession to British desires in
Ottoman foreign and military policy.
  Only a short distance behind him in influence and power was
Kuchiik Hiiseyin Pasha, a man of Circassian origin who had en¬
tered the Imperial palace as Selim’s slave and so captured his