




                                The "New Order” of Selim III
munities, each governed by its own leaders according to its own       77
laws and traditions. The place of each individual in Ottoman
society was determined by a combination of his class, institution,
millet, and position, and indicated by his dress and headgear.
These provided instant indications of his rights, privileges, and
duties and thus enabled everyone else to treat him properly and
avoid violating or infringing on them in any way. The clothing
regulations thus played an important part in maintaining the
social fabric of the community.'’
  Since by the end of the eighteenth century, the social order, and
the clothing regulations which went with it, had broken down
almost completely, Selim assumed that men attacked each other
on the streets, robbed each other’s houses, and violated the lives
and properties of others mainly because failure to observe the old
clothing regulations had made the status of individuals unclear.
Jewish and Christian merchants who had amassed huge fortunes
had begun to flaunt their wealth by wearing the more pres¬
tigeful satins and silks set aside by law and custom for members
of the ruling class. Members of the military corps wore the cloth¬
ing set aside for artisans and merchants, because they were more
artisans and merchants than they were soldiers. Since individ¬
uals no longer limited themselves to the clothing and headgear
prescribed for them, it was impossible to tell their rank and posi¬
tion merely by looking at them, and numerous disputes and
conflicts resulted. With this simple analysis, the solution was
obvious. Decrees were issued requiring all subjects to wear only
those garments, hats, and decorations to which they were en¬
titled by law. Heavy punishment was provided for violators,
and inspectors were sent out into the streets and markets to
check on compliance. Sultan Selim himself began to roam his
capital in disguise to uncover violators and turn them over to
his officials for punishments.®
  In the same way, decrees were issued ordering the suppession
of dissolute and sinful behavior among Muslims and non-Muslims
alike. The sale and use of spirits was prohibited although non-
Muslims were allowed to continue their use in the privacy of
their own homes. Taverns and coffeehouses were closed on the
not entirely unwarranted premise that they were centers of




                          Wartime Reforms
                                            I




78   misbehavior and stimulants of the mass actions which periodi¬
     cally engulfed the capital. These particular restrictions were
     the result of various factors which had exacerbated relations
     between Muslims and non-Muslims for several decades. The
     influx of non-Muslim merchants and soldiers from Europe into
     the empire, and the general relaxation of the old Ottoman urban
     codes during the last years of the eighteenth century, had led to a
     proliferation of public taverns, especially in Istanbul and Galata,
     and the relative ease with which Ispirits could be purchased in
     these places led an increasing number of Muslims to succumb to
     the temptation. Muslims who were not themselves seduced were
     increasingly irritated by the sight of practices which they be¬
     lieved to be sinful and to be leading their fellow believers into
     wrongdoing, and on various occasions their efforts to close or
     wreck the taverns and prevent the sale of spirits led to large-
     scale battles among members of different millets. Consequently,
     in the interest of social harmony and order, these particular
     irritants were prohibited, although the fact that these decrees
     were continually repeated throughout Selim’s reign indicates
     the government’s lack of success in enforcing them.^
       Administrative Reforms. Efforts also were made to allay popu¬
     lar discontent in town and country by reforming the judicial and
     provincial administrative systems. The state of the religious class
     had fallen to a new low in the eighteenth century. The ranks of
     the Ulema had been flooded with persons who were entirely igno¬
     rant of religious law and practices and who had managed to pur¬
     chase their positions or transfer their military or civilian salaries
     into Ulema pensions in order to avoid the service they were sup¬
     posed to perform in return. Such persons were able to appropriate
     the leading positions in the Ulema and use them for their per¬
     sonal profit. Through their efforts, admission to the class was
     given more and more to those who could pay the highest bribes,
     without consideration of qualifications. Standards of education
     inevitably declined as these men occupied most of the teaching
     positions and gave the degrees and certificates of accomplishment
     in return for bribes and fees rather than as the result of proper
     examinations. Persons appointed as judges in the provinces
     farmed their posts to the highest bidders, who made use of the