




                           The Reformers
affections that he was allowed to marry Selim’s cousin Esma Sul¬
tan, a daughter of Abd ul-Hamid I, and to become Grand Admiral
of the fleet in place of the grand old hero and reformer, Gazi
Hasan Pasha. Despite his lack of naval training, he turned out to
be an excellent commander, an energetic reformer, and because of
his personal connections with the Sultan, an expert and powerful
politician within the councils of state, leading the more radical
reformers against those who wished to'study, examine, and con¬
ciliate.^                           V
  The third most active figure in the councils of the sultan was
Yusuf Agha, the Lieutenant of the Queen Mother. Born in Crete,
one of the four sons of a poor cobbler, he was sold at the age of
seven to the Janissary leader in Crete, Suleyman Agha, who
educated him as his own son. When Suleyman became chief of
the Janissary corps in Istanbul, Yusuf became his Seal-Bearer
{Muhilrdar), and when he rose to be Lieutenant of the Grand
Vezir, Yusuf went along to the Porte as his personal secretary.
Through the influence of his master, Yusuf later served in other
posts, finally rising to be director of the Imperial powder works at
Gallipoli and chief of the palace kitchens. It was while he was
serving in the latter post that he became acquainted with some
members of the harem, a connection which led to his appointment
as Lieutenant of Mihrishah Sultan, Selim’s mother, in 1789.^
Selim apparently was very fond of Yusuf because of some assist¬
ance he once had given to Selim’s sister Beyhan Sultan,^ and this
made him a very powerful member of the reforming elite until
the Queen Mother died in October 1805.^
  Yusuf Agha was not a visionary and reformer in the same
sense as were most of Selim’s other advisers; neither was he a
reactionary opponent of reform. He advocated caution so as not
to stir up the older corps, and the Sultan valued his counsel be¬
cause of his personal knowledge of the feelings and ideas of those
who directed the Janissaries and the Ulema. Through this in¬
fluence with the Sultan as well as his connection with the Queen
Mother, he became the leader of the party of harem inhabitants
and functionaries and army officers who had been in power before
Selim’s accession and who opposed those who rose to power with
him. So while not an opponent of reform, for political reasons he
opposed those who advocated reform most strongly and so ac-



                   The "New Order” of Selim III
quired the reputation of being the leader of the conservatives.        89
Despite the Sultan’s usual support for those whom Yusuf Agha
opposed, he did nothing to remove Yusuf or stifle his party be¬
cause he found it useful to play them off against the reformers,
the traditional means by which sultans divided and controlled
various political groups for their own purposes.® Throughout Se¬
lim’s reign, Yusuf Agha remained a powerful figure and a man
whose opinions and desires always had great weight.
  Mahmud Raif Efendi, son 6f Abd ul-Hamid I’s granary director,
was educated in the bureaus of the Sublime Porte and rose in
Selim’s early years'as the protege of the Reis ul-Kuttab, Mehmed
Rashid Efendi. In 1793 he was app)ointed chief scribe of the Porte’s
first ambassador to England, Yusuf Agah Efendi, and he remained
there for several years learning western geography, history, and
politics, as well as English and French. Between 1800 and 1805
he served as Reis ul-Kuttab, now the Sultan’s chief adviser on
foreign affairs and main contact with the foreign ambassadors
and technicians then swarming into Istanbul. His most impor¬
tant function, however, was unofficial. Far less of a power in the
councils than the three persons mentioned above, he was a leader
in the effort to spread knowledge of western technical advances
among the members of the Ottoman ruling class and to secure
their support, or at least acquiescence, in the Sultan’s efforts. By
translating western books into Turkish, by importing and using
western clothing and furniture, and by aping the manners and
customs of westerners living in the capital, he provided a most
important channel for transmitting western ways and ideas to
the Ottoman ruling class. He was always closest to the British,
and so imitated their ways that he was called Ingiliz Mahmud
Efendi, "Mahmud the Englishman,” by his contemporaries. He
finally was killed by the guards of one of the forts along the
Bosporus when he tried to clothe them in the new European uni¬
forms on the instructions of his master, the event which touched
off the revolt against Selim in May 1807.^
  Tataijik zade Abdullah Efendi, oldest of Selim’s major sup¬
porters, was born in 1730, the son of a member of the Ulema, and
was himself a judge in Jerusalem, Cairo, and Medina before Selim
came to the throne. He served Selim as judge of the Imperial army
during the campaigns of 1789 and twice as chief judge (Kadiasker)