



                   The "New Order” of Selim III
ing, and what they wanted. This would indeed have been a radical         95
change for rulers whose only contact with the outside world in
the eighteenth century consisted of furtive incognito prowls
through the back alleys of Istanbul.
  In dealing with the bureaucracy, Abdullah Efendi attributed
most of the nepotism and corruption then existing in their ranks
to the heavy fees and bribes imposed on the higher officials by
the Sultan and those surrounding him in the palace, and on the
consequent charges of a sirhilar nature which they imposed on
their subordinates in the hierarchy in return for appointments
and reappointments every year. This procedure inevitably caused
positions to be given to those who could pay the most rather than
to the best qualified, and required able and incompetent officers
alike to treat their posts as means of recouping these fees and
securing profits for themselves rather than as opportunities for
service to subjects and state alike. Abdullah’s solution was to
abolish or considerably lower official appointment fees and to
eliminate the possibility of bribery by imposing systems of ratings
and examinations for all positions. In addition, he proposed that
the established one-year terms of office be replaced by terms of
three to five years, both to reduce opportunities for bribe-taking
each time an appointment was made, and to give officials in the
provinces and towns the security and wealth needed to carry out
their duties effectively and according to current needs, without
having to worry about sudden changes in their status and posi¬
tion as the result of politics and other factors in Istanbul. Finally,
he offered the interesting suggestion that wealthy men be pre¬
ferred for the higher positions of government since they would
have no reason either to steal from the subjects and the Sultan
or to require bribes from their subordinates. This would effec¬
tively end the vicious cycle of bribery and corruption in the bu¬
reaucratic ranks, which had to be suppressed if the government’s
efficiency was to be restored.
   The only other report received by the Sultan in these years with
breadth, detail, and impact at least approaching that of Tatarjik
Abdullah was the memorial submitted by Ebubekir Ratib Efendi
as the result of his observations while serving as Ottoman am¬
bassador to Vienna in 1792 and 1793. It was not one of the reform
memorials submitted to the Sultan following the Peace of Sis-



                            The Reformers
tova. It was rather an ambassadorial report submitted as the
result of a prior request, but it was of the same general nature
and organization, and although cloaked in the form of a descrip¬
tion of Austrian institutions and ways of doing things, it was sub¬
mitted about the same time and was considered along with the
regular memorials, thus meriting our consideration here.^®
  Ebubekir wrote in detail about what he had learned of the
military and civil organizations of the European states, their
methods of taxation, their military and financial organizations
and practices, their postal systems, roads, mines, agriculture,
industry, trade, banks, and the like. He praised the freedom left
to individuals to do what they wanted without restriction by the
state, an ideal which had little appeal to Ottoman and Turkish
reformers even into the twentieth century. He stressed the Euro¬
pean idea that government was instituted to look out for the wel¬
fare and security of individuals, a concept in stark contrast to the
traditional Ottoman idea that the sole purpose of government was
to extend, defend, and exploit the wealth of the empire for the
benefit of the ruling class.^*^