




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
courts to recoup their purchase prices and make a profit by selling
justice to those who paid the most.
  Here, too, Selim’s sole object was to restore the religious class
to its previous state and to eliminate the abuses in its operations.
In December 1789, Hamidi zade Mustafa Efendi was appointed
Sheyh ul-Islam with the specific task of reforming the Ulema, and
with the support of the Sultan he moved to accomplish this task
as rapidly as possible. Inspectors were sent into the provinces to
see whether the holders of judicial and teaching posts were actu¬
ally performing their duties and performing them adequately.
Those found to be absent or incapable were dismissed and their
appointments nullified. In the schools, enrollment, promotion,
and graduation were made subject to a rigid system of examina¬
tions. Efforts were made to examine the teachers, with those
unable to pass being removed to less demanding work. The tra¬
ditional admonitions against bribery and corruption were issued
frequently, as they had been in the past.*^
  Selim’s provincial reforms were also very limited and very con¬
servative. During the last half of the eighteenth century, the
breakdown of government at the center had led to a similar dis¬
solution of its provincial branches and to the rise of virtually
independent provincial and local notables. As the central govern¬
ment had lost its ability to control its own officials and as their
tyranny and misrule consequently increased, notables (ayans)
arose among the local bandits, as well as some of the leading fam¬
ilies, first in response to the need of the people for some sort of
protection against official tyranny, and eventually because of the
government’s need for some local force to balance and play off
against its increasingly disobedient and disloyal agents. It was
also necessary for someone to organize and carry out the basic
functions of security, irrigation, and taxation, which the regular
officials had largely abandoned in their search for personal profit.
  Abd ul-Hamid I had tried to control these notables and enlist
them in the service of the state by adapting an old and forgotten
position especially for them, that of Shehir Kethildasi (City Stew¬
ard). This position was supposed to be filled by election among the
local inhabitants under the supervision of the Ottoman governor.
Its functions were essentially those which the notables had pre-




                          Wartime Reforms
viously assumed for themselves. The Shehir Kethudasi in each
town was supposed to organize cultivation, tax collection, and
security, and represent the local inhabitants in their relations
with the central government and its officials. Thus the notables
were brought under state control by putting their elections under
government supervision and making them subject to the laws and
regulations of the state. However, as was the case with so many
other efforts to remedy abuse, the new position became no more
than another level of misrule and tyfanny over the people. While
it might have solved the problem if the governors had been honest
and loyal men, the problem had in fact arisen because they were
not, and the new office did no more than give them another oppor¬
tunity to sell positions to the highest bidders, with the successful
purchasers overtaxing and tyrannizing to recoup their payments
and make a profit. At the same time, those notables who had risen
to power because of their military strength were able to ignore
the new officials as they previously had ignored the other Otto¬
man laws and officials. They continued to exercise their local
authority as before, hampered only by the need to deal with one
more Ottoman authority.^
  The war of 1789-1792 served only to increase the strength and
bargaining power of the notables as opposed to the governors and
the Shehir Kethudasi. Since the regular Ottoman standing army
was unable to supply sufficient numbers of trained men to fight
the Russians and Austrians, Selim III was absolutely dependent
for such troops on the notables. In return for military contribu¬
tions at critical times, Selim had to abandon his predecessors’
efforts to control the notables. In 1790, the position of Shehir
Kethudasi was abolished, and orders were issued for the Ottoman
governors to accept as notables anyone who was able to get the
approval of the local population, that is, those notables who had
the force to establish their local domination. In many cases, Selim
had to go even further than this and appoint the notables as gov¬
ernors to secure their military support. Under existing condi¬
tions, this was the only thing he could do. The notables were in
fact far more able to perform the duties of local administration
and provide military contingents than were the regular Ottoman
officials.*** However, the long-term consequences of this policy