




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
there any proposal for the destruction of the older corps, although   HI
a few of the reports did come close enough to this by recommend¬
ing that the new corps be kept hidden until they became strong
enough to deal with any opposition, presumably that of the older
corps.
  Many of the writers used the reports to advance their own
interests and to secure the favor of the Sultan in some way. Some
used the occasion to try to discredit the reforms and, covertly,
even the Sultan, with the people as a whole. Nevertheless if
even the limited reforms that were proposed had been carried out,
something of value might well have been accomplished in a state
which was rapidly falling apart.




                          The Reformers
         Chapter X. Military Reforms




                                   \




As soon as the Peace of Jassy relieved the Ottoman Empire of
the immediate pressures of war, Selim III and his followers were
able to proceed to the even more difficult task of introducing some
of the changes which were envisaged in the reports and plans.
During the remaining years of Selim’s reign, while the empire
teetered precariously on the brink of involvement in the wars
resulting from the French Revolution, an unprecedented number
of laws and regulations were issued. While all aspects of Ottoman
life were in some way affected, the emphasis was laid on the mili¬
tary, for it was there that the war had made decay most apparent,
the danger most immediate, and the cure most evident. It seemed
to the Sultan and to most of his supporters that if only the army
and navy could be restored, the other institutions of the empire
would remain relatively untouched, and could restore themselves
without outside pressure or assistance. As a result, the primary
efforts of Selim’s reign went into restoring the feudal cavalry,
the Janissaries and various other infantry corps, and the groups
associated with artillery.



                    General Regulations
  Military decrees came with a rush in the two years which
followed the Peace of Jassy. ^ Their analyses of the faults of the
old military institutions invariably paralleled those of the             113
"memorials to the Sultan” on which they were based. The solu¬
tions ordered in each law for each corps were almost identical,
with only minor variations imposed by the nature of the services
to which they were being applied. To each corps a supervisor
(Nazir) was appointed from among the men of the Imperial
Council, those with the greatest political influence of the time,
so that the corps would have adequate representation when their
interests were under discussion. Each supervisor was directed
to manage the administrative and financial activities of his corps
so that the commander (Agha), formerly the sole authority,
would be free to concentrate on his military duties —the re¬
cruitment, training, and leadership of the corps in peace and war.
Each corps was to be administered jointly by these two. Orders
could not be sent to the men, appeals for new laws and revenues
could not be directed to the Porte, and salaries and bonuses could
not be paid without the participation and consent of both.
  The current commanders and other officers were examined by
special agents sent from the Porte, and those found deficient
in ability or honesty were replaced by men fully trained in the
particular arts of their corps, especially those who served in one
of the units trained by European advisers in the time of Selim’s
predecessor. The terms of the commanders and the other officers
were set at three years, and they were supposed to be appointed
without any fees or bribes but only according to their ability.
The corps were divided into regiments (orta) and these into
squads (bdliik) of various sizes according to the nature of the
service in question. In the artillery corps, the squads were at¬
tached directly to the cannons or mortars, the size and require¬
ments of which determined the exact number of men in each.
The operations of each regiment were directed by a colonel
(Chorbaji) assisted by a steward (Odabashi). Each squad was
commanded by a captain (Bdliik Bashi) assisted by a sergeant
(Chavush) and other subordinates. All official positions were
arranged in a hierarchy; and whenever one of them became
vacant, it was filled by the officer holding the position immedi¬
ately below it, with everyone else moving up one rank, the vacan¬
cies at the bottom of the offiicers’ corps being filled by the highest
ranking noncommissioned officers in the division.