

  ‘‘'The name Gazi was traditionally applied in Islamic society to the "fighters
for the faith” against the Infidel. The Ottomans themselves arose as Gazis in
western Anatolia fighting against the Byzantines.




                                The Reformers
108   punished those of their fellows who violated their laws and
      customs, and were eager to accept new weapons and techniques
      in order to maintain their supremacy at home and abroad.
      Therefore the solution to the Ottoman problem was to collect
      youths in Anatolia and Rumelia through a kind of Devshirme
      system for Muslims and non-Muslims alike, to form them into
      a new elite corps especially to use the new weapons, just as the
      Janissaries had been established in the'fifteenth century to make
      use of the newly invented muskets and gunpowder, to provide
      them with European officers and instructors, food, clothing, sup¬
      plies, and modern weapons, and to make them into the new mili¬
      tary elite. In return, those enrolled in this new corps would agree
      to serve the empire all their lives, to reipain unmarried so they
      could live in their barracks at all times, and to pledge loyalty to
      the Sultan. To avoid trouble with the older corps, this new unit
      would be attached to the Janissaries at the start until it had
      20,000 to 30,000 well-trained rifle and cannon men, after which
      it could become fully independent since it would be in a position
      to beat olf any attacks that might be made. He recommended
      that the menbers of this corps be given salaries almost twice
      those paid to the members of the older corps at that time so the
      very best men would be attracted to and retained in the new
      corps but that this high salary be paid them only so long as they
      were able to train and participate in battles. If they became old
      and infirm, they would be retired at once on special pensions
      provided by the Treasury so their salaries in the corps could be
      used to pay newly enrolled younger men.
        Abdullah Berri Efendi felt that 20,000 new infantrymen and
      5,000 cavalrymen should be enrolled as soon as possible from
      among youths aged between ten and twenty-five, primarily
      Anatolian village boys who never had seen cities or towns or
      had any contact with corrupting influence of the older corps.
      Barracks and training grounds able to accommodate 5,000
      recruits at a time would be built, preferably far from Istanbul in
      order not to excite the populace or members of the old corps
      until they were ready. He   also   mentioned      the   possibility of
      recruiting strong and brave city youths if they were orphans
      and unemployed and desperate enough to give their whole lives




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
to the service of the Sultan. The recruits might include non-                         109
Muslims, but they would have to be circumcised and converted
to Islam during the course of their training. To train these re¬
cruits instructors would be imported from Europe, to each of
whom ten Ottoman officers would be assigned so that in a single
year 100 Europeans might be able to train 3,000 to 4,000 recruits.
Within three years there would then be 20,000 infantry and
5,000 cavalrymen trained in the new ways and ready to engage
in battle at a moment’s notice. After they were trained Abdullah
Berri wanted them to be isolated from the old corps, however
much the latter might be reformed, so they would not be diluted
or contaminated by the ideas and ways of the past. This could
best be accomplished by stationing the new corps along the
borders of the empire until they were needed by the army itself
  Mustafa Reshid’s proposals in this respect were very similar
to those of Abdullah Berri. He also attributed the military dis¬
asters of the past to the army’s winter dispersals and proposed
to remedy this difficulty by creating an entirely new army which
would serve in the winter alone. For it, 15,000 to 20,000 youths
aged about fifteen would be recruited and trained in places far
from the cities of the empire, with the well-known name Segban*
applied to them so they would not attract the suspicion of the
old corps while they were in training. At first a group of no more
than 400 recruits would be intensively trained in order to form
the vanguard of the new army and to lead and train its recruits
as it gradually expanded. To finance the new army a special
Irad-i Jedid treasury would be provided, separate and distinct
from the regular Imperial Treasury, with appropriate taxes
established to support it. With this winter army the empire could
once again compete with the powers of Europe, reconquer
Rumelia, save Muslims from oppression, suppress the provincial
rebels, and restore order and good rule in the dominions of the
Sultan. Here was a direct source of Selim’s reforms.