

   In European states, the laws, organizations, principles and
   taxes laid down by their kings are observed properly by high
   and low persons. So long as their taxes are paid on time, no
   king or general or official can interfere with anyone because
   of it . . . Whatever cloth a man wants, he buys. He says what
   he wants, and there is no restriction on a person’s eating and
   drinking and going and coming, nor is there interference with
   his food and clothing and shops and earnings."*'


Turning his attention to the courts, Ebubekir Efendi remarked:


   They have no religious law. That is, out of the laws set down
   by Jesus, there remains only something of value in regard to
   marriage, and even this is not always administered according
   to Jesus in the case of kings. Religion is no longer observed in
   the matter of inheritance, so at present the European states
   are in such a form that they can no longer be called people of
   the book.^^




                      The "New Order” of Selim III
Novel ideas indeed, even for the relatively liberal mind of           97
Selim III, as Ebubekir was to find out seven years later when he
was executed by order of his master.
  To Ebubekir, a major problem which the Sultan had to face was
the immense size of the empire and the consequent difficulty
which the central government had in controlling the various
officials and provinces. To him, the essential bases of European
greatness were: (1) the organization and obedience of the soliders;
(2) the efficiency and fullness of the Treasury; (3) the honesty,
ability, and loyalty of the ministers and bureaucrats; (4) the ar¬
rangements for the tranquility, comfort, and protection of the-'
people; and (5) the ability of the European states to cooperate for
their mutual benefit and to make agreements for mutual assist¬
ance. These were the objects which the Sultan would have to keep
in mind in reforming his state if he wished to achieve the gran¬
deur and power of those he sought to imitate. Although he did not
say so explicitly, what Ebubekir meant here was that the Otto¬
man Empire would have to undergo the same sort of basic social
and economic changes which the states of Europe had experienced
if it wished to achieve their unity and strength. No longer could
government be instituted by and for the ruling class alone; the
interests, cooperation, and support of the mass of the people also
would have to be considered if the techniques and forms of organi¬
zation invented in Europe were to be successfully applied to the
Ottoman situation.
  Much of Ebubekir’s report paralleled the other memorials in
content and recommendations. He stated that the Ottoman sul¬
tans had been the first rulers in the world to establish military
laws in order to organize their armies, so that the imposition of
such laws in the nineteenth century would hardly be an imitation
of Europe. Ottoman cavalry and infantry had achieved greatness
because they had observed their laws and supplemented them
when necessary. It had been the failure of their successors to
observe them and change them according to the needs of the times
which had led to disintegration and disorganization. This was
the reason the military corps had become filled with men unable
to perform military duties adequately or to accept the discipline
required by battle and war. The old laws, modified according to