




                           The Reformers
    the needs of the time, had to be restored. Able soldiers and officers
    had to be secured and given the weapons and training required
    to combat the modern armies of Europe. He described the tre¬
    mendous advances which Europeans had made in the military
^   arts—the light and powerful new cannons, rifles, and ships —and
    he strongly recommended that they be introduced into the Otto¬
    man Empire at the earliest opportunity. Every European state
    had created what he called a "New Order” {Nizam-i Jedid) to
    make use of these weapons, and th^ Sultan would have to do the
    same —here were the direct antecedents of the reforms and even
    the terminology which Selim was to adopt within a few years’
    time. To Ebubekir Ratib Efendi, it was self-evident that every
    state strengthened itself by accepting the^laws and organizations
    of war developed by states superior to it, by using its own knowl¬
    edge and energy to apply these to its own needs and ways of
    thought and life.
      Here were two powerful and analytical statements to the Sul¬
    tan, that of Tatarjik Abdullah representing the best which could
    be produced by traditional Ottoman training, and that of Ebube¬
    kir Ratib Efendi showing how much the traditional Ottoman out¬
    look could be affected by even a short period of direct contact with
    the new forms of political, economic, and military organization
    developed in the West. Both of them were debated at length in the
    councils of the Sultan, and the recommendations of both came to
    fruition often in the deluge of laws and decrees which followed.



                    Military Recommendations
      There were other reports, the vast majority of the memorials,
    which paralleled those of Tatarjik Abdullah and Ebubekir only in
    length, not in understanding and breadth. For the most part, they
    gave primary emphasis to military reform since the danger there
    was seen most clearly and, perhaps even more important, since
    none of the writers was directly involved, none of them were
    members of the military corps or had any direct connection with
    them. Since few of the writers had any military experience or
    knew an3dhing of the European techniques they wished to imi¬
    tate, many of their recommendations were of limited value.




                        The "New Order” of Selim III
There were certain things on which all the reports agreed: Mili¬            99
tary decay was due mainly to a failure to obey the traditional         \/
laws and customs of the individual corps. It could be remedied
by their restoration. Men should be chosen for ability alone. The
corps should be inspected to determine which members were able
and willing to serve and which held the positions only for the
revenues which they made possible, and the latter should be
dropped from the rolls as soon as possible to make room for youths
who could be molded into expert and brave soldiers from an early
age. The men had to be kept together in the barracks in order to
be subjected to iron discipline, and they should be prevented
from accepting outside employment and income. Preferably they
would be unmarried in order to be available at all times for
regular training and military service.
  According to almost all the writers a major component of the
decay of the military was the practice of selling the leading posi¬
tions of the corps to the highest bidders regardless of their mili¬
tary qualifications or experience although the question of whether
this was the cause or result of decay was not considered. The
result of this practice was said to be that even the few soldiers
who did remain in the army and did report for training and service
were poorly led. In addition their officers withheld all or most of
the wage money and supplies sent by the Treasury, even going so
far as to conceal vacancies resulting from illness or death and con¬
tinuing to collect for their own profit the salaries and wages for
vacant positions. The result was that only a small portion of the
names on the rolls of the corps assembled when they were called
on to fight, and those who did join the army were riotous, undisci¬
plined, liable to run in the face of danger, and dependent for their
subsistence on booty secured from friends and foes alike along the
road of march. An initial solution proposed for these conditions
by almost every writer was to appoint only able and honest officers
and abolish the fees required in return, although how this was to
be accomplished in the face of an Ottoman society that was almost
entirely built around such a system was not discussed. Once these
almost universally accepted diagnoses were set down, the writers
became much more varied in their proposals on how new and able
men and officers should be recruited, organized, and trained.