




                           The Reformers
100     Moral! Osman and Tatarjik Abdullah felt that the decline of
      the Janissaries in particular was due to their resentment of the
      government’s increasing neglect of them in favor of the experi¬
      mental new rifle and cannon corps and their consequent loss of
      prestige in Ottoman society. If they were given the proper sup¬
      port, if they were given able oflicers exempted from all fees —in
      other words, if they were given their old prestige and esteem—
      they would automatically return to tlheir own discipline and
      ways, and they might even be willihg to accept the new weapons
      and methods. European experts could be summoned to train the
      Janissaries and the other old corps, but they would have to accept
      Islam since true believers could not be expected to accept the state¬
      ments and teachings of infldels. Such were the words of two of the
      most enlightened members of the Ottoman ruling class.
        Sherif Efendi and Mehmed Hakki Bey attributed many of the
      army’s difficulties to its annual winter dispersal. Many of the
      enemy gains had occurred after the Ottoman army had evacuated
      its advanced positions for winter quarters leaving behind only
      token guards. As solutions, both suggested the division of the
      entire army into summer and winter groups, each serving six
      months and spending the rest of the time training and working
      at other gainful occupations which would give them sufficient
      revenue to maintain and supply themselves at minimum cost to
      the state. Hakki Bey went on to suggest that the winter soldiers
      be drawn from the Janissary corps and feudal contingent of
      Rumelia and the summer soliders from the other standing corps
      and the Anatolian feudal contingents. In addition, each minister
      and official in the service of the Sultan, especially each provincial
      governor, would assume the burden of recruiting, training, and
      maintaining a certain number of disciplined soldiers in his own
      entourage, supplying them as recruits to the regular corps when¬
      ever vacancies occurred and also for special service with the
      Imperial Army in summer or winter, as they were needed. The
      cost of maintaining this reserve force would be met partly by the
      Imperial Treasury, partly by the officials involved, and partly by
      wealthy judges in the provinces. Thus for the first time in Otto¬
      man history, a kind of reserve army was proposed.
        Enveri, Salih zade, Nuri, and Rasih felt that the army’s dis-




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
orderliness in peace and war was due mainly to the enrollment                            101
of far more men than the corps’ old regulations permitted and to
the government’s insistence that they remain in service during
peacetime. To remedy this difficulty, Salih zade recommended
that vacancies be ignored until the corps were reduced to their
original numerical limits, and after that time they be filled only
by youths willing to serve all their lives. He felt that only a few
Janissaries and members of the other corps should be kept in
Istanbul and that these should be kept busy training in the use of
weapons and tactics. The remainder would be sent to serve with
the provincial governors and along the borders for terms of five
years, afterwards returning to the capital for further training.
Enveri, on the other hand, proposed a partial demobilization of
the corps in peacetime, with their members forming a kind of
ready reserve available for service at a moment’s notice. They
would return to their homes and keep up their skills by participat¬
ing in weekly training periods directed by the local governors
and district officers. At the same time they would serve periodi¬
cally in the governors’ suites to assist in the task of maintaining
peace and security.
  Ibrahim Efendi and Yusuf Pasha proposed a plan which would
revive the Deushirme recruiting system, which had manned the
Janissary corps during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.*
The best of the rayas would be recruited by periodic forays through
the Christian provinces. They would be trained as Ajemi Oglan
slaves in the suites of the provincial governors or in special camps
established for them in the vicinity of Istanbul, When they were
ready, they would be supplied to the regular corps as needed to
fill vacancies and thereafter would serve as regular salaried
soldiers except that they would be required to remain in service
all their active lives. The willingness of the subject Christians
to cooperate in such a plan was not discussed.
  Mustafa Iffet Efendi felt that the best way of securing a steady
flow of qualified recruits for the army was for the corps them-
   *In this system, Ottoman recruiting officers periodically went on tours {dev-
shirme) of the principal Christian provinces, chosing the best youths in each dis¬
trict for a lifetime of service to the Sultan. The recruits were brought to the courts
of the Sultan and other major Ottoman officials, where as "foreign youths”
{Ajemi Oglan) they were trained to be Ottomans.