


  *This term (also corrupted to Segmen) originally was applied to a subordinate
wing of the Janissary corps. Later it was applied to infantrymen in general, and
particularly to the provincial infantry corps under the command of the provincial
governors. See Gibb and Bowen, 1/2, pp. 59 and n., 60 and n., and notes on pp. 181,
191, 193, 315, and 321; also Pakalm, III, pp. 145-146.




                                 The Reformers
110               Non-Military Recommendations
                                            \


        On the subject of the administrative and religious institutions
      of government, the bulk of the reports were far more vague, far
      less specific, far less radical. Most of them admitted that unqual¬
      ified persons occupied positions of importance, that corruption
      and nepotism had increased, and that the government simply
      was not as efficient as it should be. But'inevitably their solutions
      followed the same pattern — follow^ the old laws, restore the old
      ways, eliminate the abuses. The abolition of fees and bribes
      required for appointments would end the necessity for officials
      to steal from the subjects and the state. The institution of a
      system of examinations for appointments and promotions would
      end nepotism and ensure that the best men were chosen. The
      production of decrees banning sin and crime, and suppressing
      wrongdoing and evil, would automatically restore the empire to
      the state of the past.
        Perhaps it is not fair to judge Selim’s advisers on the basis of
      their proposals. These were areas which had not been touched in
      past reforms, problems which had been discussed only briefly in
      the councils of state. Besides they were areas in which the writers
      of the reports had a great deal to lose if the abuses which they
      described were remedied. How much safer it was for them to con¬
      centrate their attacks on their opponents in the Ottoman system —
      the officers and soldiers of the military corps —where patterns for
      criticism and reform had already been established and where the
      writers knew how far they could go without incurring Selim’s
      wrath. It is mainly on the basis of the military recommendations,
      therefore that this series of reports must be judged. Here the
      writers were willing to make basic criticisms and suggest impor¬
      tant changes although most of their reports did no more than
      recommend the same sort of restoration which they wanted for
      the administrative and religious fields of Ottoman society. In
      proposing the establishment of new corps to make use of modern
      weapons and techniques they were going no further than Meh-
      med II had done when he expanded the Janissary corps, making it
      the greatest military unit of the age by its use of new muskets and
      gunpowder only recently imported from abroad. Nowhere was