




                            The Reformers
104   cut the number of men in each artillery corps in half and double
      their salaries to assure that they got^the best possible men. Fifty
      men would be attached to each cannon and given special bonuses
      in return for their standing in turns by their cannons day and
      night, year after year, so that they would be prepared to take them
      into action at a moment’s notice. When they were fully trained,
      they would be sent in rotation to the various border forts, provin¬
      cial governors, and others needing their services, and would
      serve for periods from six months 46 a year before returning to
      Istanbul for further training.
        Yusuf Pasha reported that the mortar and mining corps were
      filled with ignorant persons entirely incapable of using the old
      weapons which they had, let alone the copiplicated new weapons
      being imported from Europe, and recommended that they be
      entirely replaced. He also proposed that the previous system by
      which the officers and more experienced men in these two corps
      were rewarded with fiefs instead of salaries be abolished since it
      enabled them to become independent of their officers and to leave
      their positions to sons or relatives regardless of ability. Salaries
      would have to be provided for all members of the two corps as the
      best means of keeping their members disciplined and orderly.
        The statements concerning the Ottoman cavalry corps were of
      a similar nature. Rashid Efendi reported that of the 30,000 men
      then on the rolls, only 2,000 to 3,000 horsemen could be counted
      on to report when summoned for battle although all of them
      managed to show up whenever wages were paid. The solutions
      proposed by almost every writer involved the usual combination
      of weeding out incompetents, raising salaries, and training the
      men in the use of modern rifles. Abdullah Efendi despaired en¬
      tirely of making the Spahis into an efficient and useful military
      force within the foreseeable future because of the tremendous
      stake of the vested interests in the status quo. He suggested that
      an entirely new, regular, salaried cavalry corps be formed from
      the irregular mounted men called Delis, who in the past had been
      recruited from the "bandit” bands of Rumelia for service during
      campaigns and had been supported entirely by the booty they
      were able to amass for themselves. He felt that this reorganiza¬
      tion would require so much energy and effort, however, that it




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
would have to be postponed until after the reorganization of the        105
Janissaries was completed, and that the new corps would there¬
fore have to be developed quickly to perform cavalry service in
the meantime. Ibrahim Efendi also realized the vast difficulties
involved in attempting to restore the cavalry and suggested that
the reforms be introduced very gradually, with experts spending
a number of years investigating conditions before any final pro¬
grams were put forward. Enveri and Firdevsi Efendi attributed
much of the cavalry’s difficulty to the addition of over 20,000 men
above the numerical limits established during the eighteenth
century and recommended a return to the original number as the
best way to restore the corps.
  Bertrand and d’Ohsson, the two foreign experts who submitted
reports, were much more hesitant to include details, apparently
because of a realization that they could easily disturb their own
position by angering one or another of the many factions within
the Imperial court. They did, however, at least risk such difficul¬
ties by referring to the problem with which they were most famil¬
iar—that of the foreign advisers in the Ottoman service —and
blamed much of their lack of success on betrayal by the Ottoman
officials with whom they came into contact, on their neglect in
carrying out the recommendations of their advisers, and on their
acceptance of many reform ideas without making any further ef¬
fort to carry them out, coordinate them, or consider their effect
on the state and army as a whole. Bertrand stated that most of
the Ottoman reformers seemed content just to issue orders, with¬
out bothering to see that they were properly executed. He sug¬
gested that they be required to inspect their commands regularly
to eliminate difficulties as they arose, instead of letting them drag
on interminably until the entire reform program was undermined.
D’Ohsson disapproved of the Sultan’s stress on the artillery corps
and emphasized that new weapons and techniques should be
given to all soldiers of the Porte, and in particular to the old
infantry and cavalry corps since they remained the bulk of the
standing army.
  Thus far we have been discussing primarily the manner in
which the various reports described conditions in the established
corps, with recommendations for their reform. This always was