



                           Military Reforms
                                            i




114     Standard regulations were drawn up for the regular soldiers
      in each corps. Those already enrolled were subjected to immediate
      examination. Men who refused to report or were found incapable
      were dismissed on the spot although special pensions were pro¬
      vided for those who had performed honorably in the past. Enroll¬
      ment was limited to unmarried youths under twenty-five. Only
      officers above the rank of colonel were allowed to be married.
      Men who married after enlistment were not allowed to rise above
                                                A


      the rank of steward. In the mortar torps, marriage was prohibited
      entirely for officers and men alike. Common soldiers already in
      the corps who were not trained up to the new standards were
      given various periods of time, ranging from one to two years,
      to get the training they needed, and it was only after that time
      that they were finally dismissed if they still proved to be deficient.
      The apprentices were usually children of officers and soldiers,
      but, occasionally, outsiders who performed exceptionally well
      as irregulars in battle were also appointed. They were supposed
      to assist the regular members in peace and war, care for their
      equipment and animals, and the like. At the same time, they
      learned the arts of war so that when vacancies occurred they
      could be filled by these trained and experienced replacements.
      Children were no longer allowed to inherit directly the positions
      and revenues left by their fathers but were given a better than
      even chance of entering their fathers’ corps if they had the
      ability to pass through this apprentice stage. Promotion within
      each regiment and squad went according to a strict hierarchical
      system which was arranged in the same way as that of the
      officers. If the colonel died, he was replaced by the steward of the
      regiment, with everyone else moving up one notch, the highest-
      ranked common soldier being appointed as sergeant to fill the
      lowest officer’s post in the squad. Where there were several
      candidates of equal ability, examinations were supposed to be
      held to determine the best one, but preference was given to
      children of current or former members.
        Barracks were provided for each corps in Istanbul, and where
      they already existed, they were enlarged and modernized. Train¬
      ing grounds were also set aside in the vicinity of each barracks,
      r id where there was no room, private homes and shops were torn




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
down to provide it. Members of the army practiced with weapons        115
five days a week, with Tuesday and Friday usually being left for
rest and relaxation. Some of the corps were too large for all their
members to practice at the same time, so they came in rotation,
which permitted each group to get to the training grounds at .least
two or three days a week. Failure to appear was grounds for
severe punishment up to and including dismissal from the corps
for both officers and common soldiers.
  In addition to his salary,'each officer and enlisted man was
given daily rations of bread, meat and condiments. Officers were
given far more than what they needed for their personal use so
they could feed and maintain their private servants and others
in their personal employ. Salaries and wages were usually dis¬
tributed quarterly in the Imperial Council of Istanbul to the
scribes of the corps, in the presence of their supervisors and
commanders, and they in turn distributed them to the officers
and soldiers in the barracks. Members were required to collect
salaries, wages, and rations in person, so that they could not turn
their positions over to agents or others as was the practice in the
past. If the men whose names were on the rolls did not appear,
the scribes were supposed to keep their money for a certain
length of time, usually between six months and a year. If the man
in question appeared at the barracks during that time, he was
entitled to receive his money only if he was able to prove that his
absence was due to illness or assignment to a distant post, or
some other legitimate cause.
  The men of each corps were admonished to go on expeditions
whenever required and never to abandon their weapons so that
they could fall into the hands of the enemy. If such a thing
happened and the men survived, their names were stricken
from the rolls and they were subjected to severe punishments.
Civil and religious judges and policemen had no jurisdiction
over corps members —they had to turn such military prisoners
over to the corps authorities. In return for this autonomy, the
corps were required to make sure that their members were
punished for such violations, and in fact punishments meted out
by the corps in such cases usually were much more severe than
those set by nonmilitary authorities for similar crimes.