




                           The Reformers
                                            I
                                      1



106   their emphasis. Only a few of them actually suggested that new
      corps be formed to take over the infantry and artillery tasks pre¬
      viously performed by the Janissaries, Spahis, and others. Yusuf
      Pasha admitted that it would indeed be a long and difficult task to
      restore the old corps, but he felt that this would have to be done in
      the long run. For the moment, to protect the state until this re¬
      organization was completed, he suggested that a number of en¬
      tirely new groups be created to meet the immediate need. Ten to
      twelve thousand youths would be recruited in Anatolia and
      Rumelia and organized into new artillery and mortar corps, which
      would be given separate barracks and subjected to intensive
      discipline and training under the supervision of foreign officers.
      In addition, an even more novel and revolutionary proposal was
      made by Yusuf Pasha, the creation of provincial rifle militias
      manned by a type of universal conscription among the peasants.
      A new census would be carried out all over the empire, and on the
      basis of its findings, one man out of three in each house would be
      enrolled under the command of the provincial governors. They
      would remain in their own homes and perform their normal daily
      occupations but would be required to come to provincial or local
      training centers twice a week for intensive training in the use of
      European-style rifles under the direction of officers sent from
      Istanbul. Whenever the Ottoman Empire went to war, these
      militiamen would be brought into the regular army under the
      command of their governors in the same way that the latter
      served as commanders of the feudal contingents under the old
      Timar "fief” system. The men would be paid regular wages only
      while they were on active duty in the army. When they served
      in the reserve in their own homes, their compensation would be
      limited to tax exemptions for themselves and their families. The
      governors would be responsible for making sure that a sufficient
      number of trained and armed men were available at all times in
      the provincial militias to augment the army when needed; fur¬
      thermore they would be punished for neglect of this obligation
      and for any consequent efforts to fulfill their contributions at the
      last minute by conscripting untrained peasants as had been done
      in the past. Thus for the first time in Ottoman history, the
      Turkish peasants of Anatolia would be conscripted into the mili¬
      tary service of the empire on a large scale. A Turkish national



                          The "New Order” of Selim III
guard would be created to save the empire from its enemies.                        107
  Tatarjik Abdullah Efendi also suggested that new rifle and
cannon corps be established in the provinces in addition to those
already present in the capital, but he preferred that they be
placed under more direct central control than was suggested in
the plan presented by Yusuf Pasha. Expert officers would be
sent by the central government to the villages and towns, where
they would enroll young peasants and instruct them in the use
of the new weapons. Once trained, the peasants would be sta¬
tioned near their own homes, but under the command of these
central government officers rather than the governors, and
supported both by the Treasury of Istanbul and provincial
sources. He forecast that within eight years a force of about
42,000 men could be prepared in this way. They would be sum¬
moned to the Porte from time to time so the Sultan could inspect
them to see that they were being prepared properly. Thus there
would be a provincial militia formed of Turkish peasants, but
it would be as much an instrument of central control in the
provinces as it was a reserve for the national army. Abdullah
Efendi also proposed the novel plan of eliminating provincial
disorders by giving large bribes to provincial bandits and then
settling them on fiefs along the borders of the empire, thus
channeling their destructive energies directly into activities
which would benefit the state. This would restore provincial
security and give the frontiers the kind of permanent protection
they once received in olden times from the Gazi organization.*
  Mehmed Rashid Efendi, on the other hand, felt that general
conscription for a new corps of the type proposed by Yusuf Pasha
and Abdullah Efendi was not the answer to the empire’s military
problems. He pointed out that the Janissaries of old had achieved
spectacular success through a system of recruiting a small
number of candidates especially selected for their strength and
intelligence and subjecting them to intensive training in the
arts of government and war so that they truly merited their
place as the ruling and military elite of the empire. Such men
did not attack subjects along the road. They obeyed their officers,