




                                  The Reformers
                                              i
                                        1


102   selves to maintain auxiliary groups of trainees, numbering 100 or
      200 youths each, who would serve a& apprentices and assistants
      to the regular soldiers while in training, and who would have first
      call at filling vacancies in the corps. In addition all ministers and
      officers assigned to duty in the provinces would have to take along
      with them between 100 and 1,000 trainees each. These trainees
      would be drilled and maintained at the expense of the ministers
      and officers concerned, and would form an additional pool of 10,000
      to 15,000 trained men ready to fill vacancies in the corps.
        Ashir Efendi felt that a major difficulty with the corps was that
      their officers came from their own ranks and essentially repre¬
      sented them against the central government. His solution was
      for the chief officers of the corps to be appointed from among the
      Sultan’s men in the inner palace service. Such men would be far
      more loyal to him, they would prevent any independent action on
      the part of the corps, and they would keep the soldiers disciplined
      and obedient. No mention was made of how such palace men with¬
      out military experience would be able to improve the military
      abilities of the corps in question.
        Sherif Efendi concentrated his attention on the salaried border
      guards stationed along the Danube, contending that their officers
      kept most of the salaries and supplies sent from the Porte and
      actually maintained only a very small number of men for border
      duty. His solution was the abolition of these corps, with half their
      salaries being eliminated and the other half given as bonuses to
      the officers and men serving on the Russian front. Hajji Ibrahim
      Efendi perceived the same weakness in the border organization;
      but instead of eliminating it, he suggested that it be reorganized
      and reformed, with the local judges supervising wage distribution
      so that only persons actually performing the service would be
      paid and vacancies would be uncovered and filled.
        Many of the reports devoted particular attention to the estab¬
      lished artillery corps —the cannon, cannon-wagon, rapid-fire,
      mortar and mine-laying corps — since it was they who showed the
      clearest inferiority to the Austrians and the Russians and also
      since the tradition of reform in this field had already been estab¬
      lished in previous reigns.
        Yusuf Pasha and Sherif Efendi felt that the older artillery




                           The "New Order” of Selim III
corps had been demoralized by the attention paid to the rapid-           103
fire artillery corps and that the latter were of little use and should
be abolished and replaced with a system in which each high offi¬
cial in Istanbul and the provinces would be given two new can¬
nons and one mortar and required to train and maintain-seven
men for each of them. In this way, a large number of trained
artillerymen would be available for service with the infantry
and cavalry corps whenever they were needed. Hayrullah Efendi
said that the rapid-fire artillery corps should be retained, but only
as a training and recruiting vehicle, with its men being assigned
to the regular artillery corps for service in battle.
  Tatarjik Abdullah, Rashid, and Rasih felt exactly the opposite.
Instead of abolishing the rapid-fire artillery corps or limiting
its importance, they wanted it to be expanded and sent into battle
as a unit rather than as a part of the older corps. While they felt
that efforts should certainly be made to reorganize and restore
the older artillery corps, to them only the rapid-fire corps offered a
possibility for immediate reform, hence they had to be expanded
and put under the direction of foreign officers as soon as possible.
To restore the cannon and cannon-wagon corps, Sherif Efendi pro¬
posed that since they were complementary they should be united
into a single service, given 200 of the most modern cannons
available, with 100 men assigned to each of the large divisions
and 50 to the small, forming a corps of about 15,000 men. With
the distinction between those who fired cannons and those who
moved them eliminated, improved efficiency and discipline would
be possible. Each group of men would be assigned to a specific
cannon which they would be in charge of maintaining, moving,
and firing in battle. If it was disabled, they would have to repair
it, or at least make sure that it did not fall into the hands of the
enemy. If a cannon was left behind in battle, the men attached to
it would be dismissed from service and held up to scorn and mock¬
ery by the people.
  Ibrahim Efendi proposed that an elite of 100 master cannoneers
be trained to act as supervisors for the older corps and that special
funds be provided to assist them in their efforts and to provide
them with the new cannons and equipment they needed. Both
Osman Efendi and Rasih Efendi felt that the best solution was to