




                          Military Reforms
                                           i




128   drill masters. In April, Levend Chiftlik, an isolated spot ten
      miles north of the capital, formerly used by the rapid-fire cannon
      force trained by de Tott, was chosen as the drill grounds since it
      was far enough from the population and the old corps that it
      would not excite their disapproval or anxiety.In addition, much
      to the chagrin of the British ambassador, four French infantry
      officers were appointed to advise on its operations.Up to this
      point all of this action was taken secretly by the Sultan and the
                                               A

      Grand Vezir, without obtaining any formal approval from the
      Imperial Council. It was only during late April and early May
      that approval was obtained in a Series of meetings held in the
      rooms of the Imperial Council.®^ Since the Sultan’s determination
      to establish the corps was made clear right from the start, there
      was little open opposition to its establishment, and the only dis¬
      putes came over the question of whether it should be independent
      or part of one of the older corps. The proponents of the latter
      view, led by Yusuf Ziya Pasha, argued that an entirely new corps
      outside the established military hierarchy would needlessly an¬
      tagonize the Janissaries before the new army was strong enough
      to defend itself. They stated that if the new force was in some
      way made part of the old system, at least in form, its true signifi¬
      cance would be veiled and the opposition deluded until it was too
      late. The advocates of independence, led by Tatarjik Abdullah
      Efendi, emphasized the financial aspect, pointing out that the ex¬
      penses involved in creating the new army would overwhelm the
      established treasury, and offering a new treasury with new
      taxes supplying an independent army as the best solution. In the
      end, on May 14, 1792, a compromise was reached. The Sultan
      decided to create a new treasury with new taxes to provide for the
      new army, but both were clothed in the garb of established or¬
      ganizations in the Ottoman system in order to satisfy the con¬
      servatives and delude the reactionaries.
        Since the financial aspect always was considered to be the most
      important aspect of any Ottoman administrative operation,
      legislation for the treasury came first. On March 1, 1793, an
      entirely independent treasury was established for the new army
      with the name Irad-i Jedid, or "New Revenue.”^® Mustafa Reshid
      Efendi was made director of the entire Nizam-i Jedid organiza-




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
tion, with the formal titles of Irad-i Jedid Defterdari (Treasurer     129
of the New Revenue) for his financial duties and Talimli Askeri
Naziri (Supervisor of the Trained Soldiers) for his military ones.
To provide him with rank and prestige in the regular Ottoman
hierarchy, the now-honorific post of Shikk-i Sani Defterdari (Sec¬
ond Treasurer)^® was set aside for him, thus making him an equal
with the other chief officers of state in the Imperial Council. As
revenues for the new treasury, the Sultan gave it all the tax
farms (Iltizam) belonging todhe state treasury and to the Holy
Cities which produced annual profits of more than ten purses
each to the tax farmers who administered them. To lighten the
effect of the loss of these revenues on the state treasury, the Sul¬
tan also decreed that this transfer should take place only when
the holdings in question were vacated by their current tax farmers,
and that as soon as the new treasury took them over, it should
pay the state treasury the purchase price it normally received
for those farms, equal to five years profits of their tax farmers,
in addition to the regular annual taxes which it normally re¬
ceived from the tax farmers.In essence then the new treasury
itself became the tax farmer of these holdings for the state treas¬
ury, administering them by "subfarming” them to its own tax
farmers.In addition, all fiefs previously set aside for members
of the mortar corps and the navy and all military fiefs worth more
than 15,000 piasters per year whose holders were found to be
absent from their lands or failing in their duties in any way were
seized for the new treasury. In addition various excise taxes were
turned over to it or created especially for it. The Imperial Treas¬
ury thereafter had to pay only those expenses incumbent on it in
peacetime before the Nizam-i Jedid corps was established and
the artillery and navy reformed. The new treasury was provided
with special revenues to pay for the reforms plus all extraor¬
dinary expenditures required by wartime expeditions. All sur¬
pluses left in the new treasury at the end of each fiscal year had
to be placed in a special war chest and saved for emergencies in
 order to spare the new and old treasuries alike from the extra¬
 ordinary burdens of military emergencies.'^^
   Mustafa Reshid immediately set about to organize his treas¬
 ury and collect its revenues.®® In 1793 and 1794, no more than