




                                The "New Order” of Selim III
pean parts of the empire by this time were entirely too far re¬
moved from central control for this sort of levy to be effective; it
was entirely unsuccessful. In this area, therefore, the Ottoman
army continued to depend almpst entirely on the independent
local notables.                                                ,
  The rapid increase in the number of men enrolled in the new
army after 1794 created a number of new problems, principally
the same sort of disorderly, undisciplined behavior which had
brought the older corps into'disrepute. In the early days of the
Nizam-i Jedid, most of the enlisted men were Turks enrolled
mainly in Istanbul from among the large group of unemployed,
who joined as the only alternative to starvation. Most of them
were accustomed to the discipline, restraint, and sanitary meth¬
ods required by living in close proximity to large numbers of per¬
sons. In contrast, most of the new men enrolled after 1794 came
from Anatolia; the enrollment lists show that by 1800, 90 per
cent of the enlisted men in the army were Turkish peasants and
tribesmen.*^' Many of them joined more for the weapons and plun¬
der they hoped to gain than for anything else. Resistant to disci¬
pline and unaccustomed to the kind of life required by the corps,
they became increasingly turbulent and disorderly, and there
were frequent incidents in which they descended to the Bosporus
at Tarabya, Yeni Koy, and Beshiktash, attacking and robbing at
will. Many of them fled from the camps shortly after receiving
their uniforms and weapons, complaining that the work was too
hard, the discipline too severe, and the pay too low. Forming
powerful new robber bands, they began to plague notables and
governors alike in western Anatolia and the Balkans, the super¬
ior weapons provided by the Sultan giving them an inestimable
advantage over their opponents.^-
  To combat these problems, various changes were made in the
organization of the corps. Additional officers were appointed. Pun¬
ishments for infractions of the rules were made more severe.
Efforts were made to control the men when they were not actu¬
ally in the field or training at the practice grounds. The rapid
increase in the number of men had so far outstripped the facili¬
ties at Levend Chiftlik and Uskiidar that it was impossible for
all the men to practice daily, as was originally envisaged in their




                          Military Reforms
regulations. Those unable to practice were left with nothing to
do for a good part of the time sincg such a contingency had not
been provided for. The resulting idleness and lack of supervision
were considered a major cause of the difficulties which the army
was now experiencing. As a partial solution, new training regu¬
lations were introduced on April 6, 1801.®^ A regular system of
training rotation was set up in a manner similar to that of the
artillery corps. As an additional measure to relieve the pressure
of idleness, those men wishing tp 'engage in an outside trade
when they were not required at the practice field were allowed to
do so if they had performed their duties in full, if their work was
"a trade in keeping with the honor of the corps,” and if they were
located near enough to their barracks so that they could return at
night and be called up for instant duty when required. For the
first time, officers were allowed to marry, but the men were sup¬
posed to remain single so that they could be subjected to the
severe discipline of the corps.
  In addition, in order that the men might be commanded and
supervised more efficiently, it was decided that the financial and
military duties originally united in the person of the supervisor
were in fact too much for a single man to perform properly, and in
late 1801 they were separated, with the post of Talimli Askeri
Naziri being transferred to the supervisor of the cannon and
cannon-wagon corps, while the Nizam-i Jedid supervisor was left
with the posts of Treasurer of the New Treasury and the rank of
Second Treasurer of the Imperial Treasury.^^
  These reforms had some effect, but disciplinary cases on the
part of members of the Uskiidar mounted corps in particular
continued to be reported periodically, manifesting a continued
decline in the discipline and efficiency of the corps and also in¬
flicting a final, crushing blow against the government’s effort to
popularize the new army among the people.**'^
  This then was Selim’s Nizam-i Jedid corps. By the end of his
reign it numbered almost 23,000 men, who were armed with
modern weapons, trained by European officers, and praised for
their efficiency and good bearing by almost all the Europeans
who observed them.”® Together with the reformed and revamped