




                           Military Reforms
130   200 men and officers were enrolled, and most of its resources
      were used to build barracks and prepare drill grounds at Levend
      Chiftlik, to import officers and equipment from Europe, and to
      make new uniforms and weapons for the men. At the same time,
      efforts were initiated to popularize the new force among the people
      of Istanbul and the men of the older corps, or at least to break the
      news gradually so that when the establishment of the new corps
      itself was publicly proclaimed, they would not be taken by sur¬
      prise and goaded into sudden, viol^Pt action.®*
        It was only in the late summer of 1794 that the Sultan and his
      advisers were satisfied that the public was prepared. The official
      regulations establishing the military organization therefore were
      finally proclaimed on September 18, almost two years after it
      originally began its work.®- In order that the Nizam-iJedid army
      would fit into the established Ottoman military hierarchy and
      attract as little attention as possible, it was attached to the old
      Bostaniyan-i Hassa corps as its infantry-rifle branch, the Bostani
      Tiifenkjisi {Bostani riflemen) corps.®** While the regulation ex¬
      pressed the hope that the full corps would eventually have 12,000
      officers and men, for the moment a single regiment of 1,602 offi¬
      cers and men was organized at Levend Chiftlik as a model for
      later expansion.®‘* The basic internal regulations of the corps were
      very similar to those given to the older corps two years before. A
      regular hierarchy of promotion was established, with vacancies
      filled by the persons occupying the posts immediately beneath
      them. Provision was made for the advancement out of order of
      unusually qualified men in special cases, especially if they had
      demonstrated their ability in battle. Among persons of equal
      ability, however, preference had to be given to age and seniority.
        At the time the regulation was issued and the organization of
      the Nizam-i Jedid corps officially proclaimed, there were only 468
      men and 20 officers training at Levend Chiftlik, and they were
      living in tents and flimsy wooden shacks because the regular bar¬
      racks had not yet been completed.®® Nevertheless during the next
      six months recruits came rapidly, mainly from among unem¬
      ployed youths roaming the streets of Istanbul and from the pri¬
      vate armies of the leading notables of Anatolia,®® and the regi¬
      ment soon reached its full strength. At the same time, most of the
      permanent buildings were soon completed, including three bar-



                         The "New Order” of Selim III
racks, a rifle factory, two mosques, and a school.®^ Members of the    131
corps were dressed in the French manner, with blue berets and
red breeches and jackets.®® Training went ahead rapidly under
the direction of Veli Agha and the French official advisers and
under the frequent inspection of the Sultan and his officials. At
the same time, the Irad-i Jedid treasury collected its revenues so
efficiently that it was left with a large surplus even after all its
obligations were met.®®
  With this very favorable financial situation, the Sultan finally
felt that the new corps could be safely expanded, and with the
added stimulus of the French invasion of Egypt, a second regi¬
ment was created on November 23, 1799. The organization of the
new force was somewhat different from that of the original one.
The various provincial governors were ordered to recruit men lo¬
cally and train them in the Nizam-i Jedid way under the direction
of officers sent from Istanbul, with their salaries and equipment
provided by the Irad-i Jedid treasury. Here indeed was the pro¬
vincial militia proposed by Yusuf Pasba.'^® While these men were
to continue to serve with the provincial governors in order to
maintain order, a central regiment was established for them at
Uskiidar to direct their operations and control their training. By
1800, barracks and training grounds were built for it at Kadikoy,
including a hospital, a library, and a press.^^ Most of the men in
this regiment came from the villages of Anatolia; it was almost
entirely a Turkish peasant force, something without precedent in
Ottoman history, with enlistment encouraged not only by high
salaries but also by tax exemptions given to the families of those
who enlisted.^- The internal organization of the Uskiidar regi¬
ment was exactly the same as that of Levend Chiftlik, with the
exception that its total number was without limit. To coordinate
the activities of the two Nizamd Jedid regiments, a new post was
 created, Ojak Kethiidasi (Lieutenant of the Corps), and it was
 given to one of the Binbashis of the two regiments. Finally, the
 new regiment was given the color light blue for its jackets and
 breeches, to distinguish its men and officers from those of Levend
 Chiftlik.^® At the same time, the old barracks at Levend Chiftlik
 were repaired and expanded and a second regiment was created
 there.
   With three regiments and with large and increasing revenues.