




                          Military Reforms
                                           i

120   assuring the corps that the Sultan had no intention of violating
      their traditional rights and immunities and re-emphasizing their
      position as the most favored and important of the soldiers defend¬
      ing the Porte.'” The Sultan even went so far as to pay them the
      "accession tax” (julus bahshishi), traditionally delivered by each
      new sultan to the principal military corps but discarded by Abd
      ul-Hamid I." But all these efforts were to little avail.
        It is not known whether Selim and those around him actually
      believed they could reform the Spahis 'and Janissaries by these
      methods, but it is known that all efforts made to enforce these reg¬
      ulations were vigorously and violently opposed. The inspectors
      sent to examine the provincial fiefs had to rely on information
      supplied by the local feudal officers and men, who managed to
      conceal anything which it was not to their advantage to reveal.
      While some fiefs were seized and turned over to the Irad-i Jedid
      treasury, the vast majority of them remained in the hands of their
      previous owners, few of whom performed the military duties
      expected in return. For all practical purposes, the feudal Spahi
      cavalry did not exist as a fighting force during Selim’s reign. The
      cavalry forces used in his army came from a corps of about 10,000
      newly hired salaried Spahis maintained by the Imperial Treasury
      and by contributions of provincial notables in times of emer¬
      gency.'- Efforts to deprive Ottoman officials of fiefs held for in¬
      come alone were effectively counteracted by bribery and mutual
      cooperation.
        Nor were the Janissaries any more cooperative. They rioted in
      the streets whenever any effort was made to give them new uni¬
      forms or weapons or to provide them with instructors trained in
      the new ways. Each effort made to reduce the size of the corps by
      dismissing inactive members who were artisans or merchants
      was successfully opposed, and the number of men in the corps
      actually increased from 43,402 in 1776'” to 54,458 in 1794,'^
      55,256 in 1800,'^ 98,539 in 1806,'” and 109,791 in 1809,'^ thus
      becoming a heavy burden on the Treasury. Yet when they were
      called on to attack the independent Balkan notables and when
      they moved against the French invasion of Egypt between 1798
      and 1802, their fighting qualities proved to be just about as bad
      as they had been before 1789.'”




                         The "New Order” of Selim III-
  The Sultan’s efforts to apply similar reforms to the established     121
artillery and mortar corps were much more successful, perhaps
because they had been anticipated by similar attempts during the
two preceding decades and because these corps were less closely
tied to the interests of the Ottoman ruling class than were the
infantry and cavalry corps. In the fifteenth and sixteenth cen¬
turies, Ottoman artillery had been the most advanced in Europe.
The Ottoman cannoneers had made vital contributions to the
conquest of Istanbul and to Selim Fs successful sweep through the
Arab world. During subsequent centuries, however, the same ele¬
ments of decay which had sapped the other branches of Ottoman
society also had made the artillery corps only caricatures of their
former selves. In 1776, there were 3,258 men enrolled in the can¬
non corps and 1,482 men in its auxiliary, the cannon-wagon corps,
but only 500 of these actually reported for duty in the campaigns
against Russia during the same year.^*^ Most of the corps member¬
ships were held by Istanbul investors and officials as income-
producing property, and only a few were left to pay for artillery¬
men actually serving in the army. In addition, its equipment was
no longer equal to that used in Europe. The Ottomans remained
attached to the old Balyemez and Shahi cannons long after they
were completely outmoded by new developments in ballistics in
Europe. And even these weapons were often unusable as a result
of graft and corruption in the Imperial Cannon Foundry and Pow¬
der Works.
  Under Abd ul-Hamid I, the new-style artillery corps trained by
Baron de Tott had been increased in size from 500 to 2,500 men,
and a foundry established for them under the direction of a Scotch
renegade named Campbell, called "Ingiliz Mustafa by the Otto¬
mans. In 1783 also a French officer named Lafitte had begun a
military engineering school to produce officers for the corps, and
a rapid-fire rifle and light artillery corps was also created.^® All
of these reforms were introduced and directed by the Grand Vezir
Halil Hamid Pasha, but they had only begun when Janissary
opposition led to his deposition and execution in late 1788.^* In
the meantime the older corps, which continued to perform most of
the service of this kind in the army, had been left untouched and
unreformed.