




                          Military Reforms
                                                     i



116      The old practices by which officers failed to report vacancies,
      and collected these salaries for their own profit, were strictly
      prohibited, and investigators were constantly sent out to uncover
      violators     and inflict punishments.             Officers were specifically
      forbidden to collect the salaries or wages belonging to any indi¬
      vidual in a position in the corps other than their own, and imme¬
      diate dismissal was the punishment for any violation of this
      regulation.                                        '
         Retirement on pension (vazife\ was allowed only to active
      soldiers and officers who had served honorably and had to retire
      because of old age or infirmity, in which case the pension usually
      equaled one half of the individual’s active salary at the time of
      his retirement; if retirement was because of wounds or other in¬
      juries received in battle, he was entitled to a pension equaling the
      full amount of his active salary or even more in certain cases. In
      the mortar corps, however, the pensions were doubled, with a man
      retiring because of old age or illness receiving his full salary as
      pension, and a man retiring because of service disability receiv¬
      ing double his salary. Individuals in all corps were given bonuses
      in addition to their regular salaries and wages* in return for acts
      of heroism in battle, special services to the state, and the like,
      with special bonuses called ihbariye (information fees) provided
      for those who reported violations of any of the military regula¬
      tions.^
         These rules were repeated in the regulations decreed for each
      corps during Selim’s reign. They were general standards which
      the Porte applied to all the military units regardless of their
      specialties. In addition there were regulations which varied sub¬
      stantially according to the nature, function and past organization
      of each corps.


            Reform Regulations in Corps of the Old Army
        In the case of the Spahi cavalry corps the reform efforts,^
      which were applied mainly to the fiefs which supported them,

        *In Ottoman financial usage, a distinction was made between the "annual
      salaries,” called Sdliydne, paid to the principal officers of state, and the "wages,”
      called Mevdjib, given to lesser officials as well as to members of the salaried
      military corps. Regardless of the name, both categories usually were paid on a
      monthly basis.




                              The "New Order” of Selim III
were based primarily on the proposals submitted by Tatarjik            117
Abdullah Efendi.'* The Alay Bey (Commander) and other officers
of each feudal district (sanjak) drew up new registers of all the
the fiefs under their supervision together with the names and
descriptions of the individuals to whom they were assigned.
They then traveled around their districts to make sure that the
nominal fief holders were permanently residing on them and per¬
forming the required agricultural and administrative duties and
that they were persons who were able and willing to supply mili¬
tary service to the army when required. In addition inspectors
were sent from the Porte every three years to make sure that fief-
holders and officers alike were performing their duties and that
the commanders were really eliminating all those who violated
the regulations. If the fief-holders were not present on their fiefs
when the inspectors came or if they did not respond to calls for
their military service, they were supposed to be dismissed at
once, but the frequency with which this regulation was repeated
during Selim’s reign seems to indicate the difficulty which the
government had in enforcing it.^
  A pool of apprentices had long existed to assist the feudatories
and provide trained replacements for them when needed, but by
Selim’s time it had become little more than a catch-all for child¬
ren and relatives of the fief-holders to provide them with addi¬
tional revenue without requiring any service in return. An effort
was therefore made to revive and reorganize the apprentice sys¬
tem. The number of apprentices in each district was limited to
10 per cent of its active fief-holders, and it was stipulated that
only these apprentices could replace the feudatories when the
fiefs became vacant. Inheritance was allowed here much more
than in the salaried infantry corps. Fiefs were not supposed to be
declared vacant (and thus available for an apprentice) if the fief-
holder in question died honorably in active service and left heirs
capable of taking over his position at once. If the feudatory died
of natural causes, his heirs could not inherit his position. If he
left sons who were not of age, they could not inherit his fief, but
they were allowed to join the corps of apprentices ahead of other
applicants when they came of age.
  One of the principal causes of Ottoman failure in the war with
Austria and Russia was the insistence on the part of the feudal