




                          Military Reforms
                                           i
                                    1


124   tar men remaining would be dependent on salaries and therefore
      more obedient and disciplined than feudal men could be. By the
      time Bonneval left Ottoman service, the corps had been built up
      into six regiments of 100 men each, with approximately 300 men
      paid by salary and 300 continuing to hold their fiefs.^^ But his
      departure was the signal for a new decline and disintegration.
      De Tott’s efforts to reform them in 1783 and 1784 were only mo¬
      mentarily successful,^^ and when Selim came to the throne, they
      were almost entirely useless from 4 fnilitary point of view.
        Starting in September 1792, strenuous attempts were made to
      revive the mortar corps with the assistance and advice of Aubert
      and Cuny. New barracks, stables, and storehouses were built for
      them at Haskoy and Siitliije, on the northern shore of the Golden
      Horn in Istanbul. As was the case with the other corps, a super¬
      visor was appointed to handle financial and administrative mat¬
      ters, while the former chief, the Humbaraji Bashi, was limited to
      military affairs. In one respect the supervisor had greater power
      over the corps than similar officers in the other corps, for he was
      empowered to dismiss the corps commander without reference to
      the Imperial Council if he felt him to be inadequate for the job or
      violating the regulations of his position in some way. Thus the
      supervisor was the supreme officer and the commander (Dizdar)
      was his subordinate whereas in the other corps they commanded
      jointly.^^
        The new organization laid out for the mortar corps during the
      spring of 1793 was somewhat special by virtue of the special
      nature of its military task. The corps had 50 mortars in all and
      to each of them there were assigned teams of 9 mortar men com¬
      manded by one assistant (Halife) helped by 9 apprentices. The
      teams were organized into five companies, each composed of 191
      officers, men, and assistants, under the command of a Ser Halife.
      This organization provided a total of 450 men, 450 apprentices,
      50 Halifes and 5 Ser Halifes, with the superintendent, the com¬
      mander, and 3 subordinate corps officers bringing the total of men
      and officers to 960 in all. Whenever new cannons or mortars were
      added to the corps along with their men, new companies were
      created for them, so that the size and organization of the existing
      companies remained as they were established in the regulation.^^




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
  Because of the special skills and discipline required of members     125
of this corps, they ordinarily were not allowed to marry, regard¬
less of rank, and had to live in the barracks at all times. Salaries
and wages were higher than those paid for service in the other
corps, and the pensions were considerably better. Those members
who held fiefs were allowed to go to them only once every three
years, so that no more than one third of the men would be away
from the barracks at any one time. Special agents were appointed
by the commander to administer the fiefs.
  As was the case with the other artillery corps, most of the re¬
cruits came from Bosnia, often from members of bandit groups
who sought to better their circumstances by entering the service
of the Sultan.^^ In addition, the mortar and mine-laying corps both
received a considerable number of able recruits from the Spahi
feudal cavalrymen of Albania who had been dispossessed by the
sultan to provide revenues to the members of his Nizam-i Jedid
army.^®
  At the same time, the mortar corps’ affiliated group, the mine¬
layers corps, was subjected to similar reforms.^** Traditionally, it
was divided into two groups, one attached to the Jebejis (armor¬
ers)^” and receiving monthly salaries from the Treasury, and the
other a group based on fiefs, but both had decayed considerably
before 1792. Now the supervisor of the mortar corps was appointed
to a similar position with the mine-laying corps to supervise the
reform and end the duplication of effort between them. In 1794,
two new barracks were built for the corps in Haskoy, near those
of the mortar corps, and members were required to remain in
them at all times so that they could receive the necessary train¬
ing. The corps was divided into two groups, according to specialty,
with the first concentrating on the sciences and techniques in¬
volved in preparing and laying mines, and the second being an
engineering group in charge of the various branches of military
architecture.^^ Direction of its military and technical activities
was left to the Lagimji Bashi (head of the mine-laying corps) who
also cooperated with the supervisor in administrative and finan¬
cial functions. The corps at this time was formed primarily of men
supported by fiefs, but their number was restricted to 200, and
after that figure was reached, vacancies were retired by the Treas-