




                          Military Reforms
126   ury as soon as they became available. In addition, 50 orderlies
      were evenly divided between the mine-laying and engineering
      divisions of the corps, and given the sole right to take over the
      regular positions in the corps as they became vacant.
        If children of current or former members wished to enter the
      corps, they were allowed to do so only by serving first as orderlies
      and then advancing into the regular mine-laying corps ranks
      through the normal processes of promotion. The mine-laying
      corps members were not allowed to leave their positions or fiefs
      to their children under any circumstances.^^
        The last of the established military forces to be reformed and
      reorganized during Selim’s reign were those which garrisoned
      the forts scattered along both sides of the Bosporus. Those on the
      Anatolian side were given 500 additional men and officers, bring¬
      ing their grand total to 1,000,^^ and they were placed under the
      command of a Bosporus superintendent (Bogaz Naziri). The men
      were given considerably higher salaries than those in the regular
      infantry corps because of the constant attendance to duty re¬
      quired of all of them during both winter and summer.^^
        The forts on the Istanbul side were given a somewhat different
      organization since they were composed entirely of batteries guard¬
      ing the Black Sea entrances to the Bosporus. Their garrisons were
      tied entirely to the new corps being trained at Levend Chiftlik,'*^
      which provided both men and officers trained in the new ways."*®
        These then were the efforts which Selim made to reform the
      older corps: new commanders, organizations, methods, officers,
      and men where possible. In the artillery corps Selim was far more
      successful than in the Janissary and Spahi corps, where the
      force of resistance was too strong. Information on the fate of
      these reforms, however, is very limited. The Ottoman sources
      themselves do little more than repeat and summarize the official
      decrees without describing how they were applied. The foreign
      reports, even the secret ones sent by the foreign technicians to
      their home governments, are so vague as to be almost useless.
      Nevertheless it is clear from the fate of the Ottoman army during
      the wars in which it fought under Selim that the reforms, how¬
      ever thoroughly they were applied, had little effect on the fight¬
      ing ability of the Ottoman army as a whole. The infantry and




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
cavalry alike were just as disorderly in 1800^^ and 1807^® as they
had been earlier.



                    The Nizam-i Jedid Army
  In the long run, however much attention Selim gave to the
older corps, most of his hopes and a good portion of his energies
went into the creation of an entirely new army, the Nizam-i Jedid
or "New Order” and an independent treasury organized specifi¬
cally to support it, the Treasury of the New Revenue (Irad-i Jedid
Hazinesi). And it was in this effort that Selim was most success¬
ful.
  The nucleus of the "new army” actually came into being some
time before the Sultan knew about it or had made a definite de¬
cision to organize such a force independent of the older corps. In
late 1791, while Koja Yusuf Pasha was still in the field against
the Russians, he assembled a small number of renegades captured
in the course of the campaign. Working with a few members of
Yusuf’s personal guard, they began to train with captured Rus¬
sian weapons, using European-style exercises and maneuvers
and performed periodically in front of the Grand Vezir’s tent as
a kind of entertainment to divert the army’s leaders from their
increasingly difficult problems. At this stage, the new group was
no more than a toy, a personal caprice of the Grand Vezir. No
effort was made to force the other corps to accept or even observe
the infidel practices since such a revolutionary step had not yet
been authorized by the Sultan.^^
  When peace was concluded and the Imperial army returned to
Istanbul, the Sultan went to see the new corps perform. He was so
impressed with the massed firepower it was able to assemble
that he decided to create the new army mentioned in Yusuf’s re¬
port, with this group as its nucleus.^® In late March 1792, the
British ambassador provided a few new muskets and bayonets
for the Grand Vezir on an informal basis and asked his govern¬
ment for permission to provide additional assistance of the same
sort.®! To nian the new corps, one hundred Turks were enrolled
from the streets of Istanbul, and the German and Russian rene¬
gades brought back by the Grand Vezir became its officers and