



                          Military Reforms
118   contingents that they be allowed to return home to administer
      their fiefs during the winter months.'Under the traditional feudal
      system, it was, indeed, necessary for them at some point to collect
      the revenues they needed to maintain themselves and their suites
      in the Imperial army. As a result of this practice, much territory
      taken by successful military action against the enemy during the
      summer was lost without a fight during the winter months.
      Under the new reform policy, Selim tried to satisfy the needs of
      the feudal system without disrupting the army by decreeing that
      the feudatories no longer had the absolute right to return to their
      fiefs during the winter months; it was now to be only a privilege
      granted them by the Sultan at his pleasure. Every ten feudatories
      in the army holding lands in the same ,or neighboring districts
      were allowed to get together and choose one of their number to go
      home for a time to administer his own lands and the lands of the
      others, who continued to serve in the army.
        Special efforts were also made to secure capable and honest
      men as feudal officers. District Commanders {Alay Bey) were
      chosen for three-year terms by vote of the fief-holders in each
      district. Local and national officials were prohibited from inter¬
      fering in these elections or from collecting fees or bribes in return
      for confirming their results. To make certain that each fief pro¬
      vided revenues sufficient to support the armed contingents which
      its holder was supposed to send to the army, Selim ordered that
      fiefs whose annual revenues were less than 500 piasters be joined
      to others of the same size. Fiefs over that amount could not be
      included in such unions, so as to prevent the establishment of
      unusually large fiefs whose revenues would give their holders
      dominant power in their districts. Appointments to vacant fiefs
      were to be made only from among the apprentices of their dis¬
      tricts by the district commanders. Officials in Istanbul and pro¬
      vincial governors were specifically enjoined from attempting to
      secure the appointments for their own favorites or relatives.
        Efforts were also made to curb the practice of giving military
      fiefs to persons serving the government in Istanbul to provide
      them with revenues in addition to their salaries without requir¬
      ing them to perform the military services for which the fiefs in
      question were originally set aside. This practice had deprived the




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
state of a great deal of needed military service and at the same      119
time had made the officials in question much more independent of
the Sultan and the Grand Vezir than they would have been if
they were dependent for their maintenance on Treasury salaries
alone. About five hundred fiefs held in this way were abolished,
and only a small number was set aside to support certain palace
and scribal officials who were not given regular salaries in return
for their work. Thus an effort was made to restore the feudal sys¬
tem to the state in which it 'had operated so successfully in pre¬
vious centuries.
  Turning to the Janissary corps, the Sultan hoped that a similar
process of inspecting the currently enrolled members would re¬
duce the corps from the 50,000 men currently enrolled to less than
half that number, and that this would automatically increase the
efficiency and ability of those remaining in the corps. The pro¬
vincial governors were ordered to train men in their own entou¬
rages to provide pools of experienced replacements when needed.
Sons of current or former members were allowed to enter the
corps in preference to outsiders, but only if they were willing to
accept its duty and discipline and to devote their entire lives to
its service.*^
   Orders were also issued for the provision of new European-type
rifies and ammunition to the Janissary corps as soon as possible,
and it was hoped that they would be entirely armed with the new
equipment by the end of 1794. Each regiment was given eight
trained riflemen and eight assistants to teach the men to use the
new weapons and to lead them in campaigns.^
  Thus the government had a dual purpose —to restore the Janis¬
saries’ traditional organization while at the same time getting
them to accept new rifles and tactics. The Sultan tried various
devices to conciliate both the Spahis and the Janissaries so they
would be willing to accept the new ways. Salaries and wages were
paid on time and in full for the first time in over half a century
although efforts to make up the more than four years of arrears
which had accumulated were largely unsuccessful.® The Janis¬
sary barracks in Istanbul were rebuilt and enlarged. Various tax
farms were turned over to key officers of the corps, virtually as
bribes for their acquiescence.*^ Decrees were repeatedly issued