




                   The "New Order” of Selim III
artillery corps, it should have provided the Sultan with an effec¬         135
tive military force capable not only of meeting the enemy on
equal terms but also of protecting the Sultan and itself against
any attacks. On the occasions in which it was employed, the
Nizam-i Jedid army effectively demonstrated its superiority nver      l/
the Janissaries and the Spahis. In 1799, approximately 200 of its
men were sent by sea to Gaza, where they performed important
service in assisting its governor, Ahmed Jezzar Pasha, in his stal¬
wart defense of that fortress'against the French army of Bona-
parte.®’^ In 1800, when the British fleet blockaded the French in
Alexandria, 2,000 Nizam-i Jedid soldiers were landed along with
6,000 regular Ottoman troops, and they managed to maintain a
successful blockade against the French at Rosetta, eventually
forcing them to surrender in April 1801.®* During the next six
years the new army soldiers performed important, although some¬
what limited, service against the mountain bandits in the Balkan
and Rhodope Mountains.
  But the old corps absolutely refused to accept the new training
and weapons, and those politicians who were associated with
them deviously undermined the efforts of the European advisers.
In 1800, the British ambassador in Istanbul, Lord Elgin, reported
that "during the whole of their [the European advisers’] stay in
Turkey, a very great deal of intrigue has been successfully ex¬
erted to impede the operations of the detachment and prevent the
utility they were enabled to render this country. Every trick has
been used to disgust the officers and men. Those who were anxious
that no English land officers should be employed with the Grand
Vezir, and those who wish the power of Turkey to be kept under,
have been equally busy.”**" Similar complaints came from the
French and from others.^' As a result of the Janissaries’ refusal
to serve with the new troops in the most important campaigns
during the last decade of Selim’s rule, against the French in Egypt
and the Serbs and Russians in 1806 and 1807, the Nizam-i Jedid
troops performed only token service, and the main Ottoman army
continued to be composed primarily of the unruly and ineffective
Janissaries and Spahis, with disastrous results. *"
  General Koehler, who was the principal adviser for the regular




                          Military Reforms
136   Ottoman army during the Egyptian campaign, described it to his
      superiors in London:                  »


           As deficient as they are in all the camp duties of security
         and defense, than which nothing can be worse, so they are
         with respect to any rational system or foresight with respect to
         the plan of operations to be carried on against the enemy, so
         weak, so frivolous and childish thht an infant three years old
         would have more forecast.      ^
           They are scattered over a large extent of ground in separate
         encampments according to their own fancy. The Grand Vezir
         is exceedingly civil, has shown the greatest attention, pro¬
        vided you will talk about his fine horses, the great superiority
        of the Turks on horseback, or about his little fountain of water
        with a child’s ship in it, but directly to touch upon anything
        which relates to military operations or the enemy, he waives
        the conversation.
           What is expected from such troops, or rather mob thus com¬
        manded? Nothing but shame and disgrace, and yet they have
        fine men, excellent horses, good guns, plenty of ammunition
        and provisions and forage, and in short great abundance of
        all the materials required to constitute a formidable army,
        but they want order and system, which would not be difficult
        to establish if their principal officers were not so astonishingly
        adverse to anything tending toward it . . .
           The camp is composed of many different nations and natures
        of troops, which though properly speaking are subject to the
        same sovereign and pretending to the same religion are how¬
        ever extremely distinct as to their views and separate inter¬
        ests, jealous of each other with very little public spirit, and
        only serving for plunder or personal advantage, and have very
        little zeal when they have no immediate prospect of satisfying
        their own particular views.
          The authority of the Vezir is equally incomprehensible; an
        apparent great submission and immediate power of life and
        death over individuals, but he himself seems to stand in great
        apprehension of offending them, seems not to dare to order
        such a detachment to encamp in this or that place, nor to give