




                          Technical Reforms
148   usually entered between the ages of ten and twelve, although
      occasionally youths up to fifteen werfi admitted if they had pre¬
      viously served in one of the corps. Admission was allowed only
      as the result of special examinations administered by the school
      faculty under the supervision of the members of the Imperial
      Council and the Sheyh ul-Islam, and nepotism and favoritism
      were strictly prohibited.
        Students were divided into four one-year grades, with those of
                                                'V

      the first grade studying the lessons formerly given in the Sultan’s
      engineering school; calligraphy, spelling, writing numbers, draw¬
      ing, introduction to geometry, arithmetic, Arabic, and French.
      The second-year class studied arithmetic, geometry, and geog¬
      raphy, in addition to continuing Arabic apd French. In the third
      year, the students divided into separate classes for their special¬
      ties, and took common lessons in geography, plane trigonometry,
      algebra, surveying, the history of war, and recitation of the Koran.
      In the fourth and final year, in addition to the specialized lessons,
      common classes were given in conic mathematics, differential
      calculus, tangents, and astronomy. The students were given gov¬
      ernment salaries and rations which varied according to their
      class and distinction. They had to attend all class meetings and
      were subject to punishments ranging up to dismissal from the
      school for unexcused absences as well as for violations of the other
      regulations. Until 1801, they were given practical training in
      their specialties at training grounds near the school. After that
      time, this sort of training was given by their participation in the
      regular exercises of the cannon, mortar, and mine-laying corps.
      Students of the senior class were allowed to secure even more
      experience by accompanying the assistants when they left the
      school to perform special duties with the army.^^
        Until 1796, there were few textbooks available, and the stu¬
      dents made their own by writing down the lectures of their in¬
      structors. After that time, a press was established at the school
      under the personal direction of Abdurrahman Efendi and it
      printed textbooks needed by the students as well as translations
      of technical books made by the various members of the staff. This
      became the principal press in Turkey until a new and larger one
      was begun in Uskiidar four years later.^^




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
  From the time the school was established, its graduates who           149
did not remain to teach or assist were assured of officers’ positions
in the cannon, mortar, and mine-laying corps. The engineers were
required to continue their studies while serving in the corps, and
from time to time they returned to the school for further training
so that they would not fall behind the new developments in their
arts. Although these men were required to remain near the regi¬
ments to which they were assigned, they were not subject to the
strict marital regulations applied to the enlisted men. They also
were allowed to live with their families if they were resident
nearby and this did not interfere with their service to the corps.'^^
As far as can be made out, none of the foreign advisers and Turk¬
ish graduates of these schools were allowed to serve with the Jan¬
issaries. However, they did gradually take over most of the offi¬
cial posts in the Nizam-i Jedid army and the artillery corps and
thus provided a nucleus of well-trained, modernist, and reformist
officers to assist Selim and his successors in their efforts.^'’