




                          Technical Reforms
146      With the end of the war and the influx of western officers, it was
      possible for Selim to reopen and expand the technical schools, hut
      the number of students ready to take advantage of them was
      strictly limited. The Sultan preferred to concentrate the efforts
      of his foreign advisers in the field, to train his soldiers. It was only
      after this training was well along that Selim was willing to use at
      least some of these advisers to develop a full-fledged army engi¬
      neering school out of the old artillery sfchool, on the model of the
      long-established naval one.            v
        Essentially what Selim now hoped to do was to provide the
      army with a higher-level technical school which would give its
      officers intensive training in the theoretical and practical sides
      not only of artillery, but also of fortifica,tion, mine-laying, and
      engineering. The Sultan’s engineering and naval schools provided
      a nucleus of staff and students for the new army engineering
      school. Selim originally planned its buildings at Kagithane, near
      his summer palace at Saadabad, so that he could himself attend
      classes and exercises and follow what was being done. This idea
      was eventually abandoned because of the difficulties involved in
      establishing the school so far from the barracks and training
      grounds of the military corps with which it was to be associated.^*^
        In the summer of 1793, the new school was formally established
      as the Imperial     Land Engineering School {Muhendishane-i
      Berri-i Humayun), incorporating the old artillery school together
      with whatever educational classes had been maintained by the
      mortar and mine-laying corps. Its basic regulations were included
      with those of the mine-laying corps issued at the same time.^^ At
      first a teaching staff of five persons was provided, with one Bash
      Hoja (chief teacher) and four teaching assistants. Instruction on a
      small scale began with forty students in special rooms in the mor¬
      tar corps barracks at Haskdy while work also began on an entirely
      new building for it in the vicinity. The final regulation for the
      organization and curriculum of the school was issued only in
      1795, when the new building was opened; it expanded gradually
      thereafter, with the number of instructors being raised to four
      and the students to eighty during the course of 1797.2^
        The chief teacher was for all practical purposes the principal of
      the school, under the general control of the supervisor of the three




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
artillery corps. He was responsible for making appointments of        147
teachers, assistants, and students, for preparing and enforcing
the programs of class instruction, and for supervising the activi¬
ties of students and teachers alike. From 1793 to 1800, this vital
post was held by Abdurrahman Efendi, an intellectual and edu¬
cational leader of the time,^^ and for the rest of Selim’s reign it
was under the capable direction of Hiiseyin Rifki Efendi, who
managed to retain this post until 1815.-*'’
  When the school first opehed and Abdurrahman Efendi was the
only regular instructor, a good deal of the teaching was done by
his four assistants. In addition a number of teachers came from
the naval school once a week, and the students of the army school
went to the naval school twice a week to take advantage of its
superior equipment and shops. After 1795, when the army school
secured its own building and equipment, and especially after
1797 when its teaching staff was enlarged, the connection be¬
tween the two schools became less direct although they were com¬
bined administratively for a short time, between 1803 and 1805.'^’
  The assistants who helped the instructors were chosen from the
best graduates of the school although on occasion expert persons
coming from outside were appointed if they were able to pass
special examinations and suitable school graduates were not
available to fill them. Assistants who showed special ability and
promise were promoted to be instructors when vacancies occurred,
but most of them were sent to the three artillery corps as officers
after serving four or five years in the school. While serving as
assistants, they were required to continue their studies under the
direction of those whom they assisted and had to pass periodic
examinations in order to retain their posts and advance in the
army hierarchy. During this time they also were given practical
experience through special missions with the army in times of
war, preparing batteries, mines, and the like, while securing the
combat training they needed.
  Originally provision was made for forty students (Shakirdan),
 of whom ten were assigned to specialize in each of the four
 branches of the school: artillery, fortification, mine-laying and
 engineering. In 1798, the student body was doubled, with the stu¬
 dents in a 20-10-30-20 ratio among the four specialties. Students