




                         Technical Reforms
142   led to the same end.*^ As a result, once the war with France was
      concluded in 1802 neither the Ottomans nor their European
      "friends” were overanxious for a resumption of this sort of as¬
      sistance, and only a few European technicians served at Istanbul
      during the last five years of Selim’s reign. As a result of these
      difficulties, although the Ottoman arms factories greatly improved
      their product in both quantity and quality over that produced
      before 1794, the results were never as'outstanding as was hoped
      for at the start.v
         The Manufacture of Gunpowder. Without a doubt, the most
      successful of Selim’s technical efforts was that aimed at securing
      better gunpowder for new and old weapons alike. Before 1789,
      Ottoman gunpowder was manufactured,at the Imperial Powder
      Works {Baruthane-i Amire) at Bakirkoy (built 1698), just north
      of Istanbul on the Sea of Marmara, and at provincial works located
      at Salonika, Galipoli, Baghdad, Cairo, Belgrade, and Izmir. Each
      of these factories was under the direction of an independent officer,
      who purchased his position as a tax farm, or a retired officer of
      the Porte who was given this job as a kind of pension reward for
      previous service. Invariably the directors knew nothing about
      the manufacture of gunpowder, and for the most part they re¬
      mained in Istanbul and did nothing to supervise the factory op¬
      erations. They treated the factories principally as means of en¬
      riching themselves and diverted to their own profit most of the
      money provided for equipment and supplies. As a result, the
      powder was of extremely bad quality. The saltpeter, charcoal,
      and sulphur required for gunpowder were still mixed with the
      sixteenth-century formula of 6-1-1, with 8 okkes* of materials
      producing 7 of powder. Even when manufactured properly this
      mixture produced an extremely unstable compound which ex¬
      ploded more as the result of changes of weather, humidity, and
      precipitation than it did in response to the urgings of a lighted
      fuse. The addition of dirt and other base substances by dishonest
      factory directors only heightened this tendency. As a result, even
      when the gunpowder did explode in the cannons and rifles, the
      explosive force was either so weak that the ball or bullet would

          " The okke, or vakiyye (also called kiyye), was an Ottoman unit of weight equal
      to 400 dirhems or 2.83 pounds. The exact equivalent varied according to the ma¬
      terial being weighed and the place.




                              The "New Order” of Selim III
not go as far as it was supposed to or so violent that the weapons          143
themselves were blown apart. In addition no more than 3,000
kantars** of even this poor-quality gunpowder were produced
annually for the Ottoman army,l® an amount considerably below
its regular needs.
  Since the beginning of the eighteenth century Europe had
produced a far more stable and dependable type of powder from
a new compound mixed in the proportions of 75-15-10.'^ The
Ottomans had not adopted this ratio for their own manufactures,
but since 1768 they had recognized its superiority and had im¬
ported it in small amounts. Since the importation of this sort of
powder in sizable quantities was extremely expensive and un¬
reliable, Selim was determined to manufacture it in Turkey if
at all possible. In 1790 a Venetian traveler managed to convince
the Sultan that he was an expert in the modern techniques of
making gunpowder, and he was given a large grant from the Im¬
perial Treasury to build a factory for that purpose at San Stefano.
Having stolen all the money for himself without even beginning
the work he had contracted for, he was arrested and imprisoned in
January 1791.^*^ Selim’s first effort to manufacture gunpowder
was stillborn. No new efforts were made until the summer of
1794, when an attempt was made to reorganize and modernize
the existing powder works. The works at Bakirkoy, Galipoli, and
Salonika were placed under the direction of a single supervisor,
Tevkii Ali Raik Efendi,'® who was ordered to reorganize the
factories and their staffs and bring in new equipment from Europe
so that at least 5,000 kantars of high-quality European-type
powder could be manufactured every year. The supervisor was
put under a strict system of controls so that he could not purchase
inferior qualities or quantities of the raw material and pocket
the difference for himself as others had in the past.^'’
  Raik Efendi proved to be no more capable or honest than his
predecessors, and little was done to implement these regulations
until April 1795, when he was replaced by the former chief treas¬
urer of the empire and governor of Jidda, Mehmed Sherif Efendi.
Under his direction, and with the assistance of several British
gunpowder experts, the twenty old wheels at Bakirkoy were re-