




                            Technical Reforms
                     XII. Revival of
                   the Ottoman Navy




                                       V




With the heartland of the empire surrounded by water, with
great forests able to provide wood and masts in abundance, with
numerous fine ports on every coast, and with thousands of sub¬
jects whose lives and livelihoods were intimately tied to the sea,
the Ottoman Empire had all the attributes needed for maritime
greatness. In the sixteenth century, under the successive com¬
mands of Hayruddin Barbarossa and Turgut Reis, the Ottoman
navy fully exploited these advantages, and Ottoman naval su¬
premacy was accepted throughout the Mediterranean area. Even
after the Battle of Lepanto, when the elements of decay which
gnawed away the great institutions of Ottoman life also affected
the navy, the Ottomans were still able to maintain at least a
semblance of their old position in the eastern Mediterranean, if
for no other reason than the similar decline of their traditional
naval enemy, the Republic of Venice. It was only the long period
of peace during the second and third quarters of the eighteenth
century which left the Ottoman navy idle and led to its rapid
disintegration in the years that followed.
  As was the case with the other institutions of the empire, decay
in the navy began at the top, in this case the great Arsenal of
Istanbul, which was its military, administrative, and financial
center, as well as the source of most of its ships and their principal
anchorage. Negligence and corruption in its adminstration, when        151
combined with the stifling effects of the half century of peace
after 1718, reduced it to almost complete impotence by the end
of the century. Most of its positions were held as sources of extra
revenue by persons serving elsewhere in the government. With¬
out the stimulus of active direction or military necessity, its
officers were able to divert more and more of its resources to
their own benefit. The few ships which were built and launched
at this time, as well as aM the older ships, were so stripped of
essential maintenance and supplies that they often sank within
a stone’s throw of/their docks.
  Without the addition of significant numbers of new ships, the
forms and lines of the fleet remained little altered from those of
the seventeenth century, completely ignoring the important
changes which had been made in European shipbuilding since
that time. The ships of the Ottoman fleet at the end of the eight¬
eenth century were invariably massive and bulky, with exces¬
sively high poops, superstructures, and riggings, almost as wide
as they were long, and with unusually deep drafts which denied
them access to any but the deepest harbors. These ships were
extremely difficult to maneuver in the ordinary course of sailing,
let alone in battle, and were prone to capsize as the result of sud¬
den movements by inexperienced hands during storms or battles.
In addition the ships were structurally unsound: excessive dis¬
tances between their principal beams caused them to break up
entirely during violent storms; the use of soft wood, because
of its finer appearance, and the failure to apply caulking regu¬
larly between the underwater planks caused them to be unusu¬
ally porous and to ship water almost continuously.
   Nor were they better manned. Corruption, negligence, and
inefficiency among their commanders were inevitable results of
conditions in the Arsenal. The captains and other officers pur¬
chased their positions for profit and obtained it by depriving their
men and ships of even the meager moneys which the Treasury
provided for them. Needed repairs were avoided, and the men
were often left without pay and adequate rations. Captains re¬
duced the actual complements of their ships far below those es¬
tablished by law by failing to report deaths, by discharging many