

  **The kantar was an Ottoman unit of weight which normally came to 56.41
kilograms and was divided into 44 okkes.




                           Technical Reforms
144   modeled and five new ones were added, and within a year the
      previous annual production of 1,500 kantars of poor-quality
      powder was replaced by twice as much of a much better quality.^'
      Similar reforms were made in the powder works at Galipoli and
      Salonika, which at this time were used primarily to supply the
      gunpowder needs of the Ottoman Mediterranean fleet.
        In addition Sherif Efendi soon discovered that it was impos¬
      sible to make fine powder of constant qiiality so long as the ma¬
      chines and wheels in the factories Were moved by animal power,
      which was quite variable. Water power was far more suitable in
      all respects, but the Bakirkoy factory was not located anywhere
      near streams which could be used to move the wheels in the de¬
      sired manner. As a result of these considerations, he began to
      search for a new and more suitable location — a place far enough
      away from settled communities so that it would not endanger
      them yet close enough to a running stream for power and to the
      Sea of Marmara for both supplies and products to be transported
      easily. After a long search, an ideal location was found at Azadli,
      further west on the shore of the Sea of Marmara, immediately
      north of Kuchiik Chekmeje lake and village near the Karimburgaz
      caves. Under the management of an Armenian artisan named
      Erakil Efendi, a huge new powder works was built here during
      the spring of 1794. Its wheels and machines were moved entirely
      by water supplied by canals built between the factory and the
      nearby stream.It was so successful that after 1797 the old Im¬
      perial powder works at Bakirkoy was used only to store raw
      materials and finished products, while those at Galipoli, Salo¬
      nika, and Izmir were closed entirely,^'* and the Porte was com¬
      pletely relieved of the necessity of purchasing gunpowder abroad.
      Consequently, depending on the extent that the Ottoman mili¬
      tary corps could be provided with modern cannons and rifles,
      ammunition for both was available after 1795 in sufficient quan¬
      tities to assure their proper use.



                            Technical Schools
        In addition to reorganizing the military corps and modernizing
      their weapons, Selim and his ministers also gave a great deal of




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
attention to educating their officers in the new techniques and          145
sciences of war so that they could eventually take over direction
from the foreign advisers who had to be relied on at the start.
  The engineering schools which had been developed in Turkey
during the eighteenth century were intimately associated with
the military services whose officers they trained. The schools of
naval engineering (Muhendishane-i Bahri-i Humayun) and artil¬
lery {Topji Mektebi), founded in the years following the defeat at
Cheshme, had introduced western military sciences and tech¬
niques into Turkey on a relatively large scale for the first time.
They had been limited in scope, mainly emphasizing artillery.
They had little to do with the arts of fortification, laying siege,
navigation, and the like, which also were essential elements of
modern armies and navies, and they went little beyond the prac¬
tical techniques involved to their scientific bases. In addition, they
depended primarily on French experts and teachers, and when
these were withdrawn by Louis XVI in 1788, the schools fell into
a rapid eclipse. From this experience, and from the renewed
defeats suffered in the wars of 1787 to 1792, Selim learned to his
sorrow that in order for reforms to be effective, they had to encom¬
pass all the military arts, not just those shown most inferior in
previous campaigns, and that it was very dangerous to rely on
the assistance of a single European power for technical develop¬
ments of this kind. Both these lessons bore fruit in the years
after 1792. The only technical schools which Selim was able to
continue during the war, although on a reduced basis, were the
naval engineering school and a small new engineering school
established by the Sultan {Muhendishane-i Sultani) in Eyiib to
train some of his young servants and companions in the elements
 of arithmetic and geometry, both to provide them with the basic
 education they needed to aid his reform efforts and to prepare at
 least some of them for the higher technical schools which he was
 planning to reopen after the war. Most of the teachers in the new
 school were trained in a small engineering school maintained at
 Kagithane for a short time in the 1780s by Grand Vezir Halil
 Hamid Pasha, and many of its graduates went on to teach in the
 new schools subsequently established by Selim and his succes¬
 sors.^'"^