




                     Revival of the Ottoman Navy
152   of their men at the most convenient ports, and by entering the
      names of nonexistent persons in their places in order to collect
      their salaries and rations.
         Even those few sailors who remained to man the ships were
       unable to perform their tasks adequately because of the ignorance
      and lack of ability of their officers. Since captains and other offi¬
      cers were picked according to the amount of money they could
      pay rather than according to their ability, they often had very
      little knowledge of the tasks they were supposed to perform. Few
      knew more than the most elementary essentials of seamanship
      and navigation. The Greeks and North Africans employed to
      guide the ships across the seas were themselves usually ignorant
      of anything more technical than what they acquired by practical
      experience in navigation. Often there was not a single man on
      board who could determine position and course by celestial read¬
      ings. Even at the very end of the eighteenth century, there were
      many Ottoman ships that had to keep in sight of land in order to
      find their way. The erratic and disorganized maneuvers of the
      ships composing the squadrons of the fleet were inevitable causes
      of defeats, founderings, and abandonments. Few of the sailors
      were experienced or capable. The poor pay and conditions caused
      by corrupt captains led the best seamen to avoid service whenever
      they could. Most of the men recruited to sail the ships were inex¬
      perienced peasants and vagabonds impressed by force whenever
      the fleet was ready to leave. Many of them were the worst sorts of
      thieves, murderers, and ruffians, who were incapable of absorbing
      instruction and accepting discipline even if these had been ap¬
      plied as required. The consequent disorderliness of Ottoman
      crews was well known throughout the Mediterranean. Even in
      Istanbul itself, the concentration of more than a few ships in the
      harbor was sufficient reason for most of its inhabitants to close
      their shops and retire to their homes in fear of robbery and mur¬
      der at the hands of the crews. Since the fleet, like the army, was
      disbanded and the men dispersed during the winter months, it
      was impossible for any sort of permanent, trained, and experi¬
      enced body of sailors to be built up and maintained.’
        Nor was this all. Conditions aboard ship were chaotic. Huge
      areas were set aside for the captains and chief officers, conse-




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
quently most of the men had to sleep on deck or in the hold. The          153
officers and men were divided into many small food messes, each
of which kept and cooked its own food and maintained its own
kitchens and dining areas for this purpose. The ships were there¬
fore filled with small shacks along all the decks and corridors set
aside for this purpose, as well as with shops maintained by pri¬
vate merchants who sold articles to the men. Little effort was
made to insulate the wooden beams of the ships from the stoves of
the crews, and as a result ifiore ships were lost as a result of inter¬
nal fire than from any other cause. Crew members of various na¬
tionalities and religions formed themselves into violently hostile
groups whose efforts to settle grievances and arguments by organ¬
ized actions often left their ships in utter anarchy. In addition, as
in the army, each ship was armed with a miscellaneous assort¬
ment of cannons of various dimensions and calibers requiring
shot and powder of different sizes and quantities, and the effort to
match cannon and shot often consumed the bulk of the men’s
energies during the course of their battles. Often the guns were
placed on the decks with no regard at all for their weight and
effect on the ship’s sailing qualities and stability, and frequent
groundings and capsizings resulted from this fact alone.^
  In sum, neglect and corruption, incapable officers and men,
poorly designed and built ships, and disorder and anarchy aboard
them caused the Ottoman fleet in every way to mirror the inter¬
nal condition of the empire which it was intended to defend.
  Eighteenth-century Naval Reforms. Selim was not the first
eighteenth-century Ottoman monarch to make an attempt to
correct the situation. The disastrous defeat at Cheshme (1770),
in which almost the entire Ottoman fleet was destroyed by a
small Russian squadron sent to the Mediterranean from its base
in the Baltic, had stimulated a series of naval reforms directed
by the only genuine Ottoman hero to emerge from that affair,
Gazi Hasan Pasha, who served as Grand Admiral of the fleet
during most of the subsequent years until shortly after Selim’s
accession.^ Efforts were made to correct the principal causes of
decay. Under the guidance of two French naval architects, LeRoy
and Durest,^ new ships were built on modern lines. Inefficient and
absentee captains were summarily dismissed. Action was taken