




                     Revival of the Ottoman Navy
154   to establish a corps of regular, salaried, disciplined, and trained
      sailors, and barracks were built forxthem at the Arsenal. The
      impressment of inexperienced ruffians and vagabonds was re¬
      stricted although not entirely eliminated. In 1773, the Grand
      Vezir, Halil Hamid Pasha, assigned Baron de Tott, an English
      convert, Campbell Mustafa Agha, and a Frenchman, Karmoran,
      to set up a new mathematics school {Mekteb-i Riyaziye) at Okmey-
      dan to provide technical training to yPunger naval officers.® In
      1776, this developed into an engineering school (Hendese Odasi),
      which was located in the Arsenal, with one instructor, two assist¬
      ants, and ten students. The first instructor was Gazi Hasan Pasha
      himself. In 1783, it was given a new building next to the Jamialti
      mosque and expanded into a full-fledged nqval engineering school
      with foreign and native teachers instructing officers and poten¬
      tial officers of the fleet in the sciences and techniques of their
      trade.®
        As a result of these efforts, some advances were made. In 1784,
      the Ottoman fleet had twenty-two ships of the line and fifteen
      frigates, of which only nine were considered to be in poor condition
      by a French observer of the time.’’ These physical improvements
      were not accompanied by a similar improvement in the men ap¬
      pointed to serve the ships, however. Only a small number of offi¬
      cers attended the new schools. Appointments continued to be
      made in return for bribes and in disregard of ability despite all
      the efforts of the Grand Admiral. Conditions aboard the ships
      remained about as bad as they had ever been, and the few able
      officers trained by Hasan Pasha were frustrated and driven to
      despair by their complete inability to alter the situation. Gazi
      Hasan Pasha himself by now had become old and, according to
      the historian Asim, had built up a large fortune for himself by
      accepting bribes in return for appointments, thus returning to the
      practices he had earlier attempted to end. How much the fleet had
      declined was aptly demonstrated by its fate in 1791 at the hands
      of a Russian Black Sea fleet which itself was newly created and
      hampered by similar conditions, although on a smaller scale.
        In 1789, Gazi Hasan Pasha was replaced by Giritli Huseyin
      Pasha, but the demands of war and the ineptitude of the entire
      officer corps gave little opportunity for change. With the end of




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
the war, however, Hiiseyin was replaced as Grand Admiral by            155
the far more energetic Kiichiik Hiiseyin Pasha.® With the assist¬
ance of the Sultan’s boyhood companion and private envoy to
France, Ishak Bey,® he managed to push through a series of radi¬
cal and far-reaching reforms in the Arsenal, the fleet, and the
system by which officers and men were appointed and educated,
all of which completely revolutionized the fleet in a way that
Selim was never able to do with his land forces.
  In late 1791, Selim ordei'ed that only able men be appointed as
captains and that their salaries be increased to compensate them
more fully for their responsibilities and end the need for bribery.
Then starting in July 1792, a series of decrees was issued which
entirely reorganized the naval service. To attract and retain
knowledgeable officers of high quality, a regular hierarchy was
established, with appointments and promotions based on experi¬
ence and ability rather than bribery and nepotism. When vacan¬
cies occurred in senior posts, promotions were given to the officers
holding those posts immediately below them in the hierarchy,
the post of admiral going to the vice admiral (Patrone), the post of
vice admiral to the commander of the port of Istanbul {Liman
Reisi), the post of port commander to the rear admiral (Riyale),
and so on down the line. The salaries of officers and men alike
were doubled. In addition the previous practice of lowering the
officers’ salaries to almost nothing while they were in port was
changed to payment of a sum equal to one-half their salaries
when they were on active duty. Pensions equal to one-third their
active-duty salaries were provided for those who retired because
of old age, and to one-half or more if they retired because of serv¬
ice-acquired disability.*®
  Regulations were introduced in order to prevent the captains
from using the food and equipment assigned to their ships for
their own profit. Each captain had to give detailed receipts to the
Arsenal and port commander for all food and equipment on board
before every cruise. The men and officers were required to sign
statements for everything used or lost during the voyage, at the
end of which the vessel was examined once again, and the cap¬
tains were required to pay personally for anything which was not
accounted for in some way. The captains were admonished to do