




                        The "New Order” of Selim III
   them the least interruption or inconvenience, is obliged to use    137
   the most gentleness and leniency towards them to prevail
   upon them to do anything of the most trifling nature and to
   prevent their entirely abandoning him . .
                                                             #

  In 1807, when the opposition of the vested interests finally led
to open revolt against Selim, the new army was almost completely
ineffective in defending its master and itself against the common
enemy. The reasons for this failure to use the Nizam-i Jedid
army, as well as, indeed, the failure of Selim’s entire reform pro¬
gram, will be examined in subsequent chapters.




                          Military Reforms
              XL Technical Reforms




                                   \




Up to now we have been dealing with changes in the direction
and organization of the military establishment and improvements
in the training and discipline of its men. But such reforms, how¬
ever successful they were in themselves, could have been really
effective only if they were accompanied by even more drastic
improvements in the weapons and equipment provided for the
use of these men. The disorganization and inefficiency of the
established Ottoman military corps had been compounded by an
inferiority of arms which had become increasingly more serious
since the end of the seventeenth century, when Europe had begun
to develop the science of arms manufacture on a large scale. In the
West the awkward and heavy muskets with their sputtering and
inefficient firing pins, had long since been replaced by light and
mobile rifles with flintlock firing systems, which could be carried
easily both by horsemen and infantrymen and which could be
fired regardless of the weather. The old ponderous and awkward
cannons, of use only in attacking and defending fortresses and
much too heavy to be used in large numbers on warships or on
the battlefield, were likewise replaced by much lighter and more
mobile instruments. Changes in the compound ratios of salt¬
peter, charcoal, and sulphur used to make the gunpowder em¬
ployed in these weapons made it far more stable and dependable
than that previously employed. Similar developments in the alloy        139
of the metals used in these weapons and in the arts of ballistics
contributed even further to the vast superiority of the modern
weapons of Europe over the older ones still used by the Ottoman
army at the end of the eighteenth century.*
  In fact the isolation of the Ottoman ruling class from Europe,
its inherent conservatism and pride, its scorn of all things infidel,
its continued worship of everything that had brought the Otto¬
mans greatness in the past, prevented it from accepting the new
weapons. The repeated demands of the few European techni¬
cians who, for one reason or another, were employed in the army
during the eighteenth century had fallen on deaf ears for the
most part. Worse yet, the old-style weapons still used by Ottoman
soldiers and sailors at the end of the eighteenth century were
poor imitations of those of the past. The anarchy which had in¬
fected the military organization had spread to the factories. As a
result the weapons were of extremely poor quality, with the metal
badly forged and very brittle, the gunpowder filled with impuri¬
ties and, in consequence, highly erratic, the cannons and muskets
easily breakable and of varying dimensions, and the bullets and
bombs of various sizes and qualities.^ As late as 1793, a French
observer, B. Jumelin, reported to the French Foreign Ministry
that "until today, the Turks have founded only bronze cannon and
their army and navy have no other. Their foundries and their
forges are pitiful. Their projectiles are older than their cannons,
and their artillery men are good enough only to use such equip¬
ment.”** Under such conditions, even the most modern military
organizations, kept under the tightest discipline and training,
would have had little success, and Selim seems to have fully
realized this.^
  To secure modern weapons and ammunition for all the armed
forces, importation from Europe was simply not enough. Com¬
munications were too slow and too likely to be severed or inter¬
rupted in wartime. It was obvious that factories had to be built
within the empire to make the new army and navy relatively
independent of foreign sources. For this it was necessary to sum¬
mon European experts to direct the new factories and instruct
the Ottoman officers and soldiers in the manufacture and use of
the new weapons.