




                      Revival of the Ottoman Navy
hierarchy, with promotions based almost entirely on seniority.
Salaries were raised considerably over the amounts set in 1795,
and the captains’ salaries in port were increased from one-half
to two-thirds of their active campaign pay.
  When the post of vice-admiral of the Imperial fleet (Kapudane-i
Hiimayun) was vacated, the commander of the port of Istanbul
was supposed to All it, and everyone else moved up one notch.
When there was a vacancy among the captains, it was supposed
to be filled by the executive officer {^ash'Reis) on the same ship,
with preference given to the former if they came out equally well
in their examinations. When the post of Bash Reis was vacated,
it could be filled either by the second or third Reis or by an expert
sailor in the same crew, whichever man did best in the examina¬
tion. Only if none of these proved capable of filling the post in
question, could officers and men on other ships be considered.
While the fleet was in port, an officer called Lonja Bashi (club
chief) were appointed to make sure that its officers and sailors
were properly dressed at all times and to prevent persons not in
the fleet from claiming its rights and privileges.In addition, a
regular corps of enlisted salaried naval riflemen was established
on the model of the Nizam-i Jedid corps to serve on the ships of
the fleet as marines. In previous campaigns, such men had been
assigned from the regular land corps, and in particular from the
Nizam-i Jedid army, but they had proven to be unsuitable for
regular sea service because of their unfamiliarity with its special
conditions and needs. The new naval rifle corps was given organi¬
zation, discipline, and training very similar to those of the
Nizam-i Jedid army, but changes were made so that they could
fit in with the existing naval organization and the unique condi¬
tions at sea. A corps of 1,000 men was established in two regi¬
ments of 500 men and officers each. The chief officer of the corps
was called the Tufenkji Kapudani (rifle captain), with each regi¬
ment commanded by two of his assistants {Tufenkji Kapudani
Mulazimi) and divided into ten companies of 45 men each. All
men who entered the corps had to serve first as ordinary riflemen,
and they were allowed to rise through the ranks after demon¬
strating their ability through service and examinations. The
wages and salaries of the corps were the same as those provided




                   The "New Order” of Selim III
in the Nizam-i Jedid corps. These men and officers were also            165
trained in the regular naval skills of seamanship and navigation
so they could handle their ships when required. As a result, if
they wished, they were allowed to transfer to the active branch
of naval service and to rise as high as they could.'**
  Efforts were also made to improve naval medicine. In the past,
so-called doctors had been hired to accompany the ships and do
what they could for the men, but few of them had any training
in medicine, and they kneW nothing aside from what they could
learn from experience. In general their efforts were of little value,
and once a man was wounded, there was little chance of his re¬
covering. In 1806, a full-fledged medical school was established
at the Arsenal. A chief doctor {Hekim Bashi) and chief surgeon
(Jerrah Bashi!Ser Jerrah) were appointed to direct the education
of doctors and surgeons and their assignment and service with the
fleet.^^ Students were taken into the hospital for the first time in
late 1806, with the hope that they would be trained in sufficient
numbers so that each ship could be given at least one doctor and
one surgeon. Students there were given training in both medicine
and surgery. In their third year, they were supposed to be sent
out with the fleet to obtain experience under fire and to assist the
regular ships doctors. Students were required to serve the state
at least four years after graduation in order to pay back the cost
of their education. If they chose to enter private practice after
completing their terms of service, the chief doctors and surgeons
supplied them with diplomas (ijaze), indicating the length of
their training and service, and these were confirmed by special
decrees of the Imperial Council issued upon application by the
minister of the navy.
 European medical books were translated into Turkish by mem¬
bers of the staff. Instruments and books were purchased for the
school from Europe with the assistance of the various European
embassies in the capital, and a number of European medical
journals were secured for its library. Each of the medical students
was required to serve at least one day and night per week in the
public hospital (Bimarhane) of Istanbul as well as in the Arsenal
hospital. A special hospital was built in an isolated section of the
Arsenal to be used for treating infectious diseases, in particular