




                           The "New Order” of Selim III
office, and three each for the Riius and Rise departments. Prefer¬     173
ence was given to applicants with previous experience, but ex¬
aminations were required for all in place of the recommendations
which had formerly enabled ministers and notables to get their
own favorites and relatives enrolled. In 1797, the number of new
students who could be enrolled each year was doubled to twenty-
four because of an urgent need for them. Of these, twelve were
assigned to the Divan offices each year and six each to the Riius
and Rise departments. The section in charge of keeping the
Miihimme registers of the Imperial Council was separated from
the Beylikji department and made into an independent division,
with fifteen scribes assigned to its service. Each of these was
allowed one apprentice and one student appointed from among
scribes who had performed previous service in other departments.
The Mektubi bureau of the Amedi department, which cared for
the Grand Vezir’s correspondence, was limited to forty scribes
and thirty apprentices and students, but children of members
were allowed to serve as apprentices without regard to these
limits. In the other parts of the Amedi department, the number of
scribes was cut to six and total number of apprentices and stu¬
dents was also cut to six, all coming from service in the other
departments of government.
  New regulations were also introduced concerning the service
and compensation of scribes and apprentices. Compensation was
provided for most of them from fiefs still attached to their depart-
ments.^® The administration of the fiefs was assigned to special
agents appointed by the grand vezirs so that the scribes them¬
selves would be entirely free to perform their duties at all times.
An effort also was made to restore the standards of scribal skill
and calligraphy. Scribes were required to write the various docu¬
ments and registers in the proper scripts and according to the
traditional methods, with the traditional forms and phraseologies,
and the new tendencies toward individualistic and careless writ¬
ing and expression were sternly suppressed under threat of heavy
penalties. Scribes were also cautioned time and again to make
certain that the facts presented in petitions to the Imperial
Council and the Grand Vezir were not incorporated intact into
the resulting Imperial orders unless they were verified by investi-




            Administratiue, Economic, and Social Reforms
                                        %



174   gation. They were also ordered to refuse bribes offered in return
      for the incorporation of such false information in official docu¬
      ments and to ascertain that they were within the powers and au¬
      thority of their particular departments when they issued admini¬
      strative decrees and regulations.^^
        Ordinarily, vacated scribal posts were supposed to be given to
      the most qualified of the apprentices and students in the depart¬
      ments concerned, but Selim made various modifications in this
      rule in order to improve the morale of the scribes and make them
      much more amenable to his administrative reforms. Scribes were
      allowed to bequeath their posts and the attached fiefs to their
      sons if they were qualified and willing to perform their duties.
      Only if such heirs were not available were, the posts in question
      declared vacant and awarded to students and apprentices. Those
      sons and heirs of dead scribes who were minors were not allowed
      to assume their fathers’ posts and fiefs, but provisions were made
      for them to serve as assistants of fief-holders in Anatolia until
      they reached their majority and could become apprentices in
      their fathers’ departments.^^
        As a result of these efforts, the number of scribes, apprentices,
      and students serving in the offices of the Porte was reduced from
      over 200 in 1789 to 110 in the spring of 1798,^“* and the efficiency
      and standards of the departments were improved enormously.-^
        Similar regulations were issued in the departments of the
      Treasury. The number of scribes, students, and apprentices serv¬
      ing in its various branches was reduced from 170 to 60, with
      strict entrance examinations and work regulations restoring a
      great deal of the Treasury’s old standards and efficiency.^® Noth¬
      ing was done to modernize its methods, however, and much of the
      work which was accomplished was offset by the creation of the
      new Irad-i Jedid treasury. Although it operated in a much more
      modern fashion, using European accounting principles and the
      like, and while it attracted many of the best scribes of the Imperial
      Treasury because of the higher salaries which it offered, the
      resulting duplication of effort and overlapping of authority, plus
      the failure to distinguish exactly between the revenues and ex¬
      penditures assigned to each of the two treasuries, created new
      confusion and inefficiencies and doubled the opportunities for
      theft and misrule.