




                      The "New Order” of Selim III
Syria, Crete, Rumelia, Serbia, Bosnia, the Morea, and the Aegean       169
Islands. However, Kars, Marash, and Adana at this time were
relatively poor provinces, which could not produce sufficient
revenues to support separate vezirs. Mosul was traditionally
given to whoever was governor of Tripoli, and the provinces of
Shehrizor and Basra were reserved for the governor of Baghdad.
Moreover, much of the land belonging to the provinces of Belgrade
and Vidin had been lost to the enemy in the last war, so these
positions too were no longer sufficient for vezirs. This left only
twenty regular provinces still producing enough revenue for a
uezir-governor to/ maintain himself and his suite. By Selim’s
time, however, there were over thirty-five men having the rank
of vezir. So that they would be satisfied, they were given jobs
ordinarily going to persons with the next lower administrative
rank of beylerbey, and so on down the line, the general administra¬
tive hierarchy thus being upset.
  Selim’s solution was to order the number of vezirs drastically
cut —no more than twenty-three vezirs were allowed at one time,
with three of them serving the Sultan as Grand Vezir and sub¬
ordinates and the remaining twenty serving as governors. No
vezir thereafter was to be allowed to hold any job not specifically
set aside for a person of his rank, and care was to be taken that
only experienced and intelligent persons were appointed as vezirs,
preferably those who had demonstrated their merit by previous
service in lower ranks.^
  Detailed regulations were issued to reorganize fees and pay¬
ments required from officials in return for their appointments
and the profits received from their positions. The principal gifts
of this kind by Selim’s time were the Yillik-i Humayun (annual
Imperial payment), given by most officials to the Sultan and mem¬
bers of his family every year at the beginning of Ramazan, Idiye
(holiday) payments given by subordinates to superiors in the
bureau of the Treasury and the Grand Vezir’s office at the same
time, and Iftariye gifts of watches provided for members of the
Ulema by the Grand Vezir shortly before the close of Ramazan
each year. The multiplicity of gifts which each official was obliged
to provide proved to be an extremely heavy burden far beyond the
ability of their regular salaries to satisfy, and so they were




            Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms
                                           1


170     forced to use their positions for personal profit, even in cases
        where they did not wish to do so.^ Seliip hoped that by regulating
        and limiting these gifts, he would relieve his officials of the neces¬
        sity and desire to steal and thus provide the key to restoring
        equilibrium and order to the traditional administrative system.
        In 1795, the gifts in kind were abolished and replaced by estab¬
        lished cash sums, which were raised or lowered according to the
        annual revenues of each official. The annual Imperial payments
        were now required only from offiicial^ who could afford them and
        then only on a very restricted basis.®
          Efforts also were made to increase the power and prestige of
      ^the provincial governors [vali] so that they would be much better
        able to resist the efforts of the local notables to gain independence
        from Ottoman authority and carry out their obligations and
        duties. To accomplish this, Selim ordered that their terms be
        increased from one to three or five years. During a term they
        could not be dismissed unless they were convicted of crimes con¬
        nected with their official activities. In addition Selim provided
        that if provincial governors were found to have ruled well, their
        terms could be extended indefinitely so that state and subjects
        alike would benefit from continuity and good rule.
          The Sultan also issued various regulations to lessen the burden
        imposed on his subjects by officials traveling through the empire.
        Every official had the right to impose the cost of his food and
        lodging on the inhabitants of the villages through which he
        passed. The empire was filled with governors and their assis¬
        tants moving back and forth, using this right as a means of in¬
        flicting heavy charges on the hapless people living along their
        routes. Selim hoped that this source of tyranny might be elimi¬
        nated by strictly defining the charges which could be levied and
        by reducing the number of officials traveling on official business.
        In late 1796, he instituted the first part of this program by de¬
        creeing that when governors were transferred to new positions,
        care should be taken that they be located close to their previous
        ones so they would have to travel as little as possible.^ All officials
        with the rank of vezir were divided into two great geographical
      V services, those of Anatolia and Rumelia, and it was expressly
        stipulated that those in one service should not be transferred to