




                    Revival of the Ottoman Navy
160   nine in the morning until sunset daily except Friday and Sunday.
      Both divisions first met in common classes for their arithmetic
      and geometry lessons, and they then split into specialized sec¬
      tions for the remainder of the day. On Fridays the navigation
      students were required to go to the shipyards for observation and
      practical training, and on Mondays and Thursdays they went to
      the army engineering school for lessons with its newer and much
      superior equipment. In addition to the regular teachers, the navi¬
      gation section also employed a fewy^hip captains, who came on
      special occasions to give students and teachers alike the benefit
      of their experience. In 1796, a group of twenty apprentices was
      established to provide servants for the teachers while preparing
      the youths involved for entry into the school as vacancies oc-
      curred.^^ After that time, no one could become a student without
      first serving at least a year as an apprentice.
        Although continuous records of the school are not extant, there
      are enough references in other sources to indicate that it operated
      successfully through the crisis of the French expedition to Egypt,
      and was in operation when Selim was deposed. In 1805, Osman
      Efendi was its chief instructor, and it had forty regularly en¬
      rolled students, of whom twenty-four were present at the school
      and sixteen were with the fleet. The course apparently was for
      three years, and the students in their senior year were allowed
      to serve as apprentices on naval ships if they could And captains
      willing to take them. At the same time, there were twelve stu¬
      dents in the architectural section studying four-year courses.



                          Naval Reorganization
        With the rapid development of the navy and its schools during
      the decade following the Peace of Jassy, the relatively simple
      organization established in 1795 became inadequate to the in¬
      creasingly complex tasks of administration which arose. The
      original failure to define and distinguish the responsibilities and
      authorities of the Grand Admiral and the chief of the Arsenal led
      to continuous disputes, which began to disrupt the efficiency and
      proper development of the entire naval service.^^ To resolve these
      problems, a series of regulations were issued between November




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
1804 and May 1805, by which the navy was almost completely
reorganized and a ministry of the navy was established for the
                                                                      161   ,
first time.^®
  The post of chief of the Arsenal was abolished and replaced by
a new Umur-u Bahriye Naziri (Superintendent of naval affairs).
For the first time, the Admiralty was given its own independent
treasury {Tersane Hazinesi), with revenues assigned to it from
the Jizye (poll tax) collected from non-Muslim subjects, the
Avariz (household tax), the naval substitution tax paid by naval
conscripts wishing to avoid service, and from the Nizam-i Jedid
treasury.®^ The director of the Arsenal treasury {Tersane Hazinesi
Defterdari) was also given the position of third treasurer {Shikk-i
Salis) of the Imperial Treasury to provide him with rank and
revenues in the Ottoman hierarchy, thus placing him immediately
after the director of the Irad-i Jedid treasury, who retained the
rank of second treasurer.®®
  In addition to the regular taxes set aside for the navy treasury,
it was also given a number of tax forms as well as all the fiefs
previously given to naval officers, and it was ordered to farm
theni out to the highest bidders to secure further revenues for
its operations. As in the case of the Irad-i Jedid holdings of the
same kind,®® the naval treasury was required to pay the Imperial
Treasury the regular purchase price of the tax farms, equal to
five times their average annual profit to the tax farmers.
   Aside from his financial duties, the director of the Arsenal
treasury also was in charge of enrolling and conscripting the men
subject to service in the fleet and of collecting the substitution
taxes from those wishing to evade this service. The Mediterranean
and Aegean Islands, which traditionally had been held as fiefs
by the Grand Admiral to provide the fleet with men and revenues,
now were administered jointly by the Treasurer and the Grand
Admiral, who were admonished to act justly and avoid any sort
of misrule. While sharing responsibility and authority, the
Grand Admiral was primarily responsible for administering the
islands and the Treasurer concentrated on recruiting and tax¬
collecting.
  The naval treasury was given a separate building in the Im¬
 perial Palace and was required to use its funds to meet all ex-