



                         The "New Order” of Selim III
              Economic and Social Reforms                               175

  Selim’s efforts to improve the chaotic state of Ottoman society
followed closely the policies inaugurated in the years immedi¬
ately after his accession.^® Periodic efforts were made to reduce
the population of Istanbul and to force those without homes or
jobs to return to the villages from which they had come.^® Decrees
were issued closing taverns and coffeehouses,^® prohibiting the
construction of new hotela {han) to house transients,®* and re¬
quiring persons to wear only the clothing allowed to them by
their class and rapk,®® but this did little to calm the discontent.
Efforts made to purify the Ulema and to substitute examinations
in place of influence and bribes for appointments and promotions
were largely unsuccessful.®®
  Selim’s economic and financial measures also imitated those
adopted during the 1787-1792 war. Although the conclusion of
peace removed the pressure of military expenditure upon the
state Treasury, the tremendous expense of the Sultan’s military
reforms, combined with the rise of Balkan notables and bandits
who not only cut off the Treasury’s provincial revenues but also
forced the Porte to spend large sums for annual expeditions
against them, further increased the financial difficulties of the
state and made it very difficult for the Sultan and his ministers
to find sufficient money to run the government.
  In response to these difficulties all they could do was to increase
taxes, debase coins, seize private property, and melt down gold
and silver utensils (the tried and true Ottoman methods of
financial survival), but these efforts had the same unfortunate
results as before — economic disorder, inflation, famine, and
chaos. The devaluation of coins and increase in foreign imports
led to general price increases and a further flow of Ottoman pre¬
cious metals abroad, thus increasing the economic difficulties.®'*
  The most concrete and successful of Selim’s economic programs
were those introduced to organize the provision of grain and
coffee for the great cities of the empire. Recurrent shortages,
beginning during the war and continuing sporadically thereafter,
had been a principal cause of popular discontent, and had been
used by the opponents of the Nizam-i Jedid to foment opposition
to it. Now the previously unimportant position of supervisor of



            Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms
176   grains (Hububat Naziri) was raised in status so that its holder
      would have the power to enforce the new grain regulations intro¬
      duced by the government. He was provided with the rank of
      Third Treasurer of the Imperial Treasury, so that he would not
      only have a place in the Ottoman hierarchy but also the authority
      needed to carry out his duties.
        The principal problem of the supervisor was to provide Istanbul
      with sufficient grain to feed all its inhabitants during the winter
      months. A combination of high seas', muddy roads, and piracy
      had made it increasingly difficult to bring grains to the capital
      from Egypt and Anatolia. The grains of the Principalities, form¬
      erly procured without difficulty, had been unobtainable since
      1792. To solve the problem, large state granaries were now built
      in Istanbul so that grains still available from Anatolia could be
      brought into the city more easily for storage during the summer.
      Since private merchants in the past had used the slightest hints
      of shortages to raise prices, often withholding supplies from the
      famished population in order to increase their own profits, the
      provision and supply of grains in Istanbul was socialized under
      the direction of the supervisor of grains. He was given state funds
      totaling 125,000,000 piasters as capital to set himself up as the
      sole grain merchant in the capital, buying all grains from their
      producers at the current market prices, storing them in the vari¬
      ous granaries put at his disposal, and selling them at fixed prices
      to the bakers and householders of the capital in summer and
      winter alike. In addition he was given absolute authority to en¬
      force established retail prices for all bread and grain goods and
      to punish with death any merchants who violated these regula¬
      tions. One of the duties of the department was supervising the
      bakers of the capital, checking on standards and prices of bread,
      and making sure that each loaf had the proper amount of flour
      and was not filled with straw and other waste materials. When
      necessary, the supervisor of grain was also authorized to pur¬
      chase extra grains from the state granary, which received them
      as tax revenues and was ordinarily supposed to use them only for
      the rations given to various employees of the state.^®
        Similar efforts were made to regulate the distribution of coffee.
      Merchants often had mixed grain with the coffee sold in the mar-