




                    Revival of the Ottoman Navy
penses of the Arsenal, the construction and repair of ships, the
wages and rations of the sailors and artisans, and the ammunition
and other supplies needed by the ships of the fleet. All supplies
had to be purchased at the market price and in cash, and various
checks and balances were introduced to prevent corruption in the
process.
  The minister and treasurer of the navy were required to follow
complicated legal channels before they'could make any major
purchases. They had to send specif agents to the markets to
determine the current prices of every article they wanted and
then send lists of articles and prices to the Porte for approval
before the actual purchases could be made. At the end of each
year, detailed registers were drawn up of all the ships built, the
materials and supplies used in them, and the wages paid out.
  To assist the minister, he was given an executive assistant
called Kalyonlar Katibi (naval scribe), who was not a treasury
scribe but a member of the Imperial Council with previous scribal
training. Thus it was a major political post which had to be filled
by someone with rank in the Ottoman hierarchy. He was appointed
for a term of three years, without payment of fees or bribes, so
that he would not be tempted to use his position for personal gain
or profit.
  For all practical purposes naval affairs were divided into two
separate but interdependent divisions, military and administra¬
tive. The organization, arrangement, equipment, and training
of the fleet in peace and war, command and direction of naval
maneuvers and tactics, the organization, assignment and dis¬
ciplining of all captains, officers, and men, and the maintenance
and administration of all ships, were primarily assigned to the
Grand Admiral, with the minister of naval affairs having super¬
visory powers at most. However, the minister of naval affairs was
appointed Lieutenant {Vekil) to the Grand Admiral so that when¬
ever the Grand Admiral was absent from Istanbul on naval duty,
the minister had to take over his duties.
  All matters concerned with provisions, supplies, and weapons
of the Arsenal and ffeet, the food, rations, and salaries of officers
and men, the acquisition of grains and other supplies, the manu¬
facture and distribution of ammunition, and the collection and




                   The "New Order” of Selim III
expenditure of all Arsenal and fleet revenues were assigned to           163
the minister of naval affairs, acting as, or through, a director of
the naval treasury. In addition to these administrative and finan¬
cial duties, he was also responsible for supervising and managing
the building and repair of ships in all the shipyards of the empire,
in Istanbul and elsewhere.
  In addition, detailed regulations were issued concerning the
officers and men of the fleet, and their enrollment, promotion,
training, wages, and rations. A strict hierarchy of rank was es¬
tablished. In the first rank of officers below each ship captain were
his executive officer {Reis-i Evvel), artillery chief (Ser Topi-i
Kalyon), and chief scribe and instructor {Bash Hoja). The second
group of officers included the executive assistant {Reis-i Sani) and
the chief sailmaker {Bad Bani-i Kalyon). The lower officers were
placed in similar groups. Three-decker ships were staffed with
370 officers of various ranks, including the carpenters and caulk¬
ers, who, as already noted, were given officers’ rank under the
new regulations. Smaller galleons with fewer than 55 cannons
were given 242 officers. Frigates had 163, and corvettes 116, of¬
ficers, with lesser numbers assigned to smaller ships.
   Seamen were supposed to be enrolled only from among able-
bodied men with sea experience, and they came mainly from the
Greek Islands and from the area surrounding the capital. Efforts
 also were made to send graduates of the naval schools aboard
 ships as instructors to train both officers and men. Three instruc¬
 tors were carried on the largest ships. One would serve as chief
 instructor, caring for the captain’s correspondence and the ship’s
 accounts, keeping and using the signal flags, and keeping regis¬
 ters of the men and supplies aboard together with their disposi¬
 tion. The second instructor was in charge of the cooking and dis¬
 tribution of meals, along with the accounts of the food stocks and
 their use. The third instructor kept the ship’s log of daily events.
 All the instructors also held daily classes for the officers and men,
 and the captains were required to educate them in the more
 practical aspects of seamanship and navigation. One or two in¬
 structors were assigned to each of the smaller ships, according to
 need and the desires of the captain.
   The entire force of officers and men was formed into a strict