




                    Revival of the Ottoman Navy
156   all they could to prevent the loss and waste of supplies and to
      make sure that the men received all'the food and salaries they
      were entitled to; bonuses were provided for anyone who reported
      violations.
        Important reforms were also made in the supply of food to the
      ships. The numerous kitchens and stoves which had cluttered
      Ottoman ships for generations were replaced hy central kitchens
      and dining quarters, with cooks paid by the Treasury and com¬
      mon meals served at regular hours. The old practice of delivering
      the rations for each voyage to the men in their own homes in
      advance of sailing was also abandoned, and all food was delivered
      to the captains, who were solely responsible for its distribution
      during the course of each cruise under the>regulations mentioned
      above. Iron plates were affixed to the inner sides of the ships
      where the common galley stoves were located in order to lessen
      the danger of fire."
        Once the matters of equipment and supply were settled, Hiiseyin
      Pasha was able to turn to the systems of recruitment and train¬
      ing of sailors, which were reorganized in a series of regulations
      issued during January and February 1793.'^ The Treasury had
      always supported a small group of regular professional sailors,
      but by this time all of these positions were held for purposes of
      income alone by persons unwilling to perform service in return.
      Now they were inspected, and within a year almost all of them
      were dismissed and replaced by youths enlisting for life terms in
      the navy. A strong effort now was made to develop the sailors into
      a professional and permanent group serving the navy in winter
      and summer alike. To man this corps, a kind of conscription was
      restored to the Aegean coastal provinces traditionally included
      within the sphere of the navy. All the men living in these areas
      who were experienced at sea, whether as fishermen, merchant
      sailors, or navy men, were registered in a special survey carried
      out by the census department. Three thousand of them were
      conscripted for immediate service in the navy on a salaried basis.
      They were required to remain at their barracks in the Arsenal at
      all times and to accept whatever training, discipline, and duties
      were imposed on them. No more than one sailor could be taken
      from a single family without its consent. Conscripted men were




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
allowed to avoid service by hiring a substitute and paying a "sub¬    157
stitute tax” {Kalyonju Bedeli) to the naval treasury. Half the
wages of these men was paid them when their ships left Istanbul
for the summer cruise. One quarter was paid immediately after
their return in November, and the other quarter was kept from
them until March, so that they would have enough money and
food to sustain them through the entire winter season.*^ Pro¬
visions were introduced for regular examinations of the men to
rank and promote them acfcording to ability. Those who merited
promotion were allowed to rise to the ranks of officers.
  Revival of Ottoman Shipbuilding. Starting in the summer of
1793, efforts also were begun to modernize the Arsenal itself so
that it could build the new ships which the fleet needed. Almost
all the men serving in the Arsenal up to that time were dismissed,
and salaries and conditions were improved enormously in order
to attract the best artisans of Istanbul. As added inducements,
they were allowed to continue their private work whenever they
were not required at the Arsenal and to live at home with their
families.’^ At the same time, the work of shipbuilding at the
Arsenal was reorganized on European lines under the direction
of Jacques Balthasard Le Brun, a French naval architect who
entered Ottoman service in June 1793, and his two associates,
Jean Baptiste Benoit and Toussaint Petit. They did not return to
France until 1804, having established a surprisingly modern
naval establishment in Istanbul and trained a number of highly
capable Ottoman naval architects to continue their work.’-'^
  Between 1792 and 1797, the construction and repair facilities
at the Arsenal were modernized and enlarged, under Le Brun’s
guidance.'® The two old wooden drydocks previously in use, which
were almost constantly in need of some sort of repair and rebuild¬
ing, were replaced by three permanent stone ones which were far
superior in capacity, efficiency, and durability."’ Five new ship¬
building forms were constructed as well as a new drydock designed
on the model of the drydock at Toulon.'®
  With the foreign experts virtually directing shipbuilding opera¬
tions in the Arsenal of Istanbul, Hiiseyin Pasha was free to devote
his herculean energies to reviving the ruined Ottoman shipyards
elsewhere in the empire.'® Arrangements were made to supply