




                      Revival of the Ottoman Navy
166   for persons suffering from the plague. Thus for the first time the
      idea of quarantine penetrated into a land which had accepted the
      plague almost without question for centuries. Prisoners who died
      in the Arsenal jail were turned over to the medical students for
      their anatomy lessons and experiments although this was kept
      very secret so as not to antagonize the more orthodox elements of
      the community. Surgical instruments and medicines were now
      regularly supplied to each ship so that the doctors and surgeons
      would have sufficient equipment for their work.
        In this way a regular state medical service based on modern
      principles and methods was introduced into Turkey. Once again,
      basic reform entered the Ottoman system through the military
      although in this case it was the navy whiqh led rather than the
      army. Since the medical reforms were legislated in 1805 and be¬
      gun in 1806, only a start had been made before Selim’s deposition
      brought them to a sudden halt. By the summer of 1807, there
      were no more than two doctors and six students comprising the
      staff of the uncompleted Arsenal hospital.'*^ Yet this was an im¬
      portant beginning, and a nucleus of doctors and medical students
      was left for a renewal of the effort in subsequent reigns.




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
     XIII. Administrative, Economic,
           and Social Reforms




                 /




Selim III was a true heir of the eighteenth-century Ottoman re¬
formers in devoting most of his attention and energy to military
reform. There is little to show that he or his advisers understood
how much the technological reforms of Europe were themselves
the product of the social, economic, and political revolutions
which had been going on since the Reformation, and how they
could not be successfully applied in the Ottoman Empire except in
the context of the economic, social, and political development
which had produced them. Nowhere was this more evident than
in the attempts at administrative reform.
  The anarchy within the Ottoman adminstration at the end of
the eighteenth century, reflected so often in military dissolution,
need not be described again. Bribery, corruption, nepotism, negli¬
gence, venality, and cruelty, all were endemic to the Ottoman sys-
tern. Few officials thought of their positions as anything other
than means for personal profit at the expense of state and sub¬
jects alike.
   Even more serious, the central government had almost no con¬
trol at all over the expenditure of its funds. There was no central
budget in the modern sense. Traditionally in the Ottoman fiscal
system each government department and bureau was assigned
specific Treasury revenues to spend as it saw fit. If these were not
    sufficient, the department directors were able to issue promissory
    notes obligating the Treasury to pay back whatever they borrowed
    to meet expenses in addition to the customary ones and, of course,
    to fill their own pockets. The traditional means by which the
    fiscal activities of each department were checked within the
    Treasury had broken down. The Treasury and Imperial Council
    had no effective control over the issuance of these promissory
    notes, but they still had to pay for them. There was no effort at
    all to draw up a budget of revenues ^t the beginning of each year
    and to allocate expenditures according to means. There was no
    one who knew what the total revenues and expenditures of the
    government were. Government officials had always been rela¬
    tively independent in their posts according to the dictates of the
    Ottoman concept o{''hadd”^ and so long as they had been bound
    by the moral and religious codes of the Ottoman ruling class,
    this independence had never become license. But now they were
bound by nothing except their own greed, which was limitless in
    most cases. And of course this sort of disorganization and anarchy
at the center had weakened central control over the provinces,
over both the Ottoman provincial officials and the local notables,
who had taken advantage of central weakness to interpose ef¬
fectively between the government and the people.^
/    Selim’s response to these conditions in no way equaled his mili¬
tary reforms, either in intensity or in success. In 1793, his princi¬
pal administrative reform was introduced, an attempt to restore
the corps of ministers (sing, vezir, pi. vilzerd), the highest-ranked
administrative officers of state, who occupied the principal
government positions.^
      In 1797, efforts were made to equalize the revenues available
to the various officials holding the rank of vezir. Most of them
secured most of their revenues by serving as provincial governors,
holding their provinces as tax farms, delivering a fixed annual
amount of tax revenue to the Treasury, and keeping the balance
of their tax collections as profit for themselves. Ordinarily, vezirs
served as governors of the twenty-eight provinces of the empire:
Egypt, Damascus, Baghdad, Basra, Shehrizor, Aleppo, Karaman,
Rakka, Diyarbekir, Adana, Sidon, Mosul, Anatolia, Trebizond,
Erzurum, Childir, Van, Kars, Marash, Sivas, Jidda, Tripoli of