




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
ket, and the tax farm monopolies held for the sale of coffee had      177
been misused for the profit of the holders at the expense of the
state Treasury and the consumer.^® Early in 1794, Mustafa Res-
hid, treasurer of the Irad-i Jedid, was appointed to investigate
the entire problem, and his report was used as the basis of a new
coffee regulation introduced in the spring of 1795.^^ The most
essential element of the new law was its abolition of the tax farm
which controlled the coffee trade. No longer was the power of
regulation to be held by a tkx farmer who collected taxes from the
coffee merchants and turned over only a portion of them to the
state Treasury. Control of the entire coffee industry now was
placed in the hands of a salaried Ottoman official, the Tahmis
Emini, assisted by four of the most knowledgeable coffee experts
available. He enforced standards of quality and price on all coffee
producers and merchants in the empire and was specifically pro¬
hibited from collecting any sort of tax from them in return. Only
the state roasting plant was allowed to levy specified charges on
the coffee brought in by merchants for roasting and grinding,
but these were considerably smaller than those applied by the
tax farmers in former times. Strict regulations were introduced
to prevent attempts to mix anything with the coffee before selling
it to consumers, and inspectors were sent into the markets by the
Tahmis Emini to make certain that these regulations were
obeyed.^®
  Some efforts were also made to improve the position of the
Ottoman Empire in international trade. In the past, almost all
goods shipped into and out of the Empire were handled by foreign V
merchants in foreign ships. The Capitulations "rights” of foreign V
merchants in the Empire, originally granted as privileges by
the powerful sixteenth-century sultans, had become means for
them to ignore Ottoman laws and regulations entirely and thus
acquire considerable advantages over those Ottoman subjects
who attempted to compete with them. Those Ottomans who did
try to participate in foreign trade, for the most part members of
the non-Muslim minorities, had to acquire a competitive position
either by obtaining foreign nationality from sympathetic Euro¬
pean ambassadors or by acquiring European protection and thus
becoming members of the ever-increasing "protected” ihimayelu)




            Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms
                                               1


178        class. Many Ottoman merchants acquired such protection hy
           being appointed to the post of "translator” or to other positions
           in the foreign consulates since such employees, by definition,
           were included in the Capitulations rights. These appointees and
           their families were excused from all Ottoman taxes and were
      ^    entitled to pay the same low customs duties charged foreigners
           under the various Capitulations treaties. Foreign consuls clearly
           abused this right by selling such appointments at considerable
           profit to Ottoman merchants wishing to escape the regulation
           and control of the Sultan’s laws.
             Selim made strenuous efforts to curb these abuses. Starting in
           1794, he ordered that foreign ambassadors should appoint no
           more translators and others than those actually needed, and that
           such persons who were not performing real service as prescribed
           by the Capitulations treaties should be subjected to all the laws
           and taxes to which they were liable by virtue of their Ottoman
           allegiance.^® In addition efforts were made to force foreign mer¬
           chants to pay at least the three per cent customs tax on imports
           and exports required by the treaties and to eliminate the abuses
           which corrupt customs officials had brought into the system by
           charging considerably less than the legal customs rate and ac¬
           cepting bribes for themselves in return.^® Restrictions were im¬
           posed on Ottoman subjects desiring to transfer to foreign national¬
           ity and protection.^* Efforts were also made to interest Ottomans
           in carrying on foreign trade. The Sultan encouraged wealthy
           officials to build and sail their own merchant ships in order to
           build up an Ottoman merchant fieet, and for the first time in over
          , a century a few Ottoman trade ships began to make their ap-
           pearance in the ports of the Mediterranean.^^
             These economic regulations were almost entirely unsuccessful,
           however. Periodic shortages of grains and coffee, as well as price
           inflation, plagued Istanbul throughout Selim’s reign.^® The conse¬
           quent price rises and famines contributed in large measure to the
           increasingly hostile attitude of the people toward his reforms.
           International trade continued in the hands of foreigners. Otto¬
           man efforts to rationalize the Capitulations and reduce abuses
           in their administration were violently and successfully opposed
          by the European ambassadors and consuls, who saw in every