




                         Window to the West
182       or served in and was usually wiped away after their departure.
          Furthermore they were almost invariably constrained to accept
          the dress and life of the society which they came to serve and were
          isolated from the mass of Ottoman society; hence their role in
          transmitting western culture and thought to traditionally edu¬
          cated Ottomans was negligible.
            It was only in Abd ul-Hamid I’s later years and in particular
          under Selim III that such military technicians and instructors
          had a significant and widely felt effect on Ottoman society. Most
          of them now came to Turkey in groups in response to specific
          Ottoman requests to their governments for assistance of various
          kinds. They were no longer renegades absorbed into Ottoman
          society but salaried foreign advisers who yvere allowed to retain
          their own identities and uniforms and to have contacts far wider
          than those of their predecessors. The Porte invariably stipulated
          that these men be of high ability, character, and morals, and that
          they agree to remain in Ottoman service for at least three years.
          In the contracts issued early in Selim’s reign, they were required
          to wear Ottoman uniforms and reside in buildings close to their
          places of work so as not to arouse the reactionaries, and they
          were warned to refrain from association with any Ottomans other
          than those they supervised or instructed. But these stipulations
          were largely ignored and were omitted entirely from the contracts
          issued after 1795. To secure foreign advisers of high quality, the
          Porte agreed to pay their travel expenses and to give them sal¬
          aries and wages considerably higher than those paid Ottomans
          with the same ranks and duties. Technicians were given special
          servants and guards, and those who particularly pleased the
          Sultan were presented with huge bonuses on special occasions,
          making this service far more profitable than similar work in
          Europe.
            The individual technicians and their work have already been
          mentioned in the sections devoted to the military corps which
          they served. About six hundred foreign technicians were in the
          pay of the Porte at any one time. Of these approximately half
          came from France and the balance from England, Austria and
          Sweden. These men comprised the first western social group ever
      V
          thrust into the midst of Ottoman society without special arrange-




                             The "New Order” of Selim III
merits designed to prevent their contact with the Ottomans. While   183
the Sultan ordered them to live and work away from the populace,
it was not long before they roamed the streets of the capital at
will, frequenting its places of amusement and commerce, and in
the process demonstrating western dress and behavior to all
classes of Ottoman society, most of whom had never seen Euro¬
peans before and who had cultivated unspeakable images of life
beyond the pale of Islam.*
  This is not to say that the appearance of these westerners in
Ottoman society had an entirely beneficial effect on the cause of
modernization of ^Turkey or that their contacts with Ottomans
were uniformly influential and without incident. While many of
them were experienced and experts in their trades and willing
to do their jobs, many were not. Some were men who had failed
in their own countries and who took advantage of unsuspecting
and inexperienced Ottoman officials to present themselves as
experts in fields of which they really knew nothing. Many came
only for the financial rewards and chose to spend most of their
time savoring the entertainments and enticements of Istanbul.
The boisterous and rowdy behavior of a few of the European
artisans and soldiers and their evident scorn for Muslims led to
numerous clashes with the mobs of Istanbul and was hardly
conducive to endearing the western way of life to those Ottomans
who were unfortunate enough to encounter them.^
  Nor were the abler members of these foreign delegations as
effective as they wished to be. Much of their work was of course
undermined by negligent and incapable colleagues sent from
Europe. But more than this, the limitations of the Ottoman
outlook made it very difficult for even the most sincere Ottoman
partisans of reform to accept or even comprehend what they
had to say, and in many cases their instructions and advice were
simply ignored. In addition there were many Ottomans who
joined the reform movement only for the financial and political
rewards offered by the Sultan, and who obstructed the tech¬
nicians’ efforts for their own personal advantage. The influence
and positions of the technicians became closely attached to those
of the politicians who arranged for their employment, and they
and their work soon were involved in the complicated political