




                              The "New Order” of Selim III
reform only a new attempt to reduce the profits which they and
their proteges received from these abuses.^^ The European repre¬
sentatives at the Porte thus began a policy which was to prevail
during much of the nineteenth century despite idealistic senti¬
ments for reform. They opposed really fundamental reforms be¬
cause of the threats posed to their traditional privileges. Thus in
many ways Europeans in the Empire became as strong defenders
of their vested interests and opponents of real reforms as were the
most reactionary members of the old Ottoman ruling classes.


                  /




            Administrative, Economic, and Social Reforms
                      XIV. Window
                       to the West




                                      V




Most of Selim’s military, administrative, financial, and economic
reforms were at best only partially successful, but they were
opening wedges and essential guides for the efforts of his suc¬
cessors. At the same time and perhaps even more meaningful and
important in the long run was the concurrent introduction into
the empire of an awareness of the AVest which had harely ex¬
isted before his time. The iron curtain protecting the "Ottoman
way,” erected in an age of greatness and maintained in times of
decay by a ruling class convinced of the superiority of its institu¬
tions over anything which could possibly be conceived in an
infidel world, had effectively prevented the entry of the ideas
and artifacts of the Renaissance and Reformation and the move¬
ments which they had spawned and encouraged in the West. But
now this iron curtain was pierced on a large scale for the first
time, although it still was not destroyed, and into the Ottoman
world flowed not only the military and technical achievements of
Europe hut also many of the political, economic, and social ideas
and institutions which had made possible those achievements —
such as a recognition of the rights of the individual and of the
duty of the state to protect and serve him, and the need to provide
some means hy which all classes of society might participate in
their own government. To be sure, in a society long confined
within itself and based on a religion which provided a close-fitting   181
cloak of protection for the traditions of the past, such an opening
could at best have a very slight effect. Yet it laid the groundwork
for more widespread and significant penetration in later years,
when the real foundations of modern Turkey were laid.
  The channels through which knowledge of the West penetrated
the East during the era of Selim III were many and varied. Dif¬
ferent levels of Ottoman society were affected in different ways.
  Military Instruction. By 'far the most important of these chan¬
nels was the process by which the military techniques and wea¬
pons of the West were introduced into the Ottoman Empire.
Western languages and ways of thought, imparted to hundreds
of young Ottomans enrolled in the new corps and schools, opened
for them the whole scope of western civilization and broke down
the confines and restrictions imposed by traditional Ottoman
training as nothing else had ever done. Those whose training was
limited to technical and military subjects were able to understand
all aspects of European thought and achievements as no other
Ottomans before them could.
  The principal agents of transmission in the military field were
the European technical experts who came to the empire with the
new weapons and ideas of the West. To be sure, there had always
been western experts of this kind in the empire. Western rene¬
gades had taught the Ottomans how to use the cannons, rifles,
and gunpowder which made possible the great Ottoman con¬
quests in Europe and Asia. But during the eighteenth century,
the culmination of centuries of internal decay in increasingly
serious military defeats had led to a rapid increase in their mili¬
tary advisers. The Count de Bonneval and Baron de Tott were
only the most conspicuous of these. In addition there were numer¬
ous unnamed Europeans who fled from the lands of their births
for one reason or another and who assumed the identities and
habits of the East so completely that their true origins will for¬
ever remain a mystery, although the evidences and results of
their work are clear. But even the technical contribution of these
men was strictly limited to their own years of service and to the
individual Ottomans with whom they were in contact. Their in¬
fluence extended little beyond the small corps which they created