




                          The "New Order” of Selim III
  There were other European representatives at the Porte who          193
were able to influence certain Ottoman officials, but none with the
consistency of the French. The most important of these were the
British Ambassadors Robert Ainslie (1772-1793), Sir Robert
Liston (1793-1799), Lord Elgin (1799-1802) and C. Arbuthnot
(1804-1807); the Austrian internuncio during most of Selim’s
reign, Baron Herbert de Rathkeal; the Swedish dragoman and
later minister at the Porte, Mouradgea d’Ohsson; the minister of
Denmark and Saxony, Baron de Hiibsch; the Prussian ambassa¬
dor Knobelsdorf; and the Russian ambassadors. Count Mikhail
Golenischev-Kutu2yDv (1792-1794), Victor Pavlovich Kochubeg
(1793-1798), and Vasily Tamara (1798-1802). Each of them had
excellent sources of information at the Porte and contributed in
various ways to Ottoman awareness of the West.
  Of course all these diplomatic contacts had only a slight effect
on Ottoman society as a whole. Access to the reports sent from
Ottomans in Europe, as to the Europeans themselves at the Porte,
was limited to a very few Ottomans who were directly concerned
with foreign affairs. The knowledge imparted through these
sources was transmitted to other Ottomans only indirectly, if at
all. However, in the unofficial activities of the European repre¬
sentatives, merchants, and technicians now present in increasing
numbers in Istanbul, there was an impact which was much more
extensive and in the long run even more significant for the whole
of Ottoman society.


                        Social Contacts
  The time of the French Revolution saw a tremendous relaxa¬
tion in the social barriers which isolated the Europeans in the
Ottoman Empire from the Ottomans among whom they lived. In
previous centuries the few foreigners who did reside in the Sul¬
tan’s dominions isolated themselves almost entirely in their own
compounds. Mutual distrust and even hostility and scorn, com¬
bined with a more practical and justified European fear of con¬
tracting the plague then widespread in the empire, limited contact
to purely formal occasions. And even then most of the actual
intercourse was left to the mediation of translators serving both




                         Window to the West
194   sides, who used their positions to advance their own causes and
      interests at the expense of those whom they were supposed to he
      serving.
         But new developments during Selim’s reign made it impossible
      for this sort of isolation to continue. The very fact that foreign
      diplomats, merchants, and soldiers were living in Istanbul in
      far greater numbers than in earlier times made it inevitable that
      opportunities for contact would greatlyvincrease. Selim’s reforms
      and his efforts to popularize them w^hett6d the appetities of many
      Ottomans, at least to the extent of making them for the first time
      somewhat curious about the strange infidels in their midst and
      desirous of learning of their manners and ways. Moreover Euro¬
      peans long content to ignore the Ottomans in the past were now
      compelled by the need to compete for the favor of the neutral
      Porte to try to cultivate the friendship and understanding of all
      segments of the population.
        As a result of these factors, intercourse increased on all levels
      of society. European parties and entertainments held in the great
      embassy palaces and private homes were now attended by Otto¬
      man officials, including the Sultan himself in disguise. Upper-
      class Ottomans began to imitate the practices of European society
      and hold parties in their own homes and palaces, into which their
      European acquaintances were invited for the first time. Western
      merchants, technicians, and soldiers met subjects of the Sultan in
      the streets, bazaars, and coffeehouses. Street performances by
      European actors, buffoons, jugglers, and the like became regular
      features of lower-class Ottoman city life.^*^ The large cities of the
      empire witnessed a craze on the part of all classes of the popula¬
      tion for European clothing, architecture, and furniture, so much
      so that the British ambassador. Sir Robert Liston, reported in
      1796 that "the fashion of the day is strongly in favor of European
      imitation in every rank of society.”4*^ Selim himself is said to have
      invited European actors to perform in his palace, attempted imi¬
      tations of western music and poetry in his own compositions, and
      imported western flowers and miniature pictures for his personal
      use.^°
        These were the effects produced by Europeans of all nationali¬
      ties, but in addition the French had a special impact. Turkey at