

  Many of the European ambassadors resided in the Ottoman
Empire for years. They were acquainted with its languages and
customs, and cultivated close and lasting relationships with Otto¬
man officials, paying regular bribes in order to learn their policies
and decisions and to influence them when possible.^® As a result,
the reports they sent to Europe concerning internal Ottoman af¬
fairs give far more reliable and detailed information on Turkey
than do the Ottoman chronicles and governmental materials of
the time. At the same time, each European nation maintained its
own regular courier service to and from the Porte, sending news¬
papers and memoranda containing information and news, and
these were often passed on to Ottoman officials through various
channels, providing them with their only regular news of Europe.
  While Selim was still a prince in the palace of Abd ul-Hamid I,
his main source of contact with the outside world had been the
French ambassadors. After Selim’s accession, he continued to rely
on the French ambassador Choiseul-Gouffier more than any other
European, often meeting him outside the Palace in disguise in
order to dispense with the formalities required by protocol.^^
But Choiseul, a nobleman and royalist, was ousted by the revo¬
lutionary government of France in October 1792 and fled to
Russia in exile two months later, leaving France without official
representation.^^ During the next three years, France was repre¬
sented by agents sent to secure Ottoman favor and official recog¬
nition if possible. Citizens Semonville, Henin, Descorches, and
Raymond Verninac. Verninac re-established a regular French
embassy after Ottoman recognition in late 1795.^^ He was fol-




                         Window to the West
                                       %


192   lowed as ambassador by General Aubert du Bayet, who served
      between 1796 and 1798 and was an important provider of tech¬
      nicians, equipment, and ideas to the Ottoman Sultan although he
      never achieved Choiseul’s unusually close personal contact with
      Selim.^^
        In addition to these ambassadors, very important sources of
      ideas and information for the Ottomans were the Jeunes de
      Langues in the service of the embassy. These were French youths
      trained in Arabic, Persian, and Turkish by the most outstanding
      French orientalists in order to serve in French diplomatic and
      consular posts and enable the French representatives to dispense
      with the uncertain, inaccurate, and often disloyal services of local
      Armenians, Greeks, and Jews formerly used for such tasks. The
                                                  >

      most important of those who served the French embassy during
      the age of the French Revolution were Venture de Paradis, later
      chief interpreter for Bonaparte’s expedition to Egypt; Amedee
      Jaubert, also later involved in the Egyptian expedition; Daniel
      Kieffer and Xavier Bianchi, authors of an important Turkish-
      French dictionary later in the nineteenth century; and Pierre
      Ruffin, subsequently one of France’s leading orientalists.^^ These
      men were able to discern local conditions, report on events and, at
      the same time, inform and influence Ottomans as no one else
      could in their own embassies or the embassies of other powers.
      Without the need for interpreters, they were able to establish
      personal friendships with Ottomans and discuss things with them
      in a way that persons not knowing Turkish were unable to. Ruffin
      in particular was close to Chelebi Mustafa Reshid and Kiichtik
      Hiiseyin and was Selim’s most important advocate in his appeals
      for aid to the French government.^® It also fell to his lot, however,
      to be France’s charge d’affaires in Istanbul when war broke out in
      1798, so he and his associates were forced to spend three years in
      the dismal confinement of the Ottoman political prison at Yedi-
      kule.^^ After peace was restored, the French ambassadors and
      their Jeunes de Langues secretaries regained a strong position of
      influence at the Porte, with the Sultan relying more and more on
      the advice of the last two French ambassadors of his reign. Mar¬
      shal Marie-Anne Brune (1803-1804) and Bonaparte’s confidant
      and advisor. General Horace Sebastian! (1806-1808).