




                        Window to the West
184   rivalries of Selim’s court. Each ambassador did all he could to
      complicate and nullify the work of^ his enemy’s technicians,
      working through politicians favorable to his own cause. The
      inevitable consequence of all these factors was delay, frustration,
      and often defeat of the efforts of even the most sincere and expert
      foreign advisers, with promised equipment diverted to other uses
      and salaries and expense moneys delayed interminably.^ But at
      least in their contacts with individual Ottomans as well as in
      their instruction itself, the technicians certainly did have some
      effect. If nothing else, the stark contrast of continued Janissary
      and Spahi failure as opposed to the successful operations of the
      new corps when they were employed most certainly made many
      Ottomans much more amenable to change than they had been
                                                  >

      before.
        Rise of an Ottoman Press. An extremely important by-product
      of the military reforms introduced under Abd ul-Hamid I and
      Selim was the concurrent revival of a Turkish-language press.
      The first Turkish press in the Ottoman Empire, established by
      Ibrahim Miiteferrika in 1725, had been used only sporadically
      after his death a few years later. Abd ul- Hamid I had revived it
      under the direction of the official historians, Vasif and Rashid,
      who purchased the remnants of Miiteferrika’s equipment and
      added machines and type purchased from the French embassy in
      Istanbul. But, soon after, Vasif went to Spain as ambassador and
      the press lapsed again into relative inactivity.^
        Under Selim III, the old Miiteferrika press was restored under
      the direction of Rashid Efendi, and it printed three military
      technical books by Vauban, translated into Turkish by Con¬
      stantine Ipsilanti, for use as textbooks in the new technical
      schools.^ This press seems to have been too small to meet the
      demand, for when the engineering school was built in Haskoy in
      1795, it was given a new press and funds for fifteen workers to
      operate it under the direction of Abdurrahman Efendi. During
      the next seven years it printed eight large volumes, including
      Mahmud Raif Efendi’s French-language description of Selim’s
      reforms. Tableau des nouveaux reglements de V empire ottoman.
      In the summer of 1802, the Miihendishane press was given an
      additional building with new equipment in Uskiidar to print




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
                                                                           K


books of general interest and technical books, both under the              185
continued direction of Abdurrahman Edendi. The Imperial press
remained at Uskiidar until 1831, when it moved hack to Istanbul
by order of Sultan Mahmud II.® These presses made an important
contribution to transmitting knowledge of Europe to the Ottoman
Empire. Their publication and diffusion of Turkish translations
of western-language books made available to those who read
only Turkish the mass of information which previously had been
available only to the very few who had learned the languages of
the West.
  Diplomatic Missions. While the military teachers and their
presses provided important windows to the West for upper- and
lower-class Ottomans alike, the various channels of diplomacy
also made their contribution in this respect, although in a more
limited way. The principal agents of this sort of transmission
were the Sultan’s representatives sent to the important capitals \/
of Europe, and those of the various European powers stationed at
the Porte.
  Throughout the centuries of Ottoman greatness and decay, no
permanent Ottoman embassies were established in Europe since           V
it was felt that nothing could be learned from the infidels of the
West and that it was for the inferior monarchs of Europe to
petition for the Sultan’s favor through their representatives at
the Porte. Special Ottoman missions were sent to European
capitals but only for limited times to accomplish specific purposes,
principally to sign trade agreements and, more and more fre¬
quently during the eighteenth century, treaties of peace ceding
territories and making other concessions to the victorious powers
of Europe. In general the Ottomans who were sent on these
missions were neither qualified nor motivated to go beyond their
instructions and observe the lands through which they passed.
Only a few of them submitted any reports at all, and these for
the most part went little beyond descriptions of the ceremonials
and negotiations participated in during their trips. But there
were some exceptions.
  In 1664, Kara Mehmed Pasha, a member of the Bostanji corps,
was sent to Vienna with a suite of almost a hundred and fifty
persons, and his short description of that imperial capital was the