




                        Window to the West
                                            i
                                      %




186   first work of any kind to give the leaders of the Porte a look at
      western life/ In 1720, Second Treasurer Ibrahim Pasha provided
      a similar short description of the same city on his return from
      negotiations there in coimection with the execution of the Treaty
      of Passarowitz/ In the same year, Yirmisekiz Chelebi Mehmed
      Faiz Efendi was sent to Paris as special Ottoman ambassador
      to the court of Louis XIV and, after a stay of two years, submitted
      to his master a long and detailed report, describing life not only
      in the French capital, but also in^ several other French cities
      which he visited, by far the most important and detailed report
      of this kind received by the Porte until the time of Selim III/
      In 1754 and again in 1764, the scribe of the Silahdar corps,
      Mehmed Dervish Efendi, was sent as Ottoman plenipotentiary to
      Saint Petersburg, and his reports gave a great deal of detail on
      the Russian modernization program then in progress/® Ahmed
      Resmi submitted two reports of this kind, one describing Vienna
      during his sojourn there in 1757-58 and the other depicting
      Berlin in great detail, as a result of his mission to the Prussian
      court in 1764/’ Mehmed Nahifi Efendi a member of the mission
      sent to Saint Petersburg in 1772 to negotiate the peace treaty
      signed two years later at Kiichuk Kaynarji, provided the Sul¬
      tan with another account of the things he saw in Catherine’s
      capital, as well as of the negotiations themselves/^
        None of these reports are of great value by our standards;
      many of them are more interesting for what they did not include
      than for what they did. Yet they did provide the sultans and
      those around them with some notion of the technical and moral
      achievements of the West and they were, in the absence of
      anything better, means of making some breaks in the wall of
      Ottoman isolation. For the most part, however, the sultans had
      to rely on the European ambassadors and others resident in Istan-
      bul for regular reports of events and conditions in Europe. Since
      each ambassador naturally limited and distorted the news so as to
      favor the prestige and position of his own country, the sultans
      and their ministers remained by far the most poorly informed of
      any European rulers concerning events and conditions outside
      their own domains.
        By Selim’s time, the conditions which made possible such




                         The "New Order” of Selim III
ignorance were changing so rapidly that progress would probably          187
have been made even if the Sultan had not been especially eager
to learn about Europe. The Ottoman government was now be¬
coming intimately involved with European powers by military
alliance. It was seeking their technical and financial assistance
on a large scale. It was maneuvering for position among them.
This hardly fitted in with the old picture of a Porte content to
wait for foreigners to come and beg favors. The Porte now re¬
quired a knowledge of European affairs far more regular, de¬
tailed, and objective than that which seemingly had sufficed
before. When addgd to Selim’s desire to learn of European life
and technical accomplishments, reform of the Ottoman diplo¬
matic service was inevitable, and in 1793 it was decided to estab¬
lish permanent Ottoman legations in the important capitals of
Europe as soon as possible.
  It would seem that Paris should have been the most natural
choice for the first Ottoman embassy. Selim had always been
most favorable to France, and he hoped that it would provide
most of the technical assistance that he wanted. Europe was now
embroiled in the opening stages of the wars of the French Revolu¬
tion, however, and while Selim was most anxious to receive tech-     h
nicians from revolutionary France, he was quite unhappy about
the fate of the French king with whom he had corresponded so
hopefully only a few years before. Moreover France was in mortal
combat with most of the royal powers of Europe, who hoped to
stamp out the "contagion” of democracy before it could spread.
The new regime had been outlawed, and no one had yet officially
recognized it. An Ottoman embassy to Paris at this time would
most certainly have involved official recognition, and Selim did
not wish to recognize the new government until a precedent
had been established by another great European power. So
France was ignored at the start.Likewise Selim did not wish
to honor the court at Saint Petersburg with one of his represent-    ^
atives because of the bitterness engendered by the recent war
and various disputes which had arisen over the execution of the
Treaty of Jassy.
  So it was that in 1793 the first permanent Ottoman legation \A
was established at the Court of St. James, a traditional and