




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
struggles for power and in the suppression of the hedouins in the      219
Delta.«
  Ahmed quarreled with Ali’s chief lieutenant, Abu al-Zahab,
and was forced to flee from Egypt in 1769. For a time he served
the Ottoman governor of Damascus against the rebel riojer of
Acre, Zahir al-Omar. During these campaigns, Ahmed won the
attention and favor of Gazi Hasan Pasha, and as a result he him¬
self was appointed governor of Acre (1775). At this time he sup¬
pressed the rebellions of Zahir’s sons and the efforts of the bed¬
ouin tribes to ravage the agricultural areas. As reward he was
made leader of theXlttoman pilgrims’ caravan to the Holy Cities
(1770) and then governor of Sidon (1775) and later of Damascus
as well (1785).Ahmed now attracted into his service large num¬
bers of Bosnians and Albanians left in Syria by the Ottoman
armies, and he soon built them into the strongest army in the
area. With his base continuing at Acre, he expanded his authority
and influence throughout much of Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine.
Local ruling families had to accept his authority both as Ottoman
governor and local notable, and they paid tribute in return for
his "protection.” With these revenues, he not only paid all the
taxes he owed to the Sultan, but also enlarged his army, built a
small navy, and so extended his power that he was by far the
strongest ruler in Syria during the last quarter of the century.
  The only successful opposition which he met came from Mount
Lebanon and in particular from the Shihabi Emir Bashir II, who
was first chosen as governor of the Lebanon by its leading fami¬
lies in 1789. Bashir actually was given power by the Janbulat
chiefs with the assistance of Jezzar’s soldiers, but Bashir success¬
fully countered Jezzar’s efforts to extend his power into the moun¬
tain. Despite his ostensible submission, he gradually built up his
own power in the Lebanon by playing off the various families
against one another and gradually confiscating their properties
for his own benefit. As a result, by the end of the century he was a
powerful rival.
  Ottoman authority also began to wane in Iraq in the last years
of the seventeenth century. For over a half century thereafter
struggles for power continued without end, with the bedouins
ravaging the countryside and the province falling into political.




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
220   economic, and social chaos. It was only in the middle of the eight¬
      eenth century that the vacuum was at last filled hy the Mamluk
      slaves brought in to serve the Ottoman officials in the same way
      as they had in Egypt. But unlike the Egyptian example, once the
      Mamluks gained control in Iraq, they filled all the offices in the
      Ottoman hierarchy of government, including the governorship,
      which came to he held hy the chief of the dominant party. For
      this reason, the Porte never was abld to maintain competing
      Mamluk factions for its own benefit', and the Sultan’s treasury
      therefore never secured the same sort of financial reward as it
      had from Egypt. While the Iraqi Mamluks did divide into compet¬
      ing factions, there was always one which was able to achieve
      unchallenged control for long periods of,time. With the fear of
      oppression removed, their rulers were far freer to develop the
      security and prosperity of the country and to restore its adminis¬
      tration than the Mamluks were in Egypt.”
        This trend culminated under the greatest of the Mamluk rulers
      of Iraq, Suleyman Pasha "The Great,” whose period of enlight¬
      ened rule (1780-1802) largely coincided with that of Selim III.
      When Suleyman came to power, he found that the interregnum
      following the death of his predecessor, Umar Pasha (1764-1780),
      had been used by the bedouins of the Middle Euphrates, Arabia,
      and Syria, to ravage the countryside and defy the authority of the
      central government. At the same time, local rulers had declared
      their independence in the north at Mosul and Mardin and in the
      south at Basra, withholding the tax revenues of their areas for
      their own treasuries. To meet these challenges, Suleyman first
      had to establish his position in Baghdad itself. By restoring order
      and security in the capital, he gained the support of the local
      merchants, whose businesses had been ruined by the previous
      disorder. At the same time he found the long-established Janis¬
      sary corps to be as disorganized and ill-fitted for fighting as were
      their namesakes in Istanbul, while the Mamluks were dispirited
      and reduced in numbers as a result of the long years of factional
      disputes. Suleyman decided to rebuild the Mamluk forces to pro¬
      vide the base for his power. To do this he imported large numbers
      of slaves from Georgia and quickly trained them into an effective
      fighting force. He then appointed the best of them as officers in