




                           Internal Revolts and Foreign ITars
Anatolian notable families were united in their obedience to the        217
Sultan."


                     The Arab Provinces
  In Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and Arabia, Ottoman weakness also left
political vacuums, but these were filled less by local movements
with popular support than they were by Ottoman officials and
Mamluk and bedouin chiefs' who sought to seize power for their
own benefit. The Arabic-speaking natives were no more than pas¬
sive observers of their struggles, neither participating in nor
benefiting from them.
  During the last half of the seventeenth century, power in Otto¬
man Egypt gradually fell from the hands of Ottoman officials,
who composed the official hierarchy of government, to their Mam¬
luk slaves, who gained their freedom and rose to be rulers and
masters. By 1671, the transition from Ottoman to Mamluk con¬
trol was largely complete, with most of the administrative and
military positions being filled by members of the Mamluk fac¬
tions, the leader of the most important of these acting as the real
ruler of the country with the title Sheyh ul-Beled or "chief of the
city.” Only the position of governor (vali) continued to be filled by
vezirs appointed from Istanbul. While these governors relin¬
quished most of their administrative functions to the Sheyh ul-
Beled, they continued to perform an important role by playing
off the various Mamluk factions against one another and keeping
them relatively equal so that they were eager and willing to rec¬
ognize the Sultan’s suzerainty and to pay the taxes and tribute he
demanded in return for his support. So long as the governors were
able to maintain such a balance, the Ottoman treasury secured
sufficient revenues to fulfill its financial needs in Egypt, and was
content to leave the actual functioning of the government in the
hands of the Mamluks. But after 1779, Egypt fell under the con¬
trol of a Mamluk coalition led by Murad and Ibrahim Beys, who
ruled almost continuously for the rest of the century. For a time
they continued to pay their taxes and tribute. But once they had
eliminated their rivals and established virtually unopposed rule
after 1783, they reduced and largely ended their payments. Only




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
218   then did the Porte send a military expedition to curb them, under
      the leadership of the Grand Admiral) Gazi Hasan Pasha (1786).
      His object was not to restore direct Ottoman administration since
      he was well aware that the Porte would lack the power to enforce
      such a position once his expeditionary force returned to Istanbul.
      Rather he sought only to restore the various Mamluk factions so
      they would be able to administer the country while paying for the
      governor’s encouragement and support.' Since the outbreak of a
      new war with Russia (1787) forced Gazi Hasan to leave before he
      could bring about a satisfactory solution, it was not long before
      Murad and Ibrahim returned to power. As a result of Hasan’s
      work in building up the other Mamluk factions, however, Murad
      and Ibrahim never were able to eliminate their rivals entirely
      thereafter, and they remained sufficiently dependent on the Porte
      to be forced to pay taxes and tribute although at an ever-decreas¬
      ing rate.
        As a result of this rivalry, during the last quarter of the eight¬
      eenth century there were constant struggles among the various
      Mamluk factions, with Murad and Ibrahim never being able to
      achieve sufficient strength to overcome them and establish rela¬
      tive calm. Each faction ravaged town and country alike to finance
      its efforts, and none of them had the ability or time to perform the
      duties of police and administration needed to keep order and se¬
      curity in the land. Consequently by 1798 Egypt was in political,
      economic, and social chaos. The depredations of Mamluk and
      bedouin bands, the disintegration of the irrigation system, and
      the ravages of plague rapidly depopulated the country and left it
      an easy prey to whoever chose to attack it from outside.^
        In Syria the outstanding Mamluk leader of Selim Ill’s time was
      Ahmed Jezzar Pasha. Originally a Bosnian, he entered Ottoman
      service in the household of Hekimoglu Ali Pasha and in 1756
      accompanied his master to Egypt, where he was appointed gov¬
      ernor. When Ali returned to Istanbul at the end of his term,
      Ahmed managed to remain in Cairo and soon allied himself with
      the famous Ali Bey al-Kabir, first as the slave of one of All’s
      Mamluks and later as a Mamluk of Ali himself. It was during this
      period that Ahmed acquired the nickname of Jezzar (the butcher)
      as the result of his ferocious efforts in the internecine Mamluk