


                                    Anatolia

         By the end of the eighteenth century, and throughout Selim
      Ill’s reign, notables and Derebeys ruled all of eastern Anatolia




                         Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
and much of the west, with only Cilicia and the districts of          215
Kiitahya, Manisa, Aydin, and Menteshe in the southwest remain¬
ing under some sort of direct administration hy officials sent from
Istanbul. Among the most important and long-lived ruling fami¬
lies of this kind in Selim’s time were the Kiichilk Alioglu around
Payas and Adana, the Ilyasoglu in the area of Milas and Mente¬
she, the Tekeli Ibrahimoglu at Antalya, the Tuzjuoglu at Rize,
the Jemshitoglu around Trebizond, the Nazuhoglu at Gediz, the
Kalyonjuoglu in Bilejik, the-Ajemoglu at Ushak, the Yilanhoglu
at Sparta, and the Katiboglu family of Izmir. Of particular inter¬
est and reputatioij were the Karaosmanoglu, who dominated
large areas of southwestern Anatolia, the Chapanoglu, who con¬
trolled much of the central plateau, and the Janikli Ali Pashao-
glu, who ruled the northeast. These we must consider in more
detail.
  Founded late in the seventeenth century by Mehmed Chavu-
shoglu Kara Osman Agha (d. 1706), the Karaosmanoglu dynasty
was a Turkoman family which first rose to power in the area of
Manisa. During the eighteenth century, it extended its direct
control to the districts of Aydin, Bergama, and Saruhan, and its
influence to most of western Anatolia from the greater Menderes
River all the way to Izmir and the Sea of Marmara. Throughout
Selim Ill’s reign, its leaders strongly supported his reforms and
participated actively in the development of the Nizctm-i Jedid
army, both by supplying money and men to the corps in Istanbul
and by accepting officers sent to train its own men in the new
tactics and weapons.^
  The Chapanoglu dynasty was established at Yozgat in the early
years of the eighteenth century and held power in the districts of
Kayseri, Sivas, Amasya, Chorum, Tokat, Ankara, Konya, and
Nigde in central Anatolia during the remainder of the century.
Under Selim, Chapanoglu Suleyman Bey extended his rule south
to Karaman and at times east to Diyarbekir, and he also played
an important role in developing the Nizam-i Jedid army in his
area. At the same time, much of his energy was absorbed by ri¬
valry with the Janikli dynasty ruling to the east, against whose
rebellious ambitions he became the Sultan’s principal military
arm.'^




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
                                                 l’




216          The Janikli d5niasty was the most active and rebellious of the
           Anatolian notable groups during Splim’s time. It first became
           powerful in northeastern Anatolia during the last quarter of the
           eighteenth century, when its founder, Janikli Ali Pasha (1720-
           1785), was given territories there in return for his military serv¬
           ices to the Porte in the war against Russia which ended in 1774.^
           In 1771, he was appointed governor of Trebizond, which remained
           as the center of the family power thereafter. After his death in
           1785, the bulk of his possessions wept to'his lieutenant Abdullah
           Pasha, while his son Battal Hiiseyin Pasha was given only Sinop
           and Janik. Battal was quite unhappy about this, so when he and
           his son Tayyar Mehmed Pasha were assigned to defend the Cau¬
           casus and Anapa against the Russians in the war of 1787-1792,
           they betrayed their supporters as well as the Sultan and sur¬
           rendered the fort and its environs to the Russians, whose service
           they entered. In Istanbul, both were accused of treason, their
           families and relatives were executed, and their lands and proper¬
           ties were confiscated and turned over, at least in part, to the
           Chapanoglu family, whose rule was thereby extended to eastern
           Anatolia.^
       ^     After the peace of Jassy, the Russian ambassador in Istanbul
      /( compelled the Sultan to restore Battal Pasha to his posts at Sinop
           and Janik. His son remained in Russia in the service of General
           Suvorov, but in 1793 he was dismissed and imprisoned on the
           grounds that he had been in secret correspondence with the Porte
           and was attempting to organize a revolt of the Crimean Tatars
           against Russian rule. Within a year Tayyar was able to escape
           from Russia; but since he still was accused of conspiracy in Istan¬
           bul, he went to his old friend Ibrahim Efendi, governor of Bender,
           who had a good deal of influence in the Sultan’s palace because of
           his previous service as lieutenant of the Sultan’s sister, Shah
           Sultan. In the meantime Russia’s loss of influence with the Porte
           combined with the intrigues of the Chapanoglu led to Battal
           Pasha s dismissal from his posts. Ibrahim Efendi soon managed to
           secure pardons for father and son, however, and Battal Pasha was
           restored to the governorship of Trebizond and Erzurum in 1798.
           In return he agreed to organize and lead an army of 20,000 men
           to assist the Ottoman army, so, for the moment at least, the major