




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
the Janissary corps, and used the Mamluk army to force the Jan¬        221
issaries to accept discipline, training, and new weapons. So with¬
in a short time, he created an effective fighting force for himself.
  Once this was accomplished, Suleyman moved to restore order
in the countryside. He sent out regular expeditions which re¬
moved the bedouin tribes from the cultivated areas and forced
them to perform in his service, both to guard caravans and boats
and to serve in his armies against those of their fellows who had
not yet accepted his rule. The river and road bandits were almost
entirely eliminated, and once again the Tigris and Euphrates
were open for communications. Some of the stronger bedouin
tribes managed to retain their independence, however, and they
periodically threw off Suleyman’s domination and carried out
raids as far as Baghdad itself The leader of this opposition was
Sheyh Thuwaini, leader of the Muntafik tribe of Suk ul-Shuyuh,
who had attracted large numbers of bedouins and Mamluks who
refused to accept Suleyman’s domination. In 1784, Thuwaini
captured Zubair and Basra, arrested Suleyman’s officials, and
forced the local notables to petition the Sultan to appoint him to
Suleyman’s place in Baghdad. To combat this move, Suleyman got
the support of Thuwaini’s rival among the Muntafik, Hamid
al-Thamir, who gathered the bedouins of the Middle Euphrates
and some Kurdish tribes from the north. The combined govern¬
ment-bedouin force smashed Thuwaini at Umm ul-Abbas (Octo¬
ber 1787). Hamud now was appointed in place of his rival as
chief of the Muntafik, and Suleyman re-established his direct
authority in Basra.Thuwaini managed to escape capture and
took refuge in Arabia, where the rising Wahhabi movement
based its power. With Thuwaini’s encouragement, the Wahhabis
turned their attention to Iraq, and their raids in subsequent
years came to occupy most of Suleyman’s attention.
  In Arabia revolt against Ottoman rule during the late eight¬
eenth and early nineteenth centuries was focused in the activi¬
ties of the Wahhabi religious movement and the armies of the
Saudi family, who first rose to power in the middle of the eight¬
eenth century. The founder of the Wahhabis, Muhammad ibn
Abd al-Wahhab, was born in 1703 at Ayaina, near Riyadh. He
was the son of an extremely pious local judge who bitterly op-




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
222   posed the way in which his religion, as it was practiced in central
      Arabia at that time, had become a cult of superstitious beliefs
      in the efficacy of sacrifices, charms, and visitations to holy places,
      very much like the primitive religions which had existed in Arabia
      in the "age of ignorance” preceding the rise of Islam in the sev¬
      enth century. Muhammad accepted the teachings of his father;
      and after traveling to the Holy Cities and Basra for study, he
      began to preach a message of moral and spiritual regeneration,
      abandonment of idolatrous practiceis,' and return to the original
      religion of the Prophet. As soon as he attracted some followers,
      however, he encountered the opposition of local merchants whose
      businesses benefited from the traffic stimulated by the worship
      of saints and pilgrimages to holy places. They finally forced him
      to leave and return home, where he remained in study and medi¬
      tation until his father’s death in 1740.
        It was at this point that Muhammad moved to spread his mes¬
      sage by allying himself with local civil rulers and working with
      them for mutual advantage. In Ayaina he married the daughter
      of the local ruler, Uthman ibn Muammar, who gave him political
      support for his campaign for the first time. Under Muhammad’s
      spiritual direction and with Uthman’s army, Ayaina was trans¬
      formed into a model Muslim community of the type they hoped
      to spread to all of Arabia. Trees, saints’ tombs, and other objects
      venerated by the ignorant were destroyed; vice was eliminated;
      adulterous women were stoned to death; all opposition was vig¬
      orously suppressed. But Muhammad soon met the same sort of
      opposition he had encountered earlier in the Holy Cities. Not
      only did the populace object to interference in their lives, but the
      local merchants also felt the loss of revenues from the pilgrims’
      traffic, and they finally forced Uthman to get rid of him in 1745.
        Muhammad then moved to the nearby town of Dariye, where he
      rapidly built up a new circle of persons devoted to his message.
      It was not long before he came into contact with the ruler of nearby
      Turaif, Muhammad ibn Saud, who saw in the Wahhabi message
      an opportunity to spread his political rule in the area. Once again,
      Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab allied himself with a political
      ruler for mutual advantage. He provided Saud with a doctrine to
      attract supporters and followers while Saud gave him the finan-