




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
cial and military support and protection needed to spread and         223
enforce his teachings.
  Dari ye now became the center of the Wahhabi moral and spir¬
itual revival movement. People flocked to hear Muhammad ibn
al-Wahhab’s teachings, coming not only from the immediate
vicinity, but from all over Arabia, so the movement soon ceased
to have a merely local character. Muhammad expanded his mes¬
sage to include the idea of holy war against enemies of Islam,
including all Muslims who were not true to their faith, that is,
everyone who refused to accept his teachings, with one-fifth of
the booty from su9h wars reserved for prince and preacher to
assure the strength and vitality of both civil and religious as¬
pects of the alliance. The wealth and manpower coming through
the Wahhabi movement enabled Ibn Saud to eliminate his princi¬
pal enemies in the Nejd by 1758. With his death in 1765, the first
stage in the rise and expansion of the Wahhabi-Saudi state was
brought to an end.*^
  Abd ul-Aziz I Ibn Saud had assumed actual political and mili¬
tary leadership of the state some time before his father’s death,
so there was no problem or dispute over succession. The bedouin
tribes which had declared allegiance to his father did not hesi¬
tate to transfer their support. It was under Abd ul-Aziz that the
state founded by his father expanded out of the Nejd to rule most
of Arabia and in fact to threaten the foundations of the Ottoman
Empire. Abd ul-Aziz first continued his father’s policy of consoli¬
dating his power in the Nejd by pushing his suzerainty to oasis
after oasis and tribe after tribe, each of which accepted the Wah¬
habi teachings, at least formally, as part of the price of submis¬
sion. The Nejd now began to suffer from drought and locusts, so
to find food and fodder for his followers and their animals, in
1769 Abd ul-Aziz inaugurated a series of raids into southern
Iraq. The raids were successful, and he acquired more and more
support among tribes not only in the Nejd but also in the Hijaz
and along the coasts of the Persian Gulf. As the political succes¬
ses mounted, the religious message became more specific. To the
followers of the Wahhabi message, all the rituals of religion had
to be obeyed to the letter as manifestations of sincere belief, and
all aberrations, including failure to pray even a single time, were




              Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
224   considered to be the worst sort of sin, punishable by death. To sins
      such as the construction of tombs, lighting of candles, and venera¬
      tion and worship of saints and prophets were added the use of
      drink and tobacco and the playing of music, which were considered
      to be heretical innovations since they were not specifically men¬
      tioned in the Koran. All Muslims who had not yet accepted the
      Wahhabi teachings were considered to be pagans or polytheists
      who had to be converted or killed. To be sure, this doctrine alone
      could not have attracted the sincere support of the free-living
      townsmen and tribesmen of Arabia, but the political and military
      success that went with it, and in particular the possibility of
      acquiring large amounts of booty, seemed to be worth the price
      of accepting at least formally the doctrines which accompanied
      them.*®
        At this time, Ottoman rule in Arabia was concentrated at a few
      forts located along the Red Sea coast as stations for the annual
      pilgrimages to the Holy Cities, the ports of Yanbo and Jidda and
      tbe Holy Cities themselves. All of these were under the governor¬
      ship of the Sherif of Mecca, who, in addition to being the repre¬
      sentative of the Sultan, was accepted as suzerain by most of the
      bedouin tribes who lived in the peninsula. In 1787, this post was
      assumed by the Sherif Galib ibn Musaid, who bore the brunt of
      the Wahhabi attacks into the Hijaz during the remainder of
      Selim’s rule.*^ For the moment, the Saudis preferred to avoid open
      conflict with the Ottoman forces, so they continued to concentrate
      their activities in the north and east of the peninsula, with their
      occasional raids into southern Iraq hardly noticed by the center
      of power as anything more than the usual bedouin attacks on
      settled areas. Sherif Galib was much more aware of the religious
      and political threat of the Wahhabi-Saudi movement, and he
      considered it his duty to do all he could to stamp it out before they
      became an important danger. His messages to Istanbul had little
      impact among the increasingly decadent and worldly members
      of the Ulema, however, and without their support he was unable
      to convince the Sultan that major reinforcements were required
      to quell the movement. At the same time he also was diverted by
      internal difficulties, with a revolt led by his brother Abdullah
      preventing him from doing much about the Wahhabis for some
      time after his. accession.*®