



                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
  Some of these Derebeys and notables were closely related to         213
local families and identified the prosperity and security of the 1/
area with their own self-interest. Within limits, such leaders did
a good deal to develop and restore agriculture, trade, and industry
and to protect their holdings against the attacks of rivals. Since
most of them maintained their positions for long periods of time,
they were able to consider the long-term interests of the lands
which they ruled to a far greater extent than could the Ottoman
officials who had to use their relatively short terms mainly to
raise money to pay off the bribes they were forced to pay in order
to secure and keep^their positions. Often the rule of the notables
was therefore preferred by local inhabitants to an3dhing govern- y'
ment officials could accomplish.
  In addition since the military corps, which traditionally pro¬
vided men for the regular Ottoman army, had become disorgan¬
ized and incapable of carrying out their military functions, the ^
Porte was forced to rely more and more on these local leaders for
men to fight its wars. They in turn used these military activities
to increase their own power, by taking vast amounts of booty
from Ottoman and enemy populations alike and by absorbing into
their own armies many of the enemy troops as well as the regular
Ottoman soldiers with whom they served. So in the end, they re¬
turned to their homes with far more powerful forces than when
they departed, leaving the Porte increasingly unable to suppress
their independence.
  In fact by Selim’s time the Porte had little desire to suppress
them, even if it had the ability to do so. The regularity and size
of their tribute and tax payments and the effectiveness of their
military contingents contrasted quite favorably with those from
areas under direct Ottoman rule. Moreover these notables and
Derebeys were able to create, in the capital, political parties
favorable to their interests by providing regular subsidies to
influential persons who did all they could to prevent or frustrate
actions against their patrons.
  The most that the Porte did, or tried to do, was to keep the
loyalty and friendship of the predominant notables to retain the
tribute and military assistance which they provided. This was
accomplished by various means. For one thing, the Porte was well
aware of the fact that the degree to which these notables con-



               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
214    tinued to accept Ottoman suzerainty and to carry out their ob¬
       ligations varied in direct relation to the extent of local opposition
       they had to face. Those who had to fight the attacks of relatively
       equal opponents were quite willing to accept whatever assistance
       the Ottoman officials could give them and to honor their obliga¬
       tions to the Porte in return. When they were able to rid them¬
       selves of their principal competitors, Ottoman control and influ¬
       ence declined accordingly. A major task for the Ottoman officials
      ^ therefore was to keep the conflicting local notables and factions
       equally matched so that all would continue to seek Ottoman
       support and perform their obligations in return. It was only when
       local notables obtained absolute, uncontested power in their
       areas and disregarded their tribute and^ military contributions
       to the Porte that efforts were made to control them by more force¬
       ful means.
         Another means by which the notables were kept loyal to the
       Ottoman cause was by their appointment to official ranks and
       positions, including that of governor in the districts which they
       dominated. In many cases, where military dangers became press¬
       ing, important notables were actually appointed as military
       commanders (serasker) of the Ottoman army on the fronts where
       their forces were needed and used. Under these circumstances,
       the Porte lost its ability to play off, control, and use local factions,
       and its long-range ability to maintain its position and fulfill its
       desires declined accordingly.*
         In the age of the French Revolution, there were innumerable
       "despots,” "tyrants,” and "rebels” operating all over the empire.
       Their constant raids as well as their struggles among themselves
       and with Ottoman expeditionary forces fill large sections of the
       chronicles of the time. To enumerate and describe them all would
       be a complicated, unending, and fruitless task, yet to leave the
       subject without discussing the most important of them would be
       to ignore an essential portion of Ottoman history at that time.