




                         Window to the West
                                                                      200




New Barracks of the Mortar and Mine-Laying Corps, constructed 1793.
See page 124.
Training Ground and Barracks of the Nizam-i Jedid Army and Bostanji Corps at Levend Chiftlik.
See pp. 130-131.

                                                                                                201
                                                                            202




Imperial Cannon Foundry (Tophane) and Barracks of Artillery Corps (Topji)
and Cannon-wagon Corps (Top Arabaji) at Tophane, Istanbul.
See page 140.
Interior of the New Gunpowder Works at Azadli
See page 144.


                                                203
                                                   204




New Gunpowder Works at Azadli, constructed 1794.
See page 144.
The New Drydock at the Ottoman Naval Arsenal under Selim III.
See page 157.

                                                                205
                                             206




The Ottoman Naval Arsenal under Selim III.
See page 157.
Modern Ottoman Ship of the Line, Constructed under Sultan Selim III.
See page 158.


                                                                       207
208
Part IV. Disintegration of the Empire:
 Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars,
             1792-1807
           XV. Disintegration of the
             Empire, 1792-1798




                   /




The Treaty of Jassy left Selim III relatively free from foreign
dangers for almost six years, yet even then his efforts to take ad¬
vantage of this respite to strengthen the empire by internal re¬
forms were for the most part frustrated by the need to undertake
regular campaigns against revolts which sprang up everywhere V
in his empire. These uprisings diverted more and more of his
energy and resources and at the same time sapped the strength
and vitality of the central government.
  Internal disintegration certainly was not a problem unique
Selim’s age. One of the earliest evidences of Ottoman decline —
even in the sixteenth century—had been the central government’s
increasing inability to enforce its will in the provinces. Incompe¬
tent, tyrannical, and dishonest officials, and economic and social
chaos led to the rise of numerous separatist movements, them¬
selves both causes and manifestations of the decline.
  The notables were responsible for one kind of revolt. Individ- /
uals and families who were locally prominent because of wealth
or religious and social prestige had come to occupy influential
places in their communities. They were called notables (ayan) ]C
and were looked to as arbiters and leaders by those around them.
Because of their influence with the people, they were increasingly
consulted and used by Ottoman officials to secure local compliance
        with their orders and desires. During the eighteenth century
 ^      their positions often became hereditary. They assumed the func-
        tion of mediating between the people and the government officials
        and, as the latter became more corrupt and tyrannical, of inter¬
        vening to protect the people from the officials. And finally, as the
        officials no longer were able or willing to carry out the duties of
        government, these notables stepped in to take over police duties,
        apportion and collect taxes, organize irrigation and cultivation,
        arrange for the supply of food an^ otlier necessities, and even
       provide soldiers and military provisions for the Imperial army.
       They thus became the principal administrators of local govern¬
       ment and the defenders of their communities against the worst
       excesses of the increasingly incompetent and dishonest officials
       sent from Istanbul. The Ottoman government began to recognize
       them officially in an effort to exercise some supervision and con¬
       trol over them, but for the most part they continued to be chosen
       locally and to operate in almost complete independence.
         At the same time, cultivators and townfolk driven from their
       homes by vexation, oppression, and insecurity, soldiers fleeing
       from the tyranny and incompetence of their officers as well as
       from defeats at the hands of superior enemies, and tribesmen and
       mountain dwellers, ever willing to oppose settled authority, came
      / together with the worst elements of the population to form bandit
y I    armies which devastated the length and breadth of the empire,
       from the mountains of Bosnia to the valleys of the Tigris and the
       Nile. In the absence of effective government opposition, many of
       them came to control whole districts and even provinces, and
     .^(Aheir chiefs, known in some places as Derebeys (Lords of the Val¬
       ley), made themselves almost entirely independent of central
       control, while the government officials supposed to administer
       their areas became little more than ambassadors to their courts.
       Usually called mountain brigands and usurpers by the Ottoman
       chroniclers of the time, they became for all practical purposes
       vassal princes, maintaining autonomous powers over large areas
       with only minimal acknowledgement of the suzerainty of the
       Sultan. As they came to control the large towns in their areas,
       there was little to distinguish them from the local notables, who
       in many cases led, or at least encouraged, supplied, and used
       them.