




                        Window to the West
                                              i



198   certain that if the Porte did choose to side with the enemies of the
      Revolution, France too would have its friends within the Ottoman
      dominions/* French occupation of the Venetian territories along
      the Adriatic and of various Mediterranean islands served to
      intensify these activities which, although they were resisted
      strongly by Ottoman, British, and Russian agents, were quite
      successful, inaugurating a ferment which led directly to the sub¬
      sequent Balkan revolts against the Sultan.
        Another source of transmission ^hicH cannot be entirely over¬
      looked was provided by non-Muslims in the service of the Porte
      and the Sultan. Selim himself had a German and an Italian doc¬
      tor, who used their positions to tell him of the West and to stimu¬
      late his taste for it.^^ There were European women in the harem
      of the Sultan, and they are reputed to have provided important
      channels of contact between the Palace and the West. Also the
      Jews of the empire as well as Greek and Armenian merchants
      and aristocrats long had been in intimate contact with relatives,
      friends, and business associates living in the various countries of
      Europe. Through private correspondence, they were in constant
      touch with Europe, and it must be assumed that they passed on
      at least a certain amount of the information derived to their
      Ottoman associates. The most direct means by which this sort of
      information was communicated to the Porte was through the
      office of Bash Terjuman, the chief translator of the Imperial Coun¬
      cil and official in charge of relations with foreign representatives.^^
      After the late seventeenth century, this important position was
      held exclusively by members of the wealthy Greek Phanariote
      families of Istanbul, who kept it just because their contacts with
      the West made them more knowledgeable of Europe than their
      Ottoman brothers.^^ In addition, these and other Greek and Ar¬
      menian families often sent their children to be educated in Europe,
      in Italy in particular, thus preparing them both linguistically
      and intellectually to receive the new western ideas of their time
      and to transmit them to the Ottomans at the Porte.^^
        It is difficult to assess the extent to which these Western in¬
      fluences and ideas took root among the Ottomans of Selim’s time.
      The fact that he and those around him did try to imitate Europe
      in some respects, and the certainty that their efforts had some




                          The "New Order" of Selim III
support among rulers and subjects alike, would seem to indicate        199
that there was at least some effect. Yet this should not be over¬
stressed. As we have seen, most of the "reforms” were in fact
traditional Ottoman responses to the needs of the time, and the
relative ease with which Selim was deposed in 1807 indicates his
lack of deep-seated support among rulers and subjects alike.
That the Sultan himself retained in essence the spirit and men¬
tality of the past is demonstrated further by the nature of the
literary efforts which were supported in his court. With the doc¬
trines of revolution swirling around him, Sultan Selim chose to
promote the efforts' of poets and writers who reflected only the
themes and values of the past. Thus the great writers of the French
Revolutionary era in Istanbul were the Mevlevi leader Sheyh
Galib (1757-1799) and his brother dervishes at the Galata monas¬
tery, Hulusi Dede (d. 1805) and Esrar Dede (d. 1797) as well as
Seyyid Vehbi (d. 1809) and the great Fazil Bey (d. 1808), who rep¬
resented the last great flourish of the traditional Ottoman literary
schools. For them, as for their patron, it was the empty, mystical
searchings for the supreme being and the never-ending descrip¬
tions of court frivolities that excited attention rather than the
political, social, and economic problems of their time. That no
modern school of literature appeared in Selim’s time seems to
be clear evidence that the ideas of the West, however freely they
came into the capital, took no root but at best left the seeds for
a flowering which was to come only under Selim s successors.^®