



                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
  In the meantime, as Abd al-Aziz ibn Saud and Muhammad ibn           225
al-Wahhab advanced in age, they jointly named the former’s son
Saud ibn Abd ul-Aziz as political and spiritual successor to pre¬
vent disputes over the right of succession and, just as important,
to assure a continuity of the loyalty of tribal and town vassals
should one or both of them die. With no effective internal op¬
position, the movement maintained its vitality and continued to
expand, and early in 1790, the elimination of the last important
rivals to their power within the Nejd, the Beni Halid princes of
al-Ahsa, set the stage for expansion to the north and south on a
scale not attempte/1 previously.
  Despite the absence of Ottoman reinforcements, as soon as
Sherif Abdullah’s revolt was put down, Sherif Galib organized
an army of about 10,000 men, including bedouin vassals sum¬
moned from all over the Hijaz and even a few places in the Nejd;
and in 1790 he marched toward Dariye, intending to eliminate
the Saudi threat once and for all. When he failed to take the
fortified town of Kasr Bassam, the lure of booty was effectively
dissipated, and the army broke up before reaching its objective.
During the next two years, Abd al-Aziz scattered the Nejd bedouin
tribes which had responded to Galib’s call, thus making very sure
that they would not respond again. At the same time the death of
Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, at the age of eighty-nine, left
Abd al-Aziz as undisputed spiritual as well as political leader of
the community. Between 1792 and 1794, he conquered al-Hasa
and made it an integral part of his state, and with its wealth, he
was able to build a regular administration and army for the first
time. The desert kingdom now was becoming a state, and the
danger which Galib had feared a reality. Wahhabi forces began to
move out of the Nejd on a large scale. Various groups pillaged
the frontiers of the Hijaz and of Iraq and moved into Katar and
Kuwait along the Persian Gulf, with their preachers going along,
arousing scorn for everything the Sultan stood for. The continued
Wahhabi successes and the huge amounts of booty secured in
these raids attracted the fealty of more and more tribes, including
many of the Iraq and Syrian frontier bedouins who were severely
harried by the raids and discouraged by the failure of Baghdad
and Damascus to defend them.^*^ As a result the Saudi army now
became by far the strongest military force in the Arab world.



              Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
226     Up to this time, the extent of the Saudi threat was not under¬
      stood in Istanbul, and the complaints, arriving from Mecca, Da¬
      mascus, and Baghdad continued to be received with scorn. The
      Saudis still were considered to be no more than another one of
      the innumerable bedouin forces which had troubled the empire
      over the centuries, and the regular defenses were felt to be quite
      adequate to deal with them, especially in view of Selim’s desire
      to concentrate on internal reforms at this time. But starting in
      1796, this situation changed rather ^quickly as a result of Saudi
      attacks on the centers of Ottoman power in the Arab world, at¬
      tacks which were at least partially provoked by Galib’s efforts
      to crush the movement before it became a threat.
        Galib’s first attack, in the spring of 1796, was routed by the
      Saudis at Nil, on the caravan trail between the Nejd and the
      Hijaz.^® Suleyman Pasha of Baghdad persuaded Sheyh Thuwaini
      to return from exile and organize a coordinated campaign of all
      the bedouin princes and chiefs driven out of northern Arabia and
      southern Syria by the Wahhabi advance. But just as they were
      about to meet the Wahhabi army at al-Hasa, Thuwaini was as¬
      sassinated by a slave (July 1797) and his army broke up, thus
      ending disastrously the first important Iraqi counterattack
      against the Saudis.The threat of continued attacks both from
      Mecca and Iraq caused Saud to attack and ravage Kuwait in the
      spring of 1798 in order to get needed supplies and camels to de¬
      fend himself. This victory caused most of the Hijaz tribes to trans¬
      fer their allegiance from Mecca to Saud, thus becoming a major
      factor in advancing the Wahhabi cause. In the summer and fall
      of 1798 and winter of 1799, a regular Ottoman force sent from
      Baghdad under the command of Suleyman’s chief lieutenant,
      Kethiida Ali Pasha, moved into the Nejd and captured a number
      of villages. But despite the use of regular Janissary and Mamluk
      soldiers and of artillery, he was unable to take the important
      forts of Hufhuf and Mubaraz. When Saud ibn al-Aziz moved north
      with a rescue army in April 1799, Ali Pasha, fearing he would
      be cut off, abandoned the siege, destroyed all his heavy equip¬
      ment, buried his ammunition, and fled toward the coast with
      Saud in hot pursuit. The Ottomans thus retired and left the Saudis
      in control of al-Hasa without having to pay any tribute or in-