




              Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
232   him a full pardon on condition that he provide military assistance
      to the Ottoman army fighting against Austria. Catherine called
      on all the Balkan Christians to revolt against the Turks and help
      the Russian army and fleet which would soon arrive on the Dan¬
      ube and in the Mediterranean.^® Emperor Joseph sent a Colonel
      Vukacevich to Montenegro and Albania with a similar proclama¬
      tion, promising independence under Austrian protection once the
      war was over. Arriving with 2,000 Austrian soldiers and 400 Ser¬
      bian and Bosnian volunteers, Vukacievich set to work to organize
      and train those Montenegrins wishing to fight the Sultan.®^
        To Scutari in May 1788, he sent an agent named Brugnard with
      several soldiers and splendid gifts for Mahmud. At that time the
      Ottoman army was overrunning the Austrian positions and ad¬
      vancing into the Banat of Temesvar. Fearing that his new friends
      would be unable to help him, Mahmud massacred the Austrian
      agents and sent their heads to the Sultan along with a declaration
      of submission and a promise to join the Ottoman army.®®
        He therefore was appointed governor of Scutari once again and
      his brother Ibrahim Pasha was given the post of mutasarrif
      Ohrid, previously held by Ali of Janina’s son, Veliuddin Pasha.®®
      The two families thus became embroiled in a conflict over terri¬
      tories. The traditional Ottoman device of divide and conquer was
      introduced once again, with the Porte working to balance the two
      families off so they would continue to pay tribute and provide mil¬
      itary assistance while at the same time maintaining order in an
      area where the regular Ottoman officials found it impossible to
      keep the tribes and notables in line. Mahmud’s defection left the
      Montenegrins without the expected assistance from Albania, but
      this did not stop several thousand of them from joining the Herze¬
      govinians and Bosnians in attempting to assist the Austrian
      army during the war. As a result, Kara Mahmud Pasha, who be¬
      came governor of Anatolia and military commander of the Novi
      Pazar front in Bosnia on the death of Abdi Pasha in 1789, was
      sent on several campaigns against them.
        In October 1789, Kara Mahmud led his army against a Monte¬
      negrin rebel force near Podgoritza but was routed; the victors
      then ravaged and burned the Muslim villages in the vicinity.
      Kara Mahmud was compelled to make peace with the Vladika




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
(Prince-Bishop), who agreed to pay tribute to the Sultan in return              233
for the right to annex the entire valley of the Moraka River to¬
gether with the fortresses of Podgoritza and Zabliak.^® The Mon¬
tenegrins had no intention of keeping even this peace, however,
and after new arms and ammunition arrived from Trieste, they
attacked again and pursued Kara Mahmud’s men into Albania to
the point where the Moraka empties into the lake of Scutari
(spring 1790). In a three-day battle, which included a direct clash
between Ottoman and Montene^rairjboats on the lake, the invad¬
ers emerged victorious once again, taking and destroying the fort
of Zabliak before retiring to the north with the spoils of victory.
They then moved into Bosnia and Herzegovina and ravaged large
areas, thus undermining the entire Ottoman effort against the
Austrians along the Save.'"
  For the moment, however, Kara Mahmud ignored the Monte¬
negrins as he turned back to the job of building his power within
Albania. By the end of the war, he had eliminated almost all op¬
position as far south as Elbasan. He therefore came into direct
territorial contact and conflicts with Ali of Janina’s state to the
south. But at this time, he assisted a number of French royalists
who escaped through Germany across the Alps. Since this vio¬
lated Selim’s effort to remain neutral, a third Ottoman expedition
was sent against him in 1793, this time under the command of the
governor of Bosnia, Ebubekir Pasha. Scutari was besieged, but
once again Mahmud routed the Ottoman army and captured its
supplies with the same sort of surprise attack which had won for
him a decade before."*^
  In the meantime, in the south, Ali of Janina responded to the
increasing Bushath threat by emphasizing his loyalty to the Sul¬
tan and serving him wherever desired. In 1792 and 1793, his sons
Muhtar and Veliuddin led a highly successful series of campaigns
against brigands in Macedonia. In return, and also to balance off
the power of the Bushaths, in 1794 the Sultan gave him the rank
of mirmiran* took Ohrid from Ibrahim Pasha and gave it to Muh¬
tar Pasha, and ordered Ali and his sons to prepare a campaign