

                           Kara Mahmud Pasha

        In northern Albania, the principal ruling family was the
      Bushath. The base of the family’s power, was Scutari, which it
      apparently had occupied since before the Ottoman conquest,
      converting to Islam in order to keep its property and position.
      Over the centuries, there were many conflicts for power among
      members of the family, and it was only under Gazi Mehmed
      Pasha in the mid-eighteenth century (1748-1770) that family
      unity was established and its territories united under a single
      ruler.   He managed to gain power by acquiring large flefs and
      turning them into his private property, and also by allying with
      the Malisars (highlanders) against the Tosks of the south. During
      the war of 1768-1774, his son and successor, Kara Mahmud
      Pasha (1770-1796), was given the honorary Ottoman post of
      governor of Albania with the rank of vezir, and he performed im¬
      portant military services against the Austrians in the north and
      the Greek rebels in the Morea. At the same time, he and his sons
      built up the family power by entering into marriage and military
      alliances with the principal Gheg families of northern Albania
      while destroying those who resisted his power. By the end of the
      war, he had achieved such complete control in northern Albania
      that the Porte was forced to appoint him governor of Scutari in
      1779.31 His continued expansion and attacks on Ottoman gover¬
      nors and vassals alike, combined with a failure to pay his tribute
      to the Sultan, Anally led to an attack against him by a combined
      land and sea expedition under the command of Gazi Hasan Pasha
      in 1784-1785. Mahmud was forced to surrender, but in the end he
      was pardoned and restored as governor in return for large pay-




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
ments of tribute and promises to restrain his territorial ambitions       231
in the future.
  But as soon as the Ottoman army departed, Mahmud turned
his attention to Montenegro, which he invaded for the first time
                               f

late in 1785. Having enjoyed some autonomy in the Ottoman
Empire, Montenegro had been attempting to evade central au¬
thority even more since the end of the seventeenth century. By
Selim Ill’s time, it consisted of a league of clans headed by the
council of clan chiefs and the Vladika (Prince-Bishop), whose
main job was to get their agreement on common problems and
unite them in the/military struggles against the Porte. At this
time Montenegro was under the rule of Vladika Peter I Petrovich
Niegos (1784-1830), who, although installed through Austrian
influence, wa^lpse tp .Catherine II, whose court he was visiting      ^
to secure assistance for a new revolt against the Ottomans.®'^
Kara Mahmud used his absence to sow dissension among the var¬
ious chiefs. When he attacked Montenegro, therefore, he encount¬
ered little resistance as he expanded his power.^^ Fearful of a new
Ottoman attack as a result, he contacted Austrian agents in Mon¬
tenegro in the hope of securing an alliance against the Sultan.
Since the Emperor and Czar were then meeting to prepare the
war they were to declare against the Porte shortly thereafter,
Mahmud’s offer was greeted favorably, and he was promised
Austrian recognition as ruler of an independent Albania in return
for his assistance against the Porte and his conversion to Christi¬
anity. On his return to Albania he assembled all the Christian
chiefs with the Muslim chiefs especially loyal to him and swore
them on the Bible and the Koran to fight the Ottomans until the
death. This led to a second Ottoman expedition against him late
in 1786, which was led by Aydoslu Mehmed Pasha and included a
number of contingents of Balkan notables led by Tepedelenli Ali
Pasha, now governor of Janina and Trikala. Mahmud took pos¬
session of the fortress of Rusafa, on the hill overlooking Scutari,
and successfully held off the besiegers for several months. Finally
by feigning surrender, with the assistance of some allies within
the besieging army, he surprised and routed it.^^
  The new war with Russia and Austria in 1787 forced the Sultan
to abandon his efforts to suppress Mahmud and instead to offer