




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
244   Rumelia since the early years of the century. However, his suc¬
      cesses caused the local notables to abandon their differences and
      come together for a supreme effort'against him. Publicly they
      promised to obey his orders and help his campaigns, but secretly
      they sent large sums to Istanbul to finance the activites of his
      enemies, now led by the Grand Vezir Yusuf Ziya Pasha, who
      feared that Hakki would use his victories to return to Istanbul
      and take his place as Grand Vezir.Orders were sent to Hakki’s
      subordinates to sabotage his efforts and ignore his orders. They
      created confusion, allowed trapped bandits to escape, and at times
      openly supplied them with arms and ammunition.Arrange¬
      ments were made for the large-scale dispatch to Istanbul of com¬
      plaints from notables and common folk alike against the rigorous
      measures Hakki introduced to eliminate the bandits. When
      Pasvanoglu’s lieutenant, Hajji Ali of Servi, and the bandit Gavur
      Imam began large-scale attacks in the areas of Tirnovo and
      Plevna, the Grand Vezir was able to use them and the complaints
      to secure Hakki’s dismissal and transferral to Aleppo on the
      grounds that his efforts had been unsuccessful (May 1797).^®
      Thus once again, as so many times before in Ottoman history, an
      energetic and honest official was frustrated by the combined
      efforts of those who benefited from the established order. In his
      place, Shenekzade Mustafa Pasha, military governor of Belgrade,
      was appointed governor of Rumelia and commander of the cam¬
      paign against the bandits, while Seyyid Ali Pasha, governor of
      Anatolia, was ordered to assist him. Bitterly disappointed, Hakki
      Pasha obeyed the order, and with a small personal army crossed
      into Gallipoli on his way to Syria. Even here, he managed to
      eliminate several bandits whom he encountered along the way,
      but the Grand Vezir used these skirmishes to secure his banish¬
      ment to Istankdy Island, where he remained for two years while
      Rumelia lapsed again into chaos.
        With Hakki Pasha out of the way, it was not long before the
      notables and bandits of Rumelia resumed their former activites.
      In the early summer of 1797, Kara Feyzi and others ravaged the
      area of Philippopolis. When Mustafa Pasha moved against them,
      they routed the Ottoman force, after which he pardoned them
      and returned to his base, allowing them to plunder at will. Ali




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                      i

Pasha became so disgusted with Mustafa’s apparent connivance              245
with the bandits that he retired to Gallipoli and prepared to
return to Anatolia, leaving the task of suppressing them entirely
to Mustafa, who was unable or unwilling to do anything/^
  Pasvanoglu now declared his loyalty to the Sultan, but at the
same time moved to take advantage of the political and military
vacuum by occupying the entire area between the Danube and
the Balkan range. He extended his authority to the east, taking
Nicopolis, Tirnovo, and Sistova, and then drove Tirsiniklioglu
Ismail Agha out of Ruschuk and Shumna as the summer came to
an end.^® For the moment the Porte was forced to rely on Ismail
Agha to stop hinf, for Mustafa Pasha seemed unable to do any¬
thing. He was eventually replaced by Ali Pasha of Janina as
governor of Rumelia in the fall of 1797.^*^ With the assistance of
the governors of Silistria and Belgrade, Ismail routed Pasvano-
glu’s army near Shumna in October, and re-established his own
position in eastern Bulgaria.®® Of course Ismail had his own
ambitions in Bulgaria, but for the moment he was happy to co¬
operate with the Sultan since this alliance served to weaken the
only real rival he had in the area. Blocked in the east, Pasvano¬
glu moved west and south, besieging Belgrade and Nish, but in
both cases he was driven off by the local governors assisted by
Ismail Agha.®' In January 1798, Ali Pasha regrouped the Otto¬
man army and moved against the bandits in western Bulgaria,
defeating Pasvanoglu’s lieutenants in a series of battles near
Sofia and Nicopolis and pacifying the area between Ruschuk and
Belgrade. Under his leadership, Gurgi Osman Pasha took Rus¬
chuk and Tirnovo and Kurd Osman Pasha captured Sofia, thus
limiting Pasvan to Vidin itself, to which he withdrew in early
February, fortifying himself for an expected attack.®^
  For the moment things were quiet. Ali Pasha and his lieu¬
tenants retired to Gallipoli and drilled and provisioned their men.
At the same time, a major Ottoman army was prepared at Istan¬
bul under the command of the Grand Admiral, Kuchiik Hiiseyin
Pasha, with the intention of ending Pasvan’s threat once and for
all. At this point Russia proposed joint intervention to protec|,\,
Wallachia from Pasvan. While the Grand Vezir rejected the idea,
he ordered Kuchiik Hiiseyin to set out at once so that Pasvanoglu