


   *The same as beylerbey, the second highest ranking in the Ottoman adminis¬
trative service, immediately after vezir.




                Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
                                      1


234   against Kara Mahmud as soon as possible.         Happy to comply
      with this order, Ali moved into the mountains separating middle
      Albania from Macedonia, taking Ohrid and Goritza from Kara
      Mahmud. These conquests cut Kara Mahmud off from possible
      assistance from the east and at the same time opened the way for
      Ali to make new conquests into Thessaly. Ali now reached new
      heights of power, extending his influence among the Albanian
      clans by marriage alliances as well as by force. His main opposi¬
      tion came from Ibrahim Pasha, who^had 'succeeded his old enemy
      Kurt Pasha at Berat, allied with the highlanders of Suli and
      Shimari. Venice, from its coastal naval bases at Parga, Preveza,
      Vonitza, and Butrinto, provided them with material assistance
      in order to prevent Ali from overwhelming them as well.^^ In
      response to this pressure, Kara Mahmud once again asked for and
      received a pardon from the Sultan, agreeing to pay all his back
      taxes and to participate in a new invasion being prepared against
      Montenegro (1794).
       There the Vladika and his people had been bitterly disap¬
      pointed by the peace treaties. While Russia and Austria had got¬
      ten the Porte to give amnesty to those people of the Balkans who
      had helped their war efforts, nothing had been done to diminish
      Ottoman sovereignty, establish their autonomy or independence,
      or, in the case of Montenegro, confirm the conquests they had
      made in northern Albania, Herzegovina, and elsewhere. So the
      Vladika refused to recognize the peace and continued to harass
      the Ottomans. At the same time, representatives were sent to
      Saint Petersburg demanding that Catherine fulfill her promises,
      but she replied that for the moment the new peace made it impos¬
      sible for her to do anything to help them against the Sultan.^^
        During 1796, Kara Mahmud led two expeditions against the
      Montenegrins, but both were routed. Mahmud was captured and
      beheaded along with almost 3,000 of his men."*® For Ali and the
      Ottomans, this event marked the end of the Bushatli danger, at
      least for the moment, since Mahmud’s brother and eldest son
      began a struggle for power which effectively diverted their inter¬
      ests from their neighbors for two decades, until it finally was set¬
      tled in favor of Mahmud’s son.'^^ There was now no reason for the
      Sultan to build up All’s power, so Muhtar was dismissed as gov-




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
ernor of Ohrid on the pretext of misrule, and Ali was called to        235
serve in a new campaign being organized in the north against the
rising power of Pasvanoglu.^* At the same time, however, Ali
used the new Bushath weakness to extend his power into north¬
ern Albania while continuing his fruitless efforts to suppress the
the Suliotes and Ibrahim Pasha in the south. As for the Monte¬
negrins, their victory ended the long duel with the Bushaths and
left them independent for the moment. Vladika Peter turned to
administrative and judicial reforms and abandoned his efforts to
attack Bosnia and Dalmatia, thus leaving them in peace for a
time.^*^         ^
  In the meantime, to the East, between 1789 and 1796, the Sul¬
tan sent annual expeditions into Bulgaria, but they had little
success against the brigands who infested the area. The local
notables invariably refused to help for fear that the Porte would
interpret any lessening of the bandit danger as a cause to move
against them as well. When the Ottoman governors attempted to
move ahead without their cooperation, they sent formal protests
to Istanbul, and their powerful political allies in the capital usu¬
ally were able to secure the appointment of less active and able
men. In addition whenever the Ottoman army actually did catch
the brigand forces, the brigands usually were able to flee un¬
harmed into the mountains and to resume their activities as soon
as the army moved on.
  The most successful Ottoman governor in this area was Abdi
Pasha, governor of Silistria, who in 1795 was appointed to at¬
tack the strongest of the Bulgarian brigands, Haji Manav of
Vidin and Plevna. Abdi Pasha first tried to suppress Haji Manav
by force, and he took Plevna after a long siege; but when he tried
to move into the mountains to reach the bandit’s main camp near
Lofcha, his army was routed. He then tried a soft approach, par¬
doning Haji Manav and inviting him and his chief lieutenants to
Plevna for conversations and to receive various appointments
and honors from the Sultan. As soon as Manav and his men
reached Yeni Pazar, Abdi surprised and massacred them, but Haji
Manav himself was able to escape and flee south to Gumtiljine,
where he soon set to work gathering new followers.^® For the
moment, however, Abdi was able to clear northern and eastern