




              Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
                                      1


238   conceal the extent of his power from the Sultan and his ministers
      until he was ready to meet them in open conflict.®^
        In 1795, he openly declared his independence from the Sultan,
      beat off an attack by the governor of Belgrade, and rapidly ex¬
      tended his power in western Bulgaria, from the Danube south
      almost to Sofia and east to the environs of Plevna.^® Unlike his
      contemporaries in Albania and eastern Bulgaria, he was in a
      state of open revolt from the start. He' refused to recognize the
      Sultan’s authority and drove out QttOman officials wherever he
      went. All Ottoman efforts to conciliate him with pardons and
      official appointments and honors were brusquely rejected.®^ Once
      his power around Vidin was consolidated, he began to extend his
      financial resources by raiding north into the Principalities and
      west into Serbia.
       Across the Danube, the Principalities had been left in devasta¬
      tion by the wartime campaigns, and the consequent famine and
      plague had been intensified by the exactions of the Greek Phana-
      riote hospodars (princes) who ruled in the name of the Sultan.
      During the decade following the peace of Jassy, six princes in
      Wallachia and five in Moldavia used their short terms to secure
      vast revenues for themselves, with the intrigues of the Russians
      and family rivalries in Istanbul further complicating the situa¬
      tion and worsening the plight of the people whom they ruled.
      The Suzzos were bitter rivals of the Moruzis, who conflicted with
      the Ipsilantis and Callimachis for power in Istanbul as well as
      in the Principalities. Wallachia in particular was ravaged after
      the war by Hospodar Alexander Moruzi (1793-1796), who ex¬
      torted large loans from the local monasteries to buy wheat from
      Bulgaria, which he then sold to the desperate populace at enor¬
      mously inflated prices. What was left was carried off by raiders
      coming across the Danube from Serbia, in particular those sent
      by Pasvanoglu and Ismail Agha. The peasants in the Principali¬
      ties were thus the most completely oppressed of all the Balkan
      peoples in this period.®®
        While things went from bad to worse in the Principalities,
      Bulgaria, Albania, and northern Greece, Selim was making a
      valiant effort to prevent a similar situation from arising in the
      province of Belgrade, located south of the Danube and the Save,




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
separated from Bosnia to the west by the Drina and the Uvatz,         239
bounded on the east by Wallachia and Bulgaria and on the south
by the province of Rumelia.
  The Treaty of Sistova had left the Serbs in deadly fear. Long
years of mistreatment at the hands of the Ottoman Janissary
yamaks (auxiliaries), who garrisoned the country, and the Greek
millet leaders had led thousands of them to join the Hapsburg
army or at least provide it with sympathy and supplies as it
passed through their lands. Many Serbs had retired to Hungary
once peace was reached and the Porte reclaimed the lands south
of the Danube and ttie Save. Many more fled across the Danube in
the months following the peace in fear of Ottoman vengeance for
their wartime treason, and those who remained behind were
certain that they would not easily escape the wrath of the Porte.
  Selim III had no thought of exacting vengeance from his reluc¬
tant Serbian subjects. His main desire was to remedy the sources
of their discontent, in particular the power of the Janissary
yamaks, who in the past had provided the bulk of Serbia’s Otto¬
man garrison. He now felt he could use their inefliciency in guard¬
ing the Danube fortresses as a pretext to move against them. In
1793 he appointed Ebubekir Pasha as governor of Belgrade, with
the task of restoring its defenses, eliminating yamak strength
wherever possible, and above all, conciliating the local inhab¬
itants. His first order was to prohibit the yamaks who had fled
during the war from returning to Belgrade or anywhere else
in the province. He then not only confirmed the amnesty included
in the peace treaties but also invited those who had left Serbia
to return to their homes with guarantees that their former posses¬
sions and positions would be returned. While many of the Serbian
emigres accepted his assurances and returned, most of those who
had risen to become officers in Hapsburg service remained at
their posts at Carlowitz.
  Ebubekir then moved rapidly ahead to restore Ottoman rule
and establish a regime of security, tolerance, and justice as a
model for the reforms which his master intended to apply to the
other provinces as well, once they were restored to order and
obedience. To eliminate the financial base of yamak power,
yamaks were prohibited from holding lands in the province in