




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
242   Pasvanoglu along the Danube', Selim finally decided that stronger,
      more determined, measures were needed to remedy the situation
      in the Balkans while there was still a chance to do so. To accom¬
      plish this, in January 1796 he appointed as governor of Rumelia,
      with the specific duty of stamping out rebel bandits and notables,
      Ahmed Kamil Pashazade Hakki Pasha, who had acquired an
      excellent reputation for honesty, efficiency, and ferocious deter¬
      mination in his previous efforts to reorganize the feudal system of
      the empire.®^ Recognizing the difficulties his predecessors had
      suffered from political interfererifce, Selim gave Hakki Pasha
      absolute and full powers in all matters concerning Rumelia, with
      direct access to the Sultan and with no one having the right to
      question or refuse to obey any of the orders which he issued. To
      carry out his mission, Hakki was given direct command of a force
      of 2,000 artillery, cannon-wagon, and mortar troops. In addition,
      the mutasarrif of Kojaeli in Anatolia was sent with 1,000 riffe-
      men, the Karaosmanoglu family contributed 500, and the Chap-
      anoglu family 1,000 horsemen, all trained and disciplined.
      Hakki also was authorized to requisition all the additional men
      and supplies he needed from the Ottoman governors and local
      notables in the areas of his operations, and the Sultan assured
      him that the Imperial Treasury would provide necessary funds so
      that sufficient numbers of soldiers would be available at all
      times.®^
        Hakki Pasha’s reputation preceded him, and as he left Istan¬
      bul (February 21, 1796) and marched toward Edirne, most of the
      bandits operating in that area ffed north to safer places.®® Many
      of the local notables were overawed and sent protestations of
      loyalty and contributions of assistance. Ali Pasha of Janina even
      sent his son Veliuddin Bey to Hakki’s camp, ostensibly to assist
      him, but actually as a hostage for his father’s good behavior.®®
      Against those who attempted to resist, Hakki took strenuous
      measures. Orders were sent out prohibiting travel or movement
      anywhere in the Balkans without a specific order from his office
      in Edirne. Anyone who assisted bandits in any way, whether
      willingly or under compulsion, was subjected to punishments
      ranging up to execution according to the importance of the bandits
      involved and the seriousness of their crimes. All houses, schools.




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
hans, and caravanserais that sheltered bandits were closed.®^         24S
In addition, notables were officially charged with the duty of
clearing out the bandits in their districts, an obvious move which
previous governors had not dared to attempt for political reasons.
Hakki attempted to divert Pasvanoglu and prevent him from
helping his bandit friends by appointing Ahmed Pasha,'sanja^
bey (district governor) of the Bosnian district of Srebrnitza, to
replace him as governor of Vidin, and charging Hajji Mustafa
Pasha, governor of Belgrade, with the task of installing him in
his new position. But Pasvanoglu quickly and decisively defeated
Hajji Mustafa’s army in the Kraina (April 1796), killing Ahmed
Pasha and forciiig the Serbian army to return to Belgrade.®*^
  Hakki Pasha had his most successful campaign against the
Bulgarian bandits during the spring and summer which followed,
defeating their forces and executing many of the notables who
had assisted them.®® But many of them, led by Sinap Agha, man¬
aged to escape into the Rhodope Mountains, establish themselves
in bastions, and emerge from time to time to ravage the area be¬
tween Philippopolis and Pazaijik.^® As time passed, they began
to establish a regular system of heavily fortified villages in the
valleys as well. Whenever Hakki approached, they were able to
hold out until assistance came from the hills, and the Ottoman
force was usually routed in the end.’’^ At the end of the summer,
however, Hakki Pasha killed Sinap and routed his army by means
of a surprise move into the mountains. This demoralized the
organized bandit opposition and enabled him to clear out the
entire area between Philippopolis and Sofia. Strong bandit ac¬
tivity continued only in the areas around Vidin, Nicopolis, Rus-
chuk, and Silistria because of the strong support and material
assistance given them by Pasvanoglu and Ismail Agha. When the
Ottoman army retired to Edirne for the winter, the surviving
bandits came out of the mountains and resumed their former posi¬
tions and activities in southern Bulgaria. Kara Feyzi now be¬
came the most important of them, capturing Tirnovo and ravag¬
ing the outskirts of Philippopolis.^^
  In April 1797, Hakki Pasha moved back from Edime, and
within a short time he was able to drive out the bandits and estab¬
lish a state of security and calm which had not been seen in