




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
demnities for their previous attacks. As a result, Galib despaired     227
of being able to defeat the Saudis by force, so he agreed to make
peace with them, and in 1799 and 1800 Wahhabi pilgrims were
allowed to come to the Holy Cities for the first time.^^
                               *

  As the century came to a close, all Ottoman efforts to check the
Saudis had failed. This dangerous political and religious move¬
ment ruled without check in most of Arabia. The Sultan’s failure
to punish it caused him tremendous loss of prestige in the Mus¬
lim world, and left it in a 'position to gain new adherents and
new power at the expense of the Ottomans in the years which
followed.          ^                                           yf ,1


                          The Balkans                           ^
  In the European parts of the Empire, conditions engendered by
two wars with Russia had led to the rise of numerous bandit ^
forces, often encouraged, supported, and emulated by the increas¬
ingly independent local notables. Between 1787 and 1795 in
particular, these "mountain rebels,” as they were called by the
Porte, expanded their activities almost without opposition in the
area between the Danube, the Balkan range, and the Adriatic,
and along the Maritsa River. Between Edirne, Sofia, and Bel¬
grade, the roads were infested by bandits who raided caravans,
travelers —and even military expeditions—and exacted heavy
tribute from the towns and villages which lay along their routes.^^
In Rumelia the most important chiefs of this sort were Veysioglu
Halil Usta of Dimotica, Dagdevirenoglu, and his ally Ali Molla,
who ruled the area of Edime, and Tokatjikli Suleyman Agha of
Giimiiljine, whose authority extended as far as Salonika and
Drama. To the north along the southern borders of Wallachia,
Yillik zade Suleyman Agha controlled Silistria and Deliorman;
Ibrail, Ismail, and the Danube shores between them were under
Nazir Ahmed Agha; while the areas of Nicopolis, Sistova, and
Ruschuk were controlled by Tirsiniklioglu Ismail Agha. The
lands between Vidin and Sofia were under Pasvanoglu Osman
Pasha of Vidin, whose forces also ravaged large sections of west¬
ern Wallachia and eastern Serbia. To the west, northern Albania
was ruled by Bushath Mahmud Pasha, notable of Scutari. In the




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
228   south, rule in Epirus was shared by Ibrahim Pasha of Avlonya
      in central Albania; and Tepedelenli Ali Pasha of Janina to the
      south.

                           Ali Pasha of Janina (I)

        Ali Pasha of Janina, descended from a Turkish dervish who
      had come from Kiitahya in the seventeenth century, was born in
      1750 in the town of Tepelen (Tepedelen) in Epirus, where he
      spent his early years. His grandfatjier and father were among
      the numerous district notables who ruled Albania at this time,
      but his father died in battle in 1763, while Ali was too young to
      defend his patrimony, so he fled into the hills and, like many
      around him, became a brigand, gradually building up his own
      band and raiding the surrounding area. At this time, the Ottoman
      governor of Epirus, Kurt Pasha of Berat, was attempting to sup¬
      press these bandits and, to get Ali’s obedience and cooperation,
      invited him to his capital and promised him the hand of his daugh¬
      ter. As soon as Ali disbanded his force and entered Ottoman
      service, however, Kurt Pasha reneged on his promise and a feud
      began which was to end only with his death. Ali then entered the
      service of Kurt’s rival, the mutasarrif (administrator) of Delvino,
      Kokka Pasha, whose daughter he soon married (1761). It was
      not long before the ambitious Ali attacked his father-in-law
      and then proceeded to take over his lands and properties, rapidly
      expanding his power in the area between Janina and the Adriatic
      coast. The Porte recognized his power in 1784 by appointing him
      governor of Delvino in place of his late father-in-law. At this
      point, however, Ali’s old enemy Kurt Pasha, still governor of
      Epirus, managed to have him transferred to the sanjak of Trikala
      in Thessaly, hoping to end his rise by removing him from the
      base of his power. But Ali managed to turn this move to his own
      advantage, acquiring considerable wealth and a large number of
      followers in his new dominion while still retaining his former
      possession. In the new Russian war which began in 1787, he
      rendered important assistance to the Porte along the Danube and
      in clearing Epirus and Thessaly of bandits, and at the same time
      he managed to incorporate most of the bandits into his own army
      while retaining the bulk of the booty instead of sending it to