




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
                                     1
           '      ^    »


240   any way. The district Serbian knezes (princes) were given the
      right to apportion and collect taxes in their districts, and tax
      exemptions or reductions were granted to all married men under
      an obligation to pay. Efforts were made to rebuild damaged Chris¬
      tian churches and to clear the area of bandits and yamciks, and
      peace and security soon were re-established.
        But the yamaks and their partisans found welcome refuge in
      the neighboring provinces, in particillar across the Drina in
      Bosnia. There the eighteenth century had seen the rise of power¬
      ful Muslim feudal beys who, strengthened by the arrival of large
      numbers of Janissaries from the lost provinces north of the Dan¬
      ube, were able to make themselves entirely independent of the
      Ottoman officials, usurping both their revenues and powers. At
      the same time, they were supported by the thousands of Muslim
      refugee Spahis from the ceded areas of Hungary, Slavonia,
      Croatia, and Dalmatia, who were very bitter against Christians
      and were extremely sensitive to any sort of concessions to the
      rayas in the fear that they might be expelled from their homes
      once again. Both beys and Spahis bitterly opposed the reforms in
      Istanbul and Belgrade, and did all they could to defeat them,
      while at the same time oppressively taxing the rayas and caus¬
      ing a series of uprisings, which were bloodily suppressed. By the
      end of the century, the beys were so powerful around the Bosnian
      capital of Sarajevo that the Ottoman governors virtually aban¬
      doned it to them and took up their headquarters at Travnik. At
      the same time, to the east, Pasvanoglu offered a haven to the
      yamaks at Vidin and in the Kraina, and communicated with the
      Bosnian beys in an effort to coordinate their attacks on the re¬
      forms, both in their own provinces and at Istanbul.^**
        As Pasvanoglu built up his power in western Bulgaria, he
      began to raid across the border into Serbia, and in particular
      into the Kraina. This district was located at the northeastern tip
      of Serbia between the Timok and the Danube. It was ruled by
      an autonomous Christian bey who paid a regular annual feudal
      tribute to the private treasury of the daughters of the Sultan,
      and it was therefore subject not to the regular Ottoman taxes but
      only to those which the bey chose to levy to fulfill his obligations
      to the fief-holders. The area was under his direct administration.




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
No Ottomans could enter it without his permission, and he usually    241
provided far more orderly and efficient government than was the
case elsewhere in Serbia. However, with Pasvanoglu’s invasion
all this changed. The bey was quickly driven out and replaced by
one of Pasvan’s men, taxes were increased to pay for the. con¬
queror’s military activities, and many of the yamaks fleeing from
Belgrade were settled there to administer the new order in their
own ferocious way. At the same time, intrigues by Pasvanoglu’s
friends in Istanbul led in th6 spring of 1795 to the appointment
of Shashit Pasha as governor of Belgrade in place of Ebubekir
Pasha, who was transferred back to Bosnia, where he undertook
a similar program of reforms, curbing the power of the yamaks
and the Muslim nobles and Spahis in favor of the local peasants.®®
  In Serbia the new governor, Shashit, vigorously restored the
old order. He entered into close relations with the yamaks serving
Pasvanoglu as well as those in Bosnia, who now fled from Ebube¬
kir and returned to Belgrade in large numbers. When the Serbian
princes came to protest, Shashit informed them that he was re¬
storing direct collection of taxes by the yamaks and ordered them
to return to their homes and tell the peasants to accept the new
situation. The princes then signed a collective petition to the
Sultan warning him of the possibility of a revolt if the governor
was allowed to continue his policies. In July 1795, Selim used
this as a pretext to replace Shashit with Hajji Mustafa Pasha,
chief architect of Belgrade, who was much more sympathetic to
the Sultan’s ideas.®'
  Hajji Mustafa immediately moved to restore Ebubekir’s poli¬
cies. Once again, the princes were instructed to collect taxes,
and the yamaks left in large numbers, fleeing to Pasvanoglu,
who took up their cause and ravaged large areas of Serbia while
retaining his control over the Kraina. Mustafa Pasha was able
to continue and extend his reforms in 1796 and 1797, increasing
the privileges given the Serbian peasants, because Pasvanoglu
now was diverted by new attacks from the east by the Ottomans
and their supporters.®^
  With the campaigns against the bandits largely frustrated by
incompetence and political interference, and with conditions
getting out of hand as the result of the rise of Ismail Agha and