




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Istanbul. On the pretext of pursuing bandits, he seized the entire     229
district of Janina and persuaded the Porte to appoint him its
governor with the rank of vezir in 1788.^^
  With this official position, Ali expanded his power rapidly.
                               ♦

Using the prestige of his military victories, he attracted, large
numbers of the local armatolis into his service, and managed to
use the wartime disorder to attack and kill his old rivals in Epirus
and take over their territories, one after the other. While the
Porte condemned him for these acts, it did not dare to act openly
against him because of his important contributions to the war,
so he was able to extend his power all the way from Elbasan in
central Albania south to the Gulf of Corinth.^® The only impor¬
tant resistance came from the inhabitants of the mountainous
regions along the coast of Epirus, in particular those of Shimari,
opposite Corfu, and Suli, in the hills above Parga, whose inhabit¬
ants had never recognized the Ottoman governors in the past and
certainly did not intend to accept Ali’s rule now. The Shimariotes,
generally Muslim, were ruled by their own beys, who fiercely
kept their independence of one another as well as from the Porte
and united only when they were threatened from the outside. The
Suliotes were mainly Christians who had fled to this region in
the seventeenth century from the lowlands of Epirus to escape
absorption by the Muslims around them. Protected by their lofty
mountains, they were divided into clans, whose chiefs exercised
executive and judicial power. All decisions of major importance,
particularly those of war and peace, were decided by an assembly
of all the inhabitants, who met together when conditions required
it. In times of war, these united forces were led by generals from
clans with traditional rights to military leadership. Since agri¬
culture was impossible in their barren and rocky land, raiding
their settled neighbors in the valleys was their sole occupation;
they also managed to collect a good deal of tribute in the form of
food and money from those who accepted their guarantee against
such action.
  The Venetian rulers of Corfu and Parga long had maintained
their influence on the mainland by encouraging anti-Ottoman
action by the Suliotes and Shimariotes who now, with the encour¬
agement of Russian agents, formed a loose confederation to resist




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
230   Ali of Janina.^® Ali was not able to do anything about this until
      he returned from the Russian war early in 1791. Then he moved
      against the Suliotes hoping to catch them by surprise. But while
      he caught two clans, the rest escaped into their mountain fast¬
      nesses and soon routed his forces, inflicting heavy losses in men
      and prestige during 1792 and 1793.^® Having realized the difficul¬
      ties involved in conquering Suli, Ali abandoned his effort for the
      moment and turned to establishing his power elsewhere in the
      area, particularly to the north, where a new rival was rising.