




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
236   Bulgaria of most of the remaining bandits, and relative order
      and security were re-established. But while he was busy there,
      other bandits increased their activities in the south, raiding all
      over Thrace and much of Macedonia, and cutting off Istanbul and
      Edirne from their regular shipments of provisions from the Princi¬
      palities. During the winter of 1795-96, Abdi Pasha moved south
      and was able to defeat a good number of them, but those who sur¬
      vived secured refuge and assistance froih a number of new power¬
      ful Danubian notables who had taken advantage of Ottoman
      weakness to build large empires of their own and so pose a new
      threat to Ottoman suzerainty of the kind previously presented
      only in Albania.^^ The most important of these were Tirsiniklioglu
      Ismail Agha of Ruschuk and Pasvanoglu of Vidin.

                          Ismail Agha of Ruschuk
        Ismail Agha was the brother of Tirsiniklioglu Omer Agha,
      notable of Ruschuk, who was executed in 1791 because of his
      misrule and his failure to pay tribute to the Sultan. The Porte
      replaced him with a local notable from another family. Ismail
      managed to escape despite orders that he too be executed. He
      then built a small bandit force of about thirty men, who ravaged
      and robbed in the areas of Ruschuk and Sistova for about three
      years. In 1795, the ayan of Ruschuk, then serving also as governor
      of Silistria, sent a large force against Ismail’s camp on an island
      near Sistova, but Ismail routed them, and with the resulting
      prestige he attracted large numbers of followers and emerged
      more powerful than ever.^^ At this point, through the intercession
      of the Hospodar of Wallachia, Alexander Ipsilanti, he was par¬
      doned and allowed to return to Ruschuk and live in his family
      house on condition that he give up his bandit activities and re¬
      frain from interference in local politics (1796). He honored the
      first promise but completely ignored the second. It took him less
      than a year to gather together his father’s old partisans. With
      their assistance he regained power in the city, and the Porte was
      forced to recognize him as notable. His power now expanded
      rapidly as large numbers of bandits joined his service, both those
      particularly attracted by the opportunities offered for booty and
      those defeated by the Ottoman armies and seeking some means to




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
recoup their fortunes. Within a year he also controlled Hezargrad     237
and Tirnovo and was the major power in central Bulgaria from
the Danube to the Balkan mountains.

                           PasVanoglu

  At the same time, Pasvanoglu Osman Pasha rose in the area
of Vidin as one of the most powerful notables of Selim’s reign.
The family originally came from Bosnia, but in 1739 Osman’s
grandfather Pasvan Agha vfas given two villages near Vidin in
return for services in the recently concluded war against Austria.
Osman’s father, Omer Agha Pasvanoglu, a member of the Janis¬
sary corps, inherited these villages and became a minor notable
in the area. Because of his rebellious tendencies, however, he was
executed by the local Ottoman governor, and Osman himself was
able to escape the same fate only by fleeing to Albania. Thus at
the age of twenty-five, he had lost his patrimony and was no more
than one among thousands of landless men then roaming the
Balkans as robbers and thieves in search of their fortunes.®^
  Osman participated in the war of 1787-1792 as a volunteer in
the Ottoman army and on his return to Vidin with a number of
his army friends formed a bandit force and began raids into
Serbia and Wallachia. When the Ottoman governor of Vidin tried
to suppress his band, Osman went into the mountains, built up a
large robber army, openly declared a revolt against the Sultan
and began to devastate the area. Within a year he captured Vidin
and built it into a major fortress. He now attracted into his serv¬
ice thousands of bandits from all over Bulgaria, Serbia, and
Wallachia, and also large numbers of Janissaries, driven from
Belgrade after 1792. He thus became the principal focus of all
the unemployed bands roaming the area at the time, assisting
independent brigands to attack settled areas, and reorganizing
and supplying them when they met defeat at the hands of the
Ottomans. At the same time, since most of his regular force came
from those driven out of Serbia by Selim’s reforming governor,
Osman became a leading opponent of the entire Nizam-i Jedict
program and attracted the allegiance and support of other op¬
ponents of the program, not only in the Balkans but also among
the politicians of Istanbul. With their assistance he was able to