




              Disintegration of the Empire, 1792-1798
246   could be suppressed before tlie foreigners could intervene uni¬
      laterally. So in early April he began to move through Thrace with
      an army of approximately 50,000 mfen. This force was consider¬
      ably enlarged by men and supplies contributed by the notables
      through whose territory he passed, so that it had almost 100,000
      men by the time it reached Vidin early in May.®^ At the same
      time, an Ottoman fleet sailed through the Black Sea and up the
      Danube, bearing supplies, artillery, and heavy siege equipment.*'*
      Wallachia, now under the rule of            Constantine Hangerli
      (1797-1799), was forced to provide hiost of the wheat and animals
      needed by the besieging army, and they were secured by large-
      scale confiscations which ravaged the province just as it had
      begun to recover from the events of the 1787-1792 war.*^
        On June 20, 1798, after careful preparation, the siege began.
      At long last it seemed that the Porte had managed to organize an
      attack which would eliminate Pasvanoglu once and for all. While
      he managed to hold out against repeated attacks during the sum¬
      mer, his defeat still seemed inevitable.*® At that point, however,
      news arrived of an event which changed the entire situation and
      forced Hiiseyin Pasha to abandon the siege: Egypt had been in¬
      vaded by the forces of Napoleon Bonaparte. At long last, Selim’s
      empire was embroiled in the wars of the French Revolution.




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
          XVI. The Eastern Question,
                         1792-1798




While the Ottoman Empire was not directly involved in Europe’s
wars for six years following the Treaty of Jassy, it was naturally
interested and vitally affected by the momentous events taking
place around it. The key issue of its foreign relations at this time
was its attitude toward the French Revolution and in particular
toward the new republican government, which was being ostra-           ^
cized by the monarchies of Europe. Since the Ottoman Empire,
despite its fragility, was one of the few major European powers to
remain neutral, revolutionary France sought its diplomatic ^
recognition as a means, however feeble, to break the bonds of
isolation forged around it, while its enemies strove with equal
vigor to prevent such recognition at all costs.
  The Ottoman attitude toward the Revolution itself was a curious
consequence of self-interest, utter ignorance of European condi-
tions, and pure romance. The Sultan was naturally disturbed by
the violent death of Louis XVI, whom he considered to be a per¬
sonal friend because of their abbreviated exchange of letters in
the years preceding his accession.' While the ideas of the French
Revolution were highly subversive to the entire Ottoman social
and political structure as well as to the position of the Sultan
himself, there was at no time any particular dread of them by the
Sultan and his officials or a desire to join the movement to stop ^
      the contagion. There were many reasons for this contradictory
      attitude. For one thing, in the past, the Ottomans had witnessed
      executions of their own sultans without the institution of the
      sultanate and the society which it maintained being brought into
      disrepute or question. Besides, even the most well-educated
      Ottomans were still sufficiently isolated from Europe that they
      could not only accept the events and ideas of the revolution as an
      "internal affair of Christendom, having no relevance to the
      Ottoman Empire, which as a Muslim State was immune to this
      sort of contagion,”^ but also as additional examples of the essen¬
      tial inferiority of Europe to the Ottoman system. In the end
      Selim’s attitude toward France was determined less by the new
      issues raised by the Revolution than it was by the traditional
      bonds which had brought them togethe,r in the past —mutual
    ^ fear of Austria and Russia and a common desire to strengthen the
      Ottoman Empire as the best means of countering the aggressive
      designs of its neighbors. At the same time, Selim actually went
      so far as to welcome the advent of the Revolution because of the
      very conflicts which it spawned, all serving to divert his enemies
      from his own empire while it lay weak and open to attack. But
      in the end, while sympathizing with France, Selim preferred to
      stand aside, avoiding alignment with either side and playing
      off the ambitions and interests of both to secure their assistance
      for his reforms.^
        To accomplish this goal, Selim required a more intimate knowl¬
      edge of European affairs than his predecessors had, so for the first
      time permanent Ottoman embassies were established in the
A     great capitals of Europe, first in London (1793), and soon after in
    \_Vienna, Berlin, and Paris.^ While these emissaries conducted
      some negotiations with the governments to which they were as¬
      signed, for the most part they acted more to gather information,
      while Ottoman foreign relations continued to be handled with
      the European ambassadors at the Porte by the Sultan, the Reis
       ul-Kuttab and the Bash Terjuman (chief translator) of the Im¬
      perial Council, a post invariably filled by a member of one of the
      Phanariote Greek families. So long as the Porte maintained its
      neutrality, Istanbul was one of the few places in Europe where
      representatives of all the warring powers were bought into un-