




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
{Divan ul-Hususi), which met regularly thereafter to advise the          261
French authorities on the daily problems of administration.^^ As
a result of this activity, the people of Egypt, and in particular
their religious leaders, gained a desire to rule themselves.
  In administration and finance, the flight of the old ruling class
dictated the introduction of increasingly radical changes. At
first, under Bonaparte himself, the changes resulted less from
intentional alterations in structure and practice, as was the case
with the development of representative councils, than they did
from a complete alteration in personnel. Gone were almost all the
Ottoman treasury officials as well as the Mamluks who as tax
farmers had supervised cultivation and assessed and collected
most of the taxes before the arrival of the French. The Treasury
now was transformed along French lines into the Administration
Generate des Finances, and it was put under the direction of a
French economist, Jean Baptiste Poussielgue, who had been
financial director of the expedition since its landing. It was his
job to carry on the administration of the central Treasury and to
arrange for tax collection. The Muslim scribes who had fled were
replaced by Coptic money changers (Serrafs), who previously had
acted as financial experts, advising the Ottoman and Mamluk
officials but never holding official positions. The chief of the guild
of money changers, Serraf Bashi Girgis ul-Gohari, was made
intendant-general of the Treasury, with the task of actually di¬
recting the tax system under Poussielgue’s supervision. This dual
system at the top was paralleled all the way down to the provin¬
cial and village levels, as teams of Coptic intendants and French
agents went to each locality to supervise cultivation and tax col¬
lection under the direction of the French military officers and
with the advice of the local native councils.*®
  Bonaparte chose to retain the old Ottoman tax system intact at
first as the best means of securing as quickly as possible the food
and money needed to sustain his army. While reform might be
preferable, it would disturb the process of tax collection at a crit¬
ical time, so it had to be postponed, with French energies devoted
primarily to making the old system operate as well as possible.
But as it turned out the old system remained more in theory than
practice because of the departure of the Mamluks. Those few tax




                    The War of the Triple Alliance
          A

262       farmers who-were not Mamliiks and those few Mamluks who
          entered French service were left with their possessions, and they
          continued to carry out their traditional functions. But all the tax
          farms and other properties belonging to those Mamluks who re¬
          fused to cooperate with the French or fled to Upper Egypt, or both,
          were conflscated and placed under the administration of a sepa¬
          rate bureau of national domains. This meant that in fact most of
          the rural and urban sources of wealth in the country were admin¬
          istered and taxed by this department, rather than by the depart¬
          ment directed by Poussielgue, and Since it was entirely new and
          created on French lines, the result was considerable alteration in
          the means by which taxes were assessed and collected in the areas
          under its authority. At first efforts were made to preserve the tax
          farm system under state regulation. Copt&and Egyptian Muslims
          were urged to take over the tax farms held by the national do¬
          mains, but few citizens came forward in response to the invita¬
          tion, so in the end the village chiefs were appointed to administer
          directly the lands under unallocated tax farms in their villages. A
          direct system of administration by village officials thus replaced
          the indirect tax farm system previously in use, although for the
          moment at least the old forms remained intact.
      I        The old ruling class was gone. It was replaced by native Mus¬
          lims, in particular by the village chiefs and members of the Ulema
          and by the Coptic intendants. The Mamluks who had dominated
          the country for two centuries lost not only their positions but also
          their revenues so that even when they returned after the French
          left the country, they found the entire basis of their power under¬
          mined. Their revenues and positions were in the hands of native
          Egyptians who had been shown for the first time that it was to
          their benefit and interest to manage the affairs of their own coun¬
          try, a lesson which was not lost on them in the years which
              followed.