




                   \




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
            XVII. The War of the
          Triple Alliance, 1798-1802




                  J.




Erib Bey was still at sea on July 17 when the news reached Istan¬
bul that French troops were landing at Alexandria and an inva¬
sion of Egypt was under way. Thus were inaugurated the momen¬
tous events which were to throw the Porte into the arms of
Britain and Russia and force the Sultan once again to postpone ^
his reforms while the empire was embroiled anew in the wars of
Europe.


             The French Expedition to Egypt
  The course of French military action in Egypt has been the sub¬
ject of numerous detailed studies and need only be summarized
here. The original landings at Alexandria on July 1, 1798, wereX
not opposed.* Most of the Mamluks fled to Upper Eg)T)t without
offering resistance, and those who stayed to fight were routed by
the well-trained and disciplined French infantry at Rahmaniye
(July 13),^ and again at the Battle of Gize (July 21).** Cairo was
occupied without resistance (July 25), and Bonaparte was able to
consolidate his control of the Delta within a short time. But he
was largely unsuccessful in his efforts to catch and destroy the
Mamluks before they could move up the Nile and organize new
resistance in the south.^ As a result, while several expeditions
258       were sent as far as Aswan, Bonaparte never was able to gain firm
          control of Upper Egypt, nor could he even establish French con¬
          trol of its Red Sea port, Quseir.^ His effort to consolidate his flanks
          by conquering Syria culminated in a startling failure to take the
          fort of Acre, stoutly defended by Ahmed Jezzar Pasha with the
          aid of the Ottoman and British fleets and a large contingent of
          Nizam-i Jedid soldiers sent from Istanbul (March 23-May 21,
          1799).® Thus cut off from the east, Bonaparte was isolated from
          home by Lord Nelson’s destruction of his fleet at the Battle of
          Abukir (August 1, 1798).^ With the'expedition doomed to slow
          strangulation, Bonaparte and his chief aides abandoned it in
          search of greater glory in France (August 22,1799), while leaving
          its final liquidation to subordinates. His immediate successor.
          General Kleber, made an evacuation agreement with the Grand
          Vezir at al-Arish (January 24,1800), but this was overturned by
          the opposition of Great Britain and Russia, who did not want the
          Porte to make a separate peace, and who preferred to save Egypt
          for the Ottomans as the result of their own efforts.® Although the
          French subsequently routed the Grand Vezir’s army at the Battle
          of Heliopolis (March 20, 1800)® and managed to gain control of
          much of Upper Egypt by means of an agreement with the Mam-
          luk leader Murad Bey,‘® Kleber himself was removed from the
          scene by assassination (June 14, 1800). His successor Abdullah
          Jacques Menou attempted to establish a permanent French col¬
          ony in the country, but in the end a combined Ottoman-British
          expeditionary force obtained their surrender, and the final
          French evacuation was accomplished on August 31, 1801.“
      A     The French expedition remained in Egypt a little over three
          years. It was cut off from its source of supplies and doomed to a
          sterile existence within two months of its arrival. Efforts were
          made to liquidate it during its last two years. And yet, more than
          any other event or influence, it began the process by which the
      k long-established institutions of society and government in Otto¬
          man Egypt were overturned and replaced by new ones imported
          from the West.*^ This was achieved principally by eliminating the
          old ruling class, Mamluk and Ottoman alike, so that its departure
          left a political and social vacuum which had to be filled by new
          elements. How was this change accomplished? To what extent