




                             Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
was it a product of deliberate policy, and how much was it simply       259
an inevitable and unintentional result of the French presence?
  French policy in Egypt was a curious combination of timid con¬
servatism and radical innovation and change, of professed respect
for native traditions yet a complete disregard for them in practice.
Bonaparte declared time and again that the laws, practices, tra¬
ditions, and customs of the Egyptians had to be respected by his
men, to whom he declared: "The people among whom we are going
are Muslims; their first article of faith is this: 'There is no God
but God and Mohammed is his prophet.’ Don’t contradict them,
treat them as you have treated the Jews and Italians. Have re¬
gard for their muftis and their imams as you have had for the
rabbis and the bishops. For the ceremonies that the Koran pre¬
scribes and for the mosques have the same tolerance that you
have had for convents and synagogues, for the religion of Moses
and of Jesus Christ . . . You will find here customs which are dif¬
ferent from those of Europe; you must become accustomed to
them. The people among whom we are going treat women differ¬
ently than do we; but in all countries, be wbo violates women is a
monster. Pillage enriches only a small number of men; it dis¬
honors us, it destroys our resources, it makes for us enemies of the
people who it is in our interest to have as friends.”'^ And to a
commendable extent these injunctions were obeyed.
  Basically and simply, the French expedition revolutionized
both government and society in Egypt by removing its ruling class
in a single blow, by substituting French and native officials for 7.,
the Ottomans and Mamluks who previously had combined to rule
the country. For however much Bonaparte professed to support
Ottoman suzerainty, the fact remained that in view of the Sul¬
tan’s declaration of war, the only way he could solidify his posi¬
tion was to fight Ottomans as well as Mamluks. French victory
meant the flight of the Ottoman governor and his men, as well as
that of the Mamluks, who comprised the majority of the adminis- 'i"-
trators and tax farmers in the country. In order to rule Egypt, the
French suddenly had to create an entirely new class of adminis¬
trators, tax collectors, policemen, and the like. The conquerors
alone could not provide all of these, not only because their num¬
bers were limited but also, and more important, because of the




                   The War of the Triple Alliance
260   need for persons who knew "Egypt and understood the long-
      established practices which they had to administer. So for the
      first time since the Ottomans conquered Egypt three centuries
      before, the Egyptians themselves were called on to participate
      directly in their own rule.
        Executive authority was divided between French military offi¬
      cers and councils composed of leading mercantile and religious
      figures in Cairo, the provinces, and for a time in the districts and
      villages as well. Each council was charged with legislating, main¬
      taining order, preventing quarrels among various elements of the
      populace and, most important, serving as an intermediary be¬
      tween the people and the French authorities. Thus in many ways,
      they fulfilled the duties performed by notables in Anatolia and
      the Balkans. But there was one essential difference. In Egypt
      these councils were only advisory, and the real military and p)olit-
      ical power remained in the hands of the French officers assigned
      to each place.
        The most important council was that of Cairo, which included
      among its members the Sheyh ul-Sadat, or leader of the seyyids of
      the country, and the head of the Azhar and leader of the orthodox
      Egyptian Ulema, Sheyh Abdullah al-Sharqawi. In addition to the
      provincial councils and the council of Cairo, Bonaparte also estab¬
      lished a General Council {Divan ul-Umumi) to meet periodically
      and debate issues of national concern. Thirteen provinces each
      sent delegations of nine men—three members of the Ulema, three
      merchants, one peasant, one village chief, and one bedouin
      chief—thus representing all elements of the population. The
      first General Council met from October 5 to 20, 1798, and dis¬
      cussed problems of organizing provincial and local councils, civil
      and criminal justice, the law of inheritance, and the tax system.
      It recommended various changes in the Ottoman tax system,
      including the abolition of all past illegal charges, but added that
      it felt the Muslim system of justice and laws of inheritance should
      be maintained. This council was dismissed because of its complic¬
      ity in a popular revolt against the French which broke out in
      Cairo and the Delta in the late summer of 1798. A second council
      was summoned in December of the same year, however, and fif¬
      teen of its members also were chosen to form a special council