


              Ottoman Involvement in the War of the Triple Alliance
                The most immediate result of Bonaparte’s expedition was the
              loss of the Porte to France’s enemies. Great Britain and Russia.
              The news of the French landings created overwhelming popular




                              Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                                       >

feeling in Istanbul for war. Yet while a fetva* authorizing war                        263
was issued on August 3, 1798, no actual declaration was pro¬
claimed because the pro-French party in the Imperial Council, led
by the Grand Vezir and Sheyh ul-Islam, wished to arrange a dip¬
lomatic settlement with France, and the anti-French faction
agreed that a declaration of war would be useless so long ‘as the
Ottoman army and navy were not ready and alliances had not
yet been concluded with Britain and Russia.^® The Porte’s ap¬
proaches to the French were without success. When the news of
Nelson’s victory at Abukir reached Istanbul on August 14, Selim
finally was convinced that it was safe enough to enter the war
formally,^*^ but the'^French partisans in the council, with the sup¬
port of the ambassadors of Austria, Spain, Sweden, and Holland,
still managed to delay the declaration for a time. It was only
after the Russians forced the issue by sending their fleet from ,
Sevastopol to Istanbul that war finally was proclaimed (Septem-                    ■
her 2, 1798).^*’ The pro-French ministers were arrested, and in
their place Yusuf Ziya Pasha, an ally of the Ulema, was made
Grand Vezir and his close ally Ashir Efendi became Sheyh ul-
Islam. Once again, just as in 1791, the demands of war forced
Selim to desert his liberal friends to get the support of the con¬
servatives.^* In Istanbul, the French ambassador and his subor¬
dinates were cast into the Prison of the Seven Towers (Yedikule).
Orders were sent out for the arrest and imprisonment of French
merchants and advisers and the confiscation of their property all
over the empire. Thus did Bonaparte’s rash gamble cost France
its Middle Eastern position and assets, which had been built up
for centuries.
  The die was cast, but it was still some time before the alliance
was formally concluded. While the diplomats talked, permission
was given for the first time for Russian warships to pass through
the Bosporus to take part in a joint naval expedition with the >
Ottomans against the French in the Mediterranean area. Ad¬
miral Uchakov’s fleet anchored at Buyiikdere, fifteen miles north
of Istanbul, while he came to the Porte on September 5 for mili¬
tary talks. The main point of discussion was the immediate prob-

  *Legal opinion issued by a jurisconsult according to the Muslim religious law.




                       The War of the Triple Alliance
lem of how the Ottoman and Russian fleets should cooperate and
what their objectives should be, the Adriatic and Malta or the
coasts of Syria and Egypt. The primary Russian aim at this time
was to prevent a French invasion of the Balkans, so it preferred
to emphasize action to oust them from the Ionian Islands and stop
them in the central Mediterranean, saying that the British fleet
which had recently won at Abukir would be quite sufficient to
blockade the French there. The British, on the other hand, now
represented by their ambassador in Istanbul Spencer Smith,
cared less about this possibility than they did about French inten¬
tions in the Levant, so they preferred allied emphasis on a coastal
blockade to the uncertain results of trying to intercept the enemy
in the wide expanses of the Mediterranean. Because of the imme¬
diate danger in the Adriatic, the Ottoman representatives leaned
toward the Russian position, preferring to use a land campaign
to defend Syria and retake Egypt. In the end, Atif Efendi proposed
a compromise which was accepted by all. The naval campaign
along the coasts of Egypt and S3n:-ia was left primarily to the Brit¬
ish fleet, which was to be reinforced by an Ottoman squadron sent
from Istanbul. The main Ottoman-Russian combined fleet, under
Uchakov’s supreme command, was to move to get control of the
Adriatic and drive the French out of the Ionian Islands, after
which it would go to assist the British in the south.^^
  On September 17, the Russian fleet set sail from Istanbul, with
an Ottoman fleet of approximately twenty-flve ships under the
command of Admiral Kadri Bey following the next day. Two days
later, the two fleets rendezvoused at the Dardanelles, and on
October 1 they set sail for Rhodes to begin the campaign. The
same day a smaller squadron left for Alexandria to join the Brit¬
ish fleet hovering in the vicinity.^^
  Talleyrand now understood that there was no hope of keeping
the Porte out of the hands of Russia and Britain, so he planned to
help Pasvanoglu overthrow the Ottoman dynasty and establish
himself in its place; Talle3n-and prepared to accomplish this over¬
throw by an invasion of the Morea and Macedonia. He was sure
that the Greeks and Ali of Janina would assist him in this en¬
deavor and immediately sent agents to secure their support. But
the Sultan moved first. He promoted Ali to the rank of vezir of