


            \




                  Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
help against any attack, he still refrained from an open alliance       251
and continued to maintain his neutrality.*^
  What of France’s adversaries during this period? Great Britain
still had not formulated a clear Middle Eastern policy based on its
own particular interests. This was to be crystallized only grad¬
ually by the events of the revolutionary period itself. At thfe time,
Great Britain’s attitude toward the Ottoman Empire was based
principally on the need for Russian cooperation against France in
Europe, and so its interests in the Middle East continued to belt
subordinated to those of its ally. Russia’s long-range policy
remained based on the essential presumption that it must acquire
the Ottoman possessions in the Balkans, as well as the Straits,
and that while Ottoman disintegration might not be pushed by
an open attack for the moment, still no other power could step in
to revive the empire or to occupy the portions of its lands which
Russia had reserved for itself. Bonaparte’s successes in Italy
(1796-1797), combined with the rise of French influence in Istan¬
bul before and after formal recognition of its regime, raised in
Saint Petersburg the specter of French naval control in the
eastern Mediterranean and possible French entry into the
Balkans, the Straits, and the Black Sea.*^ The arrival of French
officers to train the Ottoman army and to build fortifications at
the Straits and along the Danube — clearly directed against
possible Russian attacks — Ottoman assistance to refugee Polish
agents, and a plan to send French merchant ships into the Black
Sea to get food for Istanbul from the Anatolian ports all con¬
tributed to Russia’s alarm. And the increasingly insistent and
insulting Russian protests in reply, her demands that her war¬
ships be allowed to use the Straits at will, added to the stepped up
activities of her agents among the Balkan Slavs and Greeks,
only increased Ottoman hostility during          1796   and   1797.*^
  Austria’s activities in the empire at this time were less impor¬
tant as a result of the Emperor’s preoccupation with French
activities in Europe; nevertheless relations with the Porte be¬
came increasingly unpleasant because of difficulties along the
Hapsburg border with Bosnia. A long series of negotiations be¬
tween the two parties, undertaken in compliance with the Treaty




                  The Eastern Question, 1792-1798
      A-
                                                 i'


252        of Sistova, had been fruitless'since local Bosnian resistance to
           frontier rectifications of any kind forced the Sultan to take an
           increasingly rigid stand. At the same time, Spahi raids across the
           border led to a series of complaints to Istanbul and hostile replies
           which further exacerbated relations.
            In the end then, between 1792 and 1797, the Ottoman Empire
           remained out of the European wars more as a result of determina¬
           tion to avoid confiict and of Russian, Austrian, and British preoc¬
           cupation with western Europe than bec,ause of friendly relations
           between the Sultan and the powers'allied against France. Despite
           the official Ottoman neutrality, its dominant sympathies clearly
           lay with Revolutionary France during this time, with French
           influence predominating at the court and in the deliberations of
           the Sultan’s ministers.
             But on October 17, 1797, Hapsburg Austria signed a separate
           peace with France at Campo Formio, by which the Emperor
           abandoned his allies and agreed to recognize the various French
           conquests in western Europe in return for territorial compensation
           in the east. By the terms of the agreement, the Republic of Venice
           was at long last brought to an end, and its territories were di¬
           vided up to satisfy the ambitions of both states. Austria obtained
           soverainty over the Istrian Peninsula, Dalmatia, the Gulf of
           Cattaro, and the former Venetian Islands in the Adriatic, while
           France received the Ionian Islands of Corfu, Paxos, Santa Maura,
           Ithaca, Cephalonia, Zante, and Cerigo, as well as the port cities of
           Parga, Preveza, Butrinto, and Vonitza, located along the Adri¬
           atic coasts of southern Albania and northern Epirus.^® France
           thus joined Russia and Austria as an immediate neighbor of the
           Ottoman Empire. While this gave the French an opportunity to
           offer the Sultan the military guarantees he had so long asked for,
           at the same time, by allowing the establishment of French
           military bases in close proximity to the Ottoman possessions in
           the Balkans, the agreement also created a new threat to the
           Sultan. Selim’s attitudes toward France necessarily changed as a
           result, and there began a rapid reversal of the diplomatic align¬
           ments which had been built up during the previous five years.
              While Selim already was disturbed when rumors of the camp
           negotiations first reached his ears in June, he became positively