




                          Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
easy contact, and their struggles for the Sultan’s favor were, as
a result, especially vigorous and determined. The initiative was /C.
taken by revolutionary France. While its internal regime had
changed, its political position in Europe and commercial interests
in the Levant dictated that its basic policies toward the Porte
remain approximately the same as those of the old regime. Under
the direction of Talleyrand, these policies were pursued with a
brilliance and consistency unmatched by any of its rivals during
this period. While Ottoman recognition of the new government
was withheld in order to retain neutrality, France still strove to
restore the close ties which had gradually weakened after 1756 as
a result of the couft-inspired rapprochement with Vienna in the
last years of the ancien regime. By playing on the latent Ottoman
desire to regain territory lost to Austria and Russia and the fear ^
engendered by the partitions of Poland, France strove to per¬
suade Selim to re-establish the traditional French political and
commercial dominance in his empire.^
  To exert influence in the absence of a regular ambassador,
various means were employed. A French-language press was
established in Istanbul by French merchants, and regular reports
favorable to the new regime were published and distributed to the
leaders of government and other influential persons. Ottoman
requests for technicians and military assistance were generously
and promptly granted.® Stories were spread about Russian agita¬
tion of the subject peoples in the Balkans and continued Russian
ambitions to control the Black Sea and the Straits, and the pres-      (
tige of Great Britain was blackened by association. Bribes were
liberally distributed in Ottoman government circles to secure
policies favorable to France and to counter similar activities on
the part of her enemies. French emissaries were sent to Ali of
Janina and Pasvanoglu as well as to other notables in Albania,
Serbia, Bulgaria, and the Principalities to ascertain their situa-^
tion and secure friends wherever possible. And these efforts
gradually bore fruit. ^
  Even before recognizing the new French regime, the Sultan
and his ministers treated its unoflicial agents who had been sent
to Istanbul with an esteem and sympathy which excited the
envy and anger of the other powers. When the first French agent.




                  The Eastern Question, 1792-1798
Descorches, arrived in June f793, the efforts of other European
powers to prevent his meeting Ottoman officials on the grounds
that he was not accredited were simply ignored. Although he was
required to reside in a private house instead of the old French
embassy, negotiations began despite the continued protests of
the British and Russian ambassadors.® Protests against the dis¬
play of the tricolor, now emblem of the Republic, were met with
amused toleration. The activities of French revolutionary soci¬
eties in Istanbul, their public demonstrations of revolutionary
fervor, and their revolutionary bA)chures and newsletter, were
also openly tolerated.® French ships were allowed to secure re¬
pairs and provisions in Ottoman ports, with the port officials
supplying them with arms and gunpowder as well as food, and
the anguished protests of the ambassadors were met by the reply
that the Porte had to give equal facilities to the ships of all
nations in order to preserve its neutrality.'® Ships flying the
tricolor were even allowed to pass through the Straits into the
Black Sea."
  This sort of sympathy was as far as Selim went in the early
years of the decade. The experiences of the last war convinced him
that his empire could only suffer mortal damage from partici¬
pation in European wars, that no matter what guarantees were
given him by friends or allies, they would in the end consider
their own interests first and desert him at the first opportunity if
it was to their advantage to do so. While he appreciated that the
primary physical threat came from Russia, not France, and that
alliance with France was therefore logically desirable, he refused
official recognition, let alone alliance, so long as France’s triumph
in Europe was not certain. He refused to take a step which would
draw the disfavor of the enemies of France so long as he was not
positive that it could and would defend him against the conse¬
quences of such an action. It was only after the Republic’s vic¬
tories over Prussia and Holland in 1795 that Selim granted
formal recognition and dispatched an ambassador to Paris.
Although an unofficial agreement was made by which Selim
agreed not to join the coalition against France in return for its
unconditional guarantee of Ottoman territory and assurances of