




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Efendi was ordered to go from Paris to Amiens to act as Ottoman         279
plenipotentiary, but to defer to the opinions and desires of the
British and Russian representatives.^® Selim thus hoped to satisfy
the demands of all the powers while retaining his ability to play
them off against one another for his own advantage.
  But the powers were not willing to play. Each continued to
press its own particular demands and work to frustrate Selim’s
efforts to solve his dilemma. A split now rose between Britain and
Russia over Russia’s efforts to mediate a direct French-Ottoman
settlement and its opposition to the special trade concessions
which the British were trying to get in return for evacuating
their troops from' Egypt. Only their common agitation over
Sebastiani’s activities at the Porte and the possibility of increased
French influence there prevented an open break. In the early
months of 1802, Bonaparte also frustrated Selim’s efforts by re¬
fusing to agree to Ali Efendi’s admittance to the Amiens negotia¬
tions on the grounds that he lacked proper credentials, and that
because he had not been present when the talks began, he would
only complicate them by entering at such a late date. He added
that the Porte’s only interest at Amiens anyway was peace with
France, and this issue did not require the active participation of
the Porte since all it had to do was ratify the preliminaries of
Paris in full in order to secure peace.
  Ali Efendi therefore remained in Paris, and the Amiens talks
proceeded without Ottoman representation, and with each of the
powers trying to represent the Sultan’s interest in a manner best
calculated to benefit itself. Bonaparte’s action was well calcu¬
lated, for as time passed, Ottoman resentment against the con¬
tinued British presence in Egypt increased and drove the Sultan
closer and closer to him. In Istanbul, Ruffin and the Grand Ad¬
miral, taking advantage of the increasing Russian-British split,
gradually gained support for full ratification of the Paris pre¬
liminaries. So in March, Selim sent Sidki Efendi as a special
agent to London to demand British evacuation of Alexandria,
threatening immediate ratification if his demand was not met.
Tamara also threw his full support on the side of those favoring
ratification.^^
  Elgin warned that such a course would end the Ottoman-Brit-




                    The War of the Triple Alliance
                               \              •


280    ish alliance and lead to indeffnite British occupation of Egypt.
       He finally convinced the Sultan to send a new plenipotentiary to
       Amiens to negotiate and sign the European agreement, thus
       forestalling the conclusion of a separate Ottoman-French agree¬
       ment.^^ To this mission, Selim appointed Mehmed Said Galib
       Efendi, chief secretary of the Imperial Council and immediate
       subordinate of the Reis ul-Kuttab, an extremely capable and en¬
       lightened supporter of reform, who was admired by most of the
       foreign representatives in Istanbul as, well as by the Sultan.
       Galib was instructed to sign the peafee agreement but to make cer¬
       tain that he cooperated with the British and Russian negotiators
       and did not alienate them in any way. If the British and French
       already had concluded an agreement by the time he arrived, he
       was authorized to sign on behalf of the Porte whatever separate
       agreement seemed appropriate to secure           peace.   Although
       Galib’s mission was suggested by Lord Elgin, Ruffin, at the last
       minute, managed to assure French influence by getting the ap¬
       pointment of two of his agents as Galib’s secretaries and trans¬
       lators, Franchini, one of the dragomans of the French embassy,
       and Prince Moruzi, brother of the former prince of Wallachia and
       member of a Phanariote family long favorable to France.
          Galib Efendi left Istanbul on April 1,1802, actually some time
      ^ after the Treaty of Amiens had been signed but before this news
       reached Istanbul. He arrived in Vienna on May 16, where he
       learned of the treaty from the British and French ambassadors.
      ^ The articles concerning the Ottoman Empire guaranteed the
      A integrity of its possessions as they existed before the war, recog¬
       nized the Septinsular Republic, declared that the treaty included
       the Porte and invited its ratification as soon as possible.^® News
       of the agreement reached Istanbul on April 22. Selim was very
        angry that the British and Russians had accepted a final settle¬
        ment without living up to their promises to consult with an Otto¬
        man plenipotentiary, so while he ratified the treaty by a firman
       on May 13, he sent new instructions to Galib Efendi to negotiate
      Va separate treaty with France without any consultation with the
        British and Russians on the matter. To further express his feel¬
        ings, he recognized Bonaparte’s new Republic of Italy, despite
        strong objections by the British and Russian ambassadors in
        Istanbul.