



                         Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
 Before Galib Efendi arrived in Paris, Ali Efendi resumed nego¬
tiations with the French on the basis of the plenipotentiary
powers sent him for the Amiens congress. By May 1802, a draft
agreement had been reached which included provisions for
French evacuation of Egypt, recognition of the Septinsular Re¬
public, and French agreement not to foment distrubances dmong
Ottoman subjects and to accept the 3 per cent customs duty in
Ottoman ports previously agreed to by the other powers.'^® When
Galib Efendi reached Paris on June 2, he informed Ali Efendi
of his suspension and recall and immediately entered into nego¬
tiations with Talleyrand and Bonaparte, with Ali’s agreement
forming the basis &f the discussions. The French now attempted
to add a provision giving them the right of free navigation in the /n
Straits and the Black Sea, and telling Galib that the Russians
had already agreed to this. When Galib refused to concede the
point, a deadlock ensued, which was only resolved when he re¬
quested permission from the Sultan to grant the French request
and then did so on condition that his government’s authoriza¬
tion would be received subsequently. Selim was now anxious to
secure peace without further delays, so he quickly sent his agree¬
ment to Paris along with his ratification of the Treaty of Amiens.^®
  The peace treaty between France and the Ottoman Empire was
finally signed on June 25, 1802, and ratifications were exchanged
on September 8 of the same year.®® Peace and friendship between
the two powers were restored. Provision was made for mutual
assistance in case of hostilities and for guarantees of each other’s
territories against all enemies. All prewar treaties and capitula¬
tion agreements were renewed, and French merchant ships were
given the right to navigate in the Straits and Black Sea in return
for the same right for Ottoman ships in French waters. Compen¬
 sation for war damages was to be determined by subsequent
 negotiations in Istanbul, and the existing customs duties were
 to remain in effect for French merchants until new ones could be
 agreed on. No mention at all was made of Egypt and the Ionian
 Islands since France had in fact been driven from both by force of
 arms.                                                          ^
   Thus the course of the diplomatic revolution caused by France s
 occupation of these Ottoman territories was reversed soon after
 their evacuation was accomplished. The Triple Alliance was



                    The War of the Triple Alliance
282   broken up by conflicting Russian and British plans for the Otto¬
      man Empire and by the Sultan’s determination to avoid the
      domination of his allies by playing them off against each other
      and against the French. France, by diplomatic means, was able
      to restore the diplomatic and commercial position in the Levant
      which had been lost by her military actions and in fact to gain
      new privileges in the Straits and the Black Sea. Selim had re¬
      gained his lost territories and escaped from involvement in the
      wars of Europe without the kind of damage that previous engage¬
      ments of this kind had cost. Once ^igain he had obtained a short
      respite in which internal reforms might be undertaken, with the
      setbacks experienced by the older military corps during the war
      providing new impetus for change. Once again he was able to
      resume his role of neutrality in the European conflicts which
      soon broke out anew.®‘