




                         Internal Revolts and Foreign ITars
                                                                       X

question of garrisoning and protecting the islands, the allies             269
also disputed the question of whether their vacant orthodox
clerical positions should he filled by priests trained in Russia or
Istanbul, that is, those under the influence of the Czar or the
Sultan.40
                                                             9

  In the fall of 1799, the tension heightened when over 8,000
Russian soldiers were brought through the Straits and landed at Y
Corfu, ostensibly to help the King of Naples against the French
but in fact to strengthen the Russian position in the islands if a
showdown came."** Kadri Bey, while resisting the Russian claims
in the negotiations^ still strove to retain a good working relation¬
ship with the Russians, much to the chagrin of many of his officers
and crews, including his Vice admiral, Abdul-Fettah Bey, who
bitterly resented the Russian demands and wanted forceful action
to remove them from the scene. He communicated with the Grand
Admiral, Kuchiik Hiiseyin Pasha, who ordered Kadri to sail at
once to Alexandria with a large squadron to support the opera¬
tions against the French now that the Adriatic campaign was
over. Kadri refused to go because of the justifiable fear that he
would be dismissed as soon as he joined the Grand Admiral. A
number of his captains then openly revolted against his authority
and sailed out of Corfu harbor toward the south. When Kadri
tried to pursue them, his own crew mutinied and, together with
the crews of a number of other ships, landed on the Albanian
coast and joined Ali Pasha of Janina. Ali, also bitterly hostile to
Kadri because of the rejection of his ambitious demands, accepted
these men into his own army despite the Admiral’s orders that
they be captured and returned to the fleet. Kadri Bey, left with
only six ships manned by reduced crews, was forced to take them
back to Istanbul. The Russians therefore remained alone in oc¬
cupation of the islands.^^
  However, this development did not mean that Uchakov was
free to impose whatever settlement he wished, for by now negotia¬
tions on the final arrangement were going on in Istanbul. There
the Russian ambassador Tamara and the Reis ul-Kuttab were
joined by the new British ambassador. Lord Elgin, who was ad¬
vocating a plan to form the islands into an independent republic
under Ottoman protection in order to keep the Russians out.




                   The War of the Triple Alliance
270   Selim encouraged British intervention in this matter to get their
      support against the Russians, but Tamara vigorously protested
      against British mediation, saying this was a matter which had
      to be decided by direct negotiation between the two allies, and
      Elgin was forced to withdraw. Once again, Britain had to sub¬
      ordinate its newly found interests in the Ottoman Empire to its
      interests in Europe, which required the retention of the Russian
      alliance at all costs.^^           ,
        In the end, an Ottoman Russian, convention was signed on
      March 21, ISOO.'*^ By the terms ot the agreement, the Ionian
      Islands together with a number of smaller islands along the
      Albanian coast were organized into the "Republic of the United
      Seven Islands” or Septinsular Republic. This union was given
      virtual independence, but was placed under the suzerainty of
      the Sultan, to whom an annual tribute had to be paid, and under
      the joint guarantee and protection of both Russia and the Porte.
      The Russians thus were left with the naval base at Corfu they had
      long sought, while the independence given to the republic, to¬
      gether with the right of Ottoman troops to garrison the island,
      seemed to provide the Porte with sufficient assurance that the
      Russians would not be able to extend their influence in the islands
      and use them as bases for later expansion into the Balkans and
      the eastern Mediterranean. While this assumption subsequently
      proved to be without foundation and led to a good deal of friction
      between the allies, for the moment both parties were satisfied.
        The four coastal ports were returned to direct Ottoman sov¬
      ereignty but under a special administration set up to guarantee
      local rights and customs and to protect them from the advances
      of Ali of Janina. Each was to be governed by a special agent sent
      directly from Istanbul. Decrees were issued guaranteeing that
      these agents would abide by local laws and customs and that all
      other local administrative officials would be chosen from among
      the local Christian inhabitants. Full property rights were recog¬
      nized, no mosques or convents were to be built, and no Muslims
      other than the four Ottoman agents were to be admitted at any
      time. Ali of Janina was enraged by the settlement, for not only
      was he forced to renounce his ambitions in the islands and at the
      port of Parga, but he also had to evacuate the three ports he had