




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign VTars
                                                                       1/


taken from the French and recognize the new administration es¬         271
tablished under the terms of the agreement. To compensate him
for these losses, the Sultan appointed him governor of Rumelia.
Ali had to accept the settlement but he vowed to reverse it as soon
as possible.                    '


                  The Conclusion of Peace
  Even before the French evacuation of Alexandria, negotiations
to end the War of the Triple Alliance had begun. In Istanbul,
London, Paris, and Saint Petersburg, the politicians and diplo¬
mats were working to secure a definitive peace agreement, not
only for Egypt and the Porte but for all of Europe. In 1799, Britain
had prevented Bonaparte from transforming the convention of
al-Arish into a separate peace with the Porte, thus forcing Selim
to join his interests to those of his allies in the general European
peace negotiations then in progress. But during the late summer
of 1800, Czar Paul had become unhappy about his ally’s unilateral X
naval actions in the Mediterranean and rigid interpretation of
the laws of neutral shipping in the Atlantic and the Baltic. The
British landings in Egypt and the arrangement under which Ali
of Janina sent two regiments to serve under British command
there had stirred Russia’s resentment against the encroachment
of outsiders on what it considered to be its proper spheres of in¬
fluence, both in the Balkans and in Egypt. Paul therefore was
driven closer and closer to Catherine’s attitudes toward the Porte
and further from his British ally, and as a result in September
1800 he withdrew from the alliance."*®
  While the Sultan’s allies began to compete for his favor, the
Porte itself had been engaging in a form of direct negotiations
with the French through the person of its ambassador in Paris,
Morah Ali Efendi. Starting in February 1800, Talleyrand and
Ali engaged in a series of conversations on the question of a direct
peace between France and the Porte. Ali insisted on a prior French
evacuation of Egypt as a necessary prerequisite, but Bonaparte
said that this would be dangerous unless arrangements were
made to keep Egypt out of the hands of Britain and Russia. But in
fact, Ali did not have plenipotentiary powers to negotiate with




                    The War of the Triple Alliance
                               \              ^


272    the French, and in Istanbul, the new Reis ul-Kuttah, Mustafa
       Rasih Efendi, as the result of British and Russian urgings, de¬
        nounced Ali’s activites and reiterated that the Porte had no inten¬
        tion of making a separate peace without the participation of its
        allies.^^ With Russia’s withdrawal from the alliance with Britain
        in September 1800, Talleyrand became a little less cautious in
        his dealings with Ali, demanding an immediate agreement and
        threatening to send reinforcements to Egypt if no agreement was
        forthcoming. He even went so far to suggest Ottoman complicity
        in Kleber’s assassination. Ali denied the charge, asserted that
        the Sultan would drive the French out by force if they did not
        agree to peaceful means, and continued to insist on French
        evacuation as a prior condition for negotiations. In December,
        Bonaparte wrote a personal letter to Selim in an effort to secure
        direct negotiations, blaming the British for the failure of the
        al-Arish convention and pointing out that France could not leave
        Egypt unless it was sure that the Porte could defend it against
        occupation by others.^®
          Selim was very anxious to secure peace with France, by direct
        negotiations if possible, in order to avoid just the kind of influ¬
        ence over his government which his allies sought. So on July 24,
        1800, he appointed as Reis ul-Kuttah his close friend Mahmud
        Raif Efendi, who was the strongest proponent of an agreement
        with France. So long as the French remained in Egypt and the
        joint Ottoman-British operations against them continued, peace
        was impossible, but as the expedition became little more than a
        mopping-up operation in the spring of 1801, Mahmud Raif felt
        much freer to pursue his objective and negotiate with the French.'*^
          At the same time, following Czar Paul’s assassination in Sep-
      V tember 1800, his successor Alexander I restored the Triple Alli-
      ^ ance. Although the factors which had led to the break remained
        to disturb relations among the allies, Alexander now moved to
        set Russia up as the Porte’s principal protector by trying to medi-
        ate its peace with France in return for economic and political con¬
        cessions in the Balkans and the Levant. In August 1801, Tamara,
        still Russian ambassador in Istanbul, achieved an important suc¬
        cess by securing the release of Pierre Ruffin, the French consul
        imprisoned in Yedikule at the start of the war. Tamara now placed