




                          Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
and Sherif Mehmed Efendi, former director of the Arsenal in           275
Istanbul, was made chief treasurer with the duties of re-estab¬
lishing and reforming the Ottoman administrative and financial
institutions in the country. For the moment, Hiisrev and Sherif
Mehmed understood that they lacked the power to defeat the
Mamluks completely, so they sought to lull them into d false
sense of security by assuring them that the prewar situation
would be restored, while retaining the ultimate intention of
killing or banishing them, or both, in small numbers whenever
                            4

possible.®’'
  The Mamluks, on the other hand, were laboring under severe
difficulties in theif efforts to restore their old dominance. The
French expedition had confiscated their properties and eliminated
their revenues, thus undermining the financial bases of their
houses. Their numbers had been depleted and their best soldiers
had accompanied Bonaparte and Menou back to France, where
they joined the Imperial Army. Moreover the surviving Mamluks
were deeply divided into factions which began to struggle among
themselves openly as soon as the French left. After Murad Bey’s
death, a good number of his followers joined the house of his ally
Ibrahim Bey, who returned from exile in Syria in the company
of the Grand Vezir. But most of them joined in a powerful new
house under the leadership of Bardisi Osman Bey, who now be¬
came one of the most important of the Mamluk leaders. While
Ibrahim and Bardisi Osman were cooperating with each other
for the moment, the other major factions surviving from before
1798, led by Muhammad Elfi Bey and Hasan Bey Jeddawi, bit¬
terly opposed them.®®
   Political struggles between Ottomans and Mamluks and among
Mamluk factions were not new in Ottoman Egypt, but three new
elements now were added to the scene. For one thing, the people
of Egypt, and in particular their religious and commercial leaders,
had tasted the sweet wine of political power under the French and
now sought to continue their influence in the era which followed.
 Seyyid Umar Makram Asyuti, the Nakih ul-Eshraf, Seyyid Mu¬
hammad Efendi, the Sheyh ul-Sadat, and Sheyh Abdullah al-
 Sharkawi, head of the Azhar and the orthodox Ulema, now rose
 to popular political leadership and tried to make certain that




                   The War of the Triple Alliance
276   they would have a voice in the political settlement.®^ In addition,
      there were the Albanian contingents brought to Egypt with the
      Ottoman army, who, under their cotnmander Tahir Pasha and
      his lieutenant Muhammad Ali Bey, began to assert their inde¬
      pendence from the Ottoman commanders, entering the struggle
      for p)ower on their own.®® And there was the British garrison re¬
      maining in Egypt, still under the command of General John
      Hutchinson, which as the strongest military power in the country
      held the balance of power among these various interests and also
      sought to use its position to assurd postwar British commercial
      and political interests in the country.
        Officially the British position was that so long as a vacuum of
      power remained with various parties competing to fill it, the
      French might still be able to intervene and use the situation to
      their own advantage. Britain therefore was trying to secure a
      settlement among the parties to assure the continuation of Otto¬
      man sovereignty and prevent further French interference. Un¬
      officially, however, the over-all commander of the British Expedi¬
      tionary Force in Egypt, Sir Sydney Smith, and his lieutenants
      felt that the Ottomans would never be able to rule Egypt suc¬
      cessfully or defend it against a new French attack. They had
      learned to respect the military and political abilities of many of
      the Mamluk leaders and believed the only solution was to turn
      the country over to them. So during the campaign, they per¬
      suaded Selim to issue an amnesty to all the Mamluks who co¬
      operated against the French, and then they used this amnesty
      decree to make an agreement with Elfi Bey, Ibrahim Bey, and
      Osman Bardisi Bey by which they agreed to continued British
      occupation of the port cities of Alexandria, Rosetta, and Damietta
      in return for promises that the beys would be restored to power so
      long as they made regular payments of tribute to the Sultan.®^
      Officially, Hutchinson did this in compliance with Selim’s am¬
      nesty decree, but in fact he clearly was going far beyond his own
      instructions and directly contrary to the Sultan’s plans for the
      country.
        The Grand Admiral, Kiichiik Hiiseyin Pasha, who was still on
      the scene during the late summer and early fall of 1801, was