




                          Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
Ruffin under his protection and began to work through him to            273
arrange an Ottoman-French agreement.®®
  Mahmud Raif, still striving to avoid the Russian embrace,
asked the British ambassador, Lord Elgin, to mediate a peace
with France with only three conditions: evacuation of Egypt,
recognition of the autonomous Ionian Republic and its evacua¬
tion by all foreign troops, and French agreement to compensate
the Ottoman government for the damage caused in Egypt, in
return for which the Porte would pay all damages for wartime
French property losses throughout the empire. At the same time,
he also opened direct negotiations with Talleyrand by sending
instructions to Ali Efendi to ascertain exactly under what condi¬
tions France would agree to peace, with Ottoman insistence on
evacuation of Egypt as a prior condition for negotiations. France
would have to recognize the Ionian Republic, but in return its
former commercial privileges would be restored.®*
  In the meantime, the direct British-French negotiations con¬
tinued in London during the summer and fall of 1801. Egypt re¬
mained the main obstacle to an agreement, with Britain con¬
tinuing to insist on full French evacuation and threatening to
form a new coalition and go to war if Bonaparte refused. Bona¬
parte now urgently felt the need for peace and decided that there
was no alternative but to accept the British proposal.®^ So on
October 1, 1801, Britain and France signed the Preliminary t
Peace of London, and the long war between them was at long last
brought to an end, at least for a time. In regard to the Ottoman
Empire, Bonaparte agreed to respect Ottoman territorial integ¬
rity and to recognize the Ionian Republic, and in return Britain
did not press the question of French compensation to the Porte
for damage in Egypt.®^
  With the first step toward general peace accomplished, Britain    ^
and Russia renewed their efforts to mediate Ottoman peace with
 France, although Bonaparte became more determined than ever
 to negotiate directly, without outside interference. Lord Elgin
asked the Sultan to entrust Ottoman interests at the future peace
conference to the British representative.®^ Russia and France
signed a peace agreement in Paris which included a secret provi¬
sion that the Russians should mediate an agreement between




                   The War of the Triple Alliance
       /<


274    France and the Porte which would be subsequently negotiated in
       Istanbul.^^ Bonaparte turned to Morali Ali Efendi once again. Ali
       had said that there would be no grounds for hostility once the
        French left Egypt, and their departure had now been assured. Ali
        apparently assumed that Mahmud Raif s instructions sent in
        August were an authorization to conclude an agreement, and
        when Bonaparte agreed to all the conditions mentioned in these
        instructions, he saw no reason to delay negotiations.
            So on October 9, 1801, Talleyrand ai^ Ali Efendi signed a di-
      ^ rect preliminary peace treaty bet>Veen France and the Porte.^®
        France agreed to evacuate Egypt, thus giving the appearance
        that it was acting of its own volition rather than by the force of
        its enemies. France also recognized and guaranteed Ottoman ter¬
        ritorial integrity and that of the Septinsular Republic and ac¬
        cepted the additional guarantee of the islands by Russia and the
      ^ Porte. The question of compensation for property destroyed or
        confiscated, or both, by both sides was to be settled by subsequent
        negotiations in Istanbul, but prisoners would be released as soon
        as the agreement was ratified. All former French rights and
        privileges in the empire would be restored, with the addition of
        the new concessions given to other powers in their peace settle¬
        ments. Ali Efendi thus actually did manage to obtain the condi¬
        tions mentioned in Raif Efendi’s instructions. But Britain and
        Russia wanted more than this. France had to be punished for her
        invasion. Her prewar dominance in the Ottoman Empire had to
        be ended once and for all. And it had to be ended through Russian
        and British mediation so that they would be sure of its taking
        place. Therefore, when the news of the treaty arrived in Istanbul,
        their ambassadors worked vigorously to prevent ratification on
        the grounds that Ali Efendi was not authorized to negotiate or
        conclude such an agreement.
            Events in Egypt following the French evacuation further com¬
        plicated the situation. First of all, the Ottoman authorities and
        the remnants of the Mamluks resumed their old struggle to fill
        the vacuum of power which remained. Selim and his ministers
        hoped to re-establish direct Ottoman rule, so the Ottoman ex¬
        peditionary force was left in Egypt as garrison. Hiisrev Pasha,
        Lieutenant {Kethiida) of the Grand Admiral, was made governor.