




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
actually pro-French and anti-British, and he sent a series of         277
messages to Istanbul warning his master and others of the situa¬
tion.®^ The Ottoman government in turn complained bitterly to
the British ambassador about Hutchinson’s dealings with the
beys. While Elgin in reply only restated the official British posi¬
tion, in his message to London he warned that Hutchinsoh’s ac¬
tions were undermining Britain’s entire position at the Porte.
But Hutchinson went right ahead with his own policies regardless
of all complaints.®®
  Then in mid-October Selim decided to settle the matter on his
own. He annulled all the promises of amnesty and protection
earlier made to thh beys in return for their service. On October
22, the Grand Vezir and Grand Admiral invited the chief beys to
negotiations at their headquarters in Cairo and Alexandria, re¬
spectively, and there arrested them on the pretext that they were
preparing a new revolt against the Sultan.®^ When Elgin and
Hutchinson complained that these actions dishonored their own
king’s promises to the Mamluks as well as those of the Sultan,
Selim refused to listen. At this point Hutchinson, on his own ini¬
tiative, threatened to attack the Ottoman forces in Egypt, and
the Ottoman commanders were forced to turn the prisoners over
to him. He immediately released them, and they fled to Upper
Egypt, where they regrouped their forces and prepared for a new
advance to the north.®® British military intervention thus clearly
upset the Ottoman effort to eliminate the Mamluks. Selim sent a
strongly worded protest to George III declaring that he had a
full right to punish the beys for their many revolts and attacks on
foreigners as well as on Ottoman subjects and asking that Hutch¬
inson be punished and ordered to change his policies. A series of
diplomatic exchanges followed, but nothing specific was accom¬
plished.®®
   Just as Hutchinson’s actions were driving Selim to new pro¬
tests, in London Britain was repeating its demands that he reject
the Paris Treaty on the grounds that he had no right to make a
separate agreement with France without the consent of his allies,
and also because more favorable terms had been secured for him
in the preliminary agreement with France at London. A Euro-




                       The War of the Triple Alliance
278   pean peace conference now was being assembled at Amiens, and
      the British requested that the Sultan give their plenipotentiary
      the right to negotiate there in his behhlf.
        Selim did not wish to accept the British demands, not only be¬
      cause of his anger over the situation in Egypt but also because of
      his desire not to alienate the French, who, now that they were out
      of Egypt, could be used to counter British and Russian influence,
      and who also might attack the Ottoman Empire again, perhaps in
      the Balkans, if they were angered.®^ Bonaparte did all he could
      to widen the split within the Triplb Alliance by sending his old
      friend Horace Sebastiani to Istanbul as a special agent, with the
      assignment of securing Ottoman ratiflcation of the Paris pre¬
      liminaries and using British actions in Egypt to restore France’s
      old position in the Ottoman Empire. He ’also continued to work
      through Russia, which was demanding that Selim accept it as a
      mediator in direct Ottoman-French negotiations to be carried on
      in Istanbul without British intervention.But Selim saw that if
      these proposals were accepted, he would alienate Britain and lose
      its support against possible Russian or French attacks.
        In Istanbul new political factions arose in response to the diplo¬
      matic situation. The Grand Admiral, now back from Egypt, led
      those who, alienated from Britain by the Mamluk problem,
      wanted ratification of the Paris agreement and conclusion of an
      alliance with France against Russia. On the other side, Yusuf
      Ziya Pasha, Mustafa Reshid Efendi, Ibrahim Nesim Efendi, and
      Ibrahim Kethiida led those who felt that the friendship of Britain
      had to be kept at all costs as a bulwark against both Russia and
      France.®^
        In the face of these diplomatic and political pressures, Selim
      sought to play the three powers off against one another as much
      as possible, using their conflicts to maintain his own freedom of
      action. As much as he might have preferred a French alliance, he
      saw that so long as the British remained in Egypt and the Rus¬
      sians in the Ionian Islands, they were a threat to his empire,
      especially since a peace agreement had not been signed. So he
      decided to ratify only those articles of the Paris agreement which
      would not offend the British, while asking the French to modify
      the others to bring them into accord with his allies’ desires. Ali