



                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
hardy mountaineers while Chapanoglu’s men were mainly culti¬           285
vators conscripted for service and unaccustomed to the difficult
terrain of northeastern Anatolia. While Chapanoglu prepared his
expedition, Ta5^ar moved to take the initiative. In January 1805,
he established his main base at Sinop, leaving a garrison of about
50,000 men, including an artillery corps built on European-lines,
under the direction of two Russian deserters from Georgia. He
then took an army of equal size into Chapanoghlu’s territories,
captured Amasya, Chorum, and Sivas, and marched on Suley¬
man’s capital, Yozgat, which he took after routing the defending
army and capturing Suleyman. Bandits from all over Anatolia
now saw in him a man who could successfully lead them to booty,
and they came to join him in increasing numbers. For all prac¬
tical purposes, Ta5^ar Pasha was now the ruler of Anatolia as no
Ottoman force of any size remained there to oppose him.^
  Since Selim’s effort to suppress Tayyar had been completely
unsuccessful, he tried the opposite tack. Yusuf Ziya Pasha, now
retired from the p)ost of Grand Vezir, was sent to negotiate with
him, offering a full pardon if only he would end the revolt. Yusuf s
enemies in Istanbul feared that the prestige he would get from
settling the affair might enable him to regain his old post, how¬
ever, so they sent their own agents to Tayyar to undercut Yusuf
by telling him that if the rebellion continued long enough, the
Sultan would be forced to give him large sums of money and all
his old positions in addition to the pardon. Yusuf responded by
telling Tayyar that if the revolt continued, Selim would also in¬
 sist on his making peace with Chapanoglu and paying indemni¬
ties as part of the settlement. Tayyar reacted by attacking and
 pillaging both camps of negotiators and sending them fleeing
 back to Istanbul. He openly declared his disdain for the Sultan
 and established himself in full independence, extending his in¬
 fluence until it stretched from Trebizond west to Bursa by the end
 of Selim’s reign.^


                      The Arab Provinces

   In the Arab provinces, the local notables were more powerful
 and independent now than before the war. But the Sultan’s suze¬
 rainty continued to be recognized everwhere except in Arabia,



                Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                             s              I


286   where the Wahhahis assumed’ a position very similar to that of
      Tayyar Pasha in Anatolia.

                                    Egypt

        In Egypt, the Peace of Amiens had no immediate result, as the
      British continued to maintain themselves in Alexandria and four
      main Mamluk factions struggled among themselves and with the
      Ottomans, Albanians, and popular elements led hy their religious
      leaders. The British supported Elfi Bey,']t)ut when late in 1802 he
      went to London to get their help f(»r an open revolt against the
      Sultan, he was met with no more than good wishes, for the cabi¬
      net now understood the effect such an action would have on its
      own position in Istanbul. The French supported both Ibrahim Bey
      and Osman Bey ul-Bardisi.® The Ottomans were divided into two
      hostile camps. Hiisrev Pasha had the support of the garrison of
      5,000 Ottoman soldiers left by the Grand Vezir plus a small force
      of Nizam-i Jedid men, partly those brought from Istanbul and
      partly men whom he hurriedly trained locally. But Tahir Pasha
      and his Albanians had thrown off all pretense of obedience and
      were working openly to secure power and revenues for them¬
      selves, in the process cooperating with the Mamluks in ravaging
      cities and towns. The popular leaders at this point supported
      Hiisrev Pasha’s efforts to curb the disorder and re-establish reg¬
      ular administration and security. So long as the British re¬
      mained, they managed to curb the worst excesses of the con¬
      flicting parties and balance them off; but with their evacuation
      on March 14, 1803, the situation was altered considerably as
      each group moved without restraint to further its interests.^
        During the following spring, Hiisrev Pasha tried to curb the
      Albanians by reducing their salaries in order to pay for the
      Nizam-i Jedid troops he was training. The result was a number of
      pitched battles between the two groups, with the Albanians in¬
      variably emerging as victors.® On May 1, Tahir Bey led his men
      in an uprising to secure back pay. Within a few days, they took
      over all Cairo, seized many of the boats on the Nile to secure food
      and supplies, and forced Hiisrev Pasha to flee for his life to Da-
      mietta. Tahir Pasha declared Hiisrev deposed because of misrule,
      assumed the position of Kaymakam for himself, and asked the