




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
        XVIII. Disintegration of the
            Empire, 1799-1806

                                                         9




The Peace of Paris, like the peace signed at Jassy a decade be¬
fore, did nothing to help Selim put down the numerous provincial ^
revolts which were stimulated by the events of the war. They now
emerged to plague him with renewed vigor, thus once again di¬
verting him from the reforms which he might otherwise have
undertaken.


                           Anatolia
  In Anatolia the situation remained relatively unchanged dur¬
ing and after the war. Chapanoglu Suleyman Bey and Karaos-
manoglu Ahmed strongly supported the Sultan and served to
quiet the brigands and introduce the Nizam-i Jedid reforms in
their areas. Battal Pasha acted as governor of Trebizond and
Erzurum after his restoration in 1798, and his son Tayyar Pasha
served the Sultan in the Balkans during the war, thus indicating
that the Janikli family also was now accepting Selim’s policies,
leaving Anatolia quiet.^
  With the death of his father in 1801, Tayyar Pasha returned to
Eastern Anatolia to take over the family possessions, becoming
governor of Janik and Samsun and Muhassil (district administra¬
tor) of Amasya, Merzifon, and Sinop. He also was appointed
284   temporary governor of ErzuruAi and Diyarbekir, in order that he
      would be supplied with the financial resources needed for the
      task of pursuing and capturing Gurgi Osman Pasha, former
      governor of Rumelia, who had now come to Anatolia and re¬
      volted. Tayyar accomplished this within a year; but instead of
      giving him the expected rewards, Selim took away a number of
      his lands and positions and limited him to the Black Sea coast,
      ostensibly at least because of the fear that he still might be in
      treasonable contact with Russian agents. In fact, this action was
      the result of intrigues of the Chapandglu family, which convinced
      Selim and his ministers that the Janikli family was becoming too
      powerful and would revolt unless curbed. The lands taken from
      Tayyar Pasha were given to Chapanoglu Suleyman Bey, who was
      thus made the principal Ottoman agent to curb Tayyar in eastern
      Anatolia, one more example of the old policy of "divide and con¬
      quer” as it was applied to the notables in the Ottoman Empire.
        But Tayyar refused to accept the Sultan’s order. He made him¬
      self entirely independent in his own provinces, ravaging the lands
      around to such an extent that he came to be known as the "chief
      of thieves” among Europeans resident in Istanbul. At the same
      time, he expanded his territory to Samsun and Amasya and de¬
      clared his complete opposition to the Nizam-i Jedid reforms, re¬
      fusing to allow the levy of men or provision of funds or supplies
      for the new army from the lands in his domain.^ By these acts,
      he gained the encouragement and support of Selim’s cousin
      Prince Mustafa, eldest son of Abd ul-Hamid I, who long had
      sought to secure the throne for himself through opposition to the
      reforms, as well as of Yusuf Agha and Ibrahim Nesim Efendi, two
      powerful leaders of the secret opposition among the ministers.
      They worked to arouse popular sentiment in favor of Ta5^ar
      Pasha and against those who sought to suppress him.^
        Selim now feared Tayyar might ally himself with Russia to
      assure his independence, so in the fall of 1804 he dismissed him
      from all his posts, and Chapanoglu Suleyman was ordered to
      lead an expedition against him. Chapanoglu’s army was organ¬
      ized and trained according to the new methods and armed with
      modem weapons, while that of Tayyar Pasha was more of a tradi¬
      tional Turkoman bandit force. European observers felt that never¬
      theless Tayyar had the advantage because his own men were