




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                     •<

So on January 3 and 5, 1799, the Ottoman alliances with Russia       X    267
and Britain respectively were finally signed.
  The Sultan’s alliance with Russia,^® concluded for a period of ^
eight years, confirmed the Treaty of Jassy and provided for mutual
assistance against all enemies and mutual consent to any peace.
Each was to provide necessary materials and supplies for all
troops and naval contingents operating in the territory of the
other, and the warships of each were to have free passage and full
assistance in the waters of the other. In a secret agreement, the
Porte specified that the Russian warships were being allowed to
use the Straits and ports of its empire only for the duration of the V
war, and the two parties agreed to consult on joint naval opera¬
tions with Britain, which was to be invited to join the agreement.
The warships of all other powers were to be kept out of the
Bosporus and the Black Sea. Russia would send an army of 80,000 >
men to help the Sultan in the Balkans but only at a time and in
a manner determined in advance by the Porte.
  The Ottoman-British alliance,®^ also concluded for eight years,
included a formal guarantee of Ottoman territorial integrity,         y
thus finally crystallizing and setting down the new British policy
which had been evolving in the last few years and which was
henceforth to become the basis of British action on the Eastern
Question. Britain was joined to the Ottoman-Russian defensive
alliance. Each of the three powers would treat as enemies any
enemies of the other two. They would consult on common opera¬
tions against all enemies. They would not make a separate armis¬
tice or peace. The Sultan would raise a land army of at least
100,000 men and would use his entire fleet in cooperation with
those of Britain and Russia. Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt thus
had transformed Ottoman enmity for Russia and Britain into an
alliance with them against France, and a new phase of the East¬
ern Question was about to begin.
  Meanwhile in the Adriatic the allied fleets continued their
naval siege of Corfu, while Ali of Janina’s army, now based at
Butrinto, entirely cut off Corfu’s supplies from the hinterland.
At first the Corfiotes cooperated with the French in the fear of
occupation by Ali’s Albanians if the allies won out. The block-




                    The War of the Triple Alliance
268    ade caused such heavy demands and requisitions hy the French,
       however, that the natives finally rose in a series of revolts which
       forced the defenders to surrender to Admiral Uchakov on March
      ^ 3, 1799, thus bringing the first phase of the Adriatic campaign
       to a successful conclusion.^®
         Up to this point the Ottoman and Russian naval leaders had
       achieved a rare degree of mutual trust and cooperation. But
       once the French were driven out, the allies soon fell out over the
       political settlement which was to follow. Ali Pasha demanded
       that he be allowed to garrison Corfu and Parga, but both parties
       refused; Kadri Bey because of the fear of making him too power¬
        ful in Albania, and Uchakov because of the Czar’s desire to estab¬
        lish them as Russian bases, although publicly he used the pretext
        that their Christian inhabitants would b6 pushed to open revolt
        if the Muslim Albanians were left in command. Kadri Bey, while
        happy to accept assistance in pushing the French out and limit¬
        ing Ali’s expansion, did not want to supplant these dangers with
        an even greater danger from Russia. Moreover for some time
        he and his officers had nourished a growing resentment over the
        tendency of Uchakov and his men to ignore Ottoman opinions and
        advice during the campaign. The French insistence on com¬
        municating with the Russians and surrendering to them alone
        further inflamed these suspicions.®®
          Despite these differences, the allies did manage to agree on a
        provisional system of joint occupation. Kadri Bey’s forces ad¬
        ministered the town of Corfu itself and the Russians manned the
        other forts scattered throughout the island. In compliance with
        their preinvasion promises, provisions were made for elections
        in the islands to choose representatives to a senate, which was
        then to draft a permanent constitution which had to be confirmed
        by both the occupying powers before it would be considered valid.
        Most of the islands’ aristocrats had opposed the French because
        of the threat to their positions and properties, and they now ad¬
        vocated some sort of Russian guarantee and protection for the
        islands with the same consideration in mind. They were opposed
        by a smaller group of nobles who felt that Ottoman suzerainty
        and guarantee would, in the long run, interfere less with their
        own independence and that of the islands. In addition to the