




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
end to all illegal taxes. When Hurshid refused, Mohammed Ali            289
told the notables that he would carry out these measures if they
would support him as governor in place of Hurshid. As a result,
on May 14,1805, all the religious leaders and notables of the city
gathered together at the Azhar, deposed Hurshid Pasha on the
grounds that he was a tyrant and responsible for the recent rav¬
aging of the city, and proclaimed Mohammed Ali as governor in
his place. Hurshid refused to accept their decision, saying that
only the Sultan had the right to depose him. While many of his
soldiers remained with Moliammed Ali, Hurshid still was able to
gather sufficient Ottoman regulars to hold out in the Citadel
while the Albanians and the populace besieged it. The siege be¬
gan on May 18 and went on for one month, with the governor
heavily bombarding Cairo in order to maintain his position. In
reply, Mohammed Ali brought his artillery to Mount Muqattam
and began to bombard the Citadel from the rear.
  By this time, Selim was very anxious to settle the Egyptian
problem because of the increasing Wahhabi danger in Arabia. So
in mid-June he sent Salah Agha as agent to Cairo with the duty of
investigating the situation and giving official support to which¬
ever party was in control so peace and order could be restored as
soon as posssble. Salah saw that while the governor was able to
hold out in the Citadel, Mohammed Ali controlled Cairo and the
Delta and had the majority of the people behind him. So he con¬
firmed him as governor and ordered Hurshid to leave the country
with him.*^
 Mohammed Ali thus first gained power by allying himself first
with the Mamluks against the British; then with the people of
Cairo against the Mamluks and the Ottomans; and finally with
the people and the Ottomans, as governor, against the Mamluks.
So long as the Mamluk danger remained, he was content to per¬
form the duties of governor, recognizing Ottoman suzerainty and
paying the regular tribute to the Sultan. At the same time, he
began to prepare the Ottoman garrison and his old Albanian
army for a new expedition against the Mamluks.
  The Mamluk opposition was now led by Elfi Bey, who managed
to eliminate most of the old factional rivalries in order to meet the
danger posed by Mohammed Ali’s rise to power, Elfi Bey had the




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                                 \              i


290     support, of the British and a cdnsiderahle number of Ottoman
        ministers in Istanbul, who intrigued to have Mohammed Ali
        transferred from Egypt and appointed 'governor of Salonika. Elfi
        and the other Mamluk leaders promised faithfully to pay their
        full annual taxes to the Sultan if only he would help them.*®
        Selim’s position was that he wanted to secure peace in Egypt at
        any price so he could get its military assistance against the Wah¬
        habis, and that while he always had wanted to rid Egypt of Mam¬
        luk rule, he did not want it to be replace by Albanian domination.
        So in response to Mamluk demands, he appointed the governor of
        Salonika, Musa Pasha, as governor of Egypt, and named Moham¬
        med Ali to replace him at Salonika. In May the Ottoman fleet
        was sent with one thousand Nizam-i Jedid soldiers to enforce the
        order since it was feared that if Janissaries .were sent, they would
        only go over to the Albanians or the Mamluks on their arrival.
        Elfi Bey also was given permission to build up his force by buying
        slaves in Istanbul, in return for his paying the back taxes which
        he owed. On June 28, the Ottoman fleet arrived off Alexandria,
        and it received large amounts of food and supplies from Elfi Bey,
        whose army then was operating in the Delta. At the same time,
        Elfi turned over one-third of his tax debt to convince the Porte of
        his sincerity and good intentions. Orders were immediately dis¬
        patched to Mohammed Ali in Cairo to prepare himself and his
        men for transport to Salonika.
          But when the order arrived, Mohammed Ali refused to depart
        on the pretext that he was needed in Egypt to prevent revolts and
        violence. On July 28, Musa Pasha landed at Alexandria, and pre¬
        pared to march to Cairo with Ottoman and Mamluk support. In
        the meantime, however, Mohammed Ali had left Cairo secretly,
        and he now surprised and routed Elfi Bey’s Mamluks at Rah-
        maniye, thus depriving the invading armies of their main local
        support. This also convinced the Ottoman commanders that a
        major expedition would be needed to dislodge Mohammed Ali and
        that he in fact had far more general support than Elfi Bey had
        reported. Furthermore Mohammed Ali had been paying his tax
        obligations on time and in full while the Mamluks had paid only
        a part of what they owed. As a result, the Grand Admiral Anally
      '^decided to support him and in mid-October officially confirmed