




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Pasha was appointed as governor, but real power continued to be       293
held by the Janissaries and the notables, their allies, who were
given all the other important positions of govemment.^^ During
1805, Mehmed Pasha gradually regained his former power by
stirring up friction between the allies, who finally began to fight
each other openly in the streets of the city. While the people suf¬
fered at the hands of both parties, Mehmed Pasha held his troops
back, hoping that the allies and the Janissaries would exhaust
each other. But the Janissaries defeated the notables, forcing the
governor to defend himself in the Citadel, now supported by the
surviving notables, who feared Janissary rule above all else. Both
sides bombarded the city, which suffered increasingly from fam¬
ine and plague as well.^^
  Events in Istanbul now affected the course of political life in
Syria. With the dismissal of Yusuf Ziya Pasha from the post of
grand vezir (April 24, 1805), it was not long before his proteges
in Syria and elsewhere suffered the same fate. On June 9, a fir¬
man arrived in Aleppo ordering Mehmed Pasha to go to Tripoli
as its governor and replacing him at Aleppo with Selim’s brother-
in-law, Alauddin Pasha. Ibrahim Pasha joined his son in trying to
prevent the transfer as it threatened the power they had built up
in Syria over the years, but Ibrahim also was dismissed at Damas¬
cus and ordered to go to a lesser post at Diyarbekir.^^
  Alauddin Pasha was actually not able to reach Aleppo until the
winter of 1805 because of the need to subdue a revolt near Kars
first. At the same time, Ibrahim and Mehmed refused to go to
their new posts, instead bringing their armies together and lin¬
gering between Aleppo and Damascus in the hope that their
friends in Istanbul might still be able to annul the orders. In
Syria the local notables were able to use the threat of these ar¬
mies, combined with the absence of the new governors, to re-form
their alliances and restore their power so that when the governors
did arrive, they had little authority.^® This situation remained
without change during the next three years. Aleppo and Damas¬
cus were officially governed by a series of Ottoman vezirs who
actually were under the control of local factions. But so long as
the possibility persisted of an Ottoman expedition, or an attack
by Ibrahim and Mehmed, the Janissaries and notables were com-




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
294   pelled to continue to acknowledge the Sultan’s suzerainty and
      remit their regular tribute and taxes. Although Ibrahim and
      Mehmed tried to get the Porte’s help to reconquer the cities, they
      were unsuccessful because the Sultan was satisfied by the contin¬
      ued payment of financial obligations by the local factions who
      were in control. At times, Mehmed and Ibrahim were able to stir
      up disputes between the notables and Janissaries, but whenever
      they moved to take advantage of the disputes, the alliances were
      always restored and the attacks repelled,^
        In Palestine in the meantime, Jefezar’s lieutenant, Suleyman
      Pasha, made a deal with Ibrahim to take over most of Jezzar’s
      possessions himself while Ibrahim went north to deal with the
      trouble in Aleppo. He now took advantage of the new uncertainty
      to regain most of Jezzar’s territories, while Bashir II concentrated
      on eliminating his rivals in Mount Lebanon and Jebel Druze.^^