




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
296   ing to take over southern Iraq, Hijaz, and even the Yemen. Their
      successes were attracting the allegiance of most of the nomadic
      tribes of the Arabian Peninsula as well as of southern Syria and
      Iraq. And these victories were inevitably strengthening those in
      Istanbul who long had opposed Selim.
        In the summer of 1803, the Porte took cognizance of the Saudi
      threat and tried to deal with it. Orders were sent to Hiisrev Pasha
      in Egypt and Ali Kethiida in Baghdad, ordering them to prepare
      expeditions against the Wahhabis as soon as possible; the gover¬
      nors in Anatolia and the Balkans wtere ordered to raise and send
      contributions of men and supplies to help in the effort. Firmans
      were sent to the bedouin tribes throughout Arabia, reminding
      them of their loyalty to the Sultan and forbidding them any rela¬
      tions with the Wahhabis. Religious tracts refuting the new doc¬
      trines were sent to Cairo and Baghdad for distribution in the
      infected areas.
        But there was little response to the Sultan’s appeals. Jezzar
      Pasha’s death removed the one Arab leader who was strong
      enough to organize and lead an expedition of the magnitude
      needed to overcome the Wahhabis. The only immediate response
      came from Ali Kethiida of Baghdad, who in the fall of 1803 at¬
      tacked and scattered a number of Iraqi tribes who had accepted
      Wahhabi suzerainty. But the rulers in Istanbul still did not real¬
      ize the extent of the Wahhabi military power, so Ali’s appeals for
      reinforcements were denied and he therefore had to avoid any
      sustained contact with the Wahhabi armies.And this was the
      best response the Sultan obtained. Internal political disputes in
      Egypt and Syria at the time prevented the local authorities from
      organizing any expeditionary forces. And the Sultan himself had
      too many other problems in the Balkans to allow him to divert
      significant strength from his garrisons there and in Anatolia.
      The way was therefore wide open for further Wahhabi advances.
        They were not long in coming. In 1804, the Saudis took and
      ravaged Medina and then moved into Iraq, routing the Shamiye
      and Muntafik tribes and advancing all the way to Baghdad. The
      next year, Saud routed Galib’s army and took Medina once again,
      and only his inability to break into the fort at Jidda prevented
      him from making his conquest permanent. While the annual pil-




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
grims’ caravan was able to get as far as Mecca, Saud refused to        297
allow it to complete the rest of the ceremonies in Medina and at
Jebel Arafat without acknowledgment of the Wahhabi doctrines,
so it turned back. The next year it was able to get through only
by acceding to Saud’s demands, thus further damaging the Sul¬
tan’s prestige in the Muslim world.^^
  The Ottomans were unable to do anything. Abu Merak Meh-
med Pasha arrived in Jidda from Egypt to replace the now de¬
ceased Sherif Pasha, but the 500 men he brought with him were
unable to do anything mord than defend Jidda, the limit of Otto¬
man efforts in the past.^^ Sherif Galib finally despaired of getting
any effective assistance against the Wahhabis, so at long last he
tried to accommodate them, allowing Mohammad ibn Abd al-
Wahhab’s grandson to come to Jidda and read the Wahhabi trea¬
tises publicly, and then introducing simplified prayer and pil¬
grimage rituals and banning the use and sale of tobacco in Jidda.
These measures did not satisfy Saud, however, who was deter¬
mined to show that he and not Selim was the real master of the
Holy Cities. To do this, in February 1807, he assembled a large
army outside Medina and ordered it not to allow the entry of the
Syrian pilgrimage, which was then on its way from Damascus.
Word of this action came to the Emir ul-Hajj (Leader of the Pil¬
grimage) while he was marching through the desert, so he turned
around at once and returned without performing any of the rit¬
uals. Saud then entered Mecca and Medina once again, carried
out the pilgrimage, and completed his earlier efforts to destroy
the tombs and carry off the jewels and valuables. He substituted
his own name for that of the Sultan in the Friday prayers, the
most important symbol of sovereignty in the Muslim world. The
local judges and superintendents of the Holy Places who refused
to practice the Wahhabi teachings or who were of doubtful loyalty
were replaced by his own men, and W^ahhabi doctrines and prac¬
tices were introduced to the holiest places of Islam. Saud added
insult to injury by inviting Selim himself to come to Mecca and
accept the Wahhabi teachings.^^ Not only was the Sultan’s pres¬
tige in the Islamic world further damaged by these events, even
more important at the moment, the bedouin tribes of the Hijaz,
who previously had accepted Ottoman suzerainty, now came for-