




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Sultan to send a new governor, who would be more amenable to            287
his wishes. Mamluks all over the country now openly revolted
against the Sultan, and a number of them returned to Cairo
from Upper Egypt to join Tahir’s army.® But on May 25, Tahir ^
was assassinated by agents of his lieutenant, Mohammed Ali, r
who now himself took the post    Kaymakam and assumed leader¬
ship of the Albanian-Mamluk coalition.^® The Ottomans fought
back on two fronts. Ahmed Pasha, governor of Medina, arrived in
Cairo and tried to assume command of the Ottoman garrison
fighting against the Albanians, but Mohammed Ali defeated and
killed him. In Alexandria, Husrev Pasha tried to gather the
Ottoman forces scattered in the Delta for an attack on the usur¬
pers, but Mohammed Ali anticipated him by marching on Alex¬
andria before he was ready, defeating Hiisrev’s garrison, and
bringing him back to Cairo as his prisoner.^
  Soon after, the new Ottoman governor, Trabluslu Ah Pasha,
arrived in Egypt to replace Husrev, and he was formally in¬
stalled at the Citadel by Mohammed Ali and his Mamluk friends.
But Trabluslu Ali was no more willing than Husrev to accept
this sort of local control. He tried to separate the Albanians and
 Mamluks by pardoning only the latter in order to arouse Mo¬
 hammed Ali’s jealousy, and then negotiating with him against
 them; but Mohammed Ali informed Bardisi, who had the gover¬
 nor assassinated (January 31, 1804).'^
   Now that Mohammed Ali had achieved power with the help ot
 the Mamluks, he moved to lessen their power over him by seeking
 to encourage and exploit their latent divisions. When Elfi Bey
 returned from Great Britain (February 14, 1804), the Albanians
 joined Bardisi in attacking him and forcing him to flee to Upper
 Egypt, thus removing Bardisi’s main rival from the scene. E
 then gathered around him all those who were unhappy with
 Bardisi’s dominance and prepared to march north to Cairo. When
 Bardisi prepared to meet the attack, Mohammed Ah refused
 assistance unless his Albanians were given all the back pay due
 them from the Treasury. This forced Bardisi, now Kaymakam in
 the absence of the governor, to levy a heavy new tax on the mer¬
 chants of Cairo to get the money. In response to this, the people of
 Cairo revolted against him and asked for the help of Mohammed




                Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
288   Ali, who quickly ended the affair by proclaiming an end to the tax
      and amnesty for all who had taken part in the revolt. He thus
      achieved popular support by first forcing Bardisi to make him¬
      self unpopular and by then leading the movement against the
      new taxes. With this popular backing, he attacked and defeated
      Bardisi and his Mamluks in mid-March, forcing them to flee to
      Upper Egypt and thus leaving himself in sole control in Cairo.
        Mohammed Ali then decided to release Hiisrev Pasha and re¬
      store him as governor in order to legitirtiize his own position with
      respect to the Porte, but his Albanian troops refused to allow this
      because they held Hiisrev responsible for Tahir Pasha’s death.
      The Porte tried to appoint Jezzar Pasha to the post, hoping he
      would be able to bring Mohammed Ali into line. But Jezzar, now
      old and ailing, wisely declined. Mohammed Ali then proposed the
      governor of Alexandria, Hurshid Pasha, who was much more ac¬
      ceptable to the Albanians, and when his confirmation came from
      Istanbul, he was installed at the Citadel with the traditional
      ceremonies.
        With Hurshid Pasha’s support, Mohammed Ali formed a large
      army and marched into Upper Eg5rpt to crush the Mamluks once
      and for all. Hurshid tried to take advantage of Mohammed Ali’s
      absence to build a new army in Cairo, and he summoned a large
      number of Ottoman troops from Syria for this purpose in the
      spring of 1805. When Mohammed Ali heard this, he immediately
      returned to Cairo on the pretext that the Porte had not paid the
      salaries and wages due his men and officers. Hurshid immediately
      summoned the notables and religious leaders of Cairo and got
      them to condemn Mohammed Ali for returning without per¬
      mission.*^
        The Ottoman forces marched out of Cairo in early April hoping
      to meet the Albanians before they could reach the environs of the
      Capital. When the two forces approached each other at Kasr ul-
      Ayni, however, Mohammed Ali managed to get the support of the
      Ottomans by spreading rumors that they also would not be paid
      once they had accomplished their mission. The latter joined the
      Albanians in entering and ravaging Cairo to get their money.
      Mohammed Ali then persuaded the city notables to demand that
      Hurshid remove the Ottoman forces from Egypt and promise an