




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
300   to penetrate the walls of this'powerful fortress, the continual
      bombardment inflicted by his new artillery finally compelled
      Mustafa to surrender and promise military assistance. In the
      meantime the Suliotes, with Russian arms, ammunition, and
      encouragement, began to leave their mountain retreats for
      surprise raids into Ali’s territory, with devastating results.
      All’s agents prepared the way for a counterattack by taking
      advantage of dissension among the Suliotes, using bribes and
      rumors to get the support of a number, of chiefs, thus dividing
      their clans and making cooperation^difficult.^^
        In June, as soon as Delvino was safely in hand, Ali led an army
      of 10,000 men south against the Suliotes. Although they were
      taken by surprise, they were able to resolve their internal differ¬
      ences quickly and withdraw into their mountain retreats before
      Ali could cut them off. Thus began the last and most famous of
      the sieges of Suli. Through the summer and fall of 1800, into the
      winter and spring of 1801, Ali’s army surrounded Suli and tried
      to starve out its inhabitants. Charbonnel’s artillery tried to
      demoralize and scatter the defenders by a continuous bombard¬
      ment on a scale previously unknown to the area, but still the
      Suliotes held out. As the siege wore on, Ali himself began to
      suffer increasing difficulties. Shortages of food and the spread of
      diseases soon sapped the loyalty and ability of his own men and
      those of his allies. Many of the Greek conscripts in particular
      sympathized with the Suliotes and secretly sent them food and
      supplies, thus nullifying most of the effects of the siege. Nor was
      the disloyalty limited to the men. Charbonnel and his officers had
      agreed to remain in Ali’s service for only two years, and once their
      contracts expired they stole away and returned to Corfu. In addi¬
      tion, Ali’s main Muslim allies began to grow cautious as they
      realized that a victory over the Suliotes would increase his ability
      to suppress them. Consequently, they relented in their efforts,
      and as a result the Suliotes were able to secure fresh supplies
      from Parga. In the spring of 1801, the Suliotes persuaded Ibrahim
      Pasha of Berat, Mustafa Pasha of Delvino, and most of the
      Muslim beys of Shimari to abandon the alliance and join a new
      "League of the Chiefs of Epirus” against Ali.^*^
        In response Ali used the vast wealth which he had gathered




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
to undermine each of his opponents. He stirred a revolt among         301
the local beys in the district of Berat, forcing Ibrahim to return
home to deal with them. He gained the support of a dissident
group of soldiers in the Delvino army, who drove out Mustafa
Pasha, forcing him to spend much of the next year struggling to
regain his own command before resuming assistance to the
Suliotes. Most of the beys of Shimari were simply bought out by
All’s agents although many of them continued to provide secret
assistance to Suli. Only Islam Progno of Paramythia was entirely
impervious to All’s efforts and continued to support the Suliotes
regularly as the siege went on. With the league weakened, if not
destroyed, Ali tridd negotiations with the Suliotes, promising
them large sums of money and free passage if they would only
agree to leave their homes, but they invariably refused. He got
the Metropolitan of Arta to excommunicate them, but this did
not disconcert them in the least. All’s expansion was stopped in
its tracks, and, as his prestige consequently fell, many of those
whom he had conquered during the previous years attempted to
throw off his domination. Although the siege went on, Ali was
forced to dispatch many of his men to maintain his rule in the
north.
  To counter his loss of prestige, Ali turned once again to the
Porte, and in return for a pardon in late 1801, he agreed to accept
a new appointment as governor of Rumelia and to send military
contingents to assist the Porte against new difficulties which had
arisen to the east. But, feigning illness he returned to Janina
and instead sent his son Muhtar Pasha, recently named governor
of Lepanto. The siege of Suli went on, but attention turned to
Rumelia during the winter of 1801-1802.^**