




                         Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                    ■J




him as governor of Egypt. The Ottoman fleet then sailed away'/           291
carrying Musa Pasha back to Salonika and also bearing Moham¬
med Ali’s son Ibrahim Pasha, who went as a hostage to Istanbul.^
  Once again Mohammed Ali ruled supreme in Cairo. Elfl Bey
escaped to Upper Egypt, however, began to organize a new Mam-
luk army, and again appealed for British assistance. As d result
of this threat, Mohammed Ali continued to accept the Sultan’s
suzerainty, and Selim was able to turn his attention elsewhere.

                          '   Syria
  While Mohammed Ali gradually eliminated his competitors
and established himself as supreme ruler in Egypt, to the north,
in Syria, the Porte managed to maintain more direct control by
playing off against one another various notables of about equal
strength. When the war ended, the rebellious Jezzar Pasha con¬
tinued to control Palestine, much of coastal Lebanon north to
Tripoli, and the Bikaa. In 1800, Bashir II had been returned to
power in Mount Lebanon and Jebel Druze with the assistance of
the British, and now, with the additional help of the Janbulat
family, he built up a powerful army capable of both beating off
Jezzar’s attacks and eliminating his own rivals within the Leb¬
anon.*® Aleppo and northern Syria were under the control of
Ibrahim Agha Katar Aghasi, who since 1792 had managed to
maintain and extend his own power by playing off the local Jan¬
issaries and notables against each other and against the Ottoman
governors of Aleppo, reducing them to little more than ambassa¬
dors to Ibrahim’s court.*** Finally, in Damascus, the Ottoman
governor Azm zade Abdullah Pasha continued to exercise direct
control through the garrisons left there by the Grand Vezir as
he passed on the way back to Anatolia from Egypt.
  Jezzar Pasha had cooperated with the last Ottoman march into
Egypt in 1801 and had expected to receive the governorship of
Egypt in return. When Husrev Pasha was appointed instead in
1802, Jezzar returned to his former intransigeance, attacking the
Ottoman supply lines and preparing to move once again against
Bashir 11. Yusuf Ziya Pasha was determined to suppress Jezzar,
but he was recalled to Istanbul immediately after the French
evacuation, before he could undertake this task. As he passed




              Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
292   through Palestine, he left Abu Merak Mehmed Pasha as governor
      of Jaffa with a force of approximately 2,000 men, mainly to watch
      Jezzar. In September 1802, Jezzar drove out this Ottoman force
      and also began to fight with the Ottoman mutesellim of Gaza.
      Selim therefore declared him a rebel, dismissed him from all his
      positions, and ordered his properties confiscated.
        Jezzar naturally refused to obey the order, and since the Porte
      had no armies in the vicinity able to enforce it, it remained a dead
      letter. Finally, in October 1803, because\of the increasing Wah¬
      habi menace, Selim pardoned Jezzar'and appointed him governor
      of Damascus on condition that he serve as commander of the expe¬
      ditionary force being sent to Arabia. But by this time Jezzar was
      old and ill, so he sent his slave Suleyman Pasha in his place to
      take over Damascus and eliminate his enemies. Soon thereafter,
      the death of Jezzar, on April 23, 1804, ended the last important
      threat to Ottoman suzerainty in Syria.^”
        As soon as the news of Jezzar’s illness reached the Porte, Selim
      secretly appointed Ibrahim Pasha of Aleppo as governor of Da¬
      mascus, Tripoli, and Sidon and commander of the Arabian expe¬
      dition, and ordered him to confiscate Jezzar’s possessions and pro¬
      perty as soon as he died. When the news of Jezzar’s death reached
      Aleppo on May 12, Ibrahim immediately published the orders of
      his appointments and left his son Mehmed Pasha to administer
      northern Syria while he marched south with an army of 3,000
      Janissaries. As soon as he got control of Damascus, he arrested
      the Janissary leaders who accompanied him and subsequently
      paroled them in the custody of Bashir II, who had appealed for
      their release.^' In Aleppo, the local notables and Janissaries used
      Ibrahim’s absence to revolt and drive Mehmed Pasha and his
      troops into the hills (July 1, 1804). The Porte immediately sent
      an agent to try to settle the revolt, while Bashir II sent the impris¬
      oned Janissary Aghas to prolong it in the hope of using the affair
      to extend his influence into northern Syria.In the meantime,
      Mehmed Pasha regrouped his forces, got the assistance of some
      Kurdish tribes from the north, and began to besiege Aleppo in
      early September. The local Ottoman representative was unable
      to mediate a compromise, and the siege dragged on.
        In late October a compromise was reached by which Mehmed