




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign IPars
governors of Salonika and Nicomedia to join the Bostanji corps        303
of Edirne in a march north to the Danube to restore order (March
1800). In addition he ordered the closing of the passes leading
from Albania into Rumelia, prohibiting Albanians from going
there without special passes issued by their governor.Prepara¬
tions also were made to send the Nizam-i Jedid corps to'assist
since it had been effectively excluded from the Egyptian opera¬
tions because of conservative and Janissary opposition in Istanbul.
Kara Feyzi and Pasvanoglu appealed to the notables against the
use of the corps in the Balkans as a price for their submission.
Despite these protests, an army of 5,000 picked Nizam-i Jedid
men under the command of Kadi Abdurrahman Pasha, governor
of Karaman, left Istanbul for Thrace on March 5,1800. Soon after
their arrival in Edirne, they were joined by a force of local war¬
riors sent from Nicomedia. During April these two forces cooper¬
ated with the Bostanjis in a series of successful campaigns against
the bandits, who were forced to flee into the Macedonian moun¬
tains. Order thus was restored and communications through the
Balkans opened for the first time in a year. Hundreds of severed
bandit heads now arrived in Istanbul at the same time as con¬
tingents of soldiers sent by the Anatolian notables for Balkan
operations.
  Selim’s main fear at this time was that the notables might
cease fighting each other and join in an alliance with Kara Feyzi.
This would pose a major military threat to Istanbul, for the
notables had most of the troops left in the area and Istanbul’s
garrison had been sent to join the effort to regain Egypt. The
Nizam-i Jedid army therefore marched to the attack and soon
inflicted a major defeat on a concentration of bandits who had
fled into the mountains near Rodosto.^^ But it was not long before
the bandits regrouped and rearmed themselves, mainly with
the assistance of Pasvanoglu, so that as summer arrived they
were once again attacking Edirne and penetrating Thrace and
Macedonia. Selim finally decided that the only remedy was to
appoint a strong governor for Rumelia, with the power to co¬
ordinate and lead all the various Ottoman forces available in
the area as Hakki Pasha previously had done. For this purpose
he chose the governor of Silistria, Gurgi Osman Pasha, who im-




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                              s              »


304   mediately intensified the military pressure on the bandits. As a
      result most of them were suppressed during the summer, but he
      still was not able to do anything against the notables themselves,
      who continued to rearm the bandits and send them out time after
      time, thus, in the long run, nullifying his efforts.'*® Pressure from
      the notables and from the conservatives in Istanbul finally forced
      the Sultan to withdraw the Nizam-i Jedid force which had oper¬
      ated so successfully against the bandits up to that time, as a price
      for their cooperation in the campaign^ then being undertaken
      against the French in Egypt. Without this force, Gurgi Osman
      had to abandon his campaigns and concentrate his remaining
      forces at Silistria and Edirne to meet possible attacks. Pasvanoglu
      used this respite to rearm the bandits who fled to him. During
      the rest of the year they ravaged the area between Vidin and
      Edirne once again, while at the same time still demanding an
      end to the reforms and the return to Istanbul of all the Ottoman
      armies remaining in the Balkans.'*^
        In response Selim sent across the Bosporus a force of 7,000
      men brought from Anatolia by Tayyar Pasha of Erzurum for the
      Egyptian campaign but now diverted for the more immediate
      danger in the Balkans. Large numbers of Albanian contingents
      also were summoned from various local governors and beys, and
      they also were put under Tayyar’s direction. When Tayyar’s
      army arrived in the area, however, his men refused to fight on
      the grounds that it was wrong to fight other Muslims. Without
      their assistance, an army of 4,000 Albanians sent by Ali of
      Janina was routed at Plevna in December, after which the bandits
      infested the area between Vidin and Edirne once again. The
      Albanian contingents and the men in the Ottoman forces of
      Gurgi Osman Pasha and Tayyar Pasha then began to ravage
      the towns and villages as much as the local bandits, so the in¬
      habitants began to support Pasvanoglu in the belief that he was
      the only one in the entire struggle with the power to restore and
      keep order if he got absolute control.*®
        While the Balkan notables concentrated most of their efforts
      south of the Danube, they did not entirely ignore the rich Princi¬
      palities lying helpless to the north. Tirsiniklioglu Ismail Agha
      sent regular expeditions into the Dobruja, eastern Wallachia,