

                 The Rise of the Balkan Notables:
                Macedonia, Thrace, and Bulgaria

  In Macedonia, Thrace, and Bulgaria, the withdrawal of the
Ottoman garrisons let loose all the bandits and notables who had
been bottled up during the previous decade. Brigand armies, of
which the most important still was that led by Kara Feyzi,
attacked Edirne several times and ravaged the entire area be¬
tween it, Sofia, and Belgrade, largely severing communications




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
302   through the Balkans. The Alhknians previously sent by Ali of
      Janina also ravaged and burned the area on a large scale. The
      only effective Ottoman resistance came from the military gover¬
      nor of Edirne and Gurgi Osman Pasha, governor of Silistria.^®
      Pasvanoglu, despite his formal submission and appointment as
      governor of Vidin in 1798, encouraged the bandits to assist his
      own efforts to occupy the area between the Danube and the Bal¬
      kan mountains.     Tirsiniklioglu Ismail Agha concentrated on
      defending his possessions south of the Danube between Ruschuk
      and Tirnovo, not only against the attacks of Pasvanoglu but also
      against a new notable who now rose in the east. Yillik Suleyman
      Agha of Silistria. Born nearby, Siilleyman first rose to power as
      notable of Deliorman in 1792. Six years later, the ayan of Silistria,
      Battal Agha, himself a vassal of Tirsiniklioglu Ismail, revolted
      against the Sultan in an effort to take advantage of the new
      anarchy. To attract the support of the bandits operating in the
      area, he gave them a free hand to take as much as they wanted
      from the populace in his district. Since the main duty of the nota¬
      bles, in fact the reason that their rule was accepted, was to protect
      the people against such attacks, the merchants and religious
      leaders got the Ottoman governor to replace him with Suleyman
      Agha in January 1800. Ismail Agha offered no objection. Pre¬
      viously he had cooperated with Suleyman against Pasvanoglu
      and assumed that he would accept his subordination as Battal
      Agha had done. Instead Suleyman got Pasvanoglu’s help to
      throw off Ismail’s suzerainty and move against him from the
      east. Through the spring and summer of 1800, Pasvanoglu and
      Ismail Agha fought each other between Vidin and Ruschuk,
      and the forces of Ismail and Suleyman clashed regularly in the
      areas of Silistria and Deliorman; in the process they ravaged
      the area just as fiercely as the bandits had done. In the mean¬
      time Kara Feyzi built up an army of 5,000 men and extended his
      raids all the way to the Black Sea coast, where Burgas and Varna
      became the special objects of his attentions.^*
        This was just the time that the Convention of al-Arish broke
      down in Egypt, and the Ottoman army was sent reeling back to
      Syria in disorder. Selim had neither time nor men to deal with
      the Balkan situation, and the most he could do was to order the