

                                Arabia and Iraq

        The situation was far more threatening to Ottoman interests in
      Arabia and southern Iraq, where the Saudi-Wahhabi danger
      fiared anew during the last five years of Selim’s reign. Since 1799,
      a truce had been arranged and maintained between the Saudis
      and their principal opponents, Suleyman Pasha of Iraq and Sherif
      Galib of the Holy Cities, with the Wahhabis refraining from any¬
      thing more serious than normal bedouin skirmishes and raids in
      return for permission to participate regularly in the annual
      pilgrimages.
        By the end of 1801, however, Suleyman Pasha was a helpless
      invalid, and the strong administration which he had established
      was rapidly falling apart. His children were disputing among
      themselves over the succession, and his army had to spend most of
      its time fighting the bedouin tribes in the Middle Euphrates and
      the Kurds in the north.
        In 1802, Abd ul-Aziz and his son, Saud, took advantage of the
      situation to undertake a number of destructive raids into southern
      Iraq. Abd ul-Aziz then moved back into the Hijaz and captured
      and sacked Taif, which Sherif Galib left without defense when he
      saw the size of the attacking enemy army. For the moment, how¬
      ever, the attacks were limited to raids. Abd ul-Aziz retired back




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
into the Nejd with his spoils.^** But the attacks meant that war       295
had in fact been declared, and the Wahhabis were on the prowl
once again. Saud immediately inaugurated a series of raids in
Iraq and the Hijaz which shook the empire. In the spring of 1803,
he took Mecca without resistance after the heavily guarded pil¬
grims’ caravan returned to the north, and Galib retired to the
fort of Jidda without daring to resist the Wahhabi hordes openly.
Saudi rule was proclaimed in the Holy Cities. An amnesty was
declared and alms distributed to the indigent and holy men. All
the notables assembled at 'the great mosque, where the Wahhabi
precepts were read publicly and all present forced to declare their
adherence. The Saudi forces then spread out through the city,
killing those who refused to accept the new doctrines and des¬
troying tombs and other objects of veneration. All hookahs and
intoxicating beverages were confiscated and destroyed. Theolog¬
ical discussions were held between the Wahhabi preachers and
the local orthodox religious leaders, and those leaders who re¬
fused to accept the new doctrines were eliminated.
  Sand’s forces were unable to penetrate the strong fortifications
of Jidda and Yanbo, however, so they finally retired to the Nejd
with their booty at the end of May. Although garrisons were left
at Taif and Mecca, Galib was able to drive them out and retake
the cities within a short time.^” The Saudi gains of 1803 proved
only temporary. But the attacks for the first time made Istanbul
aware of the extent of the threat. Up to now no one at the Porte
really had known what the Wahhabi movement represented as a
political or religious challenge to the established order. The
Ottoman Ulema were so uneducated and ignorant that few of
them knew or cared about the theological debates inspired by the
Wahhabis in much of the Arab world under the Sultan’s dominion.
Militarily the brunt of the Wahhabi attacks had been borne by
nomadic tribes and relatively minor governors in Mecca and
Baghdad. But now they had ravaged holy places which the Sul¬
tan was supposed to defend as part of the basic duties of his of¬
fice. They had challenged the official state religion of the empire
in the streets of the holiest place of Islam. And when Selim finally
turned his attention to them, he found that they controlled all of
the Nejd, Bahrein, Lahsa, Oman, and Muscat, and were threaten-