




                Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
ward to declare their loyalty t6 Saud, who thus for all practical
purposes replaced the Sultan as ruler of Arabia.


                          The Balkans
  Much of the reason for the Sultan’s failure to take decisive
action against the separatist movements in his Arab provinces
lay in his preoccupation with superficially similar, but actually
far more dangerous, threats in the Balkans during and after the
war with France.                 v
 Since Egypt and Syria were the main theaters of action during
the war, most of the remaining Ottoman garrisons in the Balkans
gradually were drained of their men and weapons to provide for
the expeditionary forces organized by the. Grand Vezir. To com¬
pensate for this loss, the Sultan’s only recourse was to pardon the
most important notables, such as Ali of Janina and Pasvanoglu
Osman, and appoint them as governors of their areas in the hope
of enlisting their services in suppressing the lesser bandits and
notables and of curbing their own ambitions. But with the ab¬
sence of Ottoman soldiers to enforce their obligations, the no¬
tables used these appointments primarily to advance their power
even more. As a result the other Balkan notables and bandits
were relieved of even the threat of official suppression of the kind
which had hindered their activities during the previous decade,
and they also took advantage of the situation to increase their
fortunes and territories. In the end it was only the conflicts among
those who sought to take advantage of the Sultan’s preoccupation
in the east which enabled him to maintain some sort of suze¬
rainty in the area until the arrival of peace allowed him to under¬
take more forceful efforts toward this end.

                     Ali Pasha of Janina (II)

  In the west, Ali Pasha of Janina took advantage of the War of
the Triple Alliance to build an empire of major proportions,
stretching from northern Albania to the Gulf of Corinth and
bounded by Ohrid in the east and the Adriatic in the west. In
1799, the Porte appointed him as governor of Rumelia both as
compensation for his failure to get the Ionian Islands and Al-




                 Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
banian port cities, and also to secure the services of his army        299
against Pasvanoglu and the other notables and bandits who were
infesting Rumelia at that time. Bitterly disappointed by the
settlement, Ali chose to ignore his new position, leaving its
capital, Monastir, in the hands of subordinates while he re¬
mained in Janina to concentrate his efforts on building his own
empire there with the help of his two sons, Muhtar Pasha and
Veliuddin. Although Ali was ordered to send to Istanbul all the
French officers and technicians captured during the course of
the campaign, he retained a good number of them in his own
service — building forts and batteries, training his infantry,
artillery, and navEil forces, and creating a lavish palace and court
for him in the European style.
  The establishment of the Septinsular Republic convinced Ali
that the Porte was determined to do all it could to prevent any
further expansion on his part. At the same time, as soon as the
Russian garrison established itself at Corfu, it began to follow
Venice’s old policy of supporting Ali’s immediate neighbors, the
Suliotes to the south, and Bushath Mustafa Pasha, who, since
the death of his father, Kara Mahmud of Scutari, had ruled
Delvino and Skopje while striving to regain the family posses¬
sions in northern Albania from his uncle, Ibrahim Pasha of
Berat. Surrounded by enemies, Ali entered into contacts with
French agents sent to Corfu and began to plot new means of
expanding his empire with French assistance. During the winter
of 1799-1800, Ali prepared to attack his enemies, with the Suli¬
otes at the top of the list. The French Colonel Charbonnel was
named to command his artillery corps. Albanian and Greek
peasants were drafted into his army and navy, which were
rapidly developed under French instruction. Ali also managed
to get the military support of most of the Muslim beys in Para-
mythia for a supreme effort to drive the Christians and their
friends out of Epirus and the Ionian Islands. While the news of
these preparations spread rapidly, Ali tried to conceal their real
object by spreading rumors that he was preparing to lead an
expedition against the French in Egypt.^®
  In the spring of 1800, Ali moved to the attack. He first marched
north against Mustafa Pasha in Delvino, and while he was unable