

                          The Rise of Ismail Agha

        For the moment, eastern Bulgaria and the Balkan range were
      cleared. Abdurrahman Pasha returned to Anatolia and Ibrahim
      Pasha to Scutari in the fall of 1804. At the same time, Selim
      decided to make a new approach toward peace in the area by
      accepting the urgings of his advisers and appointing the principal
      notables to keep the peace in their own areas from that time
      forth. Ismail Agha was appointed governor of Silistria, in charge
      of order and security in eastern Bulgaria, and Pasvanoglu was
      made military governor of Vidin with the same assignment in
      the west. These appointments fitted in with Ismail’s plans, since
      for some time he had been expanding his power in the guise of a
      loyal Ottoman agent, so he immediately set to work to carry out
      Selim’s instructions. Pasvanoglu ignored his assignment, how¬
      ever, as he had ignored similar orders in the past. To show his
      scorn of the Sultan, he also began to intrigue to gain the throne
      for the Crimean Tatar prince Selim Giray and sent Manav Ibra¬
      him with a large army to raid Ismail’s territories around Rus-
      chuk, Hezargrad, and Shumla. While Ismail was busy defending
      himself against this attack, Suleyman Agha moved to his rear.




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
ravaged the eastern areas, and entirely cut off the caravans           315
coming from Istanbul via Varna to Ruschuk.’^^
  In July 1805, Bayrakdar Mustafa Agha, now Ismail’s chief
general, caught and besieged Manav Ibrahim at Tutrakan, on
the Danube halfway between Silistria and Ruschuk. Suleyman
Agha moved to assist him, arranging for his secret departure
from the besieged city in order to negotiate a formal alliance.
Since the Albanians in Manav Ibrahim’s force did not wish to
join Suleyman, Manav was forced reluctantly to reject the offer
and return to his men in Tutrakan. At this point Manav Ibrahim
made an agreement to ally himself with Ismail Agha against
Pasvanoglu. The besieged force then left the city and joined
Ismail’s army for a supreme effort against their former master.
But Manav’s men were not able to overcome their former habits.
They soon began to ravage the areas around their own camps and,
in addition, to cross the Danube and raid north into Wallachia,
whose prince, Constantine Ipsilanti, immediately complained to
Istanbul. Ismail Agha was left with little choice. Despite the mili¬
tary assistance offered by Manav Ibrahim, Ismail could not retain
his pose of allegiance to the Sultan so long as he remained in
Manav’s service, so he finally got Alemdar Mustafa to attack and
kill Manav and scatter his followers.^^
  With Pasvanoglu now occupied in Serbia, Ismail was able to
turn his full attention to Suleyman Agha, occupying most of his
territories in eastern Bulgaria up to the Black Sea and north into
the Dobruja during the course of 1805. He then continued his
advance through the Balkan Mountains. By the spring there
seemed little to stop him from occupying all of Thrace and cap¬
turing Edime if he wished. Although he advanced under the
pretext of securing revenge from Suleyman Agha, he had in fact
gone far beyond the Suleyman’s territories and built a state of
major proportions which could easily threaten the center of
Ottoman power in Istanbul.^^