




                           Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
1803. But once again his friends in Istanbul interceded to secure     313
not only a pardon but also an appointment as governor of Silis-
tria, a far cry from the punishment he deserved.®*
  In the Balkans, All’s successes frightened Pasvanoglu and
Tirsiniklioglu Ismail, who feared that Ali might go on to annex
to his own possessions the lands he was clearing out in the name
of the Sultan, and that the order which he had established would
enable the Sultan to move against them later. So they com¬
plained of his "tyranny” and "oppression,” and through the
liberal use of bribes managed to secure his dismissal in August
1803, on the pretext that he had failed to rid the area along the
Danube of bandits. Veliuddin returned to Albania to deal with
the Suliotes, and his father was replaced as governor by the
mutasarrif of Salonica, Vani Mehmed Pasha, who soon showed a
complete lack of the kind of ability and power needed to curb the
notables.®* Suleyman Agha now expanded from Silistria toward
Ruschuk and effectively prevented Gurgi Osman Pasha from
assuming his post, compelling the Sultan to send him to Ismail
instead and to leave Silistria to the administration of a low-
ranking miitesellim whom Suleyman Agha could easily control.
Ismail Agha expanded his territory to include most of Bulgaria
between the Danube and the Balkan range, taking Yeni Pazar,
Juma, Shumla and Hezargrad as well as beating back most of
Suleyman’s advances in this direction. He soon was able to force
the reluctant Sultan to acquiesce in these conquests by appoint¬
ing his men as their mutesellims and ayans, with his chief lieu¬
tenant, Bayrakdar Mustafa Agha, now coming on the scene for
the first time as his notable in Hezargrad. At this time, with
Egypt in anarchy, the valley of the Danube had become Istanbul’s
chief source of grains, so Selim wished only to secure some sort
of order there so that needed supplies would be assured. But
Ismail and Suleyman’s continued rivalries were devastating the
cultivated lands in both their territories while at the same time
making it impossible to make gains against the bandits. Selim
was advised by most of his ministers to support Ismail Agha
against both Pasvanoglu and Suleyman Agha, in the hope that
Ismail would be more loyal than either of the latter if he obtained
absolute power in the area. Selim so mistrusted Ismail, however.




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
314   that he found it impossible to do this, and so the clashes and dis¬
      putes continued while more and more lands fell out of cultivation
      and less and less food reached Istanbul.
        Selim now tried to pacify the Balkans by a new effort at direct
      action. The indecisive and incompetent Vani Mehmed Pasha
      was replaced by Ibrahim Pasha, governor and notable of Scutari
      and Berat, who was also appointed as commander-in-chief of
      the Ottoman forces fighting south of the Danube. In the spring of
      1804, Ibrahim Pasha arrived at Sofia > with a force of 30,000
      Albanians, hoping to suppress the bandits without antagonizing
      the notables. For a time, like his predecessors, he found it impos¬
      sible to do this since whenever he defeated bandits, they fled to
      the protection of Suleyman Agha and Hiiseyin Bey, notable of
      Philippopolis. He finally moved against them during the summer
      of 1804, and with the assistance of a large force of Nizam-i Jedid
      soldiers sent under the command of Abdurrahman Pasha, he
      drove out the main bandit force near Malkara on July 17,1804.^’