

                     Ali Pasha ofJanina {IV)

  In the meantime Ismail Agha’s actions in the east were par¬
alleled by those of Ali of Janina in the west. Veliuddin returned
from Rumelia in the fall of 1803 greatly strengthened by his




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
316   successful actions against the’bandits, not only in prestige but
      also in men enlisted in his cause from among the defeated ban¬
      dits, and in booty secured from them' as well as from the people
      of Thrace and Macedonia. The siege of Suli had continued. Its
      defenders had managed to hold out, mainly because of the food
      and arms they received from Russian and French agents at
      Parga. Ali now cleverly used Veliuddin’s successes to arouse
      Selim’s fear of foreign intervention in the Balkans and get
      official Ottoman support for the campai^. As a result, during the
      summer of 1803, he was joined by numerous local governors
      from Thessaly, Macedonia, and Bosnia. Their support finally
      made it possible for him to set up a complete blockade for the first
      time.^® In September, Veliuddin took the offensive, pushing the
      Suliotes into three small villages, where they began to suffer
      greatly from hunger and cold as the winter approached. Finally
      on December 25, they agreed to surrender on the same conditions
      offered them two years before. They were to leave Suli with their
      arms, ammunition, and property and were to be allowed to settle
      wherever they wished in Albania or elsewhere.^® As soon as the
      evacuation began, however, Ali moved to secure the revenge he
      had long sought. Most of the Suliotes were massacred as they left
      the shelter of their forts, and only a few managed to reach Russian
      protection at Parga. From there they went to settle in Corfu
      after signing an alliance with the Russians against Ali (July 2,
      1804).^^
        With the end of Suliote resistance, Ali was able to complete
      his conquest of the seacoast of Epirus and secure the allegiance of
      all the local beys, both Muslim and Christian. This frightened the
      Russians in Corfu, who rightly saw All’s increasing power as a
      direct threat to their position. They attempted to meet the
      challenge by building up a new league of All’s enemies, thus
      resuming the old Venetian policy of controlling the mainland by
      dividing its rulers. In June 1804, the beys of Paramythia and
      Margariti allied themselves with Mustafa Pasha of Delvino and,
      with Russian arms and munitions and the aid of three hundred
      Suliote refugees from Corfu, they moved to attack Ali on his home
      ground. The Porte at this time chose to remain neutral and left
      Ali to his own devices, ostensibly on the grounds that it could not




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
legally prevent Russia from aiding the league, actually because it         317
hoped, like the Russians, that the league would curb All’s power
and make him more amenable to its commands and wishes.
Within a short time, however, Ali conquered the league army and
forced its leaders to accept his suzerainty once again.
  Since Ibrahim Pasha had failed to accomplish much in Rumelia
during the summer of 1804, Selim ordered Ali himself to go in the
following year, and he agreed because the Suliotes were out of the
way. While Ismail Agha was building up his power in eastern
Bulgaria and Thrace, and Pasvanoglu was occupied in Serbia,
Ali was able to chase the bandits into the Macedonian mountains
and re-establish order and security. But, just as in 1802, he took
into his own army not only many of the bandits whom he defeated
but also large quantities of booty, including most of the cannons
found in the forts which he passed. As a result, after his return to
Albania in the fall of 1805, Rumelia was even less able to defend
itself than it had been before, while All’s power and prestige
increased immensely.'^® To reward Ali for his services, and also
to satisfy his demands without forcing him to revolt, Selim
appointed Veliuddin Pasha governor of the Morea and Muhtar
Pasha governor of Thessaly at Trikala, thus completing the
family’s control of Greece as well as much of Albania. Only
Attica, Boeotia, and Negreponte remained out of his dominion in
Greece, while his court in Janina reached new heights of wealth
and grandeur, and western adventurers in his service trained an
army second to none in the area.®® Ibrahim Pasha now was the
Porte’s last hope, and in 1806 he was appointed governor of
Rumelia for the second time, mainly in the hope of providing him
with the power and prestige needed to counter All’s empire.
But the hope was not realized. Ali of Janina was supreme in
Albania and Greece.