




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
quickly from Vidin to the Morava, thus effectively cutting off
Belgrade from the south.^^ In the meantime, in Belgrade, Mustafa
Pasha got the assistance of the Janissary lieutenant, Halil Agha,
who suppressed the yamaks and restored order. However, Halil
then himself assumed leadership of the yamaks and killed the
unsuspecting Mustafa Pasha and his chief officers before the
Serbs could reach them.^^
  The yamaks now established their government in Serbia on
the model of the government established by the military corps in
North Africa two centuries before. Rule was shared by Halil
Agha with four yamak chiefs, who took the title dahi* to indicate
their special position independent of the regular Ottoman hier¬
archy. To avoid punishment and condemnation from Istanbul,
they forced the Serbian princes and local Muslim and Christian
religious leaders to denounce Mustafa Pasha and his soldiers as
tyrants and declare their gratitude for the new regime.Under
Halil Agha’s direction and with Pasvanoglu’s support, the dahis
began a reign of tyranny and exploitation on a scale never before
seen in Serbia. They soon extended their activities beyond the
rayas to the Muslim feudal Spahis, who previously had remained
almost untouched by the political vicissitudes swirling around
them. Yamaks from Bosnia and bandits from Rumelia flooded
into the province, attracted by the booty they could secure in the
service of the dahis. The princes were deprived of all their official
powers and forced to watch helplessly as the new regime ex¬
tracted all it could from its subjects.^®
   With rebels in control of much of Serbia, Bulgaria, Albania, V
and Greece, drastic measures were needed. But it was only when
victory in Egypt was assured in the spring of 1801 that Selim ^
dared to defy the conservatives and do something to remedy the
situation.


                          Hakki Mehmed Pasha

  On April 23, 1801, Selim transferred Gurgi Osman Pasha to
the district of Salonika and replaced him with the man who had

 ^Vulgarization of the title da% or dayi (Fr, dey) used by the Janissary leaders
who ruled Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli.




                 Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
308   so frightened the notables ancf their supporters before the war,
      Hakki Mehmed Pasha. In order that he would have the prestige
      and authority necessary to accomplish his mission, the Sultan
      gave him absolute power to act in any way he wished without
      question, appointed him supreme commander of all the Ottoman
      soldiers in Europe, and promised him a term of at least three
      years, a rare arrangement in an empire where short terms and
      limited powers had become the rule.^^
        Hakki Pasha moved to Edirne before publishing the firman of
      his appointment so that he could take command of his new army
      before Gurgi Osman would be able to object to it. Gurgi Osman
      in fact was terrified by the news, fearing that Hakki also had
      received secret orders for his execution, a practice not unusual
      in the empire at that time. While Gurgi Osman was soon relieved
      by the news of his appointment to Salonika, he was still bitterly
      hostile, and intrigued against Hakki Pasha through his enemies
      among the Rumeli notables and Istanbul political leaders. He
      simply refused to go to Salonika on the grounds that he was
      needed to fight bandits in Macedonia. As soon as Hakki Pasha
      reached Edirne, Gurgi Osman seized Sofia and began to gather a
      force of brigands and mountaineers from Bulgaria and Albania,
      men who had long sought such a leader to coordinate their efforts
      against the Porte. Osman wrote Hakki to stop at Skopje, where
      he had moved in order to prepare his army, but as soon as Hakki
      learned of this new development, he immediately led the forces
      at his disposal toward Sofia for a showdown before Osman could
      get the support of the brigands in the area. Osman immediately
      sent a communication to the Grand Vezir complaining that
      Hakki’s advance would only cause disturbances in Rumelia and
      help the brigands, and he requested an order for Hakki to stop
      where he was and return to Edirne, or at least to Philippopolis.
      He was supported in this request by the notables of Sofia, who
      feared that they would lose their lives and property if Hakki
      stormed or besieged the city. Hakki’s enemies in Istanbul were
      able to use this threat to have him ordered to return to Edirne,
      while Osman Pasha’s assignment was changed from Salonika to
      the much more prestigeful post at Silistria.^®
        Hakki obeyed the Sultan but complained bitterly about the