




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
he could do was send a desperate letter to Kuchiik Hiiseyin, who       311
had become aware of the order too late to do anything about it,
and intrigue with Ali of Janina’s sons, Muhtar and Veliuddin,
in the hope that they would block Omer’s march to Edirne. Now
that Hakki had cleared Thrace of Ali Pasha’s opponents, how¬
ever, Ali was happy to be rid of him and to have the area clear
for his own expansion.
  Hakki now understood that the game was up, and even before
Omer Agha arrived he left Edirne and proceeded to his home on
Chios, to which he was theh banished by the Sultan. His soldiers
immediately rioted, broke into his house, and plundered Edirne
to collect what was due them. When Omer Agha arrived, they
imprisoned him as a hostage for the money still due, and it was
only after considerable negotiation that he was released and
allowed to assume his post.®^
   Thus for the second time, Selim III allowed political intrigue to
deprive him of the only man able to curb the notables and re¬
establish order in Rumelia. Once again he sacrificed one of his
reformers to maintain his own position, providing a lesson for
all those who sought to introduce change into the empire with
his support. Omer Agha, now Pasha, soon proved too weak for
his post. Brigands and notables ravaged Bulgaria, Thrace, and
Macedonia again, with Ali Molla actually surrounding Edirne
and making raids as far as Istanbul, and Kara Feyzi ravaging
the area of Silistria and occupying Varna during 1802. At the
same time, the Albanian troops previously sent by Ali of Janina
to support Hakki’s efforts now refused to accept Omer Pasha’s
command and set out on their own to ravage and raid.®®

                     Ali Pasha of Janina (III)

  Since Hakki had fallen twice as a result of the opposition of
the notables, Selim now thought that a notable as governor might
produce results much more palatable to all concerned. It must be
remembered that the Porte’s main object at this time was not to
replace the notables but rather to use them to keep order and
collect taxes. While Hakki Pasha had been a successful adminis¬
trator, by attacking the notables he had removed the only alter¬
native to a type of direct administration which the Porte was no




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
         1/



312     longer able to provide. To accofnplish the same end by different
        means, on January 28, 1803, Selim appointed Ali of Janina as
      A governor of Rumelia, mainly because he was not directly involved
        in territorial conflicts with the Bulgarian notables, and so might
        be better able to get their cooperation for the common effort.
        His only important rival, Ibrahim Pasha of Berat, who previously
        had been built up by the Porte as a rival to balance All’s growing
        power in Albania, now was ordered to accept his leadership and
        provide men and supplies for the Rumelia campaign. All’s son
        Muhtar Pasha was appointed gove^’nor of Trikala once again,
        thus removing a principal block to All’s expansion in Thessaly
         and restoring his prestige in Albania just as Suliote resistance to
        his attacks had begun to cost him many supporters. Now Ali was
         able to summon the help of notables from all over Macedonia and
         Epirus to help him "defend Epirus against the infidel French”
         as well as to establish order elsewhere in Rumelia.®®
              In March 1803, Veliuddin led an Albanian force of almost
         10,000 men through Macedonia into Thrace. When the bandits
         heard he was coming, they were so frightened that they sent
         three hundred of their number to Trikala as hostages for their
         good behavior and immediately withdrew into the mountains
         and promised to refrain from all attacks in the future. Those who
         resisted his efforts were defeated and either forced to settle near
         Haskovo or Philippopolis or incorporated into his army, which
         was immensely strengthened as a result. At the same time, the
         Albanians who had been ravaging the area were quickly rounded
         up and returned to their homes, so that by the end of the summer,
         relative peace was restored in all Rumelia.®^
              But Gurgi Osman still remained a problem. At the time Omer
         Agha was appointed governor of Rumelia, Osman was made
         governor of Diyarbekir, and he immediately crossed from Gal¬
         lipoli with all his men to assume his new post. As he moved east,
         however, he began to gather local bandits into his service. By the
         time he reached Ankara, he was leading a full scale revolt against
         central authority, demanding that he be restored to his positions
         in the Balkans. Only a full-scale expedition against him, in¬
         cluding Nizam-i Jedict troops sent by Karaosmanoglu and forces
         sent by Tayyar Pasha of Erzurum, finally defeated him in March