




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign W^ars
interference with the "full powers” which supposedly had been        309
granted. To salve Hakki’s feelings, Selim extended his term of
office to five years, and despite everything repeated his previous
order that Hakki had absolute power in all matters relating to
Rumelia.^^* Within a short time, the excesses committed by the
bandits in Gurgi Osman’s army so outraged the citizens of Silis-
tria that their complaints, combined with Hakki’s continued
protests and intrigues, caused the Sultan to transfer him to
Berkovatz on the Ogustul, as military governor with the re¬
sponsibility for fighting thehandits in the area.®”
  In the meantime, Hakki began to summon military contribu¬
tions from all over the Balkans and move to the main object of
his mission. Through the autumn and winter of 1801 and into the
spring of 1802, he vigorously suppressed disorder and restored
security between Edirne and Haskovo, killing the notables who
attempted to help the fieeing brigands. Hakki was able to get
men and supplies from both Tirsiniklioglu Ismail and Ali of
Janina, who were happy to help clear out the opposition in order
to facilitate their own subsequent expansion into the same
areas.
  The intrigues of Hakki’s enemies continued, however, and
gradually shut off the money and supplies supposed to be sent
to him from Istanbul. In consequence his men became more and
more rebellious and increasingly amenable to the terms of¬
fered them by agents of Pasvanoglu and Gurgi Osman. So in
March 1802, Hakki wrote to the Sultan demanding that Osman
Pasha be punished and that all money and supplies sent him from
Istanbul be cut off so that the regular Ottoman army could be
maintained. When there was no answer, Hakki asked to be ex¬
cused from his post on the grounds that he was not being given
the support needed to carry out his mission. Selim persuaded him
to withdraw this request by writing that he had been diverted
by continuing problems in Egypt and Syria and that the needed
money and men would soon be on the way. But Hakki still was
unable to pay his men’s wages, and their dissatisfaction was
fanned by his enemies into a series of open revolts supported
by the bandits they were supposedly repressing.®^
  In September, Hakki sent his chief lieutenant, Chelebi Omer




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                              s             t


310   Agha, to Istanbul to deal with Yhese problems and in particular
      to get the Sultan to cut off all funds from Gurgi Osman so that
      his men would desert him. But Omer'Agha was won over by the
      Grand Vezir, who promised him the governorship of Rumelia if
      he could get rid of his master. Omer therefore reported to Selim
      that Hakki’s soldiers would desert if they were forced to attack
      Gurgi Osman and that the best solution was to appoint Gurgi
      Osman to a post in Anatolia and to send him money so that he
      could pay his men and get them to go with him. An incident would
      thus be avoided, and Hakki Pasha ^ould be able to carry out his
      work in the Balkans unhindered. Thinking that this advice came
      from Hakki Pasha, the Sultan agreed and issued the necessary
      orders, although in fact this meant that Gurgi Osman was being
      given just the financial support he needed to further undermine
      Hakki Pasha’s position with his own men.®^
       When the news of the new orders reached Edime, Hakki’s
      men began to desert him in large numbers. At the same time,
      the Grand Vezir declared that Hakki had failed in his mission
      and asked the Sultan to replace him with Omer Agha on the
      grounds that Omer came from an old Macedonian family, knew
      the areas of Edirne and Philippopolis far better than Hakki, and
      would be much more influential with the notables and the people.
      Since Yusuf Pasha now had tremendous prestige in the capital
      because of his successes against the French in Egypt, Selim
      agreed. It was decided to dismiss Hakki, but in order that he
      would not be forewarned and thus organize the same sort of re¬
      sistance as Osman Pasha had done, the dismissal order was kept
      secret. Omer Agha ostensibly was appointed as governor of Bel¬
      grade in place of the recently assassinated Mustafa Pasha. Omer
      was to march to Edirne, supposedly on the way to Belgrade, but
      actually to deliver the dismissal order to Hakki and take his
      place at once.   Hakki’s chief supporter in Istanbul, Kiichiik
      Hiiseyin Pasha, was ill at the time and not informed of these
      measures, so he did not communicate the news to his protege
      until it was too late. Hakki Pasha was a very skillful Ottoman
      politician, and when he received the news of Omer’s appointment
      to Belgrade, he understood its true significance and tried to
      intrigue against it. But in the face of the Sultan’s decision, all