


            The Serbian Revolution, 1802-1806
  To the north in Serbia, the years following the Peace of Amiens
saw an even more drastic erosion of the Sultan s authority             y
dahi tyranny finally drove the Serbs to open revolt.
   Following Hajji Mustafa Pasha’s death late in 1801, Selim




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                               s            4


318   attempted to -curb the yamaks' and restore direct Ottoman rule
      with an expedition led by Ebubekir Pasha, governor of Bosnia,
      who organized an army and moved to'prevent any further flow of
      supplies to the rebels from their sympathizers in Macedonia. The
      Sultan also requested the Austrian border authorities to prevent
      the flow of supplies to Belgrade from the north, and he appointed
      Hasan Pasha as the new governor of Belgrade, with the duty of
      securing the cooperation of the Serbs themselves. Pasvanoglu’s
      control of the area between Vidin and So^ia prevented the Sultan
      from mounting a major offensive dgainst the rebels or sending
      more than a token amount of arms and ammunition. But arms
      coming to the rayas from Ebubekir’s capital at Travnik, together
      with a supply from Austrian agents sent in the hope of using the
      expected revolt for their own ends, did provide encouragement for
      resistance. Yet Serbian aspirations still reached no further than
      to help their Ottoman master throw off the rebel yamaks and
      re-estahlish his direct control.®*
        In response to the threat of revolt, the dahis terrorized the
      population and executed hundreds of local leaders during Jan¬
      uary 1802, hoping to stifle resistance hy depriving the rayas of
      their natural leaders. But many Serbs escaped into the hills and
      joined the mountaineers (hayduks) who for a long time had re¬
      sisted established authority. They now began large-scale raids
      into the lowlands, attacking not only the yamaks and their of¬
      ficials but also the Turkish rayas and Spahis, who responded in
      kind. Thus was inaugurated a reign of terror which was to cause
      suffering and despair to all elements of the population, while at
      the same time transforming Serbian resistance to the yamaks into
      a revolt against the Sultan.®^
        These hayduk bands now grew into major resistance move¬
      ments in all parts of the province. On the whole they were inde¬
      pendent and spontaneous, responding to local grievances, and
      coordinating their efforts more by example than anything else.
      Of particular importance were the bands in the north western
      Serbian forest district of Shumadia, south of Belgrade between
      the Morava and the Kalubara. In 1802, they agreed to coordinate
      their efforts under the direction of a former soldier in the Aus¬
      trian army named Kara George, a pig merchant who previously




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                      X
had distinguished himself in the fights against the yamaks. They          319
soon achieved such success in Shumadia and wide repute through¬
out Serbia that early in 1804 the dahis tried to conciliate them by
promising that the princes alone would have the right to collect
taxes and that Turks would no longer live outside the cities, and
by offering to appoint Kara George as chief of all the princes in
return for Serbian acceptance of their rule.
  Kara George declared his agreement but demanded in return
that the dahis accept foreign guarantees of their promises as
well as a delay so he codld convoke an assembly of Serbian
notables to ratify the agreement. But the dahis rejected these
terms, in their probably wholly justified fear that Kara George
was only stalling for time to strengthen his forces in the Shum¬
adia and to extend his influence throughout Serbia.®^
  With the breakdown of negotiations, the rebels redoubled their
attacks on Ottoman officials, yamaks, Spahis and others consid¬
ered to be responsible for misrule. Still preserving the guise of
loyalty to the Sultan against the rebel yamaks, Kara George and
his followers received large quantities of arms and ammunitions
from Ebubekir of Nish and Constantine Ipsilanti of Bucharest as
well as from the mutesellim of Usitza. The arrival on March 12 of
an Ottoman firman declaring as legitimate the armed Serbian
resistance against yamak oppression, inviting all the officials and
people of Serbia to join them, and promising tax exemptions for
nine years following the conclusion of peace, gave impetus to the
movement. Four days later, Belgrade was put under siege, and
several forts were captured and their Turkish garrisons tom to
pieces. At the start of April 1804, Kara George had a force of
30,000 men under his command, most of whom were besieging
Belgrade, while the balance went through Shumadia disarming
Turks and forcing them to submit. By the end of the month, the
entire district was under Serbian control with the exception of ^
Belgrade itself.®^
 In the meantime, the yamak misrule and dahi massacres of the
 princes had led to similar uprisings elsewhere in Serbia. West of
 the Kalubara in northwest Serbia, the Serbs of Brankovina
 formed their own resistance movement under the leadership of
 Jacob Nenadovich, brother of one of the massacred princes of