




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
and occasionally into Moldavia, whose hospodars, Constantine           305
Ipsilanti (1799-1801) and Alexander Suzzo (1801-1802), fled to
Bessarabia whenever he approached. Pasvanoglu’s lieutenant,
Manav Ibrahim, undertook similar campaigns into Little Wal-
lachia, at times looting Craiova and threatening Bucharest so
seriously that the local princes and flef-holders were compelled to
flee to Transylvania. Pasvanoglu forced the Wallachian princes
to pay heavy annual contributions of wheat, fodder, and salt and to
provide artisans to build and maintain his forts and cannons as
well as money to pay them, 't'he princes in turn took all they could
from the peasants to meet these obligations.        Whenever the
princes got the help of Ottoman contingents from Bulgaria, the
latter were just as rapacious as those whom they were invited to
repulse, so in the end the princes preferred to forego such assist¬
ance and began to look longingly for help from Russia, whose 'A
agents were beginning to spread its influence in the area under
the pretext of wartime cooperation with the Sultan.^®

                              Serbia
  Pasvanoglu’s allies also used wartime conditions to regain
control in Serbia. While he had promised Selim to end all raids
and support the Ottoman presence in Serbia as part of the ar¬
rangement by which he was pardoned in 1798, he was allowed to
leave his second lieutenant, Molla Idris Agha, as governor of the
Kraina, and this gave him the entering wedge he needed to re¬
sume his activities as soon as the Ottomans were no longer able
to enforce his obedience. Soon after Selim withdrew large num¬
bers of Ottoman soldiers to participate in the campaign against
the French, Pasvanoglu resumed his old ways, giving shelter to
refugee yamaks and sending them on regular pillaging expedi¬
tions into Serbia as far as Belgrade. The Serbian princes com¬
plained to the Sultan, threatening to flee to Austria unless order
and security were restored. The governor of Belgrade, Hajji
Mustafa Pasha, managed to quiet the situation during the sum¬
mer of 1799 by a campaign into the Kraina and also by besieging
and capturing a large number of yamaks at Shabatz, forcing the
rest to flee across the Save into Bosnia. Mustafa Pasha then told
the princes that the only way he could provide regular protection




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
      V
306   of this kind was to increase the size of his army and improve its
      armaments, which would require an increase in taxes; the choice
      lay between insecurity and high taxes. The princes objected and
      persuaded Mustafa to agree to an important compromise in its
      place. Instead of relying entirely on Ottoman troops supported
      by salaries, he would allow the princes to organize and arm native
      Serbian troops as auxiliaries, and these would be supported
      directly by the local population without the necessity of new
      Ottoman taxes. Thus for the first time'jn centuries, rayas were
      allowed to bear arms in defense of thteir homes.
          While the new Serbian units were being assembled and trained,
      the Ottomans withdrew more and more of their regular men to
      meet the needs of the Egyptian campaign. In November 1800
      Pasvanoglu moved, trying to take advantage of the reduction in
      Ottoman forces before the new local defense forces were ready.
      The yamaks moved from the Kraina and Vidin into Serbia and
      took Passarowitz, Semendria, and Belgrade against very limited
      resistance. Hajji Mustafa Pasha managed to hold out in the
      Belgrade citadel until the princes arrived with a large force of
      armed Serbs who drove the yamaks all the way out of Serbia and
      back to Vidin. Thus did the Christian rayas rise in defense of
      their Ottoman overlords, a unique action in the long annals of
      Ottoman rule.^^
          But this successful defense only stimulated new complaints
      on the part of the Janissaries and Ulema and their supporters,
      not only in Belgrade, but also in Istanbul and Sarajevo. How
      could infidels be armed and used against believers in the true
      faith, whatever their crimes might be? What would the conse¬
      quences be? To calm their hostility, Selim pardoned the yamaks
      crowded into Vidin and allowed them to return to Belgrade on
      condition that they agree to obey the orders of his governor there.
      They promised but of course had no intention of obeying. As soon
      as they were strong enough, they revolted against Mustafa Pasha,
      who once again took refuge in the citadel while the yamaks oc¬
      cupied the town (August 20, 1801). Mustafa again called for the
      help of the Serbs, while the mutesellim of Nish, Mustafa Agha,
      prepared to move to his assistance.®^ Mustafa Agha was pre¬
      vented from helping by Pasvanoglu, who marched his main army