




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                              ^              4


320   that district. Help came from private sources in the Hapsburg
      dominions as well as from many Serbian emigres who now re¬
      turned to their homes to help. Here also the appeal was to clear
      the area of the yamak tyrants in order to prepare the way for the
      arrival of Ottoman troops who would join in an attack on the
      dahis in Belgrade. Munitions were secured from the Ottoman
      governor of Srebrnitsa, across the Drina in Bosnia, who long
      had been a foe of the yamaks in his own province. In addition
      a flow of arms came from Austrian officials north of the Danube
      although they officially refused to do an3d-hing for fear of offend¬
      ing the Sultan. The Austrian commander at Zemlin offered to
      mediate between the Serbs and dahis, but his offer was rejected
      on the grounds that the Serbs were fighting rebels against the
      Sultan and that surrender or death were, the only alternatives.
      By the end of April, the Serbs held most of the northwest corner
      of Serbia between the#Drina and the Save, including the impor¬
      tant towns of Valievo and Shabatz, although to secure their
      surrender, they had been compelled to allow their yamak garri¬
      sons to retire to Belgrade with all their arms and ammunition.*^
      In the meantime, the Serbian siege of the capital went on, with
      the yamaks resisting strongly while Hasan Pasha continued to
      maintain an uneasy neutrality. Shortages of food and supplies
      made it seem very likely that Kara George would soon attain his
      objective.
        While the rebels still expressed their loyalty to the Sultan,
      their continued successes frightened Hasan Pasha as well as the
      dahis, who Anally agreed to the proposal of the Austrian governor
      of Salvonia that he mediate a peaceful settlement of the dispute.
      On May 10, 1804, a meeting was held at Zemlin, with the Serbs
      represented by sixteen men, including Kara George and Arch¬
      bishop Mathiew Nenadovich, and the Ottomans by muhassil Ibra¬
      him Agha, chief of customs collections in the province, and
      Ibrahim Bey, lieutenant of Hasan Pasha. The Serbs demanded
      that the dahis be deprived of all power and the yamaks forbidden
      to hold any rural properties, in accordance with Ebubekir’s
      original reform orders issued in 1793. The Serbs would be offi¬
      cially pardoned by the Sultan, and orders would be issued pro-




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign ITars
hibiting the exaction of any vengeance from them once order was      321
restored. Kara George would provide the governor with a guard
of fifteen hundred men for his protection until the Sultan was
able to send a regular Ottoman force to take their place. The
province thereafter would be governed in accordance with Ebube-
kir’s reforms. The Ottoman governors would agree to accept the
elected princes as leaders of the rayas and a chief prince elected
from among them to represent them regularly with the Ottoman
authorities. Taxes would once again be collected by the princes
and delivered to the chief prince, who would turn them over to
the governor. There would be no arbitrary tax increases, and the
courts would be strictly administered in accordance with the law.
Orders would be issued guaranteeing free exercise of religion and
freedom to repair churches and monasteries as well as free trade
and communication within the province without interference by
taxes or other artificial barriers. In return for all these guar¬
antees, the Serbs promised to acknowledge again their loyalty to
the Sultan and to obey all his orders in full.
  The Ottoman representatives seemed agreeable to the Serbian
proposals, but the dahis in Belgrade took advantage of the
absence of the rebel chiefs to attack their strongholds around
the city, burning and pillaging raya houses as they went. When
news of this action reached the negotiators, the Serbs and Aus¬
trians reproached the Ottoman representatives, who could only
protest their lack of complicity. The Serbs then demanded that
Hasan Pasha turn the dahis over to them, and when he refused,
Kara George broke off the negotiations on the grounds that the
Porte would be unable to guarantee dahi obedience to the terms.
For the moment, the efforts to end the rebellion shifted to Istan¬
bul, where the Orthodox Patriarch made representations on be¬
half of the Archbishop of Belgrade, and the Russian minister
tried to intercede in favor of the rebels.*^®
  In Serbia the rebellion resumed during the summer of 1804.
The rebels now received considerable amounts of arms and money
from the merchants of Zemlin with the compliance of its Austrian
authorities. The rebel forces were transformed into a regular
army under the direction and leadership of Serbian officers sent