




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
by the Hapsburgs. The hayduks began to attract the support of
Greek armatolis from Thessaly and Macedonia, many of whom
had been suppressed by Ali of Janina and were happy to find a
new outlet for their energies. This inaugurated a Greek interest
in the Serbian revolt which was shared by the Phanariote princes
of Wallachia and Moldavia.^^ For the first time also, efforts were
now made to secure Russian help, both directly and through the
efforts of Constantine Ipsilanti. At the end of July, a delegation of
three Serbs crossed the Danube on the way to St. Petersburg.
In February 1805, they returnedvwith the Czar’s promise to
promote their case in Istanbul.®®
  In the meantime the siege of the yamaks in the Belgrade citadel
continued. In mid-June 1804, Jacob Nenadovich and Kara George
led a combined force along the Danube to Rassarowitz, which they
captured after a short siege. They then moved on to Semendria.
At first they assured its garrison that it would not be attacked
since it had not participated in the misrule. But its defenders re¬
fused his demand that they confine themselves to the fort, so it
was also put under siege.®® Belgrade was therefore now entirely
circled by rebel troops, from the Save all the way around to the
Danube. Kara George and other Serbian leaders met with a group
of Ottoman officials from Belgrade and agents sent from the prov¬
inces of both Principalities and demanded that thereafter all the
forts of the province be garrisoned by Serbians and that the Porte
provide assistance against the yamaks continuing to operate in
the south. The Ottoman representatives said they had no author¬
ity to grant even these concessions, however, so nothing was ac¬
complished.®® The Serbs than moved to clear the yamaks out of
southern Serbia on their own, and a summer of heavy fighting
brought them success. The power of the yamaks and dahis was
finally destroyed outside Belgrade, and the Serbian movement
was greatly strengthened as a result.®*
  Selim then moved to settle the conflict before it got out of hand
and led to international complications. At the start of June, he
appointed Suleyman Agha, former muhassil of Belgrade, as its
new governor and named Ebubekir Pasha, then in Bosnia, as his
official plenipotentiary with authority to negotiate a final settle¬
ment with the rebels. Selim also instructed Ebubekir to use the




                 Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
occasion to end the power of the dahis and yamaks once and for        323
all. As soon as this news reached Kara George, he suspended hos¬
tilities to await Ebubekir’s arrival.
  Ebubekir was delayed during most of June by revolts among
the Bosnian yamaks, who sought to protect the interests of their
counterparts in Belgrade. But negotiations finally began in mid-
July. Included among the delegates were agents of the princes of
Moldavia and Wallachia, who had been instructed by the Sultan
to urge the Serbs to accept his terms. While these delegates pub¬
licly obeyed these instructions, in private those sent by Constan¬
tine Ipsilanti urged the Serbs to hold out and get Russian help.
In addition the dahis refused Ebubekir’s request that they evac¬
uate the fort, so talks had to be suspended until this condition
could be obtained by force. Ebubekir marched east along the Dan¬
ube, relieving and occupying Semendria while waiting for the
Serbs to accomplish their goal. The dahis still hoped to retain
their power and sent secret emissaries to Ebubekir proposing a
coordinated attack on the Serbs, but the proposal was rejected.^^
On August 5, Halil Agha, the four dahis, and their chief support¬
ers left the citadel by night and fled on the Danube toward safety
at Vidin. On August 7, they were intercepted and immediately
executed by the governor of New Orsova, thus removing from the
scene the principal fomenters of the revolt.
  Negotiations for a new agreement began as soon as the dahis
left Belgrade. The Serbs now demanded the following terms: (1)
The Sultan would recognize Kara George as chief of the Serbs,
with the sole right to levy and collect taxes and to direct the ad¬
ministration of the country; (2) no Turk would be allowed to set¬
tle anywhere in Serbia outside Belgrade without the permission
of both Kara George and the governor; (3) all Turkish customs
and justice officials in the provinces would be replaced by Serbs;
(4) all fortresses in the provinces would be garrisoned jointly by
equal numbers of Ottoman and Serbian troops, and Kara George
would be allowed to maintain a special personal guard of five hun¬
dred Serbians of his choice; (5) the Serbs would pay a regular
annual tribute of 500,000 piasters and would provide the Otto¬
man governor with funds sufficient for his own maintenance and
that of his staff; (6) and Ottoman fulfillment of the agreement