




                    The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
there were no such natural dtefense points against attacks across
the Drina from Bosnia, but several small forts were established
along the Drina, and units were sent out from them to patrol
the river.
  Nor did Kara George neglect his diplomatic preparations. The
Serbian Senate quickly petitioned the Czar for arms and ammuni¬
tion as well as intervention in their behalf at the Porte. This put
the Russians in a difficult position. In Europe, their old friend
Austria had been humiliated, and the Peace of Pressburg had put
France in a position where it could threaten the Balkans once
again. The Serbs were intimating that they would turn to the
French if Russia did not intervene, so the Czar was in a position
where his entire influence among the southern Slavs would be
placed in jeopardy if assistance to the Serbs continued to be with¬
held for fear of the Ottoman reaction. In response the Czar was
considering a full-scale military occupation of southeastern
Europe. During 1805, an army had been prepared in Bessarabia
under the command of General Michelson. Selim’s recognition of
Bonaparte’s empire and the Austrian surrender of Dalmatia had
moved the Czar’s foreign minister, Czartoryski, to advise im¬
mediate preventative occupation of the Principalities, but Czar
Alexander decided against this for the moment until there was
more obvious evidence of Ottoman hostility to Russia. However,
starting in March 1806, under British pressure, a series of stiff
notes were sent to the Porte demanding an end to Ottoman mili¬
tary preparations and guarantees against any further favors to
France, with an implied threat of invasion if these measures were
not carried out at once.
  At this point, the Czar was willing to accept a rapprochement
with France if Bonaparte would be content with supremacy in
western Europe and would evacuate Dalmatia and accept con¬
tinued Russian protection of the Ottoman Empire. Russia would
then arrange to separate Serbia, Montenegro, Herzegovina,
Albania, and Macedonia from the Ottoman Empire and establish
them as independent monarchies under its suzerainty and pro¬
tection. D’Oubril originally had been sent to Paris to secure
French evacuation of Dalmatia and agreement to the establish¬
ment of independent Slavic states in the Balkans as the first




                 Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                        Y

step toward fulfillment of this plan.^^ Selim reacted by prohibiting        341
Russian warships from passing through the Straits on the pretext
that they were involved in offensive actions against France and
were not therefore covered by the Ottoman-Russian defensive
alliance. Italinsky refused to agree, on the grounds that the treaty
covered all types of ships,    and for the moment the Sultan—
satisfied with form rather than substance — did nothing to en¬
force his prohibition.^®
  Selim now also attempted to lessen the influence of foreign
agents on his non-Muslinl subjects, particularly that of Russia
among the Orthodox Slavs and Greeks, by severely limiting their
traditional capitulations right to give orders (herats) of protection
which effectively removed their proteges from the jurisdiction of
Ottoman laws. Such patents thereafter were to be limited only to
Ottoman subjects in the active service of foreign consulates and
embassies; all other persons were given only a very short time to
surrender their patents or become liable to the confiscation of
their property.^® These measures, combined with Selim’s con¬
tinued refusal to end his preparations against the Serbs, convinced
the Czar that the Porte was now under effective French control
and that only drastic action could prevent further French ad¬
vances in the east. Alexander therefore decided to make one last
effort to get the Ottomans to accept the Serbian demands, and if
that did not work to abandon caution and give full assistance to
the Serbs. Kara George and Selim were advised to forego all
military action and to accept Russian mediation in order to
secure a peaceful solution.®®
  While Russia hardened its position toward the Porte in re¬
sponse to Serbian pressure, Kara George also sent agents to
Vienna to secure military and financial assistance from his most
immediate neighbor to the north. But Emperor Francis II was
even more anxious than the Czar to avoid providing open assist¬
ance. With Russian agents already fanning out in the Principali¬
ties and in Serbia, and with the French moving into Dalmatia,
Francis felt that a successful Serbian revolt could only help one
or both of these powers at the expense of Austrian influence in
the area, and that such an event might also cause new unrest
among his own Serbian subjects resident in southern Hungary.