




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
      X



336       bandits and'rebels. Hiisrev Mehmed Pasha, governor of Egypt
          during the time between the French evacuation and the rise of
          Mohammad Ali, was made governor of Bosnia, with the job of
          arranging a push against the rebels from the west, while Ibrahim
          Pasha was supposed to lead the main Ottoman army up the
          Morava into Serbia from the south. Finally, the Danubian for¬
          tresses were strengthened against possible Russian attacks
          through the Principalities.*®
            While the Ottoman empire openly mobilized through the spring
          and summer of 1806, the Russiahs, French, and Serbs moved
          ahead toward their own objectives. At the end of January, a
          squadron of six Russian ships of the line commanded by Vice
          Admiral Senyavin arrived at Corfu after a journey of over two
          months from the Baltic, with the immediate objective of pre¬
          venting a possible French attack on the Ionian Islands following
          Nelson’s death at Trafalgar.*^ At the same time, Bonaparte
          moved quickly to occupy his new possessions along the Adriatic.
          For him Dalmatia was less important in itself than it was as a
          gateway into the Balkans. In the north, through Bosnia, it would
          enable him to enter relations with the Serbian rebels. In the
          south, Cattaro would open the way to Albania, and through
          Albania was a route to the Ionian Islands, which he planned to
          build into an impregnable Mediterranean naval base easily able
          to rival and overawe the British base at Malta. From there it
          would be only a small step to lead the Greeks in revolution against
          the Sultan. Moreover, as a powerful neighbor of the Porte, Bona¬
          parte would be in a position easily to regain the traditional French
          position in the empire and shut out both the Russians and the
          British once and for all. And if the Ottoman empire should fall
          apart, the French garrison along the Adriatic would be in a good
          position to take France’s full share of the spoils.
            The Treaty of Pressburg ceded Dalmatia to the Kingdom of
          Italy, so it was from there that the occupation was directed and
          prepared, under the leadership of General Lauriston, who planned
          to occupy the ceded areas as the Austrians evacuated them by
          terms of the treaty in January and February of 1806.*® But as
          soon as Senyavin reached Corfu and learned about Pressburg, he
          realized the threat that a French occupation of Dalmatia would




                           Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
pose to the Russian position in the Balkans and prepared to           337
frustrate it. His first step was a successful effort to convince
Cattaro to reject the idea of occupation by revolutionary France.
Cattaro was an independent republic like Ragusa. It had accepted
protection and suzerainty from Venice and then from Austria
when it replaced Venice in the Adriatic area as a result of the
Treaty of Campo Formio. But now, under Russian pressure, its
leaders opposed Lauriston’s plans. Claiming that their Austrian
protector had no right to cede their territory, they asked for the
assistance of the Russian fleet and also of the formidable fighting
forces of Montenegro led by Prince-Bishop Peter I, himself a
Russian vassal maintained by an annual subsidy sent by the
Czar.i"
  In response to Cattaro’s request, Senyavin’s fleet sailed up and
down the Adriatic coast, effectively blocking any French effort to
move their forces from Italy to Dalmatia by sea. In response
Lauriston sent a land force under the command of his chief aide.
General Molitor, and it moved from Trieste south along the
Dalmatian coast during February, planning to occupy Cattaro
and Ragusa as soon as jxjssible. Croatia was passed with no
difficulty as the Austrian authorities there readily gave their
consent. After Knin and Zara were occupied, the French occupa¬
tion of Dalmatia was formally proclaimed.       But at this point
Molitor had to pause to await the arrival of the main French
army, which was on a forced march from Trieste under Lau¬
riston’s personal command.^® The delay proved costly to French
ambitions, for the Russians and Montenegrins moved rapidly to
forestall him in the south. Peter and his Montenegran army
descended into the Sutorina valley, a Russian squadron set up a
blockade of the Gulf of Cattaro, and Russian troops landed at
Castelnuovo, which the Austrians were compelled to surrender
to them along with the strategic forts of Risano and Cattaro.
During March and April, another squadron seized most of the
coastal islands and blockaded Ragusa and the other ports to
prevent the French from sending troops or supplies to them across
the Adriatic.21 Molitor bitterly criticized the Austrians for sur¬
rendering without a fight, but he decided not to move ahead to
contest the Russians for fear of a Russian advance through Wal-