




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
negotiations with the rebels but actually to command the expedi¬
tionary army which was to be assembled at Skopje. These orders
were actually sent three days before the Serbian delegation ar¬
rived from Belgrade, but they were kept secret, and negotiations
were begun so as not to warn the Serbs of the new danger.
  In Belgrade, Kara George waited impatiently for news of the
negotiations. In the meantime he was joined not only by large
numbers of Serbians but also by Christians from Bulgaria, Mon¬
tenegro, and Albania who came to help him.*®^ When no news
came from Istanbul by the end of May, he moved to take up posi¬
tions along the Drina and at Nish, to set up a defense against
possible attacks from the west or south. On June 15, 1805, he
took Krushevatz, northwest of Nish, and finally learned of the
Ottoman plans from a captured official. He immediately moved
west toward Bosnia, and on July 12 he met and defeated on the
Drina an Ottoman force on its way to join Hafiz Pasha at Nish.
Hafiz then left Skopje and headed for the Morava, where he hoped
to join the Bosnian force for a joint attack on the Serbs. Kara
George sent a force under Milenko Stoikovich to intercept him,
and at Ivankovatz, on the Morava, the two forces came together
on August 18. Hafiz tried to continue his pose as governor of Bel¬
grade, saying that he was going to his new post and offering to
make Stoikovich chief prince of Belgrade in return for his assist¬
ance. Stoikovich refused to allow him to pass, but in the hope of
avoiding an open conflict he used the pretext that since Hafiz
Pasha held his post by an Imperial order, he would have to use
the regular Imperial route, which went west of the Morava and
via Yagodina to the north. Hafiz replied that he was an Ottoman
vezir and did not have to ask the permission of brigands to take
any route he wished. But when he attacked the Serbs, he was
routed and suffered heavy losses; abandoning all his baggage and
artillery he fled back to Nish with the remnants of his army.^®^
Thus the first Ottoman effort to quell the rebels met an unex¬
pected and staggering defeat.
  The Serbs now felt they had nothing to fear from the Porte for
the moment since they controlled almost all of Serbia with the
exception of Belgrade and Semendria. So they turned to internal
affairs. At the end of August, a representative assembly (skupch-




                Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
tina) met at Borak and decided to set up a permanent senate as        327
the supreme administrative and legislative authority, with its
members chosen in each district by the local priests, monks, no¬
tables, and town majors. Kara George was elected as supreme
executive chief to carry out its .decisions.
  With this business out of the way, the sieges of Belgrade and
Semendria were renewed. On November 21,1805, Semendria fell.
The garrison was allowed to retire to Vidin, but all its artillery,
munitions, arms, and provisions were left to the victors. Since
Semendria had been the capital of the independent Serbian des-
potate in the fifteenth century, before its capture by Mehmed II,
its occupation had political as well as military significance. The
senate was transferred there and a regular independent govern¬
ment was established.'®^ One more province thus was lost to the
Sultan, and it seemed that little remained to prevent a complete
breakup of the Empire, in Europe as well as Asia. At this point
it was inevitable that the Ottomans should once again become the
focus of European diplomatic action.