




                Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
              XIX. The Eastern Question
                     1802-1807




    With the Serbian rebels moving rapidly toward victory, their
    fate, as well as that of the entire Ottoman Empire, now fell into
i\ the hands of the European powers who had interests in the area,
    and diplomacy became as important as victories on the battlefield.
      The Peace of Amiens had given Selim III a second respite from
y   involvement in the wars of Europe, but this did not mean that he
    or his people were removed from the conflicts of European diplo¬
    macy. The most salient characteristic of Ottoman diplomacy in
    this period was a gradual reversal of the alliances molded by
    Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt and a return to the more tradi¬
    tional bonds forged by longer-standing considerations of national
    self-interest. With the resumption of the war between Britain
    and France in 1803 and the entry of Russia and Austria into the
    Third Coalition two years later, it was inevitable that this rever¬
    sal should begin and that the currently neutral Porte should be
    pressured for support by both sides.^


                          Foreign Relations

      Istanbul once again was one of the few places in Europe where
    representatives of the combatants could and did live in uneasy
    propinquity, so it became a center of diplomatic intrigue on a
scale not seen there again until World War 11. As usual Bonaparte       329
was most active. As soon as relations with the Porte were restored
in 1802, he appointed as his new ambassador his former comrade
in arms in the Netherlands, General Brune, with the mission of
regaining Ottoman confidence and restoring France’s political
and economic position in the Levant as well as obtaining compen¬
sation for the losses suffered by French subjects in the Empire
during the war. In addition Horace Sebastiani was sent on a spe¬
cial mission to Istanbul and the Levant with the object of formu¬
lating long-range policies not only to regain France’s former posi¬
tion in the area but also to expand it through the Black Sea, east
across Anatolia, and west into Danubian Europe. New French
consulates were established in various places to promote these
new political and economic ambitions. One of the earliest results
of Sebastiani’s mission was a French effort to expand its political
influence in the Arab world by championing the Sultan’s Catholic
subjects there, thus adapting the policy followed by the Russians
toward the Orthodox since 1774. Brune cultivated connections at
the Porte, not only to learn of its plans but also to influence deci¬
sions which might run counter to the interests of his master. In
particular, Selim was urged to maintain a firm policy against the
autonomous notables then troubling him because of the possibil¬
ity that conciliation would lead to the triumph of persons who
were under the influence of France’s enemies. At the same time,
however, agents also were sent to the same notables to make cer¬
tain that if they did succeed, they would turn to France for assist¬
ance against the Porte.^
  Russia, on the other hand, had gained enormously from the
Peace of Amiens, and the Czar’s main objective now was to pre-
serve those gains. The 1799 alliance with the Porte assured Rus-
sia access through the Straits to the Mediterranean. This, com¬
bined with its protectorate over the Ionian Islands, gave it
predominant naval power in the Eastern Mediterranean as well
as in the Black Sea. While it stayed out of the renewed war be¬
tween Britain and France, it tried to use its neutrality and alli¬
ance with the Porte to further advance its position at the expense
of both. But this was essentially a passive policy. Czar Alexander
I was anxious to make a much more active approach. Fearing the