




               Disintegration of the Empire, 1799-1806
                              \              4


324   would be guaranteed by a forfeign power. These points actually
      were no more than those agreed on earlier at Zemlin, and Ebube-
      kir was disposed to accept all of them except the last, which he
      felt constituted foreign intervention in an internal matter. On
      this point, the negotiations stalled in mid-September, and no
      agreement was reached.®^
        Nor did the flight of the dahis mean that the yamaks were
      entirely bereft of their power. In western Serbia along the Drina,
      they still held a number of forts and mountain strongholds from
      which they continued to ravage the surrounding areas as they
      had in the past. In Belgrade, leadership of the yamaks was as¬
      sumed by a mercenary named Gushanatz Ali, who managed to
      retain possession of the upper citadel while demanding that
      Ebubekir provide the back pay owed his men by the dahis before
      he left.
        Ebubekir now was trying to restore normal conditions to the
      province. The governorship was turned over to Suleyman Pasha,
      who confirmed the popularly elected princes and decreed that
      they would have the sole right to collect taxes. Efforts were made
      to get the Spahis to leave their fiefs and settle in the towns, where
      they would receive the tax revenues collected by the princes.®®
        But Ebubekir soon had to send a large number of his men back
      to Bosnia to curb its beys and Spahis and to meet Montenegrin
      raids from the south. The yamaks and their supporters in Bel¬
      grade took advantage of the absence of Ebubekir’s men to imprison
      him in his own palace and regain control of the citadel and part
      of the town. They began to attack Serbs in the streets and also
      to arouse Serbian-Turkish animosity in order to make impossible
      any agreement injurious to their interests. After forcing Ebube¬
      kir to empty his treasury to provide their overdue wages, they
      allowed him to leave and return to Bosnia with the remnants of
      his army.®^
        This did not mean that the yamaks now were in control of Bel¬
      grade, for they met resistance not only from Kara George’s Serbi¬
      ans, but also from Suleyman Pasha and his Ottoman garrison.
      During the winter and early spring of 1805, the yamaks devas¬
      tated the countryside and caused a new famine in Belgrade, but
      they lacked sufficient strength to overcome their opponents




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
entirely. Without Ebubekir’s assistance, Suleyman Pasha was             325
unable to eliminate them or stop their raids. So there was a stale¬
mate, with the province rapidly falling into anarchy. With Suley¬
man Pasha hardly able to defend himself against the yamaks, let
alone stop their ravages, Kara George and his supporters left
Belgrade and raised a new army in the area between Belgrade
and Shabatz, organizing and training them at Ravanitza, which
he made his capital for the time being.®* On May 7, an order ar¬
rived from the Sultan directing the Serbs to lay down their arms
and rely for protection on Suleyman Pasha and a large Ottoman
army already on the way, but in view of the continued yamak
raids, it was ignored. For the first time, the will of the Sultan had
been defied, and the uprising thus became a revolt.®® Neverthe¬
less Kara George decided to make a final attempt to negotiate a
settlement with the Porte. On May 14, 1805, Alexai Lazarevich,
Archbishop of Belgrade, and Stephen Yivkovich, a wealthy mer¬
chant, left for Istanbul with the Serbs’ final proposals. Since
Serbia had been decimated by three years of war and could no
longer afford to pay the taxes required by a regular province, it
would be lowered to the rank of a district, and the governor re¬
placed by a muhassil. The district would then be divided into
twelve communes, each ruled by an elected prince, with a grand
prince at Belgrade representing the Serbs in all dealings with the
muhassil and other Ottoman officials. All taxes would be collected
by agents of the princes, including those on fiefs, whose holders
thereafter would have to reside in Belgrade and receive their
revenues through the muhassil. The yamaks would no longer be
allowed to live in the province, and order and security would be
cared for jointly by the grand prince and the muhassil, both of
whom would be allowed to maintain armies for this purpose.^®®
  In Istanbul the news of Kara George’s new army and of up¬
risings in hitherto quiet southern Serbia at Nish and Krushevatz
finally forced the Sultan to consider the Serbs as rebels and to
plan more vigorous action against them. A full-scale expedition
against them was prepared, and all the governors and district
commanders in Bosnia, Macedonia, and Thrace were ordered to
prepare forces to join it. Hafiz Pasha, currently governor of Nish,
was appointed new governor of Belgrade, ostensibly to conduct