



                 Foreign Relations, 1805-1807
    The close relations between the Ottoman Empire and Russia
  did not last long. The news of Bonaparte’s victories over the
  armies of Austria and Russia at Ulm (October 17, 1805) and
  Austerlitz (December 2,1805) and of France’s acquisition of Istria
  and Dalmatia from Austria by virture of the Treaty of Pressburg
X (December 26, 1805) convinced Selim III that the Triple Alliance
  was dead and that he therefore was entirely free to ignore his
  agreements with its members — in fact, that he was bound to do so




                   Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
in order to preserve his Empire in the light of Bonaparte’s ap¬          335
parent triumph in Europe. The French charge d’affaires in Istan¬
bul, Pierre Ruffin, followed up this news by promising France’s
help to regain the Crimea and assuring Selim that since Russia
was the enemy of France, Bonaparte would never make a separate
peace prejudicial to Ottoman interests. It was inevitable then that
Selim would reconsider his position, and in a short time he en¬
tirely suspended his negotiations with the British ambassador.*^
  Ruffin now moved to use the new situation in order to obtain
the long-desired Ottoman recognition of Bonaparte’s full imperial
title. The Russians and British used all their influence to prevent
this and to avoid a full Ottoman-French rapprochement. In this
they were strongly supported by the Moruzi and Ipsilanti Phan-
ariote families, who had a powerful influence over Ottoman
foreign policy by virtue of their control of the post of chief drago¬
man {Bash Terjuman) at the Porte as well as of the Principalities
of Moldavia and Wallachia. But at this point they were success¬
fully countered by the French partisans in the Sultan’s Council,
led by the Reis ul-Kuttab, the official historian {Vakaniivis)
Ahmed Vasif Efendi, who used successive reports of Bonaparte’s
recent military victories to win the Sultan over to his view. As a
result, at the end of February 1806, Selim officially recognized
Bonaparte as Emperor and dispatched his close friend Muhib
Efendi to France to establish the new relationship.*^
  With the backing of France, Selim moved to mobilize his armed
forces for a full-scale campaign against the Serbs, as well as to
guard against any hostile moves on the part of Russia or Great
Britain. Orders were issued for the confiscation of all arms in the 'A
possession of the rayas in Bulgaria, Macedonia, and the Princi¬
palities, in the wholly justified fear that they might easily rise/
to assist the Serbs or the Russians if conflict were to break out.
It was not long before Selim secured a fetva from the Sheyh ul-
Islam declaring the Serbian rebels to be enemies of Islam, and a
formal declaration of war against them followed. Ibrahim Pasha
of Scutari was named commander of the Ottoman expeditionary
force to be formed against them in Macedonia, and he was given
the sort of full and complete powers in the area that formerly
had been given only to Hakki Pasha in his war against the