




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
                                                                      r,

Selim might respond to the pressure at the last minute, but to no          333
avail. As a result, he finally departed from the Ottoman capital
at the end of the month.
  With the suspension of relations between France and the Porte,
Russian influence reached new heights. French merchants and
proteges throughout the empire began to seek the protection of
other European powers. Russian warships and transports passed
regularly through the Straits. Italinsky moved to take advantage
of the situation by getting Selim to renew the 1799 alliance and
so bind the Porte to Saint Petersburg that another restoration of ^
French influence in Istanbul would be impossible. The subsequent
renewal of the old Anglo-Russian alliance against France (April
1805) intensified the Russian pressure on the Porte, and to this
was added a British claim for renewal of its alliance as well.
Italinsky also demanded that as part of the new agreement, the
Turks cooperate to expel France from Italy and some sort of au¬
tonomy be given to Serbia, Montenegro, and the Ionian Islands,
ostensibly to prevent further uprisings but actually to assure
that if the Ottoman Empire did break up, these provinces would
automatically gravitate to Russia. But the Porte was not over
anxious to revive the old alliances or to secure new ones. Selim
refused even to discuss the possibility of secret terms on the
grounds that he was still at peace with France. But he did
inform his negotiators that they could conclude a secret alliance
with the Russians if France declared war on them or on the
Porte. “
  Now faced with the threat of Ottoman adherence to the Euro¬
pean coalition against it, France moderated the demands which
had led to the break. Talleyrand ordered his agents in Egypt to
stop cooperating with Mohammad Ali against the Porte. The
demand for recognition of Bonaparte as Emperor was changed to
recognition as the Sultan’s equal, with the title of padishah, no
longer equal in Ottoman and western eyes alike to the rank of
Emperor enjoyed by the rulers of Russia and Austria. But now
Selim could only reply that he no longer could agree even to this
request because of threats of Britain and Russia. At the same
time, however, he did not wish to close the door to France entirely
and thus make himself wholly dependent on the Third Coalition.




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
  In reply to the Russian demands, he said that he would agree only
  to a defensive alliance since the Porte was not then at war with
  France and did not wish to be dragged in as long as it was not
  openly attacked. He also refused to include clauses desired by
)( Russia allowing its intervention on behalf of the Sultan’s Orthodox
  subjects and its occupation of the Principalities and Britain’s
  occupation of Egypt to frustrate possible French action; and as a
  result of his continued stubbornness on these points, they were
  dropped.*^
    The Ottoman-Russian treaty of Alliance finally signed on Sep¬
  tember 23,1805, was for the most part a nine-year renewal of the
  defensive clauses of the 1799 treaty.The signatories agreed to
  act jointly in all diplomatic matters, to repel attacks against each
  other, to guarantee mutually the integrity of each other’s terri¬
  tories, and to act jointly to secure peace with their enemies. In
  the secret articles, Selim agreed to cooperate with the Triple
  Alliance’s war against France by facilitating the passage of
  Russian ships through the Straits, and by supporting Russian
  efforts to get other neutral states to join the alliance. He agreed
/ to rule justly in Albania and to allow the Russian ambassador in
^ Istanbul to intervene if complaints arose; to confirm the con¬
  tinued Russian occupation of the Ionian Islands, cooperate with
  Russia if necessary to prevent any other naval powers from
  entering the Black Sea, and to accept Russian help in defending
  the Straits if this became necessary. Thus it seemed that the
  Ottoman Empire was more firmly than ever in the unwelcome
  embrace of Russia.