




                   The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
      A
                                    \              I               ,     .   ♦   »

330          effect of the rapid restoration of the French diplomatic position in
             Istanbul, he decided that the only way to counter this possibility
             was to resume Catherine’s efforts to fan the flames of revolt in
      '1     the Balkans in order to force the Sultan to rely more and more on
             his powerful ally to the north. Of course, Alexander could not
             encourage this sort of activity openly since it clearly would nul-
      ^      lify the efforts of his ambassador, Italinsky, in Istanbul. So his
             agents worked covertly and silently to carry out his wishes in this
             respect.^
               Great Britain’s view of the situafidn in the Eastern Mediterra¬
             nean, on the other hand, changed considerably as a result of the
             war. Long-standing fears of French advances in the area now
             were supplemented by a new determination to keep Russia from
             using the new situation to advance its position within the Otto¬
             man Empire. But Britain could not act openly to oppose Russia’s
             desires because of London’s need to secure the Czar’s support
             against France in Europe. Britain therefore worked to frustrate
           / Russian ambitions by urging the Sultan to strengthen his empire
             internally and thus enable it to resist subversion and attacks
             without foreign assistance of any kind. Beyond this, the princi¬
             pal task of British statesmen at this time was to prevent relations
             between Russia and the Porte from reaching a point where a
             choice would have to be made between them.'*
               Sultan Selim was unhappy about having to continue to accept
             Russian protection and advice. The Czar had made peace with
             France in 1801 without consulting him in advance; he was aware
             that, despite its soft words, Russia was stirring up and helping
             revolts against him in Serbia and Greece. Russia had recently
             occupied Georgia and was beginning to threaten the Ottoman po¬
             sitions in the Caucasus and eastern Anatolia as well. Neverthe¬
             less Selim still did not wish for a complete break with Saint
             Petersburg because he knew this would mean a rupture with
             Great Britain as well —and he wanted above all London’s con¬
             tinued support against both Russia and France. Selim did not
             want to rely entirely on Bonaparte any more than he wanted to
             rely entirely on the Czar. So he worked to maintain a delicate
             balance between these interests —encouraging the French by
             admitting their diplomats, merchants, and agents, but at the




                              Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
                                                                   >/