




                   The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
338   lachia and Bosnia to Croatia, Vhich would effectively cut off any
      possible retreat to the north. At this point the Ragusans, ever
      willing to blow freely with the winds, renounced their previous
      welcome of the news of Pressburg and of the French occupation
      of Zara and now sent supplies to Senyavin and recognized the
      Czar as their sole protector. While they publicly agreed to be
      absolutely neutral in the struggle between France and Russia, in
      fact they stalled negotiations with the Russians in the hope that
      the French would arrive in time to prefect them.
        Senyavin was effectively deceived, and while he passed the
      time negotiating endlessly with the Ragusans, Lauriston by¬
      passed Molitor, moved rapidly inland toward Ragusa, and finally
      occupied it (May 27), while Senyavin headed to sea and the in¬
      habitants put up token opposition in the hope of convincing the
      French to take only the outlying forts so that when and if the
      Russians returned, they would not attack the city itself.Molitor
      and Lauriston now combined their forces and prepared for the
      Russian reply, which was not long in coming. While the Mon¬
      tenegrins moved in with a large army, including many local
      inhabitants and Albanians, in mid-June the Russians landed a
      large expeditionary force and put Ragusa under a complete
      blockade. As its inhabitants and the French defenders began to
      suffer increasingly from famine as well as a constant Russian
      bombardment, surrender seemed imminent. But the arrival of
      Molitor (July 6) with reinforcements saved the day. Lauriston
      now was able to beat back the allied attacks and retain French
      control of the city. With the failure of the siege of Ragusa, Senya¬
      vin and his fleet withdrew to the Gulf of Cattaro and pondered
      their next move.^^
        It was at this point that the entire situation was changed, for
      Senyavin received the news that the Czar’s representative in
      Paris, Pierre d’Oubril, had just signed an agreement with Bona¬
      parte (July 20, 1806) by which the Russian-French war would be
      brought to an end and Russia would leave Dalmatia to the French
      in return for Bonaparte’s promise to leave Germany. In early
      August, d’Oubril directly instructed Senyavin to leave the Adri¬
      atic and Dalmatia in accordance with this agreement. While the
      Admiral did pull his forces out of the Dalmatian islands, he




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
delayed compliance at Cattaro on the grounds that he could not           339
leave his post until he received official notification of ratification
from Saint Petersburg.^'* As things turned out, this was indeed a
wise move on the part of Senyavin.

                                             >-C-


                               Serbia
  Much of the Czar’s reaction to the d’Oubril Treaty was deter¬
mined by activities in Serbia and Istanbul in the months since
Senyavin had arrived in the Adriatic. In Serbia the Ottoman
military preparations had caused Kara George to convoke on
December 1, 1805, "a second great assembly of all the principal
Serbian chiefs at the former palace of the Ottoman governor at
Semendria. Warning of the danger of a massive Ottoman attack
from all sides, he was able to get the assembly to agree to the
immediate formation of a national army, put under strict dis¬
cipline and trained by European officers as well as Serbs trained
in the Austrian and Russian armies. This new force was to be
maintained by a decentralized financial system, with each unit
paid and provisioned by a commune or district specifically as¬
signed to it. Indiscriminate demands for food by soldiers were
strictly forbidden under the penalty of death, and the siege of
Belgrade was pushed with new vigor in the hope that it might
be taken and fortified before the expected Ottoman offensive
could begin.^^
  The remainder of the winter of 1805-1806 was spent raising
 and training the new army and fortifying the strategic positions
 through which the Ottoman armies would have to pass to enter
 the province. In the east and south, this was relatively easy to
 accomplish since geography narrowed the possible invasion
 routes to a few places. To defend the Morava Valley against any
 attack from Macedonia or Bulgaria, a fort was established at
 Deligrad, thirty miles north of Nish, and in the rear Parachin
 and Krushevatz were siezed and garrisoned. In the Danube
 Valley, the choice fell on the island of Porech, one hundred miles
 east of Belgrade, which commanded all navigation at a point
 where the river rushes out of the Iron Gates on its way to the
 south. The western frontier was more difficult to prepare since