


same time avoiding any extreme positions or actions which might           331
drive off the British and the Russians.^
  Selim was in a very difficult position. It was hard to avoid
Italinsky’s persistent efforts to embrace the Porte more fully in the
protection of his master. In 1802, Italinsky managed to strengthen
the Russian position in the Empire by negotiating a new conven¬
tion with the Porte which replaced the vague "right of interces¬
sion” in the Principalities received in the Treaty of Aynah Kavak ^
(1779) by provisions which enabled Russia to control the appoint¬
ment and dismissal of the princes and thus to secure men favor-
able to its own interests. Princes thereafter were to be appointed
for seven-year terms by the Sultan with Russian consent, and no
prince could be dismissed before the end of his term without spe¬
cific Russian approval. All taxes introduced after 1773 were re¬
voked, and all offices were to be given to natives where possible,
with the Russians being given the right to intervene in Istanbul
whenever violations of these regulations were reported.
  Italinsky then secured the appointments as princes of Moldavia
and Wallachia for two close allies among the Phanariote families
of Istanbul, Alexander Moruzi and Constantine Ipsilanti - and
during the next few years, he was able to use their dependence on
him to expand Russian interests both in the Principalities and at
the Porte.® Ipsilanti in particular had given up the hope that the
Porte could effectively protect the Principalities from the raids of
the Danubian notables. Therefore he now sought to achieve real
protection by securing some sort of union of the Principalities and if"
then forming a strong army with Russian assistance. At the same
time, he made an agreement to gain the support of Ismail Agha
of Ruschuk, who was very happy to join any movement which
would help him against Pasvanoglu. Ipsilanti first sought Se¬
lim’s permission to organize an army but met with immediate
rejection. Selim still hesitated to provide infidels with arms which
might subsequently be used against Muslims. Ipsilanti then
sought Russian and Prussian intervention to obtain a reversal of
this decision but with no result not only because of Ottoman fears
but also because of Russian apprehension of the effect an inde¬
pendent Principalities army might have on its own plans in the
area. Ipsilanti finally turned to cooperation with the Serbian 4.




                   The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
332   rebels in the hope that they nfight paralyze Pasvanoglu’s ability
      to strike across the Danube/
        It was not until 1804 that Selim finally was forced to make a
      choice between the two contending blocks by the question of
      recognition of Bonaparte’s declaration of himself as Emperor.
      Since the Porte was one of the few countries of Europe to continue
      diplomatic recognition of France, Bonaparte insisted that Selim
      recognize the new empire in the hope that this would both break
      the diplomatic isolation forged by the 'I'piple Alliance and also so
      embroil the Porte with Britain and^Russia that it would be forced
      to ally itself with France once and for all. Bonaparte threatened
      to break relations if Selim refused recognition, while Britain and
      Russia threatened the same if he did. Selim tried to avoid the
      trap by stalling, telling Brune that he could not recognize Bona¬
      parte’s claim in advance of the rulers of Austria and Russia, since
      they were the only rulers of Europe with the status Bonaparte
      was now claiming—a far cry indeed from the former Ottoman
      claim to superiority among the rulers of Europe. At the same
      time, however, Selim secretly decided that if France continued to
      press the point, he would withhold recognition since Russia and
      Britain were in far better positions to attack than were the French
      at this time.®
        Brune attributed the Ottoman delays to anti-French ministers.
      Bonaparte tried to counteract this influence by writing a personal
      letter to the Sultan denying further ambitions in Egypt and
      Greece and recommending once again that the rebels be sup¬
      pressed and that direct Ottoman administration be established in
      Serbia, Egypt, S5n’ia, and the Holy Cities.® Throughout the sum¬
      mer of 1804, the arguments raged back and forth, and Ottoman
      recognition continued to be withheld. But at the same time, Selim
      allowed a series of Russian military convoys to pass through the
      Straits to reinforce their fleets in the Ionian Islands. On Novem¬
      ber 7, Bonaparte finally presented an ultimatum, demanding im¬
      mediate recognition of the Empire and also the closing of the
      Straits to Russian warships, and threatening a break in relations
      if these things were not done. Selim continued to avoid a definite
      answer, so on December 22, Brune left the French palace in Istan¬
      bul. He remained another four days in Istanbul in the hope that