




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
that the Ottoman Empire was on the point of collapse. With the            349
Serbian victories seemingly driving the Porte closer and closer
to Bonaparte, he resolved to take drastic action to save Russia’s
position in the Balkans. Instructions went out to General Michel-
son to prepare his army for an immediate push into the Balkans
and to provide officers and weapons to the Serbian rebels in order
to assure their victory and make certain that they would be
firmly committed to the Russian cause. Since the d’Oubril treaty
did not secure French withdrawal from Dalmatia, it was finally
rejected by the Czar, and an order was sent to Senyavin to remain/^
at Cattaro and expel the French from Dalmatia by force. Senyavin y
immediately resumed the siege of Ragusa, and he moved to re- ^
occupy the evacuated Dalmatian Islands. General Marmont,
now in full command of the French forces there, took most of his
army to Castelnuovo in the hope of driving the Russians out
before they could be reinforced. But as winter arrived, neither
attack had succeeded. Ragusa and most of Dalmatia remained
under firm French control, and this pushed both the Czar and the
Sultan to important new policy decisions.
  In the meantime, events moved toward an ominous climax in
Istanbul and the Principalities. Sebastiani arrived in Istanbul
on August 15. With Bonaparte’s prestige and money behind him,
he soon became the most influential foreign representative at
the Porte.And repeating his assurances of French assistance,
it was not long before he was able to get the Sultan to decide to
make a new effort against the Serbs as well as to do something ^
about the situation in the Principalities where the princes were ^
now openly under Russian control. As a result when Ichko reached
Istanbul with Kara George’s new proposals, he was completely
ignored. Selim went on to dismiss Ipsilanti and Moruzi on the         K
grounds of treasonable complicity with the Serbs and Russians.
He replaced them in Wallachia and Moldavia with their pro-
French Phanariote rivals, Charles Callimachi and Alexander
Suzzo, respectively. Ipsilanti’s property in Istanbul was con¬
fiscated and his father executed, so he fled to Transylvania and
from there went to Belgrade, hoping to arrange for Serbian co¬
operation with a Russian move into the Principalities. Moruzi
fled to Mustafa Bayrakdar Pasha at Ruschuk and joined his




                 The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
350   entourage.^^ These dismissals Were clear violations of the Turko-
      Russian convention of 1802, since the princes had been removed
      before the expiration of their terms and without Russian consent.
      Italinsky immediately sent a vigorous protest to the Porte, de¬
      manding that the Sultan restore the princes, end all restrictions
      on Russian movements through the Straits, and renew his alli¬
      ance with Great Britain, with the threat of open Russian occupa¬
      tion of the Principalities if these demands were not met. Up to
      this point, Britain had sternly refused, to allow a preventative
      Russian occupation of the Princip^ilities, but Selim’s deposition
      of the princes provided the Czar with a convenient pretext to
      compel British support. Arbuthnot therefore now supported the
      Russian demands and added his own grievances concerning
      Selim’s favoritism in regard to the berats and the customs in¬
      creases. However he still hoped to forestall Russian intervention
      by pressuring the Sultan to comply with Italinsky’s demands.
      Sebastiani tried to bring the crisis to a head by demanding that
      the Sultan either stop the passage of Russian troops through the
      Straits or allow the French army to move from Dalmatia through
      Bosnia and Serbia in order to suppress the Serbs and fight the
      Russians on the Danube.^®
       At this point Selim received the news of his army’s failures
      against the Serbs, and he decided that before attempting to re¬
      sist the Russian and British demands, he would have to settle
      the two main issues that were dividing the empire internally,
      the Serbian revolution and the Nizam-i Jedid reforms. So on
      September 10, he received Ichko in the company of the Russian
      ambassador and agreed to all the rebel demands. The next day
      Ichko was sent back to Belgrade in the company of Hasan Bey
      of Nish, who was appointed muhassil of Belgrade with authority
      to present Selim’s offer to Kara George and to sign a convention
      if the terms were agreeable. In addition, to show his good faith,
      Selim issued orders incorporating the Serbian demands in antici¬
      pation of agreement. A full amnesty was granted to all the rebels
      and their supporters. The province thereafter would be admin¬
      istered by their supreme prince and the twelve district princes
      already elected. All the yamaks as well as the Ottoman adminis¬
      trative officers were ordered to leave as soon as possible. Aside