



                           Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
  All of Arbuthnot’s efforts to conciliate Russia were of course
doomed by the Czar’s prior decision to invade the Principalities
regardless of what the Sultan said or did and by his order to ^
Michelson to cross the Dniester as soon as he was ready.®® On
November 24, the Russian army began to move in two divi¬
sions.®^ A force under General Meyendorff crossed directly into
Bessarabia and moved down the Dniester, taking Khotzim (No¬
vember 24) and Bender (December 8) and then completing its
occupation of the province by capturing Akkerman (December
16) and Kilya (December 18) without meeting any serious oppo¬
sition. Michelson led the main Russian force through Bessarabia
and across the Pfuth into Moldavia, and by November 30, Jassy
and the northern part of the Principality were entirely under his
control.®® He then issued a proclamation that he had come only
to protect the Porte from Bonaparte and that he would leave as
soon as the Sultan fulfilled his treaty obligations. A copy of this
proclamation was sent to Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha at Ruschuk
in the hope of securing his support, but Mustafa had his own
plans for Wallachia. He informed the Sultan of the Russian action
and himself crossed the Danube into Wallachia to "defend” it
against the Russian attack.®® His lieutenant, Pehlivan Ibrahim
Agha, rode with a large force through the Dobruja and reached
Ismail just in time to save it from Meyendorff s attack; Ismail
thus remained the only part of Moldavia not in Russian hands.^®
  Constantine Ipsilanti came to Moldavia with the Russian army,
and Michelson appointed him Russian governor of both Princi¬
palities, with the duty of getting the cooperation and assistance
of the local boyars and notables. But Bayrakdar Mustafa moved
quickly to organize resistance. Moruzi had fled to Ruschuk after
his deposition, and Mustafa now used him and the French consul
in Bucharest, Reinhard, to get the cooperation of a large number
of the boyars against the Russians.An agreement for joint
action was also made with Pasvanoglu, whose position and
revenues were directly threatened by the Russian advance.
Together they planned to form an alliance of the Balkan notables,
including Ali Pasha of Janina, to oppose the Russian advance and
to suppress the Serbs.But these Balkan armies were no match
for the Russians in open conflict. In a six-week campaign, the
Russians conquered most of Moldavia, Wallachia, and Bessa-



                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
354   rabia, and they were able to go into winter quarters with the
      assurance that victory would be theirs in the spring/^
        It was not until December 12 that the news of Michelson’s
      invasion of the Principalities reached Istanbul. The Ulema and
      Janissaries immediately began to lead mobs through the streets
      attacking foreigners and burning and looting shops as well as
      the homes of Ottoman officials whom they disliked for one reason
      or another. The Reis ul-Kuttab and his pro-Russian colleagues
      held out for peace as the only means of getting British support
      against the Russians, but in view of the invasion, war was clearly
      the Sultan’s only course. On December 18, the Sheyh ul-Islam
      issued an authorizing opinion, and four days later the formal war
      declaration was issued and circulated to the foreign embassies.
      Ipsilanti and Moruzi were dismissed once again, and Alexander
      Suzzo was appointed to rule both provinces; both moves were
      received with great popular enthusiasm. The Bosporus was
      closed to the ships of all nations, and Russian subjects in Istanbul
      were allowed to take refuge on the British ships anchored in the
      Sea of Marmara. While the populace clamored for the imprison¬
      ment of the Russian ambassador, Sebastiani convinced Selim to
      end this practice on the grounds that such things were not done
      by civilized nations; so Italinsky and his staff also went aboard
      the British ships at the end of December.
        Grand Vezir Ibrahim Hilmi Pasha was appointed commander
      in chief of the army, which was to be prepared in Istanbul for
      operations against the Russians in the Principalities. Ten regi¬
      ments of Istanbul Janissaries were immediately dispatched to
      the Danube to help Bayrakdar Mustafa and the fort of Ismail,
      and orders were sent out to governors and notables all over the
      empire to prepare their contingents and armaments for the
      spring. Ebubekir Pasha was made governor of Anatolia and Com¬
      mander of the east, with the job of preparing an army to resist
      possible Russian attacks through the Caucasus into eastern
      Anatolia. Hadimoglu Osman Bey was appointed governor of the
      Dardanelles, and to advise him Sebastiani sent Baron Juchereau
      de Saint Denys, previously an instructor in the Ottoman army.
      He reported that under current conditions, British ships would
      be able to pass through without any difficulties whatever. Work