




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
344     French Activities. During the spring and summer of 1806,
      Bonaparte moved to counter Russia’s diplomatic advances on
      two fronts. His agents fanned out through the Balkans to extend
      France’s political and economic interests and counter the activi¬
      ties of Russia’s agents and friends. In the Principalities, F. Rein-
      hard became French consul general in Bucharest. He began to
      develop latent pro-French sentiment among the native boyars,
      most of whom resented the pro-Russian policies of Moruzi and
      Ipsilanti.^® In Jassy, St. Luce worked with some success to frus¬
      trate Ipsilanti’s efforts to send provisions to the Russian troops
      massed on the other side of the Dniester and to get Kara George
      to seek direct Russian assistance for his revolt.^® To the south,
      adjutant commanders Charroy Bailleul and A. Meriage were
      sent to reside with Bayrakdar Mustafa, Pasha at Ruschuk and
      Pasvanoglu at Vidin, respectively.'** In the west, Pierre David
      was sent from Dalmatia to Travnik as French consul in Bosnia,
      Serbia, and Montenegro. He was particularly successful in se¬
      curing the sympathy and assistance of the Muslim beys, who
      bitterly resented the new raya mood of independence rising in
      response to the Russian urgings. David established a vice-consul
      at Ibrahim Pasha’s capital of Scutari to get his assistance against
      the Russians and Montenegrins if it should prove necessary.^^
      In Albania, Frangois Pouqueville and Julien Bessieres visited
      Ali Pasha in Janina, and they quickly secured his promise of
      support against the Russians in Corfu and Parga. While Bessieres
      returned to Paris with Ali’s amicable letters to Bonaparte,
      Pouqueville remained in Janina for some time to strengthen the
      new relationship."*^ The only serious competition with these
      efforts came from a British agent, J. P. Morier, who visited Scu¬
      tari, Berat, and Janina several times between 1804 and 1806.
      But while he had some success with Ibrahim Pasha and Kara
      Mustafa because of their reliance on Russia for help against Ali
      of Janina, he made no progress at all with Ali Pasha because of
      Russia’s help to his enemies. As a result, Pouqueville had a clear
      field. 4"*
         On May 2, Bonaparte pushed to extend his influence in Istanbul
      by appointing as ambassador his old friend, Horace Sebastiani,
      with the tasks of securing alliances with both Turkey and Iran




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
and arranging for Ottoman cooperation with the army in Dal¬           345
matia to push the Russians out of Montenegro and Albania and
end their influence in Greece and the Principalities once and for
all. He was also to secure closure of the Straits to Russian and
British ships and continue to press French claims for Ottoman
compensation for damages suffered by its subjects during the war
of the Triple Alliance. These were to be reduced in amount, how¬
ever, and in return for their payment France would agree to
allow increases in Ottoman customs duties on its goods in order
to compensate the Porte for the continuing drop in the value of its
currency. Sebastiani also was to support Pouqueville’s efforts
with Ali of Janina with the idea that he might at some time
represent French interests in the Adriatic area. He was instructed
to convince the Porte that France was moving into the Adriatic
only to keep the Russians out and to end Montenegran aid to the
Serbs, not to take or threaten Ottoman territory. He also was to
urge Selim to suppress the Serbian rebels and intervene in the
Principalities in order to end the possibility of Russian inter¬
vention in those places.