


                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Bey to Duckworth with the declaration that he would not nego¬        359
tiate any further until the British fleet retired outside the Dar¬
danelles, and that since Russia was the aggressor, he would not
agree to peace except with modiflcations of the treaty provisions
concerning the Principalities.^®
  With Istanbul fortified and the negotiations ended, Dudkworth
realized the danger of his position. If the Ottomans could fortify
the Dardanelles before he returned, his fleet would be trapped; so
on March 1, he set sail and two days later passed back through
the Straits, suffering heavy casualties and damage from new
shore batteries as he went.®® In Istanbul, the enemy’s departure
was greeted with mass hysteria. Franks, Muslims, Christians,
and Jews embraced each other with a frenzy of comradeship that
would not be seen again in the Sultan’s dominions for almost one
hundred years. Selim showered Sebastiani with gifts. His long¬
standing faith in France seemed to have been entirely vindicated,
and he once again turned to prosecute the war against the Rus¬
sians with renewed vigor.
  Senyavin’s Russian fleet reached Tenedos from Hydra on March
7, three days after Duckworth dropped anchor there upon his
return from the Straits. Senyavin now proposed a joint effort to
force the Dardanelles for a second time, but while Sir Sidney
Smith enthusiastically espoused the idea, Duckworth refused and
on March 13 sailed away to join Admiral Collingwood and the
Mediterranean fleet at Malta, ostensibly because even together
there would not be enough ships to counter successfully the fire¬
power now ready to meet them at the Straits and at Istanbul but
actually because Britain did not want the Russian fleet in Istan¬
bul under any circumstances. With the Czar’s armies marching
south from the Danube, this would assure final and permanent
Russian control of the Straits and perhaps of the eastern Mediter¬
ranean as well.®®
  Without British cooperation, and in view of Duckworth’s pes¬
simism about forcing the Straits, Senyavin hesitated to try it
alone and instead set up a blockade of the Dardanelles in order to
starve the Porte into submission.®*
  In the meantime the British fleet went from blunder to blunder.
Fearful that Senyavin’s blockade of the Straits was only a prelude
to a Russian attack on the Ottoman capital, anxious that the


                    The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
 French might reply with a new Invasion of Egypt, and encouraged
 by the British consul in Cairo to believe that Elfi Bey had won
 over most of the Mamluks to support a British invasion to save
 them from Mohammed Ali, Collingwood decided on a new British
 invasion of Egypt. Landings at Alexandria were made without
 resistance on March 16.^^ However four days later Mohammed
 Ali and his army killed Elfi Bey and scattered his supporters at
 Siyub. This deprived the British of the men and food they had
 expected and forced them to send out ^ series of expeditions to
 secure the necessary provisions.**^ ^It soon became evident that
 they lacked sufficient men for the task. Their attack on Rosetta
 (March 31) was beaten back with heavy losses, and enemy threats
 to encircle and annihilate their remaining forces finally caused
 them to retire to Alexandria and wait until they could be evac¬
 uated.**^ Through the spring and early summer the British made
 no further offensive efforts, and Mohammed Ali used the victories
  to consolidate his political position in the country. Most of the
  remaining Mamluks now came to join his ranks, including their
  former chief Ibrahim Bey. Selim ordered an expedition against
  the British in Egypt under the command of the governor of Sidon,
  but he had only begun to organize it when Mohammed Ali put
  Alexandria under siege (August 17) and forced the British to
  evacuate it by negotiation (September 17).**^ Thus ended the affair.
  All the British had succeeded in doing was to drive Selim further
  into the arms of the French and unify all elements of the Egyptian
  population behind Mohammed Ali as nothing else could have done.
    While the sea war went on during the spring and summer of
y 1807, in Istanbul and the Balkans, all sides were going forward
  with military and diplomatic preparations. Selim sent Vahid
  Efendi to Paris with a request for a formal alliance and military
  help first in Egypt and then in his planned campaign to regain
  the Crimea. He also asked for 25,000 French soldiers to pass from
\ Dalmatia through Bosnia and Serbia to the Dniester to help
  Bayrakdar Mustafa drive the Russians from the Principalities.**®
  The main Ottoman army was delayed in Istanbul by the British
  naval attack, but it finally moved to Edirne in late April.®^ At the
  same time, the news that large Russian forces were moving
  through the Caucasus toward Ahiska and Kars caused Selim to