




                      Internal Revolts and Foreign VTars
from the muhassil, the only Ottoman troops left in Serbia would      351
be 300 regulars assigned to garrison the citadel of Belgrade along
with 500 Serbs; all other forts would be manned wholly by natives.
The Serbian government would receive all revenues of the prov¬
ince except for those of the, fiefs, which would be administered
by Serbs, while the Spahis remained in Belgrade and collected
their revenues through the muhassil. In return the Serbs would
continue to acknowledge the Sultan’s suzerainty and pay an
annual tribute of 6,000,000 akches to the Porte.
  Four days later Selim acted to solve his political problems at
home by giving in to the demands of the reactionaries. Ismail
Hafiz Pasha, a cdnservative, was replaced as Grand Vezir by one
of the leading opponents of the Nizam-i Jedid, Janissary Agha
Ibrahim Hilmi Pasha. Mehmed Ataullah Efendi, one of the most
reactionary members of the Ulema, was made Sheyh ul-Islam.
The Nizam-i Jedid reforms were suspended, and assurances
were given that the new army would no longer be used for mili¬
tary campaigns. All the rebellious notables still in Edirne were
pardoned and given large subsidies in return for their agreement
to return to their homes and provide military assistance to the
Ottoman army.^®



            New War with Russia and Britain
  While the Ottoman government was in a state of flux, with
reforming ministers and their subordinates being replaced
en masse, nothing was done to answer Italinsky’s note. So on
September 22, he sent a second one, stating that the British navy
in the Mediterranean and the Russian army on the Dniester were
preparing to come to Turkey’s assistance if the French attacked
but that these forces "might be used for other purposes” if the
Porte’s "hostile” policies were not changed. Four days later Selim
replied in a conciliatory manner on the matters of tariffs and
berats but said nothing to change his earlier declarations on the
passage of Russian warships through the Straits, and he added
that he could not restore the princes because they had engaged
in treasonable activities against him. In addition he continued
to refuse further negotiations on a renewal of the Anglo-Turkish




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
      V


352       alliance.^^ On September 28, Ftalinsky learned for the first time
          of the Czar’s intention to invade the Principalities regardless of
          the Sultan’s reply, so he answered Selim’s note by repeating his
          demands and threats in full without any concessions. Arbuthnot
          supported him in a similar note, still hoping to pressure the Porte
          into concessions which would avoid war.®® Sebastiani continued
          to urge the Sultan to defy the Russians, assuring him that Bona¬
          parte would never abandon him,          even though he privately
          reported to Paris his doubts as to the ^Turks’ ability to defend
          themselves in the Balkans or at the Straits. In response to Se-
          bastiani’s urgings, Selim ordered new efforts to strengthen his
          forts along the Danube and the Dniester. His efforts to secure
          additional military contingents from the Balkans met with con¬
          siderable success as soon as the Balkan notables left Edirne and
          returned to their homes.®'
            But in the end Arbuthnot’s support of Italinsky to the point of
          war and the fact that the Russian danger in the Principalities
          was far greater and more immediate than that of the French in
          Dalmatia caused the Sultan to give in to the Czar’s pressure. On
          October 16, he restored Ipsilanti to Wallachia, and the next day
          he reappointed Moruzi to Moldavia. At the same time, he agreed
          to allow Russian warships to use the Straits and to renew his
          treaty obligations with Russia in the Principalities.®^ Arbuthnot
          was jubilant. The Russians no longer had a pretext for invasion.
          Just to make certain that the Sultan would not change his mind
          once again, he requested a British squadron under Rear Admiral
          Sir Thomas Louis to move from Malta, and it anchored off Tenedos
          on November 21.®® But Sebastiani persisted with his efforts to
          secure an Ottoman-French alliance and again turn the Porte
          against Russia and Britain. When in mid-November the news
          arrived of Bonaparte’s victory over Prussia at the Battle of Jena
          (October 14, 1806), Selim was so impressed that he informed
          Sebastiani of his decision to go ahead with military preparations
      ^against Russia and to send an agent to Paris to conclude a formal
          alliance.®^ In response Arbuthnot called Louis’s squadron from
          Tenedos through the Dardanelles, and it arrived off Istanbul late
          in the afternoon of November 18. A second squadron left Malta
          for Tenedos under the command of Sir John Duckworth, arriving
          at its destination at the start of December.®®