




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
immediately began to correct the situation under the direction         355
of several officers sent from Dalmatia and of Feyzullah Efendi, a
subordinate of the Grand Admiral’s. However because of short¬
ages of materials and conflicts between the French advisers and
Ottoman officers and workers,- work went very slowly.
   On February 5, 1807, Pasvanoglu died after a long illness.
His chief lieutenant, Molla Idris Agha, was chosen by the chief
aghas to take over his master’s position and property in Vidin.
Selim immediately tried to restore Ottoman power there by
appointing Hurshid Pasha, governor of Nish, instead of Molla
Agha, in Pasvan’s place as military governor of Vidin. But Molla
Agha refused, offering instead to pay tribute and make an imme¬
diate contribution of men to the Ottoman army, and the Sultan
was forced to agree. At the same time, Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha’/C^
now commanded the area from Nicopolis to the mouths of the
Danube with an army of 60,000 of the hest troops in the empire.
During the winter a Russian force had moved through Wallachia
to the Danube opposite Ruschuk, but Mustafa had beaten them
off. It was obvious that he was the only notable capable of stopping
the Russians; accordingly, late in February, Selim appointed
him governor of Silistria and commander of the Danube front, ^
putting him in charge of preparations for the spring campaign in
this area. The French immediately moved to get the support of
both notables. Meriage persuaded Sebastian! to support Molla
Agha’s confirmation by the Porte, with the understanding that
otherwise Molla Agha would be forced to support the Russians.
Meriage then got Molla Agha to move his troops into Little
Wallachia and occupy Craiova in order to erect a firm barrier
against a Serbian-Russian junction there.^®
   Sebastian! and Meriage also worked through Gereral Marmont
and Bayrakdar Mustafa to secure the dispatch of French troops
from Dalmatia both to the Danube to fight the Russians, and to
Istanbul to help the Ottomans there in their defense prepara¬
tions. While there were no special objections to having French
troops in Istanbul, both Bayrakdar and the Bosnian Muslim
beys vigorously opposed their presence on the Danube, albeit
for different reasons. Bayrakdar Mustafa felt he could defeat the
Russians with his own forces, without the assistance of French




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
356   soldiers whose presence in the Principalities would most certainly
      curb his own plans for the area.’^^ Although Marmont used
      David’s influence with Hiisrev Mehmed Pasha, governor of
      Bosnia, to get his permission for the transit of French officers to
      Istanbul and acceptance of a small group of French artillery
      offices and cannons to train his forces in the modern ways, he was
      absolutely unyielding in his opposition to the passage of French
      troops through his territory to the Danube. His stand was less a
      reflection of his own wishes than the result of the strong fears
      of infidel troops on the part of the Muslim beys of the province,
      who had become sufficiently alarmed already by the presence of
      infidels in neighboring Dalmatia and of Russians not far away in
      the Principalities. So while a few French officers did go through
      Bosnia to Istanbul nothing more was done about the plan to send
      an army to the Danube, and Bayrakdar Mustafa moved ahead
      with his own plans.Marmont was on good terms with the
      mutesellim of Trebinitza in Herzegovina and in February sent
      him arms and a column of troops as an aid against rebels in the
      area. Ali of Janina also entered into correspondence with Mar¬
      mont through Pouqueville, asking for men, arms, munitions, and
      money to help him against the Russians, but for the moment, the
      French delayed because of their experience with him in 1799 and
      their fear of alarming the Sultan. Marmont’s main military
      efforts went into the construction and maintenance of roads along
      the coast in order to assure his communications with the north
      and assist its defense against possible new Russian attacks from
      the sea.^*^
        Sebastiani also pressed the Sultan to make a direct settlement
      with the Serbs before the Russians could reach them. When
      Ichko and Hasan Bey arrived in Belgrade in mid-October, Kara
      George convoked the national assembly at Semendria, and the
      princes agreed to accept Selim’s proposals. However, Gushanatz
      Ali and his yamaks had continued to hold out in the citadel
      mainly because of their ability to secure supplies from Zemlin
      across the river. But in mid-December, Kara George occupied the
      island located at the junction of the Save and the Danube, effec¬
      tively blocking off this last route; as a result, on December 29,
      Gushanatz Ali and his men surrendered and immediately left