




                   The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
342   So from Vienna came advice to have recourse to the Sultan while
      trusting in Hapsburg intervention at the Porte to secure the
      desired results.In response Kara George sent a new petition
      to Istanbul (February 1806), repeating previous professions of
      loyalty and willingness to pay tribute and asking only for an end
      to the tyranny of the yamaks. At the same time, the Emperor
      wrote a personal letter to the Sultan asking him to suspend
      hostilities and give clemency to the rebels and offering Austrian
      mediation to end the dispute. In April orders were issued to all
      Austrian frontier authorites to allow free passage to all unarmed
      Serbs wishing to cross the Danube to escape possible vengeance
      in the event of an Ottoman victory over Kara George.®^ A nega¬
      tive Ottoman response therefore was clearly anticipated.
        It was not long in coming. Selim III refused to accept all offers
      of mediation. Supported and encouraged by France, he declared
      that if the Serbs wished to resume their former loyalty, he would
      accept it without malice; but they would have to make such a
      move themselves without foreign mediation or protection since
      that would compromise Ottoman sovereignty in the area. With
      French support Selim was certain that he could avoid foreign
      intervention and force a direct settlement with the rebels on his
      terms.^^
        But as spring turned into summer, nothing of significance
      resulted. The Ottoman armies preparing in Bosnia and Mace¬
      donia did no more than attempt a few raids into Serbia, and they
      were quickly pushed back by the rebel defenders. The only violent
      conflicts came in Belgrade, when the yamaks began to make
      destructive sorties into the town and its environs, and the Serbs
      made a number of unsuccessful attempts to storm the ramparts
      of the Citadel, where their enemies were entrenched.^"* But with
      the threat from the Porte persisting, such a respite could only
      stimulate the Serbs to greater efforts. Kara George took ad¬
      vantage of the situation to continue to build up and train his
      army and strengthen his defenses. In June a Russian officer
      arrived with instructions to examine the Serbian position and
      find out what was needed, but he brought only hopes and prom¬
      ises for the future.^^ Kara George therefore decided to make
      another effort at direct reconciliation with the Sultan, this time




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign IFars
sending as his agent Peter Ichko, former dragoman in the Otto¬       343
man legations in Vienna and Berlin and now resident in Zemlin,
across the Danube from Belgrade. Kara George clearly hoped that
since Ichko knew Turkish well and was a close acquaintance of a
number of high Ottoman officials, he would be more successful
in presenting the Serbian point of view and getting a favorable
response than the foreign diplomats had been. While Ichko was
authorized to state that the Serbs still were willing to recognize
Ottoman suzerainty and pay a fixed annual tribute, Kara George
now added the stipulation 'that he would allow an Ottoman agent
to come to Belgrade only to collect the tribute, and all other ad¬
ministrative and''military tasks would be cared for by Serbs. In
other words, the demand now was for full autonomy, with tribute
remaining as the only direct tie with the Porte. All Ottoman
troops, not just the yamaks, would have to leave the province, and
Serbs would man all forts in the future.^® These conditions were
not acceptable to the Sultan.
  As the summer progressed, whatever military contacts did
occur between the Ottomans and the Serbs made it seem very
unlikely that the Sultan would have an easy job suppressing his
recalcitrant subjects if he chose to do so on a large scale. Early
in May the main Ottoman army moved north from Skopje and
began to besiege Nish under the leadership of Ibrahim Pasha.
But the Serbs successfully held out, and the entire Ottoman
advance from Macedonia was stalled for the rest of the summer.^^
In July and August the attack from Bosnia met a similar fate.
Crossing the Drina in large numbers, the Bosnian army advanced
slowly in two columns, one heading toward Shabatz and the other
moving to relieve the garrison at Belgrade. On July 23, Shabatz
was taken, but on August 13, Kara George struck at the main
Ottoman force at Mishar, forcing the survivors to flee toward
the Save and Drina and capturing a large number of prisoners
and much booty. When news of this action reached Nish, Ibrahim
Pasha gave up the siege and returned to the south; Shabatz was
abandoned, and Serbia once again was largely free of foreign
occupation. Autonomous Serbia thus had successfully defeated
all the Ottoman efforts made to force it into obedience once
again.