




                       Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
  The Grand Vezir and Ismail Agha took advantage of the delay        347
to prepare their resistance in Thrace. Ismail Agha formed a
coalition of its main notables and brigands and got them to with¬
hold supplies intended for the new army and to attack the army
as it passed through their, territories. With letters of protest
inspired by the Grand Vezir and Ismail Agha coming in from all
over Thrace and Macedonia, Selim responded to the news of these
events by ordering Abdurrahman Pasha to stop his advance and
withdraw to Silivri to await further orders.^® Shortly thereafter
the Sultan dismissed him as commander of the Nizam-i Jedid
and replaced him with Ebubekir Pasha, who was ordered to take
the army back td Anatolia as soon as possible. Edirne remained
in the hands of the rebels, and there was nothing to stop Ismail
Agha from marching on Istanbul.
  How much had been lost by the Sultan’s capitulation was
realized shortly afterwards, when the news arrived that on
August 16 Ismail Agha had been assassinated by an agent of
Kadi Abdurrahman Pasha. Shortly afterwards, Ismail’s chief
subordinates elected as his successor Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha,
notable of Hezargrad and his master’s chief commander in the
wars against Suleyman Agha and Pasvanoglu. Pasvanoglu im¬
mediately moved to take advantage of Ismail’s death, and Bay¬
rakdar was forced to withdraw all his troops from Thrace and to
secure Ottoman support by paying his master’s overdue taxes
and tribute to Istanbul. Selim was quite impressed with Bayrak¬
dar Mustafa, but he did not want him to be as powerful as Ismail.
So although accepting him as ayan of Ruschuk, he withheld
recognition for Ismail’s second post as ayan of Tirnovo, and gave
it instead to a local notable as a tax farm. Ebubekir Pasha was
appointed governor of Silistria with the specific task of securing
Mustafa Pasha’s cooperation, but he was prevented from be¬
coming too powerful or independent by building up his opponents
in the area and encouraging clashes among them. Ebubekir now
began to support the claims of Ismail’s other lieutenant. Rose
Ahmed Efendi, who contested Mustafa’s right to supremacy in
their master’s house.^*
  Mustafa was faced with a dilemma. He did not wish to defy
the wishes of the Sultan openly, but at the same time he was




                 The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
348   determined to inherit Ismail’s entire realm north of the Balkan
      Mountains. So he moved to counter Ebubekir’s efforts by getting
      all the local ayans to declare their'support for him again and
      demand Ebubekir’s removal as governor. In response Selim re¬
      placed Ebubekir with Laz Ahmed Agha, previously a bitter
      opponent of Ismail’s. Mustafa Pasha declared he would not accept
      this change unless he was confirmed as ayan of Tirnova and
      Sistova and promised a free hand in the entire province of Silis-
      tria. So Selim appointed the military governor of Khotzim,
      Mehmed Pasha, as governor of Silistria with instructions to use
      Yilhk Suleyman Agha, now ayan of Ibrail, to counter Mustafa’s
      rising power. Suleyman immediately moved against Mustafa,
      taking Yeni Pazar and Silistria and preparing to march to Rus-
      chuk with an army of about 1,000 men. But Mustafa was too fast
      for him. Gathering the support of Ismail’s old subordinates, he
      occupied Silistria by a surprise night attack and forced Suleyman
      Agha to escape to Ibrail, which was placed under siege. Mustafa
      then moved quickly to follow up his advantage. By the end of
      1806, he held all of the Silistrian province and had eliminated
      the few notables who supported Suleyman or refused to recognize
      his authority. Selim now had no choice. Just as he had recognized
      Ismail’s conquests as a means of controlling him, now Selim ac¬
      cepted Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha and his subordinates as nota¬
      bles of the important cities in central and eastern Bulgaria.^^
      For the moment at least, Baju-akdar turned his attention to in¬
      ternal consolidation, and the direct threat to Istanbul disap¬
      peared. Thrace remained under direct Ottoman administration,
      and the kind of menace posed by Ismail Agha no longer troubled
      the Sultan. But this relief was accomplished at a great price. The
      men of the Nizam-i Jedid had been cruelly betrayed. Power had
      been placed in the hands of men who might pose even greater
      threats to the Sultan than had Ismail Agha once they had con¬
      solidated their positions and prepared their forces. Selim in fact
      had administered to the entire Nizam-i Jedid and to its sup¬
      porters a blow from which they would not recover. And in the
      process he had doomed himself.
        The immediate effect of the Edirne Incident was to stir the
      Russians to open attack. Czar Alexander now was convinced