




                        Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
for Vidin. When Suleyman Pasha tried to occupy the fort with         357
his own troops, a short battle ensued with the Serbs, and it was
only on January 6, 1807, that they finally occupied it.®° The last
Ottoman stronghold in Serbia now was Shabatz, which was
manned not only by the regular garrison but also by reinforce¬
ments sent from Bosnia together with many refugees from
the battle of Mishar. When Kara George demanded that it also
surrender, the garrison refused until January 6, when it received
a formal order to surrender from the governor of Bosnia. As a
result, the entire province was now under Serbian control.®*
In the meantime Kara George sent Hasan Bey back to Istanbul
with his own agents, and on January 25, 1807, a convention was
signed there, confirming what the Sultan previously had offered.®^
  But Michelson had already moved to make sure that the Serbs
would not make peace with the Porte. Soon after his occupation of
Moldavia, he sent large amounts of money and ammunition and
several officers to Belgrade and urged Kara George to fight
on for full independence instead of the autonomy which he
previously had sought. Under this influence and that of Con¬
stantine Ipsilanti, Kara George and his associates decided to
reject the convention and fight on. And on March 7, they suddenly
turned on Suleyman Agha and his Belgrade garrison and massa¬
cred them without warning. At the same time when the Ottoman
and Serbian agents bearing the convention back to Belgrade
reached Parachin, the local Serbian rebels massacred the Otto¬
mans, so the convention was effectively annuled. Russian offi¬
cials and soldiers now began to come to Belgrade to help Kara
George develop his administration, army, and fortifications, and
plans were made to effect a union between the Serbian and
Russian armies in the spring.®®
  The Porte still remained officially at peace with Great Britain,
since the British had not yet made any direct attack on Ottoman
territory and the Sultan hoped that they might still intervene to
protect him from the full force of the Russian attack. Arbuthnot
remained in Istanbul, trying to get the Ottomans to accept the
Russian demands, but his efforts were effectively countered by
the strong pro-French ministers then in control of the Imperial
Council.®^ On January 29, he learned from a spy in the Sultan’s




                 The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
358   palace that war had just been declared against Great Britain and
      he was about to be arrested, so he quickly left the city with most
      of the important British merchants'. To conceal his intentions
      from the Ottoman authorities, he left his own family along with
      those of the merchants in their homes in Istanbul. With those
      chosen to accompany him, he went to the British ship Endymion
      anchored in the harbor, ostensibly for a dinner party. Then in the
      middle of the night, the ship weighed anchor and sailed out of the
      harbor. When the Endymion reached the Dardanelles, the Grand
      Admiral let it through, not knowing the identities of its impor¬
      tant passengers. When it reached Tenedos and was no longer in
      danger of capture, Arbuthnot sent a note to the Porte giving the
      reasons for his departure, demanding full acceptance of the
      Russian demands, and threatening an’attack by the British
      fleet if these demands were not met.®^
         On February 10, Duckworth and his squadron from Malta
      joined Louis and Arbuthnot at Tenedos. The British were now
      in a position to force the Straits and move against Istanbul if
      they wished, and when the prevailing winds were favorable, on
      February 19, they began to do so. The fleet sailed into the Sea of
      Marmara and toward Istanbul, and the Ottoman guns and ships
      which attempted to stop it were destroyed with relative ease. The
      next morning, the British ships anchored before Istanbul, which
      they could have bombarded or taken with ease in view of the
      Ottoman capital’s complete lack of preparation. But Arbuthnot
      preferred to secure what he wanted through negotiation if at all
      possible. While his agents talked with the Ottomans, Sultan
      Selim and his associates were persuaded by Sebastiani to defend
      their city, prepare fortifications and arm the population, at the
      same time stalling off the British as long as possible.^® By the morn¬
      ing of February 22, the defenses were ready, and Selim was em¬
      boldened to act. First he formally recognized Bonaparte’s brothers
       as kings of Naples and Holland and requested an alliance and
       military assistance as soon as possible.*^’^ The British and Russian
      threats thus had completely reversed the consequences of the
       French Expedition to Egypt and had thrown the Porte into the
       hands of the French. Arbuthnot still tried to negotiate a settle¬
       ment, and Selim continued to stall the discussions while further
       defensive preparations were made. On February 25, he sent Ishak