



                     The Edirne Incident
  With the Serb rebels defeating the best armies which could
be sent against them, with the Montenegrins cooperating with
the Russians in their support, with powerful French armies
in occupation of Dalmatia and Ragusa, with Ali of Janina, Pas-
vanoglu, and Tirsinikli Ismail Agha extending their dominions
in Albania, Greece, Macedonia, Bulgaria, and Thrace, and with
the British, French, and Russians all combining professions of
friendship with threats of attack, Selim was in a quandary.
Danger lurked whichever way he chose to turn.
  To add to his difficulties, a dangerous new threat arose much
closer to home during the summer of 1806, making it impossible
for him to deal adequately with any of his problems. During the
previous year, Tirsiniklioglu Ismail Agha, ayan of Ruschuk, had
built up a major state in eastern Bulgaria and Thrace. This put
him in a position to threaten Istanbul and Edirne if he chose to
do so. Up to this time his ambitions had been limited entirely to




                  The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
346   personal aggrandizement, whfch he achieved under the guise of
      defending the Porte against Pasvanoglu and the other notables
      who refused to obey the Sultan. He^ had not been interested in
      internal Ottoman politics and had made no move to oppose or
      support Selim’s reforms. But with Selim’s order in 1805 for the
      organization of a Nizam-i Jedid army in Edirne through general
      conscription in the Balkans, this situation changed.^®
        At this point the Grand Vezir, Hafiz Ismail Pasha, moved
      secretly to use Ismail Agha for his owri^ ends. An agreement was
      made by which Ismail would capthre Edirne, march to Istanbul
      with his army and allies, and there help the Grand Vezir elimi¬
      nate his enemies and the Nizam-i Jedid. In return, Ismail Agha
      would be given large subsidies as well as an appointment as
      governor of Rumelia in the new order which would follow. Ismail
      Agha thus became a principal supporter of reaction and a threat
      to the capital. In early June he began to march toward Edirne
      with an army of 80,000 men, together with units sent by the
      notables of Macedonia and Thrace who supported him in his new
      effort.^’^
         In the meantime, the reform faction in the capital had arranged
      for the commander of the Nizam-i Jedid army. Kadi Abdurrah¬
      man Pasha, to come to Uskiidar. There he assembled 24,000 of
      his best men from all over Anatolia, ostensibly for service against
      the Serbian rebels but actually to provide the reformers with
      military strength in the capital in case their opponents attempted
      to use the Janissaries against them.^® On June 20, Selim ordered
      him to lead this army to Edirne, where he was to suppress the
      Bostanji corps, now ravaging the area in the guise of keeping
      order. He then was to leave half of his men to defend the city
      against Ismail Agha and go with the rest of his force to Skopje to
      assist the expedition against the Serbs. On his return, he would
      reorganize the whole Bostanji corps, limiting it to 1,000 men
      under strict discipline and with high salaries, so they would no
      longer have any desire or reason to steal. Instead of setting out
      at once, however, Abdurrahman remained in Istanbul for over a
      month putting on demonstrations of the new corps for the Sultan,
      and it was not until August 5 that he and his men finally set out
      for Edirne.'*^