




                              The Revolt
380   difficulty. The ministers and a’dvisers left the palace and returned
      to their homes, and the Sultan withdrew to his harem for the
      night.
         Thus Musa Pasha alone was left in control of the government
      and the army, and he quickly used his position to good advantage.
      He immediately sent new orders to the Nizam-i Jedid men to stay
      in their barracks and to all the other corps to join the yamaks.
      Towards midnight Kabakji Mustafa and his men went by boat
      from Ortakoy to Tophane, where they^ were joined by the entire
      artillery corps in obedience to Miisa^s orders. With the Nizam-i
      Jedid immobilized, the sailors at sea, and the artillery corps
      with the rebels, the Sultan no longer was supported by the ma¬
      jority of the military forces which he had commanded only a short
      time before. During the rest of the night,and the following morn¬
      ing, yamaks came by boat to Istanbul, Uskiidar, and Galata,
      scattered to the military barracks and quarters of artisans
      favorable to them, and spread a message for everyone to assemble
      the next day in At Meydan, the classical hippodrome, located in
      front of the Sultan Ahmed mosque, only a short distance from the
       palace. There they were to present their grievances but with the
       promise that they would not harm the lives or property of anyone,
       including Christians as well as Muslims, and that they would
       demand nothing that was not sanctioned by the Sheyh ul-Islam.
       Despite these assurances, it seemed obvious that the rebels were
      now on their way to success.
        On Thursday morning. May 28,^ Kabakji Mustafa, the yamaks,
      and the artillery men went by boat around the Galata point into
      the Golden Horn, and landed at the Unkapani quai, at the foot
      of the modern Atatiirk Boulevard. The men immediately pro¬
      ceeded up the hill of the old city to Et Meydan southeast of the
      Byzantine aqueduct, where they were joined by thousands of
      soldiers, artisans, and vagrants, coming in response to the pre¬
      vious night’s call. With Musa Pasha in charge of the government,
      no effort was made to impede their progress or to prevent the
      assembly. In the meantime the Janissary leaders met with
      officers of the other corps at the Siileymaniye mosque. After a
      spirited debate over the legality of their actions, they agreed to
      support the revolt and went to the Janissary barracks at Et




                             The Triumph of Reaction
Meydan, located between the Unkapani and At Meydan, where                381
Kabakji Mustafa and the other yamak leaders awaited them.
The city was now in panic. Those who did not join the assembly
at Et Meydan shut their shops and homes and hid themselves
and their families despite rebel assurances that no harm would
come to them. At Levend Chiftlik, the Nizam-i Jedid men took
up their arms and prepared for battle, but they still waited for
instructions to come to Istanbul and help the Sultan. But by now
it would have been too late even if such instructions did come,
for Levend Chiftlik was far from the scene of action.
  At noon Kabakji Mustafa and the other leaders left the Janis¬
sary barracks and"^ proceeded up the hill toward Et Meydan. In
the palace, on the opposite side of the city, Selim III was terrified.
While Ibrahim Nesim urged him again and again to summon the
Nizam-i Jedid army, the Sultan accepted Musa Pasha’s advice
that they instead be officially dissolved forthwith, and orders to
this effect were issued at once. Musa Pasha and Ataullah Efendi
left the palace and went to Et Meydan to announce this news just
as Kabakji Mustafa and the rebel leaders arrived on the scene
from the opposite direction. While the rebel leaders paused to
decide his fate, Selim ordered the palace gates entirely shut, and
he waited in his rooms for the results of the meeting.
  But the Sultan’s hesitations and concessions only encouraged
the rebel leaders to increase their demands. After a short dis¬
cussion with Musa Pasha and Ataullah Efendi, Kabakji Mustafa
declared to the assemblage that the Sultan’s order was not
enough; eleven reform leaders accused of various crimes, ranging
from killing Muslims in the Edirne Incident to violating Muslim
law and tradition in their reform efforts, would have to be handed
over for execution before they would disperse. These were Ibrahim
Nesim Efendi, Hajji Ibrahim Efendi, and Yusuf Agha; Selim’s
private secretary, Ahmed Efendi; the Director of the Mint,
Ebubekir Efendi; the Irad-i Jedid director, Ahmed Bey; the
Reis ul-Kuttah’s Lieutenant, Safi Ahmed Bey; the Director of
Grains, Memish Efendi; and a teacher in the technical schools,
Lutfullah Efendi. Ataullah Efendi now revealed himself for the
first time; he issued a fetva supporting all the rebel demands and
sent it to the palace with the recommendation that Selim agree