




                           The Triumph of Reaction
men, who was young, vigorous, wealthy, and politically influen¬      371
tial. With Hiiseyin dominating the council, Selim appointed
Ebubekir Ratib as Reis in May 1795. The Sultan soon moved to
limit the Grand Admiral’s power by encouraging the Grand
Vezir to rival him and build up his own power. Izzet Mehmed did
this by allying himself with Constantine Ipsilanti and Tatarjik
Abdullah Efendi, whom he brough back from exile and appointed
as Bash Terjuman and Kadiasker of Rumelia, respectively, dur¬
ing the course of 1796.®
                           4

  At this point there were three factions among the reformers,
dominated by Kiichuk Hiiseyin, Yusuf Agha, and Izzet Mehmed.
With foreign relations becoming more and more important, the
ambassadors resident in Istanbul worked through these three
groups to secure the favor of the Porte, mainly by providing
their principal members with financial subsidies and gifts of
various kinds. As a result Kiichiik Hiiseyin and his chief allies,
Ingiliz Mahmud, Ebubekir Ratib Efendi, and the Sultan’s old
friend Ishak Bey, favored the French; Yusuf Agha, the Valide
Sultan, Chelebi Mustafa Reshid and Mehmed Rashid united in
support of the Russians and British; and Izzet Mehmed and his
associates, as well as many of the lesser members of the council,
remained neutral, receiving bribes from all the ambassadors and
shifting their support from one to another according to the polit¬
ical and military exigencies of the time.^® During the remaining
years of Selim’s reign, these alliances between the principal re¬
form factions and the foreign ambassadors remained virtually
unchanged, and they had an important effect on the Porte’s diplo¬
matic positions in these critical times.
  Since the factions were fairly evenly balanced in the palace and
Porte during 1796 and 1797, they sought to strengthen their posi¬
tions by outside means, and in particular by using the armed as¬
sistance of various groups in the streets of Istanbul. Kiichiik
Hiiseyin and his partisans depended mainly on the sailors of his
fleet; Chelebi Mustafa on the soldiers of the Nizam-i Jedid army
and reformed artillery corps; and Yusuf Agha and the Valide Sul¬
tan tended more and more to associate with the Janissaries and
Ulema and to encourage their rioting and setting of fires in order
to express their common opposition to the groups in power. The




                  The Politics of Ottoman Reform
                             \             ^



372   resulting clashes among the various military groups and between
      them, the populace, and the Ulema only made worse the chronic
      anarchy and insecurity then prevalent and bred the consequent
      popular distaste for the entire reform program.
        When British and Russian influence with the Sultan increased
      during the summer of 1796, Selim dismissed and then Anally
      assassinated Ebubekir Ratib Efendi. Then after a year of service
      by Mustafa Rasih Efendi, he restored Mehmed Rashid Efendi as
      Reis ul-Kuttab on August 18, 1797, in order to facilitate relations
      with his new friends. But Izzet Mdhmed managed to regain the
      Sultan’s favor by presenting him with a magnificent new pleasure
      palace built on the shores of the Bosporus in Amavutkoy. Selim
      in return presented Izzet Mehmed with a firman giving him abso¬
      lute and unquestioned powers to issue decrees without reference
      to the council or the palace. This enabled the Grand Vezir to dis¬
      miss Rashid (March 3, 1798), who soon thereafter was entirely
      removed from the scene by apoplexy, the first important member
      of the reform group to be swallowed up by its internal difficul¬
      ties.
         The French expedition to Egypt led Selim to dismiss Izzet Meh¬
      med in order to provide the necessary scapegoat for the masses.
      (August 30,1798). To get the support ofthe Janissaries and Ulema
      for a united war effort against the infidel invasion, he appointed
      Kor Yusuf Ziyauddin Pasha, previously governor of Erzurum,
      and also replaced the reforming Sheyh ul-Islam Durri zade Meh¬
      med Arif Efendi with the conservative Mustafa Ashir Efendi and
      later with the reactionary Omer Hulusi Efendi (July 11,1800).^^
      Yusuf Pasha obtained conservative support for his campaigns by
      curbing reforms and restricting the operations of the Nizam-i
      Jedid army. He also used the authority given him to build and
      lead the army to create a party for himself, and he maintained
      power in the councils of state by allying himself with Yusuf Agha,
      his Lieutenant Ibrahim Nesim Efendi, and Ingiliz Mahmud Raif
      Efendi, who now led the British-Russian party. Opposed to them
      were the Grand Admiral, Ishak Bey, and the Chief Eunuch of the
      Palace, who sought to end the war and restore the French alliance
      as much to lessen the power of their rivals as for any other rea¬
      son.   These alignments remained unchanged throughout the