



                  Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
vin, a number of ships arrived from Venice with some arms and         363
ammunition. In early April Ali made a preliminary attack on
Santa Maura to size up its defensive positions and found them so
formidable that he decided to postpone any attacks until he could
get further assistance from the French. As a result, although prep¬
arations continued at Preveza, the attack was never laiinched,
and it was not long before the Treaty of Tilsit gave the islands to
France, thus frustrating Ali once again.*®^
  In Bosnia Pierre David had no difficulty convincing the gover¬
nor and the Muslim beys of the necessity of defending their prov¬
ince against a Russian or Serbian attack from the east. But they
equally feared arfy infidel army, and the governor informed him
that neither he nor the beys would ever permit the French to
march across their territory to the Danube. In early February
Selim instructed Hiisrev Pasha to allow the passage of a few
French officers and artillerymen who were being sent to Istanbul
to help fortify the Dardanelles, but there was no mention of any¬
thing more than this. In April, following the defeat of the British
attack on Istanbul, Selim ordered Hiisrev not only to raise an
army against the Serbs and Russians but also to call for French
aid and allow the passage of French troops from Dalmatia when¬
ever it was deemed necessary. A large number of Bosnian beys
vigorously opposed the execution of these orders, however, and
Hiisrev therefore delayed the negotiations interminably with
such questions as whether the French should dress in Ottoman or
French uniforms.*”^
  During the spring the Russians and Montenegrins wintering at
Cattaro received invitations from the Christians of Herzegovina
asking for their assistance against the Ottoman governor. An
allied force moved to help the district in April, but it was beaten
back. The Bosnian beys had been sufficiently frightened however
that they allowed the entry of a small French contingent, which
helped the governor to repulse another allied attack in late May
and to suppress the Christian notables and beys who had provoked
the attacks in the first place. But the Bosnians continued success¬
fully in their opposition to any large-scale French movement to
the Danube.*”®
  As spring arrived, the Ottoman position in the Principalities
seemed far more favorable than it had only a short time before.



                 The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
 The fort of Vidin was heavily manned, and Molla Agha had strung
 out a large number of men between there and Gladova to block
 any attempt by the Serbs and Russian's to join forces. Strong Otto¬
 man garrisons manned the forts at Ruschuk, Silistria, Ibrail, and
 Ismail. The Grand Vezir brought an army of 30,000 men to Edirne
 where he remained during April, gathering the Spahis and no¬
 tables of Macedonia and Thrace and planning his campaign.^®^
 He finally arrived at Silistria on May 24, and shortly thereafter
 crossed the Danube and captured Kalarash, which then became
 his beachhead for the attack on Ehicharest. At the same time,
 Bayrakdar Mustafa crossed the Danube at Ruschuk and moved
 on Bucharest from the south.      In addition the Ottoman garrisons
 successfully prevented the Russian-Serbian junction. In mid-
 April, Kara George’s effort to reach the Danube at Negotin was
 pushed back with heavy losses.^"® When Michelson’s force tried
 to cross the Danube at Giurgevo soon after, it also was repelled by
 Bayrakdar Mustafa’s garrison at Ruschuk."® A Russian effort to
 take the island of Ostrova (May 29) was equally unsuccessful.^"
 Finally an Ottoman force from Bosnia crossed the Drina and with
  the assistance of cannons sent by General Marmont routed the
  Serbs at Loznitza (June 3), causing Kara George to retire from the
  Danube in the fear that the Ottomans were beginning a major
  offensive from Bosnia."^
    Meanwhile Michelson ordered the commander of Bucharest to
  evacuate it as soon as the enemy approached, but the Ottoman
  forces arrived from Ruschuk and Silistria before he could do so,
  and a siege began on June 2. The population immediately fled
  from the city, and the boyars, fearing what would happen if the
  city were taken by storm, entered negotiations with Mustafa
  Pasha and the Russians to secure its surrender."® Victory thus
  seemed near. The Russian effort to join the Serbs had failed;
  Bucharest and southern Wallachia were about to come under
  Ottoman control once again. At this point, however, the opera-
y tions of both sides were paralyzed by startling news from outside.
^ In Istanbul Sultan Selim III had been overthrown by a revolt,
/ while at Tilsit Bonaparte and Alexander I were signing a peace
  which would completely transform the diplomatic and military
  position of Selim’s successor.