




                            The Triumph of Reaction
war, with the British-Russian party necessarily in control so long     373
as the French remained in Egypt. Although Kiichuk Huseyin
used the defeats inflicted on the Ottoman army to intrigue against
Yusuf Pasha, he was unsuccessful as long as the need for Janis¬
sary and Ulema support compelled the Sultan to maintain the
Grand Vezir in office.
  With the final evacuation of Egypt by the French expeditionary
force, Selim felt free to build up the French party in Istanbul once
again, as a necessary part of his plan to restore relations with
France in order to balance it off against the British and Russian
allies who had dominated him during the war. To accomplish this,
in May 1803, Ahmed Esad Efendi was appointed as Sheyh ul-
Islam, both to resume reforms of the Ulema and to strengthen
Kiichiik Huseyin Pasha’s party in the councils of state. Mehmed
Kadri Pasha, Kiichuk Hiiseyin’s chief lieutenant in the fleet and
commander of the Ottoman detachment which had cooperated
with the Russians in the Adriatic, was appointed in place of his
master when Kiichiik Hiiseyin died in December 1803. At the
same time, Ibrahim Nesim Efendi rose to take over the leadership
of Kiichiik Hiiseyn’s pro-French group.At this point the council
continued to be divided into three groups, now led by Yusuf Agha,
Chelebi Mustafa Reshid, and Ibrahim Nesim, who in foreign rela¬
tions represented the Russian, British, and French interests,
respectively. For almost three years, following the war, Yusuf
Ziya managed to retain his position by using the prestige gained
by his defeat of the French in Egypt and by allying himself with
Yusuf Agha while at the same time retaining good relations with
Ibrahim Nesim and his group.
  Yusuf Ziya’s effort to extend the reforms into the Balkans by
organizing a Nizam-i Jedid contingent at Edime during 1804 and
early 1805 so enraged the Balkan notables, as well as the Janis¬
saries and Ulema leaders, however, that Selim was compelled to
dismiss him on April 24, 1805, after an unparalleled term of
almost seven years as Grand Vezir. He was replaced by Kadri
Pasha’s successor as Grand Admiral, Hafiz Ismail Pasha, also
originally one of Kiichiik Hiiseyin’s men but now a secret op¬
ponent of the reforms and an ally of the party’s enemies.Hafiz
Ismail worked to build up his own party by appointing conserva-




                   The Politics of Ottoman Reform
374   tives to positions in the government and the army, but with the
      Sultan’s support the reformers continued to monopolize the chief
      positions. In June Selim tried to strengthen the reformers by
      appointing Chelebi Mustafa Reshid as director of the Imperial
      Treasury, Ibrahim Nesim Efendi as Lieutenant of the Grand
      Vezir, and Ibrahim Efendi as director of the Irad-i Jedid treasury,
      hoping thereby to satisfy all three factions and secure their union
      and cooperation against the common danger.*^
        In spite of these changes, their struggles continued, and as the
      summer progressed they were intensified when the Valide Sultan
      fell ill and died. Her death occasioned Yusuf Agha so much loss of
      power that Ibrahim Nesim was able to effect Ingiliz Raif’s re¬
      placement as Reis ul-Kuttab by the official court historian, Ahmed
      Vasif Efendi (August 4, 1805).i« As a result, the rivalry was
      intensified between Ibrahim Nesim and Chelebi Mustafa Reshid.
      The latter then allied himself with Yusuf Agha, who still retained
      some influence at the Porte although not as much as previously.
      Ibrahim Nesim responded by joining the Grand Vezir, and to¬
      gether they secured Yusuf Agha’s exile to the Holy Cities on the
      pilgrimage of October 1805.
        Hafiz Ismail now skillfully kept the reformers divided and
      bickering among themselves by strongly supporting Ibrahim
      Nesim against Chelebi Mustafa Reshid. At the same time, he
      actively courted the support of the Balkan notables and Istanbul
      reactionaries, leading, as we have seen, to the "Edirne Incident”
      in early June 1806. The Sultan’s refusal to use the new army
      against the rebels when the crisis came and his subsequent dis¬
      missal of Kadi Abdurrahman Pasha as its commander greatly
      increased the Grand Vezir’s prestige with the opponents of re¬
      form, who saw in him a man who might be able to accomplish
      their aims with a minimum of difficulty.Although the auxilliary
       corps remained in Istanbul and the Nizam-i Jedid army in Levend
       Chiftlik and Uskiidar, presumably to protect the Sultan, the
       reformers lost heart and thereafter devoted their efforts pri¬
       marily to saving themselves.
        With the Serbian revolt apparently a success, with the new
       Wahhabi attacks in Arabia, and, most important, with the
       imminent threat of a new Russian invasion, Selim sought to