




                             The Triumph of Reaction
under the command of the former Reis ul-Kuttah, Raif Mahmud             377
Pasha, now in charge of all the Bosporus forts, it seemed very
unlikely that they could be used for the revolt unless they were
alienated from him in some way.^^ Moreover as long as all the
Sultan’s military supporters^ remained in Istanbul, even the
yamaks would not be sufficient to support a popular revolt. Early
in April therefore Ataullah sent Pehlivan Hiiseyin Agha to the
front to try to get the support of the Janissaries and other soldiers
there and persuade them to return to Istanbul to take up arms
against the Sultan.^^
  Pehlivan Hiiseyin Agha’s mission became less important when
on May 10, 1807, the Grand Admiral led his entire fleet out of the
harbor and into the Sea of Marmara with the object of doing
battle with the Russian fleet and ending its long blockade of the
Dardanelles. With the sailors out of the way, the conservatives
had much more of a chance for victory, if only the yamaks could
be won over.
  Rose Musa had carefully concealed his alliance with the con¬
servatives, and he now persuaded the unsuspecting Raif Mahmud
to try to win the yamaks over to the Nizam-i Jedid while the
Janissaries were still absent from the capital. Orders went out
incorporating them into the new army; officers were sent to train
and discipline them; and new western-style uniforms were pre¬
pared for them at the clothing factory in Uskiidar. But at the
same time, Kose Musa and Ataullah sent their own agents to the
yamaks reminding them of the glorious past of their Janissary
allies and arousing them against any sort of connection with the
"renegades, infidels, and bad Muslims” who composed the new
army.   So when the Nizam-i Jedid men arrived to train the
yamaks, fights broke out between them. As the bad feeling in¬
creased, the plotters saw that it would be not too difficult to set
off a.yamak revolt with only a single spark.^®




                   The Politics of Ottoman Reform
                  XXI. The Revolt




                                   V




The spark that was needed to set off a yamak revolt was unwit¬
tingly supplied by Raif Mahmud Pasha himself. On the morning
of Monday, May 25, 1807, in the company of a small Nizam-i
Jedid contingent led by one Halil Agha he went by boat to Rumeli
Kavak to pay the yamaks their regular quarterly wage and also
to persuade them to accept the new training and uniforms. But
as soon as Halil Agha began to distribute the uniforms, the
yamaks set upon him and tore him apart. The revolt had begun.
Mahmud and his men managed to escape by boat and land at
Biiyukdere, hoping to go on overland to Levend Chiftlik, but the
yamaks caught and executed them as soon as they landed. The
news soon spread to the yamaks in the other Bosporus forts, and
they rose to kill their officers and the Nizam-i Jedid officers sent
to train them. As evening approached, they gathered at Biiyuk-
dere, and chose as their leader one of themselves, Kabakji Mustafa
Agha, who immediately sent out the call to all the soldiers in the
capital to join the revolt and end the "infidel innovations” once
and for all.
  When news of the yamak actions reached the palace, Selim
called an urgent meeting of all his ministers and advisers the
same evening. While they were deliberating, a message arrived
from Kabakji Mustafa stating that the revolt would end if the
Sultan agreed to remove the Nizam-i Jedid men from the Bos¬           379
porus and order them to remain in their barracks. Selim im¬
mediately issued orders to this effect, thus again dismaying his
supporters and stimulating the conservatives to greater efforts.
Musa Pasha and Ataullah Efendi, still concealing their connec¬
tions with the rebels, did not want the revolt to end with this
concession, so as soon as Kabakji Mustafa’s message arrived,
they sent an appeal to the Janissaries remaining in the capital
advising them that the time had finally come to destroy the re¬
forms. The Janissaries then sent several of their elders and
officers to Biiyukdere, where they got the yamaks to agree to
continue the revolt until this end was reached, regardless of the
Sultan’s capitulation to their original demands.*
  On Tuesday morning,^ May 26, Musa Pasha met in council
with the other ministers and advisers. While they decided to take
firm action if the yamaks continued their revolt, he got them to
agree to keep the Nizam-i Jedid men in their barracks and do
nothing overt in order to avoid antagonizing the mass of the
people and perhaps causing the revolt to spread. Musa thus
gained time for the rebels to prepare their plans and secure
partisans in the capital while continuing to deprive the Sultan
of the only force he could rely on to resist them.
  Finally on Wednesday morning. May 27,^ approximately six
hundred yamaks set out from Biiyukdere and marched along the
Bosporus shore toward Istanbul, gathering vagrants and others
as they went. Since Musa Pasha continued to hold the Nizam-i
Jedid men in their barracks, there was no opposition, and the
yamaks marched along at a rapid pace. As night fell they reached
Ortakoy, where they were joined by three hundred of their
comrades who had come by boat, and they camped there for the
night. In Istanbul, Selim summoned Musa Pasha to the palace
along with a number of Janissary leaders and elders, including
one Bakirji Laz Hajji Mustafa Agha, himself a Laz like most of
the yamaks, who agreed to go to Ortakoy and use his influence to
quiet the rebels in return for a promise to end the Nizam-i Jedid
once and for all and to disperse its men. Selim thus sacrificed the
major accomplishment of his reign in order to save himself. He
now was certain that the revolt would be ended without further