




                              The Revolt
382   at orice in order to save himself. There still was no public evi¬
      dence of any desire to depose Selim—only his evil ministers and
      associates would be disposed of and the reforms ended. With
      Ottoman society restored to the old ways, all would be well.
        When Selim received Ataullah’s message and the rebel de¬
      mands, he declared his acceptance at once, but tried to save
      Ibrahim Nesim Efendi, Hajji Ibrahim Efendi, and Ahmed Efendi,
      whom he allowed to escape by means of a rear door through the
      Giilhane park. Memish Efendi, Shpkir Efendi, and Safi Efendi
      were in the palace, but rather tha'h sending them to the Et Mey-
      dan for a savage death, the Sultan had them executed in his
      private quarters, and then sent their heads out to the rebels.
      Ebubekir Efendi heard about the order while he was at the
      Porte, but as he moved outside its gates’in an attempt to flee, he
      was caught and executed by a group of yamaks. Yusuf Agha was
      in exile in Bursa, so he escaped assassination at this time. The
      remaining persons on the list were outside the palace when the
      demands were made, and as soon as they heard the news they hid
      themselves while the Janissaries scattered through the city to
      find and execute them as well as all the Nizam-i Jedict leaders
      whom they could find. Of the reformers in the city, only Chelebi
      Mustafa Reshid Efendi managed to escape by disguising himself;
      the only other survivors were the lesser figures who were with
      the Imperial army at the time.
        Finally on Friday, May 29,^ the revolt reached its culmination.
      Shortly after midnight the Sheyh ul-Islam and Musa Pasha
      secretly met with a representative of Prince Mustafa, and for the
      first time the idea of putting him on the throne in place of Selim
      was openly discussed and agreed on. Early the next morning
      Kabakji Mustafa arrived at the Janissary barracks with about
      thirty yamaks, and for the next hour he harangued the occupants.
      The Janissaries had been avenged for their long years of suffer¬
      ing; their enemies were dead, the Nizam-i Jedid destroyed. But
      Sultan Selim still remained: he who had scorned the traditional
      laws, persecuted the older corps, disdained the Ulema, and
      consorted with infidels. Now he had consented to their demands
      in the face of armed men, but what was to prevent him from
      resuming his old ways once the soldiers went back to their posts?




                           The Triumph of Reaction
The evil could be eradicated only at its source; to assure the
permanence of the reaction, Selim would have to be deposed.
The Janissaries agreed wholeheartedly, and they poured out of
their barracks toward the palace. Kabakji Mustafa and the
Janissary elders then went ,t0 Ataullah Efendi, who issued a
fetua authorizing the deposition on the grounds of misrule and
violation of tradition and religion.
  While the soldiers headed through the At Meydan toward
the palace, Ataullah Efendi went down to the Porte where all the
Ulema were waiting. When he read the fetva, they shouted their
approval and agreed to support the deposition. In midafternoon,
the soldiers and thh Ulema massed in front of the palace shouting
their support for "Sultan Mustafa Han.” At the same time,
Selim’s secretary Ahmed Bey was torn apart in front of the Porte
and his head sent in to the terrified Sultan, who then gave up all
thoughts of resistance and agreed to give up his throne in return
only for guarantees of his personal safety.
  Selim immediately summoned Prince Mustafa, who after
feigning reluctance, agreed to accept the throne. The Imperial
Throne was set up in front of the third gate of the palace, the
Bab us-Saadet, and the rebels fiooded into the great courtyard
before it. Late in the afternoon, while Selim retired to rooms set
aside for him in the harem, his cousin ascended the throne as
Mustafa IV, and the ceremonies of homage and testimonies of)"
loyalty were carried out. Thus the revolt had reached its goal, the
"infidel Sultan” was deposed, and his reforms could now be
dismantled.