




                   Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
Part V. The Triumph
     of Reaction
                                 4




                                         \

 J




ft.




          t
                                 « ..


              i.   X
                       - p. ■■       ♦


      .J'-t
                         ’.     -• -
                       >*»»*■ I


                                             V
                   XX. The Politics
                  of Ottoman Reform




It is not surprising that the many foreign and domestic wars
which Selim III had to face limited and frustrated his reforms.
But they alone would not have heen sufficient to defeat him en¬
tirely had not he and his supporters themselves created conditions
which made it possible for those with vested interests in the old
order to raise mass opposition to his efforts. In Selim’s time chronic
insecurity, disorder, famine, and inflation were normal accompa¬
niments of life in town and country alike. The misery in which the
vast majority of people were forced to live was in stark contrast
to the lavish western-style palaces and entertainments introduced
by the reformers along with European painters, singers, actors,
and writers imported in order to create an image of modern, west¬
ern life in their homes. Since these conditions were combined
with regular reports about the Wahhabi and Serbian revolts and
the triumphs of men such as Pasvanoglu, Ali of Janina, Tayyar
Pasha, and Jezzar Ahmed Pasha, it was inevitable that accusa¬
tions of "sinful innovation” and "infidel oppression” hurled by the
Janissaries, the Ulema and others, and their effort to attribute
these conditions to the reforms, should find ready response among
those whom the Sultan intended to help.*
  Much of Selim’s difficulty could have been avoided if he himself
had possessed a strong and dominating personality and had driven
                                s             I

        and led the reformers toward the common goal or, in the absence
368
        of this, if the reformers themselves had been characterized by sim¬
        ilar qualities of mind and body. But perhaps this was too much of
        a change to expect in a single generation. Selim III, although he
        had good intentions, was a relatively mild and weak person who
        sought to direct and control his subordinates not by strength of
        leadership but by the more traditional Ottoman method of turn¬
        ing them against one another in continuous struggles for his
        favor. In his later years in particular, iij response to frustrations
        and defeats, he gradually lost interest in the reforms and reform¬
        ers and retired to the pleasures of his palace, while leaving the
        reformers to fight among themselves as well as with those who
         sought to destroy what little had been accomplished.^
           The result was continuous political instability, which prevented
      \J the reformers not only from making any serious attempt to solve
         the wider political, economic, and social problems which accom¬
         panied and endangered their efforts but also from pushing their
         reform measures through to final success. During Selim s eighteen
         years on the throne, there were nine grand vezirs, ten sheyh ul-
       i islams, seven grand admirals, eighteen chief treasurers, sixteen
         reis ul-kuttabs, and nine bash terjumans, each with his own ideas
         and policies —and even more important, each with his own politi¬
         cal ambitions, which he sought to promote by means of the powers
         and revenues granted by his office. This was the greatest tragedy
         of Selim’s reign. The reformers split into numerous factions strug¬
         gling for power, which when obtained was used more for their own
         benefit than it was to achieve the policies which they originally
         had sought to undertake.
           The political factions and their alignments were constantly
         changing and adjusting. With the Sultan acting mainly to keep
         them equally balanced and to prevent any one of them from pre-
         vailing over the others for more than a short time, and with the
         factions themselves aiming mainly at the positions and revenues
         of government as means and manifestations of power, there were
         constant appointments and dismissals at all levels of the bureauc¬
         racy, the religious hierarchy, and the army. Efficiency, honesty,
         and steadfastness were the inevitable victims. It would be fruit¬
         less to trace the endless political maneuvers and alignments