




                            The Triumph of Reaction
conciliate the Janissaries and Ulema by suspending his reform         375
program and placing the conservatives in the government during
the late fall of 1806. In mid-November he replaced Hafiz Ismail
with the Janissary Agha Ibrahim Hilmi Pasha, and as Sheyh ul-
Islam he appointed the most powerful and reactionary of the
Ulema leaders, Sherif zade Mehmed Ataullah Efendi, whd there¬
after became the leader of reaction in the country. While Selim
also dismissed Ibrahim Nesim Efendi and Chelebi Mustafa, the
chief objects of the conservative attacks, he still sought to main-
                           4

tain some of the lesser reformers in the government in order to
balance them off against the reactionaries —so he chose Mehmed
Galib Efendi as 'Reis ul-Kuttab and Morah Osman Efendi as
director of the Imperial Treasury.^' But once again the Sultan’s
temporizing solved nothing. These appointments antagonized
the conservatives and cost him whatever credit he might have
gained with them by appointing Ibrahim Hilmi and Ataullah to
positions in the government; at the same time, they did nothing
to restore the reformers’ confidence in him or to give them power
sufficient to counteract the threat of reaction now facing them.
  The Russian ambassador now began openly to support the con¬
servatives because of Selim’s new friendship with the French.
And it was not long before the wealthy Ipsilanti and Moruzi
families and their friends among the Phanariotes likewise joined
the opponents of reform after losing the Principalities to their
rivals as a result of French influence. Under the urgings of these
powerful families, the conservatives moved more and more
toward the idea of dethroning Selim and replacing him with the vX
late Valide’s son. Prince Mustafa, who, since he had spent most
of his life in the palace and was without education and experience,
would be completely unable to resist their control and domina¬
tion. With a willing candidate on whom they could focus their
activities, and with Russian and Phanariote funds used to at-Y
tract supporters, Ibrahim Hilmi and Ataullah rapidly built up a
large party and prepared to take full power as soon as circum¬
stances warranted.^^
  For the moment the Russian invasion of the Principalities in
December saved the Sultan since his opponents were forced to X
concentrate on the immediate measures needed to defend the




                   The Politics of Ottoman Reform
                             \              »



376   empire. Selim’s role in successfully repulsing the British fleet
      from Istanbul during February 1807 so strengthened his position
      that he could easily have eliminated the conservatives had it
      not been for the more urgent need of securing their military and
      financial support for the spring campaign planned against the
      Russians. With Ibrahim Hilmi and most of the Janissaries march¬
      ing to the Danube in April, conservative leadership in Istanbul
      fell to his lieutenant at the capital, Rose Musa Pasha, and to
      Ataullah Efendi and the Ulema, who > worked to restore their
      prestige and undermine the Sultan’s. Their efforts were greatly
      assisted by the food shortages and inflation which plagued the
      capital during the spring as a result of the enemy occupation of
      its principal grain sources in the Principalities and of the Russian
      blockade of the Dardanelles, which effectively prevented the
      arrival of supplies usually sent from the Anatolian seacost by
      ship. These conditions were further aggravated by the presence
      in the capital of large numbers of Anatolian troops passing
      through on their way to the Danube, who used force to obtain
      for themselves most of the supplies that still remained in the
      Imperial stores. When the news arrived of the Wahhabi attacks
      on the Holy Cities and the British invasion of Egypt, Selim’s
      remaining popularity rapidly evaporated, and Ataullah and his
      cohorts prepared for a final outburst against those considered
      responsible for all the difficulties in which the empire now found
      itself.
         But caution still was necessary. Selim and the reformers had
      preponderant military strength in and near the capital, with
      20,000 Nizam-i Jedid men at Levend Chiftlik, 5,000 artillery
      men at Tophane, and 8,000 men and officers of the fleet at Kasim-
      pasha at least nominally supporting them. With the Janissaries
      now mostly in Rumelia, the rebel leaders in Istanbul had to sus¬
      pend execution of their plans until their return or until they
      could get the support of the only other important military force
       then stationed near the capital, approximately 3,000 yamaks.
       These were mostly Albanian and Circassian mercenaries, who
       were officially connected with the Janissary corps and, in the
       absence of the regular army, garrisoned the Bosporus forts. Their
       loyalties were at best uncertain, but since they currently were