




                   Internal Revolts and Foreign Wars
appoint the former Grand Vezir Yusuf Ziya Pasha as governor of       361
Erzurum and commander of the eastern armies and to send him
to gather an army in the east and to organize a force capable of
meeting the Russians if they came.®®
  In the meantime Bonaparte disappointed the Sultan by reply¬
ing evasively to his requests, for by now he had decided to^make a
settlement with the Russians and was no longer anxious to take
important offensive actions against them. Selim heard rumors to
this effect but discounted them, believing that Bonaparte would
never desert him. Without the expected military assistance, how¬
ever, he was compelled to limit his plans for the current campaign
to Serbia and th^ Principalities. Soon after the departure of the
Grand Vezir, Selim sent his remaining reserves through Thrace
to Nish and appointed its governor, Hurshid Ahmed Pasha, as
governor of Rumelia and commander of the Macedonian army,
with orders to gather the Balkan notables and princes and then
move up the Morava Valley to cooperate with the Grand Vezir.®®
  Selim’s plan was for the governors of Bosnia, Vidin, and Nish
to attack the Serbs on both sides to prevent them from joining or
helping the Russians. At the same time, the Grand Vezir would
march from Edirne through the Dobruja to Ismail, where he
would join Pehlivan Agha, cross the Danube, and move against
the Russians in Moldavia. A segment of his force would remain at
Silistria to march on Bucharest from the east in conjunction with
Ba5n’akdar Mustafa, who would cross the Danube at Ruschuk and
attack it from the west. The Russians in Moldavia and Wallachia
would thus be cut off from each other and from the Serbs and could
be defeated, or at least forced to withdraw from most of their
conquests.*®®
  On the other hand Michelson planned to establish a defense
line all the way from the Black Sea to the Adriatic, along the
north bank of the Danube to Orsova and from there through Bel¬
grade, Herzegovina, and Montenegro. This would prevent any
French effort to move inland from Dalmatia to support the Otto¬
mans in the Principalities, and at the same time it would make it
impossible for the various Balkan armies to cooperate with the
Russians against Istanbul in the south and Dalmatia in the
west.*®* To carry out this plan, he needed the enthusiastic coop-




                 The Eastern Question, 1802-1807
eration of the various Balkan leaders, and during the winter and
spring, his agents and those of the French competed vigorously
for their favor.
  Vladika Peter I of Montenegro was willing from the start. Kara
George had toyed with the idea of a separate peace with the Porte,
hut his massacre of the Ottoman envoys in March had convinced
him it would be prudent to cooperate with the Russian officers
sent to him.”’^ In the east things were quite different. Meriage
got Molla Idris Agha’s unqualified suppqrt by supplying him with
arms and money, and by getting Sebastian! to use his influence at
the Porte to gain Selim’s recognition for him as Pasvanoglu’s
legitimate successor. Molla Agha completely blocked any direct
Russian-Serbian union by means of his well-manned forts at
Vidin and elsewhere, and Kara George’s attempt to break through
in April was frustrated and he suffered heavy losses. Meriage also
tried to get Molla Agha to provide military assistance for Bayrak-
dar Mustafa Pasha’s advance into Wallachia. But in this he was
less successful because of the conflicting territorial ambitions of
the two notables and because of Bayrakdar’s dislike of the idea of
bringing a French army to the Danube, so Meriage’s plan was
quietly abandoned. But for the moment at least, Molla Agha suc¬
cessfully prevented Michelson and Kara George from joining
forces.
  In Albania, Ali of Janina’s bitterness at Russian occupation of
the Ionian Islands and Parga made the mission of Britain’s agent
Morier entirely useless, so he departed in March, leaving the way
entirely open for the French. Pouqueville’s offer of arms and offi¬
cers to help Ali conquer the islands and coastal ports was warmly
received. Since the British and Russian fleets were now operating
in the Aegean and eastern Mediterranean, the way was open for
Ali and the French to move. Marmont began to send him by sea
large quantities of cannons, rifles, and ammunition together with
officers to organize and lead his army, which now was assembled
at Preveza. At the same time, under French direction fortifica¬
tions were prepared along the coast, and a small fleet was built to
carry this army to its objectives.
   At the same time, the Septinsular Republic assembled its own
 army and built fortifications to resist the attack, wherever it
 might come. While the main Russian fleet was now with Senya-