




                    The Deposition of Mustafa TV
400   than ever; he had got rid of Musa Pasha and of Musa’s replace¬
      ment, Tayyar Pasha. Yusuf Ziya and Suleyman Pasha were
      overjoyed. But Tayyar was bitter a'gainst Chelebi Mustafa and
      Ataullah Efendi, and when he reached his place of exile, he soon
      got into communication with Bayrakdar Mustafa, who promised
      to protect him in return for his help and got Istanbul to appoint
      him military governor of Varna at the end of April.At this
      point Mustafa IV worked to strengthen the Ruschuk committee
      and get its support against Ataullah by promoting Refik Efendi
      to be Lieutenant of the Grand Vhzir in Istanbul and replacing
      him as Reis ul-Kuttab by Galib Efendi. Tahsin Efendi also was
      brought to Istanbul as Chief of the Chavush Corps, and Behij
      Efendi remained Chief Accountant. By this time four members of
      the committee were with the Grand Vezir, and only Ramiz Efendi
      remained in Ruschuk with Bayrakdar Mustafa.
        Refik Efendi now discovered that Yilik Suleyman, Gavur
      Hasan, and Ahmed Agha were still at Edirne. He informed
      Bayrakdar Mustafa, who immediately marched there with a
      force of 10,000 men on the pretext of going on a hunt. This sud¬
      den move frightened the Sultan and Grand Vezir as much as it
      surprised the Ruschuk committee members. Mustafa IV decided
      to temporize rather than force trouble, so he ordered Chelebi Mus¬
      tafa to get rid of Bayrakdar Mustafa’s enemies, who immediately
      left Edirne and returned to their homes.Mustafa was still not
      satisfied. He decided to use the occasion to get rid of the Grand
      Vezir as well and sent a series of complaints against him to Istan¬
      bul, and Chelebi Mustafa also sent complaints about the notable
      of Ruschuk. The committee now worked to bridge the dispute
      since it needed the help and cooperation of both men. Behij Efendi
      finally managed to smooth over the situation and arrange an
      agreement. Bayrakdar Mustafa would retain command of the
      Danube army, and the Grand Vezir would stay with the Imperial
      army in Edirne; when necessary he would send assistance to
      both the Serbian and Russian fronts although he himself would
      come only if requested to do so by Mustafa.*®
        Behij Efendi then went on to Istanbul, where he worked to get
      not only the Sultan’s approval for this agreement but also his
      permission for Bayrakdar to come with his army to carry out the




                           The Triumph of Reaction
plans they had discussed earlier. The committee for some time           401
had developed good relations with two of the Sultan’s closest
associates, Guiju Fettah Efendi and Nezar Agha, both officials in
the palace, who now supported Behij’s claim that Bayrakdar was
loyal to the Sultan and would .only act to support him against the
tyrants before returning to the Danube. The Sultan demanded
however that Selim and possibly Prince Mahmud also be assassi¬
nated before Bayrakdar Mustafa came to the city. Behij Efendi
resisted this idea, but to retain his credit with the Sultan, he
                             4