




                   The Deposition of Mustafa IV
                             s             i


398   get the Sultan and the Grand Vezir to call Bayrakdar to Istanbul
      to help throw off the tyranny of the Janissaries and yamaks as
      well as that of Musa Pasha and Ataullah Efendi. In addition, so
      that they would know what was going on in Istanbul and, if
      necessary, prevent any sudden attempt to assassinate Selim,
      they decided to plant some of their group in the government by
      sending them back to declare their loyalty to the new regime/
      At first Grand Vezir Chelebi Mustafa was unmoved by this ap¬
      peal. He feared and hated Bayrakdap M'Ustafa and did not want to
      help him get the credit for overthrowing the tyrants in Istanbul.
      So in response to the committee’s appeal, he summoned Bay-
      rakdar’s   bitter   enemies —Yilikoglu   Suleyman   Bey,   former
      notable of Silistria and now leader of a small band of raiders
      operating in eastern Bulgaria and Thrace; Laz Ahmed Agha, who
      as governor of Ibrail had opposed Mustafa soon after he came to
      power; and Gavur Hasan, one of the bandit leaders who pre¬
      viously had cooperated with Pasvanoglu against Mustafa. And
      plans were made for a new attack on Ruschuk.® At this point,
      however, events in Istanbul changed the Grand Vezir’s mind.
        For some time the real power in the capital had been held by
      the triumvirate of Ataullah Efendi, Musa Pasha, and Kabakji
      Mustafa. But in mid-July 1808, Musa got the Sultan’s permis¬
      sion to try to eliminate Ataullah and appoint Omer Hulusi
      Efendi in his place as Sheyh ul-Islam. Halet Efendi got the Janis¬
      saries to rise and march on the palace, forcing the Sultan to
      rescind the appointment. Taking advantage of the situation,
      Ataullah used the Janissary pressure to get the Sultan to dis¬
      miss Musa Pasha as Kaymakam and send him into exile, appoint¬
      ing in his place Tayyar Mehmed Pasha, former notable and gover¬
      nor of Trebizond, who in 1805 had fled to Russia after being de¬
      feated by Yusuf Pasha and Chapanoglu Suleyman Bey, and who
      had been pardoned and returned to his lands and positions only
      after the revolution. Ataullah now installed him to increase
      his own power in the government. This angered the Sultan, who
      saw clearly how weak he really was; it alarmed Chelebi Mustafa,
      who feared Tayyar would replace him as soon as he made a false
      step against the Russians; and it worried Selim’s partisans, who
      remembered how much Tayyar had hated Selim in the past and




                             The Triumph of Reaction
feared he might use his new position to get the former Sultan out      399
of the way before they were ready to act.^
  In mid-August the Ruschuk committee again tried to seduce
the Grand Vezir and this time found him much more amenable.
Mustafa Refik went to his camp outside Edirne, and on October 28
he was sent to Istanbul as Reis ul-Kuttab in place of Arif Efendi,
who had proved unable to fill the post.^^ As soon as Refik reached
Istanbul, he got the support of a number of the Sultan’s close
servants, and with their assistance met secretly with Mustafa IV
and presented Bayrakdar’s plan to march to Istanbul and help
him throw off” the tyrants. Mustafa IV realized that he would not
gain much if he had to depend on one group to throw off another,
so he preferred to try to gain power by playing Kabakji Mustafa
and Ataullah off against each other and against the other factions
then rising to fight for power at the Porte. Although he confirmed
Refik as Reis ul-Kuttab and secretly invited other members of the
committee to return to key posts in Istanbul, for the moment he
refused permission for Bayrakdar to approach the capital and
commanded that he continue his preparations for the spring
campaign against the Russians. Mehmed Behij Efendi now also
came to Istanbul, and on May 7 he was appointed director of the
Imperial Treasury in place of Mehmed Emin Bey, who had been
appointed to that post just a year before by Selim. “
  While the Sultan encouraged the Ruschuk committee, he also
worked in other directions to preserve his own position. Within
a short time he won the support of Tayyar Pasha with the promise
of the Grand Vezirate if he was able to get rid of the domination of
his patron, Ataullah Efendi. Preparations were made to replace
Ataullah with Osman Pasha zade Izzet Bey, Kadiasker of Anatolia,
but so long as the Janissaries supported Ataullah, this was post¬
poned as impractical. The Sultan also worked through Chelebi
Mustafa Pasha, plotting with him and Tayyar to secure the
assassination of both princes in the palace so that he would re¬
main as the sole surviving male Ottoman. But Ataullah found
out about the Sultan’s dealings with Tayyar Pasha and used the
threat of a new Janissary uprising and a revolt against Tayyar in
eastern Anatolia by Chapanoglu Suleyman and Yusuf Ziya to
secure his dismissal on March 21, 1808.Ataullah was stronger