




                             Epilogue
      ./
                                   V             i


388        Efendi even to discuss French demands for food and transport
           for the French officers and troops who were to operate in his
           territory, including those about to pass through on their way to
           carry out a new alliance recently signed with the Shah of Iran.
           Nor did he accept Bonaparte’s demands for special commercial
           privileges and compensation for French property losses in the
           empire during the expedition to Egypt.*” So the negotiations
           dragged on without result. Then Bonaparte’s great victory over
           the Russians at the battle of Friedland (June 14, 1807) largely
           ended his need for an Ottoman alliance, so the idea was quietly
           dropped shortly thereafter. Bonaparte now was ready for peace
           with Russia in order to stabilize his new European empire and
           concentrate his military efforts against Great Britain. Czar Alex¬
           ander also was ready to desert Britain ahd make peace, not only
           because of the disastrous defeat but also because of shortages of
           food and supplies in his own army and disappointment over a lack
           of assistance from the British during the previous months. So on
           June 24, the Emperor and the Czar came to Tilsit and began to
           negotiate a settlement which would recognize Bonaparte’s con¬
           quests in Europe in return for peace for all concerned.
             During the course of the negotiations, the news about Selim’s
           deposition increased Bonaparte’s determination to abandon the
           Porte. After all, although Selim had been under Sebastiani’s
           influence, the new Sultan and government might not be sympa¬
           thetic. Moreover Selim’s removal provided Bonaparte with the
           excuse that any personal obligation to consult the Sultan on
           peace negotiations was now nullified. Alexander I also wished to
           discuss Ottoman dissolution and partition of the spoils, but Bona¬
           parte was able to use the continued uncertainty about events in
           Istanbul to avoid any agreement on these points." While the
           treaty signed on July 7 was concerned primarily with European
           matters, there were a number of important points of direct con¬
           cern to the Porte.Russia agreed to conclude an armistice with
           the Ottomans, to turn over the Ionian Islands and Cattaro to the
           French immediately, and to evacuate the Principalities, although
           the Ottomans were not supposed to move into them until a final
           peace was reached. France would mediate a peace settlement
           between the adversaries in return for a similar effort by the Czar




                                The Triumph of Reaction
for a Franco-British agreement; but Bonaparte agreed that if the     389
negotiations failed, he would join the war against the Porte and
make further arrangements to divide the European parts of its
empire. Istanbul and its hinterland were excluded from these
provisions for the moment. This was a great victory for the French
Emperor. Russia had recognized his conquests and empire and
left Britain to fight on alone. The Russians had been kept out of
the Balkans and the Straits, and France had achieved uncon¬
tested control of the Adriatic regardless of what might happen
in the negotiations still to take place in Istanbul and Paris.
  Alexander now sent orders to the commanders of all his ships
in the Mediterranean and Adriatic to return to the Black Sea via
the Straits if the Porte permitted, otherwise to the Baltic. The
Russian troops at Cattaro and the Ionian Islands were to go to
Trieste or Venice as soon as possible. At the same time. General
Marmont was ordered to send a garrison to Cattaro and Corfu
and to re-establish friendly relations with the Montenegrins, who
previously, under Russian influence, had raided Dalmatia almost
continuously.
  From Tilsit, Bonaparte and Alexander sent agents to General
Michelson, the Grand Vezir, and Selim’s successor, Sultan Mus¬
tafa, to get their agreement on an immediate armistice, Russian
withdrawal, and peace negotiations. Sebastiani was instructed
to work toward these ends and to maintain Ottoman-French
friendship by pointing out that the Tilsit agreement had been
made to help the Porte against its enemies. He was to get the new
Sultan to negotiate for peace with the Russians, to refrain from
occupying the Principalities until peace was signed, and to accept
French occupation of the Ionian Islands and Cattaro.
  During the spring and early summer of 1807, before Istanbul
heard about the agreement at Tilsit, Sebastiani had made con¬
siderable progress in getting the support of the new government.
Despite their rejection of Selim’s internal policies, Mustafa and
the men around him had early decided to maintain the associa¬
tion with France so long as Russia remained in the Principalities
and Britain in Egypt. The strongly pro-French Mehmed Efendi
was therefore appointed as Reis ul-Kuttab despite his close con¬
nection with the previous regime. In response to Sebastiani’s as-