




                             The Revolt
      XXII. Epilogue: Mustafa IV and
           the Ottoman Reaction




                                       V




With Selim in the cage and Mustafa IV on the throne, power fell
into the hands of Kdse Musa Pasha and Ataullah Efendi, who
moved quickly to eliminate the last traces of the previous regime.
On June 3, the Nizam-i Jedid was abolished along with all the
new institutions and schools associated with it. Stating that the
reforms had been created by evil associates of the Sultan in order
to secure power and money for themselves, the decree declared
that they had destroyed order, violated laws and traditions, and
caused all the anarchy, misrule, and defeats which had torn the
empire apart during the preceding years. Hereafter, it was de¬
clared, the traditional laws of the empire would be carried out in
full; the older corps would remain to carry out their assigned
functions according to the established organizations and laws.
All the new taxes introduced during the previous reign were
abolished, and the older ones restored. The Ottoman Empire
would continue its friendship with its friends and bitter enmity
to all those who sought to hurt it.*
  At the same time, Musa and Ataullah acted quickly to stabilize
their personal power by dispersing those who brought them to
success and expected to share the fruits of victory. An agreement
was made between the Sultan and the Janissary elders and
leaders in the capital by which the soldiers returned to their
barracks and agreed to cease interference in state affairs in         385
return for assurances that they would be absolved of all responsi¬
bility for the revolt and that the reforms which they disliked so
much would be completely abolished.^ At the same time, to get
the yamaks out of the city, Kabakji Mustafa was appointed com¬
mander of the Bosporus forts on the Rumeli side, so he and his
men left the capital, leaving full power in the hands of the new
government.®
  While it was impossible to eliminate everyone who had served
the previous Sultan, almost all the important reformers still
alive were now denied office, and new persons were found for
most of the higher* positions in the treasury, the army, and the
palace. But it was not long before the victors fell out among them¬
selves. Musa and Ataullah soon began a struggle for power, with
each trying to get as many positions as possible for men loyal to
him or his party. Not all the Nizam-i Jedid men were kept out of
office; those against whom the rebel groups had no special griev¬
ance were brought back to the government, with Halet Efendi,
former ambassador to Paris, becoming treasurer, Chelebi Mus¬
tafa Reshid going to the dockyard as its director and chief of
the Naval Treasury, and Galib Efendi becoming Nishanji (chief
assistant of the Reis). Hurshid Pasha became governor of the
Morea and commander of the army based in Sofia; and Asim
Efendi was made official historian and chronicler of the new
regime.^
  On the Danube, even before the revolt, Pehlivan Hiiseyin had
taken over command of the Janissary corps as its Agha and in¬
cited his men to demand permission to return to Istanbul so they
could participate in the momentous events about to unfold. Grand
Vezir Ibrahim Hilmi Pasha vigorously opposed this, thinking
that the revolt would be postponed until the enemy was dealt
with and he could return home. He feared that if his army was
dissolved, the military gains of the previous months would be
dissipated; Bucharest would be lost and the Russians and Serbs
could unite their forces and move across the Danube, imperiling
the entire European part of the empire. So in response to the
Janissary demand, he tried to replace Pehlivan with his own
lieutenant, Eyub Agha. But with the army supporting him,
Pehlivan held the upper hand and simply ignored the order. In