



                             Epilogue
386   the absence of permission to depart, he and his men remained
      at their posts instead of returning to Istanbul. But when news
      of the revolt arrived on June 1, he immediately deposed the Grand
      Vezir, and his men began to attack and kill all the Nizam-iJedid
      partisans and supporters of the old Sultan they could find. Until a
      new Grand Vezir could be sent from Istanbul, Pehlivan Agha
      took de facto command of the army, although for the sake of
      formality, he appointed as Kaymakam Ebubekir Pasha, who had
      just come from the capital with orders from Musa Pasha.^ Pehli¬
      van Agha immediately began to ciismiss the officers he did not
      like, and his men spread disorder and anarchy in the camp. The
      principal commanders of the other corps reacted by calling for the
      assistance of Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha, who on June 8 arrived
      in the camp at Giurgevo, drove out Pehlivan and his supporters,
      and restored order and discipline in the army.®
        Bayrakdar Mustafa expected to be appointed Grand Vezir and
      commander of the new army as a reward not only for this action,
      but also for his successes against the Russians during the pre¬
      vious year. But when the news of the army revolt reached Istanbul
      on June 18, Ataullah Efendi managed to get the Grand Vezirate
      for one of his own men, Chelebi Mustafa Pasha, then commander
      of the Dardanelles fortifications.^ Bayrakdar was so furious that
      he and his men abruptly departed for Ruschuk, taking with them
      all the reformers and supporters of Selim who wished to go.
      Bayrakdar now suspended all relations with the army, refused to
      supply it with food or provisions, and invited all those wishing
      to desert to join him in Ruschuk. Pehlivan Agha became second
      in command, and his supporters were installed in all the other
      key positions. As the Janissaries began to seize all the remaining
      food for themselves, the army soon fell into anarchy. Within a
      month the Grand Vezir was forced to send it into winter quarters,
      leaving care of the Danube front entirely to Bayrakdar Mustafa
      and his forces.®
        As the summer progressed in Istanbul, Musa Pasha and Ataul¬
      lah Efendi were about equal in the struggle then going on for
      control of the government, so the balance of power fell to Kabakji
      Mustafa and his yamaks, who used their position to interfere in
      state affairs and inaugurate a reign of terror in the streets of




                           The Triumph of Reaction
Istanbul despite their previous promises to stay on the Bosporus.     387
The political factions gathered vast amounts of money for them¬
selves by confiscating the properties of their enemies and of the
reform leaders and selling for their own profit most of the sup¬
plies supposed to be sent to-the imperial army on the Danube.
  Meanwhile the British remained entrenched at Alexandria,
and there seemed no way to get them out. On the Danube the
army was in chaos, but the Russians made no move to take ad¬
vantage of the situation, so^it was simply ignored in Istanbul. The
Russian blockade continued outside the Dardanelles, and the
capital suffered more and more from famine and inflation. Sultan
Mustafa finally ordered Seydi Ali Pasha to move out of the safety
of the Straits and engage the Russians, in the hope of opening
the way for grain ships being loaded in Egypt and on the southern
coasts of Anatolia. Senyavin’s main fleet was cruising in the
Archipelago, and the few ships he had left to guard the Straits
were badly outnumbered, so they fled to Tenedos with Seydi Ali
in hot pursuit. The Ottomans had begun to land men on the island
when Senyavin’s approach caused them to break off the action
and flee for home. On reaching the Straits, however, Seydi Ali
found a large new Russian force waiting for him, so he was com¬
pelled to turn back to meet Senyavin. Between July 1 and July 4,
there was a series of engagements between the two off Lemnos;
although several Ottoman ships were sunk, Senyavin also suffered
such heavy losses that he was forced to return to Tenedos, leaving
the Straits unguarded. The blockade was suspended, and the
capital at long last began to receive the needed grains, thus re¬
ducing the tension which had built up during the previous few
months.®
 The way European events took shape once again saved the
Ottomans from the consequences of their weakness. As late as
May, Vahid Efendi and Talleyrand had been negotiating at the
Emperor’s winter quarters at Warsaw, and it seemed that an
agreement might be reached for joint action against Russia and
Great Britain. But Selim had held back. While he wanted an
alliance with France, he wanted it directed only against Russia,
refusing to include Britain because of Bonaparte s inability to
help him against the British in Egypt. He refused to allow Vahid