

based his opposition on the assumption that so long as the people
of Istanbul, the notables of Anatolia and the Balkans, and the
mass of soldiers \^ere opposed, assassination was not possible
without stirring up a new revolt which might end the dynasty
altogether. He finally convinced the Sultan, but still Bayrakdar’s
permission to march was withheld.'^ Behij Efendi was appointed
Treasurer (May 7) so he could use the Imperial Treasury and its
salaries to stifle any effort by the military corps to oppose Bayrak¬
dar. Bayrakdar now came to Edirne on the pretext of discussing
spring campaign plans with the Grand Vezir but actually to
arrange the march on Istanbul while at the same time taking
care that the Russian army did not take advantage of the situa¬
tion to move across the Danube.*®
  Ataullah Efendi and his creatures in Istanbul, frightened by
the presence of such a large force in Edirne, ordered both Chelebi
and Bayrakdar Mustafa to go to the front at once in anticipation
of a Russian attack. The two commanders decided to leave the
bulk of the regular army at Edirne while they themselves
marched to Istanbul with approximately 15,000 men from the
Ruschuk army on the pretext of going to discuss with the Sultan a
shortage of supplies and the consequent increasing disorder in
the Balkan armies and garrisons.*®
  On Thursday, July 14, the army set out for the capital, with the
Grand Vezir leading the way and Bayrakdar Mustafa and the
members of the Ruschuk committee following. In order that
Ataullah not be forewarned of the march any earlier than neces¬
sary, arrangements were made to suspend all communications
and close all the roads between Edirne and the capital. As the
army marched along, only its commanders knew where it was




                    The Deposition of Mustafa IV
402   going. Secret messages were sent to Fettah and Nezar for de¬
      livery to the Sultan, stating that the army had fallen into dis¬
      order as a result of supply problems dnd that the two commanders
      were merely coming to Istanbul to discuss the matter with the
      Sultan. Bayrakdar also sent Hajji Ali Agha, notable of Pin-
      arhisar, with a group of horsemen who set out overland to Rumeli
      Feneri, where they attacked and killed Kabakji Mustafa, cut
      off his head, and scattered his men. This action effectively pre¬
      vented the yamaks from moving intp Istanbul to save their allies
      when the crisis came.^”           '
        On July 18, the advancing army reached Silivri, and it seemed
      certain to arrive at the capital the next morning. Mustafa IV
      met with the Sheyh ul-Islam and Kaymakam in the palace and
      called a formal council meeting for the next morning to discuss
      the march, which had been carried out without his permission.
      But the next morning the council decided that since the Grand
      Vezir and Bayrakdar Mustafa had come this far, nothing could
      be done, so they proceeded directly through the city and outside
      the walls to meet them.^‘
        On the afternoon of Tuesday, July 19, the Grand Vezir and
      Bayrakdar Mustafa were first received by Ataullah Efendi and
      the other state leaders, after which the Sultan formally received
      them. Since Ataullah had failed to stop Bayrakdar, he now tried
      to secure his support, and proposed an alliance against the Grand
      Vezir, who would then be replaced by Bayrakdar both as Grand
      Vezir and commander of the Imperial army. Bayrakdar rejected
      the offer out of hand.^^ The Sultan then returned to his palace
      followed by the Grand Vezir and the state officials. Bayrakdar
      Mustafa and his army set up camp outside the city walls at
      Chirpiji, where they remained for two nights while the members
      of the Ruschuk committee entered the city to prepare for their
      arrival. Finally, on July 21, Bayrakdar entered Istanbul with a
      force of between 3,000 and 5,000 men. He immediately met the
      Grand Vezir, who got the Sultan to dismiss Ataullah and replace
      him with Arab zade Arif Efendi. With Bayrakdar’s men stationed
      at key places throughout the city, the Janissaries were kept
      effectively under check, and there was no effort to oppose the
      order. By secret agreement Bayrakdar and the Grand Vezir