




                             Epilogue
      A

390        surances of continued French'support, new orders were issued
           prohibiting British commerce in the empire and organizing an
           inventory of British properties and goods in preparation for their
           eventual confiscation. In early June when Colonel Pozzo di Borgo
           and Lord Arthur Paget came to Tenedos with full powers from the
           Russian and British governments, respectively, to negotiate set¬
           tlements with the Porte and arrange evacuations of its territories,
           they were denied permission even to go on to Istanbul to present
           their proposals formally on the grounds that the Ottoman Em¬
           pire could now engage in negotiatiohs only at a general peace con¬
           ference through the mediation of France.
             When news of the Franco-Russian agreement finally became
           known in Istanbul on July 18, the initial Ottoman reaction was
           one of intense fury. Sebastiani was hurriedly summoned to the
           Porte. Mehmed Efendi told him that Bonaparte should not have
           ratified the peace without prior consultation with his ally the
           Sultan; the Ottoman Empire had been sacrificed, left in the hands
           of Russia to do with as it wished; all the promises made on the
           subject of its integrity had been violated; it was impossible for
           the Ottomans not to reoccupy the Principalities as soon as the
           Russians left; France had abandoned the Porte, betrayed it; Paget
           would be summoned from Tenedos, and negotiations would be
           opened for an immediate peace with Great Britain.*® The next
           day all the French officers and soldiers in Ottoman service were
           sent back to Dalmatia, with the sole exception of Juchereau de
           Saint Denys. In Istanbul and along the Danube, wild rumors
           accompanied the news: the empire would be divided, Bosnia and
           Herzegovina would be joined to Dalmatia, the Morea to the King¬
           dom of Italy, Serbia to Austria, Moldavia and Wallachiato Russia,
           and so forth. Mobs began to roam the streets, attacking Ottoman
           officials and foreigners alike in protest against this new betrayal
           by a Christian ally. The Grand Vezir was so angry that he ar¬
           rested the French courier bringing the news and refused to allow
           him to proceed on to Istanbul.*®
              It was not long before there were second thoughts at the Porte.
            When Sebastiani communicated the full text of the agreement,
            it was seen that there was a great deal to be said for accepting it.
          Y Militarily, Russia had agreed to abandon its conquests in the




                                  The Triumph of Reaction
Principalities; this meant an end to its assistance to the Serbian    391
rebels, who could therefore be suppressed easily once peace was
secured. Politically, the Treaty of Tilsit would be a new blow at
Selim’s policies, since it was he who had inaugurated the pro-
French policies of the Porte oyer a year before. So on July 25, the
Grand Vezir sent Galib Efendi from Silistria to negotiate an
armistice.'^ The negotiations were set for the Slobosia fortress
near Giurgevo, but it was not until three weeks later, on August
12, that work actually began because of a delay in sending Galib’s
documents of authority from Istanbul. The discussions then
dragged on for two weeks, with the parties disputing bitterly the
question of whether the Porte would occupy the Principalities
immediately after the Russian evacuation and whether guaran¬
tees for a Serbian settlement would be included. In the end Galib
Efendi gave in on the first point and the Russians on the second.
A temporary boyar government would be established to rule both
Moldavia and Wallachia until a peace settlement allowed a new
Ottoman occupation; nothing at all was said about the Serbs,
who thus also found betrayal at the hands of their friends.'®
  On August 23, Mehmed Efendi informed Talleyrand in Istan¬
bul that the Porte would observe the Treaty of Tilsit and accept
French mediation for peace negotiations with Russia, to be carried
out at Paris with the Ottoman ambassador there, Muhib Efendi,
being appointed with full plenipotentiary powers to represent
the Sultan.'® A day later the armistice was signed at Slobosia
for a term ending on March 21, 1808. Within thirty-five days,
Russian troops would leave Moldavia and Wallachia, while the
Ottoman army would move south of the Danube, with the right
to leave garrisons only at Ismail, Ibrail, and Galatz to provide
for police and security. The last Russian ships in the Mediter¬
ranean, now at Tenedos and in the Archipelago, would leave and
presumably be allowed passage through the Straits into the
Black Sea.""
  The Porte ratified the armistice in a communication to Sebasti-
ani on September 21, and its armies immediately withdrew to
Silistria. General Michelson died soon after the agreement was
reached, and although it was ratified by his successor. General
Meyendorff, the Russians never fulfilled it. They left Bucharest