


          Preparations for a Spring Campaign
  With the armistice definitely broken, both sides did their best
to prepare for resuming their campaigns in the spring. In the
east a Russian arrdy moved into Anatolia, and on the Arpa Su it
defeated an Ottoman army of 30,000 men under the command
of the former Grand Vezir, Yusuf Ziya Pasha, now governor of
the province of Erzurum; preparations were then made to move
along the Black Sea coast in the spring.^® In the west, at the same
time, 10,000 Russian soldiers moved across the Dniester and
took up positions in Moldavia and Wallachia in preparation for a
new advance in the spring.^® In Serbia Kara George’s state now
controlled all of the ancient kingdom with the exception of Nish,
Leskovatz, and a few small places at the foot of the mountains
leading into Macedonia and Albania. A Russian agent, Rodo-
finikin, was occupied with reorganizing the government and
army, and special efforts were being made to organize the popula¬
tion en masse and to transform the various semi-independent
rebel bands into regular disciplined regiments under a central
command.^’^
  Nor did the Ottomans neglect their preparations. Orders were
sent out to Anatolia, Bosnia, and Macedonia for troops to be raised
and sent for the spring campaign. Hundreds of men were soon
crossing the Bosporus and moving through the capital on their
way to Edirne. In Bosnia the governor had a force of 10,000 men
ready at Travnik to move toward the Drina. Efforts were made
to replace Yusuf Pasha at Erzurum and send him as governor to
Baghdad, but when he refused to leave, he was retained in his
post and ordered to regroup his army as soon as possible.^® On
March 23, a full Imperial Council, meeting at the Porte in the




                             Epilogue
394   presence of all the military, administrative, and religious leaders
      of the ruling class, decided to gather the Imperial army at Edirne
      and send it north as soon as it was re'ady.^® On April 12, it set out
      for the Danube in the company of the Grand Vezir and chief
      treasurer.^®
         In the Adriatic and along the Albanian coast, conditions had
      changed considerably during the winter. The French had oc¬
      cupied Corfu and the other Ionian Islands in September 1807.^'
      While Pouqueville continued to secure Ali of Janina’s coopera¬
      tion, the ruler of Albania and Greece was quite unhappy at his
      continued inability to secure these places for himself, so he now
      moved to secure the assistance of the foreign power whose own
      interests best corresponded with his own. Great Britain.^^ In the
      past Britain had been able to do little with Ali, or in fact with the
      Porte, because of the long-standing Anglo-Russian alliance in
      Europe. But now this alliance was broken, and it no longer con¬
      strained the Cabinet in London from considering its own interests
      in the Middle East and the Balkans. The Treaty of Tilsit had
      made it unnecessary for Britain to continue a war with the Porte
      which it had entered primarily to preserve the Russian alliance;
      so while Britain arranged for evacuation of Egypt, and negotia¬
      tions began for an Anglo-Ottoman peace which would be signed a
      year later. All’s overtures for help against the French were met
      with a ready response. To establish the new relationship. Admiral
      Collingwood sent from Malta Captain W. M. Leake, who had
      previously gone to Janina when Morier made his unsuccessful
      effort in 1804. Meeting secretly with Ali at Preveza on Novem¬
      ber 12, Leake got him to agree to cooperate with the British
      against the French forces in Dalmatia and the Ionian Islands but
      with the understanding that he would break with the French
      only when the British actually sent a squadron to his assistance.
      Collingwood was unable to send help for the moment because of
      other needs in the Mediterranean, so Ali preserved op>en neu¬
      trality while in fact making Pouqueville and the other French
      agents at his court virtual prisoners and preparing to move
      against Corfu and Santa Maura as soon as British assistance
      arrived.^^ Thus a collaboration was inaugurated which was to