




                             The Triumph of Reaction
drive the French from the Ionian Islands and benefit both sides   395
considerably in the years ahead. At the same time that Ali made
his plans, the French occupied the islands and Dalmatia and
controlled the Adriatic, and this threat from the rear was an
important calculation in the Ottoman military plans for the
spring.




                  /




                           Epilogue
             ^   XXIII. The Deposition
                    of Mustafa IV




                                    \




  While conditions were ostensibly returning to normal in Istan¬
 bul, and the Imperial army along the Danube prepared for the
  spring campaign, momentous efforts were being made at Ruschuk
 to reverse the reaction and restore Selim to the throne from which
  he had been so abruptly removed the year before.
    While most of the Nizam-i Jedid leaders had been either killed
  or absorbed by the reaction, their subordinates had been with the
  Imperial army at the time of the revolt. Most of them moved
 back to Ruschuk with Bayrakdar Mustafa Pasha when he split
 with the Grand Vezir and returned home in early July 1807.
y There they accepted his protection, and with his approval and
  inspiration, they formed a secret committee with the aim of re-
^ storing Selim and reviving his reforms.* Led by Bayrakdar
 Mustafa himself, the committee included Mustafa Refik Efendi,^
 a member of the scribal class who had served as Lieutenant of the
  Grand Vezir immediately before the revolution, Mehmed Said
 Galib Efendi,^ Chief Assistant of the current Grand Vezir and
 ostensibly stationed at Ruschuk to carry on the negotiations
 with the Russians at Slobosia; Abdullah Ramiz Efendi,^ a mem¬
 ber of the Ulema who had served as judge of the expeditionary
 force sent against the French in Egypt before entering the scribal
 class and serving as supervisor of the Mortar corps and Chief
Accountant in the Treasury before the revolution; Mehmed             397
Tahsin Efendi,® also originally a member of the Ulema, who had
transferred to the scribal class and risen to be secretary of the
Grand Vezir at the time of the revolution; and Mehmed Emin
Behij Efendi,® who as chief buyer of the Imperial army in 1806
and 1807 had come into close contact with Bayrakdar Mustafa
during the course of the campaigns. The moving intellectual force
behind the committee was Ramiz Efendi, who wrote a long report
to Bayrakdar describing the foreign and domestic situation at
that time, praising the virtues of Selim and his reforms and
urging his restoration in order to save the empire.
  Ba3u-akdar Mustafa was hardly an intellectual, nor was he a
strong partisan of reform. His beloved master, Ismail Agha, had
ended his life as a firm opponent of everything Selim stood for,
and most of his fellow notables, led by Pasvanoglu, had con¬
stantly opposed the reforms as direct threats to their autonomy
and power. In a sense, his new emphasis was not as much a de¬
parture from their policies as might be imagined. The notables
had maintained and emphasized their autonomy by opposing
those in power in Istanbul, and they had secured their following
mainly from among Janissaries and others who had suffered at
the hands of government, so they opposed reform. But now it was
the Janissaries and reactionaries who ruled in Istanbul, and once
in power they disliked ayan autonomy in the Balkans just as
much as Selim had. It was therefore natural for Alemdar Mustafa
and his friends to support Istanbul’s opponents, who now were
represented by Selim’s partisans. He was won over by their
preaching and gave full support to their plans.
  The committee members decided almost at the start that the
only way to accomplish their ends would be to bring Bayrakdar’s
army to Istanbul to overcome their enemies by force. But this
was not possible without sacrificing the life of their hero Selim,
who was completely in the hands of his cousin. The Sultan would
hardly welcome the unexpected arrival of an army from Ruschuk.
He would most certainly execute Selim and his cousin Mahmud
in order to leave himself as the only male member of the Ottoman
dynasty and thus to assure his position regardless of who was in
power. In order to solve this problem, the committee decided to