




                           The Triumph of Reaction
thus giving Mustafa a chance to get rid of Selim. Mustafa now         405
was dethroned after a reign of little over a year, and in his place
Prince Mahmud ascended the throne as Mahmud II. The rebels
were successful, but now they had to work to restore the Nizam-i
Jedid through the offices of an unknown and untried young
prince. With Mahmud’s accession a new and eventually much
more successful and fruitful period of Ottoman history was
begun, and Selim’s era came to an end.


  Despite indications that Selim was a "modernist” in many
ways, the evidence at hand seems to indicate strongly that he
was a man of his time and no more, that at most he was a link
between the traditionalist reformers who preceded and the mod¬
ernist reformers who followed.
  Selim’s attitude toward reform was molded by events. In his
letters as prince to Louis XVI, when speaking of reform, he men¬
tioned only the military changes necessary for the Ottoman '/
Empire to secure revenge from Russia and to regain the terri¬
tories lost to Catherine II. After he came to the throne in 1789,
his efforts went entirely into modernizing and reforming the
existing military corps, the Janissaries, the cavalry, and the
artillery. It must be granted that the danger of the war itself
made more comprehensive and radical reforms impossible. But
after the war was over, there was only one important change. In
addition to continuing his efforts to reform the old corps, or at
least those able and willing to accept such reforms, Selim also
responded to Janissary and cavalry military weakness and obdu¬
racy by introducing the Nizam-i Jedid army. But this was not
the new idea of nineteenth-century reform. Ottoman sultans had
been introducing new corps and new armies to make use of new
weapons and military techniques ever since the Janissary corps
had been specially created in the fifteenth century to use the
rifles, cannons, and gunpowder then introduced for the first time.
The Nizam-i Jedid army was no more than an enlarged and
modernized model of the rifle and cannon corps created during
the eighteenth century by Bonneval, Baron de Tott, and other
European advisors. So long as the establishment of the new army
was not accompanied by an effort to eliminate those members of




                   The Deposition of Mustafa IV
406   the afmy, government, and society who refused to accept reform
      and lived in the past, and so long as the Nizam-i Jedid and tech¬
      nical innovations were not in the context of the radical political,
      social, and economic reforms which made possible their develop¬
      ment and successful operation in the West, they cannot be consid¬
      ered as anything more than the last gasp of a dead tradition. One
      may argue that Selim would have gone on to such policies once
      his Nizam-i Jedid army was strong enough to overcome the
      resistance of the vested interests. Perhaps so, but during the
      entire eighteen years of his reign,^ Selim showed little evidence
      that he had intented to push on into these new fields or had the
      ability to do so.
        Selim was a ruler with good ideas but without the moral
      strength or the ability to put his ideas into practice. As soon as
      his limited military reforms aroused opposition, he modified
      them, he limited the size of the new army, he appointed conserva¬
      tives to key positions and he retired to the pleasures of the harem
      while leaving his reforming friends to fight their enemies. Instead
      of leading his supporters with an example of strength and deter¬
      mination, he sought their control by stimulating them to struggle
      for his favor, thus creating the same sort of political factionalism
      which had paralyzed Ottoman governments in the past.
        But as a man of his time, Selim did witness the introduction of
      new institutions, practices, and ideas into his empire, which
      necessarily began the process by which the old concept of reform
      was replaced by the new. The old tradition was molded by an
      Ottoman attitude which was largely isolated from the outside
      world, and which consequently assumed that the modern Otto¬
      man inferiority was due more to disruption of the older ways
      than it was to any new and more powerful institutions and prac¬
      tices developed in Europe. It was only when this Ottoman "iron
      curtain” of the past was broken down so that Ottomans could
      clearly see the tremendous political, economic, and social strength
      of the new Europe, that the old concept of reform was necessarily
      replaced by the new. And the events of the age of the French
      Revolution pierced this iron curtain in such a way that it never
      could be restored, no matter how many reformers were killed and
      institutions torn asunder. The incursions of European armies