




                           The Triumph of Reaction
planned to punish the tyrants who had opposed the Sultan and          403
mixed in state affairs, and then Bayrakdar and his men would
return to their regular duties on the Danube. In the days which
followed, they set to their work with a vengeance. Most of the
Ulema and others who had played important roles in Selim’s
deposition were exiled, and the Janissaries and yamaks who had
participated in the riots were put down; within a week all opposi¬
tion was ended. The Grand Vezir was very happy because he
finally had sufficient power, to administer the government with¬
out any opposition at all.^^
  But it was not long before Bayrakdar Mustafa and the Grand
Vezir split on the question of whether or not the Ruschuk army
should return home now that its work was done. The immediate
spark for the quarrel came over the question of the Grand Admi¬
ral, Seydi Ali Pasha, who the Ruschuk committee said had been
in close relations with Ataullah Efendi and should be dismissed.
The Grand Vezir considered Seydi Ali one of his chief supporters
and refused to dismiss him, insisting on his right to make final
decisions on such matters. Bayrakdar was enraged and said
that none of the tyrants could be pardoned if the evil was to be
eradicated and the state saved from those who would usurp
power.Bayrakdar Mustafa and the Ruschuk committee mem¬
bers now worked to get Selim out of the palace so they could
put him on the throne and depose both the Sultan and the Grand
Vezir. Early on the morning of July 27, however, Chelebi Mustafa
learned of this plan from spies in Bayrakdar’s army. At long
last he realized what was happening and what had been planned
all along, and he sent a message to this effect to the Sultan. But
Mustafa IV did not take the message seriously, and did nothing
about it. Chelebi Mustafa then moved to act on his own, if not
against Selim at least against the Ruschuk committee members.
He got Nezar Agha to agree that all committee members in the
city should be killed during the night and the gates closed against
Bayrakdar Mustafa and Ramiz Efendi, who were camping with
their men outside the walls. Since Nezar Agha still believed in
Bayrakdar and thought he had come to Istanbul to kill Selim,
not save him, he stated that the Grand Vezir was mistaken and
left the Porte without taking any action. He then immediately




                   The Deposition of Mustafa IV
404   informed the Ruschuk committee and Bayrakdar of his talks
      with the Grand Vezir, and they decided to take direct action as
                                           V

      soon as possible.^®
        On the morning of July 28, Bayrakdar Mustafa and Ramiz
      Efendi marched into Istanbul with the entire army of 15,000 men.
      When it arrived at the Bayezid mosque, the force was divided,
      with one group moving across the peak of the Istanbul hill di¬
      rectly toward Et Meydan and the palape, and the other descend¬
      ing the slopes to the Porte to take control of it before moving to
      join their commander at the palace. By noon the Grand Vezir had
      heard the news and closed the gates of the Porte. When he refused
      to open them, Bayrakdar’s men broke them down, forced him to
      turn over the seal of office, and then sent him out of the city.^®
      On the advice of Ramiz Efendi, Bayrakd’ar summoned the Sheyh
      ul-Islam and other leaders of the Ulema to the Porte and got
      them to agree to restore Selim and to accompany him up the hill
      to the palace. Early in the afternoon, this group went into the
      palace and marched up to the Bab as-Saadet gate. Bayrakdar
      Mustafa and his entourage withdrew into the imperial council’s
      meeting room and told the Sheyh ul-Islam to go to Mustafa, and
      persuade him to abdicate his position and to send Selim out to
      them so he could be restored to the throne. Here Bayrakdar
      Mustafa made his fatal mistake. Mustafa IV refused to listen to
      the Sheyh ul-Islam, accused him of conspiring with the rebels,
      and sent him back to Bayrakdar Mustafa in terror. Before
      Bayrakdar could muster his forces and move to enforce his revolt,
      Mustafa had the gates closed, and he immediately sent his per¬
      sonal slaves to assassinate both Selim and Mahmud. Selim was
      caught in his apartment and killed after a short struggle; but
      Prince Mahmud was forewarned sufficiently to escape the assas¬
      sins and flee over the roofs to Bayrakdar Mustafa, who immedi¬
      ately placed him on the throne as soon as he learned of Selim’s
      fate.^^
        Selim’s death was apparently the result of two fatal blunders on
      the part of the plotters; they had failed to act for a week, giving
      the Sultan and Ataullah a chance to find out what was happening
      and arrange resistance, and when they moved into the palace,
      instead of attacking at once, they tried to mediate a settlement,