

Reflecting the profession's growing interest in environmental history, Buckley attempts to trace the impact of the increasing British military presence on the physical condition of the islands. The author notes the "environmental-altering proclivity" of the garrisons, as they sought to tame and control their surroundings. Buckley recounts the striking abundance of the descriptions of nature found in travelers' accounts and ships' logs during this era, and points out the stark contrast of the Caribbean climate and vegetation to anything previously experienced by the newly-arrived men and women. As it is, the section is mainly descriptive and fails to make a clear link between ecological change and the expansion of the capitalist economy, as suggested by one of the book's main themes, or to make use of the methodologies of the new studies in environmental history; future students of the region undoubtedly will take up this implied challenge and may produce analyses of ecological exploitation by conquering forces pioneered by Warren Dean for Brazil and Elinor Melville for Central Mexico.

The section describing the formation of the West Indian garrison reveals many interesting aspects of the relationship between the military and society in the British Caribbean, but also lays bare some problems as well. Noting that settlers preceded soldiers in the island, Buckley accepts the common assertion that the militarization of society often accompanies the extension of capitalism. His discussions of the development of the criminal justice system and the extensive use of prisoners as soldiers more than indicate a clear link between the needs of the propertied classes and the rise of standing armies to extend and protect ones power both within and against foreign threats. Yet, the subsequent chapter dealing with the perpetual tensions between the army and the Creole society over prestige, funds, the role of the slave in island culture muddies the overall picture of this very relationship. There is reference to the "Africanization" of the garrison (p. 128), but Buckley does not develop in great detail the ideological implications of this significant social change, how it might compare to other European colonial regiments in the region, or what is the impact of this development to the abolition process. By the end of the book, it is unclear both whose purposes the army was serving and what was the relationship of the islands (and their planter leaders) to the central power base in England. Buckley quotes Stephen Saunders Webb, saying "There can be no empires without armies" (p. 45) and goes on to discuss armed force as the defining characteristic of empire, but extends Webb's conception to include not only internal compulsion, but also the necessity to maintain a guard against external threats as well. Buckley includes much information about the historical development of domestic standing armies, but the nature and characteristics of colonial armies remains less clearly drawn.