

There is much highly colored language, such as repeated references like "10 million Africans stolen from their homelands in West Africa and transported against their will to the America . . . . Here was the epitome of evil" (p. 42). There are many anachronistic analyses such as a description of contemporary uniforms as something "no thinking person would possibly wear" (p. 120) or a condemnation of child service in the military as "ludicrous, dangerous, and, most importantly, immoral" (p. 124). Buckley recounts many equally appalling examples of English prisoners or unfortunate lower-class men being "crimped," or kidnapped, into service as soldiers in the Indies, but he reserves his harshest criticism and vitriolic language for those brought over from Africa against their will. If one can draw distinctions between better and worse forms of forced relocation and servitude that leads to harsh conditions and, typically, a painful early death, Buckley raises interesting questions not only about race, class and impressment and forced service, but also about the influence of race on the way we interpret the past.

The book could have benefited from some more careful editing. There are several extended passages that seem extraneous; for example, the first chapter, which deals with the soldiers' adjustments to their new tropical environment, is particularly overburdened with high flown descriptions and metaphors far beyond that which is necessary to make Buckley's point. Furthermore, there are many instances of repetitive assertions, sometimes within the space of a few pages, and often across chapters; issues of health and the prevalence of annoying mosquitoes are just two examples. Some of the book's organization is confusing; for example there is no mention of homosexuality in the section on the soldier's domestic and sexual relations; discussions of sodomy appeared briefly in a later chapter's section on criminality and British military justice. Obviously, this could simply reflect the prevailing attitude of the era which viewed homosexual behavior as a abhorrent crime against nature, but by limiting its discussion in this book to the section on criminality, Buckley unintentionally reinforces the old notion that this is where it properly belongs.

The meticulously researched and often engagingly written book by Roger Norman Buckley, The British Army in the West Indies: Society and the Military in the Revolutionary Age is likely to win its author the gratitude of future scholars for the avenues of investigation that it opens up for the next generation. The experience of women in the forces, criminality in the British Caribbean, the nature and operation of police duties and their relationship to the militias, the connection between black battalions and white forces (and the development of the abolitionist cause in general), and the concrete relationship between capitalist expansion and the development of a regularized military presence in the region all beckon the researcher in need of a topic. Furthermore, the general nature of the book raises the question about differences and similarities of the experiences of the militias stationed on the various islands.