

[447](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1811/jun/05/vote-of-credit#column_447)
clearly proved that great evils had resulted from it, and that the loss of the American market had been severely felt in this country. No man attempted to deny the sufferings of our manufacturers, or to say that they were overstated in their petitions. Their misery was sufficiently well known to the world, and the only reason alleged for not going into a Committee was the impossibility of giving them any substantial relief. If the enquiry should, however, now take place, he hoped that it might still be possible to prevail upon ministers to retrace their steps with respect to America, and to reopen that market to our exports. We had been often told, that it was impossible to repeal those Orders in Council, until the French decrees should have been repealed. If, however, the Berlin and Milan decrees were now actually repealed, why not repeal the Orders in Council? If there were doubts whether the French had really repealed those decrees or not, should not some experiment be made to learn whether they were sincere or not? When it had been in the power of ministers to put this matter to the test, it appeared to him, that a noble lord (the marquis Wellesley) had shewn a dilatoriness, and a negligence of conduct, which was quite astonishing. In his negociations with the American ambassador, he appeared to shew a considerable degree of inattention. The American minister had left the country; the negociations had completely broken off, and must recommence when Mr. Foster should arrive in America. The communications between the two governments had now been published by America, and he could conceive no other reason for having denied them to the House of Commons but merely to gain time. He could not avoid feeling very sincere regret, that a minister of such talents and such temper as Mr. Pinckney should have left the country. There never was a minister whose patience and forbearance had been more put to trial than Mr. Pinckney's, and he thought that it would be hardly possible to find a negociator equal to him, not only for supporting the interests of his own country, but for discussing with fairness the points which were disputed between the two countries. The course of the communications respecting the revocation of the French decrees was this: on the 25th of August, Mr. Pinckney communicated to the marquis Wellesley the revocation, expressing
[448](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1811/jun/05/vote-of-credit#column_448)
an expectation that the Orders in Council would be revoked also. The receipt of this letter was not acknowledged until the 31st of August. On the 12th of October, the British merchants applied to the Board of Trade to know whether the Orders in Council would be revoked in consequence of the revocation of the French decrees. The vice president professed entire ignorance of the revocation on the part of France, and advised the merchants to call on the Chancellor of the Exchequer. That minister was then out of town; and no communication having been made to the merchants by the 9th of November, they, on that day, presented another memorial, and on the 12th of November, lord Bathurst saw the committee of merchants, and expressed a doubt of the decrees being really revoked by France, and a wish for some practical proof of it. The Committee immediately offered, as a way of obtaining this practical proof, to send off to France a rich American ship, which lay off Mother-bank, if she could obtain protection from the admiralty cruisers. This offer was refused. On the 19th the Committee saw lord Wellesley, who expressed himself to the same effect as lord Bathurst had done. They offered to him the same means of obtaining a practical proof, and were again refused. What could be more strange than that ministers, after having always professed that their Orders in Council should only subsist while the French decrees were in force, should yet neither take any measures themselves to ascertain whether the revocation was real or not, but should refuse the practical proof when offered by the merchants. It appeared as if ministers were afraid to give up their darling object. Lord Wellesley, however, said, that he would give an answer in a few days. No answer, however, did arrive, and on the 22d of December the merchants presented another memorial; and on the 29th they saw Mr. Hamilton, the Under-secretary, who told them that ministers had no satisfactory proofs of France having actually given up her decrees. They again presented a memorial, on the 12th of January, without any better success. It did appear to him that during all this time lord Bathurst and lord Wellesley had shown gross inattention to* those important interests which were involved in that question. On the 2d of November, the President of the United States published his proclamation, declare-