

11 July: In order to keep the negotiations on the rails, Talleyrand tells Napoleon (untruthfully) that Yarmouth is expecting a permission from Fox to give Sicily to France (wanted for Joseph’s kingdom of Naples). At the beginning of the talks, Britain refused to discuss the acquisition of Sicily.

12 July: Signature of the Treaty of Paris, bringing about the creation of the [Confederation of the Rhine (Rheinbund)](https://www.napoleon.org/en/Template/chronologie.asp?idpage=464577&onglet=1). The treaty was to be ratified by Napoleon and the other signatories on 19 July.

21 July: Despite the Russo-British agreement to negotiate together, Oubril was led by general Clarke (who had replaced Talleyrand) to sign a Franco-Russian peace treaty. Oubril was however well aware that he had exceeded his instructions.

31 July: The British government sends out a firmer negotiator in the shape of Lord Lauderdale, in support of Yarmouth. Given that the Russian envoy Oubril had signed a separate treaty with France (offering Sicily), in order not to be out done the British envoy brought with him a new version of the Franco-British peace treaty. The concessions in the new treaty were: that the family reigning over Sicily were to be found other territories and reparations; that Britain would accept not only the French emperor’s title but also those of other nominated or promoted by Napoleon (so Sicily could be taken by France); that all France’s gains since 1797 would be respected; that the Bourbons would be relegated to Scotland or Ireland; that any Chouan leaders nominated by France would be transported to Canada. This was rejected by Napoleon because it was (in his words) “not yet fully mature.”

1 August: The members of the Confederation of the Rhine declared that they no longer formed part of the Holy Roman Empire.

6 August: Francis II abandoned his title Holy Roman Emperor.

9 August: Mobilisation Prussian troops.

25 August: On Napoleon’s orders, Palm, bookseller in the free city of Nuremberg is executed for having distributed a pamphlet encouraging German resistance to Napoleon. Beginning of work on the Vendôme column.

3 September: Napoleon learns of the Russian refusal to ratify the peace treaty. In a letter to his brother, Joseph, dated the same day, the emperor says that he thought the failure to ratify was as a result of the change of ministers in Russia. In the same letter, he noted that the Russian emperor, Alexander, had only given one reason: that he would not sign without Britain.

9 September: Marriage convention signed between France and Wurtemberg, relative to the wedding of [Jérôme Bonaparte](https://www.napoleon.org/en/reading_room/biographies/files/jerome.asp) and [Catherine de Wurtemberg](https://www.napoleon.org/en/reading_room/biographies/files/catherine_wurtemberg.asp) (the ceremony was to be celebrated on 22 August, 1807).

12 September: Prussians invade Saxony in order force her to participate in the coming war against France. The Saxons were to be the only troops to fight alongside Prussia at Jena.