

rose, not with any intention of opposing the motion, but for the purpose of giving an explanation on one or two points. Government had pledged themselves in the course of last session, to give the fullest information with reference to the expense of the colonies. That information was to be obtained through the agency of commissioners, whose reports would be laid before the House. It was intended by his majesty's government to lay on the table, with reference to the year 1824, an account of the revenue raised in those colonies, and the manner in which it had been appropriated. With respect to the sum expended by Great Britain in aid of the colonies, when the sum raised on the spot was not sufficient to meet the necessary charges, the hon. gentleman could see the amount in the estimates that were annually produced. He must, however, perceive, that it would be impossible to give him the information which he required, with respect to the exact portion of military force that it would be necessary to keep in each of the colonies every year. Government could not state the precise number of troops that would be requisite in every year. In fact, even if it could be ascertained, it would not be safe nor prudent to make the disclosure. Again, to say that every colony should be bound to answer for its military expenditure, and that a fixed number of troops should be maintained, would be to take out of the hands of government the discretion which it ought to possess, with respect to the disposal of the military force of the empire. There were many considerations, both of economy and policy, which forbad the adoption of such a principle. The subject could not be considered on such narrow grounds as those which had been stated by the hon. 253 gentleman. With respect to the income of the colonies, he should receive information on that head, and would then have it in his power to make such observations on its application as he thought proper. There was no portion of the administration of those colonies that would not hereafter come under the consideration of the House. When the proper time arrived, he would show how fallacious the reasoning of the hon. gentleman was, when he stated, that these colonies were rather a burthen than a benefit to the country.

said, it was, in his opinion, high time to take into consideration the state of the colonies, for the purpose of forming wise and wholesome constitutions for them, or, in default of so doing, to make application to the throne that such charters should be granted to them as were suited to their peculiar interests and habits. Canada had been for a long time in the same state as some of the colonies which had that night been mentioned, until, at length, hasty and inefficient charters were drawn up. This, he hoped, would be avoided with respect to the new colonies; and that, in legislating for them, due regard would be had to their immediate wants and their original habits. The hon. mover had complained, that the Dutch law still prevailed at the Cape of Good Hope, and he had expressed his regret, that the British constitution had not been extended to that colony. But, was the British constitution fit for every soil? Were its principles in unison with the long-established manners and customs of every people? Could the laws of one country be transplanted to another, to the advantage of a people who had been accustomed to a very different system? Certainly not. The best system of law was that which agreed best with the habits and manners of a people; and therefore it was impossible to transplant an entire code of laws from one part of the world to another, so as to produce a beneficial effect. In forming laws, attention should be paid to the circumstances, feelings, wants, and habits of a community; and it was by pursuing that plan alone, that the Cape of Good Hope, or any other colony, could be effectively governed. Some of the doctrines laid down by the hon. member were at variance with the sound maxims of our forefathers; and the broaching such doctrines in that House, if they were suffered to pass unnoticed, would produce the most mischievous 254 effects in the colonies. It was by considering their wants, by adding to their comforts, by treating them with kindness, and not by laying down sweeping propositions as to the way in which they ought to be governed, that we should conciliate their love, esteem, and respect. Doctrines like those laid down by the hon. member, if frequently introduced into the debates of that House, would be canvassed in the colonies, and must lead to feelings of a very dangerous description. They would extend slowly, but they would extend, and the consequences must be dangerous to the colonies. If the latter were attempted, this country would infallibly lose them.