

| Revenue. | Expenditure. |
| --- | --- |
| Ceylon, 1817 | £.378,812 | £.450,816 |
| Mauritius, 1817 | 164,441 | 251,186 |
| Malta and Gozo, 1818. | 108,336 | 105,761 |
| Cape of Good Hope, 1819 | 116,115 | 119,087 |

250 It appeared from the report of the finance committee in 1817, that they had been aware of the mismanagement of this branch of the national interests, and had called upon ministers for an account of the expenditure of each of the colonies. They then learnt, that the government was not in possession of full accounts; and in this respect, therefore, their report was imperfect. They, however, inserted in it a recommendation, that steps should be taken in order to render the foreign possessions of the country more efficient towards defraying the charge of their own military expenditure. It was obvious, that the colonies, instead of being an addition to the strength of the country, increased its weakness; and he believed it would be better able to cope with any contingency which might arise, if those colonies were freed from their allegiance, and became their own masters. The commercial advantages to England would be still the same; for we should continue to be the principal suppliers. In the event of a war with America, we should have to defend Canada, and the distance to which we should have to send supplies, would give fearful odds against us in such a contest; while the expense would be five-fold more than the colony was worth. Ought we not, then, to be relieved from the drain which was caused by the colonies? The Cape of Good Hope had been now for seventeen years in the possession of the British government; and he was utterly surprised that it had been suffered to continue so long in its present state. It was under arbitrary laws, ruled by a military governor, and subject to the orders of the colonial secretary. The only code which they had was in the Dutch language, and was that commonly called the Statutes of India. They had been framed at Batavia in 1715, and having been agreed upon there, their operation was transferred to the Cape of Good Hope. The revenue and expenditure of this colony were extremely large, and called for the especial notice of parliament. Amongst the items from which revenue was raised, he observed some that were highly productive. It appeared, that the sale of wine-licences produced no less than 165,000 rix-dollars. There was one point, with respect to which government were bound to interfere. He alluded to the mismanagement of the currency at the Cape. By the immense issue of paper money, the currency was 251 greatly deteriorated. Instead of the pound sterling being at five rix-dollars, so much was the currency depreciated at one period, that it was at 15; and, according to the last return, it was 12½ being 180 per cent in addition to the exchange. The governor was paid 10,000l. per annum by this country; so that he derived a very great advantage from the depreciation of the colonial currency. Several other officers received their salaries in the regular currency of Great Britain. The greater, therefore, the depreciation of the colonial currency, the more extensive was the advantage derived by them. This was a system which was evidently at variance with the principles of good government. The hon. gentleman then alluded to a proclamation which had been issued by the governor, forbidding the people to assemble at public meetings without his authority, under pain of imprisonment. The meeting which occasioned this proclamation had been convened, for the purpose of drawing up a petition to the English government, relative to the lands which had been allotted to certain individuals, and complaining of different acts of oppression. The people were not, however, allowed to meet. And, when they were not suffered to represent their grievances and demand redress, was it to be expected that they would remain quiet and contented?—He next adverted to the colony of Ceylon, which had a revenue of between 300,000l. and 400,000l., but which revenue was Considerably less than the expenditure. In the observations he had made, he meant not to give offence to any individual; but he thought he had made out a case which called for the prompt and serious consideration of the house. His object was, to have an account of the revenue of all colonies which were managed by the king in council, separately made out, and laid on the table every year, in the same manner as was done with other branches of revenue and expenditure. He concluded by moving, "That an humble Address be presented to his Majesty, that he will be graciously pleased to give directions that there be laid before this House, separate Accounts of the Revenue and Expenditure, Civil and Military, of the Island of Ceylon, of the Mauritius, of Trinidad, of Malta, and of the Cape of Good Hope, for the latest year the accounts can be made up for; together with an Estimate of the amount to be 252 paid by Great Britain for the civil or military expenses of these colonies for the current year, so as to exhibit an Account of the total Expenditure for each colony, and of the whole in the year; and also, separate Estimates of the Civil and Military Expenses of every kind to be incurred by Great Britain for Upper and Lower Canada, Nova Scotia, and every colony in the West Indies or elsewhere, India excepted, not included in the preceding return, every year, along with the other estimates of the year, so as to exhibit the total Expenditure of the British Colonies."