

10. Fine arts and sciences

[…] Our chief maxim also applies to the sciences and
arts. Simply remove the obstacles, the guild spirit, the positive
opinions and prescriptions, and everything will progress easily
and rapidly!

Much has been written and debated about freedom of the press
and teaching. I think one says it all by stating: it should be as
expansive as circumstances possibly permit. Circumstances alone,
with the directives of a wise government, must decide the rare
exceptions. For example, it can be a necessary measure to spare a
foreign state or its mighty ruler so as not to bring great evil
upon the fatherland. However, writings that merely seduce people
to crude sensuality must be denounced by censorship.

[…]

VII. Religion.

[…]

8. The state shall exercise tolerance; it shall not interfere
in matters of conscience and shall tolerate every religious
service that does not cause a public nuisance and disturb others;
it shall not persecute any religious sect unless it acts against
the civic order. There is nothing wrong with the state giving
preferential care to a religious party that it deems useful and in
this sense treats as the reigning church. – In Prussia, that
includes both Protestant religions. […]

IX. Managing affairs.

[…] I very much question whether it is advisable for the
district authorities
[Kreisbehörden] to be made up
solely of those chosen by the communities and for them to serve
entirely without compensation. To me, it seems better for the
state to employ a paid, fully qualified, permanent district head
[Kreisvorsteher], whose status
would not be considered in his employment, and to appoint,
alongside him, two unpaid elected representatives, who would be
given the right to block directives that do not seem useful to
them until a decision is reached by the highest authorities.

[…]

Conclusion and epilogue regarding
external conditions.

[…] Herr von Altenstein asserts very correctly what can
be done immediately under all circumstances: the firm
determination, adoption, and promulgation of the chief principles
upon which the system is based; especially

1. the abolition, if possible, of the difference between
estates, also with respect to a better military establishment;

2. the proposed regulations and decrees on account of the
freedom of the subjects and of acquisition;

3. the urgent organization of the military system, new
conscription arrangements etc.;

4. freedom of trade and security installations on a domestic
level;

5. the necessary overview in the entire financial field, the
debt system, the searching out of extraordinary money sources;

6. the organization of the highest administration, the decrees
and pronouncements on general principles, the determination of
principles concerning pay, pensions. –

Source: Georg Winter, ed., Die
Reorganisation des Preussischen Staates unter Stein und
Hardenberg. Part 1, Volume 1 (Publications of the Prussian
State Archives 93). Leipzig: Hirzel, 1931 (reprint: Osnabrück,
1982), pp. 313–24, 330–36, 353 f., 357, 360–62; reprinted in
Walter Demel and Uwe Puschner, eds.,
Von der Französischen Revolution bis
zum Wiener Kongreß 1789-1815. Deutsche Geschichte in Quellen
und Darstellung, ed. Rainer A. Müller, Volume 6. Stuttgart: P.
Reclam, 1995, pp. 87–97.