

3. The farming estate.

The most numerous and most important estate in the state,
though one that has hitherto been most neglected and oppressed,
the farming estate, must necessarily become a preeminent object of
the state’s attention. The abolition of hereditary bondage must be
carried out thoroughly and immediately by law. Likewise, the laws
according to which the peasant is prevented from leaving the
peasants’ estate should be repealed. The military constitution
will not suffer from this, provided that the right regulations are
adopted in it. In addition, it should be easier for the peasant to
obtain property, whether this pertains to new acquisitions or the
purchase of the rights of the manorial lord. It is not necessary
to abolish the system of villeinage. Oftentimes it is not only not
a burden, but actually more favorable to the person subject to
service than a monetary payment, depending on the local
circumstances. Changes therein should be left to voluntary
agreement, and they should only be promoted by laws, in that one
should stipulate the principles under which the dues in kind can
be bought off. […]

4. Creation of the connection between the nation and the state
administration.

It is, however, salutary and necessary to bring the nation into
closer relationship with the state administration, to make it more
familiar with the same and interested in it. The idea of a
national representation, as Herr von Altenstein articulated,
without abolition of the monarchical constitution, is lovely and
useful. The label of a dangerous national assembly does not apply
to it. By amalgamating the representatives with the individual
administrative agencies, it will provide the usefulness without
the disadvantage. It should not form a special constitutive body,
no administration of its own […].

5. Creation of the freest possible use of the powers of the
subjects of all classes.

[…] The exercise of personal powers for every trade or
craft shall become free, and the impost on the same shall be the
same in the cities and the countryside. The abolition of the
guilds and taxes, if not all at once then gradually, as Herr von
Altenstein indicates, would have to be stipulated, as would the
possible elimination of all older monopolies. […]

7. Means to an end.

I am in full agreement that one must not do any violence to the
provincial character, and that one must not, out of an
overwhelming urge to force everything into one form, especially a
form that is unsuitable, set up all institutions and implement all
regulations in the same way everywhere. But it strikes me as wise
to imprint a single national character upon the whole, and to
gradually work, those maxims notwithstanding, toward that goal,
which can also be done without coercion. Accordingly, I would not
maintain the administration of the provinces; I would divide and
name the administrative departments in accordance with natural
conditions and place a chamber at the head of each. Henceforth,
the entire state shall be called
Prussia. […]