

II. External conditions.

[…] Autonomy and independence are now empty phrases.

How shall we get there again?

How do we avoid complete dependency? […]

As far as I can see, Prussia should follow these
principles:

1. Above all else, it must gather the strength to bring its
domestic affairs into good order in all respects and to coordinate
them in a planned fashion; also, it must arm itself for battle
once again without delay, to the extent that the means allow,
especially for defense. War can return quickly, and it probably
will, and therefore preparation is urgently necessary. The
obstacles herein are evident and great, but one must not be
deterred, one must be unceasingly active and push forward as far
as one can, for everything depends on this.

2. One must not nurture the delusion that one can remain
neutral, and one must beware of establishing and announcing a
system of neutrality. It does not accord with Prussia’s
geographical location; it has done a great deal of harm, and is in
no way applicable under the current circumstances. Only a large
and strong state with a favorable geographical situation can
assert neutrality and avoid the entanglements that put an end to
it. […]

III. Basic constitution of
domestic affairs.

[…] Let us not shrink from what he [Altenstein] called
for as the main principle, the highest possible degree of freedom
and equality. – Not the lawless and rightly denounced principles:
those that needed the bloody monstrosities of the French
Revolution as a cover for their crimes, or those that, with
fanatical rage, seized not the true
principles, but those possible in the developed social
condition, but only those
that accord with the wise laws of a monarchical state and do not
restrict the natural freedom and equality of the citizens more
than the stage of their culture and their own welfare demand. […]

1. The nobility.

[…]

a) Every position in the state, without exception, should be
open, not to this or that caste, but to people of merit and
ability from all estates. Every post shall be the object of
general emulation, and no one, no matter how small or
insignificant, should ever have his ambition killed by the
thought: you can never achieve that, despite the most heightened
zeal, despite your greatest efforts to make yourself qualified.
Let no power be impeded in its striving for good! […]

b) The sole prerogative of the nobility to possess the
so-called knightly estates is, as Herr von Altenstein correctly
spelled out, so harmful and so little suited to our times and
forms that the abolition of this prerogative is entirely
necessary, as is the abolition of all other prerogatives which the
laws have hitherto accorded only to the nobleman as an estate
owner.

[…]

d) With the goal of attaining freedom from dues, various
important observations arise. Here, too, complete equality should
exist for many reasons. […]

2. The citizens’ estate.

The citizens’ estate gains from the opening up of access to all
posts, trades, and jobs, and in turn it must, for its part, also
relinquish everything that previously excluded other estates.