

IV. Military system

[…] 1. Number and composition of the army. a) Regular
troops, b) Land regiments or reserves c) rural contingents,
volunteer corps.

It is entirely necessary to immediately assemble as many forces
as possible by whatever means, since a situation in which a new
war becomes unavoidable can arise again very easily and quickly. […] In terms of regular troops, one would have to add perhaps
45,000 infantrymen and 25,000 cavalrymen, and in addition the
necessary artillerymen, engineers, tunnelers, sappers,
pontoon-builders, etc. In addition, however, I would propose
80,000 men as infantry reserve troops or land regiments, and in
order to make our defense all the more secure, I would let the
entire body of the population participate, and I would endeavor to
get them more interested in it. To that end, the cities and the
countryside – here meaning primarily estate owners and officials –
shall be called upon to set up voluntary corps, not for external
use, but merely to serve for the protection of their own property.
[…]

2. Obligatory military service.

Military conscription would be entirely changed. All previous
exemptions would be abolished, without exception. Everyone who is
not employed in service to the state in some other way would have
to be obligated to real military service in the regular and
reserve forces.

Every dishonorable form of punishment, caning, running the
gantlet etc., is eliminated […]

11. Education and training to the soldier’s estate

Given the great importance of the soldier’s estate, attention
to the upbringing of the state citizen must in general already be
aimed at giving everyone an education directed at this as well as
a sense of patriotism and a sense of obligation to defend the
fatherland. Special educational institutions for the military,
both for the lower and higher sciences and the individual branches
of the same, are important and necessary. […]

V. Domestic Regulation

[…]

1. Agricultural regulation

With agricultural regulation, the elimination of obstacles by
itself will achieve everything one could ask for, and spread
activity and life everywhere. This includes especially freedom of
trade and equality in regards to this with the cities. […]
Free sale of the products is the second chief requirement. If
other examples and advanced scientific culture (which, like the
institutions of learning, will follow by themselves) are added to
this, then agriculture, this main pillar and source of national
prosperity, will surely increase and secure the latter enormously.
[…]

3. Trade regulation

When it comes to trade regulation, one observes above all
laissez faire, which is what a
deputy of the merchant class told Colbert as his expert testimony
when the latter asked him for it. […]

Facilitating trade and traffic through the construction of
roads, internal shipping, the improvement of seaports and
shipyards, and also the promotion of sea-going shipping and trade
treaties, where this is advisable and possible, is of great
importance. […]