                                      —
                         ADVERTISEMENT.

to some inaccuracies, even during its printing, he hopes thai,
where any errors may be perceived, they will not be imputed to.
negligence, as the utmost care has been taken to render the List
correct ; and he earnestly entreats those who may do him the honour
of making this Book their travelling Companion, that they wilt
have the goodness to transmit any additional information for the-
improvement of the work ; and their communications shall be
carefully attended to and gratefully acknowledged.     A full and
complete Index to the Seats is given at the end of the Work,,
with particular reference to the page where they are noticed.


                              MAP.
   The Map of England and Wales, which accompanies, has been
executed with the utmost oare and attention, and exhibits the
whole of the Roads contained in this Work, particularly describing
those on which the Mail Coaches travel.
   Figures of Reference are added to the Cross Roads, correspond-
ing with the number of the Route wherein they are described j
thus affording an additional Index to those Roads, and giving
facility to the Traveller in tracing his Route in every direction,
and to any extent.

Surveyors employed in measuring the Roads described in this Work.

               George Gretton, Liverpool.
               Richard Wollams, Shirleywick.
               John Burton, Lancaster.
               Joseph Singer, Littletown, Devon,
               L. Hebert, Strand.

  The Measurements, which are taken in miles and furlongs, are
arranged in columns ; the first and second giving the distance from
one City, Town, or Village, to the next ; the third and fourth,
the number of miles from the commencement of the Road.


                         Example.   —Page   3.

                                                     M F     M    F
     To Shooter's Hill                                   -    8   I

     From Shooter's Hill to Welling
     —                       Crayford
                             Dartford     Bull Inn
                                                     2
                                                     2 5
                                                         I   10 2
                                                             12 7
     ,                                               1
                                                         7   14 6

  Thus, the distance is given for Shooter's Hill in the third and
fourth columns, eight miles one furlong j and in the contiauation
          4                                                           of
