                                      [        873    ]


                       PACKET BOATS;
With the Dat/s on which they sail from their respective Ports,

                      At Pom Patrick, for Donaghadee.
Th e Packet sails at One P. M. daily Wind and Weather permitting. — Distance
                                          ;

Seven Leagues.
                             At Holyhead, for Dublin.
  Do. Do. Two P. AT. daily.       — Distance 23 Leagues. — Returns every Day from
Dublin, Sundays excepted.
                           Sit   Milford, for Waterford.
  Do. Do. Do.    daily. - Distance 50 Leagues.

                    At Falmouth, for the West Indies.
  Mails are made up at the General Post Office for the West Indies tv/iee a
Month ; on the Fust Wednesday tor Jamaica and the Leeward Islands, and n             i




the Third Wednesday for the Leeward Islands only.     A Mail is also made up
                                                                •




the Second Wednesday in every Month for Suiinam, Demerara, and Berbice.
The Mail arrives at Falmouth late on Saturday Evening; and the Packet sails
en Sunday Morning, if it has sailing Orders from the Secretary of State.
                           At Falmouth, for America.
  Malls are made up        in    London       the First   Wednesday of every Month   for
Halifax, Quebec, and New York.      The Packet sails from Falmouth soon after
the Arrival of the Mails on the Saturday Evening, if it has sailing Orders from
the Secretary of State ; and goes and returns by the Way of Halifax, to and
ftom New York, every Month ; except November, December, January, and
February, during which Months it goes and returns to New York direct.
                        At Faxmouth, for Lisbon.
  The Mail for Lisbon is made up every Tuesday Night, and sent from Fal-
mouth generally on the Saturday Morning, if a Packet be in the Harbour.
              At Falmouth, for Madeira and the Brazils.
  The Mail is made up the First Tuesday in every Month, and sails on the
Saturday following.
        At Falmouth, for Gibraltar and the Mediterranean.
  The Mail is made up every Third Tuesday, and sails on the Saturday fol-
lowing.
                          At Dover, for Calais.
  The Mail for Calais is made up at the General Po<t Office every Tuesday,
"Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday Night, at Twelve o'Clock, and                   sails
                                                 —
immediately on the Arrival of the Post. Distance Eight Leagues.
                    At Harwich, for Holland, &c.
  The Mails for Holland, Gottenburgh, and Hamburgh, are made up at the
General Post Office every Tuesday and Friday Night, at Twelve o'Clock, and
sails immediately on the Arrival of the Post.

               At Weymouth, for Guernsey and Jersey.
  The Mail is made up every Tuesday and Friday Night in London. Sails on
Wednesday and Saturday from Weymouth about Four or Five o'Clock in the
Afternoon; Wind and Weather permitting.       Returns to Weymouth the
Thursday or Friday following.      —Distance 35 Leagues.
                 At Whitehaven, for the Isle of Man.
  The Packet Boat carrying the Letters to and from the Isle of Man, sails from
Whitehaven once a Week, every Tuesday, and returns as often.
                         At Ilfracomb, for Wales.
  The Packet sails for Swansea every Monday and Thursday, and returns every*
Tuesday and Saturday Wind and Weather pel mining.
                       ;
