

 Arms of Maria Luigia on the palace of Colorno, near Parma. 

 On her death on 17 Dec. 1847, Lucca and Parma were united. Some territorial adjustments were made in execution of the treaty of Florence of 28 Nov 1844: Guastalla and l'Oltrenza (part of Parma) were ceded to Modena, and the Lunigiana was acquired from Modena and Tuscany. In 1848-49 the small arms were Per pale 1. Farnese and 2. per pale Medici Malaspina (Massa), over all Bourbon-Parma (France on a bordure gules eight escallops or). In the great arms, Bourbon-Parma is en surtout on a quarterly Castille-Leon, itself en surtout on more complex quarterings. The style was "Carlo III di Borbone, Infante di Spagna, per la grazia di Dio Duca di Parma, Piacenza e Stati annessi". The Bourbon-Parma lost their throne in 1859, and their territories were annexed to Sardinia on March 18, 1860. 

The flag from 1545 to 1731 was simply the Farnese coat. From 1731 to 1801 the duchy used the Bourbon white flag. From 1815 to 1847, under Marie-Louise, the flag was per pale gules and argent. From 1851 to 1859 the national flag became gironny or and azure a bordure gules. 

### Venice

The banners of Venice, as early as 1177, showed Saint Mark. In the early 14th c. the saint was replaced by his symbol the winged lion, initially red on a white background, but by the middle of the 14th century it had assumed its familiar tinctures or on a field gules. The lion was depicted in various ways, either whole or issuant. It remained on the arms and flag of the Republic until 1797. 

In the 18th century Venice used a large version of its arms: Grand-quarterly: I. Quarterly Azure an eagle or armed, membered, beaked and crowned gules (Friuli), argent a cross gules Padova), Azure a cross or (Verona), Argent a lion azure armed gules (Brescia). II. Quarterly Argent a cross and two stars of eight points in chief gules (Treviso), Azure a cross and two dragons issuant in chief or (Belluno), Gules a cross argent (Vicenza), Gules a castle surmounted by two towers inclined toward the flanks argent, masoned and port sable (Feltre). III. Per pale gules and or (Bergamo), per fess gules and argent (Crema), Azure on a point vert a triple-towered castle on three steps or grieces, the middle tower higher, all argent, masoned sable (Adria), Vert on a two-towered castle or masoned and port sable a lion of Saint Mark of the second (Polesine). IV. Azure issuant from sinister flank the galley of the Argonauts or (Corfu), Azure a hyacinth flower slipped argent (Zante), Argent a cross gules (Cefalonia), Vert a horse rampant argent maned and unguled sable (Cherso). En surtout five escutcheons, each crowned: In chief, Cyprus, which is quarterly Argent a cross potent between four crosslets or (Jerusalem), barry of 8 argent and azure a lion gules armed and crowned or (Lusignan), or a lion gules (Armenia) and argent a lion gules (Luxemburg). In dexter Candia (or Crete), which is gules a minotaur argent armed purpure, on a chief azure an eagle rising sable, armed or, clasping a thunderbolt of the last. In sinister Dalmatia, which is quarterly Gules three lions' heads guardant or (Dalmatia), chequy gules and argent (Croatia), or three horseshoes sable (Rascia), and or a lion gules armed and tongued azure (Albania). in point Istria, which is Azure a goat passant or, horned purpure. In fess point Venice, which is Azure the lion of Saint Mark or. The pavilion is purpure lined with ermine, and it is crowned with the dogal crown, as is the escutcheon of Venice in fess point. 