          3°& 4°GULIELMI IV. Cap.73.                                           915
Person shall for Twelve Calendar Months at the least next before the
passing of this present Act have been habitually employed in Agricul-
ture or in the Manufacture of Colonial Produce.

   V. And be it further enacted, That no Person who by virtue of Apprentice-
this Act, or of any such Act of Assembly, Ordinance, or Order in ship of the
 Council as aforesaid, shall become a preedial apprenticed Labourer,           La-
                                                                      preedial
 whether attached or not attached to the Soil, shall continue in such ,> vontinnes
Apprenticeship beyond the First Day of August One thousand eight beyond Ist
hundred and forty ; and that during such his or her Apprenticeship Augustl840;
no such predial apprenticed Labourer, whether attached or not
attached to the Soil, shall be bound or liable, by virtue of such
Apprenticeship, to perform any Labour in the Service of his or her
Employer or Employers for more than Forty-five Hours in the whole
in any One Week.

   VI. And be it further enacted, That no Person who by virtue of of the non-
this Act or of any such Act of Assembly, Ordinance, or Order in predial La-
Council as aforesaid, shall become a non-preedial apprenticed pourers le
Labourer, shall continue in such Apprenticeship beyond the First August 1838.
Day of August One thousand eight hundred and thirty-eight.
   VII. And be it further enacted, That if before any such Appren- Before the
ticeship shall have expired the Person or Persons entitled for and Apprentice-
during the Remainder of any such Term to the Services of such ship ed, th
apprenticed Labourer shall be desirous to discharge him or her from [nour
such Apprenticeship, it shall be lawful for such Person or Persons so may be dis-
to do by any Deed or Instrument to be by him, her, or tlem for that charged by
Purpose made and executed; which Deed or Instrument shall be insuch the voluntary
Form, and shall be executed and recorded in such Manner and with Employer.
such Solemnities, as shall for that Purpose be prescribed under such
Authority, and in and by such Acts of Assembly, Ordinances, or
Orders in Council, as herein-after mentioned: Provided nevertheless, In case of the
that if any Person so discharged from any such Apprenticeship by voluntary
any such voluntary Act as aforesaid shall at that Time be of the Discharge
                                                                                 of

Age of Fifty  Years or upwards,  or shall be then labouring under any infirm ape
such Disease or mental or bodily Infirmity as may render him or prenticed
her incapable of earning his or her Subsistence, then and in every Labourers,
such Case the Person or Persons so discharging any such apprenticed the Employer
Labourer as aforesaid shall continue and be liable to provide for able fon
the Support and Maintenance of such apprenticed Labourer during theirSupport.
the remaining Term of such original Apprenticeship, as fully as
if such apprenticed Labourer had not been discharged therefrom.
  VIII. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for any Apprenticed
such apprenticed Labourer to purchase his or her Discharge from Labourer
such Apprenticeship, even without the Consent, or in opposition, if mayoh"
                                                       :
                                                                        purchase
                                                                         SC arge
necessary, to the Will of the Person or Persons entitled to his or her against the
Services, upon Payment to such Person or Persons of the appraised Will of his
Value of such Services; which Appraisement shall be effected, Employer,
and which Purchase Money shall be paid and applied, and which praise mat.
Discharge shall be given and executed, in such Manner and Form, How Ap-
and upon, under, and subject to such Conditions, as shall be pre- praisement
                                                               scribed and involun-
