916                    3° & 4° GULIELMI                       IV. Cap.73.
tary Dis-      scribed under such Authority, and by such Acts of Assembly,
charge to be
effected.
               Ordinances, or Orders in Council, as are herein-after mentioned.

Apprenticed      IX. And be it further enacted,   That noapprenticed      Labourer shall
Labourers     be subject or liable to be removed from the Colony to which he or she
not remov-                    and that no predial apprenticed Labourer who may in
able from the may belong;
              Manner aforesaid become attached to the Soil shall be subject or
Colony.                                                    of his or her         or
Predial         liable to perform any Labour in the Service                    Employer
                Employers except upon    or in or about   the Works   and   Business of the
apprenticed
Labourers       Plantations or Estates to which such predial apprenticed Labourer
 not remov-     shall have been attached or on which he or she shall have been
able from the                                                               of August One
 Plantation     usually employed on or previously to the said First Day
except by       thousand eight hundred and thirty-four Provided nevertheless, that,
                                                          :


Consent of      with the Consent in Writing of any Two or more Justices of the
Two Special Peace
Justices,               holding such Special Commission as herein-after mentioned,
                it shall be lawful for the Person or Persons entitled to the Services
                of any such attached predial apprenticed Labourer or Labourers
                to transfer his or their Services to any other Estate or Plantation
Consent not within the same Colony to such Person or
                                                              Persons belonging ; which
to be given     written Consent shall in no Case be given, or be of any Validity,
till the        unless any such Justices of the Peace shall first have ascer-
Justices have
ascertained     tained that such Transfer would not have the Effect of separating
that the Re- any such attached praedial apprenticed Labourer from his or her
moval will      Wife or Husband, Parent or Child, or from any Person or Persons
not separate              to bear any such Relation to him or her, and that such
the Members reputed
of Families. Transfer would not probably
                                                be injurious to the Health or Welfare
                                                                         and such written
How Consent of such attached predial apprenticed Labourer;
to be given     Consent to any such Removal      shall be  expressed  in  such Terms, and
and   recorded. shall be in each Case given, attested,   and  recorded    in such Manner,
                as shall for that Purpose be prescribed       under  such   Authority, and
                                                              and Orders     in Council, as
                by such Acts of Assembly, Ordinances,
                herein-after mentioned.

Right to the     X. And be it further enacted and declared, That the Right or
Services of  Interest of any Employer or Employers to and in the Services of any
apprenticed  such apprenticed Labourers as aforesaid shall pass and be transfer-
Labourers
to be trans- able by Bargain and Sale, Contract, Deed, Conveyance, Will, or
ferable Pro- Descent, according to such Rules and in such Manner as shall for
perty,       that Purpose be provided by any such Acts of Assembly, Ordinances,
                                                                     ;
Labourer not or Orders in Council as herein-after mentioned provided that no
to be sepa-  such apprenticed Labourer shall, by virtue of any such Bargain and
rated from
             Sale, Contract, Deed, Conveyance, Will, or Descent, be subject or
Wife, &c.    liable to be separated from his or her Wife or Husband, Parent or
             Child, or from any Person or Persons reputed to bear any such Rela-
             tion to hi or her.

Employer to      XI. And be it further enacted, That during the Continuance of
supply the                                                                         for the
Labourer        any such Apprenticeship as aforesaid the Person or Persons
with such       Time being    entitled  to  the  Services of every  such  apprenticed La-
Food, &c. as    bourer  shall be and   is  and  are hereby required  to supply him or her
the Law at                                                           Medical
                with  such  Food, Clothing, Lodging, Medicine,               Attendance,
present re-
       in       and  such  other  Maintenance and Allowances as by any Law now in
quires
case of Slaves. force in the Colony to ‘which such apprenticed Labourer may belong
                                                                                        an
