           3°& 4°GULIELMI IV. Cap.73.                                             923
 Jurisdiction over, and shall solely and exclusively take cognizance of, Jurisdiction
 all such Offences or alleged Offences as last aforesaid, and of         between
                                                                   every apprenticed
such Breach, Violation, or Neglect of any of the aforesaid                               -




and of every such Question, Matter, or Thing as aforesaid,  Obligations, Labourers
                                                               any Law, and their
Custom, or Usage in any of the said Colonies to the contrary in Employers.               |




anywise notwithstanding: Provided nevertheless, that nothing herein Jurisdiction '       *




contained shall extend or be construed to extend to abrogate or take of Supreme
                                                                         Courts
away the Powers by Law vested in the Supreme Courts of Record, or preserved.
the Superior Courts of Civil and Criminal Justice in
                                                        any of the said
respective Colonies.
    XX. Provided also, and be it further enacted, That no appren- Apprenticed
 ticed Labourer shall, by any such Act of Assembly, Ordinance, Labourers
                                                                      not to be
 or Order in Council as aforesaid, be declared or rendered liable
                                                                      subjected
 for and in respect of any Offence by him or her committed, or toa Prolon-
 for any Cause or upon any Ground or Pretext whatsoever,                     or
                                                               except gation
 as hereafter is mentioned, to any Prolongation of his or her Term Renewal of
                                                                      their Appren-
 of Apprenticeship, or to any new or additional
                                                      Apprenticeship, ticeship, nor
 or to any such additional Labour as shall
                                              impose upon any such to more than
 apprenticed Labourer the Obligation of working in the Service or 15 Hours
 for the Benefit of the Person or Persons entitled to his or her Ser- extra Labour
                                                                      in any Week
 vices for more than Fifteen extra Hours in the whole in
                                                             any One for their
Week, but every such Enactment, Regulation, Provision, Rule, or Employers
 Order shall be and is hereby declared null and void and of no Benefit.
effect: Provided nevertheless, that any such Act of
                                                           Assembly,
Ordinance, or Order in Council as aforesaid may contain Provisions
for compelling any apprenticed Labourer who shall, during his or
her Apprenticeship, wilfully absent himself or herself’ from the
Service of his or her Employer, either to serve his or her
                                                            Employer
after the Expiration of his or her Apprenticeship for so long a Time
as he or she shall have so absented himself or herself from such
Service, or to make Satisfaction to his or her Employer for the Loss
sustained by such Absence, (except so far as he or she shall have
made Satisfaction for such Absence, either out of such extra Hours
as aforesaid, or otherwise,) but nevertheless so that such extra
Service or Compensation shall not be compellable after the Expira-
tion of Seven Years next after the Termination of the
                                                      Apprenticeship
of such Apprentice.
   XXI. Provided always,  and
                              be it hereby further enacted, That neither
                                                                         Apprenticed
under the Provisions of this Act, nor under the Obligations imposed Labourers
by this Act, or to be imposed by any Act of any General Assembly, not to be
Ordinance, or Order in Council, shall any apprenticed Labourer be to     compelled
                                                                            work on
compelled   or compellable to labour on Sundays, except in Works of Sundays, nor
Necessity or in Domestic Services, or in the Protection of Property, prevented
or in tending of Cattle, nor shall any apprenticed Labourer be liable from attend-
to be hindered or prevented from attending anywhere on                   ing Religious
                                                                 Sundays           on
for Religious Worship, at his or her free Will or Pleasure, but shall Worship
                                                                         Sundays.
be at full Liberty so to do without any Let, Denial, or
                                                            Interruption
whatsoever.

  XXII. And whereas it may be expedient that Persons in the Nothing
                                                                          herein to
Condition of apprenticed Labourers should, during the Continuance interfere with
                                                                       of any Colonial
