           3° & 4° GULIELMI                    IV. Cap.73.                        927
  Words and under such Regulations as shall be
                                                    approved by the said
  Commissioners of His Majesty’s Treasury : Provided
  case any such Contributors who have                     always, that in Subscriptions
                                                                          paid in part,
                                          already deposited with or shall and
  hereafter pay to the said Cashier or Cashiers          Sum  or Sums of
                                                                              not
                                                    any                   completed,
  Money, at the Time and in the Manner specified in the Proposals of forfeited.
  the several Loans, in part of the Sum or Sums so
                                                        by them respec-
  tively subscribed, or their respective Executors, Administrators, Suc-
  cessors, or Assigns, shall not advance and pay to the said Cashier or
  Cashiers the Residue of the Sum or Sums so subscribed at the
  Times and in the Manner stated in the Proposals, then and in
  such Case so much of the respective Sum or Sums so subscribed     every
                                                                       as
 shall have been actually paid in
                                     part thereof to the said Cashier or
 Cashiers shall be forfeited for the Benefit of the
                                                        Public, and all
 Right and Title to the said Redeemable Annuities or Annuities for
 Terms of Years in respect thereof shall be
                                                extinguished, any thing
 in this Act contained to the
                                  contrary thereof in anywise notwith-
 standing.

    XXXI. And be it further enacted, That all the said Annuities, Interest and
 Interest, Dividends, and Charges for Management which shall Charges of
 become payable in respect of the said Sum of                       the Twenty
 or any Part thereof, shall be charged and
                                                   Twenty Millions, Millions
                                           chargeable upon and the charged upon
 same is hereby charged upon and made
                                           payable out of the Con- Consolidated
 solidated Fund of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Fund.
 Lreland.

   XXXIT. And be it further enacted, That so much Money shall from Money for
Time to Time be set apart and issued at the
                                                     Receipt of the Ex. paying An-
chequer in England out of the Consolidated Fund of the United nuities             to be
                                                                          issued by
Kingdom     of Great  Britain and Ireland to the said Cashier or Cashiers
of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England as shall be to         Exchequer
                                                                             Cashier of
sufficient to satisfy and pay the respective Annuities to be created in the Bank.
respect of the said Sum of Twenty Millions, or any Part thereof,
together with the Charges attending the same.
   XXXITI. And for the Distribution of the said Compensation Fund, Commission«
and the Apportionment thereof amongst the several Persons who ers to be
may prefer Claims thereon, be it enacted, That it shall and may be for
                                                                     appointed
                                                                         distri-«
lawful for His Majesty from Time to Time,
                                              by a Commission under buting the
the Great Seal of the United Kingdom, to constitute and
                                                                     Compensa-
                                                             appoint tion
such Persons, not being less than Five, as to His
                                                  Majesty shall seem      provided
meet, to be Commissioners of Arbitration for inquiring into and by this Act.
deciding upon the Claims to Compensation which may be preferred
to them under this Act.

    XXXIV. And be it further enacted, That the said Commissioners Commissione
 to be appointed by virtue of this Act shall each of
                                                     them, previously ers to be
 to his entering upon the Execution of such                            sworn.
                                                 Commission, take an
 Oath before the Chancellor of the
                                    Exchequer or the Master of the
Rolls for the Time being, which Oath they are
                                                   hereby respectively
authorized to administer, the Tenor thereof shall be as follows
is to say,)                                                     (that
                                                                  3;




                                                               ‘IAB.
