928                                3° & 4°GULIELMI IV.                    Cap.73.
                       ‘
Form of
Oath.                  «~
                            [
                            4.B. do swear, That according to the best of my Judgment I
                             will faithfully and impartially execute the several Powers and
                       ‘ Trusts vested   in me by an Act, intituled [here setforth the Title of
                       ©
                         this Act].

Meetings of                 XXXV. And be it further enacted, That the said Commissioners
the
    Commis-
                       may meet and     sit from Time
                                                    :
                                                       to Time in such Place or Places as they
sioners, and                        :
                              find it most convenient, with or without Adjournment, and
Appoint-               shall
ment ofthe             with the Consent and Approbation of the Commissioners of the
subordinate
                       Treasury for the Time being, or any Three of them, in Writing; and
Officers.
                       shall and may employ a Secretary, and Clerks, Messengers, and
                       Officers, and shall and may allow such Secretary, Clerks, Messengers,
                       and Officers, with the like Consent and Approbation, reasonable
                       Salaries, and shall and may employ a Solicitor, and allow to such
Officers to            Solicitor a reasonable Salary or Reward, and shall and may give and
be sworn.              administer to such Solicitor or Solicitors, Secretary, Clerks, and
                       Officers respectively an Oath for their faithful Demeanor in all
                       Things relating to the due Performance of the Trusts reposed in them
                       by the said Commissioners, and in all other Things touching the Pre-
                       mises ; and the said Commissioners shall and may from Time to Time,
                       at their Discretion, dismiss and discharge such Solicitor or Solicitors,
                       Secretary, Clerks, Messengers, and other Officers, and appoint others
                       in their Place; and the said Solicitor or Solicitors, Secretary, Clerks,
                       and other Officers are hereby required faithfully to execute and per-
                       form the said Trusts in them severally and respectively reposed,
                       without taking any thing for such Service other than such Salaries or
                       Rewards as the said Commissioners, with such Approbation as afore-
                        said, shall direct or appoint in manner aforesaid.

Any Three                   XXXVI. And be it further enacted, That all Acts, Matters, and
Commis-                 Things which the said Commissioners for the Execution of this Act
                 be
                    are by this Act authorized so to do or execute may be done and
sioners     to
                 "executed by any Three or more of such Commissioners.
Remunera-                   XXXVIL. And be it further enacted, That no Remuneration shall
tion of the  he given for and in respect of the Execution of the said Commission
 Commission-
             to such of the said Commissioners as shall be Members of either
             House of Parliament, nor to any Number exceeding Three of the
             said Commissioners.

 Appointment                    XXXVIII. And whereas it may be necessary that Assistant
 ofauxiliary Commissioners should be    appointed to act in aid of and under the
 Comiis- the Directions
                        of the Commissioners appointed by this Act in the said
             several Colonies; be it therefore enacted, That the Governor and the
                  he

 Colonies.
             Attorney General or other chief Law Adviser of the Government
             of the said Colonies respectively shall, with any Two or more resi-
             dent Inhabitants for each of such Colonies, to be nominated during
             Pleasure by the Governor thereof, be Commissioners for the Colony
             to which they respectively belong, to act in aid of the Commissioners
             under this Act in all such Cases and in relation to all Matters and
             Things which shall be referred to them by the said Commissioners,
             and for all such Purposes shall have and use and exercise all the
             Powers and Authorities of the said Commissioners ; and such Assistant
                                                                     Commissioners
