926                   3°& 4°GULIELMI IV. Cap.73.
              Years of the like Description then existing, in which such Sum or
              Sums shall be agreed to be raised.

Annuities       XXVII. And be it further enacted, That all the several Redeemable
created by     Annuities and Annuities for Terms of Years which shall be created
this Act to
form Part
               from Time to Time by virtue of this Act shall be deemed and taken
of and be      to be and shall be added to and form Part of the like Redeemable
subject to     Annuities or Annuities for Terms of Years in which such Sums of
                                                                                  Con-
same Regu-
               Money shall be raised, and shall be subject to all the Clauses,
lations as                                                   and Periods of  Payment
like Annuities ditions, Provisions, Directions, Regulations,                as altered.
now existing. as fully and effectually to all Intents and Purposes, except
                and varied by virtue of this Act, as if the said Clauses, Conditions,
                Provisions, Directions, Regulations, and Periods of Payment were
               severally repeated and re-enacted in this Act.

Commis-         XXVIIL And be it enacted, That the Commissioners for the
sioners for    Reduction of the National Debt may subscribe and contribute from
Reduction
of National
               Time to Time towards the raising any Sum or Sums of Money to be
Debt may       raised under the Provisions of this Act any Part of the Monies
subscribe to- which shall be at any Time standing in their Names in the Books of
wards raising the Governor and Company of the Bank of England under and by
Sum wanted virtue of an Act
                                    passed in the Ninth Year of the Reign
                                                                                  of King
for this Act.
9 G.4. ¢.92. George the Fourth,       intituled An   Act to  consolidate  and amend     the
               Laws relating   to  Savings Banks,   and  of another   Act  passed   in the
10 G. 4, 6.56. Tenth Year of the Reign of King George the Fourth, intituled
                                                                                        An
               Act  to consolidate  and amend   the Laws  relating to  Friendly  Societies,
               and also to sell and dispose of the Bank Annuities and Exchequer
               Bills, or any Part thereof, which may be now standing or may here-
               after stand in their Names in the Books of the said Bank in pur-
               suance of the said respective Acts, and with the Proceeds thereof
               may subscribe and contribute such Monies from Time
                                                                                to Time,
               or any Part thereof, towards the raising the Sums of Money which
               may be required from Time to Time under the Provisions
                                                                                         of
              this Act.

Monies raised   XXIX.     And be it enacted, That all Sums            of
                                                                  Money             which
to be paid to shall be raised from Time to Time by virtue of this           Act
                                                                        shall be
an Account          into  the Bank of  England to the Account   of the Commis-
at the Bank, paid
called the
              sioners for the Reduction of the National Debt, under the Title of
West India
              “©
                 The West India Compensation Account,” and the Cashiers of the
Compensa-     Bank of England are hereby required to receive all such Sums of
tion Account.
              Money,     and to place the same from Time to Time to the said
              Account.

The Cashiers    XXX.     And be it enacted, That the Cashier or Cashiers of the
of the Bank Governor and Company of the Bank of England, who shall have
to give Re-    received or shall receive any Part of any Contribution towards any
ceiptsfor Sub- Sum or Sums of
scriptions,                      Money raised or to be raised under the Provisions
which may be of this Act, shall give a Receipt or Receipts in Writing to every
assigned.      such Contributor for all such Sums; and that the said Receipts so to
               be given shall be assignable at any Time for and during such Period
               as shall and may be determined upon by the said Commissioners of
              the Treasury; and the said Receipts shall be in such Form
                                                                        and
                                                                      Words
