934.                  3° & 4°GULIELMI IV. Cap.73.
               and the said Commissioners shall also inquire and consider upon what
                                                                       Law and Equity in
               Principles, according to the established Rules of
               similar Cases, the Succession       to  such  Funds   should   be regulated
               upon the Death of any Person
                                                 entitled  thereto who
                                                                 are  also
                                                                          may die intestate
                                                                           authorized    and
                                                                                            ;
               and the said Commissioners      shall   and  they
                                                               which   it     be
               required to consider of any   other    Question            may      necessary
               to investigate in order to establish just and equitable Rules for the
                                                                                the Persons
               Apportionment of such Compensation Money amongst
               seised of, or entitled to,   or   having any Mortgage, Charge, Incum-
               brance, Judgment,   or Lien  upon, or any Claim to, or Right or Interest
               in, any Slave or Slaves  so to  be manumitted as aforesaid, at the Time
                                               and having made all such Inquiries, and
Having made of such their Manumission;
the Inquiries, having taken all such Matters and Things as aforesaid into their
Commission-
ers to frame
               Consideration, the said Commissioners shall and are hereby required
               to proceed to draw up and frame all such general Rules, regard being
general                                                                                  as to
Rules for the had to the Laws and Usages in force in each Colony respectively,
equitable      them may seem best adapted       in  each  Colony respectively   for  securing
Distribution
               the  just and equitable Distribution of the said Funds amongst or for
of the Fund
assigned to
               the Benefit of such several Persons as aforesaid, and for the Protection
each Colony of such Funds, and for the Appointment and Indemnification
                                                                                            of
                such Trustees  as aforesaid;  and    such  general Rules   when   so  framed,
Such Rules     and when agreed upon by the said Commissioners, shall by them
to be laid     be subscribed with their respective Hands and Seals, and transmitted
before His     to the Lord President of His Majesty’s Council, to be by him laid
Majesty in
Council.       before His Majesty in Council ; and so from Time to Time as often
               as any further general Rules should be so framed and agreed to. for
               thePurposes    aforesaid or any of them.

Rules to be     XLVIII. And be it further enacted, That the general Rules to be
published in  transmitted as aforesaid to the said Lord President shall be forthwith
the London                                           on Three several Occasions at least,
Gazette,      published in the London Gazette
with a Notice together   with  a  Notice  that all  Persons  interested in or affected by
that. Appeals      such            Rules may, by    a Time  to be in such Notice limited,
              any        general
will be
received      appeal against any     such  Rules    to His  Majesty in Council; and it
              shall be  lawful   for the  Lords    and  others of His Majesty’s Privy
against their
Establish-    Council, or for any Three or more of them, by any further Notice or
ment.         Notices to be for that Purpose published in the London Gazette, to
              enlarge, as to them may seem meet, the Time for receiving any
                                                                                     such
               Appeals.
His Majesty      XLIX. And be it further enacted, That if within the Time soshall
                                                                              to
in Council    be limited for receiving such Appeals any Person or Persons
      hear
 may
such Appeals, prefer any
                          Petition of Appeal to His Majesty in Council against any
                                                            in the London Gazette, it
and there-    such  general Rule so published as aforesaid
 upon confirm shall be lawful for His Majesty in Council,
                                                           or for any Committee of
                                                                    Notice thereof’ to
              Privy Council, to hear such Appeal, and to cause
 or disallow
any general
Rule so       be served    upon the said Commissioners, who shall thereupon under-
appealed       take the Defence of such Appeal; and upon hearing any such Appeal
against.       it shall be lawful for His Majesty in Council to confirm and annul or
               to rescind and disallow any such General Rule as aforesaid, or there-
                                                    such Rule in such Manner as to
               upon to alter, amend, or vary any
               His Majesty may seem just, or to remit the same to the said Commis-
               sioners tor further Consideration and Revision.
                                                 6                                   L. And
