          3° & 4°GULIELMI                    IV. Cap.73.                937
   LVII. And be it further enacted, Thatit shall be lawful for His His Ma-
 Majesty in Council, upon hearing any such Appeal as aforesaid, either jesty in
 to confirm and allow or to reverse or to amend or alter                Council
                                                             any such confirm may
                                                                                or
 Adjudication or Award as to His Majesty in Council shall seem fit, disallow, or
 or to remit any such Adjudication and Award to the said Commis- alter or remit
 sioners for further Consideration and Revision, or for the Admission Adjudication
 of further Evidence but it shall not be lawful for His Majesty in appealed
                      ;
 Council, upon the hearing of any such Appeal, to admit any new against,
 Evidence which was not admitted by or tendered to the said Commis-
 sioners before the making of such their Adjudication and Award.

   LVIII. And be it further enacted, That the several Adjudications
and Awards of the said Commissioners, unless duly appealed from Failing         any
                                                                       Appeal, the
within the respective Times to be limited by His Majesty in Council Award of the
for that Purpose, shall be final and conclusive and binding upon all Commission-
                                                                       ers final.
Persons interested therein or affected thereby; and that the Decisions
of His Majesty in Council upon any such Appealshall in like Manner
be final, binding, and conclusive.

   LIX. And be it further enacted, That the Lord High Treasurer, Treasury may
or the Commissioners of His Majesty’s Treasury, or any Three or order Issues
more of them, for the Time being, may order and direct to be issued of Money for
                                                                                   of
and paid out of the said Sum of Twenty Millions of Pounds Sterling Payment
                                                                        Salaries, &c.
any Sum or Sums of Money for the Payment of Salaries to Commis-
sioners, Officers, Clerks, and other Persons acting in relation to such
Compensation in the Execution of this Act, and for discharging such
incidental Expences as shall necessarily attend the same, in such
Manner as the Lord High Treasurer, or Commissioners of the
Treasury, or any Three or more of them, shall from Time to Time
think fit and reasonable; and an Account of such Expence shall be
annually laid before Parliament.
   LX. And be it enacted, That a Certificate containing a List of Manner in
 the Names and Designation of the several Persons in whose Favour which Sums
 any Sum or Sums of Money shall be awarded from Time to Time Commission-
                                                                      awarded by
 under the Provisions of this Act by the Commissioners, as herein- ers are to be
before mentioned, shall be signed by Three or more of the said Com- paid.
missioners, who shall forthwith transmit the same to His Majesty’s
Principal Secretary of State then having Charge of the Affairs of the
said Colonies, for his Approbation and Signature, who shall, when
he shall have signed the same, transmit it to the Commissioners of
His Majesty’s Treasury; and the said Commissioners of the Trea-
sury, or any Three of such Commissioners, shall thereupon, by War-
rant under their Hands, authorize the Commissioners for the
Reduction of the National Debt to pay the said Sums, out of the
Monies standing upon their Account in the Books of the said Bank
under the Title of «The West India Compensation Account,” to the
                                    ;
Persons named in such Certificate and the said Commissioners for
the Reduction of the National Debt, or the Comptroller General or
Assistant Comptroller General acting under the said Commissioners,
are hereby required to pay all such Sums of Money to the Persons
named therein under such Forms and Regulations as the said Com-
missioners for the Reduction of the National Debt shall think fit to
adopt for that Purpose.
                   11E                                      LXI. And
