          3° & 4°GULIELMI                    IV. Cap.73.                        939
effectual as any Laws made by His Majesty in Council for the
Government of any Colonies subject to the Legislative Authority of
His Majesty in Council are or can be.
   LXIII. And be it further enacted, That within the Meaning and The Word
for the Purposes of this Act every Person who for the Time being
shall be in the lawful Administration of the Government of any of         joni”
the said Colonies shall be taken to be the Governor thereof.

   LXIV. And be it further enacted, That nothing in this Act Con- Act not to
tained doth or shall extend to any of the Territories in the Possession extend to
of the East India Company, or to the Island of Ceylon, or to the             Indies,
                                                                        Bast
Island of Saint Helena.

  LXV. And be it further enacted, That in the Colonies of the when Act
Cape of Good Hope and Mauritius the several Parts of this Act to come into
shall take effect and come into operation, or shall cease to operate
and to be in force,
                  :
                      as the Case may be, at Periods more remote Good
                                                                          roe
                                                                           ton,
                                   °                                         pe
than the respective   Periods herein-before for such Purposes limited and Mauri-
by the following Intervals of Time; videlicet, by Four Calendar tius.
Months in the Colony of the Cape of Good Hope, and by Six Calendar
Months in the Colony of the Mauritius.

  LXVI. And be it further enacted and declared, That within the Islands
Meaning and for the Purposes of this Act all Islands and Terri- dependent
tories dependent upon any of the Colonies aforesaid, and constituting Upon
                                                                           Colo
Parts of the same Colonial Government, shall respectively be taken Part of  auch.
to be Parts of such respective Colonies.




LONDON: Printed by Georce Eyre and AnDRrEw Spotriswoope,
       Printers to the King’s most Excellent Majesty.      1833.
