           3° & 4° GULIELMI                   IV. Cap.73.                        935
   L. And be it further enacted, That at the Expiration of the In Absence of
Time limited for receiving such Appeals as aforesaid it shall be Appeal, His
                                                                      Majesty in
lawful for His Majesty in Council to confirm and allow, or to rescind Council
and disallow, in the whole or in part, or to amend, alter, or vary, any confirm, may
such general Rule or Rules, though not so appealed against, as to resciud, or
His Majesty may seem just, or to remit such Rules to the said Com- amend such
                                                                        Rules.
missioners for further Consideration and Revision.

   LI. And be it further enacted, That when and so often as any such Rules when
general Rule or Rules as aforesaid shall by His Majesty in Council confirmed
                                                                       His Majesty
                                                                                  by
have been confirmed and allowed, an Order shall be made by His shall         be
Majesty in Council, reciting at length any such Rule or Rules, with recited in the
any Alterations or Amendments which may have been therein made confirmatory
             ;
as aforesaid and a Copy of every such Order in Council shall be Order in
                                                                      Council, and
duly certified by the Lord President of His Majesty’s Council for the inrolled in
Time being to the Lord High Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Chancery.
Seal, or to the Master of the Rolls, for the Time being, and shall be
duly inrolled among the Records of the High Court of Chancery, and
shall there remain and be of Record.

   LII. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful, by any Rules Rules so
so to be framed, published, confirmed, allowed, and inrolled as afore- inrolled may
                                                                       be revoked or
said, to revoke, amend, alter, and again renew, as Occasion may amended.
require, and as may be thought just, any former or preceding Rule
or Rules.

   LIII. And be it further enacted, That every such general Rule as Rules when
aforesaid, when so inrolled as aforesaid, shall be of the same Validity, confirmed
Force, Virtue, and Effect as if the same had been made and enacted shall inrolled
                                                                         and
                                                                               be of
by His Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of Parliament the same:
Provided nevertheless, that no such Rule shall be in anywise repug- Validity as if
ant to or at variance with this Act or any Part thereof, or with the enacted by
Laws and Usages in force in the several Colonies respectively to Parliament.
which such Rules may relate, so far as any such Laws or Usages may
not be repugnant to or at variance with the Provisions of this Act.

   LIV. And be it further enacted, That the said general Rules, Rules so
when so framed, confirmed, allowed, and inrolled as aforesaid, shall be inrolled shall
observed and followed by the said Commissioners, and shall be be observed
                                                                        by the Com-
binding upon them in the further Execution of the said Commission, missioners
and in the Exercise of the Powers and Authorities hereby committed in making
to them, and shall in all Cases be taken, observed, and followed as their Awards.
the Rules for the Decision of and Adjudication upon all Claims
which may be preferred to them by any Person or Persons having or
claiming to have any Interest in the said Compensation Fund or
in any Part thereof.

  LV. And be it further enacted, That any Person            having or Persons
claiming to have had any Right, Title, or Interest in  or  to, or any interested
                                                                      in any Slaves
Mortgage, Judgment, Charge, Incumbrance,    or other  Lien  upon, any nianumitted
Slave or Slaves so to be manumitted as aforesaid, at the ‘Time of by this Act
such their Manumission, shall and may prefer such Claims before nay prefer
                                                                  the Claims before
