Acknowledgements

Our cooperation on the Continental System dates back to 2006, when we
met at a workshop on the Revolutionary and Napoleonic era hosted by the
German Historical Institute in London. We soon discovered that we shared
a common interest in port cities, urban political culture, popular protest
and the Continental System. Despite its significance in Napoleonic expan-
sion, the Continental System seemed overlooked in earlier workshops and
conferences that marked moments in the Napoleonic bicentenary. During
the next several years we organized an international conference on the
Continental System, and in May 2011 welcomed more than 30 scholars
from nine countries to The Netherlands for ‘The Napoleonic Continental
System: Local, European, and Global Experiences and Consequences’. The
International Institute of Social History in Amsterdam and the Teylers
Museum in Haarlem hosted the three-day conference. The papers at the
conference featured a number of historiographical, social, economic,
financial, judicial, urban, regional and intercontinental case studies of
the Blockade, as well as the role of neutral states and the ingenuity of
merchants, bankers and shippers in evading both the Napoleonic and
British blockades. For this volume we selected 13 papers to be revised
for publication and welcomed two new papers. The Continental System
proved to be a provocative topic that stimulated the contributors to revise
old findings and to explore new fields of research. Needless to say that
much more of the execution, scope, consequences and all other aspects of
the Blockade requires further study, and in this respect we consider this
volume not the end to a process that started in 2006 but the starting point
for new research.
   We owe our thanks to many helpful institutions, foundations and indi-
viduals. We are grateful for financial support from the Eberly College of Arts
and Sciences and the Department of History at West Virginia University,
the International Institute of Social History, the Netherlands Economic
History Archives in Amsterdam, Teylers Museum in Haarlem, the Royal
Netherlands Academy of Sciences (KNAW), the foundations Professor Van
Winter, Daendels and J.E. Jurriaanse that generously facilitated and sup-
ported the 2011 conference and subsidized this volume. We also thank Lex
Heerma van Voss for his help and essential support during the whole pro-
cess and all the participants from the 2011 Amsterdam conference for their
stimulating presentations, and in particular the authors of this volume for
their willingness to expand and revise their original papers. We are indebted
to the patient assistance from Holly Tyler and Jenny McCall from Palgrave.


                                      x
