6   Katherine B. Aaslestad


   The regulation of neutral trade and British and French targeting of neu-
tral vessels as fair prize generated increasing international conflict with
neutrals and allies alike. By 1807 the United States, the largest neutral state,
responded with an Embargo Act directed against trade with both belligerent
powers and in 1809 replaced it with the Non-Intercourse Act that temporarily
suspended trade with France and England. Neither Act could be effectively
enforced, but Napoleon appeared to respond to US terms, leading the
United States to focus on restricting trade with Britain. Friction over trade
restrictions, the pressing into service of seamen on American vessels and
an attempt to maintain access to European markets led the United States
to declare war on Britain in June 1812 based on the cause of ‘free trade
and sailors rights’.18 Seeking to use his Spanish allies against the British,
Napoleon invaded Spain in 1808 to strengthen the enforcement of the
Continental System and ‘carry on the war against Britain with more vigor’.19
Britain, on the other hand, managed to benefit from rebellion in Iberia and
by providing Junta Spain with favourable trading conditions. By 1809 rebel
Spain under the Cortes shifted its trade to Britain along with the trade of its
colonies in Central and South America, which partially offset Britain’s com-
mercial losses on the continent.
   Conventional smuggling and illicit trade thrived in the midst of the
Anglo–French economic contest, and both belligerents resorted to licensed
trade to control this shadow market. In 1797 Britain resumed the old practice
of issuing licences to merchants to circumvent trade restrictions and prevent
the import or export of specified goods. After 1806, the number of British
licences rose sharply, especially as insurance companies insisted on licences,
due to the protection those ships gained from the Royal Navy.20 Much of the
licensed trade took place on neutral vessels, turning the merchant marines
of northern Europe into carriers sanctioned by the British government. After
1807 Heligoland, Gothenburg, Malta and Sicily emerged as thriving transit
centres for Britain’s licensed trade with the blockaded continent. Following
Britain’s seizure of Heligoland in 1807 to facilitate its illicit commerce, the
former Danish island resembled a miniature London. British and continen-
tal mercantile houses established offices there, 300 to 400 ships visited the
small island daily and the Royal Navy protected it.21 Likewise, Malta became
the principal centre of illicit trade in British goods in the Mediterranean,
where English exports to the region increased from less than 4 per cent in
1806 to 45 per cent in 1808, necessitating a fivefold increase in the island’s
fleet from 165 vessels in 1803 to 840 in 1811.22 Throughout continental
Europe, smuggling developed into a quasi-legitimate business involving
fixed business transactions, including commissions and insurance rates.
Illicit trade and smuggling networks united a cross-section of society: unem-
ployed labourers, fishermen, women, children, merchants and bankers.
   Economic warfare reached a new level by 1810. In 1809 Napoleon
annexed the Papal States and the Illyrian Provinces, and in 1810 Holland
