2   Katherine B. Aaslestad


of Portugal in 1807, Spain in 1808 and Russia in 1812. Yet scholars gener-
ally discuss the Continental System to stress its failure to destroy British
commerce. This volume, in contrast, addresses how Anglo–French economic
warfare generated new tensions with neutral states, redirected trade, devel-
oped expanding merchant networks, generated illicit commerce and
shaped the ‘daily life’ of Europeans during the Napoleonic era. A variety
of responses to the blockades characterized these wars, as merchants,
shipowners, financiers and working people accommodated, subverted or
protested imperial restrictions, which reveals the contradictions inherent
in the Napoleonic Empire – at once rational and progressive, but also
coercive and exploitative. This book demonstrates the vulnerability and
ingenuity of Europeans as they faced economic warfare amid transforma-
tive social and economic challenges that made this an important ‘bridge
era’ between the prosperous but bitterly competitive eighteenth-century
mercantile economy and the instability of rapidly shifting markets, mechan-
ization, consumer demand and calls for free trade in the first half of the
nineteenth century.
   Scholars have naturally focused on Napoleon in studies of the Continental
System and explained the 1806 Blockade as his desperate attempt to defeat
Britain via economic warfare, his mercantilist worldview, his ambitions to
develop French industry and his awareness of French naval weakness. The
French, however, did not alone determine the course, experiences and con-
sequences of the Continental System. Britain’s role in the economic warfare,
as well as the fate of neutral states who sought to survive and profit from the
commercial rivalry of two feuding empires, are also central to the story.
This volume moves beyond viewing the Continental System as primarily an
Anglo–French conflict and explores the conduct of both belligerents, their
allies and the crucial role of neutral states, including the United States, in
the transformation of international commerce.
   Regional and urban case studies offer a new and more complete under-
standing of the significance of economic warfare during the Napoleonic
era, and explore the experiences and consequences of the conflict through
several key themes: a re-evaluation of the historiography of the Continental
System, the uneven power triangle of the French, British and neutral powers,
and the strategies of merchants and smugglers to adapt to or circumvent the
system. Together they reveal complex international networks that circulated
goods, credit and especially commercial and political information to ensure
illicit trade adapted to the shifting geography of war. With this approach,
this book fills a void in current historiography and reminds scholars and
students alike of the crucial role of the Continental System in warfare,
modernization, state-building and socioeconomic transformations. It also
invites new scholarship on this topic in other regions in continental Europe
not covered in this volume, especially in southern and southeastern Europe,
the Atlantic World, and the Americas.
