                            Introduction: Revisiting Napoleon’s Continental System 7


and the north German coast into his Empire, forming a ‘political, military,
dynastic and economic federation of very unequal states’.23 In addition, he
finally compelled Sweden officially to join the French blockade and issued
three new decrees. With the Saint Cloud and Trianon Decrees, Napoleon
formalized special licences for colonial and agricultural exports and imports
in order to turn smuggling to the advantage of the French Treasury and to
strengthen the already privileged position of French industry and commerce
by raising imperial tariffs. Both Dutch and north German merchants hoped
that, as members of the Empire and part of the preferential market zone,
they might benefit from Imperial reforms and trade with France on equal
terms. To their bitter disappointment, tariff barriers remained, as the expan-
sion of the Empire and licence system was designed to meet immediate and
short-term logistical needs, primarily of metropolitan France and the inner
Empire. For example, Napoleon encouraged grain exports from France in
1810 during the British grain crisis to drain British specie during a period
of high grain prices to the benefit of French farmers. Napoleon’s licence
system, however, remained handicapped by insufficient naval support and
growing hostility to the French from occupied and annexed territories.
Finally, that same year he also issued the Fontainebleau Decree as a frontal
attack against smuggling. In a punitive move, Napoleon increased the num-
ber of customs officials and imperial troops in French cities to enforce the
Blockade, punish smugglers and confiscate British goods. Imperial officials
burned seized goods with ceremonial pomp in hundreds of towns and cities
in the last months of 1810 and first months of 1811.24 These modifications
to the Continental Blockade permitted imports of certain colonial goods
and simultaneously fostered a ‘customs terror’ that characterized the last
years of the Blockade.
   In December 1810 Tsar Alexander I opened Russia’s ports to neutral trade,
an act that ultimately provoked Napoleon to invade Russia in June 1812.
The Russian campaign and retreat galvanized a new and broad continental
alliance when Napoleon rejected Austrian peace terms in 1813. Seriously
outnumbered by Russian, Prussian, Austrian and Swedish forces, the
French and their remaining allies faced defeat at Leipzig in October 1813.
As Russian and Prussian troops invaded eastern France in early 1814, the
French economy suffered from the combined loss of continental markets
and the ongoing British blockade. Napoleon’s Continental System, unravel-
ling since early 1813, ceased to function long before Napoleon abdicated in
April 1814, and Blockade legislation was formally repealed. On the Atlantic
front, the British redeployed their navy to blockade the US coastline, leading
to the formal end of the War of 1812 in December 1814. After Napoleon’s
defeat at Waterloo in 1815 the Emperor sought to escape to the United
States, but the British blockade of French ports prevented that voyage, and
instead he spent his last days on the island of Saint Helena guarded by the
Royal Navy, the force he could never defeat.
