4   Katherine B. Aaslestad


   The 1801 Battle of Copenhagen demonstrated the crucial role of Britain’s
naval power; by 1800 Britain had twice as many war ships as France.
Moreover, Britain’s Royal Navy was far superior to the combined fleets of all
its rivals, underscored by its size, functional variety, battleships’ firepower
and the number and quality of skilled seamen mobilized for warfare, all
supported by a well-financed naval structure and an effective fiscal state.10
Nelson revealed the superiority of British naval power, gunnery and seaman-
ship at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 when he attacked and defeated the
larger French and Spanish fleets. Naval victories, as Jeremy Black points out,
could protect Britain from invasion and enable amphibious operations but
could not determine, in a sustained manner, the conflict on land.11
   Napoleon’s own series of military victories over Austria and Russia in 1805
and Prussia in 1806 confirmed the dominance of the Grande Armée over
their ill-coordinated opponents on the continent.12 These French victories
ended the War of the Third Coalition, enhanced Napoleon’s dominance in
Europe and underscored that Britain required land allies to defeat him. In
fact, Napoleon’s success generated a new level and intensity of trade disrup-
tion when he issued the Berlin Decree in November 1806; it prohibited all
trade and traffic in British goods, criminalized British subjects in French-
occupied areas, making their property ‘fair prize’, and barred vessels from
Britain or British colonies from French ports as well as such French satellites,
allies and occupied territories as Holland, Spain, Naples and the Hanseatic
cities. In contrast, the ongoing conventional British blockade sought to
restrict the imports and exports of France and its allies.
   The Continental Blockade expanded as Napoleon gained more territory
on the continent, and Britain exerted its muscle on the high seas. Following
the defeat of Russia at Friedland and the Treaty of Tilsit in 1807, Russia,
Prussia, Norway-Denmark (following a British invasion and bombardment
of Copenhagen) and Portugal (following a French invasion) joined the ‘self-
blockade’ against British manufacturing and colonial goods. The British
responded to the Berlin Decree with a series of Orders in Council in January
and November 1807 that sought to tighten the blockade of France and its
allies, deny French trade with neutrals and prevent Britain’s enemies from
trading with their colonies. Britain, like France, targeted neutrals. For example,
the first Order required neutrals to call at a British port before proceeding
to the continent, thereby imposing economic costs on neutral states.
Napoleon’s retaliation with the Milan Decrees of December 1807 strength-
ened the Berlin Decree as they expanded the blockade of continental ports
to include neutral shipping that complied with the British directives. They
authorized the capture of neutral vessels that called on British ports and
declared neutral ships searched by the British on the high seas ‘lawful prizes’.
The economic disruption, hardships and declining standards of living caused
by the dual blockade engendered widespread hatred of France and Britain.
Merchants everywhere condemned their common practice of privateering
