                            Introduction: Revisiting Napoleon’s Continental System 5


and disregard of neutrality, but found coerced collaboration with Britain
through licensed trade, the lesser of two evils.13
  The French navy was too weak to destroy Britain at sea, so the Berlin
Decree targeted the British economy. Foreign trade financed Britain’s power,
and Napoleon sought to defeat Britain by attacking the vast capital and
credit that made possible its sustained mobilization of financial assets for
use in the war. Napoleon sought to damage British financial stability and
balance of trade by reducing the British supply of gold and specie and weak-
ening its credit, so that it could not subsidize continental warfare against the
French. This continental ‘self-blockade’ was therefore not a conventional
naval blockade that endeavoured to deprive its enemy of weapons, food
and commodities; rather, it sought to deny Britain the financial ability to
wage war.
  The ‘self-blockade’, moreover, endeavoured to encourage the production
of continental, especially French industries. Beyond subduing Britain, the
restructuring of the continental trade with a new ‘market design’ attempted to
establish French industrial and commercial hegemony on the continent.14 If
some scholars view it as a constructive programme for European industrial
development and trade under French guidance coupled with destructive
intent for Britain, recent research reveals that the Berlin Decree repre-
sented an act of aggression against the continent beyond French economic
imperialism. The Berlin Decree altered the character of the Napoleonic
Wars, as Paul Schroeder asserts, since both France and Britain pursed vic-
tory at the expense of the continent, as economic warfare shifted from a
‘covert, secondary, unsystematic, aspect of the war into a primary, central,
highly organized one’.15 The Berlin and Milan Decrees, along with their
British countermeasures, therefore, marked a turning point in the war, as
the economic contest spread across northern and southern Europe with
belligerents targeting neutral, conquered, satellite and allied states alike.
  The Continental Blockade and System are often used interchangeably,
but they are distinct if related in origin. The Blockade was Napoleon’s
‘economic war machine against Britain’, whereas the Continental System
encompassed the political organization necessary to enforce this Blockade
on the continent.16 For example, Napoleon reorganized the political
boundaries within the Italian peninsula to strengthen his control over the
Continental Blockade, ultimately annexing Tuscany, Parma and Piacenza
in 1808 and Rome, Umbria and Lazio in 1809 directly into the Empire,
whereas the Kingdoms of Italy and Naples remained satellite states. Within
a few years, commerce in Mediterranean ports was reduced to short-term
coastal shipping.17 Napoleon also employed an army of green-jacketed
douaniers (customs agents) to enforce his decrees on unwilling populations.
In January 1807, 300 customs agents arrived in Hamburg, and throughout
French-occupied Europe, douaniers became the hated symbols of Napoleonic
economic oppression.
