                           Introduction: Revisiting Napoleon’s Continental System 15


invasion in 1812 for presentist purposes. Pierrick Pourchasse concludes
this section by placing the Continental Blockade in a broader context. He
identifies and sets up the key actors and dynamics of Napoleonic economic
warfare through a study of conflicts over the grain trade in the mid-1790s.
He evaluates the tensions between the Revolutionary government, the
blockading British and the neutral states seeking profit to uncover poli-
cies and conflicts of interest that would resurface during the Continental
System.
   Recent studies emphasize that the economic impact of the Blockade and
Napoleon’s Continental System were far from uniform on the continent.79
Regional variations, even within France, illustrate that not all port cities or
inland hinterlands experienced the same fate. Regionalism as a conceptual
framework is better suited to explore the complexity and nuances of eco-
nomic life under Napoleon than traditional national narratives emphasizing
either economic growth or decay. Transmitting goods, ideas and people,
the Atlantic functioned as a space of transnational exchange and also
provides a regional perspective, as Silvia Marzagalli reveals. She argues that
the Continental System determined the direction and pace of French conti-
nental expansion. In order to ensure submission to his system, Napoleon
occupied and annexed territories crucial for the success of his Blockade, but
the Blockade only produced a reorganization of trade patterns and routes
that diverted maritime commerce; it did not stop it. Likewise, Alex Grab’s
chapter on the Kingdom of Italy illustrates the efforts undertaken by the
French in establishing and implementing the Blockade along the Adriatic
and Mediterranean coasts as well as the Alps. Despite opposition to commer-
cial restrictions, Grab demonstrates that the Kingdom’s integration into the
French market system stimulated agricultural growth which offset commercial
and industrial losses generated by the Continental System. These unin-
tended consequences served the lands of the Kingdom well in the following
decades. Robert Mark Spaulding’s study of traffic on the Rhine River and its
key cities reveals a transformation in the location of the river’s commercial
activity, highlighting new patterns of trade and enduring shifts in downri-
ver traffic. Intensification of the Blockade in 1810 triggered an economic
recession that further reduced upstream imports in favour of downstream
commerce and ultimately prompted new regional economies on the lower
and upper Rhine. Chapters in this section demonstrate that during the war,
rivers and coastlines, like the sea, remained a contested terrain where ‘conflict
and cooperation coexisted’.80
   Merchants, smugglers and privateers played a key role in forming the
practices and networks necessary to circumvent the dual blockade. Margrit
Schulte Beerbühl explores the networks and strategies cultivated by Nathan
Mayer Rothschild as a young merchant engaged in continental commodity
trade. Benefitting from kinship, family friends and commercial con-
tacts, Rothschild’s networks provided crucial information to help relocate
