                           Introduction: Revisiting Napoleon’s Continental System 17


rising costs on basic goods and drained urban finances. Johan Joor presents
the Continental System as the ‘motor’ of imperial policies in Holland and
outlines the different phases of the Continental System to present the
Blockade as the final blow in the process of steady decline within the city’s
crucial commercial and financial sectors. He traces the transformation of
Amsterdam from a world market, hosting leading international houses
of finance before the Revolutionary Wars, into one of only national and
regional importance after Napoleon. In contrast to the traditional view of
cities as sites of decline or quintessential modernization, cities during the
Napoleonic Wars emerge as far more nuanced. They were agents of adap-
tation and forward-looking change as much as tradition and nostalgia for
past prosperity.
   The combination of hardships generated by the Continental System
and the innovative means to circumvent it discredited the mercantil-
ist approach to trade as a zero-sum game in which one party wins and
another loses. Thus, it is no surprise that historians like Frank Trentman
view the Napoleonic era as the first period in the history of free trade.
During these decades, critiques of mercantilism combined with Adam
Smith’s moral vision of free trade to highlight a benign spirit of com-
merce and an interdependency between peace and prosperity that would
calm the passions that stoke conflict.81 In fact, between 1776 and 1810,
26 translations of Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations appeared.82 According
to Peter Andreas, Adam Smith viewed smugglers as the ‘real free trade
pioneers’ at the forefront of breaking down arbitrary barriers.83 In the
context of disrupted markets, privateering and smuggling, growing prices
and insurance rates, Smith’s vision of the economy as part of the natural
world governed by the invisible hand of market forces gained a strong
resonance that would only truly develop after the wars.
   The difficult years of economic warfare and new commercial networks
and practices outlined in this volume predisposed Europeans to openly asso-
ciate peace with trade and prosperity and offered contemporary experience
to support Smith’s theory. Revellers carried a banner, ‘For Peace and Trade’,
through the rebellious streets of Amsterdam in November 1813 underscor-
ing the popular association of peace and prosperity.84 The print, The Sea Is
Open. Trade Revives (Figure 1), expresses the same sentiments and ironically
depicts the greatest winner of the war, Britain, celebrating with one of the
greatest losers, Holland. Both states, symbolized by well-fed toasting men,
joyously unite over the burning of the Imperial Decrees and symbols of the
‘customs terror’. This print, like the free market it celebrated, was deceptive.
The course of the conflict transformed the international landscape in favour
of Britain, which secured nearly half of the world’s shipping by the end of
the war, whereas the former neutral maritime power Holland, once central
in international trade and finance, foundered.
