14   Katherine B. Aaslestad


about southern European markets and goods carrying neutral trade during
the Napoleonic wars, and continued to meet European demand for tropical
products by specializing in a limited number of commodities after 1815.76
Merchants in Rouen survived and adapted by shifting their focus to interior
trade, identifying alternative sources of cotton in Portugal, Italy and the
Levant and relying on landed property for rental and farming revenues.77
Other merchants replaced established commercial ties with new, more
profitable ones. Uncovering their networks provides important insights on
the practice of trade, the transfer of information in commercial communi-
ties and the interconnections of an expanding world economy.78 The aim
of this volume is to explore the world of merchants and smugglers, their
regional and urban commercial networks, and the power triangle between
France, Britain and neutral states to uncover the dynamics and experience of
economic warfare. In doing so, it revisits the Continental System as a formative
transitional period in modern European history.

Structure of the Book

Revisiting Napoleon’s Continental System consists of 15 chapters within
four thematic sections that approach the experience or consequences of
economic warfare from a new perspective. The book commences with histor-
iographical assessments of the Continental System in Anglo-American,
French and Russian literature and a chapter on commercial dynamics
between British, French and neutral states prior to the Continental
Blockade. Geoffrey Ellis revisits his Oxford doctoral thesis, published in
1981 as Napoleon’s Continental Blockade: The Case of Alsace. His description
of the Blockade’s objectives as an ‘Uncommon Market’ was formulated
as the European Economic Community expanded, and his chapter
addresses the place of the Continental System in the context of Stuart
Woolf’s ‘integration thesis’ on imperial expansion as a modernizing project.
Annie Jourdan explores three French narratives on the Continental System:
contemporary assessments, historical scholarship and legal studies. Taken
together they reflect key interpretative paradigms on the nature of
Napoleon’s rule. Explanations of the Blockade as necessity, a poisoned
legacy from the Revolution, or unbridled imperial ambitions failed to reso-
nate with legal scholars who placed the conflict in the context of ineffec-
tive maritime legislation and the arbitrary rules of the high seas. Alexandre
Tchoudinov highlights trends in Russian historiography, featuring their
key contributions and their scholarly legacies through the politicization of
the economic conflict during the Soviet era and in contemporary Russia.
Struggling with incomplete sources, Russian scholars drew mixed results
on the impact of the Continental System on Russia’s economy, whereas
popular journalists, ‘revisionists’ and ‘patriots’ cited older research to
revisit and frame such iconic moments in Russian history as the French
