                           Introduction: Revisiting Napoleon’s Continental System 13


port of Dunkirk to English trade and later to protect Gravelines as a ‘city of
smugglers’, a locale for the illicit trade in traditional goods, guineas, letters
and newspapers and French prisoners of war.69
   Like smuggling, privateering reached its zenith during the early nineteenth
century as another alternative wartime form of trade to compete with
Anglo-French restrictions on legitimate commerce. Viewed as a form of
state-sanctioned piracy, private individuals and companies gained permis-
sion to arm vessels to seize hostile and neutral ships transporting contra-
band based on a letter of marque. Privately owned and armed vessels also
supplemented the offensive efforts of each nation’s navy, providing a new
kind of weapon in the form of smaller and more manoeuvrable vessels
appropriate for commerce raiding. During the War of 1812 the United States
depended by default on privateers who were central to the US war effort.
Privateering could combine economic and patriotic interests. For example,
Danish privateers attacked British ships out of greed and hostility after the
bombardment of Copenhagen, and Baltimore merchants acted similarly
during the War of 1812.70 Yet, it remained a desperate way to control trade
amid war, as privateers targeted both belligerent and neutral shipping for
profit. Historians have tried to assess the impact or success of privateering by
calculating the number of captured ships and value of their cargos. Andrew
Lambert points out, however, that of the 1613 British ships – 7.5 per cent
of the British merchant fleet – captured by American privateers, the British
recaptured 30 per cent of those ships, and concludes that US privateers did
not form a significant threat to Britain.71 If privateering was a futile military
exercise, it succeeded as a war against trade evidenced by increased prices
and insurance rates that depressed commerce.72
   Merchants stand at the centre of trade, legitimate and illicit. Studies of
their networks and strategies associated with smuggling, fraud, privateering
and other forms of ‘alternative trade’ reveal Napoleon’s misunderstanding
of the strong commercial and kinship communities that structured interna-
tional markets. In fact, the Napoleonic era demonstrates well that conflict
shaped new trade patterns and practices; the Blockade provoked merchants
to adapt.73 In fact, Margrit Schulte Beerbühl argues that the necessity to
find loopholes in the Continental System stimulated mercantile mobility
and cooperation that ultimately fostered international continental integra-
tion only apparent at the end of the wars.74 Expanded or new commercial
networks helped merchants devise new structures and trade patterns, man-
age risk and ensure that trade could be profitable in the midst of conflict.
These multilateral networks reveal the circulation of credit, bonds of trust
and information necessary to reduce risk and maximize profit during the
war. The example of Livorno demonstrates that neutral American and Greek
merchants used the war as an opportunity to enter or expand their presence
in the Mediterranean market when the British relocated to Malta, Messina
and Palermo.75 Likewise, American merchants in Livorno gained knowledge
