16   Katherine B. Aaslestad


and reorient trade during the war. Jann Witt focuses on illicit trade and
blockade-running in Denmark, illustrating both the ingenuity of indi-
vidual merchants and the disastrous consequences Denmark faced during
years of blockade and war. Bård Frydenlund further develops the political
consequences of Denmark’s inability to protect its trade and sovereignty
through a case study of Norwegian merchants. By 1809, economic decline
combined with insecurity associated with the licence system generated a
lack of trust in the Danish state. As Norwegian merchants circumvented
blockades, they developed new networks in Sweden and eventually emerged
as internal opponents of Danish rule in Norway, favouring a new political
order in 1814. Michael Rowe’s study of illicit trade in the Rhineland illus-
trates a socially diverse population adapting to the ever-increasing economic
restrictions with widespread and sophisticated smuggling operations. Rowe
emphasizes that smuggling was a collaborative venture that included doua-
niers and local notables as well as people of different backgrounds: Norman
merchants, Rhenish bankers, Dutch fishermen and British manufacturers.
Taken together these chapters highlight merchants, networks of trade and
information, and the emergence of new commercial communities on local,
regional and international levels.
   The final thematic section of the volume features merchants in their
urban milieu. Commerce, the target of both the Napoleonic and British
blockades, was the lifeblood of port cities. Yet, as these studies demon-
strate, port cities remained sites of change and transition even as their
trade deteriorated. Alan Forrest contextualizes the Continental System by
emphasizing the decay and decline that French Atlantic cities experienced
during the Revolution, including the loss of French colonies, especially
Saint Domingue, and the war with Britain. Napoleon framed his inter-
vention in commerce in 1806 as a form of commercial protection for
merchants, yet Forrest points out that the Blockade offered few benefits to
the economy of the French Atlantic, and merchants there, as elsewhere,
had to experiment with new markets and risky forms of trade as they
appealed to Bonaparte for a resumption of trade with neutral nations.
Despite their innovations, Forrest emphasizes that merchant communities
in France’s Atlantic cities stubbornly retained a commercial conservatism
that sought a return to the profitable triangular trade of the 1780s. Hilde
Greefs studies two merchant communities in Antwerp, ‘traditional elites
and new internationals’, to track how they reoriented and diversified
their commerce. She traces the different commercial strategies these two
groups pursued based on their experience, knowledge and commercial
connections. Anita Čerpinska examines the export trade of the city of Riga
between 1807 and 1812 to measure the impact of the Continental System
and suggests merchants succeeded in circumventing trade restrictions. The
city, however, did not escape the costs and hardships of the war due to
