                                             The Continental System Revisited 29


term ‘System’ for the title of this essay, and I should like now to discuss the
cases for and against the ‘integration’ thesis before deciding how far the
Continental Blockade itself fits the picture.
   The notion that Napoleon was an early exponent of European ‘integra-
tion’, or even a sort of progenitor of the modern European Union, has
gained some currency during the last 20 years or so. Admittedly, much of
such talk has come from popular commentators, notably in France itself,
with their own tendentious motives for propagating the analogy and with
an eye for sensational publicity. It had a good airing at the bicentenary of
Brumaire in 1999, for instance, perhaps because those writers and commen-
tators wanted to play down Napoleon’s image as an all-consuming military
conqueror and extol his credentials as a civil ruler instead. But even if its
more extravagant variants are excluded, the idea has also been advanced in
serious scholarly work, and it now has quite a fashionable niche among the
more recent genres in Napoleonic research. Pieter Geyl – thou shouldst be
living at this hour! Napoleonic studies hath need of thee – again!
   My apostrophe here is more than rhetorical. Pieter Geyl’s celebrated
Napoleon: For and Against, first published in Dutch in 1946, in English
translation in 1949, and with many paperback editions since then, remains
the best scholarly review of the ‘classic’ writings on Napoleon in French
historiography up to the Second World War.6 If the ‘integration’ thesis had
any long-established roots at all, one would expect to find traces of them
somewhere there. Yet even if the rich vein of nineteenth-century French
writings is followed through the heroic legend of Napoleon, and his ‘black
legend’ is disregarded completely, there is little evidence of them. Those
early writers certainly dealt with the great issues of Napoleon’s imperial
ambition, but their frame of reference was usually of a celebrated past rather
than an unimaginable future. Some of them thus portrayed his ‘grand idea’
in classical analogies, such as the Roman imperial ideal – Napoleon as a new
Caesar or Constantine or Theodosius or Justinian the lawgiver. However,
though their invocation of a Roman civilization (Pax Romana) that lasted
for centuries was comprehensible enough, they failed to establish any con-
cept of ‘Napoleonic civilization’ (Pax Napoleonica) to match it. Other writers
preferred the analogy with Charlemagne, which Napoleon himself used
to good effect at different times of his imperial career, and which had the
merit of identifying the essentially Latin and Germanic bases of his ‘Grand
Empire’. And other writers, again, put greater stress on Napoleon’s rise to
fame as a soldier of the Revolution, and saw him as the vital instrument of
radical change through French aggrandizement, as the strong arm of the
exemplary nation – la grande nation – destined to give its reformed political
system and laws to the rest of Europe. This argument has at least the sugges-
tion of European ‘integration’ seen as an imposed one-way process, but for
writers who disseminated the ‘black legend’ of Napoleon, any such notion
was excluded almost by definition.
