26   Geoffrey Ellis


Blockade studies, argued that a major long-term effect of the maritime wars
of 1793 to 1815 was a ‘shift of industry from the seaboard to the heartland
of western Europe’. This ‘shift’ was so marked by the end of the period that,
as he forcefully put it, ‘the axis of the Continental economy had now moved
from the Atlantic toward the Rhine’.1
   Following those leads, I was soon convinced that markets were a crucial
element of Napoleon’s Blockade project. This belief was sharpened by major
differences of economic policy current among the states of western Europe
during that formative period of my doctoral research, which prompted some
tempting historical analogies. At the time my original thesis was conceived
and completed, Great Britain had not yet joined the European Economic
Community. For a young and no doubt rather impressionable researcher
then projecting himself from an English university into the archives and
libraries of Gaullist France, the analogy, however broad, between French
opposition to British membership of the EEC and Napoleon’s Continental
Blockade against British trade more than a century and a half earlier seemed
intriguing. But whereas de Gaulle was pursuing French interests within a
genuine European Common Market of six initial member states subject to the
same rules, Napoleon had no such restraints. He was not bound by the terms
of any multilateral Treaty of Rome or of any other subsequent treaties that
have redefined the identity of what is now the much enlarged European
Union. He was in a position to impose his economic policies on conquered
Europe in a much more unilateral and partisan way, if necessary by military
force.
   That, indeed, was the sense of my central theme that Napoleon’s Blockade
objectives included a continental market design, a project to create what
I called an ‘Uncommon Market’ on the continental mainland – or what Louis
Bergeron once likened to ‘a kind of “one-way common market” (une sorte
de “marché commun à sens unique”), in which imposed commercial treaties
and unilateral decisions produced an exchange system in the interests of
France alone’.2 To achieve this, Napoleon had to find within his essentially
land-based empire the economic resources, both markets for French exports
and re-exports and sources of supply of vital primary materials, which the
French had lost in their overseas colonies during the maritime wars since
1793. It was thus on the continental mainland, within his expanding sphere
of power, that he sought preferential or even exclusive rights favourable to
French industry and trade. Such rights were not reciprocal, however, as soon
became painfully clear to many manufacturers and merchants in countries
that lay beyond the official imperial customs frontiers for all or much of the
period of the Blockade.
   How well my analogy of Napoleon’s ‘Uncommon Market’ has weathered
the last 33 years others may judge for themselves. Inevitably, something
of its earlier topicality disappeared as the EEC was steadily enlarged, with
Britain becoming a member in 1973. It would seem that just as historical
