28   Geoffrey Ellis


formerly a shady counter-revolutionary polemicist who had ingratiated
himself into Napoleon’s circle of publicists through a series of reports. The
thinking behind the Berlin Decree of 21 November 1806 had been antici-
pated in Montgaillard’s mémoire of 25 July 1805, three months before the
French naval defeat at Trafalgar, and its supplement of 24 March 1806.5 He
saw British trade as a vast organized system of piracy, but at the same time as
phantom wealth which he likened to ‘dropsy’ (hydropisie). Other polemicists
around that time were also propagating an image of British commercial
power as ‘a colossus with feet of clay’.
   Formulated in such terms, the rationale behind the Continental Blockade
was crude and lacking in any real intellectual pedigree, except perhaps for
a superficial foothold in outmoded mercantilist theories, which Napoleon
himself shared. In short, his Blockade was not a carefully reasoned and well-
organized economic ‘system’ in any meaningful sense, but rather an ad hoc
extension of his military power to the commercial conflict with his most
elusive enemy, and its enforcement was wholly dependent on that power.
Its official proclamation in the immediate aftermath of Prussia’s twin defeats
at Jena and Auerstädt on 14 October 1806 was not coincidental. Conversely,
it also testified to the increasing naval weakness of France after the battle
of Trafalgar on 21 October 1805. It was not a blockade properly so called
but in effect a self-blockade, or boycott, as Heckscher pointed out long ago.
Military conquests on land, Napoleon presumed, would lead to French con-
quests of continental markets as well.
   In those broad terms, 33 years ago, I argued that the French continental
market design was the obverse and more constructive side of the Blockade’s
destructive function as an economic war machine set in motion against
British trade. Since then, as we know, Napoleonic studies have moved on
to new areas and new debates, and the whole subject of the Blockade now
needs to be approached in a somewhat different context.

New Directions in Napoleonic Studies:
The Question of European ‘Integration’

One of the more recent historiographical interpretations is the notion that
Napoleon’s overarching ambition was the ‘integration of Europe’ under
French tutelage. Within this genre of writings, the Continental Blockade
is seen as only one element of his wider imperial project to assimilate the
annexed departments to French models and also to extend that process
as far as possible to the subject states beyond the official frontiers of the
French Empire, in other words, to all parts of his so-called ‘Grand Empire’.
Indeed, the proponents of this idea seem much less concerned with the
economic history of the Blockade than with all the other policies (military,
political, administrative, judicial and social), which together made up
Napoleon’s ‘System’ in the ‘Grand Empire’. That is why I have preferred the
