                                             The Continental System Revisited 27


circumstances change, so historiographical trends change with them. If in
retrospect I engage in some critical self-appraisal, I would have to make
certain concessions in the light of more recent research. I can see now that,
constrained as I then was by the strict word limit for doctoral theses at
Oxford, I may have focused too narrowly on urban industrial and commer-
cial markets. Although these were significant in themselves, and of growing
future importance, they did not of course match the aggregative scale and
overall primacy of local agricultural markets and the small-scale industries
serving them within the European economies of Napoleon’s time. I must
equally admit that in my original research I only skimmed the surface of the
large but neglected issue of military markets, that is to say markets for the
supply of vital food and equipment to Napoleon’s armies, which we now
know were a major spur to local production and trade in many areas, includ-
ing some in the subject states. These, too, reduced the relative importance
of private industrial and commercial markets within the imperial economy.

‘Continental Blockade’ and ‘Continental System’

Those were necessary self-limitations in my original work, and I should now
also revisit another initial problem: was there any important distinction to
be made between the ‘Continental Blockade’ (Blocus continental) and the
‘Continental System’ (Système continental)? Both terms were in common use
from 1806, and it would be fair to say that contemporaries often thought of
them as synonymous and interchangeable. Later nineteenth-century writ-
ers also tended to do so, and that same loose usage persisted even in some
modern scholarly works in this field of research. Of these, one of the most
influential was by Eli Heckscher, the political economist and economic
historian. It appeared in English translation in 1922, three years after his
original Swedish edition.3 Entitled The Continental System: An Economic
Interpretation, it was primarily a study of the questionable theory behind and
the erratic implementation of the Blockade as a failed venture in commercial
and industrial warfare, to which the author as a celebrated free trader was
opposed in principle. Heckscher’s volume was to remain the standard text
on the subject in Anglophone countries for almost the next half-century.
His treatment of its British dimension was rather sketchy, however, and
readers conversant with French had to wait until the publication of François
Crouzet’s magisterial account in 1958 provided the definitive statement.4 He
preferred to use the term blocus continental, and I readily followed suit in my
own published thesis.
  Yet, even by then it was becoming clear that the term ‘Continental
Blockade’ did not adequately cover the gamut of Napoleon’s economic poli-
cies in conquered Europe, let alone his much wider imperial ambitions, and
one could ask whether it had ever done so. The first use of the phrase blocus
continental is usually attributed to the comte de Montgaillard (1761–1841),
