1
The Continental System Revisited
Geoffrey Ellis




The year 2011 marked the thirtieth anniversary of the publication of my
doctoral thesis, Napoleon’s Continental Blockade: The Case of Alsace, by Oxford
University Press. When I first embarked on my doctoral research at Oxford
in the late 1960s and early 1970s, I was struck by a marked lopsidedness
in Blockade studies published up to that time. It seemed to me then that
most, particularly those in English and French, had dealt in some way with
what I called the ‘sea aspects’ of the subject, in which the Blockade is seen
as essentially a ‘coast system’. Such a view tended to accentuate its harm-
ful commercial and industrial effects in the maritime ports of continental
Europe and their hinterlands, to the neglect of its ‘land aspects’, which
often reflected more positive economic results. My aim was to redress the
balance by concentrating more on the inland regions of the Napoleonic
Empire. That was why I chose Alsace, the two departments of the Bas-Rhin
and Haut-Rhin, as an area for detailed focus, using the extensive archival
material in Strasbourg, Colmar and Mulhouse. In due course, my wider
research revealed that some of the economic fortunes of Alsace during the
Continental Blockade from 1806 to 1813 were matched in other inland
parts of the Empire, notably the annexed departments of the German left
bank of the Rhine and mainland Belgium. Although industrial and commer-
cial expansion varied considerably across those regions under Napoleonic
rule, they were spared the prolonged decline, which overtook the major
European seaports during the maritime wars of that time.
  This conflicting evidence suggested that those very different economic
experiences largely depended on whether the manufacturers and merchants
concerned had access to, or lacked access to, markets and sources of supply.
A familiar pattern of economic activity became clear to me: as the mari-
time ports entered their time of troubles from the mid- to later 1790s, and
especially later during the Blockade, there was a reorientation of trade
and industry in France and its earliest annexed departments towards
the mainland markets. In a seminal article published some 50 years ago,
the much-lamented François Crouzet, for long the recognized doyen of
                                      25
