30   Geoffrey Ellis


   If we turn next to the ‘integration’ thesis in more recent scholarly works,
pride of place surely belongs to Stuart Woolf’s important study, actually
entitled Napoleon’s Integration of Europe, published 23 years ago.7 I should say
at once that his account is not based on any modish but anachronistic anal-
ogy. It has no proleptic undertones and is firmly set in the historical con-
text of Napoleonic Europe, which of course was also in large part conquered
Europe, the product of prolonged wars. It acknowledges and fully discusses
all the forces then working against European ‘integration’, including hostile
reactions to the Continental Blockade. On the other hand, Woolf posits the
idea of a Napoleonic model of administrative ‘centralism’, ‘uniformity’ and
‘modernity’ which incorporated the legal model of the French Civil Code
promulgated in March 1804 and renamed the Code Napoléon in 1807. He
aims to show how far that model, premised on the belief of French imperi-
alists that their administrative science was superior to all others, was imple-
mented in the directly annexed departments of the formal French Empire
and then also in its widely diverse subject or satellite states.
   In my more recent writings I have disputed this notion that Napoleon
‘integrated’ Europe.8 My purpose was empirical: to find out how far the
established historical facts, not least the basic facts of time and space, fit-
ted that thesis. Two questions arose at once. First, given the relative brevity
(just 15 years) of the whole Napoleonic episode, was it reasonable to think
that European ‘integration’ could take enduring form in such a short his-
torical time? Second, did the different time-lags through which the various
annexed departments and subject states of the Empire were exposed to
French rule, as well as their varying distances from the metropole, make
them more or less receptive to its ‘modern’ administrative and legal models?
   The answers to those questions seemed clear to me. The foreign lands in
which assimilation to such models had been most pronounced by 1814,
and proved more lasting thereafter, were those directly annexed compara-
tively early (some before Brumaire indeed) and so brought under French
rule longest. As it happened, these lands for the most part also lay closest
to France: namely, Savoy and Nice (two new departments formed in 1792
and 1793), Belgium and Luxembourg (nine new departments annexed in
1795), the German left bank of the Rhine (four new departments created in
November 1797 and definitively annexed at the Peace of Lunéville in 1801),
Geneva and its environs (one new department formed in 1798), Piedmont (six
new departments, later reduced to five, annexed in 1802) and the Ligurian
Republic (three new departments incorporated in 1805). To them one might
add the satellite Kingdom of Italy, created in March 1805, which at its height
had 24 administrative departments in Lombardy, Venetia and some neigh-
bouring provinces. Other scholars, perhaps most notably Michael Broers,
have rightly pointed out, as I at first had not, that those were precisely the
conquered territories in which earlier social and economic change had most
closely matched similar developments in France, and that this too was a
