34   Geoffrey Ellis


and imperial nobility to include many other lesser beneficiaries, among
whom faithful military officers were the most numerous. As a group, the
recipients of these imperial land-gifts were known officially as donataires,
and by 1814, there were nearly 6000 of them, who together enjoyed dota-
tions with a notional total value of some 30 million francs a year. But by
then, as the French military grip on the lands of the Napoleongeld weakened
during the campaigns of 1813–14, the whole system of endowments was
rapidly disintegrating, and many of these confiscated estates were to be
restored to their former owners at the final peace settlement of 1815.
   Prima facie, there is not much evidence of European ‘integration’ at
work here, and the way Napoleon’s system of land-gifts operated further
undermined such presumptive aims. Legal ploys were used to convert rev-
enues originally raised from feudal dues in the subject states into legitimate
‘defeudalized’ income in France itself, since the donataires themselves did
not reside on the foreign lands from which their dotations derived. Another
much blunter instrument for cash exactions in the subject states was the
Domaine extraordinaire, created in January 1810. This was a special chest into
which the accumulated spoils of war – sales of booty, confiscated land rev-
enues, irregular levies from dependent treasuries and punitive war indemni-
ties imposed on defeated enemies – were siphoned off for Napoleon’s own
use. It enforced a form of despoliation far removed from any model of
French ‘modernity’. Indeed, the late Michel Bruguière once commented on
‘the profoundly archaic character of this institution [Domaine extraordinaire],
which in its nature and its profits reflected only the right of conquest of the
Emperor, “exercising the right of peace and of war”’.12
   It appears, furthermore, that the imperial dotations and exactions for the
Domaine extraordinaire seriously hampered the implementation of the Code
Napoléon in many of the subject states of the ‘Grand Empire’. The classic
example of this was the satellite Kingdom of Westphalia, created in July
1807, and nominally ruled by Napoleon’s youngest brother Jérôme. As
Helmut Berding showed in his definitive account 40 years ago, the new
‘model’ Constitution adopted in November 1807 was meant to abolish all
feudal revenues in the kingdom.13 In practice, however, the extraction of
dotations worked against that much vaunted aim. Westphalia was to become
the most lucrative of all the lands of the ‘Napoleongeld’, and the enforcement
of the Code Napoléon was largely ineffectual there. In fact, its application was
also patchy in most of the other states of the Confederation of the Rhine,
which Napoleon had formed in July 1806. In her pioneering research,
Elisabeth Fehrenbach firmly concluded that on the whole the states of the
Confederation were not naturally receptive to the Code.14 This was in stark
contrast to the directly annexed departments of the Rhenish left bank,
where the Code was effectively implemented, along with the reformed pro-
cedures for jury service, and then actually retained under Prussian rule after
1815 in preference to the Allgemeines Landrecht of 1794.15 In the subject and
