                                               The Continental System Revisited 35


allied states of the Rhenish Confederation, even where it was enacted de jure,
its terms were widely evaded and feudal practices continued de facto.
   The overall result was that, east of the Rhine, shortness of time com-
pounded with local resistance to weaken the ‘modernizing’ thrust of the
Code Napoléon so that ‘uniformity’ and ‘integration’ with French law
foundered in their turn. Mutatis mutandis, there were similar effects in the
satellite Kingdom of Naples, as John Davis has shown in several works, thus
confirming some of the earlier findings of Pasquale Villani in the lands of
the Mezzogiorno.16 There the social conservatism of both the old and the new
agrarian elites long survived the French decennio.17 In these and other sub-
ject states of the ‘Grand Empire’ in Germany and Italy, it thus appears that
the early reforming zeal of the French administrators and jurists was frus-
trated and the process of ‘modernization’ and ‘defeudalization’ retarded.18

Effects of the Continental Blockade on European ‘Integration’

I have left till last perhaps the strongest of all arguments against the ‘integra-
tion’ thesis and so shall finish where I began – with Napoleon’s economic
record in Europe. This is a much bigger issue than his Blockade against
British trade alone, as the term ‘Continental System’ now usually covers a
much wider range of related economic policies. These include Napoleon’s
cash exactions of various kinds, his requisitioning and billeting for military
purposes, and all the other costs of maintaining his Grand Army in the
‘Grand Empire’. The cumulative effects of such policies hardly encouraged
economic ‘integration’ in the subject territories or with former enemy states;
again, one thinks rather of exploitation and despoliation.
   Yet even if the economic focus is confined to the Continental Blockade
itself, one struggles to see how its aims and effects could seriously be
thought conducive to European ‘integration’. Hypothetically, at least,
there were alternatives to that policy as actually applied. Napoleon might
have encouraged the formation of a multinational common market, a genu-
ine Zollverein, across all the lands of his ‘Grand Empire’. He might have offered
all his Italian, German, Iberian, Swiss, Dutch, Polish and other foreign sub-
jects real incentives to cut their commercial ties with Britain by allowing
them to trade unhindered in the large imperial home market. In fact, he did
none of those things, but quite the opposite. His crude mercantilist beliefs
convinced him that national interests could be served only through strict
protectionist policies. As he once asserted bluntly in a letter of 23 August
1810 to Eugène de Beauharnais, Viceroy of Italy, his ‘principle’ to be fol-
lowed in dealing with conflicting national interests was simple: ‘France
first’ (la France avant tout).19 Now it must be acknowledged here that as the
official French Empire expanded, so some of its annexed foreign subjects
gained economic benefits from membership of its growing home market.
Those economic advantages were most conspicuous in Belgium (chiefly in
