2
French Representations of the
Continental Blockade: Three Kinds of
Narratives for and against
Annie Jourdan



         ‘Let us destroy England, Europe will be at our feet!’
                    – Napoleon to Talleyrand, October 18081

To better understand how the Continental Blockade has been interpreted
in France, it is useful to study at least three kinds of historical narratives.2
First, there are the memoirs of contemporary witnesses and Napoleon’s
remarks on the topic. Second, there are the writings of nineteenth- and
twentieth-century historians, and third, the studies of legal scholars, who
are more interested in the law of nations, the rights of the so-called neutrals
and maritime law. These sources have different perceptions and goals. The
first want to testify in person about the times they lived through and their
own part within them. This does not mean, of course, that they do not take
sides or seek to justify their actions. In contrast, historians seek to depict
and understand the history of the past, drawing conclusions on the conse-
quences of events and individual decisions. Here it bears noting that French
historiography from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries is tinged with
a kind of nationalism, or at least a patriotism, which leads the authors to
attribute the responsibility for war to others – to Britain mostly – and not
solely to Napoleon.3 This tendency is less perceptible with the legal scholars,
eager to employ comparative analysis in the legal history of Europe. These
diverse explanations are indispensable if we are to place the Napoleonic
Continental Blockade in the context of changing times.
   In this chapter, some of these texts will be treated chronologically, and
each kind of text will be approached separately so that developments and
variations in interpretation can be better understood. We also have to be
aware that these authors would have read their predecessors on the subject
and that their own interpretations tend to take sides for or against those
predecessors. All, however, ask similar questions about means and ends,
causes and consequences, successes and failures, the morality or immorality
of the Blockade and its consequences, and the errors committed by one side
or the other. What is perhaps most significant is that very few Frenchmen
                                      40
