36   Geoffrey Ellis


the production of cottons, iron and coal) and on the German left bank of
the Rhine (in textiles and metallurgy) – both relatively advanced industrial
regions at that time.
   Such gains, however, were offset by the losses suffered by many manu-
facturers and merchants in the subject states beyond the imperial customs
frontiers. The Kingdom of Italy, for instance, was declared a sort of ‘reserved
market’ (marché réservé) for whole categories of imperial textile goods by
Napoleon’s decrees of 10 June 1806 and 10 October 1810, and by the
imposed preferential trade treaty of 20 June 1808. Such one-sided interven-
tions cut across established trade routes within the Italian peninsula itself
and also disrupted those between northern Italy and Switzerland (hitherto
a vigorous industrial rival) and between Switzerland and the Rhine, along
with its vast hinterland into central Germany and Poland. Merchants on the
North Sea and Baltic were trapped between the pressure from France on land
to enforce the Blockade and the demand of the British at sea to maintain
their traditional commercial exchanges.
   In the face of such obstacles to legitimate trade, smuggling and other fraud-
ulent practices were rife across Napoleonic Europe, not least in the French
Empire itself, aided by the corruption of many douaniers and some military
officers. Merchants, shippers and bankers in Europe and across the Atlantic
showed great ingenuity and guile in devising new strategies to evade the
Continental Blockade and the counteroffensive of the British naval block-
ades, as important recent works by Silvia Marzagalli (among others) have
amply demonstrated.20 They changed the destinations, agents and methods
of their illicit trade as circumstances demanded, across maritime and land
borders alike. Even the customs crackdown or terreur douanière between 1810
and 1812 in the North Sea ports, following the harsh Fontainebleau Decree
of 18 October 1810, ended with Napoleon’s later military reverses. By then,
moreover, he had already moderated the Blockade elsewhere in the Empire
by the Trianon Tariff of 5 August 1810, which permitted the import of many
formerly prohibited goods but subjected them to exorbitant duties. The
blatant fiscal motives behind the tariff had also been anticipated in his
Saint-Cloud Decree of 3 July 1810, under which special licences for trade
with the enemy were increasingly extended to ports in ‘old France’, not-
withstanding the official Blockade.
   Taken as a whole, Napoleon’s economic record was decidedly mixed and
fell well short of European ‘integration’. The imperial cotton and silk indus-
tries generally did well under his rule in spite of major setbacks during the
economic crisis of 1810–11. Cottons were more prone to sharp fluctuations,
but overall production nevertheless increased significantly, partly due to
important technological advances. The manufacturers of silkstuffs, for their
part, enjoyed preferential export markets and valuable commissions from
the imperial court. So, too, the woollen and iron industries both benefited
from fairly buoyant markets, thanks not least to military orders. Among the
