                                              The Continental System Revisited 31


crucial factor in their receptivity to the reformed French models of gov-
ernment and civil law.9 They were also the conquered lands in which the
French were most successful in gaining the active collaboration of the local
notables and professional elites, whose public service under Napoleon left an
important legacy after his fall.
  Conversely, assimilation was much less pronounced in areas that came
under French rule later or which lay further afield. These covered a wide arc
from Parma, Tuscany, the Papal States and Rome itself (annexed at differ-
ent times between 1808 and 1810) to Holland, the Hanse ports (Hamburg,
Bremen and Lübeck), northern Hanover and Oldenburg, all incorporated
later still in 1810. Subject states had already been formed in Switzerland
(1803), southern Italy (1806), Holland (1806, until its direct annexation in
1810), Germany east of the Rhine (1806–07), Poland (1807), Spain (1808)
and the so-called ‘Illyrian Provinces’ of the Adriatic hinterland (1809).
Furthermore, as a general rule, ‘integration’ was weakest of all in those
countries where feudal practices were traditional, deep-rooted and difficult
to abolish by legal writ alone.

What Might ‘Integration’ Have Meant in Napoleon’s Time?

That, briefly put, was and remains my empirical position. Yet perhaps it
would also be useful to address some of the more theoretical possibilities
raised by the ‘integration’ thesis. One question here is hypothetical: what
might ‘integration’ have signified to the leading Napoleonic players in the
heyday of the Empire, say in 1810, and what would it not have signified?
It is not what we today mean when we speak of European ‘integration’ or
rail against it, but rather what the term might have meant to Napoleon
and his collaborators 200 years ago. For a start, it could not have meant a
multilateral movement towards closer economic and political union among
European nations as a collaborative way forward from unprecedented war-
time conflict to peacetime reconciliation. Before Napoleon seized power in
the Brumaire coup of November 1799, there had already been more than
seven years of major wars in Europe, both on land and at sea, which dragged
on for another year under the Consulate. The rupture of the Peace of Amiens
in May 1803 and the land campaigns of 1805 set off a further decade of
military conflict. Whatever else the ‘integration’ thesis might imply, it cer-
tainly cannot denote conditions of collaborative peacetime reconstruction;
somehow, it would have to be reconciled with the plain fact of persistent
warfare – and that is not a promising starting point.
   On the other hand, and apart from its obvious military purpose of rein-
forcing a Grand Army of more than half a million men, Napoleon’s ‘Grand
Empire’ was also an attempted construct in civil government. We might
then ask how much ‘integration’ he sought, and how much he actually
achieved, in its civil apparatus. At its territorial height in 1812 the official
