32   Geoffrey Ellis


French Empire had 130 departments with a combined population of around
44 million subjects, of whom only about 30 million lived in the area of ‘old
France’. The wider ‘Grand Empire’ added another 40 million Latin, Germanic
and Slavic people to Napoleon’s nominal domain. It would be a revealing
test of the ‘integration’ thesis to ask how far Napoleon and his imperial
collaborators saw themselves as the founding fathers of what might be
called a ‘United States of Europe’. And here, admittedly, Napoleon at times
seemed to allude to just such a grandiose ambition, although much of
this grandiloquent rhetoric came after the event, in the rambling reminis-
cences of his final exile, most famously recorded by Emmanuel de Las Cases
in the Mémorial de Sainte-Hélène of 1823. Some of this epic stuff was to live
on in the Napoleonic ‘legend’ of the nineteenth century, but as historical
evidence it cannot be trusted.
   By contrast, the supporting evidence in Stuart Woolf’s cited account
is carefully garnered from the writings of many Napoleonic administra-
tors and military commanders across the expanding Empire. If he is right
about the French administrative model of ‘uniformity’ and ‘modernity’,
then his ‘integration’ thesis might well hold for Napoleon’s aim, if not for
its achievement. The administrative system of state centralism, vested at
departmental level in the functions of the prefects and sub-prefects in the
arrondissements, and at local level in those of the mayors – all of whom
were appointed from Paris, let us remember – was increasingly extended
beyond French frontiers. Its methods of raising direct taxes and large con-
script armies as well as harnessing ecclesiastical resources were conspicu-
ously more effective than those in force in any of the other continental
states. The Imperial Gendarmerie, which by 1810 had more than 18,000
officers and men, became a model police force for other states to emulate
on a smaller scale, a process which continued well after 1815.10 The Code
Napoléon was in theory a monumental model of modern civil law, which
formally confirmed the abolition of feudalism in all its forms in France dur-
ing the Revolution, paid lip service to the principle of legal equality (among
males at any rate) and recognized existing individual property rights fol-
lowing sales of the national lands (biens nationaux) in the 1790s. The franc
de germinal, based on the bimetallic standard adopted in April 1803, one of
Napoleon’s most important and enduring financial reforms, had the poten-
tial to become a common currency across the whole Empire. Conceivably,
then, the Napoleonic system had some of the basic technical apparatus
required to ‘integrate’ an expanded western European state.

The Empirical Case against ‘Integration’

That façade of enlightened reform masked a different reality, however, as
three fundamental contradictions undermined ‘integration’. First, the ‘Grand
Empire’ was forged by French military might and entirely on French terms.
