                                             The Continental System Revisited 37


new industries, chemicals (especially dyestuffs and artificial soda) made the
most headway, and foundations were laid for the later prosperity of sugar
beet. But other economic sectors such as linens, ship-building and all its
feeder industries and the once lucrative trade in colonial goods (includ-
ing re-exports) generally declined. Inland entrepôt towns like Strasbourg
took advantage of the reorientation of trade routes during the Continental
Blockade; yet for the maritime ports and their dependent industries, that
episode, and more particularly the period from 1808, marked the climacteric
of a longer time of troubles dating from the French declaration of war on
Britain in February 1793. It was in those later years that the crucial earlier
lifeline of the carrying trade by neutral (especially American) ships became
much more precarious, caught as it was between the conflicting require-
ments imposed by the British orders in council of January and November
1807 and by Napoleon’s Milan Decrees of 23 November and 17 December
that same year.
   Beyond the imperial frontiers, the final economic balance sheet was on
the whole negative. By ruthlessly pursuing the interests of imperial agricul-
ture, industry and trade, Napoleon actually induced disintegration in many
competing economies. If the cotton industries of Saxony, which flourished
during the Blockade, were one notable exception here, then the results in
most other subject states were rather different. In the grand duchy of Berg
just across the Rhine, for instance, the once highly successful cotton and
iron industries went into decline, most sharply from 1810 onwards. The
effects of French agricultural protectionism were eventually even more dam-
aging and more widespread. In the closing years of the Empire there was a
creeping depression in agricultural prices in several subject states along the
Baltic and the Mediterranean due to the official ban on trade with Britain at
a time when France could not absorb their surpluses. This weakened their
purchasing power and, in turn, paradoxically reduced their demand for
imperial exports.

Conclusion

The ultimate failure of Napoleon’s Blockade, both as a war machine and
as a continental market design, seems clear. The aim of shutting out and
replacing British goods in markets under French control was, at best, only
partly achieved. The Blockade at times troubled but never sank the pound
sterling, and it manifestly did not reduce Britain’s capacity to finance for-
eign coalitions against Napoleon or force it to sue for peace out of economic
exhaustion. The volume of French foreign trade in the years between 1812
and 1814 was no more than half the annual average recorded for trade for
the years 1784 to 1788.21 Moreover its official values in the years immedi-
ately preceding the Revolution of 1789 were not again attained until the
mid-1820s.22 By 1815 Britain’s primacy over France as a naval power, as an
