                                               The Continental System Revisited 33


The dynamic of conquest was centrifugal – from France outwards, and then
further outwards. Napoleon had inherited from the Revolutionary Wars
the so-called ‘natural frontiers’ of France (the Pyrenees, the Alps and the
Rhine), and he then extended them so far that, in strictly national terms,
they eventually seemed distinctly ‘unnatural’. As a power bloc, his ‘Grand
Empire’ never naturalized any concept of multinational reciprocity, that is of
a genuinely ‘European’ identity distinct from an enlarged ‘French’ identity,
and its survival always depended on the continuing superiority of French
arms. It took eight years or more to build, yet it fell apart in rather less than
one, as Napoleon’s forces drained away in the campaigns of 1813–14. The
Peninsular War had been one running sore since 1808, but his disastrous
Russian campaign of 1812 marked the critical turning point. One wonders
what vital interests or what ‘natural frontiers’ of France really had to be
defended in Moscow. As the frontiers of the ‘Grand Empire’ receded, and
then as Napoleon’s final power base was driven back by the – for once
united – Allied Coalition into the boundaries of ‘old France’ early in 1814,
any semblance of European ‘integration’ collapsed in the wake of his retreating
armies. It fell to the ultimately victorious Allies at the Vienna Congress of
1814–15 to devise a new international order in Europe, not of ‘integration’
but of ‘concert’ among the great powers. That, however, is another story
beyond the scope of this chapter.
   The second basic factor which vitiated any project of European ‘integration’
Napoleon may have had was his increasing resort to a spoils system in the
subject states from 1806 to 1807. This diverted him from the reforming and
‘modernizing’ vision of European reconstruction he had so confidently
trumpeted in the early years of the Empire. It was to become an important
function of what is sometimes called his ‘politics of grandeur’, a growing
desire to embellish his imperial pretensions with dynastic and social lus-
tre. The very finality of the Revolutionary sales of the national lands, as
confirmed by the Civil Code, meant that Napoleon had no ready stock of
disposable state lands in France itself with which to endow his new
imperial nobility. The titles of prince and duke were the first to appear,
from 1806/07, and the system of honours was then launched on a much
grander scale by the March decrees of 1808 which inaugurated the titles
of count, baron and chevalier of the Empire. The total number of these
imperial nobles may eventually have reached 3600, and, crucially, the
resources for their material endowment from 1806/07 were found in the
conquered territories of the ‘Grand Empire’, most notably Italy, Germany
and Poland.
   In theory, the endowments took the form of land-rents, in effect cash,
or what in earlier works I have called a kind of ‘Napoleongeld’, drawn from
confiscated domain lands of the feudal lords and, in Poland, from the nation-
alized royal domain lands.11 These land-gifts were called dotations and in due
course were extended widely beyond the members of the imperial family
