                              French Representations of the Continental Blockade 47


French influence in this way, he would have lost his supporters, and thus his
empire. This argument is well adapted to the context of the times in which
he wrote, but it would also be employed by later Bonapartist historians to
explain imperial conquests. Be that as it may, Sorel had some difficulty in
linking the Continental Blockade to Napoleonic hegemony. Significantly, in
volume six, he does not link them as early historians, whereas in the follow-
ing volume he reverses this position.33
   According to Sorel, Napoleon conceived of a Continental Blockade from
1802 with ‘French supremacy on the continent’ as its objective. But he
implemented this policy only in 1803 with the resumption of the war and
with ‘the return to the ambitious policy of the Committee of Public Safety’,
as he pursued a kind of total war ‘that was already the blockade’.34 However,
the term ‘blockade’ would only be defined in 1805, when Napoleon was
crowned king in Italy, annexed Genoa and reorganized the Kingdom of
Etruria. That was the very beginning of the ‘Great Empire’.35 But what
was the nature of the link between the Great Empire and the Continental
Blockade? The answer comes in volume seven: ‘the blockade would have
been a warlike initiative, transformed into a political system’ and wedded to
French hegemony. This blockade was a response to English policies directed
against France and sought to create ‘the coalition of the continent against
Great-Britain’.36 Sorel described a Great Empire that had taken shape based
on the necessity to constrain England and make peace on French terms.
Only then did Napoleon decide to ‘conquer the sea via the power of the
land’.37 But to be able to do so, he had to carry on fighting at a time when
France’s independence was no longer threatened.
   This hyperbolic enterprise – the term is taken from Sorel – was doomed to
failure, as it was far too ambitious. In Sorel’s narrative, moreover, Napoleon
was not a free agent. He was the instrument of a causality which tran-
scended him: the necessity of reaching the natural limits of France and of
destroying England’s expanding hegemony. Thiers had a better feeling for
historical interactions. In his view, the consequences of the Blockade were
certainly important, but Napoleon’s ambition played no less a role.
   So should the Blockade be explained as necessity due to circumstances –
owing to a poisoned legacy – or as the thirst for power of an ambitious
individual? These two explanations remain the most frequent in Napoleonic
historiography and consequently in that of the Continental Blockade.
Later and recent historians have not introduced any significantly different
interpretations, but they have tried to qualify them. Georges Lefebvre, for
instance, wrote that the success of the Blockade depended on the solidity of
the Continental System before he concluded that England was saved not ‘by
the natural laws of liberal economy’, but by the Russian campaign. Against
Bonapartist historians who underlined the poisoned legacy of the French
Revolution and the necessity of enforcing a belligerent policy, Lefebvre
contested any kind of historical determinism and attributed Napoleon’s
