                              French Representations of the Continental Blockade 43


so expensive that workshops and factories had to close their doors. The
spiral was evident. Mollien drew the conclusion that Napoleon led an old
regime war against England which in turn waged a modern one against the
Empire, and he noted that ‘sometimes and in some cases, anachronism is
fatal’.12 However much Napoleon’s customs officers tracked down European
smugglers, England remained master of the seas and had still the oppor-
tunity to buy cheap raw materials. British merchants started to open new
markets, in America for instance, and they still had access to some parts of
Europe, where goods could be smuggled onto the continent.13 The licence
system itself was hardly beneficial, since it introduced arbitrary and con-
tradictory measures. Above all, it allowed England to get her breath back.
Moreover, it was not intended to benefit Napoleon’s allies and vassal states;
rather it benefitted France exclusively.14 This huge plan was doomed to fail-
ure, believed Mollien, precisely because it was too large and cumbersome.
  Another Napoleonic public servant, Etienne-Denis Pasquier, agreed with
Mollien. Pasquier, however, analysed the reciprocal responsibilities of France
and Britain and emphasized the fact that England had been the first to intro-
duce a blockade. Consequently, he insisted that the Continental System was
not worse than the English initiative. But Pasquier admitted that England
possessed far more assets. With its navy, Britain could initiate and pursue a
blockade by itself, whereas Napoleon needed all the powers of continental
Europe to support him.15 If a single nation refused to support his system, it
was bound to fail. The best examples include Holland and Russia, though
the Hanseatic cities also refused to faithfully follow Napoleonic rules. Like
Mollien, Pasquier was not enthusiastic about the licence system. He disap-
proved of it because in his eyes it was nothing more than ‘organized contra-
band’. But more than his colleague, he emphasized the great achievements
resulting from the innovations stimulated by the Blockade, such as beet
sugar.16 He also maintained that the extension of the war to the Spanish
Peninsula represented a further unintended consequence of the Blockade.
Thus, Pasquier and Mollien try to explain the subsequent history of the
Napoleonic Empire in the light of mistakes that had begun with the Berlin
Decree of 1806. Their vision of the Empire, based on hindsight, was largely
determined by the vagaries of the Continental Blockade.
  The former Minister of Police, Anne-Jean-Marie-René Savary, Duke of
Rovigo, more or less shared their opinion. Moreover, he contested contem-
porary interpretations, speaking of an ‘incredible ambition to extend and
to enlarge an empire which was already too far-flung’.17 According to him,
such measures as the Blockade were ‘temporary’ and intended to restrain
British power and convince the enemies of France to side with Napoleon.
Indeed, Savary cited the banker Jacques Laffitte in his memoirs who had
made a strong impression on him. During the Empire, Laffitte told him that
a blockade was a grand idea, but he was sceptical about its execution. And
yet if such a policy could not be executed, then ‘a great idea is nothing more
