46   Annie Jourdan


understands, however, that Napoleon responded to the fictive English
blockade with a general blockade of the British Isles, and he condemned
the British for having claimed ‘extraordinary sovereignty over the seas’.
Napoleon had to retaliate and to attack his enemy to force Britain to sue for
peace: ‘One cannot but excuse what he did to reach his ends. One can even
be convinced that his fundamental mistake was not to persevere enough in
his views’.28 He is referring here to the licence system, which openly con-
tradicted Napoleon’s anti-British policy. Tsar Alexander was indeed right,
thought Thiers, when he observed that Napoleon ruined his subjects as he
himself grew richer and richer. Moreover, this system encouraged corruption
on an immense scale.
   It was true that Napoleon achieved great results as his customs officers
harassed smugglers and compelled England to suffer trade dislocation. But
it was not only England that suffered. The other European powers, among
them friends and vassal states, faced great distress, and that was not the
original purpose of the Blockade. As a consequence, Spain was bankrupt,
Austria had great problems and Russia was displeased and impoverished.
Despite the huge resources mobilized by Napoleon, he failed to resolve ‘the
great European question’.29 According to Thiers, this was not due to any fail-
ure of military genius, but to Napoleon’s politics. For ‘it was not the soldier
who succumbed … it was the politician who had undertaken something
impossible since he wanted to win from the invincible nature of things’. In
other words, ‘this wise legislator, this expert administrator, this great cap-
tain, was … a very bad politician, because victorious, he lost his reason, and
following a series of triumphs he went on to lose everything’.30 This inter-
pretation constitutes the basis of nineteenth-century French historiography
and emphasizes the personal ambition of the Emperor as inseparable from
the ultimate fate of the Empire. In this interpretation, the implementation
of the Blockade is less important than the Emperor’s ambition. The final
failure is due to Napoleon’s mistakes, as he was incapable of moderating his
thirst for power.
   Albert Sorel provides another important contribution to the history of the
First Empire and Europe. Though less positive in his approach than Thiers,
he is more Franco-centric.31 He wrote at the beginning of the twentieth
century, not long after the French defeat against Prussia in 1870. This defeat
coincided with an increasing wave of nationalism. Sorel’s peculiarity is that
he sees Napoleon as the heir of the French Convention – and thus of the
Revolution – which on foreign matters would have implemented the tradi-
tional policy of Richelieu and Louis XIV, the pursuit of the natural frontiers.
That means the borders of ancient Gaul as it had been described by Cesar.
The Directory, he believed, would have carried out a similar kind of policy
‘but in an exaggerated and a distorted way’, whereas Napoleon did it with
‘order, method, and harmony’. According to Sorel, France required such a
policy from Napoleon: ‘this was the price of his rule’.32 Had he not expanded
