48   Annie Jourdan


final defeat to his ambition.38 A more recent historian, Jean Tulard, adopts
the reverse point of view, inspired by Marcel Dunan – himself a contem-
porary and rival of Lefebvre. He insisted that the shift from the federative
system, created by the French Revolution, to the dynastic one, created by
Napoleon, generated a progressive evolution starting with the revolutionary
search for natural boundaries, then led to the Blockade, and, finally, to the
Great Empire. By emphasizing the revolutionary legacy, Tulard in some way
reflects Sorel. He does so, too, when he sees the Blockade as inevitable.39
   More recently, Thierry Lentz has taken the same line when he depicts the
changing course of Napoleon, who after 1806 exchanged his Carolingian
dream for that of Caesar. More than earlier historians, however, Lentz
noted the ineffectiveness of the measures taken between 1809 and 1810
to strengthen the Blockade since these measures in practice implied a
slackening of the Blockade in favour of French trade. Indeed, as Napoleon
annexed neighbouring countries to close all continental coasts and havens
to England, he gave licences to a few privileged merchants, stimulated gold
smuggling from England and introduced colonial spices – with a taxation
rate of 50 per cent.40 But he also favoured some imports – at a very high
price – to the same England. Like earlier historians and, above all Bertrand
de Jouvenel, who is regularly quoted on this issue, Lentz admits that the
Blockade could only succeed if it was strict and lasting .41 Nor does he forget
to emphasize that England was open to the world and could freely trade
with the East and the West. No naval fleet could hinder it, except perhaps
the American one. And yet Napoleon made the mistake of alienating the
United States with ill-judged measures. Lentz is also one of the few histori-
ans to recognize that a very different policy was still conceivable in 1806,
for example a peace treaty with England.42 These two last points are funda-
mental to a better understanding of Napoleon’s politics. They echo in some
way Thiers’s opinions on his political mistakes.
   Another contradiction about the Blockade is that, even as it tried to
unify the continent, it replaced an English trade monopoly with a French
one. Moreover, French prices were higher and her goods less aligned to the
needs of the rest of Europe.43 As these new interpretations implicitly sug-
gest, recent historians have benefitted greatly from François Crouzet’s study
on the British economy and the Continental Blockade. They introduce
an economic dimension to their studies and focus on the political conse-
quences of economic warfare or, conversely, examine the economic (and
financial) consequences of French and English expansionist politics.44 Thus,
the Blockade intertwined politics and the economy as well as two confron-
tational powers, equally greedy for domination. The one ruled the seas and
the other the European continent. Both wished to have a piece of the other’s
pie. These studies highlighted the reciprocal responsibilities for economic
warfare, those of Britain as well as France. Since Crouzet’s work, these are
not simply explained as a result of counterrevolutionary ideology, but as a
