                              French Representations of the Continental Blockade 41


asked themselves whether the Blockade was the only or the best solution for
France between 1806 and 1813.

Contemporary Memoirs

During his reign and when in exile in Saint Helena, Napoleon spent his time
justifying the Blockade and his decisions about it. He was prone to accuse
the British government of having been responsible for it and for its dramatic
consequences in Europe. In contrast with the epigraph at the beginning of
this chapter from a letter he wrote to Talleyrand, Napoleon wrote in 1808
to his brother Louis, king of Holland at the time, that the Continental
System was in no sense living proof of his ambition – as his enemies were
saying – but rather, that it was intended to force Britain to surrender. He
further added that he wanted to reduce British power and halt the economic
monopoly it imposed on other nations. His sole ambition, he claimed, was
to destroy British power and give back to the continent what it had lost. In
1811 Napoleon wrote to Bernadotte, by this time king of Sweden, telling
him that he must join the coalition against England since Sweden had far
more to lose from a British blockade than from France. Bernadotte was not
convinced. Finally, on Saint Helena, the ex-emperor told his companions
that he was not his own master and that he did not follow a rigid system;
rather, he ‘tried to bend his system to the unforeseen structure of events’. Or
so he said.4 As on other occasions, it must be clear that Napoleon adapted
his language to his audience and he alternated between explaining his
foreign policy as an act of his own will and ambition, and as a necessity,
imposed on him from outside. Both explanations would become a source of
inspiration for later historians.
  The Blockade was such a dominant issue at the time that, even years
later, those who sided with Napoleon felt obliged to address it. The Finance
Minister, Nicolas François Mollien, devoted several pages of his memoirs
to analysing the harsh war between Napoleon and Britain. To succeed and
exclude England from trade with the continent, he wrote, Napoleon had to
exert a huge influence across Europe, from ‘Bayonne to St-Petersburg; from
the harbour of Cette to the mouth of the Cataro’.5 From the moment the
decree was issued, Napoleon’s policy was exclusively focused on this plan.
Any ruler who did not cooperate with the Blockade could lose his kingdom
or states, like the Pope, who was ordered to leave Rome because ‘some
English ships had landed in Civitavecchia’. The same fate was reserved
for Louis Bonaparte, whose kingdom Napoleon abolished because he pro-
tected his Dutch subjects and tolerated contraband. According to Mollien,
Napoleon’s political dictatorship became progressively commercial with,
as its sole objective, the destruction of the only people who dared to resist
him.6 But this dictatorship also had a global impact. Mollien is careful not
to put all the blame for this on Napoleon. He is aware of the responsibility
