50   Annie Jourdan


the impossibility of that goal since, ‘the prosperity and the labour of twenty
nations had been sacrificed to serve the exclusive interest of France’. With
his licences, understood as a ‘contemptible trickery’, Napoleon became
richer and richer, but at the expense of French trade. According to Merlhiac,
Napoleon was both ‘too capricious and too greedy’. These faults would
themselves have caused the Blockade to fail. England, however, was neither
innocent nor a victim. If we can believe an author who spent much of the
period in the Arab world, the entire Arab maritime fleet was captured by the
British to the ruin of the Arab nations. Merlhiac believed that all nations,
including China, Japan and India, would have suffered from the Blockade
whenever their ships were put to sea.53 They were alternately attacked by the
French or by the British. No one was secure.
   What these two legal scholars do not explicitly say, although they suggest
it, is that arbitrary rules governed the seas, and that, unlike the war on land,
maritime war did not reflect the progress of civilization. On land, they noted
that armies respected the rights of civilians and their goods or proprieties.
On land, ‘war is launched against the state, and not against individuals’.
And yet, at sea all these rules are turned upside down. Private goods are
seized, individual sailors are ensnared and mistreated, and ships are captured
and burnt. War at sea strove to destroy the naval forces of the enemy as well
as its trade. As a consequence, it harmed such non-belligerents as consumers
and producers. This would be contrary to international maritime law, which
pronounced that the sea is free and open to all nations. It would contradict
the rights of man – that is, the right to life and the freedom of property.
Once these rights were violated, concluded the legal scholar Chevalley,
one would return to the state of nature and to natural rights, where law
was based on reciprocity. Based on this premise, Chevalley affirmed that
Napoleon had the right to retaliate and to take reprisals against England.
With his Berlin Decree, he simply transposed the laws that applied at sea to
the European continent. Or to put it in Napoleon’s own words, he answered
‘the sea blockade with a continental blockade’, which would be legitimate
in positive law even though it was not entirely legal or legalized.54 Napoleon
himself was quite aware that ‘these laws were unjust, illegal and prejudicial
to the sovereignty of nations’. He would have preferred to ‘have the liberal
ideas of continental wars transferred to maritime war’.55
   The immediate context of war made this transfer impossible. War had in
fact, become more intense and progressively extended to include the whole
world, neutrals in particular. In fact, Britain would claim in 1807 that ‘all the
vessels of all nations would be denationalized’, whereas in international law
‘the flag covered goods and cargoes’.56 With the publication of this Order in
Council, the flag no longer covered goods. That meant that neutral vessels
would be visited by British customs officers and would have to pay taxes
before navigating further. ‘All nations were becoming dependent on the
British admiralty’, complained a French writer.57
