42   Annie Jourdan


of England which, he writes, sought to make the whole of Europe dependent
on it for American goods and for colonial spices from the West and East
Indies. Mollien is also one of the first to notice that the Blockade enjoyed
some early success and that in its first months the exchange rate for the
pound fell by around 30 per cent.7 But thereafter, great dissatisfaction arose
among European and international merchants because of the disruption to
international trade.
   In the beginning, it is true the French were seduced by the advantages
that the Blockade seemed to offer. It seemed that French trade and industry
would benefit, since it provided stimulation for innovation and invention.
France would be compelled to produce what it could no longer import. It is
widely accepted that some new products were indeed made in France, such
as beet sugar, pastel and cotton wool. But Napoleon lost this advantage after
1810 when he decided to issue import and export licences and introduce
new taxes on national and international goods. According to Mollien, by
doing so Napoleon created two monopolies instead of one and increased
the French commercial deficit – as well as disturbed the balance of European
exchange. European cotton was so highly taxed that it could no longer com-
pete with English cotton, although that had been the initial intention. With
the licences, only some privileged merchants were able to trade, whereas
the majority were not. And these privileged men were French and not their
European allies.
   A minority of French merchants grew rich. Mollien criticizes the injustice
of the implementation of the Blockade, for it was not only merchants and
manufacturers who suffered from the situation. Above all it was the popula-
tion at large. All prices increased: sugar and coffee by 400 per cent and cotton
clothes and colours by 100 per cent.8 But Napoleon had no intention of
withdrawing or altering his policy since he believed that England suffered
more, and he had to continue it if he wanted to force it to surrender. What
he knew of the British situation – the decreasing exchange value, the scar-
city of key supplies and popular uprisings between 1811 and 1812 – seemed
to confirm his perceptions. Napoleon also had reason to be satisfied with
his new taxation and licence systems which yielded the state new sources of
income.9 Conversely, merchants and manufacturers lamented the increasing
cost of raw materials and complained of the difficulty of selling at excessive
prices.10 They asked for help and Napoleon agreed to help at least some of
them.11 As a consequence, part of the money from licences and taxation
went to merchants and manufacturers rather than reinvesting it in the
economy generally or on military supplies.
   This was one of a number of paradoxes that Mollien rightly pointed out.
Napoleon helped French merchants with significant amounts of money
and, in the long run, this could affect the liquidity of the state itself. After
his fall, for instance, around nine of the 18 million francs he borrowed
remained unpaid. With the licences and increased taxation, prices became
