                              French Representations of the Continental Blockade 45


striving for. The only thing that they understood was that they were getting
poorer and poorer, and they could not get the supplies they needed.21
   Gérard de Rayneval, a diplomat and former servant of Vergennes, was
more qualified to comment, and in 1811 he published a book on British
policy that demonstrated, drawing on plenty of quotations and references,
how nations hid their true motives and interests under the veil of the law.
Quoting some English legal scholars from the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, Rayneval argued that the English actually nurtured the law of the
strongest and denied other countries freedom of the seas.22 He also hoped
that there would be a revolution to change this policy so that every people
would be free to navigate when and where they wished. He thought at the
time that Napoleon would be able to attain this objective and the emperor,
thanks to his wisdom and authority, could resolve the fate of the continent.
This task entailed supporting a maritime code based on just and stable
rules that would establish the freedom of the seas and facilitate commercial
exchange between all the nations of the world.23 What Rayneval over-
looked, however, is that even though Napoleon had enforced such a policy,
England had never agreed to it. His analysis demonstrated that England was
exerting an intolerable dictatorship on the seas or, in other terms, that ‘the
seas belong to anyone who is powerful enough to exclude the others’.24 The
only power in a position to do so was Britain.

Historians’ Narratives

The first to write a history of the Napoleonic era were his companions on
Saint Helena, the ‘evangelists’.25 They were followed by the memorialists we
have just considered. Then it became the turn of the historians who claimed
to be objective and to ground their analyses on archival sources. One of the
most important was Adolph Thiers, who admired the genius of Bonaparte,
the General of the Republic, yet he had more problems with Napoleon, the
emperor. For him, the general was genial, but the emperor was too ambi-
tious.26 Certainly, Thiers was aware of the problems created by the Blockade,
but he would have preferred that Napoleon not invoke a blockade in order
to annex more and more new territories. Like several historians and philoso-
phers of the nineteenth century, Thiers attached importance to providence
and fate in Napoleon’s destiny. He interpreted the difficult victories of Ella,
Bayle and Esslingen as a warning sign – more or less as Balzac symbolized in
the ‘red man’ from Le Médecin de campagne, whose sudden appearance pres-
aged the disaster to come. Napoleon, he believed, should have limited his
ambition to the Alps, the Rhine and the Pyrenees – and thus to the natural
limits of France. Within these limits, the French Empire would have been
‘admirable’ enough.27
   In his analysis, Thiers is inclined to confuse the political consequences
of the Blockade with the hegemonic ambitions of Napoleon. He also
