44   Annie Jourdan


than an idealistic fancy’. He wished to tell Napoleon that the Blockade as
it was conceived throttled not England, but the continent, since ‘it is the
continent which cannot put a vessel to sea’. If British ships sailed across
the world and exerted a worldwide monopoly, the European continent
experienced blockade and exclusion from global commerce. Laffitte went
on to ask, ‘is the continent worth the other parts of the world?’ He worried
about this new monopoly and its consequences for French merchants and
consumers, but also about the dissatisfaction of the allied powers, for which
‘everything is sacrificed without a chance to gain any advantage’. Russia, for
instance, was greatly dependent on English factories. Since the Blockade, its
exchange rate had fallen dangerously. Prior to 1806, the rouble had been
worth three francs, and during the Blockade it was only 20 sols.
   There was more. The licence system, Laffitte thought, harmed the effec-
tiveness of the Blockade in two ways at least: it reintroduced a kind of
privilege and ‘it damaged the respectability of trade with the spread of the
fraud and corruption that is inseparable from this system’.18 Furthermore, it
so annoyed the allied powers that they would have to be allowed to intro-
duce a licence system of their own. But if that happened, said Lafitte, the
Napoleonic Blockade would become an illusion. Another reason for failure
lie in the state of English credit which was far stronger than the French.
As he explained, ‘to get credit, England only had to work with the govern-
ment, whereas France would lose its own, if she did’.19 According to the
French banker, ‘England was a great warehouse of which the ministers were
the managers, and the laws were the contract that the government itself
would have no right to break’. Conversely in imperial France, the council of
state ‘violates the power of the courts and nothing useful is done, because
nothing is really secure’. This analysis was bold. Though it did not seem to
enrage Napoleon, he did not follow the banker’s advice. He simply contin-
ued with his system which, in turn, caused him to annex more and more
new territories.
   This is why Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord interpreted the
Continental System as absolute evidence of Napoleon’s desire for universal
domination. In his memoirs, the former Minister of Foreign Affairs insists
on revisiting treaties in which he had himself played an important role to
underscore the kind of policy he wanted to avoid. Napoleon, he said, had
unscrambled governments just to create new ones, which were in their
turn overthrown. Talleyrand emphasized the arbitrary nature of Napoleon’s
policy in order to highlight his own talents. For him, everything had
to be explained by the insatiable ambition of the French emperor. The
Continental Blockade was not considered interesting or important enough
to play a role in his memoirs. So Talleyrand did not take the trouble to jus-
tify the Continental System. Napoleon himself would tell his companions
at Saint Helena that few people understood what he was doing.20 That was
true. Nobody on the continent had a proper understanding of what he was
