60   Alexandre Tchoudinov

             Table 3.3    Import of cotton to Russia (in English pounds)

             1809                           1810                1811

             557,924                     3,769,137            9,255,404

             Source: Tarlé, Sochinenia, vol. 3, 364.


   Simultaneously, the former Russian measures against British contraband
eased and in 1811 a huge torrent of British goods flowed into Russia and
then through Russian borders into Europe. In support of his findings, Tarlé
cited data, shown in Table 3.3, from the American economist Pitkin. In
1811, the Russian import of cotton was the largest in Europe. Certainly, such
a radical increase could not be attributed only to the needs of the Russian
industry. So the Trianon tariffs enriched Russian merchants making their
transit trade beyond Russian borders highly profitable.
   Thus, according to the French sources used by Tarlé, the influence of the
Continental System on Russian trade was, in general, quite negative. This
system undermined Russian exports. Only Russian merchants engaged with
transit trade profited from this situation a year prior to Napoleon’s cam-
paign of 1812.
   There remains the question of the influence of the Continental System
on Russian industry. Did isolation from British manufacturing foster native
industries in Russia as in Saxony and France? Tarlé ignored this important
question and aspect of the Russian economy. He noted that according to
reports from Caulaincourt, the production sector in Russia had developed
and flourished because of the System, but underlined that this Franco-
centric source was too tendentious to be a sure base for any decisive con-
clusion. Tarlé concluded that only a special study based on Russian sources
could determine the status of Russian industrial production between 1806
and 1812.

Stagnation of Russian Historical Studies after 1917

After the revolution of October 1917 research on the history of the
Continental Blockade begun by Tarlé was interrupted like most other pre-
revolutionary historical studies in Russia. The Bolshevik regime, based on
Marxist ideology, placed a lot of importance on the ‘proper’ interpretation
of history and restricted the activity of non-Marxist historians of the pre-
revolutionary era. The new state censored and decreased their publications
and prohibited their research and travels abroad.
  As the Soviet generation of historians appeared in the 1920s, they derived
their interpretations far more from the ideological dogma of Marxism than
from the study of concrete sources and analysis of archival materials. In this
way, the leading Communist historian Mikhail Pokrovsky proposed his own
