52   Annie Jourdan


add that the Continental System alienated a lot of European nations from
France and from the ideals of the French Revolution, and it facilitated the
formation of the fatal coalition that defeated Napoleon in 1814 and 1815.

Conclusion

French historians and legal scholars distinguish the Continental Blockade
from the System of the same name. The first was an economic war and
the other was its consequence; it was a continental coalition against
Britain. Scholars elsewhere, however, depict the Blockade as a maritime
war directed solely towards Britain, whereas the Continental System con-
cerned all European nations and, hence, should be seen as independent
of the Blockade. More interesting is what the legal studies reveal, namely
that Britain’s violations of the law of nations on the high seas inaugurated
the Blockade.61 Indeed, the Blockade showed that the law of the sea was
still in the process of being formulated, and the right of the strongest still
dominated. Legal scholars also contend that maritime supremacy remained
a global and long-lasting problem exemplified by serious shortcomings in
maritime legislation. Since the Navigation Acts from 1651, 1660, 1662 and
1663, England had restricted maritime liberty and dominated the seas – at
the expense of all other countries. The reprisals enforced by Napoleon intro-
duced a similar despotic policy on the continent and across the world. He
did so by imitating England and not by liberalizing the law of nations. Some
scholars even spoke of this as lex talionis (an eye for an eye) which many
judged to be intolerable, the more so since Napoleon’s system of licence was
seen as corrupt and arbitrary.
   The licences were also at odds with the Blockade and destroyed some of
its results. For the Continental Blockade to function well perseverance was
needed, but also a degree of reciprocity or equality between the European
nations concerned. Prussia, Austria, Russia, Spain and Rome should have
been permitted to give licences too and to fix their own taxation on sup-
plies. Yet they were not. And when they protested against the Napoleonic
measures, the Emperor reacted with annexations or with war against the few
who had the power to resist him.
   Annexations and wars were Napoleon’s answer to friends and allies who
disobeyed him: so it was in 1808 in Spain; in 1809 in Rome; in 1810 in
Holland, the Hanseatic cities and the Swiss Valais. In other words, Napoleon
did not allow his allies to ignore his orders and to favour their own inter-
ests, although they were twice losers. They could no longer get raw materi-
als or sell their goods, and they were obliged to buy French goods at very
high prices. All these problems help explain the failure of the Continental
Blockade and of Napoleonic policies. To be sure, most French historians
had, and still have, some difficulty in accepting the ability of England to
resist and the superiority of the British financial system. Under the Empire,
