58   Alexandre Tchoudinov


disproportion took place in the best year of French–Russian commercial
relations. When Anglo–French hostility resumed in 1803, the domination
of the British Navy overwhelmed and diminished Russian–French trade.
Finally, in 1805 Russia entered into war against France, but only the French
occupation of German ports in 1806 interrupted trade between Russia and
France. It was especially painful for some branches of the French industry.
Tarlé analyses in detail a petition of the Lyon Chamber of Commerce
presented to the French government in December 1806, which affirmed
that the Lyon silk industry was on the brink of destruction because of the
breakdown in trade with Russia and the German states.4
   The Treaty of Tilsit infused the French commercial class with new hopes
for trade with Russia in 1807. The peace convention not only re-established
the good relations between France and Russia, but also eliminated the
strongest commercial competitor. As a consequence of this convention,
Russia had to join the Continental System and break trade links with Britain.
Nevertheless, very soon these hopes turned out to be a chimera. Studying
petitions of the French merchants, Tarlé designated three major obstacles
for Russian–French trade in the post-Tilsit period: a lack of credit, an insuffi-
cient and outdated Trade Convention from 1787 and the low exchange rate
of the ruble. If the first two obstacles were more or less expugnable, then the
third became a real stumbling block for French attempts to play the same
role as the British in the enormous Russian market.
   The termination of British–Russian commerce had a dreadful impact on
the rate of the ruble. Russian exported goods lost their markets as their
prices decreased. According to data provided by the French Ministry of
Internal Affairs (Tarlé used primarily the French sources), the rate of the
ruble at the end of 1807 was only 40 to 50 per cent of nominal value. At the
beginning of 1808 this Ministry asked the French merchants trading with
Russia to provide a reason for the radical decrease of the ruble and received
a decisive answer – it was the loss of the market for main Russian goods.5
   Tarlé shows that the French government actively sought to overcome this
problem. At the beginning of 1808 Napoleon addressed a special document to
his ministers of home affairs and finances in which he suggested developing a
direct exchange of commodities with Russia.6 But this idea, Tarlé affirms, had
no real consequence. France could not substitute Britain within the Russian
market. The neglect of the French navy did not require the necessary articles
as did the British. Thus, primary Russian export goods did not find buyers.
Moreover, even if such goods had found markets within France, they could not
be transported there by sea because of Britain’s naval domination. Transport
by land of such cumbersome articles would be too difficult and too expensive.
   Thus, all hopes of the French merchants to establish positions as British
substitutes in Russia remained in vain even during the first post-Tilsit year
when the Tsar strictly obeyed the Continental System. By July 1808 French
Ambassador Armand Caulaincourt reported on suspicious ships carrying
