                              French Representations of the Continental Blockade 51


   The Milan Decree of 17 December 1807 responded to this Order. It pro-
claimed that the British Isles were in a state of blockade at sea and on land
and announced that all neutrals who obeyed the British would be captured
and declared lawful prizes. These rules would be abolished if England can-
celled her ‘barbaric system’ and abided by the law of nations. It was not the
first time that France had underlined the right to take reprisals. Thiers had
already noticed that the situation was intolerable for those neutrals who
navigated between two ‘tyrannies’.58 They had ‘to go to London to get a
licence, and then they were menaced with being caught by the French’ for
having taken one. The situation became inextricable and menaced neutrals –
that is, non-belligerent peoples. In part, the Anglo–American war of 1812
resulted from the irritation provoked by these constraints – and, also in part,
from the increased imprisonment of sailors in American vessels. In fact, the
United States was the only state to take measures against both the French
and British blockades. Their reaction provoked a new Napoleonic decree
closing French ports to the Americans, even if it was revoked some months
later. The contradictory Napoleonic measures did not encourage the United
States to open hostilities against England. By a strange irony of fate, when
they finally did so, Napoleon had fixed his attentions on Russia.
   Later, when he was in Saint Helena, the French Emperor told his audi-
ence that he had had a lot of bad luck towards the end of his reign: ‘At the
end of my career, I was repetitively pursued by fate!’59 In this precise case,
one could agree; it was bad luck, indeed. But as several historians demon-
strated, it was an ill fate brought about by the Continental Blockade, which
could not succeed unless it was lasting and imposed inflexibly all around
the continent. And that was the rub. As the former Minister of the Interior,
Jean-Baptiste Nompère de Champagny, the duke of Cadore, wrote to the
diplomat Armand de Caulaincourt, the duke of Vicence, ‘the maritime war
constrains the emperor to dominate the continent’.60 This would explain
the brutal war in Spain and the dramatic Russian campaign.
   Obviously, it is difficult to know how Napoleon would have acted without
the Blockade. After all, the first annexations took place in Piedmont from
1802 to 1803 during the Peace of Amiens. Napoleon was crowned king of
Italy in 1805, and the first satellite kingdoms were created during the spring
of 1806, that is, before the Blockade was enforced. Furthermore, no great
economist, the French Emperor could not foresee the consequences of the
Blockade for England. He was, above all, a pragmatic man, a ‘handyman’,
who drew profit from circumstance, as he himself admitted. Be that as it
may, historians and legal scholars will still disagree on this issue. Some will
continue to affirm that the Napoleonic hegemony on the continent was an
inherent part of the Emperor’s character, whereas others will insist that the
Great Empire was a logical consequence of the Blockade. They agree only on
one point: they admit that Napoleon became the victim of his own system
and that he committed incredible mistakes in pursuing it. One could also
