4
Speculations and Embargoes on
the Grain Trade at the Time of the
Revolutionary Wars (1792–1795)
Pierrick Pourchasse



In 1793, a grain crisis touched France as major European powers joined
forces to combat the new Republic. In addition to the military conflict, a real
‘war on hunger’ took place involving four actors. First, the revolutionary
government; it understood that the grain supply was essential to the sur-
vival of the regime. For the working classes, bread had become a right and
the authorities had the duty to ensure the right to obtain subsistence. Any
failure led naturally to riots that the revolutionary government desperately
wanted to avoid. Second, England, which asserted that the French Republic
was not legitimate, decided ‘to starve the rebels’ and, contrary to all the
rules of neutral trade, put an embargo on all foodstuffs to France. In the
North Sea, the English Channel and the Mediterranean, British ships led a
veritable hunt against vessels loaded with grain, but also stockfish, rice and
so on. Third, grain-producing countries who naturally wanted to sell their
surplus to France; their interest increased as the French demand led to rising
prices that offered great opportunities for speculators. These countries were
in Northern Europe, bordering the Baltic and North Seas, but also in the
Mediterranean (North Africa, Morea, Sicily, the Levant). Fourth, the neutral
northern powers who understood that they could make a lot of profit from
the needs of France by organizing trade and providing transport between
producer countries and France; the merchants of Hamburg and Copenhagen
belonged to the only neutral maritime powers (with the USA) that had the
fleets and the capital to meet French demand.
   These neutral states, therefore, set up intense speculation by organizing a
network to supply France. This essay presents this period of tension between
the French, who were fighting for the survival of the Revolution, the British
who set up an extremely well-organized blockade and the neutral powers
from the north seeking to speculate on the grain and gain high profits. A few
years later, during the Continental Blockade, the four actors remained, and
if the positions were different between France and England, the same game
was being played with similar problems and similar results.


                                      69
