                                           Russia and the Continental System 61


interpretation of the Continental System along with explanations of other
phenomena of world history. He treated the influence of the Continental
Blockade in continuum with the development of Russian industrial capital-
ism.11 Pokrovsky never worked with the necessary primary sources; thus,
absent concrete evidence, his conclusions were purely speculative. He
derived them from an abstract idea that any protectionism was favourable
for national industry, so according to this logic the forced closing of the
Russian market for British industrial production had to be useful for Russian
manufactures.
   The temporary co-existence of the Russian pre-revolutionary historians
and of the Soviet ‘soldiers on the history front’ (as they were called in
official Communist party documents) ceased in the late 1920s. The official
historians of the Soviet regime declared their non-Marxist colleagues of the
pre-revolutionary generation to be ideological and political enemies, and
announced their works to be erroneous. In 1930 many non-Marxist scholars
were arrested and persecuted. Tarlé was one of them; he spent more than a
year in prison and several years in exile. The Marxist historians established
a monopoly on the interpretation of history.
   In 1934 the pendulum of ideology swung back. The Communist Party
leaders abandoned the ideas of the Marxist world revolution within histori-
cal research and tried to anchor the Soviet state to the traditions of Russian
nationhood.12 The state condemned the ideas of ‘the Pokrovsky school’, as
it was named in negative context by official documents. Though Pokrovsky
himself had already died, some of his disciples were persecuted, whereas the
remaining historians of the pre-revolutionary generation, including Tarlé,
were liberated and permitted to renew their research and studies.

The Fundamental Work of Mikhail Zlotnikov

In the late 1930s Mikhail Zlotnikov, one of Tarlé’s pupils, produced an
immense two-volume work called The Continental Blockade and Russia based
on numerous documents from Russian archives. Due to the Nazi invasion
of the Soviet Union in 1941, his manuscript remained unpublished at the
time. Indeed, this new destructive war more than postponed the publication
of Zlotnikov’s research; it killed him. In 1942 Zlotnikov starved to death in
Leningrad during the siege.
  Tarlé survived the war and after 1945 made efforts to publish the work of
his former student. In 1951 he even wrote an introduction for the upcom-
ing edition. Unfortunately, Tarlé did not survive to see this important work
published, for he died in 1955. The first volume of Zlotnikov’s monograph
appeared only in 1966.13 It explored Russian commerce in the heyday of the
Continental System.
  Using numerous statistics from the Russian government, Zlotnikov pre-
sented a picture of Russian commerce at the end of the eighteenth century
