                                             Russia and the Continental System 65


clear example is the ‘new Russian school’ regarding the historiography of
the French Revolution.24 But far more often, revisionism manifests itself in
popular journalism as journalists pounce on this or that historical cliché.
It’s especially popular among ‘liberal’ (as they called themselves) publicists
to attack commonplace interpretations of events that have been significant
for Russian national identity or mark the collective memory of Russia’s past,
described by Pierre Nora as the lieux de mémoire. Naturally, such attempts
often incur a sharp reaction from patriotic press and historiographers. The
‘Patriotic War’ of 1812 remains one of the most important lieux de mémoire
for Russian national identity as a demonstration of the strength of Russian
patriotism and has become a subject of especially heated public discussion
between ‘revisionists’ and ‘patriots’. Trying to diminish the glory of this
pre-eminent historical event, ‘revisionists’ declare that this war was not a
national heroic defence against Napoleon’s aggression, but a consequence of
the silly and provocative politics of Alexander I, who compelled Napoleon
to invade Russia.25
   This trend of ‘revisionism’ also touched the interpretation of the
Continental Blockade. In 2002 the young journalist Eugeniï Ponasenkov
published an article in which he tried to prove that the Continental System
had no negative impact on the Russian economy and that the fiscal cri-
sis between 1807 and 1810 (which the author did not deny) had been
the result of bad government and military expenses. So the Continental
Blockade might not be considered a legitimate reason for the rupture
between Alexander I and Napoleon.26 In 2004 Ponasenkov developed these
ideas further in a monograph.27 The author did not use any new documents
and only presented a new interpretation based on well-known sources. His
publication, however, stimulated hot discussion in Internet forums. One
of the most detailed responses to Ponasenkov’s interpretation came from
an amateur ‘patriotic’ historian and active participant in the military re-
enactment movement, Alexander Podmazo. He refuted Ponasenkov’s main
ideas one after the other using Zlotnikov’s data, the same data his opponent
had drawn on, but Podmazo applied it far more accurately.28
   At last, this discussion attracted the attention of professional historians.
In 2005 Svetlana Vasilieva defended a doctoral thesis, ‘English–Russian
Commercial Relations and the Continental Blockade’, in which the she
cited some comparatively new Russian and English published sources, in
particular Commercial Statistics by John Macgregor (1850), not drawn on by
Zlotnikov. Nevertheless, this work has not drawn significant attention from
either amateur or professional historians. The author accurately rectified
some particular assertions of the former classical works, but made no drastic
revisions or contributions to our understanding of the Continental System.
   The recent bicentenary of the 1812 war, solemnly celebrated in Russia,
has not essentially changed the historiography in this field. In spite of a real
