66   Alexandre Tchoudinov


glut of publications on this event, most were, as usual, dedicated to political
and military aspects. Generally the economic questions and consequences
of the Continental System remained in the shadow and on the margins.
Nevertheless, there was one exception: articles by Nikolaï Troshin, who wrote
about the influence of the Continental Blockade on the Russian economy.29
By scrupulously rereading already-known and published sources, he placed
in doubt the widespread assertion that the influence of the Continental
Blockade on the Russian economy had been extremely negative. According
to this author, the decrease of Russian trade (he doesn’t deny it) was deter-
mined far more by the activity of the British Navy, which blocked Russian
ports, than by the disruption of Russian–British commercial relations. As
for Russian industry, Troshin cited some opinions of contemporaries to
speculate that the forced protectionism of the Continental Blockade had
stimulated industrial development. Unfortunately, all of these subjective
conclusions were not confirmed by precise statistical data, which has not
yet been well studied, as Troshin noted himself.
   To be fair to these recent attempts to critique some long-held views in
Russian historiography, while they represent important new initiatives in
Russian scholarship, I think it is too early yet to recognize them as full-scale
revisions. Troshin, for example, still needs a study of all the complex eco-
nomic statistical data for the era of the Continental Blockade. This would
require wide-ranging research in Russian and foreign archives, because the
existing published data is utterly insufficient for far-reaching conclusions.
It is indicative that although he contests numerous general works on the
Russian economy, Troshin has not challenged the main conclusions of
Zlotnikov and has confined himself to rectification of some of Zlotnikov’s
calculations. As for the monograph of Tarlé, it has not been mentioned at
all in the cited articles of Troshin.
   Thus, we can continue to assume that, even now the old monographs by
Tarlé and Zlotnikov still remain the best in this field of Russian historiog-
raphy. But the appearance of some new studies, like those of Vasilieva and
Troshin, offer hope that the corresponding research may be further devel-
oped and deepened in the near future. Within the last century dramatic
changes in Russia have prevented and sometimes distorted an accurate
assessment of Russia’s experience with the Continental Blockade and System
during the Napoleonic era. Now is the time to reverse that trend thorough
research and scholarship.

Notes
1. This work carried out with the financial support of Fondation Maison des Sciences de
   l’Homme (Paris) and the Russian Humanitarian Research Foundation (RGNF), grant
   no. 14-21-17001.
2. Evgeniï Tarlé, Sochinenia (Works), 12 vols (Moscow, 1958), vol. 3, 342–3.
