70   Pierrick Pourchasse


The Survival of the French Revolution

From the year 1792, the economic situation deteriorated in France. In early
1793 the grain ceased to move between the different provinces and prices
were extremely variable from one region to another. The Revolution faced
a cereal crisis caused by rising prices. Though stocks existed, speculation
created a food shortage. This crisis was exacerbated with the depreciation
of assignats, the new French paper money.1 To solve these problems, the
National Convention voted on the Law of the Maximum on 4 May 1793,
imposing fixed prices on grain and flour, and supplemented by a second law
on 29 September 1793.
   These decisions completely blocked the grain trade and accentuated spec-
ulation. The situation worsened, as in Marseilles, where, ‘since food is taxed,
we cannot find any. All the shops are empty and people from the country
stop supplying. The city is hungry.’2 In August 1793, ‘we, in Bordeaux are
in a very critical situation, famine threatens us and if we do not receive
corn in a few days, we will succumb under the most dreadful scourge’.3 The
conditions were already difficult; although the harvest of 1793 had been
quite good, this was not the case in 1794, a disastrous year which led to
semi-starvation in spring 1795.
   On 22 October 1793 the Subsistence Committee was established to
responsibly administer and develop agricultural production and organ-
ize the import and distribution of foodstuffs throughout the territory.
Previously, foreign markets freely supplied coastal cities, but by 1793 the
Subsistence Committee centralized and theoretically organized all opera-
tions for purchasing grain. For this purpose, it sent missions particularly
into Northern Europe and North America to conclude contracts for food
supplies.4 In December 1793 citizens Delamarre, Castera and Duveyrier
arrived in Copenhagen to buy grain. They were received by the upper class
of the Danish capital who were very curious to meet these dangerous revolu-
tionaries.5 During their journey, that first led them to Hamburg, they signed
contracts with major traders in these different places to supply the Republic.
In the Mediterranean, the Comité de Salut Public secretly took in hand the
old Africa Company, which enabled it to retain the privileges it enjoyed in
Barbary. Its agents were retained in service and were now acting under the
control of the Subsistence Committee to provide grain to the Republic.
   In April 1794 the Subsistence Committee was replaced by a Commission
of Trade and Supplies. The highly centralized administration was aban-
doned in favour of a more liberal policy. The number of overseas agents
was reduced and purchasing was given to commercial firms chosen by the
authorities. In Northern Europe, the main supply centres were Gothenburg,
Copenhagen, Hamburg and Altona. The largest house involved in these pur-
chases, however, was that of the American James Swan, one of the biggest
speculators during the Revolutionary Wars.6
