74    Pierrick Pourchasse


     15: Do you know, or have you any Connections in Trade with Mr. Elick
     Backman, or Messrs. Tournier, Merchants at Gotenburgh, Mr. Sieveking,
     Messrs. Dennas et Lubbert, Mr. Ernst, Mr. Parish, Mr. Amberg,
     Mr. Chapeaurouge, Mr. Olivier, Messrs. Pierre Boué et fils, Mr. Jacob
     Burmester, the senator Rucker, the senator Klevicker, the senator Poppe,
     the senator Westphal, the senator Adami, Henry Westphal, Mr. Gabe,
     Mr. Mackelers, Pierre, Springhorn, Mr. Glasshoff the younger, Jan David
     Bredermann, Mr. Wippe, Mr. Wiper, Mr. Wilcke, Jacob Hahn, Pierre
     Jansen, Henry Hansen, Henry Doltz, all Merchants at Hamburgh; Mr. Otto
     Matthies, Matthias Matthies, Jan Ernst Matthiesen, Henry Kuper, Bohne
     Hansen, Mr. Theden, Mr. Tandau and Mr. Beekers all Merchants at Altona;
     the French Agents Albite, Honnore, Delamaire et Ceteraij residing at or
     near Altona; Messrs. Hansen, Merchants at Randers; or Mr. J Gummer,
     Merchant at Stockholm, or any, or either, and which of them? Do you
     know, have you not heard, or do you not believe, that some one or more
     of the Persons abovementioned, or some other Person or Persons, and who
     in particular, not mentioned by Name in the Ship Papers, had some and
     what Interest in, or control over, or connection with, the Cargo of the Ship
     in question, either directly or indirectly ? Can you take upon Yourself to
     Swear positively, that no one of such above named Persons, or any other
     Person or Persons not mentioned in the Ship Papers, had any such Interest
     in, Control over, or Connection with the Cargo in question?18

  The interrogation process looked like a police investigation. All the names
quoted in the interrogatory were neutral traders and the purpose was to
obtain responses that could lead to legal proceedings. The questions were
repeated and overlapping in various forms to confuse the traffickers. The
reports were analysed, the answers compared and a decision regarding the
legitimacy of the ship’s cargo and destination quickly taken. In doubtful
cases, but also to supply Britain in cereals, the British frigates seized numer-
ous vessels. In August 1794, after the end of the instructions of June 1793, the
capture of grain vessels continued. The British services appeared fully aware
of the smuggling and knew when the merchandise belonged to the French.
  As the interrogation process indicates, the British were extremely knowl-
edgeable about the smuggling and neutral traffic and the merchants who
participated in such trades. To obtain information concerning French trade,
the British authorities set up an intelligence service in all northern ports
which exported grain and also in France. The great orator Fabre d’Eglantine
compared these agents to ‘vampires’ ordered by the ‘infernal genius’ of
Downing Street, that is to say William Pitt, whose mission was to destabilize
the Republic by any means.19 For example, the former policeman Claude
Antoine Rey, Lieutenant General of the Lyons police up to 1789, immigrated
to London in October 1792 and organized with the help of two assistants an
intelligence service paid for by the British government. In May 1793 it had
