                                  Speculations and Embargoes on the Grain Trade 71


   The payments for goods were particularly onerous to France because of
inflation and the difference in currency exchange, which was particularly
unfavourable. In August 1793, to limit this inflation, the authorities decided
to ban the export of all commodities and raw materials by organizing a gen-
eral embargo. This satisfied public opinion, which concluded that the enemy
benefitted from exported goods. Absent exports, commercial interest from
neutral ships declined; they had little interest in trade with France without
freight to ship from French harbours. Eventually, as imports were needed,
exports were permitted to ensure the entry of essential commodities.
   As the neutrals did not want to be paid in paper money that depreciated
daily, several solutions were implemented. Payments were made partly in
cash. According to Albert Mathiez, sacred objects taken from the churches
during the de-Christianization process were melted into mint and provided
largely for these payments. Neutrals were also paid with high-value goods
like wines, silks, luxury goods, art objects, silverware and books. At last, in
December 1793 the Comité de Salut Public confiscated the funds that French
bankers had abroad.
   As its trade risked becoming completely paralysed by British naval power,
the French government counted on the neutral fleets to ensure supplies of
grain and food. The definition of neutrality, however, differed among dif-
ferent states. At the beginning of the eighteenth century it was generally
accepted that neutral ships had the right to enter ports not under siege by the
countries at war. The definition of contraband products depended on each
state’s interpretation. France understood contraband narrowly as arms and
munitions. Britain, in contrast, had a wider conception of contraband, which
included all naval munitions and even the resupplying of warships (ships
loaded with Danish salt beef were declared good capture during the Seven
Years War).7 The right to carry products belonging to the enemy emerged as
a second point of discord. For the neutrals, the flag covered the merchandise
(‘free ships, free goods, unfree ships, unfree goods’). For London, the trea-
ties authorized the confiscation of enemy property and the flag in no way
protected the cargo. The final point of contention between the neutrals and
the warring powers concerned the checking of the merchandise. If isolated
ships had to accept undergoing a check, the neutrals maintained that ships
in convoy were not liable to the right of access. The British held the opposite
position and insisted that right of access had no special limit. Finally, coastal
trade between two French ports or France’s colonial trade carried out by a
neutral vessel must follow ‘the rule of 1756’, which was that the ship and
the goods could be seized because this trade had not been authorized by the
French authorities in peace time.8 As a consequence, neutral ships and car-
goes had, in that case, to be treated as being French.
   For Eli Heckscher, these rules allowed the power of the British fleet to
grow by multiplying the number of privateers who were sure to make a
profit by seizing neutral ships.9 The possibility of such prizes encouraged all
