                                  Speculations and Embargoes on the Grain Trade 73


Lords on 3 November 1795 communicated that the seizure of cereal ships
meant for France was a useful means of obtaining supplies from abroad.14
   To control French traffic, most available frigates of the Channel Fleet were
organized in independent squadrons. According to Nicholas Rodger, the two
most famous were based in Falmouth under the command of Sir Edward
Pellew and Sir John Borlase Warren.15 Commanded by young officers, these
frigates had great freedom to conduct raids which paralysed French com-
merce. The sea routes of Northern Europe were closely watched, preventing
deliveries by neutral ships to France.
   To withstand such raids, neutral vessels had false papers indicating false
destinations. It was, moreover, very easy for the shipowners to take over the
cargoes, that is, to declare under oath that these belonged to a neutral country.
This was a purely commercial move, paid for by a commission of one to two
per cent to the company in charge of the operation. The port of Emden, in
East Friesland, belonging to Prussia, was an important centre of neutralization
for vessels en route to France.16 If the Prussian monarch, Frederick William,
was theoretically at war with revolutionary France since 1792, Danzig, one
of the biggest exporters of cereals in the Baltic, became a Prussian town after
the second partition of Poland in 1793 and needed to continue its exporting
activities towards Western Europe. The chartering contracts for neutral vessels
loading on the Barbary Coast for the Africa Agency clearly indicated ‘that the
destination when returning to Barbary had only been laid down in the part
of the charter for Genoa as simulation and to give better authenticity to the
expedition, whereas the true and only destination was Marseille’.17
   To know the truth about the cargoes and the destinations, the British
put the seized ship’s crew through a very thorough examination. The ques-
tions, posed separately to the captain and several crew members, were listed
on a preprinted document to confuse smugglers. The examination was
divided into 34 points representing around 150 questions. For vessels from
Northern Europe, a second supplementary examination of 20 points and
about 50 questions was added. Questioning was extremely accurate. Thus,
for example, the additional interrogatory, numbers 14 and 15:

   14: Do you know, have you heard, or do you not believe, that Mssrs. De
   la Marre, Duveyrier, and Castera, French Commissioners or Agents at
   Copenhagen, have, in the Course of the last Year, and up to the Present
   Time, Freighted a very great Number of Danish, Swedish, Hamburgh,
   and other Ships; and have Dispatched them from the Ports of Denmark
   and Sweden, and Northern Ports, with Cargoes of Provisions, and
   Naval and Military Stores, on Account, and for the Supply of France,
   under Fictitious Papers, in respect to the Property of such Cargoes, and
   Fictitious also as to the Destination? How many of such Ships have been
   Freighted to them, and what were their Names, and the Names of the
   Masters of such Ships, or any of them, to the best of your Knowledge,
   Information or Belief?
