72   Pierrick Pourchasse


shipowners who hesitated from engaging directly in the conflict. According
to the jurist William Manning, this system increased a state’s naval power
‘by causing vessels to be equipped from private cupidity, which a minister
might not be able to obtain by general taxation without much difficulty’.10
Thus, since the Seven Years War, implementing of rules for the blockades
became harder and the Revolutionary Wars were the outcome of the process
that led to the total suppression of the enemy’s trade.

‘To starve the rebels’
The war between revolutionary France and Great Britain was declared on
1 February 1793. From February 14 orders were given to capture all French
ships and goods. On 8 June new measures known as the ‘instructions of
1793’ authorized privateers and British warships to ‘stop and take all vessels
loaded wholly or partly with grain, flour or any food product intended for a
port in France or any other port occupied by the French armies’.11 As England
did not want any conflict with the powers of the North, which supplied
them with strategic materials for their navy, and sought to avoid intermina-
ble procedures with the neutrals, the British government released funds to
buy all doubtful shipments of grain and to pay the freight of the ships.
   France, of course, reacted to the decisions made by the British govern-
ment. On 1 March, the Convention took the first measures to ban British
products. The Eden–Rayneval Treaty of 1786 was abolished and the import
of a great number of products strictly forbidden. These measures were
detailed in the law dated 18 Vendémiaire, Year II, entitled ‘law prohibiting
all goods produced or made in countries under British rule on Revolutionary
soil’. Customs officers and cheats risked a term of 20 years in prison if they
evaded these laws. These measures, however, did not appear to be sufficient
as anyone caught carrying or using English products would be considered
suspect and punished according to the rules defined in the ‘law of suspects ’,
meaning that the law-breakers could be imprisoned in a completely arbi-
trary manner. All documents referring to British products or brands and all
advertisements regarding the sale of goods in Britain were prohibited, and
cheats were also liable to 20 years in prison.12
   More than a blockade, however, the British decision to cut off the sup-
ply of foodstuffs was new and could be considered an organized plan to
starve France. The London authorities justified these instructions in various
ways. First, war was declared in a manner contrary to international laws
by a government not recognized by the British authorities. Since the grain
trade was supported by the French government itself, this meant that these
purchases were acts of an illegitimate government, so it was normal to
prevent them. Finally, the only solution was to force the enemy to make
peace. Pitt’s justifications did not mention the need for cereal products in
the United Kingdom. In 1794 and 1795 this need was great because of poor
harvests affecting the country.13 According to a communiqué from Lars von
Engeström, the Swedish envoy in London, a speech made in the House of
