78   Pierrick Pourchasse


  It appears that the implementation of the embargo was not enforced
consistently. In June 1793 the Danish consul in Bordeaux noted, ‘It seems
that the British let pass currently neutral vessels loaded with corn for France
because two Danish vessels and one from Hamburg have just arrived in
our harbor after having been visited carefully at sea.’22 On 6 August 1793
Captain Peter Cushing, commanding the ‘Anglo-American’ schooner
Hannah coming from Boston to le Havre (then Hamburg) with rice, sugar,
coffee and groceries, declared that he ‘had been stopped by an English pri-
vateer who had taken all the letters he had for France & only handed back
those for Le Havre after having read them’.23 It is true that between the
beginning of May and the end of the month of July 1793 English harbours
received 184 grain ships coming from the Baltic and that demand had no
doubt lessened. This could partly explain the success of Danish neutral ship-
ping in supplying France.24

Conclusion

The British blockade became less strict in August 1794 for several reasons.
First, the British were disillusioned regarding the war. In early 1793 the
London authorities believed the war would be short. According to Pitt,
‘surely, everything will be finished in one or two campaigns’.25 Things
turned out quite differently. The campaign of 1794 turned into a disaster
after the victory of Jourdan at Fleurus. The doors opened for the French to
enter Belgium, threatening the Dutch Republic. At sea level, even if Villaret
Joyeuse’s fleet was defeated on the ‘glorious First of June’, it was only a
partial victory because the convoy of grain it protected arrived in Brest.
Second, the blockade had failed in its objectives. The cost of a total blockade
was too high, and England could not control the entire French coast. The
French population did not starve and even showed a new vigour in the fight
against its enemies. Faced with the threat of France, Britain had to adopt a
more conciliatory attitude towards the neutral powers. This was especially
true when crops failed and grain riots broke out in various parts of Britain.
It was therefore necessary to buy grain abroad, including from the United
States and Northern Europe. Finally, the English may have noticed that, due
to inflation and unfavourable exchange rates, it was detrimental to French
economy to trade abroad. Buying high-priced products on foreign markets
fed inflation and accentuated the economic crisis affecting revolutionary
France.
   The British decision to starve France was contrary to traditional blockade
measures. In practice, however, the cereal trade war hardly changed at all.
Lloyds’ registers clearly show that the Royal Navy and British privateers were
more interested in French ships loaded with rich colonial products or in
liberating British ships taken by the French. As we have seen, ships from the
north loaded with cereals were seized in great numbers when Great Britain
