                                  Speculations and Embargoes on the Grain Trade 75


four main agents and eight junior agents in Paris; in the provinces, it had
agents in Brest, Toulon, Granville and Lyons, its home town.20 In Northern
Europe, the diplomatic services wrote reports exceedingly well informed
on ships and trades. The hunt seemed to be a success. In the archives, it is
possible to identify approximately 392 Danish ships, excluding those from
Sweden and the Hanseatic towns, taken by the British during the years 1793,
1794 and 1795, and this list is not exhaustive.

A Blessed Time for Neutrals

The system set up by the British Navy was extremely well organized, and the
merchants’ imagination seemed to be stimulated by the rigour imposed on
them. For neutral countries, it was a complete violation of the principles of
trade with the belligerent powers that anticipated restrictions on strategic
goods but accepted free movements of foodstuffs.
   The Scandinavian shipowners decided to ignore the embargo and got
round the obstacle. In order to do this they used the usual means: change
of flags, false papers with false destinations and so on. Even today it is dif-
ficult to understand this trade because of the use of nominees and other
subterfuges to conceal the cargo owners.
   Pierre Peschier of Copenhagen was one of the largest Danish merchants
to participate in such trade. A Huguenot born in Switzerland, he specialized
in the grain trade from the Baltic ports of Denmark and Hamburg. Between
1793 and 1795, when a ship loaded with grain was stopped in the North
Sea by the British fleet, they always asked the captain if he knew a Mr
Peschier of Copenhagen. In fact, he was a businessman working for Ernst
Schimmelmann, the Scandinavian Minister of Finance. Schimmelmann
regularly speculated on the benefits of Danish neutrality in European
conflicts. Thus, during the American War of Independence, he organized
an expedition to the Spanish colony of Caracas with a group of investors,
whose names were kept secret but which included Prime Minister Guldberg,
two members of the Council of State and the most important ministers and
government officials.21 There is no doubt that during the Revolutionary
Wars these men had also invested their money in neutral trade.
   Finally, many ships escaped the British blockade so that France continued
to receive foodstuffs. The risks were limited for the neutrals because the British
were buying goods and paying the freight in the case of doubt as to the destin-
ation. When the ships arrived in France the profits were large, especially as
payments were made with a very favourable exchange rate in luxury goods and
confiscated objects (for example furniture mirrors and so on). For historians,
it is difficult to know exactly the number of ships and the quantities of cere-
als that came to France. Amid the tumultuous revolutionary year, the French
administration remained disorganized, and port records were very sketchy or
non-existent, as indicated in the example from Bordeaux in Table 4.1.
