                                  The Continental System: A View from the Sea 87


constraints substantially shaped the way trade persisted, both spatially and
in terms of organization.
  Great Britain seized, as it had done since 1756, enemy ships and cargoes
belonging to the subjects of an enemy state, whatever the flag of the ship.
They also condemned apprehended ships and cargoes trading directly between
two enemy ports, neutral ships transporting war munitions shipped to enemy
ports even when they originated from a neutral port and cargoes bound to a
blockaded port when the captain intentionally tried to break the blockade.15
  The French Empire, on the other hand, seized ships belonging to enemy
countries (a measure extended from 1808 to 1810 to American vessels),
prohibited all imports coming directly from Great Britain and its allies
(although from 1812 onwards French licences authorized such trade), as
well as the import of British manufactures and goods, regardless of the flag
or the itinerary of the ship and of the citizenship of the cargo-owner. Non-
prohibited colonial goods could pass only when provided with a certificate
of origin, but they were heavily taxed, especially after the Trianon Decree of
August 1810 – a factor that considerably increased smuggling.
  The easiest way to circumvent most British and French trade restrictions
was to call in to a neutral port in order to avoid the direct leg between two
enemy ports. This was a standard practice used by shipowners and captains
in times of war, notably in order to carry on colonial trade. In March 1797,
for instance, the US merchant ship Eliza, belonging to Elias Hasket Derby
of Salem, arrived from Salem to the French colony île de France (today’s
Mauritius Island) where it bought a cargo consisting in sugar, coffee, indigo
and cotton, which was imported to Salem in August 1797. A month later, the
ship sailed to Bordeaux, where it sold the cargo.16 By 1805, the practice of
the ‘broken voyage’ was so wide spread that British prize courts started con-
demning cargoes which could be proven to have been imported in a neutral
intermediary port just to be re-exported to the final destination.17 By mixing
up cargoes in a neutral port, changing ships, captains and crew, and by being
very circumspect in correspondences that might be intercepted, trade was still
possible. The US brig Three Brothers, for instance, on 20 April 1805 exported
from Newburyport to Copenhagen brandy which had been imported two
months before from Bordeaux to Newburyport on the Alert.18 Similarly, it was
possible to export French goods to the British market by sending such goods
to a neutral port before re-exporting them to Great Britain.
  Imports of British products and British colonial goods bound to continen-
tal Europe could follow the same path. For instance, in the spring of 1806,
before the French occupied Hamburg, British manufactured goods bound
to Livorno, where the prohibitions of British goods were already enforced,
were sent first to Hamburg and then reshipped to the Mediterranean on a
neutral ship.19 Merchants had to provide them with a false certificate of
origin or false trademarks.20 Such documents could be forged, and the zeal
of authorities could be hampered by pecuniary incentives. In the 1790s, the
