86   Silvia Marzagalli


severely restricting neutral shipping: neutral ships complying with British
legislation and controls were considered as ‘denationalized’ and, therefore,
a good prize. By the beginning of 1808, the Berlin and Milan Decrees were
not only adopted within the boundaries of the Continental System, but also
by Napoleonic allies Russia, Prussia and Austria.
   The conjunction of British, United States and French policies asphyxi-
ated trade in all major ports under French control and dislocated numerous
economic activities on the continent linked to maritime trade, both exports
and imports. In order to counter such disastrous effects, Napoleon provided
navigation licences from July 1810 onwards, which sanctioned trade in
colonial goods.13 This measure, however, radically favoured ports in ‘old
France’, whereas imperial territories and allies were denied the opportunity
to adopt similar policies.14
   The evolution of the Continental Blockade over time emerged as a major
factor in the increasing discontent within the system of forced imperial alli-
ances in Europe. Specifically, the reintroduction of maritime trade relations
between France and Great Britain in 1812, from which Napoleon excluded
his allies, accelerated the decline of the Blockade. Many former allies ceased
to implement effectively the Continental Blockade even before they aban-
doned Napoleon officially after the defeat of Russia. Consequently, the dif-
ficult implementation of the Continental Blockade, especially by reluctant
allies, induced Napoleon to annex extensive portions of European coastal
regions. In order to demonstrate this assertion, it is necessary to look more
closely at the way the Blockade influenced trade and the means merchants
deployed in order to circumvent trade restrictions.

Circumventing the Continental Blockade:
The Recourse to Old Wartime Recipes

Legislation from France and Britain made wartime maritime trade consist-
ently more complicated than in times of peace. Merchants in continental
Europe, however, continued to carry on some international commerce.
Maritime trade came to a standstill for specific lapses of time, such as in
1808 and again in 1811, related to British, French and American actions, but
the Continental Blockade as such diverted maritime trade routes more than
it stopped trade entirely.
   Warfare and restrictive legislation obliged merchants to modify trade routes
and to find ways to introduce prohibited goods to consumers within the con-
tinent. Some of the methods adopted in order to sustain trade were older than
the Continental Blockade, others were specific to this era. This section deals
with the old techniques that consisted mainly in recourse to neutral carriers.
   From the point of view of the merchants in major European cities, busi-
ness was shaped by the Blockade, but also – and above all – by the condi-
tions imposed by the British on maritime trade. The addition of these two
