                                  The Continental System: A View from the Sea 89


  Sugar trade underwent major changes not only in trade patterns, but also
in areas of production. The West Indies experienced major upheavals since
the 1791 slave revolt in Saint Domingue. The success of the slave revolt
severely disturbed the island’s sugar production, which in 1789 produced
half of the world’s sugar. As Haiti’s sugar production collapsed, however,
new sugar plantations were settled in the British West Indies, Brazil,
Louisiana and Cuba. Merchants in London also absorbed the sugar produced
in those colonies occupied by the British.23
  As a result of this reorganization, and despite temporary slave abolition
in the French colonies from 1794 to 1802, total sugar imports to Europe
in 1807 were higher than in 1789. Great Britain imported 165,000 tons of
sugar in 1807, and although great quantities of it were traditionally con-
sumed in Britain itself, a significant portion of imports was re-exported to
Europe. By 1807, the United States re-exported 65,000 metric tons of sugar,
mainly to continental Europe.24 Some of this sugar had been produced in
the British colonies, which had been opened to neutral traders in 1793.
Despite the restriction imposed on such imports (certificate of origins),
substantial portions of the sugar imported into the continent were either
produced or traded with the concourse of British subjects.
  There is no doubt that neutral merchant fleets greatly benefitted from
warfare, notwithstanding an unpredictable likelihood of being seized by
one of the belligerents, delayed or condemned. Despite individual losses,
the overall increase in neutral merchant fleets clearly proved the positive
experiences of shipowners. Hamburg fleet increased from 159 units in 1788
to 280 in 1799.25 Both the Danish and the Swedish sent twice as many ships
to Southern Europe between 1793 and 1807 than during the period of peace
from 1784 to1792.26 The overall tonnage of United States ships entering a
port of the United States increased threefold between 1790 and 1807.27 The
Greek merchant fleet which sailed mainly under the neutral Ottoman flag
had ‘more than doubled’ by the end of the Napoleonic wars.28 Belligerents’
hostility toward neutrals was a constant cause of international tensions and
of diplomatic and consular frenetic activities, but it did not prevent neutral
merchant fleets from prospering.
  Recourse to neutral trade and carriers and to diverted trade routes lasted
until the end of 1807 when, under the conjunction of the November Orders
in Council, the Milan Decrees and Jefferson’s Embargo Act, transatlantic
maritime trade to and from continental Europe was heavily reduced. If until
then trade had been carried out mainly through neutral carriers, as in previ-
ous wars, new ways had to be found now to dispatch products to their final
consumers. These new approaches implied a radical reorganization of trade
routes which went far beyond the circuitous voyages through a neutral port.
This evolution ultimately provoked the reconfiguration of the Continental
System and pushed Napoleon to expansionism.
