                                   The Continental System: A View from the Sea 91


  Hamburg’s population, on the other hand, became extremely active
between 1807 and 1810 in daily smuggling from Danish Altona into
Hamburg. Although Denmark had adopted the Berlin Decree after the
British attack on Copenhagen in September 1807, the Danish king refused
to adopt the Milan Decrees against neutral trade. Neutral shipping – notably
American – was consequently very intensive in most Danish ports, espe-
cially in 1809 and early 1810, after the repeal of Jefferson’s embargo. Huge
quantities of colonial goods, therefore, entered legally into Denmark. The
Danish port of Altona was a 15-minute walk from Hamburg, and thousands
of Hamburgers carried daily small quantities of colonial goods into the
Hanseatic city. A contemporary report states,

   This smuggling was carried by a crowd of women, children, young girls,
   old people and the lowest class of the population, who go into the
   hidden warehouses of the city’s outskirts, each of them carrying half a
   pound of sugar and coffee which they hide into their boots, shoes, and
   clothing.33

Although seizures were considerable – 9.3 tons of goods in August 1810,
6.5 tons in September – the quantities smuggled into the city were far
greater.34
   Once in Hamburg, goods were re-exported to the rest of the continent
or into the French Empire. As most countries had adopted the Continental
Blockade, all goods had to be accompanied and protected against seizure
by a certificate of origin stating their non-British character. The French
occupied Hamburg from November 1806 to December 1810, yet the
number of French authorities in the city itself remained small, and they
clearly felt far enough from Paris to accept incentives facilitating this trade.
French plenipotentiary Minister in Hamburg, Louis Antoine Fauvelet de
Bourrienne, agreed to countersign merchants’ oaths delivered by the local
Senate stating that the goods were not of British origin, although, strictly
speaking, he had no idea of the actual origin of such goods. The inquiry
ordered by Napoleon at the end of 1810 revealed that Bourrienne received
an ad-valorem duty on the documents which accompanied the goods. The
duty was actually very modest compared to the sum other French consuls
required elsewhere for similar services: between 0.25 and 0.5 per cent in
Hamburg, compared to 3 to 5 per cent in Rotterdam. From the investiga-
tion on Bourrienne, I calculated that between August 1807 and December
1810, he had delivered passports covering a yearly trade which was 60 to
120 million francs’ worth in average – a sum which should be compared
with the approximately 50 million francs’ worth of colonial goods which
Hamburg imported before the French Revolution, which consisted of half
of its total imports.35
