90   Silvia Marzagalli


Circumventing Trade Restriction: New Solutions

The Continental Blockade forced merchants to organize a structured smug-
gling of prohibited or heavily taxed goods and to adapt to the changing
capacity of the French Empire and its allies to control the coasts of Europe.
In order to conduct circuitous trade, merchants modified trade routes with
existing ports, as well as created new trading places and exploited broader
portions of continental coasts.
   The case of Hamburg provides a good example. Since 1807, Hamburg
experienced a situation which became the standard for most of Europe after
1810. The free Hanseatic city of Hamburg had been occupied by French troops
two days before the promulgation of the Berlin Decree. The local Senate, the
highest authority of the city, was forced to adopt the Continental Blockade
a week later.29 Great Britain consequently blockaded the mouth of the Elbe
in March 1807, but authorized the navigation of coastal vessels on the river
Elbe. As this had already been the case between 1803 and 1805 during the
French occupation of Hanover and the British blockade of the Elbe, the
Danish port of Tönning became the centre of intense smuggling activity with
Hamburg. During the first quarter of 1807, coastal vessels with a total burden
approximating 30,000 tons entered Hamburg from Tönning, charged mainly
with goods previously imported from Great Britain. The commander of the
French occupation army, General Guillaume Brune, and the French consul le
Chevardière, did their best to help inhabitants to circumvent French prohibi-
tions. As the consul of the United States in Hamburg put it, ‘The secret of this,
as of most of their [French] measures, is that the austerity of the agents must
be softened by pecuniary motives’.30 By the end of the summer of 1807, the
deterioration of the British–Danish relations and the removal of the most cor-
rupted French authorities from Hamburg put a temporary end to the prosper-
ity of the small fishing port of Tönning, which would revive in 1809 and 1810,
mainly through American shipping. Meanwhile, merchants found other ways
to introduce British and colonial goods into the North Sea region.31
   At the beginning of September 1807 following the British bombardment
on Copenhagen, the British occupied the Danish small island of Heligoland,
where 2000 inhabitants made a living from fishing. Within a year, the island
became one of the major bases of British trade to the continent, and dozens
of British and European merchants settled there. The total value of imports in
Heligoland from March 1809 to September 1811 amounted to the very con-
sistent sum of 5.7 million British pounds, mainly consisting of colonial goods
and British manufactured products. Goods were discharged at night on the
continent of the North Sea by small fishing and coastal vessels until Napoleon
finally decided to annex the whole North Sea coast in 1810. If the Heligoland
trade bypassed the city of Hamburg, the city’s merchants took an active part
in the smuggling networks that helped goods reach the continent.32
