                                   The Continental System: A View from the Sea 85


the 1790s, and again from 1803 onwards.9 In its content, the Decree rep-
resented not only a manifestation of industrial protectionism – although
this aspect was the most likely to induce governments in Europe to accept
it – but also a change in imperial strategy, as it aimed to reinforce economic
warfare against Great Britain by banning its trade to (and less convincingly
from) the whole continent. Colonial goods were considered British, and
were thus prohibited, unless they were accompanied with a certificate of
origin signed by the French consul in the ship’s port of clearance, stating
that the ships’ contents had not been produced in a British colony.
   By pointing to the fact that ‘It was an extension to the whole continent …
of a toll legislation which was previously applied within a state only’,
Dufraisse stressed that the novelty of the 1806 Berlin Decree consisted pre-
cisely in Napoleon’s determination to extend it to the greatest possible num-
ber of European countries.10 The Continental Blockade, thus, reflects the
Continental System as much as it shapes it. The two, however, overlap nei-
ther conceptually nor geographically. If the Continental System was essen-
tially related to power relations in the continent, the Continental Blockade
was an economic policy which remained strongly determined by maritime
factors and should in fact be understood as an ersatz for naval weakness.
   This desire to extend existing interdiction against British trade to the
entire continent should be understood in the context of the French defeat at
Trafalgar in October 1805 and the victory of the French army at Austerlitz in
December 1805 and at Jena in October 1806. The decree tacitly recognized
British superiority at sea and the impossibility for France to blockade British
ports through a classical naval blockade or to seriously hamper British ship-
ping and maritime trade at sea. The French victory over Austria and Prussia,
on the other hand, made it possible to conceive of a forced extension of
the anti-British economic measures to a contiguous part of Europe and its
coasts.
   Napoleon thought it possible to stop British trade to Europe by controlling
the land and the ports of the continent. By the time the Berlin Decree was
issued, he already controlled, directly or indirectly, such major European
ports as Genoa, Livorno, Amsterdam, Lübeck, Bremen and Hamburg. In the
case of the north German cities, French troops occupied these once neutral
states, guaranteed by Prussia since 1795, a few days before Napoleon issued
the Berlin Decree declaring Great Britain under blockade.11 The Continental
Blockade – a term which does not appear as such in the Berlin Decree itself –
was thus maritime in its nature but continental in its implementation.
In contrast with a traditional maritime blockade carried out by the navy,
Napoleon’s Blockade was continental because it was to be applied on land
and aimed to encompass the whole continent.
   Indeed, within a year, Napoleon had imposed the Continental Blockade
to almost the entire continent.12 The measures against British trade were
reinforced by the Milan Decrees of 23 November and 17 December 1807,
