                             The Kingdom of Italy and the Continental Blockade 99


  This chapter discusses the implementation of the Continental Blockade
in the Kingdom of Italy. Aside from examining various imperial decrees and
policies, the chapter responds to two main questions: How successful was the
enforcement of the Blockade? and What was its impact on the Italian king-
dom’s economy? The chapter also references the experiences of the Blockade
in other parts of the Italian Peninsula to provide a regional context.

The Formation of the Kingdom of Italy

To understand the implementation of the Blockade in the Kingdom of Italy,
some background about its formation is necessary.5 Following his victory
at Marengo (June 1800), Napoleon set up the Second Cisalpine republic in
northern Italy. On 26 January 1802, he replaced it with the Republic of Italy,
becoming its president. In March 1805, after becoming French Emperor,
Napoleon transformed the republic into the Kingdom of Italy (Regno d’Italia)
and declared himself king and his stepson, Eugène de Beauharnais, his
viceroy in Milan. The kingdom, which lasted until Napoleon’s fall in April
1814, consisted of the northern Italian regions of Lombardy, Novara, Emilia-
Romagna, Modena, the Veneto, the Marche and South Tyrol. At its peak, the
kingdom consisted of 24 departments, extending over an area of 84,000 sq. km
with 6.7 million inhabitants.
  Its geographical location made the kingdom a prominent player in
securing the Blockade. It bordered Piedmont, Tuscany, the Kingdom of
Naples, Switzerland and the Illyrian provinces, thereby constituting a major
transit territory of commerce and smuggling from southern Italy and the
Mediterranean to Northern Europe and from the Balkans to France. Its
importance rose when it gained the northern Adriatic coastline. Indeed,
Napoleon extended the kingdom’s territory three times between the years
1806 and 1810, aiming to strengthen the Blockade’s enforcement. Following
their defeat in Austerlitz, Austria ceded the Veneto with the important
port of Venice, which Napoleon added to the kingdom. In May 1808, the
Emperor joined the Adriatic Marche provinces of Urbino, Ancona, Macerata
and Camerino to his Italian state. Those changes gave the kingdom con-
trol over the northern coastline of the Adriatic Sea, which positioned its
authorities to stop the smuggling of English goods from Malta and the
Mediterranean. In 1810, Napoleon annexed South Tyrol to the kingdom,
thereby strengthening the kingdom’s strategic location vis-à-vis central
Europe, and in particular, its control over the Alpine passes.

The Continental Blockade in the Republic of Italy (1802–05)

In northern Italy the blockade had its roots during the Revolutionary Three
Years, 1796 to 1799. A treaty of commerce with the Cisalpine republic in
February 1798 subjected that ‘Sister Republic’ to France, and along with
