94   Silvia Marzagalli


and producers in continental Europe, despite belligerents’ restrictions at sea
and Napoleon’s restrictions on land. The Continental Blockade is an aspect
of a much more comprehensive story linked to international circulation and
Napoleon’s limited means to control it. The Continental Blockade itself can
only be understood by looking at it from a maritime perspective.
   In producing major shifts in trade routes and price changes and by com-
plicating or making virtually impossible some kinds of trade and economic
transactions, the Continental Blockade influenced the economy in many
different ways and affected the living conditions and, incidentally, state
revenues of many countries, regions and cities in Europe. It also shaped
relations between the Empire and its satellites and allies. Ultimately, it deter-
mined the directions of French expansionism.
   Since the cessation of the Peace of Amiens, the directions of Napoleon’s
expansionism cannot be understood without considering his will to exert
direct control on larger parts of European maritime regions. After the repub-
lic of Genoa, annexed in June 1805, Tuscany and central Italy were annexed
in 1808, the Republic of Ragusa ceased to exist in 1808 and the Eastern
Adriatic coast was put under direct French control with the creation of the
Illyrian Provinces. In 1810, the Kingdoms of Holland and Bremen, Hamburg
and Lübeck were incorporated into the French Empire. Finally, Catalonia
was annexed in 1812. Annexation was conceived by Napoleon as the most
adequate response to the incapacity or unwillingness of continental allies
to impose respect for the Continental Blockade among the merchants in
the ports and population living along the coasts. In those parts of Europe
which were not annexed, the Continental Blockade markedly contributed
to increased tensions with the French Empire as it became clear that French
interests came before that of the allies. The evolution of the Continental
System and imperial expansion and politics, therefore, can also be better
understood by looking at it from a maritime perspective.


Notes
1. George Lefebvre denied that the Blockade was the ‘essential purpose’ (raison d’être)
   of the Empire: George Lefebvre, Napoleon (4th edn, Paris, 1965), 238–9; but Marcel
   Dunan considered the Blockade as the main factor of Napoleon’s expansionism in
   Europe: Marcel Dunan, ‘Napoléon et l’Allemagne’, in Napoléon et l’Europe (Paris,
   1961), 63–78 (75). See also Stuart Woolf, Napoleon’s Integration of Europe (London,
   1991), 26–9.
2. Luigi Mascilli Migliorini, Napoléon (Paris, 2004).
3. Michael Broers, ‘A Turner Thesis of Europe? The Frontier in Napoleonic Europe’,
   Napoleonica. La revue 5 (2009): 2–12 (7).
4. These aspects have been best developed by Michael Broers, Europe under Napoleon,
   1799–1815 (London, 1996); see also his ‘Cultural Imperialism in a European
   Context? Political Culture and Cultural Frontiers in Napoleonic Italy’, Past &
   Present 170 (2001): 152–80.
