100   Alexander Grab


the later law of 13 July 1798, prohibited the import of British goods to
Italian markets. Napoleon continued the Directory’s policy. Britain never
recognized the Republic of Italy and Napoleon’s presidency there, and the
First Consul was convinced that economic pressure would force Britain
to change its practice. In June 1802, he wrote to Vice President Francesco
Melzi, ‘Thwarting [English] merchants will force it to recognize the Italian
Republic.’6 Melzi responded that the authorities had difficulties identifying
the origin of imported products since ‘We receive [the merchandise] second
hand, which renders it difficult to assure its origin.’7
   The collapse of the Treaty of Amiens in May 1803 marked the resumption
of hostilities between Britain and France and affected the Napoleonic satellites’
relations with Britain as well. On 29 May 1803, Napoleon ordered the arrest of
British subjects in the Italian republic.8 On 4 June 1803, he banned British goods
from the republic and ordered the confiscation of British products.9 Merchants
requested to be exempt from that ban.10 For example, Enrico Mijlius and the
Pensa brothers asked to be allowed to import English goods they had paid for
prior to the resumption of hostilities. Another request came from a certain
Buttarelli who had paid 480 pounds for goods before 1803. The merchandise
had arrived in Venice and he asked to be allowed to import them into the
Italian republic. Giuseppe Prina, the Finance Minister, recommended allowing
those imports, thereby indicating his reluctance to antagonize the merchant
class. The Napoleonic prohibitions succeeded in reducing British imports to the
Republic of Italy between 1803 and 1805.11 British goods, however, continued
to arrive via Venice and Trieste, which were under Austrian rule.

The Implementation of the Continental Blockade
in the Kingdom of Italy

Within the kingdom, authorities intensified the restrictions on trade with
Britain. On 27 July 1805, a bilingual decree in Italian and French repeated the
ban on English merchandise, threatening violators with their confiscation.
On 10 June 1806, Napoleon extended the prohibition to colonial goods whose
owners were unable to prove that they did not originate from Britain.12 The
authorities also stiffened penalties, imposing a three-month incarceration
and a fine on smugglers as well as the confiscation of means of transporta-
tion. To encourage the population’s cooperation, they promised substantial
rewards for informers who reported law violators. On 21 November 1806,
the kingdom’s authorities published the Berlin Decree in Italian and French.
Then on 10 December they issued another decree designed ‘to assure the
full execution’ of the Berlin Decree.13 It ordered citizens who possessed
British goods to report them within 48 hours to department officials who,
in turn, had to provide a list of those products to the Finance Minister. Inn
owners had to supply names of English guests within 24 hours, and prefects
and vice-prefects had to arrest them and to supply their names to the chief
