                             The Kingdom of Italy and the Continental Blockade 101


of police. All British subjects were ordered to reside in the city of Cremona
in Lombardy so that they could be better supervised.14 The government also
established a special commission to deal with seized British merchandise.
   Enforcing the blockade met with difficulties in the kingdom. As in other
countries, merchants opposed the Blockade’s restrictions and tried to evade
them. The chief of police Diego Guicciardi reported that the December decree
‘spread great fear among the class of merchants in this city [Milan]’.15 Not
surprisingly, the authorities failed to receive an accurate picture of the quan-
tities of British goods in the kingdom. Guicciardi wrote to Viceroy Eugène
that most merchants in Milan had failed to inform the government about
their English goods, although ‘secret reports cause me to assume that vari-
ous merchants and especially owners of fancy shops had such goods’.16 He
reminded Eugène that ever since 1803, when the ban was first proclaimed,
only a few merchants had notified the authorities of English imports. A week
later Guicciardi reported the growing discontent and opposition among
merchants to that policy. Merchants in Treviso requested exemption from
notification since they had imported British goods prior to the Berlin Decree.
Entrepreneurs also resorted to falsification of documents that marked the
British origins of the products to indicate their arrival from other countries.
   Clearly, merchants feared that the authorities would confiscate their goods.
Exporters were owed money from England and feared not being paid. Venetian
merchants possessed an abundance of English merchandise, which they had
purchased during the eight-year Austrian rule (1797 to 1805). Prina pointed out
that ‘before the annexation of the Venetian states … [Italian merchants] were
furnished with a lot of English goods but now were slow to notify to the authori-
ties’.17 Luigi Lambertenghi, the head of the customs department, lamented that
notifications from Venice and the departments of Piave and Brenta included no
value of the goods.18 By January 1807, the authorities had received only 312
declarations of English goods from Venice. Rather than reporting their wares to
the authorities, merchants shipped those products to Tuscany where the policy
was enforced less rigorously. Indeed, much English merchandise was stocked in
Livorno and from there was sent to Mediterranean ports.19
   The kingdom’s administration exerted much effort to end fraud and
obtain an accurate picture of British merchandise. Among Napoleon’s rela-
tives who ruled over satellite states, Viceroy Eugène was the most loyal to
Napoleon and, far more than Louis in Holland and Murat in Naples, he
exerted efforts to fulfil the Blockade’s orders. On 7 January 1807, the gov-
ernment issued a new decree ordering prefects, police and customs officials
to complete the lists of merchants’ names and their British and colonial
goods within two days and submit them to the authorities.20 A week later,
on 15 January, a decree warned that unreported goods would immediately
be confiscated and law violators punished. Not surprisingly, those decrees
did not eradicate the problem and on 7 October 1807 the Viceroy issued
a new comprehensive decree designed to provide the government with
