6
The Kingdom of Italy and the
Continental Blockade
Alexander Grab




On 21 November 1806 Napoleon proclaimed the Berlin Decree, declaring
‘The British Islands are in a state of blockade’ and ‘all trade or communi-
cation with the isles are prohibited’, thereby launching the Continental
Blockade. It would last until 1813.1 This Decree played a central role in
Napoleonic governance in the Kingdom of Italy. Dominating the Italian
Peninsula was indispensable for Napoleon to assure the success of the block-
ade for two reasons. First, the peninsula’s long Adriatic and Mediterranean
coastlines were vulnerable to British smuggling. Second, the peninsula
possessed important ports that served British ships, including Ancona,
Civitavecchia (near Rome), Genoa, Livorno, Naples and Venice. Napoleon
was aware of the close commercial relations between Britain and the penin-
sula throughout the eighteenth century.2 England purchased raw silk, cereal,
wine and olive oil from Italy and shipped textiles and colonial goods to
the peninsula. Between 1793 and 1796 Britain sent to Italian markets eight
per cent of its European exports.3 Moreover, dominating the peninsula was
crucial for French presence in the Mediterranean Sea generally and for main-
taining communications with the Near East and the Balkans.
   By the time the Emperor proclaimed the Berlin Decree, the French occu-
pied most of the peninsula. Napoleon established the northern Kingdom
of Italy and the southern Kingdom of Naples in 1805 and 1806, respec-
tively, and annexed Piedmont (1802) and Liguria (1805) to his empire.
Between 1807 and 1810, Napoleon completed the occupation of Italy. In
March 1808, he annexed Tuscany and two months later joined Parma and
Piacenza. In November 1807, to strengthen French control over the Adriatic
littoral, the Emperor seized the Papal Marche.4 Since Pope Pius VII rejected
Napoleon’s demands to close the port of Civitavecchia to British trade, the
Emperor occupied Rome and the rest of the papal state and in May 1809,
annexed the rump papacy to his empire and exiled Pius VII to France. Only
the islands of Sicily and Sardinia remained outside French domination. They
were under the rule of the Bourbon and the Savoyard dynasties, respectively,
yet they owed their semi-sovereign status to Britain.
                                    98
