108   Alexander Grab


The Economic Impact of the Continental Blockade
on the Kingdom of Italy

What was the impact of the Continental Blockade on the economy of the
Kingdom of Italy? The Russian historian Evgeniï Tarlé, in his book La vita
economica dell’Italia nell’età napoleonica (Economic Life of Italy in the Napoleonic
Period), insisted that the kingdom suffered serious economic damages from
the Blockade and the Napoleonic efforts to assure French monopoly over
Italian markets. Indeed, he even maintained that Napoleon treated the
kingdom as a colony after 1810 and 1811.81 More recent historians chal-
lenged Tarlé, arguing that he placed too much emphasis on commerce and
industry, although the kingdom’s economy was predominantly agricultural.
   The Blockade certainly inflicted heavy damage on Italian commerce.82
Tarlé stressed that Italian maritime trade ‘suffered mercilessly owing to
the implacable and continuous struggle against England’.83 The annexa-
tion of Trieste and Venice to the Empire inflicted a decisive blow to their
commerce.84 Between 1811and 1812, Trieste ceased to be a major port.
After 1806, Venetian trade was reduced to cabotage with Trieste. In January
1807, Ravende, the president of Venice’s Chamber of Commerce, lamented,
‘Venetian commerce is annihilated and industry discouraged’ and added that
he could not see an improvement as long as war and blockade continued.85
In February 1807, French agents reported to the emperor that Venice’s
commerce was ruined. Aside from the Blockade, a threefold increase in
taxes, confiscation of merchandise, detrimental customs and the detach-
ment of the former republic from Istria aggravated Venice’s crisis. Maritime
activity in other Adriatic ports, including Ancona, decreased commerce to
‘minimal proportions’. Of course, many other European ports underwent
similarly severe losses.86 In sum, the Napoleonic regime and commercial
prosperity remained incompatible in the Italian kingdom, Tarlé justifiably
concluded.87
   Italian industries also experienced difficulties. The main victim of the
Blockade was the silk industry, the most important industry in northern
Italy.88 The kingdom lost the English and other foreign markets as it faced
stiff internal competition from French products. In August 1812, the
Milanese Chamber of Commerce complained that the silk industry declined
due to ‘general diminution of consumption, lack of foreign orders’ and
‘above all due to the dismemberment of cities and countries where most of
the exports had been shipped’, including Pavia, Parma and Piacenza, and
part of Romagna that were annexed to the Empire.89 Tsar Alexander I pro-
claimed a ukaz forbidding silk import to Russia, whereas high customs were
imposed on imports into the Hansa cities and Bavaria. Napoleon, however,
never helped the Italian silk industry find foreign markets or protect it
against French competition. Consequently, the number of silk manufactur-
ers fell from 489 in 1806 to 401 in 1811, the number of weavers declined
