110   Alexander Grab


agriculture experienced solid growth during the French period. Cereal exports
to the French Empire increased, rice cultivation rose and mulberry planting –
the basis of raw silk – expanded. Even cotton cultivation was attempted,
though without much success.100 The growing investments in agricultural
products resulted in an expansion of irrigation and improvement in raising
silk worms. Advances in agriculture increased revenues and land value. The
benefits to cultivators can be seen from the high revenues from exports of raw
silk between 1809 and 1813. In 1810, exports of raw silk rose to 76 million lire
from 56 million in 1809, and if they later declined, at least they remained at a
high level at 61.5 and 60.5 million in 1812 and 1813, respectively.101
   The agricultural nature of the Italian economy, therefore, assuaged the losses
in commerce and in some industries. Most importantly, agricultural expansion
more than offset the industrial and commercial losses, stimulating an overall
economic improvement during the Napoleonic period. And so, though Tarlé’s
book is useful for an understanding of the Blockade’s impact on the kingdom’s
economy, his conclusions are inadequate. The Blockade, along with other
Napoleonic economic policies, caused major setbacks to ports and maritime
trade, as well as to the silk industry. Agriculture, however, the dominant branch
of the kingdom’s economy, underwent expansion during the Napoleonic
period, leaving an important positive legacy for future economic development.

Conclusion

The Kingdom of Italy, along with the rest of the Italian peninsula, played
a major role in the Napoleonic efforts to establish a successful blockade.
Through geo-political changes that expanded the kingdom and aimed at
shoring up the northern Adriatic coast against the smuggling of English goods,
and numerous decrees designed to consolidate the Blockade’s apparatus,
imperial authorities exerted great efforts to assure the effective enforcement of
the Blockade in the kingdom and its surrounding regions. As in other parts
of the Napoleonic Empire, however, implementing the Blockade met with
opposition and obstacles, most notably rife smuggling that the government
was unable to eliminate. The Blockade also needs to be viewed within the
context of the Napoleonic goal of subjecting the kingdom to French economic
interests by favouring the export of French industrial products into Italian
markets and by establishing the kingdom as a source of agricultural products
for the benefit of French industry and consumers. The Blockade caused serious
disruption within Italian ports and commerce. It also dislocated some
industries, primarily silk, which lost its European market and remained unable
to compete with the more developed French industry. In contrast, agriculture,
by far the main branch of the kingdom’s economy, experienced growth which
offset commercial and industrial losses and provided a momentum to future
economic development in northern Italy throughout the nineteenth century.
Particularly in Lombardy, agricultural developments along capitalist lines,
