                             The Kingdom of Italy and the Continental Blockade 105


served as a centre for smugglers.50 After the proclamation of the Blockade,
Ticino became ‘a storehouse of colonial foodstuff and Swiss goods’. The moun-
tainous Swiss–Italian border, difficult to police, enabled smugglers to evade
customs officials easily. Illicit trade was also hard to prevent since numerous
people took part in it by smuggling small quantities.51 Certain goods could be
imported if their owners possessed a certificate demonstrating that the goods
were made in France. Those certificates were often falsified. Smugglers also
benefited from the fact that border officials, guardie di finanza, neglected their
duties and let them cross the border freely.52 Eugène suggested that Napoleon
join Ticino to the kingdom.53 In October 1810 Napoleon ordered the Viceroy
to occupy that canton with 5000 to 6000 Italian troops and ‘a good detach-
ment of customs and gendarmerie’.54 Stressing that this was necessary due to
smuggling, Napoleon instructed Eugène to confiscate colonial merchandise
and any goods ready to be imported illegally into Italy, which he estimated to
be worth several million francs. He further ordered the arrest of local outlaws
and English merchants. The occupation, Napoleon stressed, would last until
peace with England was achieved. Ticino remained occupied until 1813 when
the Allied invasion into Switzerland forced the kingdom’s troops to withdraw.
But profits were so high that the occupation did not deter smugglers, causing
Prina to blame customs officials’ negligence.55 The government sold whatever
they seized in an auction in Milan. In sum, the authorities had some successes
in fighting against smuggling, but English and colonial goods continued to
enter the kingdom illegally by land and by sea.
   In 1810, Napoleon proclaimed new policies throughout his Empire estab-
lishing what became known as nouveau Blocus continentale.56 The Fontainbleau
Decree on 18 October 1810 tightened customs surveillance, formed new cus-
toms courts, stiffened punishments – including long prison terms and even
the death penalty – increased rewards to informers, and most spectacularly,
ordered the public burning of seized English goods. In the Confederation of
the Rhine, 56 bonfires were lit between 16 November and 3 December 1810.57
Earlier, in the Trianon Tariffs (5 August and 17 September 1810), Napoleon
expanded the list of colonial goods allowed into the Empire, but at the same
time imposed exorbitant duties on them, a move meant to deter their import
and increase public revenues. The authorities also encouraged the production
of substitutes for colonial staples: chicory for coffee, beet sugar for cane sugar
and woad for indigo. In 1809, Napoleon began selling licences that allowed
trade with Britain, and on 25 July 1810, he institutionalized that system
through the Saint Cloud Decree. The licences endeavoured to help landown-
ers sell agricultural products, provide industrialists with raw material and
augment customs revenues. Yet at the same time, this policy undermined the
Emperor’s goal of isolating Britain and tightening the Blockade.
   Naturally, the Kingdom of Italy was integrated into the nouveau Blocus con-
tinentale and Napoleon ordered English goods to be burned there as in the
north.58 On 29 January 1811, the kingdom’s authorities issued an 18-article
