                            The Kingdom of Italy and the Continental Blockade 103


English goods shipped to northern Germany.29 Louis Bonaparte, the King of
Holland, failed to contain Dutch smuggling, which led Napoleon to force
his abdication in July 1810 and annex the Netherlands to his Empire.30
   In southern Europe, British and colonial goods entered the continent
through Iberia and Gibraltar, the Italian Peninsula and the Adriatic
coastline. Malta, ‘the centre of all the smuggling in southern Europe’ and
counterpart to Heligoland, became the ‘capital of English commerce’ in the
Mediterranean Sea.31 The British occupied Malta in September 1800 and
refused to evacuate it as the Treaty of Amiens required. After the proclama-
tion of the Continental Blockade, British exports to Malta increased rapidly
from an annual average of 95,000 pounds from 1801 to 1805 to three mil-
lion and five million pounds in 1808 and 1812, respectively. The number
of English merchants in Malta rose from 5 in 1802 to 20 in 1807 and 60 in
1812. In 1812, 25 per cent of British goods shipped to Europe went to Malta.
Much merchandise made its way from Malta to nearby Sicily, where many
English merchants settled.32 From there, goods were smuggled across the
Straits of Messina into the Kingdom of Naples, Tuscany and the Kingdom of
Italy and from there to Switzerland and German Central Europe.33
   Livorno remained another ‘centre of flourishing smuggling’ in Italy.34 In
April 1806, the Kingdom of Etruria prohibited the import of English goods,
but barely implemented this order. Thousands participated in smuggling
in that port, including merchants, storekeepers and porteurs, who carried
merchandise across customs lines. Customs officials failed to enforce the
Blockade adequately, but were rarely brought to justice. From Livorno,
merchandise was shipped to other parts of the peninsula, the Adriatic coast
and the Near East. British goods arrived from Malta in the Adriatic ports of
Trieste and Fiume. To enhance their commerce, Britain captured the island
of Lussin, southeast of Istria (May 1809) and the tiny island of Lissa in the
south Adriatic (April 1812). This stimulated Napoleon to create the Illyrian
Provinces, which failed, however, to deter British activity in the Adriatic
region.35 Napoleon’s concern with Britain in the Adriatic was obvious when
he ordered Eugène to ship more soldiers and food to the island of Corfu,
under French occupation since Tilsit (July 1807), adding, ‘If the English
become one day masters of Corfu, the Adriatic will be lost forever.’36
   Despite the efforts of the kingdom’s authorities, widespread smuggling
both by land and by sea remained a major challenge.37 Illegal traffic was not
new in northern Italy; grain and salt constituted major contraband com-
modities in earlier centuries. However, during the Blockade years, smuggling
became more systematic and included more products. The kingdom’s loca-
tion, bordering many states, explains the extensive smuggling, which was
hard to prevent along the long Adriatic coastline and in the mountainous
areas. As in other places, thousands of working people, who suffered the
adverse effects of the Blockade, participated in the smuggling. The Lombard
economist Giuseppe Pecchio stated that smuggling was ‘so profitable that
