                             The Kingdom of Italy and the Continental Blockade 109


from 25,152 to 14,274 and the number of workers employed in processing
silk cocoons dropped from 70,349 to 56,079 during the same period.90
   Other industries, including wool, cotton and metallurgy, were scarcely
affected by the Blockade since they produced primarily for internal consump-
tion.91 Some industries, however, were damaged by French competition. The
wool industry benefitted from the elimination of imports of British textiles
and from the military demand for cloth.92 French products were imported
to the kingdom, but the wool industry was able to successfully resist that
competition. On the other hand, cotton cloth production remained rudi-
mentary as it lacked sufficient raw material due to the Blockade. Moreover,
Napoleon assured the domination of French cotton products in the Italian
market.93 Production of hemp and flax yarn, which was quite developed in
northern Italy, suffered from French imports as well and declined in the last
years of the kingdom. Metallurgy, including mining and the arms industry
in the city of Brescia, had the best experience under the French, although
scarcity of fuel and skilled labour hindered its development.94 It supplied
local needs and arms to the Italian army.
   As stated above, recent historians have criticized Tarlé’s interpretation.
Bernardino Farolfi argued that any economic decline during the Napoleonic
era could not be blamed strictly on the Continental Blockade, but needs
to take into consideration the contemporary structural fluctuations and
problems of the capitalist economy.95 Tarlé, he insisted, supported free-
market policies and hence tended to blame, rather narrowly, the crisis on
the Blockade. Likewise, Carlo Zaghi played down the negative effects of
the Blockade, maintaining that the pre-Blockade years witnessed progress
and that industries that produced for domestic consumption continued to
develop. In other words, the economic crisis was not as profound as Tarlé
suggested, and certainly was not irreversible.96
   Most important, historians, along with Mario Romani, a major expert on
Lombard agriculture, criticized Tarlé’s excessive emphasis to the crisis in com-
merce and industry in a country that was predominantly agricultural and
suggested that Tarlé underestimated the fact that opportunities for indus-
trial developments were limited from the start.97 Romani criticizes Tarlé for
‘excessively simplifying’ the results of Napoleonic policy and for viewing ‘in
a totally negative manner the effects of the blockade and the [Napoleonic]
commercial policy … and underestimating the profoundly rural nature [of
northern Italy]’. The possibilities of industrial silk development, Romani
insists, ‘were non- existent or limited and have been in conflict with the pre-
vailing agricultural interests for centuries’.98 He cites a French document from
August 1806 that stressed that ‘The Kingdom of Italy is properly speaking an
agricultural country; by nature of its land, the abundance and the diversity
of its productions and the character of its inhabitants, it cannot become a
country where industry flourishes.’99 Significantly, the crisis in commerce
and industry caused entrepreneurs to shift their investments to land. Indeed,
