106   Alexander Grab


decree, modelled on Fontainbleau, announcing stiff penalties for smugglers:
owners of smuggled goods and heads of gangs received jail terms of ten years
with forced labour, whereas small carriers were subject to police surveillance
for five years.59 Article Eleven stipulated the public burning of ‘prohibited
goods’. In early 1811, Prina reported that the kingdom’s authorities burnt
goods worth 230,109 francs.60 The Milanese diarist Luigi Mantovani reported
on several such auto-da-fes between November 1810 and July 1813 in Milan
and Venice.61 In Milan they took place in the piazza dei Tribunali, where
in May 1811, for example, English goods belonging to certain merchants
Perlasca and Millius were burnt. Mantovani spoke for many outraged citizens
who resented this ruthless policy, calling it a ‘great bestiality’.62 In the canton
of Ticino, French officials destroyed suspected merchandise including 3325
pieces of Nanking cloth that belonged to two brothers Bianchi.63 The broth-
ers tried to save their property by presenting a document from the French
consul in Frankfurt, confirming that the cloth had been purchased from a
Dutch company, but to no avail, and the authorities seized the goods. In
December 1810, the authorities burnt English goods in Ticino, but allowed
the import of colonial products valued at 38,000 lire, for which the Trianon
Tariffs had been paid and sold at an auction.64 Confiscated colonial products
that entered the kingdom from Ticino included cotton from the Near East,
sugar, coffee, indigo, cacao, black pepper and fish oil.
   Though Napoleon gave priority to French merchants when granting
licences, he also extended them to merchants in satellite states. In the Italian
peninsula, Napoleon created the licences italiennes through a decree on 23
July 1810.65 In August and September 1810 he sent Eugène instructions
regarding the entry of colonial goods, stressing the need to follow the French
system and obey his orders.66 Entrepreneurs in Venice and Ancona were to
receive licences, allowing them to export wheat, cheese and other products
to Malta, England, Switzerland and the Ottoman Empire, and import dye and
foodstuffs. When sailing to England, Italian ships needed to stop in Nantes,
and when returning from Malta, they had to stop in Genova, Toulone or
Marseilles. On 26 October 1810, 30 licences were divided among merchants
in Venice, Chioggia, Senigallia and Ancona.67 In January 1812, the authori-
ties gave four licences to export silk to England. Silk exporters, however,
faced delays and difficulties that caused ‘the most serious damage’.68 In
1813, to increase his revenues, Napoleon augmented the number of licences
throughout his empire and the kingdom’s merchants benefitted from this as
well. Napoleon also tried to encourage Italian growers to produce colonial
products or their substitutes. Two decrees on 12 September 1810 announced
a subsidy of 150,000 lire to promote growing cotton, and a grant of 50,000
lire to produce sugar out of grapes.69 Results remained limited, however, as the
northern Italian climate was not conducive to growing cotton. In December
1811, Napoleon further integrated the kingdom into his empire by ordering
the application of French navigation rules in Italian ports and regulations
pertaining to entrepôts in Venice, Ancona, Sinigaglia, Milan and Bologna.70
