102   Alexander Grab


complete information about English merchandise in the kingdom.21 Local
police were ordered to periodically inspect customs’ houses, warehouses,
merchants’ shops and houses to seize prohibited products. Officials were
authorized to examine merchants’ accounting books and correspondence.
The decree repeated the penalties for violators of these policies and collabor-
ating administrators were threatened with losing their job and with arrest.
   The prefects of the departments of Bacchiglione, Tagliamento and Agogna
reported on inspecting stores and confiscating banned products.22 The authori-
ties sold seized English merchandise and in March 1808 sent 1.5 million francs
to Paris.23 Meanwhile, in Tuscany, not trusting that Queen Marie Louisa would
enforce the Blockade, Napoleon deposed her. In southern Italy, the Kingdom of
Naples had a ‘critical role to play in enforcing the blockade against Britain’.24
In March 1806, Joseph Bonaparte, Naples’ ruler, prohibited British imports.
Napoleon pressed his successor, Joachim Murat, to ban English goods and
facilitate imports of French goods into his kingdom. Murat, however, was
reluctant to cut ties with Britain and support the subordination of his kingdom
to French products. He refused to recognize France’s commercial privileges
and interests; he never enforced the Continental Blockade as Napoleon
ordered.25

Smuggling in the Kingdom of Italy

Smuggling British and colonial goods constituted by far the greatest
challenge to the enforcement of the Blockade throughout Europe.26 The
attempts of the French government to encourage production of colonial
staples, like sugar and cotton, had limited success; their quality was inferior
and the quantities were insufficient for Europe’s needs. France’s economy
was not strong enough to replace Britain as the supplier of goods to the
Continent. In sum, demand for British and colonial products remained
high throughout the Blockade. Napoleon was unable to hermetically seal
the European coastline despite his many geo-political changes and military
campaigns. In the words of Eli Hecksher, smuggling ‘flourished throughout
Europe to an extent of which the world since then, and perhaps even before,
has rarely seen the like’.27 It is impossible to quantify precisely the volume
of smuggled goods since smugglers left no records, but clearly contraband
was a profitable occupation of enormous scope that employed tens of thou-
sands of people, many of them from the lower classes. Scarcity of customs
personnel and an insufficient number of guards and widespread corruption
among officials and police, who took bribes and often participated in illicit
commerce, seriously undermined the blockade’s effectiveness.
  British goods clandestinely entered northern Europe through the
Netherlands, German states and the Baltic Sea. Thousands of citizens dealt
in profitable contraband in Hamburg and the Rhineland.28 The island
of Heligoland, seized by the British in 1807, served as a warehouse for
