104   Alexander Grab


it seduced even honest merchants’.38 The principal smuggled products
included textiles, silk, colonial foodstuffs, dye and wheat.
   Initially, much merchandise crossed illegally back and forth between
Tuscany, Lombardy and the Veneto.39 In September 1807, Napoleon com-
plained to Eugène,

   English merchandise cross the Kingdom of Italy; some English goods,
   which were found in Livorno, come from Milan. It is time that this ends.
   War without respite against English goods is the way to arrive at peace.
   English merchandise crosses the kingdom with false seals. It seems that
   customs in Italy is poorly managed.40

On 4 October 1807, Prina reported that many English goods in Livorno had
the kingdom’s customs stamp.41 He explained that under Austrian rule many
English goods were shipped to the Veneto, whose merchants shipped them to
Tuscany ‘where the prohibition of English merchandise was very late to appear
and was not observed with rigor’. Prina also maintained that many English
products were smuggled into the Kingdom of Italy from France and from there
to Livorno. Moreover, merchants falsely marked many contraband goods as
English to obtain a higher price. The Viceroy immediately wrote Napoleon
that the Italian authorities would use every means to eradicate the problem.42
   Antonio Aldini, the kingdom’s representative in Paris, was quick to
promise the same to the Emperor.43 Yet, as long as nearby Trieste was under
Austrian rule, English inventory found its way from there to Venice and
Ancona. Along the Adriatic littoral small boats carried out illegal traffic.44 A
certain Batellante Spellari carried English cotton in such a boat, intending
to unload it illegally in Ancona.45 He was arrested and the boat and cargo
were confiscated. In 1811 Prina reported on a boat transporting salt that had
anchored in Ancona due to a storm and which the authorities suspected had
illegal merchandise on board.46
   Smugglers were also busy along the border with Parma and Piacenza,
which, in part, consisted of the Po river where Napoleon declared free
navigation in April 1806.47 Prior to the Napoleonic period, commercial
traffic in the area was free and their separation by Napoleon (Parma and
Piacenza were annexed to France in 1808) hurt local trade. Customs officials
in Parma and Reggio Emilia complained about ‘the enormous smuggling’
in their departments.48 The river and a winding frontier line created ‘ideal
conditions for smugglers’. Likewise, much clandestine trade was carried out
on the border with Piedmont.49 That border was resented especially by the
Novarese inhabitants who had belonged to the Kingdom of Piedmont before
Napoleon and considered the new border artificial and disruptive.
   Considerable illicit trade took place along the Swiss–Italian border. Colonial
foodstuffs and other prohibited goods were stored in canton Ticino, the only
Italian canton in the Helvetic Confederation. The border town of Bellinzona
