116   Robert Mark Spaulding


   Most of these claims are assertions that rely on qualitative impressions
rather than quantitative measures. Other judgments derive from very nar-
row bases comparing a few years before and after 1806, still others rely on
material from one particular town or city, and many exhibit both temporal
and spatial limitations. In the absence of larger, longer and more system-
atic sets of data, scholars have necessarily extrapolated from smaller source
bases to offer conclusions regarding the impact of the Continental System
on Rhine commerce. Thus far, their efforts have produced contradictory
declarations of the type noted above. Twenty-five years ago, Roger Dufraisse
bemoaned the inadequate sources at hand, particularly the ‘low level of
statistical information’ and the ‘bad record of quantifiable material’ that
virtually precluded efforts to get beyond local and regional histories of trade
in German Central Europe during the Napoleonic era.9 The fundamental
dilemma of the topic was captured in Karl Aretin’s statements that ‘the
imposition of the continental Blockade by Napoleon in 1806 profoundly
modified the economic structure of Germany’, but that ‘we lack the sources
to give exact details of the development of the German economy during the
wars of the Revolution’.10
   Only one clear point of agreement has emerged: the volume of overseas
imports heading upriver from the Netherlands into the German states
declined because of the Continental Blockade. Yet this widely reported trend
is rarely quantified and even the better efforts at capturing these changes
depend on spot data from one or two years at one or two locales. Nor has
the decline in ultramarine imports been adequately portrayed over longer
stretches of the river by differentiating between merchandise declines on
the lower, middle and upper Rhine. Other important subjects, such as the
growth of downstream traffic in these years, have barely been touched.
There is no overview of how the Continental System and other overlapping
French policies combined to alter the patterns of commerce on the river in
the yeas from 1806 to 1813.11
   This chapter brings important new evidence to bear on these issues in
the hope that an expanded source base can help address the significant
gaps that remain in answering basic questions regarding the flow of
merchandise on the Rhine during the period of the Continental System.
The most important piece in this new body of evidence is the Rhine toll
data for the years from 1806 to 1815. In August 1804, after a decade of
ad hoc French reforms along the Rhine, the French Empire and the Arch-
Chancellor of the Holy Roman Empire, acting as agent for the German
princes on the right bank, signed the Convention sur l’octroi de navigation
du Rhin, which placed the river under joint control of the two parties.12 In
1805, regulation of the river’s commerce passed into the hands of the new
bi-partite administration, the Octroi. The new bureaucracy consolidated
the ongoing transformation of river practices that had already boosted
Rhine commerce dramatically during the previous five years. Further steps
