118   Robert Mark Spaulding


   By combining the Rhine toll revenues with Eichhoff’s memoir and other
published and archival materials, this essay offers some robust conclusions
about changes in the Rhine trade under the Continental System.14 The judg-
ments emerging from this expanded and improved source base reinforce and
elaborate some older views, such as the decline in colonial imports headed
upriver, but also suggest significant nuances to that general observation. The
toll revenues also allow a better understanding of how the economic crisis
of 1811 unfolded along the Rhine. Current hypotheses about the changing
ratio of upstream to downstream traffic can be significantly revised and
extended. Finally, some heretofore unrecognized changes in the patterns
and location of the river’s trade are suggested.
   This contribution also reminds readers that the Continental System was
only one strand in a wider web of revolutionary and Napoleonic economic
policies. It would be misleading to attribute the evolution of Rhine com-
merce in the years 1806 to 1813 solely to the impact of the Continental
System without reference to other French programmes that also moulded the
patterns of river trade at that time. Beyond the wholesale legal and admin-
istrative reforms of the Octroi, the French administration also upgraded
the river’s physical infrastructure, especially the tow paths that were vital
for upstream traffic, and began to measure and mark the river with greater
accuracy. Rhine commerce was shaped by the composite of French actions
along the river in the years after 1806; the Continental Blockade was only
the most visible of these policies.
   Nor would it be fair to judge the entire two decades of French occupation
along the Rhine on the basis of the half-dozen years of the Continental
Blockade. After the Treaty of Lunéville brought peace to the Rhine valley
in 1801, the beneficial effects of French commercial policies stimulated a
dramatic increase in river trade. By the time the Rhine trade passed into
the jurisdiction of the Octroi administration in November 1805, trade
volumes along the river were triple their pre- revolutionary levels.
Evaluating the Rhine trade of 1806 to 1813 in comparison to the low
levels of river commerce in the final years of the Old Regime allows a
more sophisticated appreciation of the beneficial and harmful effects of
French policies.
   A better understanding of how the Continental System and other French
policies reshaped Rhine commerce resonates well beyond the fields of
economic and business history. Along the densely populated banks of the
Rhine, running nearly 700 km from Strasbourg to the Dutch border,
the health of the river’s economy was the chief determinant in popular atti-
tudes and responses to the French administration. The ambivalence of most
of the Rhenish population towards the French regime is an understandable
response to the mixed set of French policies that generally stimulated, but
sometimes depressed, commercial life along the Rhine with significant vari-
ations depending on location, commodity and direction of trade.
