                             Rhine River Commerce and the Continental System 117


by the Octroi reduced monopoly privileges and navigational restrictions
that controlled trade, converted myriad local weights and measures to
the metric system, introduced a standardized bill of lading, established a
uniform commercial code, opened the boatmen’s guilds and reorganized
harbour practices at Cologne and Mainz. Most importantly, the Octroi
reduced the number of river tolls by two-thirds, simplified and published
the toll rates, and standardized collection procedures at the remaining 12
toll stations along the Rhine between Strasbourg and the Dutch border.
The figures for upstream and downstream toll incomes at each station
have been preserved for the years 1806 to 1811, and total figures for the
12 stations combined exist for 1806 through 1815.13 These records do not
include figures for merchandise volumes or individual commodities. That
material is not likely to be discovered for the toll stations in this period
because such information was almost certainly never recorded. Thus, the
toll revenues are an incomparable indicator of trends and direction in the
Rhine trade, unlikely to be surpassed in the future. The toll revenues reflect
upstream and downstream traffic at 12 points along the length of the river
from Neuburg, then 70 km below Strasbourg, to Emmerich on the right
bank just a dozen kilometres from the Dutch border, and stretch over six
years from 1806 to 1811 with composite figures for toll revenues available
to 1815.
   It appears the toll revenue data, which cover the years of the Continental
Blockade, have never been used to help clarify the changes underway in the
river’s commerce. By exploiting this new data set and using it in conjunc-
tion with smaller fragments of quantitative data that have been available for
some time, this essay offers a more thorough and more grounded assessment
of the changing nature and volume of the river’s trade during the years from
1806 to 1814.
   Chief among these other sources is the account of Johann Joseph
Eichhoff who served as Director General of the Octroi administration from
1806 to 1812. His Topographisch-statistische Darstellung des Rheines, which
appeared in 1814, contains a wealth of information about the Rhine trade
during Napoleon’s reign, including hard figures for merchandise trade
volumes at dozens of cities and towns along the river. For some locations,
Eichhoff also included figures on the volumes of the most important
commodities traded there. Although Eichhoff’s data are generally limited
to only the three years 1807, 1808 and 1809, his numbers for merchan-
dise volumes are an irreplaceable source of information. Eichhoff’s data
on trade volumes can be used together with the Rhine tolls revenues to
gain a very good picture of trade flows in the years from 1807 through
1809. By extrapolating from these middle years, when data for volumes
and tolls overlap, some reliable estimates can be made for trade vol-
umes in other years, when only the toll data is available, 1806 and 1810
through 1813.
