126   Robert Mark Spaulding


significant regional economy in the space between Cologne and the Dutch
border. In 1809, Mülheim sent one-third of its shipments to ‘places on the
lower Rhine’ and another one-quarter of shipments into the Ruhr valley
which can be considered part of the emerging lower-Rhine economy. At
Dusseldorf three-quarters of the total turnover was exchanged with the
lower-Rhine and Ruhr areas. Arrivals outweighed departing shipments by
more than 350,000 Zentner, indicating Dusseldorf distributed vast quantities
of merchandise inland into the lower-Rhine economy. Hitdorf provided the
same function on a smaller, more local scale, receiving some 50,000 Zentner
of goods from upriver, two-thirds of which was dispersed into the interior
of Grand Duchy of Berg with only the wine being forwarded on to the
Netherlands in significant volumes.34
   The movement of Ruhr coal, which made up 90 per cent of all Ruhr
exports, also fed into the regional economy of the lower Rhine. Spotty data
for the entire period indicates overall production and export to Holland
may have declined under the revolutionary regime.35 On the other hand,
the consumption of hard coal from the Ruhr increased dramatically in the
lower-Rhine area, including Cologne during the French occupation and
especially during the years of the Continental Blockade. Reliable data for
Cologne show coal imports accelerating from very low levels in the 1790s,
reaching roughly 500,000 Zentner in 1807 and nearly 800,000 Zentner in
1812, two-thirds of which was consumed in and around Cologne, and only
one-third of which was forwarded.36 If Cologne’s 60 per cent increase in coal
consumption in those years was typical of the lower-Rhine valley, then the
1.4 million Zentner of Ruhr coal used in the lower-Rhine economy in 1809
would have grown to 2.25 million by 1812. If shipments to Cologne are
included the figures move to almost 3 million Zentner.
   The small set of powerful examples presented here indicates the emer-
gence of a lower-Rhine economy that received and absorbed immense
quantities of goods shipped along the Rhine with impressive powers of
consumption. There seems little doubt that large, and in many cases grow-
ing, volumes of materials arrived by river into the lower-Rhenish economy
precisely during the years of the Continental Blockade. Those commercial
trends lead naturally to questions regarding the nature and scale of produc-
tive activities in these territories. What was the lower-Rhenish economy
doing with these vast volumes of incoming materials, in particular with
150,000 tons of coal arriving annually? How can these phenomena be
reconciled with the generally dark picture of economic developments
unfolding in the interior of the Grand Duchy of Berg and perhaps in other
locations as well? Answers to these questions will require commerce and
industry to be integrated into a single object of study far more thoroughly
than has been done in the past. More comprehensive economic histories
of trade and production in the lower-Rhine basin could serve as important
