                              Rhine River Commerce and the Continental System 129


   A better understanding of ‘what happened’ should then help answer the
question, Why did this happen? Not all of the developments in the Rhine
trade concurrent with the Continental Blockade were in fact caused by the
Blockade. Some occurrences are directly attributable to the causal impact
of the Blockade, whereas explaining other commercial trends necessitates
untangling the results of the blockade from the consequences of other fac-
tors, particularly other aspects of French economic policies. These analytic
efforts will require a lot of additional work, but some preliminary evalua-
tions can be made here in brief summary form.
   The sharp decline in upriver traffic beginning in 1808 can safely be
attached directly to the increasing strictures of the Continental Blockade.
The crisis of 1811, with its clear differences in degree of economic downturn
along the lower, middle and upper Rhine might indicate that the Blockade
and its great intensification in 1810 precipitated the economic recession,
which was more severe in the coastally connected lower-Rhine ports.
Because the Blockade decisively reduced upstream imports, it helped reverse
the historic pattern of Rhine trade to one in favour of the downstream com-
merce. Yet the downstream trade showed significant absolute growth and
had already surpassed the upstream freight well before the Blockade took
effect, so the significance of Napoleon’s commercial boycott in this develop-
ment as it continued after 1807 remains unclear. The commercial reform of
the Rhine, consolidated under the new Convention of 1804, and affecting
portions of the lower Main and the Neckar as well, certainly played a role in
opening up the river for downstream trade. Similarly, it was the combined
impact of commercial reform and then blockade which undermined the
ancient dominant role of Cologne in distributing trade on the lower and
middle Rhine. During the period of French hegemony the privileged metro-
poles of the old regime were superseded by intensified regional networks of
commerce on the lower and upper river. Despite the retardant effects of the
Blockade on some parts of the Rhine trade, commerce on the entire length
of the Rhine from Strasbourg to the Dutch border moved in larger volumes,
over greater distances and more freely in the Napoleonic period than it had
since Roman times. The expanded, extended and liberated commerce of the
Rhine proved an enduring outcome of the revolutionary era and played a
vital role in the breathtaking transformation of the Rhenish economy in
the nineteenth century. For these reasons, the imposition of revolutionary
French hegemony, with its efforts at continental economic restructuring,
produced ambivalent reactions among much of the local population, and
its historical legacy remains contested.


Notes
1. Eli Heckscher, The Continental System: An Economic Interpretation, trans. C.S.
   Fearenside (1922; repr. Gloucester, MA, 1964), 295–323.
