128   Robert Mark Spaulding


late as 1811, the throughput at the port in Mainz must have been about
three times as large as the pre-revolutionary figure. Frankfurt contributed
to the lively upper-Rhine river commerce by supplying goods banned by
the Blockade, as Heckscher noted many years ago.42 Eichhoff’s data shows
a nearly 400 per cent increase from 1808 to 1809 in goods moving from
Frankfurt to Mannheim and up the Neckar River.43
  There is no doubt that the years of the Continental System saw the rise
of a commercial economy along the banks of the upper Rhine that moved
volumes and values of traded goods far in excess of any previous period
in the river’s long history. What did this increased river trade mean to the
general economic development of the riparian German territories? Ellis’s
study of Alsace, which linked Strasbourg’s dramatically increased river trade
to a larger swathe of spreading prosperity, can serve as a model for how
these questions might be answered. A better understanding of economic
conditions on the upper Rhine could provide a new basis for reassessing the
Rheinbund, the political strategies of Baden, Hessen-Darmstadt and Nassau
in the period of Napoleonic rule, and the legacy of the revolutionary era in
the upper-Rhenish territories.

Conclusion

The study of Rhine commerce during the entire period of the French
occupation is still engaged with that most fundamental historical ques-
tion, What happened? Using the Rhine toll data for the first time, Ellis’s
comprehensive figures for Strasbourg, Eichhoff’s numbers for many
Rhine locations in the years 1807 to 1809 and other sources, this chapter
presents an improved assessment of the changing patterns and trends
in Rhine commerce. A depiction that is both more comprehensive and
more detailed than earlier accounts should serve as the starting point for
a better understanding of what happened to the volume, direction and
location of Rhine commerce during the period of the Continental System.
It offers important quantitative confirmation and substantial nuancing
of some existing impressions about Rhine commerce, particularly the
dramatic declines in upstream imports and the existence of an economic
slump in the year 1811. The data here have also allowed substantial
expansion and modification of earlier observations on the changing ratio
of upstream to downstream freight. Finally, the materials gathered here
support the suggestion that the era of the French occupation, and the
period of the Continental System in particular, saw an epochal transfor-
mation in the organization and location of the river’s commercial activity
as the great gateway city of Cologne declined in relative significance and
new regional economies emerged on the lower and upper Rhine con-
structed around dramatically increased exchange at medium-sized cities
such as Dusseldorf and Mannheim.
