                             Rhine River Commerce and the Continental System 127


new starting points for assessing the highly differentiated local responses of
the Rhinelanders to the French authorities.
  A second large area of mercantile growth can be found along the upper
Rhine. Beginning at very low levels, a vibrant commercial economy devel-
oped on the exchanges between Frankfurt/Main, Mannheim, Strasbourg and
the smaller cities in-between. Unsystematic but indicative data reveal the
presence of upper-Rhine products moving downriver in unprecedented vol-
umes. In many instances, the dramatic increases in commerce on the upper
Rhine are so formidable as to appear unbelievable. Anchoring the upper end
of this economy was Strasbourg, which saw an impressive increase of 175
per cent in the port’s turnover from 1806 to 1812, part of a longer ‘quad-
rupling in volume by comparison with the annual average before 1806’,
as Ellis pointed out years ago. Freight heading downriver from Strasbourg
to Frankfurt surged 350 per cent from 42,067 metric quintals in 1806 to
192,220 in 1812. Ellis linked Strasbourg’s increased Rhine trade to a larger
and deeper ‘Alsatian prosperity’.37
  At the convergence of the Rhine and Neckar rivers, and at the centre
of the budding upper-Rhine economy, sat Mannheim, which during
these years finally acquired the commercial and economic position the
Electors Palatine had sought for the city during the eighteenth century.
Before the revolution, long-distance shipping linking the lower Neckar
and the Rhine was almost non-existent; probably not more than 5000
Zentner of goods per year moved the 30 km between the Rhine–Neckar
confluence and Heidelberg.38 But during the years of the French occupa-
tion of the Left Bank of the Rhine and particularly during the phase of
the Continental Blockade, the Rhine–Neckar trade exploded, particularly
with goods coming out from the Neckar valley. For the two years 1807
and 1808, nearly 200,000 Zentner of goods moved upriver from Mainz
to Mannheim and into the Neckar as fruit, tobacco, millet, sorghum,
clover and rapeseed oil arrived in Mainz from the Neckar valley and
Baden.39 Neckar exports reached 637,223 Zentner in 1809; shipments to
Strasbourg reached 728,920 Zentner for the two years 1808 and 1809.
Eichhoff mentioned the new role of Mannheim as ‘an important point
for the shipping and commerce’ of the Rhine and Neckar, and in 1808
the increased commerce inspired the founding of Ludwigshafen across
the Rhine from Mannheim.40 Export growth at smaller cities on the upper
Rhine contributed as well. Worms and Speyer, for example, showed lively
rebounds from their depressed states at the end of the eighteenth century,
as Eichhoff’s data shows.41
  At the lower end of this upper-Rhine commercial circuit sat Mainz and
Frankfurt/Main. Mainz benefitted tremendously from the persistent growth
of the downstream traffic originating in the upper Rhine, which more than
offset the losses in the upstream import trade caused by the Blockade. As
