                             Rhine River Commerce and the Continental System 123


Blockade is not tenable. A second, related point is that the downstream
trade did not come to predominate merely because the upstream trade
was reduced by blockade. Of course, sharp declines in upstream shipping
boosted the downstream freight as a percentage of the river’s total com-
merce, but the downriver trade gained not only relatively as a portion of
the overall business, but also increased in absolute volume along all three
sections of the river. Third, the data also shows that the biggest gains in
downstream trade were made on the upper portions of the Rhine with real,
but much smaller, gains on the middle and lower river. Each of these three
points merits some explication.
   First, downstream freight surpassed upstream transport both before and
after Napoleonic regulation of overseas trade. Already in 1806, toll rev-
enues for upstream and downstream traffic at the 11 stations from Wesel
to Neuburg were evenly balanced, at approximately one million francs in
each direction.22 Because the downstream trade paid one-third less in tolls
than did the upstream freight over the entire distance of the river from
Strasbourg through Emmerich (1.33 francs/50 kg versus 2.00/50 kg), the
volume of downstream freight must have been significantly larger than the
upstream cargoes.23 Trade volumes on the upper Rhine at Strasbourg show
the downstream trade as much larger than the upstream traffic for every
year from 1800 to 1806; in that final year before the Blockade, the down-
stream trade already was twice the size of the upstream business. In 1807,
before the Blockade disrupted import trade, downstream shipments were
61 per cent of the arrivals in Cologne and 71 per cent of departing cargoes;
the preponderance of the downstream loads, perhaps at a lower ratio, must
have been in place for some years before 1807.24 This trend continued after
the withdrawal of French forces from the Rhine. In 1814, Cologne’s trade on
the lower Rhine showed downstream shipments of 871,843 Zentner (50 kg),
which exceeded upstream arrivals of 840,520.25 The pattern of larger
downstream trade volumes continued at Cologne for every year from 1819
through 1826 with the exception of 1823.26
   An enlarged downstream trade that both preceded and succeeded the
Continental System must be examined in a broader context of French
reforms that also began before 1806 and survived after 1814. The most likely
cause of increased downriver freights was the extensive commercial over-
haul of the river codified in the Octroi Convention of 1804, the essential ele-
ments of which were preserved after 1815 in the new Central Commission
for the Navigation of the Rhine.27
   Under the impact of blockade and war, the upstream trade continued to
shrink, so that by 1813 the downstream trade provided 79 per cent of the
river’s toll revenues, despite the lower toll rates on downriver shipments.
But the relative increase of the downstream trade should not obscure
its growth in absolute terms as well. Downstream toll revenues grew by
