138   Margrit Schulte Beerbühl


Expansion of Trade during the Short Peace of Amiens between
1802 and 1803

During his first two years in Manchester Nathan was mainly occupied in
establishing business contacts with English and Scottish textile firms. In
1801 he spent some time in Glasgow, Paisley and other places in Scotland
to establish business contacts with local textile manufacturers. He was tem-
porarily assisted by his brother, Salomon, who had come to England for
that purpose.14 During the short period of peace Nathan expanded his trade
considerably. Peace allowed him to travel to the continent, including France.
There he visited Paris, Metz and other places to confirm the business relations
his father had initiated. Likewise, continental merchants crossed the chan-
nel. Merchants from Lyons, Russia and other places came to Manchester.15
One of the first who visited Nathan in November 1801 was G. Haenel of the
Leipzig firm of Schoeffel & Haenel, who became one of his first and most
regular customers outside Frankfurt. Nathan traded with the Leipzig firm on
a regular basis until the proclamation of the Continental Blockade in 1806.
   Nathan’s travel on the continent and his visit to France may be seen as
an important step in the building up of his own clientele, although his
father continued to supply him with new commissions and remained the
backbone of his emerging trade.16 His father, Mayer Amschel Rothschild,
used the opportunities of the Frankfurt fairs to make contact with potential
customers for Nathan. Soon after the end of the fairs Nathan was busy writ-
ing to merchants whose addresses his father had sent him and who might
be willing to buy English and colonial goods. The transport of the goods for
firms in France, Basel or Salzburg usually went via Hamburg to Frankfurt,
and from there his father and other German-Jewish houses organized the
onward transport to the final destination.17
   The rapid expansion of his trade during the short peacetime had a snow-
ball effect on Nathan’s circle of business partners. Until 1802 his agents had
been his father’s partners, the shipping agent and the merchant house of
Roerup & Reinicke at Harburg (now part of Hamburg) and the merchant-
banker Mayer Michael David at Hamburg. For the transfer of goods and bills,
Nathan’s new customers advised him to use their agents and bankers, not
his partners. Some French houses, for example, recommended him to take
the Hamburg house of de Chapeaurouge as agent. Within the next few years
de Chapeaurouge became an important partner for Nathan – at least until
the Continental Blockade.18
   The de Chapeaurouge family were of Swiss origin; Jacques de Chapeaurouge
(1755–1805) had settled in Hamburg in 1764. This house dealt extensively
with France and the Swiss states. De Chapeaurouge brought Nathan into
business with the Bourcards, one of the principal firms at Basel. Both firms
were heavily involved in smuggling English and contraband goods via Basel
into France and other places.
