                                       Trading Networks across the Blockades 137


to Nathan’s early days in Manchester and his commodity trade, Kaplan
regards Nathan as a ‘failing commodities merchant in Manchester’ who had
turned to banking just in time.10 In contrast, Ferguson reasons that Nathan
was a rather successful commodity merchant based on the development of
Nathan’s sales figures and the fact that he had a house at 25 Mosley Street,
on one of the most elegant streets in Manchester.11 It should be pointed out
that sales figures alone do not say much about gains unless the transaction
costs and net gains are known. Nathan always insisted that he sold with a
very small profit.12 If his profit margins were indeed lower than the average,
his business would have been very vulnerable to wartime crises and the fail-
ures of his partners, for transaction costs were surging during the blockades.
During the 22 years of war the numbers of bankruptcies jumped to unfore-
seen peaks in England and even old and well-established businesses stopped
payment.13
  Trade during the war years and blockades became extremely difficult
and risky, as legal commerce for most during that period was impossible.
Nevertheless, as the trade with the continent had been very profitable in the
past, and remained so if the goods could be sold or bought on the mainland,
few merchants on either side of the sea voluntarily gave up that business.
Thus, undercover and contraband trade as well as smuggling became wide-
spread and took on new dimensions. Besides the petty smuggler, more or
less all classes up to the highest ranks in society were involved in seeking
loopholes to circumvent the blockade. However, an influential and trust-
worthy network of business partners was needed to keep from Napoleon’s
clutches.
  The organization of secret transnational business activities afforded the
collaboration of various classes and occupations in Britain as well as a net-
work of trustworthy and reliable business partners on the other side of the
Blockade. Given Nathan’s later rise, it was ultimately his continental net-
work which drew the attention of the British government to commission
him and his family with transferring large amounts of species and bullion
to Wellington. Irrespective of the question of Nathan’s success as a com-
modity merchant, the early years in Manchester were crucial in establishing
his commercial networks. This chapter, therefore, uncovers information on
the social structure of his network, explores how it developed, reveals the
pillars of the network and speculates on how he tried to circumvent trade
restrictions.
  The following elaborations are based on Nathan’s early letter books. I will
start with some remarks on the development of his trade network between
the Peace of Amiens in 1802 and the renewal of war a year later and then
turn to his trade until the Continental Blockade in 1806 and shortly after
until about 1809. The focus will be on Nathan’s German and continental
partners.
