142   Margrit Schulte Beerbühl


others with Harman & Co., an old partner of Mayer Amschel Rothschild in
Frankfurt. In 1794 the house of Parish had transferred English subsidies to
Prussia and in 1809 also to the Austrian Government. Parish also dealt with
the Board of Transport in London. He supplied the English troops on the
continent with money and goods and provided the Royal Navy with ships
for the transport of British soldiers to the West Indies.33 Between 1793 and
1796 he was also consul for the United States in Hamburg.
   At the time Nathan began to trade with the house of Parish. John Parish’s
sons, John, Charles and David had been installed in the business. The
sons became key figures in breaching the Continental Blockade from 1806
onwards. The Hamburg house turned into an exchange centre of com-
munication between Nathan and his father. Parish organized the transport
of Nathan’s goods to Frankfurt and transferred bills of lading, money and
goods to correspondents in Rotterdam and Amsterdam.34
   In view of the alarming news that the French troops were approaching
Hamburg, Mayer Amschel Rothschild travelled from Frankfurt to Hamburg
several times to safeguard his and his sons’ property. He stayed at the home
of John Parish and discussed with him measures to ‘colour’ English goods –
that is to declare them as of German origin – and also the possibilities of
safe transport routes to Frankfurt.35 For security reasons, they arranged that
goods sent by Nathan to Parish should be entered in the name of Mayer
Amschel Rothschild. After his return to Frankfurt, Mayer Amschel stationed
his son Carl in Hamburg to safeguard the trade and also supply Nathan with
new commissions of some Hamburg houses.36
   As already mentioned, two events changed the structure of Nathan’s
trade considerably in 1805 and 1806: his betrothal and marriage to Hannah
Cohen and the Continental Blockade. Hanna Cohen was the daughter of
Levy Barent Cohen, a well-known and wealthy merchant and diamond
trader in London. Of Dutch origin, Levy Barent Cohen had come to London
in the 1770s. Remarkably little is known about Cohen’s mercantile activi-
ties. According to Herbert Kaplan, he was London’s leading international
diamond trader between 1781 and 1794.37 In his early years Nathan had
financially relied on his father’s credit and reputation. After his marriage he
became financially very dependent on his in-laws, for, according to Kaplan,
L.B. Cohen’s bills of exchange were generally accepted throughout the inter-
national mercantile community, whereas Nathan’s bills were not.38
   Until about 1805 Nathan predominantly traded in textiles, and from that
point he then began to broaden the range of products he dealt with. He
increasingly traded with colours, especially indigo, coffee, sugar and other
colonial produce.39 By 1807 he had extended his business relations to the
West Indian sugar islands in cooperation with his in-laws.40 Other new destin-
ations were Lima and Montevideo.41 In the latter business, he was involved
with the house of Fermin de Tastet of London. He had been dealing with
that house since about 1804.
