140   Margrit Schulte Beerbühl


‘formed for the sole purpose of covering, by fraudulent documents, the ves-
sels and merchandize, belonging to the subjects of the belligerent powers’.25
The tideland between the mainland and the East Frisian Islands particularly
favoured a clandestine trade during the nights, as the coast-dwellers knew
the routes through the Wadden Sea (Wattenmeer) and the dangers of the
tides as well as those of the tidal rivers, whereas the French occupiers, who
controlled the coast, either did not know or feared them.
   Before 1803 Emden had been an insignificant port from which pre-
dominantly agricultural goods like oats had been shipped to Bremen.26 The
American consul William Clarke, who settled in Emden after 1803, remarked
in his consular despatches to the US government that in peacetime the
traffic to Emden was inconsiderable. Since the other rivers and ports were
blockaded, ‘about a dozen American vessels have entered this River’ within
two months.27 In 1804 the number of ships arriving at Emden had increased
to 1283 and to 1595 in 1805. Many merchants from Bremen and Hamburg
opened branches in that port town as well as in Tönning.28 Those merchants
of Bremen, who had imported colonial goods directly from London or
Liverpool, redirected them via Emden or Varel after the renewal of war.
   Legal trade to the Dutch ports also continued for some time after the
return to war, but in November 1804 the Hull shipping agency of Clingham
& Gell wrote to Nathan that ‘every avenue by which goods where intro-
duced into Holland, is now strictly guarded by the French’.29 However, small
barges continued to sail from Varel to Delfsiel using the tidal waters which
escaped the vigilance of the enemy. From Delfsiel, goods were entered into
Holland and Brabant.30
   Since the British blockade of the Elbe and Weser, the firms of Abegg & Co.
and Altmann & Winkelmann at Emden had become important agents for
Nathan. To facilitate the trade they had also established a branch in Varel
on the river Jade that belonged to the neutral Duchy of Oldenburg.31 They
cooperated closely with Nathan’s father and supplied Nathan with informa-
tion how to circumvent the blockade and how to transport British goods
safely to Frankfurt as well as into Holland and Brabant.
   Part of the trade shifted toward the Baltic, and Coulson started to ship
some of Nathan’s goods to the Baltic ports of Lübeck, Kiel, Wismar, Stettin
and other places. However, until 1806 Nathan and his shipping agents pre-
ferred the ports of Emden and Tönning. They were not only much closer to
Britain, but also nearer to Frankfurt, and the neutrality of the surrounding
duchies made it easier to circumvent the Blockade.
   Despite the renewal of war in 1803, Nathan continued to expand his busi-
ness network. At least since 1804 he traded directly with the firm of Messrs
Ausset Dutoit & Co. of Vevey Switzerland. It seems that he sent above all
British cotton textiles to Switzerland. Involved in Nathan’s Swiss transac-
tions was the Swiss-German firm of Rougement & Behrens in London. On
the continent, the firms in Emden and John Parish at Hamburg organized
the onward transport.
