136   Margrit Schulte Beerbühl


wheat came from these states.5 British merchants had settled in important
port cities at the North Sea and the Baltic, and continental merchants had
flocked to Britain, predominantly to London, to organize a more or less
global trade. Embargoes and reciprocal blockades during the wars, there-
fore, threatened Britain’s supply of the above-mentioned necessaries and
disrupted well-established trade routes and links. Scholars have pointed out
that Britain’s struggle against Napoleon combined a commercial war with a
‘fight for political power’.6
   Central questions discussed in this chapter address the role of covert trade
among networks of British and continental merchants. What happened to
these networks during the protracted wars of the Napoleonic period? How
did merchants react to the challenges of the blockades when the main
European ports were closed for British goods? What role did kin, religious
or national affiliations play in developing and sustaining commercial net-
works? A case study on Nathan Mayer Rothschild’s early years in Manchester
will explore these questions in the context of commercial warfare during the
Napoleonic era.
   Nathan Mayer Rothschild came to Britain from Frankfurt in about 1798 or
1799 during an extremely difficult time. Britain and France had been at war
since 1793 and trade with the continent was severely interrupted, first by
the British blockades and, since 1806, by the Napoleonic Blockade. During
his early years in Manchester until 1808, he had not yet turned to banking,
but was a young, hardly known immigrant merchant exclusively trading in
commodities. Myths abound about his motives for moving to Britain as well
as about his early days in Manchester. Nathan himself much contributed to
these myths.7 Whatever his motives, his early letters clearly reveal that he
started his profession as an agent of his father’s firm in Frankfurt. During
the first years, his commercial activities relied predominantly on his father’s
reputation, credit and business partners. Nathan’s main customers were his
father, Mayer Amschel Rothschild, and a few other related Jewish families
in Frankfurt.
   Although there is rich literature on the Rothschilds and their banking
activities, remarkably little has dealt with Nathan’s early years. Besides
S.D. Chapman’s article on Nathan Mayer Rothschild’s regional textile trade
around Manchester, the only detailed study on this era is Niall Ferguson’s
introductory chapters in his voluminous study on the Rothschilds.8 Many of
his biographers either bypass these early years or touch on them only very
briefly. Herbert Kaplan, one of the most recent biographers, starts Nathan’s
history in England in 1806, a year when a few events changed his career
decisively: his marriage to Hannah Cohen, the Continental Blockade, and
two years later his move to London.9 Kaplan focused on Nathan’s early bank-
ing activities and the period when he was asked by the British government
to supply Wellington with large amounts of bullion and species. Referring
