                                        Trading Networks across the Blockades 139


   In one of his letters home, Nathan mentioned as his business aim to get
commissions from the very best houses, but added that he could only afford
to handle small commissions.19 Indeed, during the short peacetime he got
into contact with some of the leading bankers in Amsterdam like the De
Smeths, Jacob Marcus and some internationally leading merchant houses
in Switzerland, such as the Bourcards cited above and the Iselins of Basel.
Geographically, he extended his trade to France, Switzerland, Italy, Austria
and Russia. He also crossed over the close circle of the international Jewish
community and started to trade with merchants of various denominations.
   His French business, however, ended with losses, as his new customers
complained about the quality of the goods and also could not agree on
exchange rates. By the end of October 1802 he faced losses of about £2000
in Paris alone besides further losses in Metz.20 They evidently drove him into
a liquidity bottleneck. In several letters, he asked his costumers to remit his
bills before they were due.21 Ferguson’s table of Nathan’s sales at the begin-
ning of 1803 reveal a sharp downturn. They almost dropped to nil.22 It was
not the only time that he faced financial problems. Repeatedly, he overdrew
his account at his father’s bankers. In one case, for example, he had over-
drawn his account with the house of Parish in Hamburg by more than £2000,
and Parish complained to his father that he was not prepared to give him any
further credit in advance.23 The sharp fluctuations of his turnover as well as
his liquidity constraints reveal some of the problems young merchants faced
in the early modern maritime trade. If he had not been backed by his father’s
financial means and reputation among the international merchant com-
munity, his fate may have been a different one during his Manchester years.

Trade Preceding the Continental Blockade, 1803–06

After the renewal of war in 1803 the British government proclaimed the
blockade of the Elbe and Weser. Richard Southern & Pearson and Edw. and
Geo. Coulson, both of Hull, had become Nathan’s main shipping agents
since 1802. They had shipped most of Nathan’s goods to Hamburg. Even
after the proclamation of the British blockade in 1803, Coulson continued
to send neutral ships to the Hanseatic city for a while, but it became increas-
ingly difficult to ship goods to Hamburg and Bremen, and by July Coulson
complained to Nathan that ‘suitable German ports were running short’.24
  The British blockade, however, did not stop trade with the north German
port cities, but caused a shift to the smaller, neutral towns of Emden, Varel
and the Danish ports of Altona and Tönning. They became the centres of
English trade. The closeness of Emden, Varel, Norden and the neutral Duchies
of Oldenburg and Papenburg to Bremen as well as to Holland made the ports
a suitable entry for forbidden goods. John Brown of Yarmouth remarked
in 1806 that Emden was ‘considered the headquarters of neutralization on
this side of the Elbe’. In the port town, about 50 establishments had been
