                                      Trading Networks across the Blockades 145


   The clandestine trade with Holland increased under the reign of King
Louis, Napoleon’s brother. Napoleon had installed him as king of Holland
in 1806 to enforce the Blockade and raise money for the French troops.56
Louis did not enforce the Continental Blockade as rigorously as his brother
expected him to do; to some extent he turned a blind eye to the entry of
forbidden goods, so that the Blockade became very porous along the Dutch
coast. Nathan and his family increasingly transferred money and goods
via one of the Dutch ports. In August 1807 Carl, who was at Hamburg,
wrote to Nathan that all English ships destined for Tönning were return-
ing to England without having unloaded their cargoes. Thereupon, Mayer
Amschel in Frankfurt advised Nathan to send his goods to Holland. As let-
ters were opened in Hamburg by the French, he also suggested that Paris
bills be henceforth sent to Amsterdam.57 Thus, part of Nathan’s continental
trade shifted to Holland during 1808. Financial transactions were increas-
ingly organized by some Dutch-Jewish houses like Braunsberg & Co. in
Amsterdam.
   The business letters with Nathan reveal the high mobility of his broth-
ers on the continent during these years (see Fig. 8.2 and Map 8.1). Carl
Rothschild moved between Hamburg, Itzehoe and other nearby places
to oversee the secret entry of English and other forbidden goods, and
Nathan’s older brother, Amschel, went to Amsterdam after the conflict with
Denmark in autumn of 1807. While his father stayed at Frankfurt, the sons
Carl, Salomon and Jacob (James) moved between Schleswig and Holstein,
Holland and France, and Jacob even went to England. Though the journey
was dangerous, Mayer Amschel reasoned ‘that you’ll stipulate many things
by mouth which would be unsuccessfully transacted by the long way of
correspondence.’58
   Since the occupation of Heligoland by the British in 1807, the island
became a thriving smuggling nest. Within a few years the number of ware-
houses increased from four to more than 140. Among those who opened
a warehouse on the island was Nathan. As early as October 1807, shortly
after the British occupation of Heligoland, Nathan saw an opportunity to
send British and colonial goods via that island to the blockaded continent.
Although his father-in-law thought Heligoland an ‘infamous place’ where
no goods could be properly stored, Nathan decided to station one of his
employees there. Within the next few years the island became a promi-
nent smuggling hub from which goods were not only sent to the nearby
German and Danish coast but were reloaded for more distant places like
Holland or the Baltic. Between 9 August and 20 November 1808 altogether
120 English ships arrived at the island.59 As Napoleon was distracted by his
struggle against Spain and Austria in 1808 and 1809, the illegal trade from
Heligoland to the German coast took place almost openly. In 1809 Nathan’s
shipping agent was sending three to four vessels every day from Hull to
Heligoland. S.F. Cantor, Nathan’s agent on Heligoland, as well as S. Bogen
