144   Margrit Schulte Beerbühl


  Trading routes became circuitous. Within the next few years a ring of smug-
gling nests were established around the European continent that organized
and coordinated illicit trade. Gothenburg, Christiansand, Heligoland, the
Azores and Malta, as well as later on Gravelines near Dünkirchen, became
major loopholes for the entry of British wares on the continent. Within
the scope of this essay, only a few glimpses can be presented of Nathan’s
commodity trade after the proclamation of the Blockade. In Liverpool the
shipping firm of Ewart & Rutson, for example, supplied forged papers for
ships that went under American and other flags to Gothenburg.49 They also
organized a smuggling trade with colonial goods which were entered via the
Azores into Spain, Portugal and even France.50
  Early in 1807 Nathan installed his clerk John Fox at Gothenburg to organ-
ize the trade with the blockaded continent. His father-in-law, L.B. Cohen,
and Nathan had originally planned to send Fox to Amsterdam. They decided
against that plan, however, because Fox was well known there and might be
detected as a British subject. Thus, they thought it too dangerous to install
him there to oversee the safe arrival and transfer of cargoes.51 As he was not
known in Gothenburg, he would easily pass as an American. Ewart & Rutson
of Liverpool provided Fox with a certificate which documented his birth-
place as Nantucket, Massachusetts. The notary who had issued the birth
certificate was dead, so that there were no witnesses who could disprove
the authenticity of the paper.52 Thus furnished with an American pass and
birth certificate, he was to go with the ship Laura to Gothenburg. Ewart &
Rutson provided the ship with American ship papers, as if it departed from
New York or Boston. The final destination of the ship was not Gothenburg,
but actually Amsterdam. In a letter to Nathan, L.B. Cohen was concerned
about the ship papers. An American ship coming from Gothenburg might
arouse suspicion in Amsterdam, and he suggested that Fox should change
the papers in Christiansand, if the latter thought it necessary. Cohen also
suggested the possibility of sending the ship to Russia, though he feared that
the Baltic might be too dangerous.53
  As Gothenburg became one of the big loopholes in the Continental
Blockade many merchants had relocated to that Swedish coastal city.
Among those who settled there temporarily was John Parish Jr. He acted
there as an undercover intermediary between the Swedish government
and the English Admiral Saumarez, who was sent into the Baltic in 1808
to protect English merchant ships.54 In 1806 at last the Hamburg bank of
Warburg & Co. had established a branch in Stockholm, and since 1807
part of the correspondence with Fox and also financial transactions with
Frankfurt, Amsterdam and other places went via that bank. After the fall of
king Gustav IV of Sweden, his successor Count Bernadotte officially joined
the Continental System, but unofficially he kept the maritime trade fairly
open for British ships. In 1809 British trade with the Baltic states more than
doubled.55
