148   Margrit Schulte Beerbühl


   Besides Heligoland and Gothenburg, Malta and Messina in the
Mediterranean became smuggling centres for the entry of British goods
into Italy. Since 1808 the number of British and Anglo-German merchant
houses had increased considerably. Importations of British goods on Malta
jumped from £35,000 in 1806 to £311,619 in 1808 and peaked in 1809 with
£779,541.61 From there goods were sent to Trieste, Fiume, Napoli and many
other Italian port cities. Among those who began to trade with Malta were
well-known British merchants like James Cazenove, J.W. Mellish and John
Lubbock. In 1809 there were between 30 and 40 English houses on Malta.62
   Nathan and his in-laws also began to send goods to Malta and Messina.
Nathan organized his Mediterranean trade in cooperation with the textile
firm of Isaac Aldebert & Co. of Manchester. The house of Aldebert & Co.
operated internationally with branches and agents in several European
towns and places. Isaac Aldebert was born in Erlangen near Nürnberg. He
had a textile house at Frankfurt in partnership with Johann Christoph
Mylius in 1787. If Isaac Aldebert went to Manchester, Johan Christoph
Mylius’s son Enrico opened a branch at Milan in the early 1790s.63 At
Frankfurt the parent houses were competitors on the market with English
textiles.64 Isaac Aldebert had come to Manchester about the same time
as Nathan and entered a partnership with Charles Christian Becher from
Hanau near Frankfurt. Nathan certainly had some knowledge of the
Aldeberts, but he does not seem to have started business with them before
the Continental Blockade. Aldebert’s agent on Malta was John Christopher
Ritter, and he also cooperated closely there with the firms of Joseph Barker
on Malta and Melchior Dunner at Messina.65 Nathan cooperated with
Aldebert not only to enter goods into Italy, but also to Holland and via
Sweden and Heligoland to Frankfurt. Like Nathan, Aldebert, also had an
agent on Heligoland.66 Relations between both merchants were strained
from the very beginning, and in 1809 a conflict about the goods on the
ship Wellbedacht arose which ended their commercial cooperation. The ship
was to go to Memel, and if it succeeded would arrive safely at the port town,
and Nathan’s goods were to be forwarded to Frankfurt. The goods, however,
were seized at Riga.67
   Early in 1808 Nathan’s father-in-law died and Nathan decided to move to
London. Not later than September 1808, Nathan had settled with his family
in London. With his arrival in London a new period of his career began. It
is after his move to the capital that he started to trade in species and bul-
lion. During his first London years, however, Nathan remained financially
heavily dependent on his in-laws. Moreover, together with Peter Fawcett of
the Manchester firm of Moulson & Fawcett, he even traded with fictitious
bills, called wind bills – that is, they generated bills of exchange that were
not backed by credit. In the financial crisis of 1810 that highly speculative
business caused Fawcett to bankrupt. Nathan, embedded in the influential
