                                        Trading Networks across the Blockades 149


network of his in-laws and family, remained solvent. Furthermore, after his
move to the City he started to smuggle not only commodities but species
and bullion – often via Amsterdam – to the continent. His trade in species,
which his father initiated and controlled on the continental side of the
Blockade with the help of his other sons and related Jewish traders, found
the attention of the British government when it sought international under-
cover merchant networks who could deliver specie to Wellington in Spain.

Conclusion

Nathan Mayer Rothschild’s career as a commodity merchant was certainly
not a linearly rising success story. Years of rapid expansion alternated with
years of severe setbacks. He had to cope with the war and blockades. Losses,
despite surprising gains, were inevitable, for ships were lost, goods con-
fiscated by the French and many of his business partners went bankrupt.
He, like many others, showed a remarkable flexibility and adaptability to
quickly changing circumstances. Nathan’s trade with the blockaded conti-
nent rested on three pillars: his father, his brothers and the agents and bank-
ers employed by this father and father-in-law. His family, therefore, above all
his father and his father’s reputation within the international Jewish com-
munity and the mobility of his brothers on the continent and their posi-
tioning at strategically important places, allowed him to organize the secret
import of British goods. Another key pillar rested on his father’s bankers and
agents in London and Hamburg as well as later on those employed by his
in-laws. It may be concluded that above all, his embeddedness in the influ-
ential and widespread network of his family and, later, of his in-laws, were
of crucial importance for his commercial survival. Instead of interrupting
the well-established transnational trade, the Continental Blockade encour-
aged a closer collaboration within the international Jewish community as
well as within transnational operating merchants of other denominations.
   Although no definite answer can be given about his financial success as a
commodity merchant, it was his marriage and probably his turn to finance,
initiated by his father about 1809, which was of crucial importance for his
professional survival during the hard years of the Napoleonic Blockade. It
certainly was the Wellington commission which finally served as ‘catalyst
in the creation of the Rothschild financial dynasty’.68 In all, Nathan was
neither a diligent nor a considerate merchant. He only survived the difficult
years during the Napoleonic wars and the blockades because he was embed-
ded in the powerful and influential networks of his family and his in-laws.
Backed by this support system, he developed a geographically extended
continental network which lowered his risks of failure as he engaged in
speculative and hazardous trading activities amid international economic
warfare.
