                                       Trading Networks across the Blockades 143


   In 1806 Fermin de Tastet was active in the big undercover bullion transac-
tions between Mexico and France. This operation was routed via the United
States. It was organized by an international consortium of French, German,
English, Dutch, American and Spanish merchants and bankers, among them
the big banking houses of Hope & Company in Amsterdam and Baring in
London as well as one of John Parish’s sons who had settled in Philadelphia
for the purpose of overseeing and routing the bullion transactions via the
neutral United States.42 These undercover operations were known to the
British government and had even received the consent of William Pitt.
Facing diminishing trade with Europe, he had agreed to these transactions
with the prospect of opening new markets for British merchants in the
Spanish colonies. According to Vincent Nolte, who was also involved in the
bullion transactions, the far greater part of the whole transaction was not
transmitted in bullion but in the commodity trade.43 De Tastet had received
licences to purchase bills on Buenos Aires worth £45,000.44 The letters
between Nathan and his father do not provide any hints as to his participa-
tion in the financial business, but they at least took part in the accompany-
ing commodity trade, for Mayer Amschel had given an order to De Tastet
via Nathan to buy Buenos Aires hides. They also received indigo and Jesuit
bark via this channel.45

Trade during the Continental Blockade from 1806 to 1808

The Berlin Decree of November 1806 and the occupation of Hamburg by the
French troops transformed Nathan’s business considerably. A glutted market
and the confiscation and prohibition of all English goods in Switzerland in
1806 forced the Swiss firm Ausset Dutoit to cease all business with England.
Similarly, trade with the Leipzig firm of Haenel ended in October when
the French troops entered Leipzig.46 In Hamburg relations with the house
of Parish ceased temporarily. After the French had entered Hamburg John
Parish Jr was among the first taken into custody. His father fled to Denmark
and later on to Bath as his brother Charles fled to London. On 20 December
Charles wrote to Nathan from London, ‘It is out of question, as to sending
manufactured goods there.’47 Commercial relations with the Hamburg firm
of de Chapeaurouge were also discontinued.48
  The Continental Blockade forced British merchants to shift their trade
again to places out of Napoleon’s reach, for any trade with the blockaded
continent, including Nathan’s trade with his father and kin in Frankfurt,
became dangerous and the goods liable to confiscation. Until the Blockade,
Nathan’s goods had been predominantly shipped from Hull and since 1805
also from London. An occasional ship had also left from Glasgow, for he had
bought a substantial amount of cotton in Scotland. From 1806 onwards the
number of ships leaving Glasgow increased and Nathan also started to send
goods from Liverpool.
