160   Jann M. Witt


of convoys and licensed trade to secure grain supplies for Norway. For
humanitarian purposes, the British allowed the continuity of Danish trade
with Iceland, the Faroe Islands, Greenland and Norway, when King Frederik
temporarily withdrew all letters of marque and stopped privateering war-
fare in Norwegian waters. Thus, many ships sailing under the Danish flag
used British licences. To make things even more complicated, there is even
evidence of cases in which Norwegian merchant vessels were defended by
British ships of war against attacks by Danish privateers. Nevertheless, the
question of whether the Danes themselves also issued licences for trade with
Great Britain is yet to be answered.24

The Danish Struggle against Smuggling

Regardless of the complicated question of licensing, the Danish state
intensified its struggle against smuggling and blockade-running. In 1810
Napoleon issued an edict that all ships, including vessels sailing under neu-
tral flags which transported a cargo of British origin, should be confiscated
and considered as good prizes regardless of the ship’s cargo documents and
statement of origin. On 8 September 1810 Denmark’s King Frederick VI
issued a similar edict.25
   That this was no empty threat is evidenced from an incident that occurred
in the little seaport of Eckernförde, situated about 30 km north of the city
of Kiel in the duchy of Schleswig.26 On 1 November 1810 two American
merchant ships, the Charlotte and Admittance, and the Dutch merchant vessel
De Vrouw Hendrica, entered the harbour of Eckernförde to unload their cargo.
On his arrival, David Elliott, master of the Charlotte, declared that he had
loaded his cargo of colonial products in Boston. Although the merchandise
apparently was of neutral origin, the authorities in Eckernförde – in accord-
ance with the aforementioned edict – refused to give Elliott the permission
to unload his cargo. Left with no choice, Elliott planned to leave Eckernförde
on the morning of 5 November 1810. But during the night, one of his seamen,
Davis Gillmann, deserted the ship. Declaring he had been mistreated by
his captain for the entire voyage, Gillmann, likely motivated by revenge,
informed the authorities in Eckernförde of Elliott’s offences against the
regulations of embargo. Gillmann eagerly produced evidence against his
master, declaring that ‘the ship had false papers on board and went under
English convoy’.27
   This information was sufficient for Lieutenant Holsten, a Danish naval
officer who acted as the local Danish commander in Eckernförde, to seize
the ship and to start a formal investigation. The crew of the ship were
interrogated and subsequently admitted that the ship had indeed ‘used
English convoy’. This evidence allowed Lieutenant Holsten to confiscate
the Charlotte in accordance with the ‘Instructions to Privateers’ of 28 March
1810. These instructions also declared that ‘ships, whose flags are to be seen
