                           Smuggling and Blockade-Running from 1807 to 1814 155


The Second Battle of Copenhagen, 1807

By 1806 Denmark faced new challenges in light of Napoleon’s continental
expansion. Following his victory over Prussia and the conclusion of peace
with Russia, Napoleon had but one enemy left: Great Britain. The French
Emperor had become the undisputed overlord of the continent, but his
fortune began to turn following a sea battle off Spain’s Atlantic coast. The
Royal Navy’s decisive victory in the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October 1805
ensured that Great Britain quite literally ‘rule[d] the waves’.6
   Napoleon had but one chance to force Great Britain into defeat: through
economic, not military measures. In the Berlin Decree on 21 November
1806 Napoleon officially established the so-called Continental Blockade,
banning all British trade goods and products from the continent, intending
to crush his enemy’s export-orientated economy. Napoleon’s Empire, satel-
lite states and allies, however, also were expected to adopt the Continental
System. Seeking political reconciliation with France, Russia also affiliated
herself with Napoleon’s economic warfare against Britain. Together both
great powers agreed to persuade the minor powers in the Baltic area to join
the embargo against Great Britain – if necessary, by force. This would have
locked Great Britain from the Baltic Sea and cut one of its most important
lifelines to its supply of indispensable Baltic naval stores.7
   When intelligence about the Franco-Russian plot reached the British gov-
ernment, the reaction was as forthright as it had been six years previously.
The British sent a fleet to Copenhagen, this time commanded by Admiral
Lord James Gambier, to exert pressure on the Danish government and retain
access to the Baltic for British ships. After their arrival off Copenhagen, the
British delivered an ultimatum that demanded the Danes consent to an
alliance against France and hand over their fleet to the British. The Danish
state was given one week to reach a decision to pledge their future com-
pliance to this British demand. Caught between the Scylla of British sea
power and the Charybdis of the far superior French army advancing toward
the Danish border, a neutral state such as Denmark could only lose. Were
they to succumb to British demands, Napoleon would attack the kingdom,
yet to remain defiant would mean the British forces would besiege their
capital city.8
   In the end, the Danish government, with courage born of despair, refused
the British ultimatum. On 2 September 1807, the British commenced
the bombardment of Copenhagen. For five long days the Danish bravely
defended their burning capital in the Second Battle of Copenhagen, but
capitulation was inevitable. This attack and the subsequent seizure of the
Danish fleet caused a deep and enduring hatred of the British among the
Danish population. As a result of the British assault, Denmark became a
loyal ally of Napoleon. One immediate casualty of the outbreak of the war
