158   Jann M. Witt


The British Licence System

Although Britain remained in an official state of war with Denmark, Sweden,
Prussia and Russia between 1810 and 1812, the British were able to main-
tain their access as well as their economic contacts to the Baltic Sea region.
A strong naval squadron commanded by Vice Admiral Sir James Saumarez
kept the approaches to the Baltic sea open and protected the merchant ves-
sels sailing to and from the Baltic.16 British merchant ships were not alone
in the Baltic; most of the vessels belonged either to American owners or, in
even more cases, to owners from Scandinavian countries. Thus, in many
cases the ships were owned by subjects of states formally at war with Great
Britain. States around the North and Baltic Seas that were more or less reluc-
tantly allied with France did not consider blockade-running and smuggling
a criminal act, but almost a form of resistance, if not a patriotic duty. So the
Continental System was increasingly undermined, not only economically,
but also politically. An elaborate scheme of so called ‘licences’ offered these
neutral and even enemy ships free access to British ports and protection by
the Royal Navy from enemy warships and privateers.17
   The British licence system allowed all foreign ships in possession of such
permission to call in British ports and to export British goods unhindered
by British warships and privateers. To prevent misuse and an uncontrolled
breach of the British blockade by France, British officials strictly controlled
the entire licence system. For instance all ships in possession of a license
were obliged only to sail in large convoys, escorted by British ships of war.
This escort was not only intended to protect the merchant vessels from
enemy attacks, but also to monitor them.18
   The British convoys met at fixed points of rendezvous and sailed during
the shipping season from 15 April to 15 October every fortnight according
to a strict schedule. But the British system of licences and convoys only
regulated the passages between Great Britain and the Baltic region. Once
inside the Baltic, the convoys dissolved and the ships then sailed individu-
ally to their individual destination. No longer protected by the Royal Navy,
they had to rely on disguise and deception alone. One popular form of dis-
guise was so-called ‘neutralization’. To achieve this, a vessel was pro forma
in pretence sold to a new owner of neutral nationality, thus changing the
vessels nationality and flag. This procedure made it possible to ‘to operate
the enemy trade under the mask of neutrality’, as the German expert on
prize-law, Kaltenborn, called it. Furthermore, most ships were equipped
with counterfeited documents. As a consequence of this, the imitation of
foreign documents proclaiming the neutrality of the ship and its cargo
almost became an art form in itself.19 For instance, Peter Hansen, a seaman
born in 1787 in Ekenis in the duchy of Schleswig who sailed on a neutral
American vessel captured by a Norwegian privateer in 1808 and released by
the prize court in Trondheim, reported in his memoirs about this dubious
