                          Smuggling and Blockade-Running from 1807 to 1814 159


business: ‘In those times of war the production of false documents for ships
and cargoes formed a special trade in London, and these counterfeited docu-
ments in general were so deceptively forged, that in almost every case the
authorities in foreign ports were misled by them.’20

Smuggling

For its loyalty to Napoleon and the participation in the Continental System,
the Danish state paid an enormous price, as the economic consequences
from war, blockade and embargo proved to be disastrous. Besides the export
of rural and forest goods to Great Britain, shipping had been the backbone
of Denmark’s prosperity before the war. The ruin of merchant shipping
after 1807 had considerable effects on the entire economy; seamen, ship-
wrights and sail-makers became unemployed, shipyards closed down and
many merchants went bankrupt. In this dire economic situation, smuggling
seemed to be the only way out for many Danish merchants and seamen.21
   By seizing the Danish island of Heligoland in August 1807 the British had
secured themselves a first-class base for running the Danish blockade. They
transformed the little island, situated in the North Sea about 45 nautical
miles west of the Schleswig–Holstein coast and predominantly inhabited
by fishermen and their families, into a fortified warehouse containing all
the goods desired on the continent, especially such colonial commodities
as sugar, tea and coffee. In a short period of time, Heligoland became a
smuggler’s nest, accommodating a large number of merchants of various
grades of respectability. From Heligoland these merchants ran the blockade,
and landed their contraband – more or less secretly – not only in ports like
Husum or Tönning, but also in numerous other small harbours. Soon the
port of Tönning became the most important location of trans-shipment
for smuggled goods on the west coast of the Danish state. The small town
became a prospering seaport until the collapse of the smuggling trade
in 1812.22
   Although Denmark was one of the most loyal allies to Napoleon and
France supporting the Continental System, the embargo was not entirely
maintained even by the Danish authorities. In theory, any trade with Great
Britain was strictly forbidden, but there were some exceptions from the
embargo, especially regarding trade with Norway. As Norwegians depended
heavily on the import of grain and other vital supplies, both the British and
Danes continued trade with Norway. An order by King Frederik VI from
10 November 1808, in which he instructed his officials to confiscate all
ships available to ship grain to Norway, demonstrates the critical nature of
supplying Norway with cereals.23
   British naval supremacy dictated these terms. Regardless of his political
dependency on France, the Danish king had no choice but to reluctantly
allow his subjects to use British licences and to accept the British system
