                           Smuggling and Blockade-Running from 1807 to 1814 161


as neutral … but nevertheless have used an English convoy in the North and
Baltic seas’ should be liable to condemnation by a prize court.28
  Lieutenant Holsten also became suspicious of the second American ship,
the Admittance, commanded by F. Myrion. Again, the Danish naval officer
seized the ship, inspected the ship’s documents and interrogated the crew.
During these interviews one of the seamen, an Italian named Giovanni
Varra, admitted

  that a cargo of Campeche wood, that the ship took from New York, had
  been unloaded in London, that the cargo now on board, consisting of
  sugar, had been taken on board there, that the ship, after it had arrived
  near a small Swedish port, had joined a British convoy, and went through
  the Great Belt under its protection.

   Thus, the Admittance was likewise confiscated by Holsten. Both ships were
later condemned as good prizes by the competent Prize Court in Flensburg.29
   Only the Dutch vessel De Vrouw Hendrica remained so far uncontrolled.
The ship had allegedly come from the port of Varel, near the city of Bremen
on the German North Sea coast, with a cargo of raisins. On presenting the
ship’s documents her master, Dierck Hendrick Metting, had asked permis-
sion to discharge his cargo. The authorities responsible had no reason to
refuse the request and so Metting received permission to unload his cargo
on 3 November 1810.30
   Two days later, the ever-suspicious Lieutenant Holsten reported to his
superiors that he had judged it necessary to also confiscate the De Vrouw
Hendrica, the last ship in the harbour, on suspicion of smuggling and
blockade-running. If the attentive and alert Holsten certainly was not too
popular among the Eckernförde merchants, his merits were well received by
the government. The Danish government officially commended him and
recommended him for a reward.31
   A local Eckernförde merchant known as Dreyer, who represented the
trading house of Stoppel und von Dadelsen from Hamburg, challenged this
last seizure, formally submitting a protest to the Holstein authorities on
the grounds that the lieutenant’s action were allegedly injudicious.32 The
merchant, Dreyer, repeatedly addressed the Königliche Statthalterschaft, the
office of the royal Danish Representative in the Duchies of Schleswig and
Holstein, who eventually stopped the examination of the case. Nevertheless,
the ship De Vrouw Hendrica was finally condemned by the competent Prize
Court in Flensburg. In its sentence the court stated, ‘The seizure was indeed
well motivated, since the condemnation effected mostly is based on the
fact, that the ship’s neutrality wasn’t sufficiently documented by the papers
found aboard.’33
   Dreyer, in fact, seems to have been a character of rather doubtful respect-
ability himself. Apparently, not only were the De Vrouw Hendrica and her
