                           Smuggling and Blockade-Running from 1807 to 1814 157


a prize crew. To be condemned as a good prize, the vessel had to be tried
before a prize court. Only if this court considered the seizure to be lawful
could the ship be sold for the benefit of the privateer’s crew and owners.
Otherwise, the ship would be declared to be free and its owners would be
entitled to receive compensation from the captor for the illegal seizure.12
   Due to the devastation of Danish commercial trade, many shipowners
and merchants invested in privateers in hope of rich profits. Between 1807
and 1813 a total of 556 Danish ships were commissioned as privateers
to prey on British merchant vessels in the North and Baltic seas. In the
beginning the Danish privateers were relatively successful, bringing in a
number of captured British merchantmen.13 For example, the yacht Johanne
of Copenhagen was quite typical of Danish privateers. Commanded by
Christen Holm and commissioned in 1813, the small one-masted vessel was
armed with two three-pounder guns and had a crew of 25. Danish authori-
ties also commissioned privateers in the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein.
For instance, the Flensburg merchant Andreas Andresen equipped the ves-
sel Ellen Sophia as a private ship of war. Likewise, the Flensburg privateers
Arestides and Hans Hansen preyed on enemy shipping, but were captured by
the Royal Navy.14
   In many cases, presumably greed or desire for adventure were the main
motives for seamen as well as ‘landlubbers’ (as men from the non-seafaring
population were called by sailors) to join the crew of a privateer. Instead of
regular wages, the crew would enjoy a share of the profits – should they be
lucky enough to take a prize. On the other hand, there were seamen who
simply preferred privateering to the compulsory military service in the
Danish navy, especially the arduous duty aboard the rowed gunboats. One
of these seamen was Niels Martin Nielsen, born in Copenhagen in 1785.
When the ship he sailed in was captured by the British in 1807, he was
lucky enough to escape from a prisoner-of-war camp. In the following years
he sailed in British and American vessels until he found a ship destined to
Norway. After his arrival in Norway in 1809 he joined the crew of a priva-
teering schooner as boatswain in hope of rich prize money and to escape
compulsory service in the Danish Navy. On their second voyage they seized
a merchant vessel, but were captured themselves by a British man-of-war.
This time Nielsen did not escape captivity – one of the many occupational
risks for privateers. After spending a couple of months aboard one of the
infamous British prison hulks – rotting hulls of old warships moored in
ports and river mouths for the confinement of prisoners of war – he was
officially exchanged for the survivors of a wrecked British ship of the line in
1813. Again Nielsen joined a privateering outfit, but later transferred into
the merchant service. As for many other seamen, Nielsen’s motivation for
joining the crew of a privateer was a mixture of Danish patriotism, hope
for riches and lack of alternatives, since Danish merchant shipping had col-
lapsed after 1807.15
