9
Smuggling and Blockade-Running
during the Anglo–Danish War
from 1807 to 1814
Jann M. Witt



Between 1792 and 1815 Great Britain and France fought for political and
economic dominance in Europe. Though both nations disrupted their
respective sea trade, neutral shipping prospered. Thus, for many years, the
Kingdom of Denmark maintained its neutrality and benefitted economically
from this bitterly fought war.1 This chapter, however, examines the difficult
years Denmark experienced at war with Britain, allied with France and, most
importantly, faced with the destructive policies of the Continental System.
   Since the end of the Great Northern War from 1700 to 1721 in which
Russia, Denmark-Norway and Saxony-Poland had successfully challenged
Swedish supremacy in the Baltic area, the Danish state had remained
neutral. Composed of the Jutland peninsula, the archipelago of Danish
islands in the Baltic, the Kingdom of Norway, Greenland, Iceland, the
Faroe, the Orkney and Shetland islands as well as the duchies of Schleswig
and Holstein, both connected to Denmark by a personal union, Denmark’s
geographical location, buffering the North and Baltic Seas, and its access to
the Atlantic helped the kingdom establish itself as an important maritime
nation.2
   Economic reforms also led to the success of Denmark’s maritime econ-
omy. During the first half of the eighteenth century, the Danish economy
was dominated by the same mercantilist principles predominant in
other European absolutist monarchies. For instance, the Danish capital,
Copenhagen, and its merchants and shipowners enjoyed economic privi-
leges to the disadvantage of the rest of the Danish state. Only after 1751,
when the German-born statesman Johann Hartwig Ernst Bernstorff became
Danish foreign minister and actually head of the Danish government,
Danish economic policy underwent a fundamental change. He abolished
the old mercantilist centralism focused on Copenhagen, and sought eco-
nomic advances beyond the capital in other regions of the Danish state,
especially Schleswig and Holstein. Due to this new approach to industry,
trade and seafaring in the two duchies started to grow again after a long
period of stagnation. More reforms followed to the extent that by the
                                    153
