156   Jann M. Witt


between Denmark and Great Britain was the collapse of Danish–British
trade; this proved disastrous for the Danish economy.9

Gunboats and Privateers

Although the British seized much of the Danish fleet to prevent them from
falling into French use, the remaining Danish naval forces recovered amaz-
ingly quickly following the bombardment. With its limited resources, the
Danish navy tried to launch an embargo on British goods. With their few
remaining warships and a large fleet of quickly constructed gunboats, they
began to wage a kind of seaborne guerrilla warfare against British shipping.
The focus of the Danish seaborne operations was the closing of the passages
in and out of the Baltic Sea – the Øresund – the narrow passage between the
Danish island of Sjælland and Sweden, as well as the Storebelt, or the ‘Great
Belt’, the route between the Danish islands of Fyn and Sjælland.
   Gunboats proved to be a most effective weapon as the Danes fought
against blockade-runners and enemy merchant ships. Open, flat-bottomed
and of a shallow build, these vessels were ideally suited for the guerre de
course or merchant warfare in coastal waters. Armed with a cannon astern or,
in larger vessels, with a heavy gun each in the bow and in the stern, these
gunboats could be sailed as well as rowed. Swift and highly manoeuvrable,
they specialized in the element of surprise, conducting sorties from their for-
tified bases. They preyed on enemy merchant ships, which were easy prizes
for them, especially when unescorted. Indeed, in a dead calm a squadron of
these frail vessels could even menace a ship of war. A more traditional navy
would have been wiped out in short time by the mighty British fleet, but
in the narrow and shallow waters of the Baltic Sea and the Wadden Sea off
the Schleswig-Holstein North Sea coast these handy vessels proved to be a
match for the heavily armed but much more ponderous sailing warships of
the Royal Navy.10
   Not only Danish gunboats fought against the British. The use of privateers
remained the classical weapon of minor maritime nations, mainly aimed
at enemy sea trade. Once issued an official document called the ‘letter of
marque’, privately owned ships transformed into ‘private ships of war’ (thus
the term ‘privateer’) against the enemy nations specified in the document.11
   As early as 14 September 1807 the Danish Regent announced ‘Instructions
to Privateers’, describing under what circumstances privately owned ships
could be empowered by the Danish government to act as privateers at their
own risk and for their own profits in the naval war against Great Britain.
The Danish privateering regulations reflected the principles of the maritime
law of nations as followed by most other European maritime countries. A
suspect vessel had to be stopped first and its documents examined. If the
inspection yielded sufficient evidence that the vessel or its cargo were of
enemy origin, the ship could be seized and brought in to the next port by
