154   Jann M. Witt


middle of the eighteenth century, in addition to the Danish capital, a num-
ber of ports in Schleswig and Holstein had become home to large merchant
fleets operating in European and international sea trade as a result of this
process of economic modernization. The most important of these ports
were Flensburg, Eckernförde and Altona. Altona was then the second-largest
city of the Danish state after Copenhagen and situated approximately
40 nautical miles inside the Elbe River near the city-state of Hamburg. If
eighteenth-century Hamburg served as the main trade partner and financial
centre for the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, the city-state’s merchant
fleet was smaller than that of neighbouring Danish Altona, whose ships
frequently sailed on behalf of Hamburg merchants, specializing particularly
in Mediterranean trade.
   Maintaining Danish neutrality after 1720 allowed Danish fleets and com-
merce to prosper at the expense of those powers distracted by the frequent
eighteenth-century wars, and represented the key factor in the growing suc-
cess of Danish merchant shipping. Under the Danebrog, the neutral Danish
flag, merchant vessels from Denmark and the duchies of Schleswig and
Holstein could trade more or less unimpeded by the warships and privateers
of warring nations. These decades, characterized by a thriving economy,
became known in Danish historiography as the ‘long peace’ and ‘flourish-
ing period’.3

Armed Neutrality

During the war of American Independence and the wars of the French
Revolution, the Danish merchant fleet took advantage of the protection
offered by its neutral flag. As the British policies against neutral trade after
1793 became more and more repressive, however, international tensions
grew. For instance, in July 1800 the Danish frigate Freya, escorting six
Danish merchantmen, refused control and was forced to strike flag by a
British squadron after a short but fierce battle. Finally, friction between the
North European neutral powers and Britain culminated in the forming of
the second ‘armed neutrality’. Initiated by Russia’s Tsar Paul I and based on
the model of a similar alliance of neutral powers during the American War of
Independence, members included other European neutral nations in 1800,
including Denmark, Prussia, Sweden and Russia.4
  When ‘armed neutrality’ threatened to block British access to the Baltic
sea, the British counter-strike was swift and hard, since a large amount of the
vital Baltic naval stores, such as wood, hemp and tar, were necessary for the
maintenance of the Royal Navy. On 2 April 1801 a British squadron under
command of Admirals Sir Hyde Parker and Lord Horatio Nelson destroyed
the Danish fleet in the bloody First Battle of Copenhagen. Despite this act of
hostility, Denmark maintained its neutrality for a number of years.5
