162   Jann M. Witt


master deeply involved in the smuggling business, but also Dreyer himself.
Only a few days before the three ships had put into Eckernförde harbour,
Dreyer had been caught red-handed by the local authorities smuggling coffee.
As the Zollkammer, the ‘customs office’, reported, one squire Schallburg, owner
of Hemmelmark, an estate in close proximity to the town of Eckernförde,
had confiscated about 15,000 lb of undeclared coffee on 27 October 1810.
This coffee was ‘bought by the merchant Dreyer from Eckernförde’ to be
transported to Hamburg, the customs office continued in its report.34
   As this example shows, the fight against smuggling was not entirely futile.
By 1811 although Napoleon and his allies were able to curtail illicit trading
and to increase economic pressure on Great Britain to a certain extent, they
did not succeed in making the Continental System impenetrable. Despite all
restrictions, smugglers and blockade-runners repeatedly found ways to elude
the strict embargo controls.35
   In 1810 on the North Frisian island of Amrum, a so-called Kaffeekrieg, a
coffee war, emerged when the British tried to recover a cargo of coffee that
had been confiscated by Danish officials. Furthermore, in 1811 Danish
authorities uncovered a widespread smuggling network. Three merchants
from Flensburg, two from Sonderburg and one from Kiel were accused
of illegal commercial connections with Britain. The verdicts against the
three Flensburg merchants were severe: Christian Stuhr was fined 500
Reichsbanktaler, Lorenz Göttig was sentenced to one year in prison and a
fine of 5000 Reichsbanktaler and Hans Thomsen Fries (a future Mayor of
Flensburg) was even sentenced to death, though later pardoned and sen-
tenced to six months imprisonment. Needless to say, all smuggled goods
were confiscated. Despite these relatively stern punishments, smugglers
were not discouraged.36

The Case of the Vigilantia

In 1811 a daring case of blockade-running took place in the port of Tönning,
on Schleswig’s North Sea coast. The leading player in this affair was one
Hendrik van Nievervaart, a Dutch merchant from Dordrecht, apparently
somewhat reduced in his circumstances as a result of the economic crisis
brought about by the Continental System. Eager to regain his commercial
standing, Nievervaart concocted a scheme to run the Blockade in the guise
of a fake privateer. He planned to bring in a cargo of smuggled British goods
by pretending to have captured an allegedly enemy merchant vessel.37
  Nievervaart employed Georg Christian Hasse, a local merchant from
Tönning, as legal frontman. In the name of Hasse, he had fitted out a pri-
vateer called Vigilantia under the command of Captain Jan Jansen, from the
north Friesian island of Föhr off the Schleswig west coast, an area renowned
for its highly qualified seamen during the eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries. Nievervaart himself was listed as secretary on the Vigilantia’s
