                            Smuggling and Blockade-Running from 1807 to 1814 163


muster roll. Under the pretence of a privateering cruise, the Vigilantia sailed
from Tönning, but instead of preying on the enemy merchant shipping the
vessel sailed directly to the English port of Hull where Nievervaart had pre-
arranged a rendezvous with a Dutch brig named Fortuna, commanded by
Hemme Hendrick de Groot.
   After the Vigilantia’s crew had assisted in rigging the brig, the Fortuna, with
a cargo of coal and accompanied by the Vigilantia, set sail from Hull. Both
ships fell in with a British man of war, but after an examination they were
allowed to proceed to the island of Heligoland where the Fortuna completed
its load with a cargo of coffee. They then sailed back to Tönning where
Nievervaart claimed the Fortuna to be a prize taken off the coast of Norway.
By making a false declaration, he tried to get the brig and its cargo officially
condemned as lawful prize which, if successful, would have allowed him to
sell the ship and its cargo legally.38
   In other words, using the privateering business as disguise, Nievervaart
had tried to game the Continental System by declaring his merchant goods
as lawful prize. But the cleverly contrived Vigilantia scheme failed because
of the vigilance of the ever-distrustful Danish authorities.39 Both ships, the
Vigilantia and Fortuna, were seized by the local authorities and their crews
interrogated. During the investigation, the authorities discovered sufficient
evidence that the Vigilantia had sailed to Hull under pretence of cruising
against British merchant shipping to meet the brig Fortuna and to run the
blockade.40
   This affair was too important to be handled by the local authorities alone.
Thus a special examination board, called a Combined Commission – com-
binirte Commission – was established on direct order of the Danish king.
This committee also had judicial powers.41 Nievervaart proved as creative in
his excuses as he had been in the design of his elaborate blockade-running
scheme. At first, he tried to wriggle himself out by claiming that it was
not smuggling but industrial espionage that had been the true objective of
his enterprise and that he had been attempting to figure out the construc-
tion of British spinning machines to earn a reward of one million francs
offered by Napoleon for this technical information. But very soon the
commission discovered Nievervaart’s complete lack of technological knowl-
edge. The commission determined that this was only an excuse to escape
punishment.42
   Even less credible in the eyes of the commission was Nievervaart’s claim
that he was entirely ignorant of the rules relating to the Danish instructions
for privateers. Not only was Nievervaart officially listed as the Vigilantia’s
secretary, and thus responsible for any misuse of the ship’s letter of marque,
but as a merchant he should also have had a certain knowledge of the
regulations concerning the Continental System.43 The commission also dis-
covered that a Dutch translation of the Danish ‘Instructions to Privateers’
had been found aboard the Vigilantia, apparently written by Nievervaart
