172   Bård Frydenlund


other merchants. Their wealth, political status and international networks
further strengthened their significant positions in Norway as well as within
the composite state of Denmark-Norway.
   The ties between these magnates in southern Norway were strong.
Although their estates and properties were scattered over vast areas, they
interacted socially at their estates and in Christiania. Most of them were
related to each other and exchanged technology, workforce or financial sup-
port to improve their businesses and tighten their social relations. During
the Continental System, this cooperation was strengthened even further as
they helped each other by procuring grain for their workforces, gunpowder
for the mines or exchanging licences and the latest news on trade and poli-
tics in Europe amid the destructive economic warfare. Their many interna-
tional links among business agents, ship captains, consuls and merchants
in centres like London and Hamburg were important to ‘check’ the official
communications issued from the autocratic government in Copenhagen.
This ‘competition for information’ between these private magnates and the
officials and civil servants in Norway and Copenhagen was a fundamental
factor leading up to the two competing political factions during the consti-
tutional assembly in Norway in 1814.4

Initial Responses to the Continental System:
Patriotism and Passive Response

The first real consequences of the Continental System on Denmark-Norway
did not cause any serious disruptions in Norway during its initial phase.
On the contrary, the bombardment of Copenhagen in September 1807
and later the war between Denmark-Norway and Sweden created a patri-
otic wave within Norway. Regarded as a loyal satellite of Copenhagen, an
interim government ruled Norway. The government was led by the head of
the armed forces in southern Norway, Prince Christian August. He was an
integral member of the social circles of Christiania and won considerable
popularity when he led the Norwegian forces to victory against the Swedes
in the spring of 1808. The Danish high officials had more or less become
assimilated into the local elite of Christiania since 1750, but with the crisis
situation in 1807 new tensions arose between the officials and the mer-
chants, even though the head of the new government was an officer and a
close friend of the merchants. The other members of the new government
for Norway included both state officials and magnates with a dominance of
high-ranking members of the civil service.5
   The patriotic movement was also manifested by the many subscriptions
mobilized for helping the homeless in Copenhagen and for equipping land
forces in Norway in the military operations along the Swedish–Norwegian
borders.6 Crown Prince Frederik issued the Privateer Decree of 14 September
1807, giving permission for civilians to board ‘enemy’ vessels and set prizes
