                           Smuggling and Blockade-Running from 1807 to 1814 165


affected the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein and furthermore resulted in
a loss of confidence in the Danish government among the duchies’ popu-
lace. One year later military collapse followed this economic breakdown.
In January 1814 the Danish troops surrendered to an allied army under
the command of the Swedish Crown-Prince Bernadotte, formerly one of
Napoleons leading generals. Compelled to accept the humiliating Treaty of
Kiel, the Danish state lost one-third of its entire territory when it was forced
to hand over Norway to Sweden.52
  This treaty reduced the Danish state from its former status as an inter-
mediate European power to a small state politically dependent on the great
powers in Northern Europe. A combination of the effects of national bank-
ruptcy and a loss of confidence in the government in Copenhagen became
one cause for the escalation of national conflicts between the Danish- and
German-speaking populations in the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein in
the first half of the nineteenth century.53 If the German-speaking population
in the duchies demanded the maintenance of the close connection between
Schleswig and Holstein and affiliation to the German Confederation, the
Danish National movement demanded the incorporation of Schleswig
into the Kingdom of Denmark. In 1848 this conflict culminated in
the Schleswig–Holsteinische Erhebung, a rebellion of the German-speaking
Schleswig-Holsteiners against Danish rule. From 1848 to 1852, the first
war of Schleswig was fought to determine if Schleswig-Holstein should stay
within Denmark or become part of a German nation state. Eventually, the
German-orientated Schleswig-Holsteiners were defeated in 1851 after their
Prussian allies retreated following diplomatic pressure imposed by Great
Britain and Russia. After Denmark’s defeat in the war against Austria and
Prussia of 1864, the Danish kingdom finally lost the duchies Schleswig and
Holstein – under Danish rule since 1460, both being annexed by Prussia in
1867 after the victorious Austrian–Prussian War of 1866.54

Conclusion

All in all, a close look at the Anglo–Danish war reveals a rather confusing
image. From 1807 to 1814 Denmark was one of Napoleon’s most loyal allies.
Nevertheless, the attitude of the Danish authorities remained contradictory.
On the one hand, letters of marque were issued and the authorities severely
punished merchants and seamen convicted of smuggling and blockade-
running. On the other hand, despite Denmark’s political will to punish
the British for acts of war against the Danish state, the Danish merchants
and seamen maintained their economic contacts with Great Britain. Thus,
in Denmark, as in the rest of continental Europe under French control, a
form of populist resistance against the Continental System developed and
thrived, though motivated more from necessity than from patriotism or
