164   Jann M. Witt


himself. Thus, the commission declared that Nievervaart was obviously well
acquainted with Danish privateering regulations, and that he had wilfully
violated them.44
   After a careful examination of the case of the Vigilantia and interrogations
of all individuals involved, the Combined Commission pronounced its judg-
ment on Nievervaart, Captain Jansen and two merchants from Tönning on
25 November 1811. Captain Jansen was declared to forfeit his right to com-
mand a ship under the Danish flag and sentenced to serve four years of hard
labour in the fortress of Rendsburg.45 Nievervaart was sentenced to two years
of penal servitude, thus losing his respectability. This was a harsh sentence
for someone living in a social order which considered respectability as one
of its foundations, not only for being a reputable member of society but also
for the practice of his profession as a merchant. By losing his respectability,
Nievervaart also lost the trust of his fellow citizens, an essential component in
business transactions.46 The two accused merchants from Tönning, Albrecht
Keller and Georg Christian Hasse, only received prison sentences of two and
four weeks, respectively. Concerning the two ships Vigilantia and Fortuna, the
commission declared both be condemned and be lawful prizes. Accordingly,
both vessels were forfeited to the Royal Danish Treasury.47
   The judgment of the Combined Commission made it explicitly clear that
under Danish law the crimes of Nievervaarts and Jansens were considered
felonies, not mere minor offences.48 These harsh sentences were designed to
act as a clear signal by the Danish authorities as to how serious they viewed
smuggling.49 Doubtless, the commission’s fear was well founded since the
economic crisis still caused many Danish merchants and seamen to turn to
risky enterprises such as privateering, smuggling or licensed trade.50

The Collapse of the Continental System

Despite the intensification of the Continental System and the infliction
of harsh sentences against smugglers and blockade-runners, France and its
allies failed to make the Blockade impenetrable and to destroy the British
economy – quite the contrary. Though he strictly forbade his allies any com-
mercial contact with Great Britain, Napoleon undermined his own blockade
by granting licences to supply the French economy with the import of badly
needed raw materials. Thus, Napoleon deprived himself of the chance to
defeat Great Britain economically, at precisely the very moment the British
economy slipped into an economic crisis. It was not until the breakdown
of the Continental System following Napoleon’s failed assault on Russia in
1812 that Great Britain experienced any economic relief.51
   If Britain endured and recovered quickly, the Danish economy collapsed.
In January 1813 the economic breakdown culminated in the national
bankruptcy of the Danish state. Needless to say, such a collapse also deeply
