                                Defying the Continental System in the Periphery 171


Great Britain to secure the best possible livelihood under the exceptional
blockade conditions.2

The Peaceful ‘Pre-Continental System’ Situation –
the Anglo–Norwegian Timber Trade

Norway was a periphery in the broad sense of the word. Added to the obvi-
ous geographical fact that Norway was the northernmost part of the north-
ernmost state of Europe, since the turn of the century the head of state,
Danish Crown Prince Frederik, practised a highly centralized version of a
capital-focused kind of absolutism which emphasized even more Norway’s
explicit outsider position. The distance made it more difficult for the mer-
chants of Christiania (today Oslo) than for their colleagues in Copenhagen
to influence Danish trade policies. During times of peace the situation was,
nevertheless, far from intolerable as Denmark-Norway enjoyed more or less
peaceful relations since the Great Northern War in 1720, and the state’s
merchants had gained substantial profits and developed reliable and trust-
worthy trade relations throughout Europe.
   Nearly as important as the capital Copenhagen was the influence of
London for Norwegian trade. Since the seventeenth century, significant
commercial links developed between southern Norway and Great Britain.
Plank from pine trees cut at the saw mills around the Christiania Fjord,
known as ‘Christiania Deals’, was a trademark Norwegian commodity in
London.3 The towns of southern Norway were the most ‘English’ towns in
the Danish state, and trade agents (factors) from London settled in Norway.
Cultural and social relations developed during the eighteenth century and
the grandest elite families, like the Anker and Collett families of Christiania,
played a significant role in the establishment of the Nordic Society in
London in 1789, where Danish and Norwegian citizens gathered for social
visits, listened to lectures, read Scandinavian papers and collected the lat-
est information from across the North Sea. Norwegian aristocracy were
also members of British agricultural societies and even the Royal Society.
Since the merchants in Denmark-Norway did not have access to formal
political decision-making arenas like representative estates, such informal
social relations played an important role in the merchants’ political and
economic relationships and activities. Merchants with personal connec-
tions in Copenhagen, and instrumental relationships in ports like London,
Hamburg, Amsterdam, Leith and Gothenburg were the best equipped to
gather pertinent information to favourably influence their own situations.
   The upper strata among these Norwegian merchants were the magnates
of Norway. They were involved in a multitude of enterprises like saw mills,
estates, mines and ironworks, and their family fortunes had created substan-
tial profits and regional power bases. The combination of their international
trade network with local and regional state offices distinguished them from
