174   Bård Frydenlund


around the Christiania fjord did not support the privateer initiative like they
had supported other such patriotic projects as the building of grain store-
houses, new poor relief initiatives and raising money for the army. Peder
Anker, one of the leading patrons of southern Norway, gave large donations
to improve poor relief and grain storage facilities. He initiated new school
projects, both civil and military education, sponsored the planning for a
Norwegian university, and set up, with the assistance of his son-in-law,
Count Herman Wedel-Jarlsberg, a private military company of riflemen, to
be used as a reserve unit in the war against Sweden. When it came to sup-
porting the privateer business, however, he signed only two shares at the
Christiania Caper Compagni.12 This relatively marginal investment on his
part was the least he could contribute to still be considered a patriot in his
home region.
   Grain shortage emerged as the most serious challenge to the Norwegian
community during this period. Norway did not produce enough grain to
supply their own demand, and a grain monopoly remained in effect until
the late 1780s, forcing grain to be imported only from Danish Jutland or
Copenhagen.13 And after the lapse of the monopoly in 1788, Norwegians
had neither taken initiatives to improve their grain production nor gained
any real support from Copenhagen to deal with the deficit. So when the
Blockade came into effect after 1807 and the supply ships from Jutland
stopped their grain deliveries to Norway, the government in Copenhagen
and the interim government in Christiania were at their wits’ end. The eager
County Governor of Buskerud County, west of Christiania, Count Herman
Wedel-Jarlsberg, then took actions into his own hands with the help of his
father-in-law, Anker, and his business associates in Norway, Jutland and
Sweden. Swedish Gothenburg emerged as a key position and junction for all
trade to southern Norway, but specifically for the grain import. The presence
of Admiral Saumarez and the British navy outside the Gothenburg harbours
was another key feature of this area. Although the navy searched all ships
they apprehended and potentially could confiscate cargo, this potentially
negative consequence was counterbalanced with secure convoys transport-
ing goods between the Baltic Sea and Great Britain.14 By using Anker’s
personal accounts and credit, Wedel-Jarlsberg started to find new ways of
importing grain to Norway without a clear mandate from any Danish or
Norwegian authority.15
   Anker, whose family’s lineage originally came from Gothenburg, was
the best-connected merchant in Norway at the time and benefitted from a
range of business connections and friends in western Sweden.16 Apart from
the heads of several merchant houses in Gothenburg – most significantly,
Gustaf Ekman of Ekman & Co., Immanuel Norling of Anderson & Wohlfahrt
(later Wohlfahrt & Norling) and David Low and John Smith of Low &
Smith – he had a personal relationship with the Bagge family. An influential
industrialist in Scandinavia like Anker, Peter Bagge experimented in canal
