180   Bård Frydenlund


mentioning its source and that he had ordered a ship to deliver it to the
harbour of Brevik not far from Anker’s mines. With the ship, he hired a ship
captain from Brevik, Simon Wilberg, to stay with the cargo as he should
transport other goods from Brevik to Christiania. Norling obtained licences
from Low & Smith, and everything appeared in order. Yet in the same let-
ter he reported that he had to put ‘groats’ on the barrels of gunpowder
and cover them with straw and sawdust, remarking that ‘such measures
have to be taken these days’. After that Peder Anker did not hear from
Norling until he received a letter on 23 May confirming that the payment
for the gunpowder had arrived in Gothenburg. At this moment Norling
stated that it was absolutely necessary to have ‘the right English licences’
as Admiral Saumarez and his 12 warships stopped every vessel outside
Gothenburg.29
  The shipment met problems. The steward, Falchenberg, sent Anker a let-
ter on 8 May recounting that he could not get the barrels of gunpowder
out of the customs house. An eager customs officer had discovered the
real contents of the barrels and held them back for further inquires. Anker
then acted quickly by contacting his son-in-law Count Wedel-Jarlsberg
who sat in the interim government of Norway, and the government issued
an official statement to Anker that he had free passage to take the barrels
‘with no further evidence required’, signed 15 May by the new head of the
Interim Government of Norway, prince Friedrich of Hessen, and the three
other members – and close friends of Peder Anker – Wedel-Jarlsberg, Marcus
Rosenkrantz and Mathias Sommerhielm. On 25 May Falchenberg thanked
Anker for his quick intervention and confirmed the barrels of gunpowder at
Anker’s mine at Østre Langøe.30
  But the gunpowder transaction had a peculiar and interesting aftermath.
Following the barrels of gunpowder discharge in Norway, the Brevik ship
captain, Wilberg, sent a complaint to Anker. He complained in strict terms
to Anker about the appalling conditions of the sea passage from Gothenburg
to Norway and that the ship had been stopped and searched several times
at sea. It was only by his personal contribution that the shipment reached
Brevik safely, and he wanted financial compensation for the unpleasant
journey. At the end of the letter he stated that he knew the consequences
such a transaction would have for Anker if his important shipment were to
be known among ‘the high lords of Copenhagen’.31
  Anker considered Wilberg’s complaint as blackmail and responded
severely. The exact words used are not known, but considering the humble
answer from Wilberg and letters from ship captain Jens Halvorsen of Brevik
and ironwork owner and County Governor Severin Løvenskiold (another
close friend of Anker), it must have been tough. Instead of merely deny-
ing Wilberg extra compensation, he counter-attacked and promised to
see Wilberg in court. A ‘pipe’ of Madeira Wine (450 l.) was missing from
the shipment and Wilberg had to answer for that. Though Halvorsen and
