178   Bård Frydenlund


The volume of this trade was by no means like the proportions of the
Heligoland, Altona or Tönning business in the south, but it nevertheless
demonstrated that the Norwegians also chose to defy the Continental
System in a multitude of ways.
   The Norwegian magnates communicated freely with British representa-
tives and Swedish merchants and authorities alike, and in situations when
new decrees required new regulations on trade, Norwegian merchants just
changed ‘partners’. For shipments travelling to Leith by convoy, they either
contacted the authorities in London or the British Consul in Gothenburg
for a licence and a berth on the next convoy. When they had to bring ques-
tionable goods to Norway, they tried to evade the British navy by either
taking the risk of going directly to the point of destination or traversing the
shallow waters along the coastline of Båhuslen (Sweden) and Smålenene
(Norway) counties between Gothenburg and Christiania. Goods were trans-
ported partly by road and partly by sea, according to the regulations in
force. Swedish merchants in Gothenburg facilitated the Norwegians in cre-
ating new trade routes, issuing papers – lawful as well as false – and arrang-
ing transportation. The consuls were also key facilitators, and the ones in
London and Gothenburg were as significant for the North Sea trade as those
in Hamburg were for the Heligoland and Altona business in the southern
part of the Danish state.26
   Officials in Copenhagen learned that merchants in southern Norway had
established close relations with leading Swedish merchants and politicians,
but remained unable to control the situation north of the blockaded zones.
The existing commercial and social relations led to meetings in which politi-
cal matters, like the overthrow of the ‘semi-absolute’ royal rule in Sweden
in 1809, were discussed. The search for a new Crown Prince of Sweden had
begun as the elected king, Charles XIII, was an old and uninspiring leader.
The Swedes eyed Prince Christian August as a potential successor. Anker
and Wedel-Jarlsberg were most frequently mentioned in both Danish and
Swedish sources. As Peder Anker made use of his international trade network
for political purposes, he facilitated meetings in April and August 1809 at
his estates under the leadership of his son-in-law, Count Wedel-Jarlsberg. In
April they introduced Prince Christian August, the head of the provisional
government of Norway, to the Swedish minister Baltzar von Platen, who
informed the prince about the Swedish situation and what support he would
get if he would accept the title of Crown Prince of Sweden. After much
correspondence and several attempts from the Danish court to stop him,
Christian August went to Stockholm to become the successor to the Swedish
crown in December 1809.27
   The choice of Christian August as Swedish Crown Prince under the new
name Charles August strengthened support for uniting Sweden with Norway
as a new Scandinavian state formation. Sadly, Charles August died in May
1810, paving the way for Jean Baptiste Bernadotte to become new Crown
