182   Bård Frydenlund


war with Sweden commenced, diplomatic conspiracies ensued, and the year
ended with the rather autonomous union between Norway and Sweden
(which lasted until 1905) led by one of Napoleon’s former field marshals.
   On this path to a new political order a new association, the Royal
Patriotic Society for Norway, emerged during the winter of 1809 and
1810. Established by the magnates who assumed leading roles within the
patriotic society, its projects would extend beyond promoting industrial
and economic progress in Denmark-Norway. Run by a board consisting of
the most important merchants, state officials and clerics in Norway, Peder
Anker and Count Wedel-Jarlsberg were among the directors and financial
backbones of the society. Divided into committees according to professions,
it had links with regional and local patriotic societies. As Norway was still
severed from its de facto political centre in Copenhagen and the role of the
interim government was weakened by the king, the Patriotic Society took
the form of a proto-government with local administrations in counties and
local communities. The establishment of a university in Christiania in 1811
represented the most significant result of the work of the Society. Despite
inner tensions between officials and merchants and the controversial Count
Wedel-Jarlsberg as a leading figure, the society was a peaceful arena where
it’s members were committed to the same goal of developing Norway.35 If
officials remained loyal to Copenhagen, the contents (or meaning) of patri-
otism shifted during these years towards a stronger national programme for
Norway as a sovereign entity. The vital roles in this process were played by
magnates like Peder Anker and Wedel-Jarlsberg.
   During the years of the Continental System and its many challenges
the magnates consolidated their role as internal opponents of Danish rule
in Norway. Both Wedel-Jarlsberg and Severin Løvenskiold resigned their
posts as county governors in 1813, and Anker and Wedel-Jarlsberg resumed
talks with Swedish ministers, leading Norway into its political revolution
in 1814. At the constitutional assembly at Eidsvoll, Anker, Wedel-Jarlsberg
and Løvenskiold assumed the role of leaders of the so-called ‘Union Party’,
favouring a peaceful union with Sweden instead of the war and block-
ades associated with Danish rule. Indeed, following the defeat of a badly
equipped, supplied and organized Norwegian army, the Swedish king
appointed Anker and Wedel-Jarlsberg as the two most significant ministers
of Norway for the new political order.

Conclusion

The Norwegian magnates undermined the Continental System in coopera-
tion with British and Swedish partners. The convoy system was a key factor
and helped Norwegian exporting survive. Anthony Ryan is right in saying
that ‘the only trade they could have in the circumstances of the time was
trade with Britain’. However, his ultimate conclusion that ‘It proved … a
