                               Defying the Continental System in the Periphery 179


Prince of Sweden as Charles John (Karl Johan). Bernadotte fulfilled the
Scandinavian plan on Sweden’s behalf with support from the Great Powers
between 1812 and 1813, making the demand for Norway as compensation
for the loss of Finland in the war with Russia in 1809. But the compensation
was not entirely fulfilled. A personal union between Sweden and Norway
made the Swedish monarch king of two kingdoms, and the Norwegian
constitution of 1814 remained a defence against Swedish interference in
Norwegian politics. As mediators for a peaceful union between Norway and
Sweden, Peder Anker and Count Wedel-Jarlsberg played significant roles,
becoming prime minister and minister of finance in the Norwegian govern-
ment within the union.

A Case Study: The Norwegian ‘Gunpowder Plot’ of 1810

A case study from the spring of 1810 demonstrates the controversial condi-
tions that shaped Norwegian commerce and the extraordinary measures
taken to manage it during the Continental System. Norway was depend-
ent on the export of a whole range of commodities. The mining industry
imported the gunpowder necessary for ore extraction. There were very few
gunpowder mills in southern Norway, and due to a lack of potassium nitrate
they under-produced gunpowder, which hurt the ironwork industry.
   Peder Anker owned several mines along the Norwegian coastline and
faced grave difficulties in the period between 1807 and 1814, among them
declining gunpowder supplies. The steward of Anker’s largest mine at Langø
Island outside the town of Kragerø (Telemark County), Peder Falchenberg,
reported frequently back to Peder Anker at his estate outside Christiania,
and in January 1810 the message was final: the amount of gunpowder was
so short that production would not last more than a couple of months. All
imports from Denmark had stopped, and the local supply chains from the
Norwegian gunpowder mills had been blocked as well.
   Gunpowder had to be bought from the east, so Anker activated his
Swedish connections as he had in managing the grain shortage. Among his
trading partners in Gothenburg, Immanuel Norling was of great importance.
He connected Anker and his son-in-law, Count Wedel-Jarlsberg, to grain
traders in southern Sweden, northern Germany and the Baltic area and
acted as a financial agent for the Danish state on behalf of the Wohlfarth
& Norling company. Norling was recommended for the position as agent
when the central government in Copenhagen wanted to take control of
the provisioning of Norway in 1810 (after relying on Peder Anker’s private
accounts in Gothenburg until 1810).28
   Norling creatively dealt with the obstacles of the Continental System.
In April 1810 he placed an order for gunpowder for Anker and organized
a crew for its transport. In a letter from 30 April Norling reported to Anker
that he now had obtained 30 ‘centner’ of gunpowder (1.5 tons) without
