                               Defying the Continental System in the Periphery 173


in provisional courts.7 Officials in Copenhagen expected Norwegian mer-
chants and ship captains to rally their forces and equip their fleets for the
privateer business. Many shipowners responded appropriately, but there was
never the expected landslide of support in 1807. In response, more explicit
measures were taken by leading officials in Norway to galvanize public
opinion. The Lord Chief Justice of southern Norway and member of the
provisional government for Norway, Enevold Falsen, published an attack on
Great Britain in the semi-official newspaper Tiden in March 1808 and called
for patriotic support for the privateer business:

  If the British Men have abandoned their civilized culture and once
  again awaken the Brutality that Philosophy once hoped to have put to
  sleep forever, then: Norwegian Men of Honour, Hear the calling of your
  Fathers! Arm yourself! Equip your Privateers against the Robbers of the
  Fleet! Set Sails for a Viking Expedition, rally old Courage and Love of
  your Fatherland, and the Barks shall give you Revenge and Gold to your
  Coastlines!8

   The prosperity of ship captains and owners increased dramatically along
with the expanding privateer enterprise in 1808 and 1809. Even public pri-
vateer companies were established and invited members of high society to
sign shares at a value of 100 Danish riksdaler each.9 Some Danish high offi-
cials even combined their state obligations in Norway with a prosperous pri-
vateer business. The County Governor of Christianssand County, Emanuel
Thygeson, publicly announced that the citizens should arm themselves as
early as 25 August 1807, and many supported the privateer business whole-
heartedly. Indeed, Christianssand, at the southern tip of Norway, became
the capital of the privateer business in Norway. It was the only coastal
town in Norway that did not stagnate demographically and economically
between the years 1807 and 1814, and the town’s fleet of privateers counted
70 ships which captured approximately 300 ships as prizes during the same
period.10 Governor Thygeson had a significant impact on Christianssand’s
good fortune, as he became the most influential owner of privateers in the
area. Although owning only the third largest fleet, he was the most suc-
cessful as he did not have the same expenses as the other shipowners. In
contrast to Thygeson, who made a substantial profit after deducting only
salaries for the crew and the ship investments, others had to compensate
their newly achieved profits with their running expenditures and previous
economic losses.11
   But not every Norwegian supported the patriotic and warlike momentum.
Merchants heavily involved in trade with Britain foresaw a problematic
future that could complicate their long-term business. Yet, they assumed
present conditions would not last and calculated that privateers would cre-
ate employment competition against their own enterprises. So the magnates
