176   Bård Frydenlund


and the mines, mills and ironworks in Norway reflected an autocratic and
centralized system of government. These small communities functioned as
a state within the state. The magnate patron represented the head of state
and the workers accepted the patron’s employment terms for a set payment
and social security. Although this social contract situation looks asymmet-
ric and unjust in a contemporary view, many Norwegians preferred it to
the status of a ‘free’ peasant or independent worker without the security
associated with a magnate’s resources. This deferential notion, created by
the patrimonial system, influenced the magnates’ political base and activi-
ties as political patrons of rank and ‘protectors’ of hundreds or thousands
of workers. When, for instance, a man like Peder Anker could not pay the
approximately 2500 workers in his mines, ironworks and the estate, as well
as transport workers, millers, smiths, clerks, agents, stewards, messengers,
ship captains and servants, the very order of society was at stake. Magnates
presented these apocalyptic arguments to their full extent to regional and
central authorities.
   The lack of cash payments meant that workers sought to look elsewhere
for employment. Moreover, the Blockade created new inner markets in
Norway, and as a way of compensating for the lack of imports, these mar-
kets created new jobs, setting the single worker in a negotiating position
never experienced before. New endeavours such as smuggling and priva-
teering attracted former miners, lumberjacks and shipmen to try their luck
in more unstable but potentially more profitable businesses. Peder Anker’s
enterprises faced this experience, evidenced in reports from his stewards
throughout southern Norway who complained that the workers demanded
higher wages and better social conditions and that competing enterprises
also sought their labour.20 This situation, however, did not uniformly affect
all workers as inland labourers faced severe challenges as they struggled to
meet their needs through grain shortages and threatening unemployment.
   A further dimension of this shift in commerce manifested itself in the
disparagement of Norwegian timber. After the timber trade resumed in 1809
weekly bulletins were sent from the Wolffs & Dorville Company in London
complaining that some of the Norwegian planks were of bad quality and
were ‘not merchantable’. The lumber had either been stored as cut timber or
the lumber had remained too long in water before it was sawed. This situa-
tion lasted until summer 1810.21
   Popular reactions to Norway’s increasingly isolated and compromised
situation grew in number and strength in 1809. The author and ironwork
owner Jacob Aall put it bluntly in a letter to the head of the interim govern-
ment in Norway in September 1809:

  The restrictions on trade are many, the limits of industry are strength-
  ened, the roads of Enlightenment stopped. No bank, no free trade, no
  academy or university, few of our country’s able men in significant
