                               Defying the Continental System in the Periphery 175


building and imported new technology from Great Britain to modernize his
enterprises. More important for the personal relationship between Bagge
and Anker was Anker’s employment of Bagge’s son Samuel in 1804. Anker
hired Samuel Bagge to review a canal plan in Norway, as he was an engineer
and a director of Trollhättan Canal & Lock Works just north of Gothenburg,
and to help improve the waterways to Peder Anker’s saw mills.17 In 1807
Bagge engaged in grain transactions with Wedel-Jarlsberg in Gothenburg,
and later Prince Christian August and Wedel-Jarlsberg sent him as a delegate
to Swedish authorities to negotiate general trade concerns in 1807, the deliv-
erance of prisoners of war in 1808 and the Crown Prince question in Sweden
in 1809.18 Bagge was not the only Swede in Anker’s and Wedel-Jarlsberg’s
service; Swedish stewards and iron masters filled influential roles in Norway,
even when Denmark-Norway engaged in hostilities against Sweden.19 As a
result of Swedish contact, Wedel-Jarlsberg, and to some extent Anker, were
looked upon with suspicion by Danish officials in Norway.

1809: Protests and Active Adjustments to the
Continental System

The resigned attitude towards the Continental System and benign policies
of the central government developed into despair and hostility in 1809. The
immediate loss of income was not the biggest challenge for the Norwegian
magnates as they had diverse investments to cover short periods of general
losses. As the Blockade lasted, the merchants faced a bigger and more fun-
damental problem. Since Norwegian deals failed to arrive in British harbours
in 1808, importers of timber questioned the ability of the Norwegians to
fulfil their orders and started to look elsewhere to meet their timber needs.
This was a devastating blow to established trade relations as it questioned
the very core of long-term trade relations, especially the centrality of mer-
cantile trust. The fact that specific commodities should be delivered on time
was a fundamental criteria in business as was the expectation that correct
payment should be made on time. Trust was a crucial component in inter-
national commerce during the period; it took ages to establish, but a short
time to ruin. Such problems did not fully affect merchants like Peder Anker,
who had personal friends in London and enjoyed huge respect among
agencies and mercantile houses in the City. Yet those merchants with only
‘weak links’ to London could be devastated by such break-downs in business
confidence.
   Along with the fall in timber trade, the lack of bullion and coin emerged
as a significant problem. Absent money from commercial interactions with
London, Copenhagen or Hamburg meant that the cash flow diminished
and a shortage of coins appeared. This posed a real threat to the estate,
ironwork and sawmill owners in southern Norway as it jeopardized the
entire enterprise and the magnate’s authority. The social order at the estates
