                                Defying the Continental System in the Periphery 177


   positions. … If only the Danish Government would listen to the com-
   plaints and petitions we Norwegians put forward!22

   In the meantime, merchants used several other strategies to manage these
challenges. Apart from influencing local officials and ministers of the cen-
tral government like the Danish Minister of Finance, Ernst Schimmelmann,
they also ignored state regulations and designed a range of strategies to deal
with the economic crisis.23
   Schimmelmann was known as a ‘friend of Norway’; his wife’s salon in
Copenhagen was frequently visited by Norwegians, and Count Wedel-
Jarlsberg had been in his service a couple of years before the bombard-
ment of Copenhagen. He also had a profitable monopoly on provisioning
southern Norway with sugar and had been known to undertake informal
services for Norwegian merchants.24 Although he had been the Minister of
Finance since the palace revolution in Copenhagen in 1784, he did not have
Frederik’s full attention or trust anymore. The regent sought to act inde-
pendently, and only his military advisors – army officers (not navy!) – had
frequent access to the regent.
   Unfortunately, protests, letters and petitions did not create necessary solu-
tions. Though King Frederik reluctantly allowed the licence system to take
place in 1809, allowing ships to pass with British licences and Danish letters
of safe conduct, trade was neither safe nor predictable. Moreover, confu-
sion and insecurity persisted when new regulations and customary laws
were issued at a rapid frequency, identifying new legal or illegal goods and
commodities to transport, as well as new papers necessary to secure a safe
voyage. This environment created a lack of trust in commercial law itself
among those involved in shipping and trade. The licence system triggered a
wide range of deceptive measures. To ensure success, a ship needed at least
two sets of official documents: British licences for the British navy showing
Leith, London or any other British port as destination, and Danish Lejdebrev
for French, Danish or Norwegian privateers indicating a cargo destined for
Amsterdam, La Rochelle or another continental harbour.25 A widespread
practice of forgery, false papers and camouflaging goods existed among the
ships carrying Norwegian goods, causing international trade in the North
Sea and the neighbouring waters to develop into a lawless situation that
ultimately assisted Great Britain in undermining the Continental System.
   One other crucial component of these strategies included the discreet
advancement of trade relations between southern Norway and western
Sweden. Anker remained a key person for this activity, although other
Norwegian magnates as well as merchants participated, including members
of the Pløen, Thrane, Tank, Mathiesen and Rosenkrantz families. Iron, gun-
powder, various colonial goods and other commodities were transported
in illegal and creative manners by land or sea to avoid customs officers,
the British navy, privateers, landed militia or other controlling officials.
