                               Defying the Continental System in the Periphery 181


Løvenskiold supported that Wilberg had never seen or heard of the wine,
they also withdrew their support for his accusations against Anker.32
   But the case had a further epilogue. The key facilitator in Gothenburg,
Immanuel Norling, was entitled by King Frederik as Commerceraad (Danish
Royal Advisor of Commerce) a year later. This seemed an unusual act towards
a subject of a hostile country, but Norling’s service as trade agent for the
Danish state had saved 20 Danish shipmen from apprehension by British
authorities on Swedish soil.33 That the gunpowder transaction was men-
tioned in a secret report from Swedish County Governor Georg Adlersparre
to Crown Prince Charles John in the summer of 1812 is also intriguing. The
report states, among other things, that Swedish sentiment is low in Norway
at the time being, and only Count Wedel-Jarlsberg and Peder Anker can be
reckoned as ‘friends of Sweden’. But at the end of the same page, there is a
remark by Adlersparre saying that he would gladly inform the Crown Prince
on the details of l’infame Complot by the Norwegians and how they obtained
the finest gunpowder from His Majesty’s own Army Storehouse at the town
of Filipstad (northeast of Gothenburg).34 Whether Carl Johan sought more
knowledge on this or not is not known, but considering the fact that Anker
was made the first Norwegian prime minister and Wedel-Jarlsberg was made
the first minister of finance in Norway in the new union with Sweden two
years later, it is more likely that he did not care. The Swedish Crown Prince
and head of government had of course experienced much graver incidents
of smuggling and other dubious transactions earlier when he served as
French field Marshal Bernadotte during the wars on the continent.
   The Gunpowder Plot demonstrates how local elites in Norway and Sweden
cooperated to manage and survive the Continental System, and in particular
how these resourceful and self-righteous merchants in the periphery took
measures to overcome local obstacles issued by central authorities. Danish
and Swedish authorities understood the regional challenges faced by the
System and responded flexibly by turning their eyes from the merchants’
operations and thus contributed indirectly to the undermining of their own
diplomatic obligations towards Napoleon.

Political Developments in Norway

In the years of war and economic crisis the substance of patriotism changed
in Norway. Indeed, the Continental System contributed to significant politi-
cal implications as the breach between the men of the state and the men
of commerce grew rapidly, leading to the disunion with Denmark and the
constitutional convention in 1814. During that crucial year Denmark signed
the Treaty of Kiel, which ceded Norway to Sweden and diminished the
Danish Kingdom as a northern power. In response to this event a Norwegian
constitutional assembly met, Danish absolutism ceased, Danish Crown
Prince Christian Frederik emerged as sovereign of an independent Norway,
