                                         Economic Warfare, Organized Crime 191


cases where gangs were involved and weapons discharged. The government
similarly took a dim view of smuggling by those entrusted with policing the
frontier. Douaniers suspected of collusion were to be tried before tribunaux
spéciaux, even in cases where no weapons were used.10
   Evidence from the Rhine suggests that fear of corruption spreading within
the Directions des douanes was not misplaced. The directeurs of Cologne
(Gorsas) and Cleves (Turc) were both subject to denunciations, and the
latter’s guilt is lent credence by the fact that he was one of the candidates
nominated by the departmental electoral college during elections for the
Corps Législatif – certainly this is how the prefecture interpreted this oth-
erwise inexplicable occurrence! Also suspicious was the low number of
seizures made during Turc’s 12-year tenure, and the extraordinary fact that
more than a third of the 400 customs agents under him made no seizures at
all.11 Nor did reports of corruption diminish over time. For example, a police
report from Cologne in January 1811 accused the local customs administra-
tion of colluding with the major financial houses of the city – Oppenheim,
Schoeffen and Cassel were all named – in the lucrative business of cur-
rency speculation.12 In December 1812 the prefect of the Rhin-et-Moselle
department ordered the gendarmerie to arrest the receveur des douanes in
Breitscheid for fraud.13 The fact that humble préposés, who enjoyed only a
modest annual salary of 500 francs, were susceptible to corruption is easier
to explain: though they had a right to a ‘prize’ share of seizures, this needed
to be set against the physical dangers of vigorously opposing smugglers. It
would be unfair, however, to dismiss the Directions des douanes as ‘institu-
tionally’ corrupt. There are too many examples of its employees bravely
doing their duty at considerable risk. Assaults against douaniers occurred
from the beginning: on 6 July 1798, two days after the Rhine tariff became
active, a crowd in Mainz faced off customs agents attempting to seize
foodstuffs, though on this occasion they survived unharmed. Less lucky
were two colleagues murdered in nearby Bingen two months later, a fate
the administration expected was in store for other douaniers given the level
of public hostility. The situation was no better further north. In the same
month as the Bingen murders, Cologne’s chronicler, the Augustinian Anno
Schnorrenberg, recorded a series of clashes between douaniers and smug-
glers. In the following May a pitched battle reportedly occurred in nearby
Xanten in which a detachment of douaniers was defeated by an armed band,
though with no deaths on either side. So it went on, year-by-year, even as
the Napoleonic administration bedded down and the prospect of an alterna-
tive to French rule receded.14

Public Opinion

That smugglers enjoyed a fairly wide base of public support among the
general population is well documented. It is fair to say that smuggling and
customs fraud were socially acceptable crimes. It is easy to see why. So far as
