192   Michael Rowe


Rhinelanders were concerned, they were victimless crimes. The same could
not be said of banditry, which created an atmosphere of fear in parts of the
countryside among ordinary property owners who were its primary victims.
Nor were draft-dodging and desertion without costs that needed to be borne
locally, as the relevant legislation demanded that young men from the same
localities where the deserters were from be called up to replace them. Smug-
gling, in contrast, appeared to harm no one. To this should be added the
tacit support afforded smuggling operations by the Prussian authorities
that remained in control of the right bank of the Lower Rhine region, at
least until the war of 1806. This would have had an impact on the opposite
(left) bank, where loyalty to the Hohenzollern dynasty survived the onset
of French rule.
   Public support for smuggling took on various forms. At one level, it
expressed itself in the inclination of native judges and juries to either acquit
or else show leniency to defendants. For example, two-thirds of the smug-
glers tried before Cologne’s court of first instance in the period of 1803
to 1811 got away with fines. It was this tendency that finally persuaded
Napoleon’s government to create a new network of specialized courts (the
tribunaux ordinaires des douanes and superior cours prévôtal des douanes) as
part of the final tightening of the Continental System instituted by the
Fontainebleau Decree (18 October 1810). The personnel of the new customs
courts established along the Rhine – based in Mainz, Cologne and Wesel –
initially included a high proportion of native German-speakers, but by 1812
the balance had shifted in favour of natives of the Meurthe department, in
whose chef lieu (Nancy) the relevant cours prévôtal des douanes was located.
Not surprisingly, this last institution passed the harshest sentences, though
perhaps not as draconian as might be expected. Of 123 cases brought to this
court from the four Rhenish departments, only two ended in the applica-
tion of the death penalty. The effects of this tightening up can be seen in
the composition of the prison population in Cologne. In June 1806, of the
one hundred persons locked up in Cologne’s prison, only five were smug-
glers; by September 1811, in contrast, 39 of the 106 prisoners were there for
customs offences.15
   At another level, public support for smugglers manifested itself in large-
scale riots against douaniers, such as occurred for example in Cologne in
November 1798 when an estimated 1200 persons attacked douaniers attempt-
ing to seize coffee that had just been smuggled in. Regular troops under
General Jacobé-Trigny prevented the customs agents from being lynched.
Worryingly, both the municipality and civic guard stood to one side. Nor
did the municipality bother to report the affair to the commissioner-general
based in Mainz. When challenged on this, the municipality replied that
the whole affair was the fault of the customs-men.16 At least the army did
its duty on this occasion. This was not always the case; Jacobé-Trigny, who
saved the day in Cologne, was one of seven generals who were complicit in
