190   Michael Rowe


Coalition. This emboldened opponents of French rule and allowed for
organized resistance to the tariff to take root. This was especially so in the
former Hohenzollern territories of the Lower Rhine. Here Prussian provin-
cial authorities still based on the right bank (and dominated by that inveter-
ate Francophobe, Karl Freiherr vom Stein) lost no opportunity to provoke
France by challenging the frontier. This included encouraging armed attacks
against douaniers.7
   French victory and the Treaty of Lunéville (1801) did much to alleviate
pressure on the frontier. However, even then the sense among Rhinelanders
that the French were but squatters never disappeared entirely and resurfaced
whenever they were rumoured to have experienced setbacks, as occurred
in the wars of 1805, 1806, 1809 and, of course, in 1813. The Rhine never
really took on the status of a barrier in the collective psyche. Historically,
this geographical feature had never been a determining factor in shaping
borders of the numerous polities through which it flowed. The larger ter-
ritories tended to span the river. This is not to ignore that territorial frag-
mentation under the Old Regime hindered the development of the Rhine
as a commercial artery; the fact that no one effectively had ownership of
it discouraged the necessary investment. French rule from this perspective
would be immensely beneficial in the long run. However, territorial fragmen-
tation under the Old Regime never seriously impeded movement across the
Rhine. The region, as Eichhoff correctly stated, had long formed a whole in
economic terms. Territorial fragmentation even helped to the extent that
it encouraged ‘states’ to compete for investment. The Wittelsbach duchies
of Jülich (on the left bank) and Berg (on the right) in particular adopted
pro-business policies that encouraged entrepreneurs deterred by the restric-
tions they encountered, especially in the imperial cities, where the guilds
remained influential.8

Napoleon’s Direction des Douanes

Napoleon, who, as noted, inherited rather than created the Rhine tariff and
its attendant infrastructure, was not deaf to arguments that it might dam-
age the economy of an area that was now French. Regional lobbying carried
weight in high-level deliberations, including in the Council of State over
turning Cologne and Mainz into free ports.9 For Napoleon, however, tariff
policy was ultimately an adjunct to the wider struggle against Britain, and
regional interests were subordinate. In this view, which is likewise reflected
in the Council of State, the smuggler resembled more a rebel than a simple
criminal. Government acted accordingly, demonstrating also a determina-
tion to strike at what it described as the entrepreneurs de brigandage who
directed the smuggling operations from behind the scenes. These were to
be treated with equal severity should the ventures they organized take on
the form of attracting capital punishment for those actually engaged in
handling the contrabands – something that implied capital punishment in
