                                  Defying the Continental System in the Periphery 183


durable relationship governed on both sides by a wary recognition of mutual
dependence’ is flawed.36 In 1812 British authorities issued a food blockade
that compelled Norwegians to rely on risky shipments from Danish Jutland
and through Sweden. Britain’s timber needs were met increasingly by the
Canadian and Baltic forests, which reduced the political resistance to block-
ade Norway. A new tariff was also introduced by the authorities in London,
putting heavy customs on all Norwegian commodities. As Norway would
experience later, Great Britain was at best a temporary partner when it suited
their interests, not a long-term benefactor.
   The realities of the northernmost area of the Continental System sup-
port the conclusion that Napoleon’s economic campaign failed. Of the
‘two-trigger engine’, the French emperor had failed in both pistons: the
aim of disrupting the British economy had resulted in the self-destruction
of his own imperial vision and even more the self-destruction of his closest
ally – Denmark-Norway.37 Moreover, the new ‘market design’ fell on its own
absurdity, as neither Napoleon nor any of his advisors had enough regional
or naval knowledge to foresee the development of trade or to influence the
conditions to create a French economic and industrial hegemony.
   Among the inner forces working against these imperial visions, the
Norwegian magnates showed flexibility and pragmatism as they managed
the obstacles presented by the Continental System in the northern waters.
Norwegian commerce lost a great deal and endured tough times as trustwor-
thy trade relations diminished, safe sea routes and local enterprises became
endangered, bankruptcies multiplied and the weak spot of Norway – the frail
grain situation – had been exposed with painful consequences. Although
weakened as a social elite, a combined ‘public-and-secret’ policy, working
through local authorities, political contacts and trade relations in several
European ports, aided the magnates to survive as mercantile participants.
This fuelled new political processes in Norway as the meaning of patriotism
increasingly oriented towards Norwegian sovereignty and generated a fun-
damental split within the Norwegian elites that would influence and outlive
the new political order of 1814. The magnates of southern Norway played a
particular role here in their struggle against the Continental System and the
government in Copenhagen, making their developing trade relations useful
for political purposes. As the Continental System strengthened the division
of Denmark and Norway it also stimulated Norway’s path to independence
within a free constitutional union with Sweden.


Notes
1. Eli Heckscher, The Continental System: An Economic Interpretation, trans. C.S.
   Fearenside (Oxford, 1922).
2. The material for this article is sourced from articles and books I have published in
   Norway over the last three years about merchants, estate, saw mill and ironwork
