188   Michael Rowe


réunis bordering the Rhine, covered by directions based in Mainz, Cologne
and Wesel.2 Expressed in another way, the total of 3200 ‘brigaded’ douaniers
amounted to 241 per 100,000 of the population, a level that matches almost
exactly the relative number of police in present-day England and Wales – a
staggering statistic that reflects Napoleon’s determination to police the fron-
tier.3 Only approximately 3 per cent of customs-men originated from the
region. The vast majority – over 80 per cent – were natives of ‘old’ France,
and the rest mainly from the Belgian departments.
   The French tariff frontier moved from the Maas to the Rhine in 1798, a year
before Napoleon overthrew the Directory (1795–99) and eight years before the
Berlin Decree (21 November 1806) that formally instituted the ‘Continental
Blockade’. From the Rhenish perspective, the Continental System largely
came into effect, both in legislative and institutional terms, at this earlier date.
The already impressive corpus of restrictive French legislation, including nota-
bly the Law of 10 Brumaire V (31 October 1796) that prohibited the import
of British manufactures, was enforced in the four newly established Rhenish
departments from 1798 onwards, despite the fact that these departments were
only officially annexed to France following the Peace of Lunéville (9 February
1801).4 The impact on the regional economy of the restrictions was felt well
in advance of 1806, as for example revealed in some detail by the memo-
randum submitted to the Interior Minister by Bonn’s mayor, Johann Joseph
Eichhoff, under the Consulate (1799–1804). With this document, Eichhoff
reinforced his reputation as an authoritative voice on the subject and helped
ensure his appointment as the first Director-General of the Rhenish Octroi,
established in 1805 to regulate commerce on the Rhine.
   Eichhoff identified the destruction of commerce caused by the new tariff
as the main regional grievance against France. Eichhoff was political enough
to blame this on the Directory, a regime he accused of acting ‘passionately’
rather than ‘rationally’. The fundamental problem was that the Rhineland –
the wider region bounding both sides of the river – formed a single economic
zone, irrespective of government. Eichhoff conceded that in the long term,
fundamentals might change, as improved transport infrastructure allowed
the left bank to reorientate itself towards France. However, in the short-
to-medium term, the tariff undermined two key areas that accounted for
regional prosperity: the export of agricultural produce and manufactures
and the transit trade along the Rhine. Both guaranteed the accumulation of
capital and sustained the employment of vast numbers, including the opera-
tors of the estimated 1300 boats plying their trade on the river; the tariff
removed incentives for higher productivity. Eichhoff recommended for the
long term increased investment in roads and canals linking the region to
France, but more immediately urged the concession of free-port status to
Cologne and Mainz. This would mean relocating the tariff barrier so that
it ran along their landward fortifications. Eichhoff concluded by observing
that punitive duties simply encouraged fraud, in which context he reported
the establishment of brokerages on both banks of the Rhine that insured
