11
Economic Warfare, Organized Crime
and the Collapse of Napoleon’s
Empire
Michael Rowe



        … take the case of sugar and coffee which have proved their
        world-historical importance in the nineteenth century by
        the fact that the lack of these products, occasioned by the
        Napoleonic Continental System, caused the Germans to
        rise against Napoleon, and thus became the real basis of
        the glorious Wars of Liberation of 1813.
                                   – Karl Marx, The German Ideology1



The French Tariff Barrier on the Rhine, 1798–1806

Born three years after Waterloo, Karl Marx never experienced Napoleon’s
Continental System. For his parents it would have been a fact of every-
day life in his native Trier, a city that before 1814 belonged to the French
Empire. It lay about 90 km west of the Rhine which from 1798 marked the
tariff barrier separating France from the world beyond. Trier bounds the
Moselle, which joins the Rhine at Koblenz, home of Joseph Görres. This
writer counted among the republicans in the 1790s. Under Napoleon he
grew disillusioned with French rule and emerged as a prominent German
nationalist whose strongly Francophobic message reached a wide audience
in 1814 and 1815 via his newspaper, the Rheinischer Merkur. The Continental
System, however, hardly figures in its pages, which condemn French rule
for reasons other than the scarcity of coffee: military conscription, high
taxation, requisitioning and the arrogance of native French officials. The
Rheinischer Merkur repeatedly warned against bureaucratic government,
and not only in France, and readers would most likely have identified the
Direction générale des douanes as an obvious manifestation of this phenom-
enon. They were reasonable to do so: in 1812 the total number of customs
agents in the French Empire peaked at approximately 35,000, including
four thousand agents de bureaux, and 30,750 organized into ‘brigades’ that
patrolled the frontiers. Of the latter 3200 deployed to the départements
                                    187
