198   Michael Rowe


and Ems. Peasants then transported them from farm to farm and to the great
depots of Bremen, Oldenburg, Kniphausen, Aurich and Emden, located
in the newly annexed Hanseatic departments. These were the principle
centres for the conclusion of business arrangements whereby the rates for
subsequent illicit transport across the customs barrier were agreed. Further
south, Osnabrück (previously in the Kingdom of Westphalia, but annexed
to France in 1810) and Münster (initially part of the Grand Duchy of Berg,
but annexed to France in 1811) served as relay posts and centres of the
‘insurance’ industry. The report calculated that the insurance costs together
with those for transport increased the price of the wares by 50 per cent by
the time they reached Düsseldorf, Mainz and Frankfurt. The city of Mainz
provided easy access for the entry of these wares, unlike Trier where an effec-
tive customs administration made it difficult. The report concluded with the
optimistic observation that the increased controls were making this kind of
fraud unprofitable, but also suggested the displacement further to the east –
towards the Baltic coast and Oder – of smuggling operations. The ingenious
tricks employed by smugglers – carriages with false bottoms, stuffed carp,
carrier pigeons, women wearing multiple levels of clothing – are well docu-
mented and make for entertaining reading, but are covered in the secondary
literature; they need not detain us here.35
   As already noted, 1810 witnessed a general reinforcement of the state’s
efforts to combat smuggling, though also something of a retreat from the
rationale of the Continental System with the issuing of export licences
designed to enable the state to tap some of the profits previously flowing
into the pockets of fraudsters and smugglers. The objective of eliminating
smuggling lay behind the annexation of Holland and the Hanseatic depart-
ments. So, too, were the increasingly severe punishments prescribed for
smugglers, including branding the right shoulder with the letters ‘VD’.36
This tightening coincided with a general economic crisis that afflicted
Napoleon’s Empire from late 1809 onwards. Given the coincidence, it is
hardly surprising that Rhenish businessmen should blame Napoleon directly
for the economic downturn. The extent to which this widely shared senti-
ment undermined the military defence of the Rhine in 1813 is debatable.
   The economic hardship inflicted in large measure by the Continental
System on the Grand Duchy of Berg contributed directly to the uprising
that occurred there in January 1813.37 This was suppressed fairly quickly and
well before the advance of Coalition forces. However, it heightened fears
that a similar rising might occur on the left bank, and especially in the Roer
department, where the substantial numbers of industrial workers similarly
faced unemployment. Colonel Jean-Pierre Henry of Napoleon’s Gendarmerie
d’Elite calculated that fear of social unrest might be exploited to attach nota-
bles in the region to the government.38 This was not to occur. The Rhenish
elite did fear social unrest and took measures to mitigate the worst effects of
the crisis by not laying off workers and engaging in social relief. However,
