196   Michael Rowe


The Sociopolitical Impact of Napoleon’s Continental System

Of greater concern for the rest of this essay are the social and political
consequences of the Continental System in the Rhenish departments and,
in particular, whether Marx was correct in identifying the policy as an
important factor in the collapse of French rule. The first observation is the
social diversity of those engaged in smuggling and customs fraud. Records
evaluated by Betrand in the 1950s from the tribunal prévôtale des douanes
at Nancy, which covered the Rhenish departments after its establishment
in 1811, indicate that the majority tried by this court were relatively poor:
68.5 per cent, including casual workers and poorer artisans. Those at the
upper end – businessmen – represent only 6.34 per cent, but this seems
a generous reflection of their proportion within society as a whole. The
fairly prominent position of boaters, carters and tavern owners among the
accused – collectively, they represented just over 10 per cent of the total –
makes sense given the usefulness of such trades in smuggling operations.29
Women and children were often involved on the assumption that they
would be treated more leniently if caught. Smuggling and fraud appear as
socially inclusive activities, which made Rhinelanders cohere rather than
fragment. This was very much unlike banditry, which was the result rather
of social breakdown.30 At one level, one might conclude that this was a good
thing from the perspective of the administration. At least smuggling was
not a sign of the kind of social implosion that made places like Spain and
Calabria virtually ungovernable. On the other hand, it also made smuggling
harder to suppress as the authorities could not rely on the cooperation of
elements within the local community who felt threatened.
   A second observation relates to the first: the collusion of local govern-
ment, run by notables, in smuggling and fraud. This needs to be seen in the
context of the autonomy traditionally enjoyed by local communities under
the Old Regime, the legacy of which influenced political culture even under
the more centralized Napoleonic System. Historically, for example, local
administrations in the Rhineland enjoyed the authority to contract debts, a
facility much made use of in the 1790s to meet the demands of the French
army of occupation.31 The experience of the 1790s, when occupation by the
French army cut the link between the localities and the princely govern-
ments that removed themselves to the right bank, reinforced this tradition
of self-reliance that went on to shape responses to military conscription and
the Continental System. It is, thus, not surprising to uncover cases of maires
reacting to military conscription by organizing the provision of replace-
ments, an activity that spawned an insurance industry not dissimilar to that
concerned with the smuggling of contraband. The complicity of municipal
authorities might extend no further than hushing up smuggling activi-
ties. It might extend to providing smugglers with early warning of immi-
nent searches by douaniers or, most seriously of all, it might culminate in
