                                         Economic Warfare, Organized Crime 195


‘flexibly’ – indeed, the sovereign of the last named kingdom even appears to
have had fraudsters acting on his account.23 Such defiance was not possible for
Berg, where the first festive burning of seized British wares (in Düsseldorf on
10 December 1810) coincided with the descent of the Grand Duchy’s economy
into a profound crisis. It was in this context that Berg’s desperate manu-
facturers organized a deputation that arrived in Paris in early April 1811
to present a petition signed by 4000 individuals begging for annexation to
the French Empire. This illustrates the expansionary impetus built into the
policy. The initial displacement of the tariff line to the Maas in 1795 had
provoked calls for ‘reunion’ with France among Rhenish manufacturers who
feared exclusion from traditional markets. Their wish came true in 1798;
however, the problems of policing the new frontier without controlling the
right bank beyond provoked calls after 1798 for intervention on the right
bank.24 Nonetheless, there were countervailing pressures, and Berg’s calls
for annexation fell on deaf ears, in part because of lobbying by manufac-
turers within France (who themselves were suffering from the Europe-wide
downturn that started in late 1809).25
   A second reason for rejecting the incorporation of Berg was that the River
Rhine proved far more viable as a customs frontier in policing terms than a
line following the eastern frontier of the Grand Duchy, which was devoid
of any major natural obstacles. This can be seen in the relative failure of
the customs barrier running from Rees on the Rhine to Bremen that was
set up by the imperial decree of 18 July 1809 to stem the flow of British
wares from Holland to Germany. Insurance premiums to cross this line only
amounted to about 6 to 8 per cent.26 The rate for crossing the Rhine frontier,
in contrast, ran at about 30 per cent in July 1809, and would rise to about 50
per cent at the end of the year, a rate that was maintained into 1811. This
compares to only 6 per cent for the Rhine in 1800, 10 per cent from 1801
to 1802, and 26 per cent from October 1806 to June 1808.27 Why should
Napoleon throw away this achievement and restart the process of creating
a new line further to the east? Obviously, the Napoleonic ‘achievement’
on the Rhine was only relative. Contraband never ceased crossing the river
even though it became more difficult to smuggle wares across the frontier in
the years 1810 and 1811. If one believes that the entire Continental System
was ultimately counterproductive, then this tightening only damaged the
long-term economic prospects of continental Europe, including France.
However, from the perspective of proponents of the Continental System,
the creation of an absolutely watertight frontier along the Rhine was not the
ultimate measure of success. Even states today, with all the resources at their
disposal, cannot prevent entirely the movement of contraband across their
borders. A lower threshold for judging the intended ‘success’ of Napoleon’s
Continental System will do; insurance rates pushed to a level where non-
French wares simply became uncompetitive.28
