200   Michael Rowe


and withered in the face of British competition after 1815.42 In Berg, the
impact was fairly disastrous even in the short term. What did contribute to
the region’s spectacular economic development later on was the territorial
and institutional legacy bequeathed by Napoleon, but this could have been
achieved without the Continental System.
   What about the impact on Rhenish political culture, and the popular
psyche? Did smuggling and fraud become somehow ingrained, corrupting
society at large, as some at the time predicted it would? This seems unlikely.
Smugglers, though engaged in a crime that was socially acceptable, never
captured the popular imagination or attained quasi-hero status as did the
most famous bandits, like ‘Schinderhannes’, who, despite the documented
heinousness of his crimes, nonetheless quite rapidly became the subject of
ballads and popular theatre.43 Smuggling, like speculation in nationalized
property, conformed to the kind of financial machinations that the increas-
ingly dominant nationalist discourse of the nineteenth century associated
with the Jews rather than with German virtues. Certainly it was not cel-
ebrated as a form of resistance against Napoleon. Rather, if mentioned at
all, it was condemned as a form of depravity encouraged by French rule or
as a product of effeminacy (similarly associated with the French) that drove
demand for the latest foreign fashions at the expense of national styles and
local products.44
   Neither did the smuggling and fraud of the Napoleonic era contribute
to social disintegration (if anything, the opposite was true), nor generate
contempt for the law in general. Rhinelanders, accustomed to the legalism
of the Holy Roman Empire, appreciated the virtues of French legal reforms.
They especially liked key aspects of French legal procedure: equality before
the law, juries, oral proceedings, public trials and the separation of justice
from administration. They fought hard after 1815 to preserve them. In
lieu of constitutional government, which was not forthcoming in much
of Germany after 1815, Napoleon’s codes provided the next best guarantee
against arbitrary government, and this was much appreciated.
   This leads on to the concluding observation. Michael Broers, with his con-
cept of an ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ empire, highlights the Janus-faced character
of Napoleonic government. It had a benign face, distinguished by regular
government by civilians operating within the constitution, the kind of gov-
ernment characteristic of the inner empire that lent credence to Napoleon’s
subsequent portrayal as a liberal modernizer. The other face, apparent in
the ‘outer’ empire, was in contrast characterized by the oppressive and
above all arbitrary instruments of rule: martial law, special courts, collective
punishment and so forth. The Rhineland, and indeed Berg, were areas that
naturally belonged to the inner empire. Their population density was high,
they were relatively urban, wealthy and used to regular, as opposed to arbi-
trary, government. In Marx’s view, they were archetypically bourgeois, thus
it was quite natural that they should be receptive to many of the Napoleonic
