                                         Economic Warfare, Organized Crime 193


the movement of contraband across the Rhine. The case of General Charles
Georgeon is especially interesting. He served as commander of the French
garrison in Cologne in the 1790s, and while there he married into a promi-
nent local family involved in the illegal export of cereals. Georgeon subse-
quently used his position in the Gendarmerie to assist in this, until he was
removed.17
   Collusion in smuggling between native Frenchmen and locals under-
mines the notion that the phenomenon was ‘national’. Even within Paris
the customs policy was publicly contested, at least under the Consulate.
Among the most eloquent opponents of the policy was Marc-Auguste Pictet.
Pictet’s arguments, which were published, made a powerful case against a
policy of high tariffs and prohibition: the cost of implementation consumed
a large proportion of the proceeds; fraud only increased with measures to
counter it; the policy created a permanent state of war on the frontiers;
those entrusted with its implementation were exposed to corruption; it sti-
fled industry in frontier regions; draconian laws against smugglers marked
a regression to the emergency conditions of the Jacobin Republic; forced
import substitution diverted capital away from areas such as agriculture
where France enjoyed a comparative advantage and ‘false’ (faux) enterprises
that emerged as a consequence could only be sustained through ‘artifice’,
unlike ‘natural’ or ‘real’ ones which sustained themselves.18
   While restrictive tariffs and prohibitions found their critics in Paris, so
too did they win defenders in the Rhineland where opinion was not unani-
mously hostile. In the northern Roer department – the most important
of the four in terms of population and wealth – one can broadly identify
support for the tariff policy and its post-1806 outgrowth (the Continental
System) in the western part of the department among the industries clus-
tered near the Belgian border. In the eastern part, closer to the Rhine, where
commerce rather than industry predominated, hostility to the tariff was
more apparent, including in the years of relative prosperity during the early
empire. However, even this east–west split is a simplification. What mat-
tered was the balance between costs and benefits unique to each enterprise.
The von der Leyen silk manufacturing business, though located just a few
kilometres from the Rhine in Krefeld, emerged as a winner. The concern
had been a flourishing one already under the Old Regime, when Krefeld
was ruled by Prussia, a state that also pursued a policy of boosting domestic
manufactures as part of a wider project of import substitution. The turmoil
of the 1790s damaged the von der Leyen business, but not to the extent that
it did not recover dramatically under the Consulate and Empire. Privileged
access to the Italian market (after 1806) and protection from British com-
petition encouraged this. By 1810 the business employed 3000 workers and
had an annual turnover of three million francs – higher than ever before.19
   To the south, in Cologne, business interests represented in the Chamber
of Commerce lobbied for exemptions and privileges for the city that, if
