                                          Economic Warfare, Organized Crime 197


municipal administrations acting as the operational hub of smuggling oper-
ations.32 Such involvement, in part, explains the surprising knowledge of
the law that those engaged in fraud and smuggling displayed. Court records
from Nancy together with police reports of actual operations indicate that
smugglers knew very well that smuggling of contraband was treated more
seriously (it constituted a crime, potentially carrying with it the death pen-
alty) than mere fraud (which was a correctional matter, punishable with a
custodial sentence of not more than six months); that arrest as an individual
rather than as a member of a larger group similarly tended to attract more
lenient treatment by the authorities; or that it was sensible to arm oneself
with weapons that could be characterized as ‘dual use’ (for example, knives)
rather than with those that could not (for example, firearms).
   A third observation is that smuggling in no way constituted a ‘national’
activity. True, douaniers were generally French and smugglers more often than
not German. However, smuggling operations – certainly the larger ones –
involved a collaborative effort between individuals of different nation-
alities: Norman merchants, Rhenish bankers, Dutch fishermen and British
manufacturers. All were attracted by the profits that were in the offing.
These were considerable and increased as a tightening of the Continental
Blockade and other restrictive practices increased the price differential of
commodities between the two banks of the Rhine. The smuggling of tobacco
following the institution of the imperial monopoly in 1810 provided an
especially good opportunity for making large sums of money. A report from
the special police commissioner based in Cologne dated 4 December 1811
described this fraud as ‘très considérable’, and estimated the annual quan-
tity of tobacco introduced illegally via the city at more than one million
kilos. On the left bank, imperial tobacco cost 3 francs per kilo; on the right,
in contrast, it cost 16 sols per kilo, resulting in a profit (assuming a rate of
20 sols per franc) of 44 sols (or 2 francs 20 centimes). The potential profit
from 1,000,000 kilos would, therefore, amount to 2.2 million francs; this, at
a time when an agricultural labourer might earn something in the region of
1 franc 50 centimes per day.33

The Apogee and Collapse of Napoleon’s Continental System

Such profits explain the sophistication and scale of smuggling operations, as
for example reported by the secret agents despatched to the Rhine frontier
at the time of the Trianon Decree.34 One of these produced an especially
detailed report on smuggling operations, grounded in part on seized docu-
ments, and a summary of which formed the basis of the police Bulletin of
6 September 1810. The report described Frankfurt as a ‘vaste entrepôt’ of
prohibited English wares, including ‘immense’ quantities of cotton thread.
These wares had been transported to the Continent via British-controlled
Heligoland, and landed somewhere between the mouths of the rivers Weser
