194   Michael Rowe


granted, would have effectively exempted it from French tariff legislation. It
is easy to understand why, if one accepts the statistics collected by Eichhoff
on the volume of imports and exports passing (legally) through the city:
between 1807 and 1809 alone, imports fell by 38 per cent and exports fell
a staggering 63 per cent. The figures for Mainz were hardly more encourag-
ing. Long-distance trade between the Rhineland and the Netherlands was
hit disproportionately hard. The volume of goods imported into Cologne
from Holland fell by 87 per cent between 1807 and 1809, and exports fell
by 71 per cent.20 Given this, it is hardly surprising smuggling and fraud
should take hold. Cologne’s wealthiest individual in the Napoleonic period,
the banker Abraham Schaaffhausen, engaged in large-scale smuggling activities,
the proceeds of which were, in part, used to make even more money through
speculation in biens nationaux. The 100,000-franc fine imposed on him by the
authorities for the illegal export of wheat appears hardly to have dented his
finances.21 However, when in 1811 manufacturers from neighbouring Berg
petitioned Paris for the Grand Duchy’s annexation to the French Empire,
Cologne’s Chamber of Commerce suddenly changed its tune. Now it sang the
praises of the Rhine tariff, which it credited with encouraging the return to the
left bank of business ‘unfairly’ lost to the right under the Old Regime.22

Grand Duchy of Berg

Berg, which Napoleon in 1806 transformed into the satellite Grand Duchy
and entrusted initially to Murat, emerged as arguably the biggest loser from
the emperor’s commercial policies. This was not clear from the beginning,
however, when the Rhine tariff threatened rather to make competitors on
the left bank uncompetitive (because of the extra cost for them of imported
raw materials). The early years also brought the benefits of the elimination
of the internal customs barriers within the territory of the Grand Duchy
and the beginnings of improved communications linking mining areas
with ones engaged in manufacturing. The Grand Duchy also benefitted
from the illegal flow of contraband, which passed along the Right Bank
of the Rhine following its entry into the Continent via the Netherlands
and Hanseatic ports. From this perspective, the Berlin and Milan Decrees
(respectively, 21 November 1806 and 17 December 1807), instituting the
Continental System proper, made little difference. The real blow to Berg
came in 1810 with the Trianon and Fontainebleau Decrees (respectively, 5
August and 18 October) and the annexation of Holland and the Hanseatic
cities to the French Empire. Berg was now cut off from suppliers and mar-
kets; the dream expressed in 1806 by a deputation of its business leaders
of a grand système fédératif, including France and its satellites, lay in tatters.
Larger states of the Confederation of the Rhine, like Bavaria, Saxony and
Württemberg, could, to an extent, get away with applying Napoleon’s decrees
