                                        Economic Warfare, Organized Crime 199


this did not translate into attachment to the regime, as seen for example in
the great reluctance to cooperate in the formation of the ‘Guards of Honour’
that were mobilized in the final months of Napoleonic rule. What the unrest
in Berg achieved was to make the French feel they were operating on hostile
territory, a sentiment transmitted to native Frenchmen employed on the left
bank by the sight of streams of their compatriots fleeing across the river as
the Coalition armies advanced.
  The sense of impending doom on the left bank increased when the
Coalition forces finally reached the Rhine in November 1813. The French
authorities responded by attempting to seal the frontier, and douaniers
played an important role in this. Boat owners were ordered to lock up
their vessels at night and deposit the keys with the local maire. The whole
infrastructure that had developed to enforce the Continental System could
now be employed in defence of the frontier. However, the reverse was also
true. The smuggling infrastructure might equally be employed to assist
the Coalition. There is an example of this; the Prussian raid on Neuss on
2 December 1813, when locals acted as guides and used the opportunity
to demolish customs posts along the river. Reports of the incident do
not identify the culprits as smugglers, but it would be surprising if those
engaged in smuggling were not involved.39 It can be surmised that years
spent evading the French authorities created a store of knowledge on the
best means of crossing the frontier undetected, knowledge that would have
proved useful to Coalition commanders as they planned their main assault
across the river.40

Conclusion and Napoleon’s Legacy

French rule in the Rhineland came to an end in the days following Blücher’s
crossing of the Rhine at Caub in the last hours of 1813. In the region,
Napoleon’s Continental System can be seen as a component of a wider
policy of attempting to weaken existing ties between the newly annexed
departments of the left bank and the territories on the right. This policy
predated both the Continental System proper and, indeed, Napoleon.41
The wider policy went beyond economics and tariffs and extended to areas
such as education and culture, as in the example of discouragement of the
Rhenish elite from sending its sons to German universities as opposed to
French institutions or forbidding them from entering the service of the
Austrian Habsburgs, as had traditionally been the case. This policy of reori-
entation failed because it was not allowed sufficient time to succeed.
  As to the longer-term impact of the Continental System and the smug-
gling it gave rise to, the following observations can be made. In economic
terms, it encouraged the short-term development of manufactories on the left
bank – especially those engaged in textiles and metallurgy. However, many
of the enterprises founded in the Napoleonic years were under-capitalized
