208   Alan Forrest


the culture of an urban elite, sure of itself and its values. Their children were
expected to follow in their footsteps and were educated to take over at the
comptoir, to assume their place in the natural order of things.5 These mer-
chants did not welcome change and they spent much of the Revolutionary
and Napoleonic years yearning for the return of the world they had lost.

The Continental System in Context

It is in this wider context that their reaction to the Continental System must
be seen. Napoleon’s aim was never in doubt. It was to achieve the final vic-
tory that had eluded him in battle, to force Britain to capitulate by shutting
off its European markets and thus ‘conquer the sea through his power on
land’.6 It was not an entirely novel idea; the Committee of Public Safety
had already discussed the value of a trade war as a means of undermining
Britain’s morale and shared with Napoleon the view that ‘Europe will be
wholly free as soon as England’s influence is weakened or destroyed’.7 But
it was not something to be taken on lightly, since the challenge Britain
posed was very different in kind from that of his continental adversaries.
Recent precedents did not bode well. During the eighteenth century Britain
had won almost every one of its wars against France, and its victories had
been achieved with the help of a finely tuned ‘fiscal state’ which the French
monarchy could not match. This stronger tax base ensured that the British
government could at any moment raise the revenue needed to re-arm or
to recruit additional troops for war.8 France did not have that capacity.
Whereas Britain turned to indirect taxes to raise its war chests, the French
monarchy had little choice but to stack up added debt, borrowing on the
international market at ever-increasing rates of interest.9 It was always going
to be an uneven struggle. When Louis XVI had tried to tip the scales of war
at sea in France’s favour during the 1780s by embarking on an ambitious
ship-building programme, all he achieved was to encourage the Royal Navy
to invest three times as much. Britain’s threat, in other words, came as much
from its commercial strength as from the traditions of its regiments or the
fighting qualities of its troops.10 Napoleon recognized this clearly: following
the defeat of his continental rivals on land and the establishment of his
mastery over central Europe by 1806, he saw victory over Britain as being
his next major priority, a step that was essential to the safety and stability of
his Empire. He believed that he must destroy the profitability of British trade
if he was to discomfit the powerful commercial interests in Parliament and
the City and break the martial spirit of the nation. It was this that led him
to invade first the Peninsula, then Russia, his two most disastrous military
adventures of the entire war.11
   But could this be done without imposing a terrible cost on the port cities of
France itself? Napoleon intended the Continental System to inflict maximum
damage on Britain, while offering protection to the trade of France and its
