                      The Continental System in the Cities of the French Atlantic 213


   Most of the merchant community put their faith in the return of peace, a
peace that would allow them to resume their old, profitable ways. The Treaty
of Amiens had been hailed by many as a new dawn, an invitation to resume
normal commerce, and the merchant communities of all the west-coast
ports had responded with eager anticipation. A report from Nantes in 1811
noted that it had been followed by a reinvigorated economy and healthy
exports to the colonies, but added that the period of peace was so short that
industrial capital had since been wiped out.27 What is most notable here,
perhaps, is the deep-seated commercial conservatism of the Atlantic ports,
a faith in old ways and old sources of profit. Nantes wanted nothing more
than a return to the triangular trade that had been so beneficial to the local
economy in the 1780s and early 1790s and which had provided thousands
of jobs in industries from textiles to ship-building, including the manufac-
ture of the bright-coloured indiennages so prized by the African market.28
   This conservatism is easy to understand, given the extent of their losses.
The war years had decimated not only the commercial traffic through the
port but also production and employment in those local industries that were
dependent on colonial markets. The workers of Nantes were as aware of this
dependence as the city’s elites. Indeed, from the moment they had heard
of the first slave revolt in Saint Domingue in 1791, they had understood its
implications for their jobs and their families. In an address to the king writ-
ten in response to the insurrection, more than a thousand workers expressed
their solidarity with their ‘brothers’ in Port-au-Prince who had been the
victims of the massacre and went on to express their fears that the rebellion
would reduce them to ‘the most profound misery’. They offered to serve as
soldiers to help crush the rebellion, arguing that their physical strength was
the only force left to them; they existed, they said, only through the work
the colonies provided, and so ‘we offer you our bodies, the only possessions
left to us, to go to Saint-Domingue to help our brothers’.29 Their fears proved
justified, as work in the indiennages was almost totally wiped out in the wake
of the insurrection.30
   The statistics that were collected by Jean-Baptiste Huet for the Loire-
inférieure in the Year XI made the degree of this dependence, and hence
of the decline of the colonies, brutally apparent. The hat-making industry
had flourished before the Revolution; the chapelleries of Nantes were known
well beyond the immediate hinterland of the city. But this trade was tightly
linked to the colonial markets and the needs of the African slave trade to
which they had supplied some 50,000 hats. It was the same for linen manu-
facture which had seen employment halved since 1790, both among the
weavers and outworkers who supplied the trade and the industrial workers
in the factories of Nantes. Huet adds a word of warning here, arguing that
these are losses that will not be easily remedied, since there is little money in
hat-making and little incentive to train up a new generation.31 And French
shipping seems in terminal decline. On the eve of the Peace of Amiens,
