214   Alan Forrest


French trading houses had hit their lowest ebb, and foreign shipping, espe-
cially that of the United States, threatened to dominate the Atlantic trade
routes. This accompanied a huge increase in trade with America. In 1800 the
total value of American exports to France was only around 40,000 dollars,
whereas by 1801 it had leapt to more than 11 million dollars.32 With the
return of peace, at least for a few brief months, there were the beginnings
of a recovery, with greater tonnages of shipping in the ports and with old
markets suddenly restored.
  Napoleon’s lust for further expansion meant that Amiens was no more
than a short, and some would suggest artificial, truce, so that the benefits
were short-lived. The months that followed proved a marked exception to
years of recession, which in Nantes lasted from the beginning of the war
in 1793 through to around 1809. They lit fires of hope and convinced the
inhabitants that all they needed in order to restore prosperity was a sus-
tained period of peace. And although that promise was not sustained, the
years 1804 and 1805 had been better for trade, largely through the arrival
of large numbers of American vessels and their cargoes. But the Continental
Blockade was imposed against a backdrop of gloom and decline: the war of
the Fourth Coalition, the occupation of the Hanseatic ports which ended
their neutrality, and the British attack on Copenhagen all deprived France of
useful trading partners. The year 1807 witnessed another brief rise in public
optimism with the signing of the Peace of Tilsit, as once again hopes were
raised that the war might finally be over. It was now crystal clear that what
the merchants wanted was an end to war, not state regulation. Hence, there
was little public enthusiasm to greet the announcement of the Continental
Blockade which was recognized for what it was – an extension of the war
at sea and a move that might provide controlled outlets for commerce but
which ultimately made peace a more distant prospect.33

Merchant Opinion

Did Napoleon’s Continental System benefit the west-coast ports? If it
brought no immediate alleviation, it may nevertheless have contributed to
recovery in the longer term. The years from 1810 to 1812 were marked by a
strong upturn in both the activity of the docks and the fortunes of Nantes’
dependent industries. The tonnage of ships entering the port equalled and
even briefly exceeded the levels that had been reached before the outbreak
of war. But that prosperity did not last. The West experienced a further
slump from 1813 to 1815, and the Napoleonic years would end in reces-
sion, the quarter-century since the outbreak of Revolution showing a net
decline in economic activity. Maritime tonnage in Nantes had fallen from
around 237,000 tons in 1790 to only 147,000 tons by 1816.34 Tax receipts
dropped, too, with the fall-off in economic activity affecting the vitality and
even the viability of local administration. Whereas Bordeaux had posted
