                      The Continental System in the Cities of the French Atlantic 209


allies. It was conceived as a form of mercantilism as well as a weapon of war,
one which would isolate Britain from its markets while opening up Europe to
French goods. It would, he hoped, punish Britain for its commercial exploi-
tation of war and for its initiative in blockading French ports, and it would
bring with it political benefits by undermining public confidence in London
and dissolving support for the war effort across Britain. It would also bring
valuable benefits to French agriculture and commerce, some of which had
been stagnant after a generation of revolution and war. And it would counter
the inherent economic advantage which, many Frenchmen believed, Britain
had gained from the Eden Treaty of 1786 and from an almost ideological com-
mitment – rare in a country that took such pride in its supposed moderation
and pragmatism – to Adam Smith and the principles of free trade.12
   The government thus found itself singing the praises of protection-
ism in a bid to win over public opinion, offering hope that, by favouring
French trade and industry, the Continental System would be able to undo
some of the damage that had been inflicted on the economy during the
Revolutionary decade. But not all branches of economic activity could be
helped in this way, and not all regions of the country were similarly affected.
The Continental System had an uneven impact. It undoubtedly caused some
sectors of the economy to revive and the protection offered to struggling
companies was grasped with gratitude by employer and employee alike. It
may have been a short-term success for an industrial sector starved of invest-
ment and exposed to competition from cheap, mass-produced goods from
abroad – as Geoffrey Ellis has shown for Alsace – but such protection offered
relatively few benefits for the economy of the Atlantic coast which had
suffered so much from the effects of war with England.13 Ports like Nantes
and Bordeaux could not hope to equal in wartime the levels of prosperity
they had enjoyed in the two decades before 1793, with their economies so
heavily dependent on wine, slaving and colonial produce. It was precisely
those activities which a dozen years of war had put at jeopardy and which
risked ruin if blockade cut them off from their traditional markets in Europe
as well as across the Atlantic. In an attempt to win over an understandably
apprehensive merchant community, the government showered the Atlantic
with propagandist messages, loading blame for France’s commercial troubles
on the perfidious role played by Great Britain. For the British were not only
blockading the French coast, they were pressurizing neutrals to abandon
French ports and renege on French contracts and they were bribing French
shipowners to trade with Britain by issuing them with licences. In late 1807
the Minister of the Interior condemned these practices in a letter to the
merchants of La Rochelle in which he denounced the tactics of the British
government and those who had betrayed the independence of their nation
by ‘shamefully submitting to British sovereignty and accepting to sail under
licence’.14 If Napoleon was intervening in the economic marketplace, it was
to offer protection to the merchants of France.
