210   Alan Forrest


Revolution and War

The Revolution, it is now clear, was not in itself responsible for interrupting
that prosperity. The Atlantic trade flourished beyond 1789, with 1790 and
1791 among the most prosperous years of the century. But the character of
that trade changed during these years, with the triangular trade to Africa and
the Caribbean proving less profitable than direct voyages to and from the
Americas.15 Besides, the Revolution exposed the fragility of France’s Atlantic
economy, especially once the rebellion in Saint Domingue removed France’s
richest colonial possession from its control and ended its involvement in
the highly lucrative slave trade. Nantes, in particular, but Bordeaux, too,
in the last years of the ancien régime, had become unhealthily dependent
on the profits of slaving, and when the triangular trade died merchants had
to look quickly elsewhere – to the United States, Latin America, Ile-Bourbon
and the Indian Ocean. The Revolution as a political event did not kill off
trade any more than it condemned capitalism. Though the abolition of the
chambers of commerce as instruments of privilege was certainly resented,
the ending of corporations, trading privileges and monopolies were all
welcome to merchants who flourished on the basis of individual enterprise.
Less welcome was the moralistic streak in Jacobinism, which laid great
emphasis on service and the duties of citizenship, and the spread of Terror.
In Nantes, it is true, few merchant houses were directly caught up in Terror;
here, Carrier showed far more interest in rooting out political and religious
opponents and destroying the last vestiges of the Vendean insurrection. But
the regular executions on the Place du Bouffay and the periodic drownings
of priests and others in the Loire were hardly designed to create harmoni-
ous conditions in which trade could flourish.16 In Bordeaux the threat to
trade was more immediate. Here the deputies sent out on mission from the
Convention identified the merchant quarter of the Chartrons with egotism
and profiteering, for which they invented a new crime of négociantisme, a
crime unknown elsewhere in France. In all, 279 merchants were charged and
imprisoned for what was seen as their selfish addiction to profit, pursued
at the expense of all else – the people, the Revolution and the public good.
Twelve were sentenced to death.17 Risk-taking and accumulation of wealth,
which merchants regarded as virtues in a négociant, were decried as evidence
of a lack of civic consciousness.
   What had proved far more damaging than the political revolution was the
return of war – the declaration of war on Britain in March 1793 and what
turned out to be the permanent loss of France’s role in the Caribbean. By the
turn of the century the major commercial cities had seen the tonnages of
ships entering their ports drastically reduced, their colonial trade decimated
and the strong population growth, which had been evident throughout
the second half of the eighteenth century, dramatically reversed as those
who had come in quest of wealth returned crestfallen to the countryside.
