212   Alan Forrest


with both the Seven Years War and American Independence bringing lean
years for those engaged in Atlantic and colonial trading. But the long-term
trend across the second half of the eighteenth century, years of war and
peace included, had been strongly upwards: profits continued to grow, most
especially from the colonial trade; the cities of the West continued to attract
economic migrants from Brittany, Poitou, Gascony and the Pyrenees; and
the industrial sector provided livelihoods for increasing numbers of workers,
in ship-building and rope-making, textiles and wine. There were important
links between the Atlantic ports, too, especially among the rich Protestant
families who made up an important part of the merchant community.23
The difference after 1792 was that war lasted for a whole generation and
was waged against a backdrop of economic decline: falling populations as
workers were paid off, as the young left for service in the army and the disil-
lusioned returned to the communities they had come from. Port cities like
Bordeaux and Nantes were increasingly cut off from international liaisons
and were thrown back on their immediate hinterlands.24 Prosperity seemed
a thing of the past, a state of well-being that was recalled nostalgically and
was, doubtless, much exaggerated in the telling.
   By the turn of the century the Atlantic ports seemed dead and devastated,
just waiting for the peace which Napoleon finally seemed to bring them
with the Treaty of Amiens in 1801. And it was not just the long-haul Atlantic
commerce that was hit; so, too, was European trade and coastal shipping as
owners, already penalized by the impossibility of finding insurance for their
vessels, took increasing precautions against loss and attack. Foreign visitors
who passed through Bordeaux and Nantes during the Consulate and the first
years of the Empire were unanimous in their view that previously bustling
port cities had been reduced to inactivity and misery by years of war and
revolution. It is the contrast with what had gone before that left the deepest
impression, the descriptions of luxury and good taste that had marked the
pre-Revolutionary writings of visitors like Arthur Young and Sophie de la
Roche giving way to a somewhat apocalyptic vision of ships laid up and idle,
docks reduced to silence, prosperity destroyed.25 Lorenz Meyer, a merchant
from Hamburg who had visited Bordeaux at the end of the ancien régime and
was a great admirer of its classical architecture, is one whose correspondence
betrays a deep sense of the Garonne’s commercial decline in the course of
the 1790s. His analysis is uncompromising, the sense that prosperity has
given way to decay. Even the Bourse could boast few sales, and if people
still came and milled around, they came only ‘through force of habit’.26 His
view reflects, of course, that of Bordeaux’s merchant community, with whom
Lorenz mixed when he was in the city and whose outlook he patently shared.
If he betrays a propensity to exaggerate the extent of the economic disaster
the city was suffering, it was an exaggeration he would have heard expressed
on all sides. But the message was clear: gloom and decay had set in long
before the launch of the Continental System and the resort to protectionism.
