                      The Continental System in the Cities of the French Atlantic 211


Individual merchants suffered serious losses as a result of the Haitian revo-
lution. Among Nantes merchant houses Olivier Pétré-Grenouilleau gives
figures of 12 million for Bouteiller père et fils, 7 million for Louis Drouin,
5 for Arnous, 4.5 for Chaurand.18 There were few leading merchants who
escaped with their profits and property intact. Preaching liberty and equal-
ity to men of colour, exporting revolution to Saint Domingue and failing
to secure France’s commercial interests in the Caribbean, all were the errors
that were imputed to the revolutionaries by Nantes’ merchant community.
They were less united in their criticism of Napoleon, welcoming his deci-
sion to re-establish slavery in the French sugar-islands and his abortive
attempt to overthrow Haitian independence. They petitioned after 1815 to
be allowed to resume the triangular trade with the Americas. And they con-
tinued to seek indemnities for the colonists who had been dispossessed and
forced to flee, often to the United States or to Cuba, indemnities that were
only finally agreed in 1826.19
   This was the context from which they judged the Berlin and Milan
Decrees. By then, of course, their lot had become even more precarious, as
the French fleet proved unequal to the task of holding off the Royal Navy,
suffering a confidence-sapping defeat at Aboukir Bay and near-total destruc-
tion at Trafalgar. Thereafter, the British blockaded the Atlantic coastline,
claiming the right to stop French commercial shipping on the high seas and
seizing cargoes as legitimate prizes of war. French merchants had to invent
their own stratagems for survival, whether by resorting to privateering,
diverting their ships to neutral ports or using false papers and foreign vessels
to transport their goods. Some of the established merchant families hesi-
tated to do this and were forced into bankruptcy, whereas younger newcom-
ers were sometimes more ready to take risks and cut corners in pursuit of
profit.20 The proximity of Bordeaux and La Rochelle to Spain and Portugal,
where Napoleon never managed to impose effective control, served only to
deepen their sense of grievance.

Decay and Stagnation

Many merchant houses did survive these years of shortage, though they
were forced to be resourceful and often had to experiment with new mar-
kets and more risky forms of trade. Throughout the Consulate and Empire
the economy of the west-coast ports was salvaged by arming merchant
vessels and resorting to the high risks of la course.21 Smuggling and con-
traband became necessary makeshifts to evade the noisome restrictions
that prevented legal trading, with smugglers’ bands along coastlines and
frontiers swollen by deserters and young men taking refuge to avoid the
draft. These were the concomitants of every war, what Silvia Marzagalli
calls the usual ‘substitute activities’ of merchants in wartime.22 Even in the
self-styled golden age of the French Atlantic, war had incurred heavy losses,
