218   Alan Forrest


certain primary materials and to allow French industry and agriculture – and
viticulture in the south-west – to sell abroad. But the policy, introduced by
imperial decree in April 1808, was applied selectively. Merchants could not
trade freely, and they needed to obtain a licence from the imperial authori-
ties, a process that often proved cumbersome and time-consuming. During
1808, indeed, very few voyages were authorized, though by the following
year greater numbers of merchants were applying for licences or using up
the licences issued in the previous year. Indeed, 1809 was generally per-
ceived as a boom year in French trade, when the Bordeaux wine merchants,
among others, could again sell to their traditional markets.40 It gradually
became more plausible for the imperial authorities to claim that they were
acting with the interests of trade at heart – a constant refrain in communi-
cations from Paris across the war years. As the chambers of commerce were
reminded in 1813, ‘the Emperor has made war to gain the liberty of the seas,
for the prosperity of French industry and commerce’.41 Responsibility for
their losses lie elsewhere.
   Where licences were issued there was usually a good strategic reason
for doing so. In April 1808, for example, while passing through Bayonne,
Napoleon authorized 15 commercial voyages from Bordeaux to France’s
overseas colonies, a gesture which he presented as a measure to encourage
Bordeaux’s commercial activity as well as to take much-needed supplies to
Martinique, Guadeloupe and Cayenne. The size of the ships was carefully
regulated as well as the cargoes and their destinations, and the expeditions
were to be entrusted to men ‘whose morality, ability and solvency will be
investigated and judged by the chamber of commerce of Bordeaux’. The
decree also outlined plans for financing the mission, with the state taking a
share in the enterprise. Each merchant was to divide the value of his venture
into a determined number of shares, and the state would use its sinking
fund (caisse d’amortissement) to take up a third of the shares in each voyage
to a maximum value of 60,000 francs. In other words, this was not trade
freely entered into by the merchant. Both the crew and the cargo had to
be officially approved. Besides, the ships were to be fitted out for war, and
any merchant who asked to have troops on board to help defend the ship
would be supplied with them. Approval would be given by the minister for
the Navy, who would use the merchant vessel to take between 10 and 20
soldiers out to the Antilles.42
   The government could also take refuge in the argument that controls
were not all of their making and that the French system of issuing licences
was made in response to a similar initiative by the British government as it
sought to tighten the blockade of French ports. The purpose, of course, was
very different from Napoleon’s. The British authorities did not wish to ossify
trade around Europe; they merely intended that it serve British, and not
French, national interests and that British ports and British markets would
reap the benefit. The Board of Trade, too, instituted a system of licences for
