                       The Continental System in the Cities of the French Atlantic 219


neutral vessels, which they sold at a modest cost to the ships of all non-
combatant nations, discriminating, of course, against those sailing under
the flag of France or its allies. If the licences were inexpensive, they were also
widely available and speedily delivered. A single application could be made
for multiple voyages, and the result was a predictable rush to apply; in 1810
alone the Board of Trade received nearly 15,000 applications, and it granted
the great majority of them. This had the effect, of course, of freeing up trade
again, offering markets for the cunning and unscrupulous and encourag-
ing more evasion and subterfuge by the French. Bordeaux merchants, for
instance, exported around 5000 barrels of wine to England in 1812 and
more than double that in 1813.43 But licensing was also something of a
diplomatic coup by Whitehall, and one that punched holes in the already
pervious skin of Napoleon’s maritime defences.44

Conclusion

The Continental Blockade would prove a dangerous policy for France and
its allies, inviting retaliation and proving almost impossible to enforce
effectively. Napoleon believed that it would so damage Britain’s commercial
prosperity as to destroy public confidence in the war in London and pres-
sure the government to sue for peace. This was a serious miscalculation.
The Royal Navy was too strong, especially after Trafalgar, for France to offer
a serious challenge at sea, and no British government could afford to accept
any measure that interfered with its commercial sea lanes. The only possible
response was to retaliate, and the consequences were soon felt in France,
not least in the Atlantic ports which had enjoyed such dramatic prosperity
in the generation before the French Revolution and which had suffered so
grievously from the loss of Haiti and from a colonial struggle with Britain
that had engulfed much of the Caribbean. Unable to open up new markets
and deprived of the raw materials to invest in the new heavy industries,
their economies continued to decline and their population to diminish. The
first half of the nineteenth century would see a structural shift in French
prosperity from Atlantic commerce to continental manufacturing, a shift
that would prove difficult to reverse.
   What did not change was the faith of the merchant community in their
traditional sources of wealth, nor their intense economic conservatism.
Between 1815 and the late 1820s France’s Atlantic cities tried to regenerate
eighteenth-century trade patterns in the face of a raft of new economic and
political realities: a revolution that had abolished the slave trade in Britain
and the United States, the growth of free-trade economics and the decline
of mercantilism, and independence movements that threatened the Spanish
and Portuguese empires in Central and South America. The slave trade
proved a particular source of contention. Britain, in the person of its foreign
minister, Lord Castlereagh, was in no mood to allow France to profit from
