224   Hilde Greefs


for as long as circumstances allowed was only one option. One could also
wait and eventually rely on business’s deposits, or spread the business’s risks
by diversifying. One could also opt to adjust and react flexibly to new and
even unfavourable conditions. Wartime presented opportunities for inven-
tive entrepreneurs and merchants who were willing to take risks. I argue
that business people who weathered the conflict had to adapt their business
behaviour, and that these strategic choices determined further develop-
ments for their own enterprises and in a way for the economic future of the
cities from which they operated.
   The case of Antwerp lends itself to an examination of the choices made
by business elites, especially as the point of departure for Antwerp’s story is
unique. The French removed the lock on the Scheldt River in 1795, thereby
enabling the port’s first direct access to the sea in more than two centuries.
The Scheldt and Antwerp were now reopened to all maritime imports.3
Antwerp was officially annexed the same year and integrated into the
French Republic, becoming the Empire’s ‘youngest’ river port to the North
Sea. The Antwerp business community hoped that the city could regain the
importance and prestige it had enjoyed during the golden sixteenth century,
when Antwerp was an international port city. Yet merchants elsewhere in the
country and abroad were also attracted by the city’s new prospects. A study
of Antwerp demonstrates that first-generation immigrants and the native
Antwerp businessmen reacted differently to the precarious situation and that
their divergent choices not only determined further postwar economic devel-
opment but transformed the business elite of the young continental port.
   To understand how these two business groups – native businessmen and
‘newcomers’ – adapted their business strategies, it is necessary to exam-
ine their business and trade in the years following the reopening of the
Scheldt. This review will illustrate how (and if) they adapted their initial
strategies during the Napoleonic era, in particular following the Continental
Blockade when the conflict hindered commercial ambitions. Next to busi-
ness instincts and risk behaviour, their business experience and professional
networks and relations were crucial. Analysing the scope and extent of their
business relations and acquaintances allows for situating their individual
economic actions into a social context and stresses the importance of a
network of trustworthy relations.4 Especially during these years of war and
unrest, trustworthy relations were essential for garnering access to strategic
information and for reducing business risks. Before delving into the deci-
sions of these two groups, I will examine significant specificities of the
Antwerp port and its business community during the French period.

Antwerp and Its Business Community under French Rule

Annexation of the southern Netherlands into France (1795–1814) brought
economic advantages for the region. It now benefited from a toll-free French
