216   Alan Forrest


their masterpiece, they duly sent it to Paris in the confident belief that they
had made their central point: that the benefits that could be derived from
the Continental System were now over, that its objective – to punish those
neutrals who gave assistance to Britain – was achieved and that it was time
to get back to the task of maximizing trade.36
   Other cities and chambers of commerce took up the call, each in its own
way arguing the case for the resumption of normal trading relations with
neutral nations and insisting that the Continental System had now out-
lived its usefulness. The town council of Nantes was reporting the belief of
its merchant community when it wrote, doubtless in hope, that ‘peace on
the high seas is the greatest encouragement that the commerce of our city
can be accorded’.37 In January 1808 a report had been drawn up from the
Emperor summarizing the views of the principal chambers of commerce in
France. They urged the strengthening of commerce, but, just like Bordeaux,
took care not to be seen to criticize the Continental System or, by implica-
tion, the Emperor. The merchants of Nîmes, for example, if they regretted
the shortage of raw materials, stopped short of advocating a change of
economic direction. They stated their support for the ‘firm and rigorous’
steps that the government had taken, adding that it was imperative that
France should inflict defeat upon England. Perhaps, battered by the long
years of war, they saw no alternative to pressing for outright victory, a vic-
tory that alone would bring a guarantee of peace. For so long during the
Revolutionary Wars, as well as under the Empire, this had been the official
mantra that they had heard repeatedly. The Continental System might not
be liked by the merchant community, but the measures it imposed were
seen to be necessary and were justified on the grounds that they provided
‘guarantees of a future prosperity more brilliant and especially more solidly
based than it has ever been in the past’.38 Like their Emperor, the Chamber
seemed content to prioritize foreign policy in the pursuit of this goal and to
conclude that there could be no peace without outright victory.

Licensing and Regulation

The strategic aim, of course, had not changed: both before and after 1806
Napoleon sought to strangle British commerce by cutting off its goods
from continental markets. British goods were understood to include those
shipped from the colonies. The legislation was intended to deprive Britain
not only of markets for its manufactures but also of its profitable entrepôt
trade with Europe. In the months that followed the screw was progressively
tightened. By 1807 France declared any ship coming from a British port to
be fair game for its warships and for corsairs. The ships were to be seized,
along with their cargoes, as legitimate spoils of war. But 1807 proved a
turning-point in other ways, too, as Britain spelt out its response to what it
saw as an act of war. As the most powerful naval power of the time Britain
