                      The Continental System in the Cities of the French Atlantic 217


had no intention of capitulating to Napoleon at sea, and with its control
of the seas recently reconfirmed, the British government took an initiative
of its own by forbidding neutral shipping from moving between any ports
controlled by the Empire. This measure was aimed especially at American
vessels which had become by far the most important suppliers of the French
Atlantic coast during the previous few years. But it spread the net widely.
Britain’s Orders in Council placed all the ports of France and its allies and
colonies in a state of blockade and forbade any neutral ship from enter-
ing them without first passing through a British port and paying a newly
imposed tax to Britain. Napoleon responded by threatening to take meas-
ures against any neutral ship that dared to submit to such conditions. This
had the effect of strengthening the Blockade as the last American ships
stayed away, though from the viewpoint of French merchants it at least
had the advantage of allowing them to regain a proportion of their former
commerce.39 But that was small consolation since they were now unable to
trade without being in breach of either the French or the British blockade
of the French coast.
   On the French side, they were faced with a new raft of government restric-
tions on their movements if they were not to break the law – new, though
not necessarily more restrictive. Before 1806 a merchant seeking to import
British manufactures would be driven to conceal his activity to avoid arrest,
hence the considerable number of voyages made indirectly through ports
in the Baltic or towns just outside France’s borders, most notably Brussels.
But such activity was clandestine, the stuff of subterfuge, involving under-
hand deals with third parties and false papers for cargo, since the import of
colonial goods into France almost invariably aroused suspicion. The new
regulations still prohibited all trade with Britain, but the French authorities
showed greater flexibility, and by applying for licences and submitting to
a pile of paperwork, merchants could once more hope to engage in trade
without breaking the law. This encouraged a gradual reprise of trade to other
European cities in the first place, but gradually also to the Americas. By 1810
the complaints largely dried up as merchant firms in Bordeaux and Nantes
sought to take advantage of the new regulations and found new ways to
elude capture and seizure by the British.
   But at what price would this be achieved? What did the restrictions
imposed by the government imply for the merchants of Bordeaux and
Nantes, and how did they affect day-to-day life in the Atlantic ports? Were
they really so intrusive or so intolerable for cities that had been starved of
commerce for so long? At the very least, the Continental System allowed the
merchant community – or a majority among the merchant community – to
re-engage in commerce, albeit on terms of the government’s choosing. The
reason for the new policy was straightforward enough: though Napoleon
at no time allowed mere economic considerations to stand in the way of
his foreign-policy initiatives, his government accepted the need to import
