13
Choices and Opportunities amid
Economic Warfare: Strategic
Decisions of the Business Elite in the
Young Harbour Town of Antwerp
during the Napoleonic Era
Hilde Greefs



In the world of business, unstable political circumstances exert a critical
influence in determining commercial activities, especially when circum-
stances are accompanied by unrest and economic insecurity. Periods of
instability and political transitions increase social and economic uncertainty
as well as challenge established business patterns and disrupt familiar busi-
ness channels and connections. This was especially the case during the
French–British wars from 1793 to 1815. These hostilities occurred amid
a broader process of social, political and economic transitions, of which
the French Revolution and industrialization in Great Britain were pivotal.
In long-term perspective, economic modernization in Great Britain was
accompanied by a shift in trade activities and routes, a development that
challenged the competitive position of many continental ports.1 I argue that
the French–British War, which deployed economic measures as a means of
warfare, disrupted economic life and challenged business people. Rather
than focus solely on the detrimental effects, in line with recent historiog-
raphy this chapter presents a case study that demonstrates that the conflict
also offered opportunities to those who could capitalize on them and who
had the power and means to adapt their business strategies.2
  Economic warfare, of which the Continental Blockade was one of the
most devastating measures, challenged the established position of many
merchants, traders and business elites. Prohibitions on trade and increasing
transportation risks drastically transformed transaction costs. Consumers
and manufacturers, however, still required provisions. Their demand for
commodities as well as the heightened risks in trade influenced prices and
offered incentives for business people to speculate and take risks or con-
sider new business niches. These particular circumstances obliged business
people to reflect on new possibilities and potential benefits, as they also
confronted restricted alternatives. Continuing to conduct business as usual
                                     223
