                      The Continental System in the Cities of the French Atlantic 215


a tax income of 1,700,000 francs in 1809, this fell to 1,400,000 with the
downturn in 1813, a loss that was made more painful by Napoleon’s habit
of raiding local authorities for cash when he needed to raise extra troops for
the army.35
   If the implementation of the Continental System evoked no great out-
pouring of enthusiasm from the merchant communities, neither did it
arouse any great protest. The provision of some degree of protection was
not of itself unwelcome, as there were many in Nantes and Bordeaux who
had serious doubts about the much-vaunted benefits of the free market,
especially at a time when their arch rival not only controlled the seas but
had a capacity for capital investment which France sadly lacked. But there
was more to it than that. They were not being freely consulted, and it would
have taken a bold and foolhardy spirit to challenge in writing the wisdom
of a policy in which Napoleon had invested so much personal belief. When
they sought to voice even the most tenuous criticism, it had to be done sur-
reptitiously or be carefully disguised in coded language. On 21 April 1808
for instance, the reconstituted Chamber of Commerce in Bordeaux lavished
praise on imperial policy, or appeared to. The Chamber started in a duly
deferential tone, claiming that the Emperor’s wise policies had rallied the
whole of Europe against the pretensions of the British government, while
the counter measures of the British had led to significant reprisals. This
was, no doubt, just what the Emperor wanted to hear. But they now urged
him to adopt a different line. The Berlin and Milan Decrees, they said, had
achieved all that they had been designed to achieve and more, but ‘pro-
longing them further would do more harm than good’. Why? Not because
of any shortcoming in Napoleonic policy, of course, but rather because of
the Americans. Their humiliation by the British meant that they now kept
their ships at home, and the neutral shipping that had been their lifeline
now risked being lost. But of course, the far-seeing Emperor will have under-
stood all that. The Chamber was careful to avoid any suspicion of criticism.
Napoleon’s far-sighted policy, they protested, had their total support, and
it would surely work to their advantage. It might, however, take a little
time. And in the meantime ‘it would be useful to your people if you would
adopt measures that could revive our trade a little and show the Americans
who their real enemies are’; that way no advantage could possibly accrue to
Britain. A simple reversal of policy will suffice, if only Napoleon would con-
sider giving neutral shipping permission ‘to come to France either in ballast,
or bringing goods and merchandise from the Americas’, and removing the
restriction that they could not enter French ports if they had been boarded
by the Royal Navy. In this way, they suggested, foreign vessels would no
longer be condemned to rot away in French docks, but instead they could
take on cargoes of ‘our wines, our spirits, our manufactures of all kinds’,
and go to the ends of the earth to tell others of ‘the justice which they have
obtained from Your Majesty’. Once they were happy with the wording of
