232   Hilde Greefs


originally from Chimay, was convicted for illegal transportation of march-
andises d’Indes by way of Bergen op Zoom and Breda to Antwerp and Paris
between 1805 and 1808.40 After the Napoleonic wars Rymenans settled in
Antwerp, where he specialized in maritime trade with Hubert Havenith, of
Raeren. Likewise, Donnet, Dirven and Thuret remained active in Antwerp in
the mercantile business after the war.
   Although the relevant information is limited, available data suggest that
business people who moved to Antwerp early in the nineteenth century
were able to survive the Continental Blockade by continuing to trade via
legal, and sometimes illegal, channels. Because of the war, they faced unu-
sually high risks and thus had to be constantly informed so as to effectively
adapt their commercial trajectories. They relied on trustworthy partners
and relations abroad to minimize risks. In doing so, they were partially
able to circumvent prohibitions instituted by the French government and
the blockades imposed by the British. In Antwerp, transplanted business
people kept their capital mobile and flexible; they also strengthened their
contacts, such as through joining the Chamber of Commerce or by institu-
tionalizing privileged positions in certain trade routes.41 Although their ini-
tial capital in Antwerp may have been quite modest, some quickly managed
to accumulate significant wealth during these years. After the war they again
used their international networks to successfully restore their maritime
trade. Moreover, alongside even newer immigrants who had settled in the
port city between 1814 and 1815, they came to dominate maritime imports.

Reorientation and Diversification:
The Strategy of the Native Businessmen

How did native business people survive these difficult years, and what deci-
sions did they make in doing so? Local merchants and traders originally
from Antwerp were surely motivated by the new opportunities offered by
the reopening of the Scheldt. Changes in market orientation, however, often
constituted obstacles. For example, during the early years of French control,
many Antwerp merchants found it difficult to break from their usual trad-
ing routes via ports in the northern Netherlands, such as Rotterdam and
Amsterdam. In their reticence, they exhibited a notable degree of path-
dependency in their trade orientation. They continued importing com-
modities through the northern Netherlands ports, just as they had before
the Scheldt was reopened.42 Many of the more successful maritime traders
within the Antwerp group were from wealthy Antwerp families who had
been active in the trade world before 1795.43 Local merchant houses profited
notably from the 1802 Peace of Amiens, which freed shipments to French
ports and from unification with France. The latter development prompted
them to begin importing regional products, such as wine, oils and fruit from
harbours on the Atlantic coast, including Bordeaux and Nantes.44 Other
