                       Choices and Opportunities: The Business Elite in Antwerp 229


commercial agent and, later, consul of the United States in Antwerp, thus
institutionalizing his position in trade with America.23 His particular evolu-
tion strongly resembles that of many American merchants who settled in
Bordeaux during the French period.24 In Bordeaux, however, other options
were possible. Many Bordeaux merchants took initiative in the opposite
direction: to facilitate trade, they delocalized their businesses, reorienting
them to American ports and relying heavily on their former colonial trade
relations. In Antwerp a comparable strategy was pursued by David Parish, a
young merchant who resettled in the port city, but who continued to rely
upon his business contacts abroad.
   Parish hailed from a business family in Hamburg and he relocated to
Antwerp around 1802. According to a contemporary, his initial successes
stemmed from astute financial speculations on the new outbreak of hos-
tilities between France and Britain. His speculations had been particularly
successful thanks to a tip from a long-time friend of his family, the French
minister of foreign affairs, Charles Maurice de Talleyrand. Parish met with
Talleyrand in Antwerp in July 1803 during Napoleon’s visit to the city. He
subsequently bought a large amount of colonial commodities and, after
prices skyrocketed due to the outbreak of war, realized a huge profit.25 In
1806 Parish departed Antwerp for New York and Philadelphia on the basis
of contacts he had established with the merchant bankers Hope & Co. in
Amsterdam. The firm had contacted Parish to act as their agent in America.
The deal originated from the French house Ouvrard & Co. and was intended
to oversee ships leaving Spanish America; these ships, bearing colonial
goods and piasters to the Continent, would sail under protection of the
Spanish and French governments.26 Peter Labouchère, of the firm Hope &
Co., took the lead in arranging this business and decided that the neutral
vessels should be routed to Antwerp. Impressed by Parish’s rapid success in
Antwerp, Labouchère appointed him as the American agent for the trans-
actions.27 To protect the ships against actions from the British fleet, Parish
contacted the British firm Baring Bros. in London, who specialized in the
Atlantic trade.28
   Parish realized a great deal of money from these arrangements – roughly
estimated at around 721,000 dollars. Yet his gains were likely even higher,
because he could also work for his own account. Transatlantic shipping
of piasters was a risky venture, and so the money was primarily used to
pay advances to American firms in Baltimore, New York, Philadelphia and
New Orleans for transport of their commodities to Europe. Parish acted as
a middleman and contacted firms in Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Nantes and
Antwerp. In Antwerp, the business was entrusted to the firms David Parish
& Co. and Ridgway, Mertens & Co., both of which thus enjoyed excellent
provision of colonial commodities during these difficult years.29 These
arrangements, although supported by the French government and impor-
tant merchant bankers, remained a hazardous undertaking. In late 1807
