                        Choices and Opportunities: The Business Elite in Antwerp 233


Antwerp business people now explored more distant commodity markets.
Examples include Nicolas Werbrouck and Nicolas Joseph De Wael, who
imported Brazilian colonial commodities via Lisbon, a city that enjoyed neu-
tral status in the French–British conflict. Werbrouck and De Wael frequently
relied on business relations and distribution channels they had used before
the turn of the century. De Wael had been a prominent trader in hides in
the late eighteenth century.45 When the war obstructed trading channels,
they, like myriad other foreign mercantile houses, requested permission
from the authorities to import commodities. Werbrouck was licensed by the
authorities to import hides on French ships via Ostend, whereas De Wael
was granted permission to import American hides through London.46
   Antwerp’s native business community, however, also had other options
and, unlike the merchants who had arrived more recently, they did not
always focus exclusively on trade. For merchants who only occasionally
imported through the harbour, the choice was fairly simple, and they now
opted to concentrate on other activities, such as production of luxury goods
or financial services. Likewise, many of the foremost merchants appeared to
have modified their business orientation or tried to diversify so as to spread
risk. Likewise, during the French period some Antwerp business people,
unlike the new immigrants, secured capital by investing or even speculating
in real estate.47 Moreover, in contrast to traditional Antwerp historiography,
local business people were not only interested in protecting their money
and investments, they also searched for alternatives and took risks during
the Napoleonic Era.48 These native business people relied on their experi-
ence and earlier business contacts to revise their business behaviour and
to adapt to the ever-changing circumstances. Industrial investment pat-
terns are a striking example. For example, investments in the previously
flourishing textile industry were phased out, whereas the rising processing
industries, such as sugar-refining, enjoyed renewed interest. This shift in
investment patterns will be used to illustrate business adaption strategies.
   By the 1790s the textile industry in Antwerp encountered difficulties. In
1801 cotton imprinters and manufacturers of mixed textile fabrics com-
plained that political instability had curtailed their annual turnovers.49 Five
years later, in 1806, the number of cotton spinners and weavers had fallen
by half. At the end of the French period, Antwerp’s three huge calico print-
ing manufacturers had shut their doors.50 In contrast to developments in
other textile centres, the port city’s cotton textile business collapsed. Three
explanations were presented for these developments. First, that the unstable
political situation and the regime changes had wrought severe economic dif-
ficulties. Yet this was not a local phenomenon. Second, that Antwerp’s cot-
ton industry was technologically backward, despite available technological
knowledge. This was linked to a third explanation: that the city’s business
classes had been unwilling to invest in its textile industry. Lis and Thijs have
argued that Antwerp’s capitalists were no longer interested in investing in
