228   Hilde Greefs


were shipped via American ports such as Philadelphia, Charleston and
New York. The vessels sailed directly from the American ports to Antwerp,
thereby bypassing other ports under French control.
   The American shipping business profited from the French wars. Likewise,
American exports grew extensively until 1807, thanks to the country’s
neutrality in the continental conflict. Shipping between non-belligerent
countries and France was possible, provided that neutral merchants and
ships were involved. Such ships were sent from America to the continent,
not only to ports such as Bordeaux, Hamburg and Livorno, but also to
Antwerp, an indication that the city had quickly established a foothold in
the transatlantic commercial circuit.17 Of the 184 intercontinental ships that
arrived in Antwerp between 1801 and 1807, 167 ships (most of which were
American) had departed from American ports.18 How did Antwerp merchant
houses venture into this long-distance trade, and what kinds of relations
did they rely upon? I examined the ship records of vessels that arrived in
Antwerp’s harbour, in particular the records that indicate which merchants
and merchant houses received the goods.19 These samples indicate that the
merchant house Ridgway, Mertens & Co. held a major share in this com-
modity trade.
   Jacob Ridgway was American by birth; he was born in Monrsouth
County in New Jersey, and moved to Philadelphia as a child. According to
an anonymous trader, it appears that he began a career as a small grocer
when he established the firm Smith & Ridgway in Philadelphia.20 The firm
specialized in European trade; Ridgway moved to Antwerp around 1802 in
order to boost his trading business. This was a strategic relocation, intended
to facilitate commodity trade between his hometown and the continent.
Thanks to his contacts in America, he could act as a person of trust for
American merchants he already knew or with whom he established contact
via recommendations from friends, relatives and business relations. Because
of the distance and instability inherent in such trade, merchants had dif-
ficulties in garnering up-to-date information; thus, they had to rely on a
trustworthy partner for the consignments of their ships or commodities.
This was of particular importance during these tumultuous years.21 The firm
Ridgway, Mertens & Co. imported goods in consignment but also acted
on its own account. In October 1802, for instance, the ship Phoebe Anne
departed from Philadelphia with colonial commodities, including coffee,
sugar and cacao imported from such places as Martinique, Calcutta, Norfolk
and Guadeloupe. In Philadelphia, Richard Smith and the firm Smith &
Ridgway acted as exporters of the freights alongside other American mer-
chant houses.22 Thanks to the neutral status of the Americans in the ongo-
ing continental conflict, the freights could be shipped to Antwerp.
   In Antwerp, Ridgway became associated with Louis Joseph Mertens, a
merchant from Frankfurt-am-Main, thereby bolstering his commercial ties
with the Rhineland, an important transit destination. He also became a
