                       Choices and Opportunities: The Business Elite in Antwerp 231


   Another way to continue trade during wartime was to provision via
inland navigation from the northern Netherlands, a strategy pursued by
nearly every trading firm in Antwerp. According to notices in the Journal du
Commerce, products imported from small ports in the northern Netherlands
included not only foodstuffs, such as fish, grain and cheese, but also colo-
nial products such as coffee, hides, sugar and tea. Such trade in colonial
commodities was not forbidden, but in 1808 France banned, by Napoleonic
orders, imports via illegal routes from England.35 Nonetheless, substan-
tial amounts of colonial commodities still arrived in Antwerp in 1810.36
This likely explains why various merchants moved from Amsterdam and
Rotterdam to Antwerp during this period, including Jan Vanderhoeven
and John Knight (1807), Adriaan Saportas (1808) and Jean Jacques Legros
(originally from Liège, 1810). As a distribution centre for forbidden colo-
nial goods imported via the northern Netherlands, Antwerp emerged as
an attractive locale for these merchants. The rising prices for colonial com-
modities offered significant economic incentives for smuggling. In Antwerp,
the price of coffee from Java or San Domingo doubled between 1806 and
1810 and the price of American cotton tripled.37 For Napoleon, this trade
in colonial commodities along the northern border was an irritant, but it
was only after the empire’s annexation of the Kingdom of Holland that
this commodity flow came to a standstill. In 1811, according to Antwerp
brokers, legal imports via the northern borders included only some cheese,
butter and fish.38 This collapse in imports evidences the importance of this
transport route for illegal commodities.
   Much more stringent than these measures were the orders against the
importation of British manufacturing goods. Such commerce was consid-
ered smuggling, and those involved faced prosecution from the French
government. Merchants also used land routes for illegal commodity trade
from the northern and southern Netherlands to France and the Rhineland.
Dufraisse and Marzagalli have suggested that British products were smug-
gled via Amsterdam, Breda and Rotterdam by way of Antwerp to the
Rhineland and France.39 Eugène Rymenans, in Düsseldorf, was an important
middleman for the Paris businessman Jean François Gaudoit. He dispatched
French lace to England and trafficked forbidden English commodities into
the Empire. Antwerp functioned as a transhipment zone in this smuggling
operation. Lace was transported by way of stage coach to Antwerp, where
Vanderschriedt functioned as a middleman. Importing British commodities
was far more challenging. London merchant houses dispatched the com-
modities to Rotterdam, Amsterdam or Breda, where specialists insured the
transport to France. Rymenans, born in Malines, operated from Düsseldorf
in these years; he also worked in Antwerp with the mercantile houses of
Jean Donnet, Jacob Dirven and Daniël Thuret, all of whom had moved to
Antwerp early in the century. Many of the wartime entrepreneurs were not
unknown to the French authorities. For instance, Jean Bissiliat Donnet,
