                       Choices and Opportunities: The Business Elite in Antwerp 227


contacts with the Holland staple market. After the reopening, business
people from France, Switzerland, Spain, and especially from the Rhineland,
relocated to Antwerp. This was particularly the case following the Peace
of Amiens and temporary cessation of the conflict; many new merchants
settled in Antwerp. This migration continued even after the Continental
Blockade began to paralyse maritime trade in 1806.13 The difficult political
and economic circumstances appear to have reinforced geographic mobility
and even offered opportunities to ambitious business people keen on travel-
ling or relocating.14 Moreover, the constant necessity to modify commercial
routes – due both to the structural reorientation of international trade and
to ongoing warfare – opened new prospects. In this perspective, moving to
Antwerp may have been part of a plan to adapt the structure of business
networks to changing circumstances and to redirect mercantile patterns
obstructed by the French–British commercial war. A notable example of
this was the population of young business people who, backed by trading
companies in their home countries, settled in newly developed port towns
and worked there as commissioners for their contacts abroad.15 Antwerp, a
well-situated, inexpensive and newly developing harbour town, offered a
promising base of operations.
   This chapter explores choices made by these Antwerp business groups –
natives and ‘newcomers’, respectively – and the kinds of business and trade
that captured their interest. It uncovers how they utilized their experience,
knowledge and networks to survive and even prosper during an era of inter-
national and commercial warfare. This chapter first examines their business
behaviour following the reopening of the Scheldt and looks at how these
business people adapted their initial strategies to the ongoing changing cir-
cumstances of the Napoleonic Era.

The Return of Commerce:
Immigrants and Maritime Trade during Difficult Years

In-migrants, who relocated shortly after the reopening of the harbour,
arrived in Antwerp with a deliberate purpose – to trade. Initially, their trad-
ing routes were often directed towards their home regions or cities, where
they still had relatives, business contacts and friends. Typical examples
include Christophe Duhring, from Denmark, and David Parish, of Hamburg,
both of whom resettled in Antwerp to import goods from northern ports.
These initial trading routes, however, were easily susceptible to wartime
obstructions. Following Britain’s blockade of the mouths of the Elbe and
the Weser in 1803 the number of ships arriving from the German northern
seaports collapsed. More ships now began arriving from the Baltic Sea and
Scandinavia, obliging merchants to redirect their trade routes.16 Of particular
importance to Antwerp’s future as a port city was the arrival of colonial com-
modities from the Spanish, French and Dutch colonies. Such commodities
