                        Choices and Opportunities: The Business Elite in Antwerp 225


‘export’ market and the early implementation of French revolutionary laws.
Moreover, in 1806 the Continental Blockade protected its fledgling indus-
tries from British competition until 1814. Certain manufacturing regions
emerged in the southern Netherlands that would later result in Belgium
becoming the first industrialized power on the continent. The textile
industry set the pace for these developments from about 1800 until 1810.
However, mechanization was limited to specific regions.5 The qualitative
changes and innovations bypassed Antwerp, although the city’s textile sec-
tor had flourished during the eighteenth century. According to historians,
the reopening of the Scheldt and the commercial orientation of Antwerp’s
industrialists were each partially responsible for the collapse of the local
textile industry. Indeed, the industry’s sharpest crisis appears to have taken
place exactly during the French regime.6
   After 1795 Antwerp regained its position as a well-located harbour town
in the southern Netherlands, a densely populated region with a growing
economy. If the country’s modernization process would enable Antwerp to
function as an important gateway for industries in the immediate hinterland,
the city’s favourable geographic position towards the North Sea and Britain
offered possibilities to reconnect with transatlantic commerce. Trade on
the east–west axis to Britain and across the Atlantic Ocean was important
for colonial commodity trade; it also functioned as an import route for raw
cotton, essential for the booming textile industry. Moreover, the river port’s
deep inland position reduced transportation costs, and its central location
offered an advantageous hub for transit trade to other parts of France, as well
as to the northern Netherlands, the Rhineland and Switzerland.7 Attentive to
these advantages and urged on by the local business community, the French
government invested heavily in renewing the infrastructure of the town
and the port, all of which was in deplorable condition after two centuries
of neglect. Napoleon visited Antwerp twice, as a consul in July 1803 and as
an emperor in July 1810. Although his intentions had initially related to the
city’s commercial future and were part of a strategy to gain the support of
the local population, his military expeditions and conflicts prompted him to
revise these objectives. For Napoleon, Antwerp became a naval port, ‘a pistol
directed to the heart of Britain’, and therefore military vessels – not trading
ships – were constructed in its new shipyards (see Fig. 13.1).8
   The Antwerp business community welcomed this revivification of the
port. Its renaissance as a port town, however, was hindered by structural
shortcomings, including a lack of both maritime trade experience and
related trade networks. Indeed, research into eighteenth-century Antwerp
has shown that the city had in fact been merely a regional trading hub on
the periphery of even the important domestic commercial activities. Such
unpromising prospects eventually led important business elites to with-
draw from commerce during the 1700s and adopt an aristocratic lifestyle.9
Moreover, they also began to invest capital in industrial activities, especially
