230   Hilde Greefs


the cargoes of seven American ships consigned to Parish and Ridgway were
confiscated by French authorities, to be publically sold. Although David
Parish explained that they were acting on behalf of the French treasury
and that neither the cargoes nor the merchants and firms involved were
British, a letter from David Parish in 1810 indicates that after three years
the affair remained unresolved and that the situation remained difficult, not
least because the advances had already been paid.30 As evidenced by such
developments, these business arrangements and transactions posed various
hazards. Nonetheless, backed by their international business relations and
networks, some merchants and firms opted to assume the risks.
   How the firms David Parish & Co. and Ridgway, Mertens & Co., managed
later to survive the Continental Blockade is unclear. From the end of 1807
onwards neutral shipping from American ports ceased. On 20 December
of 1807 the American government embargoed all transatlantic shipping to
Britain and France. British ships now controlled the mouth of the Scheldt,
and between 1809 and 1810 the only way for merchants to continue mari-
time imports was through an import licence from the central authorities.31
In early 1809, amid growing tensions on the continent, Labouchère asked
to close the Spanish–American transactions. Parish’s contacts in America,
Britain, the Netherlands, France and Hamburg had likely offered him alter-
native opportunities. Richard Ehrenberg estimated that in 1809 alone the
firm Parish & Co. in Hamburg received 50 shipments from American ports,
with a total value of more than three million dollars. Various members of
the Parish family engaged in smuggling commodities from Heligoland and
via Hamburg to Frankfurt, Rotterdam and Amsterdam.32
   David Parish appears to have been successful in his business ventures dur-
ing these years. In the 1810s he bought extensive plantations in America
and invested considerably in an American state loan devised by his friend
and one of the leading businessmen in Philadelphia, Stephen Girard.
Despite widespread rumours about his adventurous character and impru-
dent speculations, Parish maintained respectable appearances and lived ‘in
a style of great splendour’ in Philadelphia.33 Jacob Ridgway is thought to
have returned to Philadelphia around 1813 with a prodigious amount of
capital, worth some three to six million dollars, and was popular thanks to
his charity work.34 Because of their relocation back to America, Parish and
Ridgway’s capitals now partially flowed away from Antwerp; their business
contacts, however, remained in the port town. After their departures, the
trading houses Parish, Agie & Co. and Ridgway, Mertens & Co. continued
under Parish and Ridgway’s previous business partners: the former was
conducted by Grégoire Agie from Lorient under the merchant house Agie
& Insinger, and the latter under Louis Joseph Mertens with the firm name
Mertens, Mosselman & Co. Though each associated with new partners,
both merchant houses became important intercontinental traders after the
Napoleonic wars.
