234   Hilde Greefs


production activities; rather, they preferred to invest in trade and finance,
which were considered more profitable, whereas small textile entrepreneurs
had inadequate financial means to modernize.51 Lis and Thijs’s arguments
are compelling, yet one question remains: Who dominated the imports of
raw cotton during these years? This is a central question, as involvement
in the cotton trade would, at least hypothetically, have spurred interest in
investing in the cotton industry.
   According to the records of ship arrivals in 1805, only one Antwerp textile
firm imported cotton wool and fibres via the port; the firm of De Heyder
& Lombaerts, which imported raw cotton from Amsterdam, Rotterdam
and Gouda. One partner, De Heyder, had contacts in Hamburg, Bordeaux,
Dieppe, La Rochelle and Paris and delivered raw materials to cotton manu-
facturers in Ghent, Brussels and France.52 However, he was not involved in
the direct maritime importing of raw cotton via the American ports. This
trade was dominated by the previously mentioned American-German mer-
chant companies. In 1806 and 1807 ships from America were still arriving
in Antwerp; these arrangements, however, became much more difficult from
the end of 1807 onwards, and traders and manufacturers suffered. Likewise,
in Nantes and Hamburg the collapse of American imports paralysed the
calico printing industries.53 Smuggling raw cotton remained possible but
was always risky, as De Heyder experienced when ships bearing commodities
for his firm were embargoed in 1807.54
   De Heyder sold out to his partners in 1806. He subsequently used his
stocks and the capital of his trading business to modernize his cotton plant
in Lier, where, compared to Antwerp, wages were lower and real estate prop-
erties cheaper.55 His trading partner, the widow Lombaerts, bought a sugar
refinery in Antwerp that same year. Similarly, Jean François Vermoelen and
the firm Janssens & Le Grelle, former shareholders in cotton business in
Antwerp, now opted to specialize in the import of raw sugar and invested in
the sugar-refining business. For example, in 1800 Jean Guillaume Le Grelle,
then 66 years old, invested fresh capital in the sugar industry; he gave
up textiles, and, together with his mother-in-law – the widow of Adriaan
Janssens, who had ranked among the most important cotton printers in
Antwerp in the second half of the eighteenth century – concentrated on
importing colonial goods such as tea, coffee and sugar. The firm’s change
in commercial orientation was accompanied by reorientation in its produc-
tion activities, which shifted from textiles to the sugar-refining business.56
Vermoelen established a sugar refinery in 1812, the same year when the
bankers Albert and Joseph Henri Cogels invested fresh capital in the sugar
refinery Cogels, Koelman & Co.57
   Since early in the century, most of these Antwerp merchants had antici-
pated opportunities in importing raw sugar, before this particular commod-
ity trade came to be dominated by foreign traders. Their willingness to invest
in the sugar-refining business was stimulated by the growing shortage of
