244   Anita Čerpinska


  The Riga Liquidation Commission was responsible for implementing the
embargo. These tasks included the sequestration of English ships and goods
and handing over perishable goods for public trade. Along with reviewing
the complaints of foreign and Russian merchants related to imposing the
embargo, the Commission gathered information on the English in the city,
their shares and bills in the Russian Empire. It also gathered information on
the claims of Russian subjects against the English outside Russia who did
not have offices or properties in Russia. The Riga Liquidation Commission
was responsible for goods not only in the port of Riga but also in the ports
of Tallinn, Haapsalu, Ventspils and Liepaja.
  After 14 December 1807 it was forbidden to buy or take as a pledge English
immovable and non-goods property.12 People whose companies had English
shares or bills were to inform the Riga Liquidation Commission, a practice that
only began in May 1808. An order to stop business with English goods and
properties was sent by the trade court to notaries, timber graders, measurers,
carrier and scale supervisors, hemp scutchers and carriers of salt and wine.13
  The English had to submit information to the Commission regarding their
properties in the territory of Russia. Although they did not hurry to submit
their statements, those who wanted to leave Russia were forced to submit
them in order to receive travel documents. Following the publication of the
ukase, English merchants registered in Riga filed a claim with the trade court.
They were willing to present their goods, but only if they were considered
as guests that had immunity granted to their personal property by Russia.14
Their claim did not go further than the board of the Vidzeme government,
but the English were soon excluded from Russia’s list of ‘guests’, and the
money they had deposited went to the Riga Liquidation Commission.15
  Table 14.1 presents a review of goods sequestrated at storehouses at the
port. It was prepared by the Riga port customs and submitted to the Riga
Liquidation Commission in February 1808. Timber represents the greatest
portion of the goods. Technical crops made up a comparatively small pro-
portion of the confiscated goods. Russian merchants submitted purchasing
documents to the Riga Liquidation Commission for some of the goods. If
payments had been made before the embargo had been imposed, the Riga
Liquidation Commission made the decision to give the goods to the claim-
ant.16 If the goods in Russia were ordered by the English, the Riga Liquidation
Commission charged to the claimant a certain percentage of the cost of the
goods for removing the sequester and added the money to its budget.17
  By 1810 Russia started to hastily secure its western border for the impend-
ing war against Napoleon. At that moment it turned out that there was not
enough timber in Riga and its expense and added costs associated with deliv-
ery would mean additional expenditures for the state and require lots of time.
For this reason, in the summer of 1810 the War Ministry made the decision
to take over the timber (particularly logs and oak wood) sequestrated from
the English in Riga and use it for the construction of city fortifications.18
