242   Anita Čerpinska


   Before 1806 Riga encompassed 20 per cent of Russia’s export in the Baltic
Sea and 20 to 24 per cent worth of Russia’s total export. The Daugava River
region played a significant role in ensuring the well-being of Riga since the
export goods came to the city down the river. Prior to 1806 two-thirds of
Riga’s export goods comprised of the so-called ‘technical crops’: hemp, flax,
linseed (for sowing and oil) and hempseed. If 10 to 15 per cent of Riga’s
export comprised of crop products, about as much consisted of timber. In
some years Riga provided more than half of the corn, flax, hempseed and
linseed and 30 per cent of the hemp and timber that Russia exported. In the
time period from the 1760s until 1800 the amount of export goods (flax,
hemp, linseed and spars) brought to Riga from Poland, Lithuania, Belarus
and other inner-Russian territories continued to increase.3 The last decades
of the eighteenth century also saw an increase in the prices of export flax
and hemp indicating stable demand.
   As an importer Riga remained a local centre covering only 5 per cent of
Russia’s imports as it supplied imported goods to the neighbouring areas of
Kurzeme and Vidzeme and to some extent Lithuanian and Belarus territor-
ies. The principal imported goods invariably were salt (20 per cent of the
import of Riga) and herring. The inner-Russian governments provided little
salt to the Baltic region, and the territory of present-day Latvia depended on
foreign salt deliveries.
   The main Russian export goods from St Petersburg included bread, iron,
hemp and flax. The amount of technical crops and half-processed materials
in the export had gradually increased since the 1770s and they constituted
two-thirds of Russian exports, whereas corn products formed one-fifth of
exports in the beginning of the nineteenth century. It is important to note
that the field of export trade was almost equally divided between England
and Russia, and in some years English merchants’ share of Russia’s exports
was bigger than that of the local merchants.4 Thus, in the years between
1802 and 1804 Russia’s ports were visited by 2100 English ships (20.1 per
cent of the total number of ships), and their total storage capacity was
217,503 lasts, or 37.7 per cent of the total tonnage.5
   To a great extent, life in Riga depended on trade. A large portion of
the burghers of Riga engaged in commerce, whereas the common people
laboured in the port or warehouses and transit trade. Historians estimate
that up to 20 per cent of the residents of Riga were involved in trade.6 Otto
Hoon, a local doctor, wrote,

  Trade is highly respected here. Many people of different classes, unrelent-
  ing activity, joint application of forces and means bring about reflection
  on the value of trade, on increasing of the common good with the help
  of trade and on the influence of trade on the arts and sciences. Trade is a
  creative force that turns the local sandy meadows into merry fields and
