                       Choices and Opportunities: The Business Elite in Antwerp 235


sugar on the European market and by the advantages of locating the indus-
try in a harbour town. In the long term this was the logical consequence of
ports beginning to specialize in processing industries that depended on sea
access for the supply of raw materials. Existing refineries were expanded,
and new refineries were established, individually or in collaboration with
experienced refiners. Antwerp merchants also bought existing firms, taking
advantage of unstable sugar imports that threatened smaller, less profitable
refineries. The sugar business was soon booming thanks especially to the
growing import of raw sugar and to the sales potentials afforded by French
outlets.58 The firm Cels Aerts & Co. saw profits rise from 8.9 to 17.4 per cent
between 1800 and 1804; in the years from 1806 to 1808 its profits rose to
40 per cent, largely due to the growing disparity between the purchasing
and the selling price (from 28.1 per cent in 1806 to 59.2 per cent in 1808).59
Furthermore, the sugar-refining business, besides requiring less capital,
fewer workers and less technological investment, since its businesses were
small and operated in a traditional way, was also more remunerative. The
sector was dominated by local businesses, and foreign firms and merchants
showed little interest in the processing industries during these years.
  These examples demonstrate that there was minimal resistance to reori-
entation and production investments in Antwerp. Antwerp business elites
even renewed their interest in local industry, although they were no longer
willing to invest in the city’s textile business. These business people were
generally attracted only temporarily to maritime trade. Foreigners who
remained in Antwerp managed to survive the impediments imposed by the
French regime via reliance on international contacts. Antwerpers, on the
other hand, were keenly aware that they held advantages in locally embed-
ded economic activities; this was especially so as competition from foreign
merchants had been growing markedly in international trade. Local niches
also offered favourable prospects to Antwerp’s business people. Indeed, that
local merchants and firms were deeply embedded and rooted in the vast
local capital market often compensated for their initial backwardness in
maritime trade.

Conclusion

Even before 1815, when the wars on the continent ended and normal
maritime trade along the North Sea and the Atlantic re-emerged, changes in
business orientation had already taken place in Antwerp, and these changes
would initiate further developments. At the start of the century immigrants
to Antwerp had seized upon opportunities to trade in the ‘new’ port town,
supported by their experiences and networks abroad. These newly relo-
cated merchants and firms were able to weather the Continental Blockade
by using their international trading networks and by reconsidering their
trade opportunities. As necessitated by the current situation, they relied on
