236   Hilde Greefs


relations abroad, travelled or delocalized their businesses, and speculated.
Some managed to garner wealth, became members of the city’s business
elite and developed additional new commercial enterprises. Relations in
their home country or elsewhere abroad would have greatly facilitated their
entrance into Antwerp’s commercial world, as well as aid them in circum-
venting blockades and trade prohibitions.
   Antwerp’s traditional business elite, despite being similarly keen to capi-
talize on the myriad new opportunities afforded by the Scheldt’s reopening,
were only moderately attracted to maritime trade. Some took advantage of
French unification and endeavoured to explore the markets of port cities in
France, Spain and Portugal; others, however, had more difficulty in adapt-
ing their commercial routes, and so confined themselves to familiar import
channels via staple markets in the northern Netherlands. Confronted with
stark competition from a varied, constantly changing group of immigrants,
Antwerp’s business people soon keenly appreciated the advantage of having
strong roots in the local community. Their subsequent diversification and
focus on local sectors were crucial to their surviving the difficult wartime
years. In short, local elites cannot be faulted for their reluctance to special-
ize in international trade. Their successful reorientation from textiles to the
sugar business, for instance, indicates that Antwerp’s business people also
adapted their business strategies.
   These two different groups each made distinctive and valuable contribu-
tions to Antwerp’s transformation process during the French period. These
various merchants, traders and firms concentrated on areas where they could
realize profits and availed themselves of relevant networks and connections.
They acted from clear economic logic and were supported by acquaint-
ances and associates. S.D. Chapman’s research on Britain suggests certain
fundamental similarities to the Antwerp model. For example, in Britain,
particularly in Liverpool, foreign commission traders and agents with reli-
able contacts in their home countries controlled imports of raw cotton and
exports of British textiles, whereas English firms controlled domestic textile
production and local distribution.60 In Le Havre, another harbour town that
was expanding during this period, local business elites feared competition
from recently arrived foreigners. Yet, as with Bordeaux and elsewhere, these
local business elites would hold their own and remain successful.61
   These patterns appear to have been reinforced by the continental wars,
obliging business people to reconsider their business strategies. The exam-
ples discussed in this chapter demonstrate that different groups of business
people were able to benefit commercially from the wartime situation and
sought to bypass obstacles imposed by ongoing economic warfare. Yet, this
is the story of the ‘successful’ ones. Many others faced further difficulties in
adapting to the challenges embedded in economic warfare; they were forced
to withdraw from business or even went bankrupt. Yet even these develop-
ments offered prospects for merchants and traders who were able to pursue
