14
Riga Export Trade at the Time of the
Continental Blockade (1807–1812)
Anita Čerpinska




By the end of the Great Northern War, Russia emerged a Baltic power. Riga
became a Russian city in 1710 when it capitulated to the Russian army.
As a consequence of the Treaty of Nystad in 1721, Riga was incorporated
into the Empire as the administrative centre of the Vidzeme Government
and became an important stronghold in the Russian frontier. After the city
recovered from the dual destruction of the war and the Black Death, it
experienced considerable growth due to the almost uninterrupted increase
in trade. In 1809 Vidzeme Professor Johann Petri of the Erfurt Grammar
school described Riga:

  Trade brings wealth and life to Riga … Money calls, it allures and draws
  one here … One can easily go broke here and prosper with the same ease
  … Most people spend all they earn and choose a way of life whereby they
  can barely make both ends meet. Only some plan ahead and put aside
  some money to be able to survive later: they count on the endless stream
  of trade that brings them its treasures from day to day … Everyone can
  earn money with ease unless they are stripped of reason, competence and
  knowledge. Money is easily the cheapest commodity, and one worries
  little about the future.1

At the beginning of the nineteenth century the Baltic Sea comprised 85 per
cent of Russia’s foreign trade.2 Despite privileges granted to St Petersburg to
develop its status as an imperial port, Riga remained Russia’s second largest
export port to western states. By 1800 Riga, with a population of roughly
30,000 inhabitants, supported a substantial amount of Russia’s export trade.
Commercial growth since 1750 generated a demand for labour in the city,
and consequently in the summer season Riga attracted workers from neigh-
bouring regions. Every year the city attracted new residents, and during
exceptionally favourable conditions the number of incomers could make up
even one-third of the total number of city inhabitants.


                                     241
