                                              Riga Export Trade, 1807–1812 243


  gardens, which brought Riga city to a blooming state, which feeds and
  spreads the arts and sciences and which brought Vidzeme out of a wild
  and barbaric state … 7

Russian regulations in Riga forbade foreigners to trade among themselves,
therefore Riga burghers were mostly involved as middlemen. The Manifest
of 1807 enabled foreigners to gain residency in Russia as well as the rights
of a Riga burgher. Riga merchants specialized in exports of certain goods and
several dozens of wealthy merchants held up to 80 per cent of the turnover.
In most cases, they bought export goods from suppliers and sold them to
representatives of the Western European companies engaged in export. The
family of Barclay de Tolly was one of the leading families in Riga’s timber
trade and Russian Field Marshal Michael Barclay de Tolly, who became War
Minister in 1810, devoted much attention to fortifying Riga against possible
attack by Napoleon.
  According to the Riga Trade Law of 1765, all the principal export goods
in Riga had to be sorted, weighed or measured, and packed. All goods enter-
ing the city by barge or by road had to be inspected, weighed, sorted and
stored.8 This ensured earnings for Riga merchants and auxiliary workers
though it delayed the turnover of goods and increased prices. In addition,
the city collected various duties for the state or itself – export duty, duty
from vehicles, duty for the benefit of the city weighing room, duty for
trade agents, duty for auxiliary workers, duty for destitute people and so on.
Thus, the well-being of the entire city depended heavily on commerce. For
the duration of the eighteenth century the value of Riga’s exports exceeded
by several times over its imports in bringing wealth to the city, promoting
Riga’s reputation as an expensive and lavish city.

Implementation of the Continental Blockade

As in Russia generally, the Continental Blockade in Riga was implemented
at the end of 1807. On 17 November 1807, the Riga Stock Exchange pub-
lished and enforced the ukase (proclamation by the tsar that had the force of
law) of Tsar Alexander I regarding the break in relations with England that
had transpired on 7 November 1807.9 From 11 November to 13 November,
49 ships managed to leave Riga; 41 of them were English.10 Most of them
carried goods (hemp, flax, linseed) purchased by English companies and
departed straight for the English ports. The ukase provided for creating a
special Liquidation Commission in Riga that was subject to the Liquidation
Commission of St Petersburg. The Commission consisted of the Riga military
governor, a town councillor, a court councillor, a guild alderman and two
local merchants.11 In March 1808 John Mitchell and William Cumming –
representatives chosen by the English – joined the Riga Commission.
