                                               Riga Export Trade, 1807–1812 249


of corn, timber and hempseeds underwent a steady crisis that lasted for
the duration of the Continental Blockade. Export of timber almost stopped
in 1808 and 1809. In other years it existed only due to the purchases of
a few countries: in 1810, Holland and Prussia and in 1811, Holland and
Sweden.
   On one hand, fluctuations in the prices of goods have not been studied
sufficiently so far. Provisional data indicates no fall in prices for some of the
principal export goods at Riga Customs. On the other hand, difficulties with
selling more expensive kinds of timber have been noted. For instance, due
to the large supply of spars, customers did not want to pay the price listed
by the merchants.
   Meanwhile, prices in Riga’s local market during the Continental Blockade
have barely been studied and cannot be analysed.25 It is clear that a general
increase in the price of corn and corn products in the local market took
place in 1805. It reached the highest point in the first half of 1808 after
which prices fell gradually. A similar increase of prices in the beginning of
the Continental Blockade can also be observed for other goods, like salted
fish and butter. The impact of the Continental Blockade on the local market
remains ambiguous. For example, salt experienced a considerable increase
in price; its price rose several times in 1808 compared to the six years before
the Continental Blockade.26 This was caused by the substantial drop in salt
imports, which was especially striking at the beginning of the Blockade.
Salt import returned to pre-Blockade levels only after 1812, as shown by
Table 14.6. The steps the Russian government took to provide the Baltic
region with salt and its attempts to step up production of salt locally had lit-
tle effect on the salt crisis in the Baltic. During the War of 1812, Riga’s mili-
tary government tried to prevent Riga salt from reaching Kurzeme, an area
occupied by Napoleon’s army. As a result, there was a shortage of salt, and
its price rose so high that common people could not afford it. Salt became
rare and valuable, an object for barter and begging.27
   In the local market, Riga’s principal export goods – hemp and flax – exper-
ienced a temporary fall in prices in the first half of 1808 – about one-fourth
compared to the average indicators of the previous years. This was due to
the fact that in 1808 supply to Riga of some sorts of flax and hemp remained
at the level of previous years, whereas the amount of exports fell consider-
ably. Relations between the local market and the Continental Blockade are
a matter for separate study since most of the export goods arrived in Riga
in transit from inner-Russian governments. Thus, price fluctuations in the
local market might not be related to the Continental Blockade. There are
some references available, for example the memoirs of a Kurzeme landlord,
Ulrich Schlippenbach, which indicate increased poverty in Kurzeme during
the trade ban.28 In 1810 the Kurzeme nobility turned to the government
with complaints about the damage caused by the export ban, but as of yet
there are no studies regarding this topic.
