                                                 Riga Export Trade, 1807–1812 253


commercial exchanges and relations. The problem of reliability, however,
dominated these discussions without a clear resolution. As in commerce,
the year 1808 was the hardest on the city. In 1809 income returned to the
same level it was before the Continental Blockade only to fall again in the
following years and see its lowest point during the War of 1812.40
   In 1811 declining city income due to the Continental Blockade definitely
contributed to and influenced the decision of the Riga municipality to hand
over the city fortifications and artillery to the supervision of the Russian state.
The War Ministry of Russia had been preparing for the war with Napoleon
since spring 1810 and military plans required securing the fortress defence
system. In accordance with the articles of the Accord of 1710 regulating the
bilateral relations between Riga and Russia, the city remained responsible for
the maintenance of the Riga fortress.41 During the Blockade, however, the
city increasingly considered maintaining the fortress a burden and turned to
the Emperor several times requesting that the state relieve Riga of this fiscal
liability. When preparing for the war with France, the War Ministry deemed
this request appropriate since it facilitated the organizing and execution of
the maintenance works. On 7 May 1811 Alexander I approved the Senate’s
decision to take over the Riga fortress and its artillery.42
   Illegal trade and smuggling represented another means to survive the
decline in commerce during the Blockade, even if it generated conflict with
the Russian state. Yet currently there is very little information regarding the
ways merchants tried to bypass the Continental Blockade. It is known that
Riga broke the rules of the Continental Blockade more often than other
ports of Russia because almost half of the ships and goods confiscated dur-
ing the Continental Blockade were confiscated in Riga. The new capital
tax also encouraged merchants to pursue illegal business.43 Knowing that
merchants were cheating in various ways, the government passed new
decrees in 1808. In April it forbade entrance in the Russian ports for those
ships from friendly states that had previously been to English ports even
if they only carried ballast. In addition, sailors that left Russian ports had
to confirm that they were not going to England.44 Only the ukase of May
1809 stipulated that every ship entering the port should be able to present
documents confirming the neutrality of the shipowner and crew and the
neutrality of the cargo owner.
   The negative influence of the 1810 regulations against neutral trade on
Riga’s export trade can also be noted. With the help of these regulations,
Russia tried to solve the imbalance of foreign trade. In fact, it deviated
from the Continental Blockade by trying to decrease import and increase
export.45 Although several bans on the export of goods were abolished, for
fiscal reasons the export duty was increased for flax, hemp, linseed, potash
and other goods.46 These polices impacted a great part of Riga’s export.
As a result, the amounts of flax, hemp and linseed oil exported in 1811
fell considerably in comparison with the few previous years. There was an
