254   Anita Čerpinska


insignificant increase only in the amounts of exported linseed for sowing
and corn. Riga faced double losses during the Continental System, a decline
in exports and, due to falling income, in public revenue.

End of the Continental Blockade

In June 1812, shortly before the beginning of the war between Russia
and Napoleon, the commander of the English squadron in the Baltic Sea,
Rear Admiral Thomas Byam Martin, contacted the Riga War Governor
Lieutenant General Magnus von Essen offering his help in fighting the
common enemy.47 A few days into the war several English ships stopped at
Riga to help arm gunboats for the defence of Daugava River in the envir-
ons of Riga.48 On 5 July Thomas Martin arrived in Riga to meet Essen. As
there were also English merchants in Riga, their talks concerned not only
military matters but also addressed the reinstatement of trade relations.
Thomas Martin was ready to provide convoy for ships going to England.
He prepared a special certificate that indicated the holders had rights to
take goods from Riga directly to England.49 Martin claimed that until 12
July no fewer than 100 ships had left Riga with corn, hemp and timber. It
is significant that this happened before 18 July, when the peace treaty with
England was concluded and reinstated trade relations, although it was not
ratified until 24 September.50 Since Russia and Britain remained officially at
war, this situation provoked resistance from the Russian customs and port
officers who did not want to let the ships leave Riga.51 Essen solved this
dilemma and ordered the officers not to delay the merchant ships. Only
on 16 August 1812 was the ukase ‘on restoring peace with England and
opening trade relations with it in line with the existing legislation’ issued,
which opened Russian ports for English ships. Hence, until that point,
ships from Riga went in the direction of London under the flags of other
countries. According to the register of outgoing ships, some ships went to
England only in the end of July, yet their numbers were low.52 Meanwhile,
in July there were a considerable number of ships heading to Gothenburg,
and it is very likely that they continued farther to England. In September
the Liquidation Commissions were eliminated and the sequester removed
from English property, so in October those once-sequestrated ships left Riga
for England.53 It should be noted that the English did not get back all the
sequestered timber. Part of it had been used for securing Riga’s defence, as
mentioned above. Part of it (about 100 spars and about 2000 logs and other
wood) had been kept in unsuitable conditions, and therefore decayed.54
   There are only a few cases in 1812 when English merchants had been
registered as exporters of goods. Still, this does not necessarily mean they
were not involved in export deals because foreigners often cooperated with
local large-scale merchants in Riga. Hence, it is difficult to determine the
