                                              Riga Export Trade, 1807–1812 247


the Continental Blockade, Russia experienced state-imposed restrictions on
bread export. It is significant that the price of corn in the Riga market did
not fall sharply because the territory of Latvia experienced several poor har-
vests during the Continental Blockade. Also, the country nobility preferred
to use part of the corn for distilling spirits; therefore, there was a shortage
of corn in the market.
   The timber trade was the most disrupted by the Continental Blockade,
but not only because of the English embargo. Contracts about the export
of timber were concluded several years in advance to accumulate a suf-
ficient amount of timber in the storehouses since deliveries by water and
road were not reliable and often late.20 Timber from the most distant
governments arrived in Riga no sooner than in the second year after their
harvest. Additional expenses in transit and storage could not be avoided,
so merchants often took loans to cover the expenses associated with the
timber trade. This investment usually paid for itself as timber brought great
profit. Due to loans, customs and transporting expenses, foreigners paid for
exported timber six times as much as the initial purchase price. For exam-
ple, in 1800, 100 spars cost 900 silver rubles when harvested but still in the
forest, yet they cost a foreign merchant 3390 silver rubles by the time they
arrived in Riga. With the existing trade restrictions, the big timber mer-
chants did not know how much timber they would be able to sell; therefore,
it was complicated to determine how much timber should be purchased.
Right after the beginning of the Continental Blockade there appeared a
surplus in timber and prices fell sharply. Due to the decline in shipping as
a result of the Blockade, the surplus of certain kinds of timber recurred also
in the following years.21
   The decrease in the export amounts of flax and hemp is also obvious
although not that considerable. This can be explained by the long tradi-
tion of flax and hemp export in Riga. Before and after the Continental
Blockade, Riga surpassed other Russian ports in the amount of exported
flax. Flax from Riga was superior in quantity and quality; it was reputed to
be the best flax exported from Russia. The constant demand for flax in Riga
permitted several governments (Vidzeme, Pskov and Smolensk) to specialize
in growing flax, and for many people in these regions, flax was the primary
source of their living. There was constant demand in the European market
for the relatively cheap Russian flax that this country could supply in great
amounts. ‘Who knows not the famous flax of Riga?’, exclaims Petri in his
description of Vidzeme.22 The principal port for hemp export remained St
Petersburg, but one-third of the total amount of hemp passed through Riga
where it was brought from more distant governments within inner Russia.
Hemp was also in constant demand in the European market because ships
needed hemp ropes and tows.
   When looking at the recipients of Riga’s export goods before and after the
Continental Blockade, as shown in Table 14.4, one can see that prior to the
