                         Consequences of the Continental System for Amsterdam 261


manifested itself practically in three main forms: unrest, including riots and
revolts; incitement, in oral, written and printed form; and ‘unwillingness’.
The last category covers people’s deliberate evasion of rules or of the require-
ments forced upon them by the government. In the Kingdom of Holland
‘unwillingness’ or evasion emerged as the primary form of protest against
the Continental System. Neutral trade was key to this approach and many
neutral ships were actually Dutch and reflagged by the Dutch merchants
and shipowners using false identity and registration papers easily obtained
in north Germany: Varel, Jever and Kniphausen. This semi-neutral ship-
ping under a foreign flag came to an abrupt end with the proclamation of
the Treaty of Fontainebleau in November 1807. In this Treaty, East Frisia
or Oost-Friesland was added to the Kingdom of Holland and this meant
that the above-mentioned East-Frisian enclaves lost their sovereignty. The
involvement of Denmark and Sweden in the war also denied the loopholes
of Danish and Swedish neutral flags for Dutch merchants, leaving only the
Americans as neutral transporters for the import of textiles and colonial
goods. Louis ordered the closure of Dutch harbours for all shipping by
decree in January 1808, which forced captains of American vessels to disem-
bark their cargoes near the coast at sea. Louis’s decree seriously hampered
the former lucrative American trade, and the number of American vessels
that arrived in the Kingdom of Holland dropped steadily in 1808.6 An angry
Napoleon torpedoed a half-hearted attempt of Louis to reopen his king-
dom to American ships in the beginning of 1809, and, as a consequence,
American traffic came to an almost complete standstill in that same year.
   The gradual disappearance of the neutral shipping was almost certainly
largely compensated by the growth of the illegal trade. Although sys-
tematic studies about the illicit trade in Holland remain unwritten, some
incidental evidence makes perfectly clear that the practice of smuggling
must have been enormous during the time of the Kingdom of Holland. The
Waddenzee, a shallow sea in the north, which was very difficult to control
because of the strong tides, remained an important smuggling route. This
‘Emden Circuit’ – the Waddenzee extends from Den Helder in Holland to
Esbjerg in Denmark and covers the northwest coast of Germany – became
the highway for English commodities and colonial goods to Holland.
Incidental figures show that in the end of 1809 more than 170 ships were
actively involved in this trade and that a few million pounds of coffee and
sugar and large quantities of dyewood and indigo could be easily imported
through this northern route in less than one month.7
   An additional consequence of the big money that could be earned by
smuggling and illegal communication was, of course, a staggering level of
corruption. Officials of all ranks were willing to facilitate the smuggling
against the payment of enormous bribes. As a result of the large-scale and
almost open support of many Dutch and French officials to help merchants
circumvent the Blockade, protest in the form of popular unrest against
