                         Consequences of the Continental System for Amsterdam 263


   The combined control of the military forces, the police and customs offi-
cials was successful in enforcing the Continental Blockade to a large extent.
Shipping and trade came to a complete standstill in 1811. Excluding some
fortresses on the Gold Coast in West Africa and the small isle of Dejima in
Japan, Holland had lost all its overseas possessions and strongholds, includ-
ing Dutch East Asia, which transported colonial goods to the mother coun-
try until 1810. Neutral ships, especially American vessels, had transported
those goods, primarily sugar and coffee, from East Asia. The downfall of
the international trade in 1811 was pervasive; Rotterdam shared the bleak
Amsterdam pattern and the customs office at the river Maas experienced a
complete breakdown of import and export activity.
   The disappearance of international trade was a deathblow for Dutch
industry, which was already in decline since the third quarter of the eight-
eenth century. The Blockade was particularly devastating for the industries
that were directly related to trade and shipping, especially that of ship-
building and all associated crafts such as sail-making, hemp production and
rope-making. Moreover, other labour-intensive industries and branches, like
the herring fisheries, were also in decay. The result was massive unemploy-
ment and a steep rise in poverty.
   The intensification of Imperial repression to enforce the Blockade after
July 1810 successfully suspended most of the smuggling and the illegal
transporting of passengers and correspondence from and to England.
Popular protest against the Continental System, however, shifted from mas-
sive evasion to open unrest. In this regard, it is telling that the first large-
scale revolt in Holland during the Incorporation took place in Amsterdam
on 20 September 1810 and was generated by harsh control on illegal imports
from England by customs officials.

Amsterdam and the Continental System

Amsterdam provides a very useful case study in exploring the broad impact
of the Continental System. To best understand the role of Amsterdam in
Dutch and European commerce, it is necessary to review the city’s develop-
ment throughout the eighteenth to the beginning of the nineteenth cen-
turies. Research on the Dutch Republic during the 1700s demonstrates that
instead of misery and decline, international trade expanded at least until the
outbreak of the Fourth Anglo–Dutch War in 1780.10 Nevertheless, the Dutch
Republic had lost its leading international political position already with the
Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, and England and France economically surpassed
the Republic in international shipping and trade in the 1730s. Amid its rela-
tive decline in comparison with its neighbours, the Dutch economy became
characterized by a concentration on trade in colonial products and the
growing importance of inland German markets. Within the Republic, the
economic gravity centred increasingly in Amsterdam, a process described as
‘internal contraction’ in Dutch historiography.11
