15
Significance and Consequences
of the Continental System for
Napoleonic Holland, Especially
for Amsterdam
Johan Joor



The Continental System represented an important era for Holland in the
Napoleonic period and for Dutch history generally. The founding of the
Kingdom of Holland in 1806 was an unmistakable part of Napoleon’s imper-
ial political, economic and military plans in the war against England, and
Louis’s successive fall as king in 1810 was a direct result of his incapacity to
meet the demands of his imperial brother in maintaining the Blockade. After
Louis’s abdication, Holland lost its independence completely and became a
part of the French Empire. During the period of annexation or ‘incorpora-
tion’, the ‘Dutch Departments’ were administered separately by a general
government under a French governor general. Furthermore, international
trade, the mainstay of the economy of the seventeenth- and eighteenth-
century Dutch Republic, came to a complete standstill as a result of the
Blockade. The subsequent decline in Dutch industry, large-scale impover-
ishment of the people and an unprecedented de-urbanization in western
Holland all illustrate the hardships wrought by the Napoleonic Blockade.
The impact of the Blockade was particularly intense for Amsterdam; it lost
its proud position as a leading international commercial and financial cen-
tre and transformed during the Napoleonic years into a modest trade and
commercial market of national and regional importance at best.
   Although studies on the Batavian Revolution in 1795 and following years
have grown in number, the Napoleonic Era spanning 1806 to 1813 remains
historically marginalized, if not forgotten. Despite its great importance in
Dutch history, the Continental System remains understudied in Holland.1 Few
modern studies on the Napoleonic period in Holland address the Continental
System. One of the most informative international studies on this subject
remains Simon Schama’s Patriots and Liberators, published in 1977.2
   Rich sources for detailed research into the Continental Blockade in
Holland seem available, but a systematic study still remains unwritten. This
chapter contributes to our understanding on this topic by concentrating on

                                      259
