260   Johan Joor


the case study of Amsterdam. The analysis of the Dutch capital will demon-
strate the consequences and impact of the Blockade on urban society. It also
explores merchant strategies to adapt to Imperial regulations and practices
as their traditional commercial livelihoods declined. The chapter closes with
some remarks about the long-term consequences of the Continental System
for Holland.

The Phases of the Continental System in Holland

Although the Kingdom of Holland emerged in June 1806 prior to the for-
mal proclamation of the Continental Blockade in the Berlin Decree on 21
November 1806, Louis Bonaparte’s appointment as king of Holland was
an indissoluble part of Napoleon’s greater project to construct a system of
dependent states following the War of the Third Coalition. Aside from these
political motives, Napoleon’s purpose for the founding of the Kingdom
of Holland was economic from the start. Following the Berlin Decree, the
Blockade became an over-dominant theme in the personal relationship
between the Bonaparte brothers and, consequently, in the relation between
Holland and France. Napoleon criticized Louis for his apparent unwilling-
ness to enforce the Blockade as he bitterly stated that Holland had turned
into a ‘province Anglais’.3
   Although Louis Napoleon remained mindful of Dutch traditions and
commercial interests, evidence of his permissive approach in evading the
Blockade exaggerated his reputation as an opponent to Napoleon. The
image of Louis as a stubborn and unwilling imperial partner who systemati-
cally obstructed the enforcement of the Continental Blockade to help the
Dutch against his brother’s tyranny has shaped national and international
historiography, but is historically inaccurate. As I have argued in my work,
Louis was in fact quite submissive to Napoleon’s blockade policy and,
indeed, seriously tried to enforce the Continental Blockade following the
proclamation of the Berlin Decree. First, he proclaimed a series of official
decrees and orders to enforce the Blockade in Holland during his reign.
Second, he established a network of different official services and organiza-
tions to control the execution of the Blockade and to prevent illegal com-
munication with England as much as possible. Some of these organizations
included Holland’s first centralized police force and a Dutch Customs Office
which was modelled on the French.4 If we take all of Louis’s measures into
consideration, it is clear that he made some serious attempts to meet his
brother’s demands in enforcing the Blockade. Nevertheless, it is also safe to
conclude that Louis appallingly failed in his attempts as he emphasized that
maintaining the Blockade in Holland was as difficult as ‘preventing the skin
from sweating’.5
   The proclamation of the Continental Blockade in 1806 generated inten-
sive social tensions from the start. Popular protest in Napoleonic Holland
