                                               Riga Export Trade, 1807–1812 255


real involvement of the English in export during the war. In 1813, however,
the Mitchell, Cumming, Renny and Hill companies resumed active flax and
hemp export at the very beginning of the sailing season.


Conclusion

Russia was part of the Continental Blockade for four full years. It intro-
duced the ban on trade with England at the end of 1807. In 1812 it actu-
ally dropped out of the Continental Blockade, reinstated trade relations
with England and concluded or prolonged agreements with Spain, Sweden
and certain German states. Aside from 1808 the value of Riga’s export did
not considerably fall during the Continental Blockade. It suffered much
less than the total amount of Russia’s exports. The city’s merchants that
specialized in export trade faced significant difficulties only in 1808 when
the Continental Blockade expanded to include not only England, but also
Sweden, and English warships blocked access to the Baltic ports.
   Although Riga’s treasury remained short of money, as very few ships
came to the port and very few goods were exported, only a few merchants
faced bankruptcy. Auxiliary workers as well as seasonal workers experienced
temporary employment problems. They might have had difficulties finding
work in 1808, but it was no longer a problem in 1809 when the move-
ment of goods recommenced, or in 1811 when hands were required by
the military department. The well-being of Riga’s citizens was less affected
by the Continental Blockade than by the fire of 23 July in 1812 when 782
buildings burnt down and 6882 people were left homeless and without any
belongings. The fire broke out after the military leaders ordered the burn-
ing of buildings around the fortress to make an open field for artillery fire.
Sloppy demolition work by the soldiers, gusty winds and the work of arson-
ists and plunderers led to the spread of an uncontrollable fire. At that time
Riga expected an attack from Napoleon’s army. Though the siege never took
place, the fire that emerged from the preparation for the attack changed
the lives of many people and left a permanent imprint in the history of
Riga. The above events therefore remain inseparable from the Continental
Blockade because Alexander’s rejection of Napoleon’s System was one of the
key reasons for the War of 1812.
   It is obvious that some of the factors in evolving commercial patterns and
declining trade cannot be attributed solely to the Continental Blockade.
Preparation for the war also hindered the normal exchange of goods. For
example, in 1811 the construction of widespread fortification works in Riga
required the demolition of several buildings, storehouses included. For security
reasons, engineers forbade the merchants to keep their goods by the Daugava
River. Many storehouses and trading places were relocated further from the for-
tifications into the suburbs, which was inconvenient and disadvantageous for
