262   Johan Joor


commercial restrictions was very rare under Louis. Officials reported some
cases of obvious friction between villagers and local officers in some coastal
villages, but only a few people were involved in those scuffles.
   In contrast to the proclamation of the Kingdom of Holland, Napoleon’s
decision to annex the kingdom in 1810 was strongly related to the
Continental System and especially to Napoleon’s new policies towards the
Blockade. The Treaty of Paris between Napoleon and Louis of 16 March
1810, in which France seized the area of Louis’s kingdom below the river
Rhine, revealed Napoleon’s blockade plans openly. Besides the secession of
the departments of Brabant and Zeeland in the south and impossible mili-
tary demands, the tractate provided a French Military Observation Corps
and an unlimited number of French customs officials for Louis’s rump
kingdom in order to strictly enforce the Continental System in the cities
and around the mouths of all rivers in Holland. Napoleon fully deployed
the French corps d’Observation in May 1810, which quickly turned into an
Occupation Corps within the kingdom. Louis, abandoned and terrorized
by his brother, abdicated as king of Holland and fled to Austria on 3 July
1810.
   A few days after Louis’s flight Napoleon annexed Holland with the Decree
of Rambouillet, which had been drafted in advance. This decree ended
Dutch independence in a few lines by uniting Holland and the Empire in
the first article. The following 12 articles concerned matters of administra-
tion, the arrival of the former third consul, Charles François Lebrun as
Napoleon’s lieutenant general and, above all, public finances. These articles
included explicit details about the unification of the Dutch and French
customs, which would be reorganized under the French Directeur-général
des Douanes. The reduction of the interest of the national debt to one-third
was also proclaimed, as was the extra payment of 50 per cent of the worth
of their goods by all merchants who were trading in colonial products. As a
compensation for the loss of Dutch independence, Amsterdam became the
‘third city’ – after Paris and Rome – of the Empire.8
   During the Incorporation, the French regime under Lebrun was far more
suppressive than that of Louis. Napoleon’s policy towards the enforcement
of the Continental System also fundamentally changed with several decrees
during the summer and autumn of 1810, when he introduced a system of
new tariffs, suppression and licensed shipping for a selective trade with
England, which primarily and selectively supported French interests. From
the annexation onwards, Napoleon ordered a strict enforcement of the
Blockade by the military and the army of customs officials stationed in
the major cities and near the coasts to protect licensed French interests. A
grim system of repression was established, including a decree proclaimed
on 24 January 1811 that made all sailors and fishermen in Holland who
sustained communication with England subject to the terror of a Military
Commission. In addition, a far more repressive French police system and
secret police were introduced in Holland in early 1811.9
