                         Consequences of the Continental System for Amsterdam 271


Accommodation could take many forms. For example, John Williams Hope
sold his estate, Welgelegen near Haarlem, to King Louis for 300,000 guilders
and a royal licence in order to import two ship cargoes of coffee.42 This
transaction demonstrates Hope’s involvement in semi-legal imports of colo-
nial products and Louis’s willingness to open the blockade if it was in his
own interest.
   In fact, a case study of Hope & Co. represents model examples of accom-
modation and liquidation as merchant strategies during the Napoleonic
Era. Originally from Scotland, the Hope family commenced business in
Amsterdam in 1722. As the firm gradually expanded, brothers Thomas and
Adrian Hope emerged by 1734 as well-respected Amsterdam merchants and
important advisers to the Dutch stadholder William IV of Orange. The break-
through of the family Hope as leading merchant bankers came after 1762
with the founding of Hope & Co. and the inclusion of Boston-born Henry
Hope, nephew of Thomas and Adrian. Although Hope & Co. continued to
be active in the commodity trade and the import and export of colonial
goods, its fortune was primarily boosted by an expansion of its financial
services, especially the origination of foreign loans. In 1768 the firm issued a
spectacular loan of 750,000 guilders on behalf of Sweden. By then Hope & Co.
had already surpassed the merchant houses of Pels and of Clifford, which
had been the leading financial firms in Amsterdam in foregoing years. In the
following 25 years Hope & Co. strengthened its position on the Amsterdam
stock exchange and capital market further, and the firm became one of the
most powerful merchant bankers of Europe, if not of the world. Between
1788 and 1793 Hope & Co. issued successfully 18 foreign loans on behalf of
Russia for a total amount of 53.5 million guilders. The profits of the origina-
tion of the Russian loans pushed the annual turnover of Hope & Co. to an
all-time high of 76 million guilders in 1792.43
   The outbreak of the Revolutionary Wars made Henry Hope, an outspoken
supporter of the party of the stadholder and of the English, move to London
in 1794. Henry was accompanied by the above-mentioned John Williams
Hope, who was born as John Williams but who had married Henry’s niece
and successively had become a partner in the firm, after which he added
Hope to his surname. Pierre César Labouchère, a brilliant businessman
and diplomat, ran the firm from 1793 and soon followed them. The firm
in Amsterdam was left under the supervision of a clerk. Payments by the
company were redirected to London where the Hopes intensified their rela-
tions with the Barings, and the two firms started to explore new land and
business projects in the United States. Labouchère sealed relations between
Hope and Barings, even matrimonially by wedding Dorothea Barings, the
daughter of Sir Francis.
   In November 1802 Hope & Co. was re-established in Amsterdam. After
several delays, Labouchère and John Williams moved back to Holland.
Henry Hope chose to remain in London. That same year the Hope Company
