270   Johan Joor


migrated to the small village of Stickhausen in East Frisia, which became a
centre for illicit northern European trade around 1809.36
   Diversification and specialization were, of course, merchant strategies that
were also used in ordinary times. Diversification could be obtained by exten-
sion of the merchandise and commercial services and by the exploration
of new geographical markets. Bienfait & Son, to give one example, became
actively involved in the tea trade in addition to the trade in wines, although
this process was already started in 1801.37 Bienfait & Son was also one of the
leading firms of Amsterdam who wanted to open up new markets, especially
by strengthening trade with the Levant in 1810.38
   Contrary to diversification, specialization as a business strategy sought
to narrow, in a selective way, products and services. The firm of Pieter &
Christiaan van Eeghen, already very active on the American market in the
last two or three decades of the eighteenth century, focused even more
strongly on the United States during the Napoleonic period, especially on
the import of rice and tobacco. The firm’s American trade reached record
heights in 1807, though the actual shipping of goods was completely
undertaken by American shipowners and vessels.39 Yet, by 1808 and 1809
American trade faltered, and collapsed completely in 1810.
   The strategy of substitution was closely connected to the Continental
System as trade and industry were in decline. The absence of imports, how-
ever, also offered new economic and commercial opportunities to a limited
number of economic branches. This was especially the case for the cultiva-
tion and processing of crops, which were found to be useful or tolerable
substitutes for colonial goods. For example, inland tobacco, chicory (for
coffee) and, initially less successful in Holland, beet sugar represented new
industries. Moreover, some enterprises benefitted from protective policies,
like wool manufacturers and textile workers in the eastern part of Holland.40
Unfortunately, quantitative data about the production and distribution of
substitutes, as well as specifics regarding the involvement of Amsterdam
merchants in this relatively new branch of trade are lacking.
   New forms of transport, another form of substitution (namely the shift
from maritime shipping to land transport), represented an important mer-
chant survival strategy. Despite microeconomic data about this shift in
transport for Amsterdam merchants, some reports indicate that import and
export over land in Holland were strongly rising. According to the Dutch
economic historian Brugmans, the Blockade structurally reframed Dutch
international trade by making the land route to Germany and France the
most important, if not the only significant, international trading route dur-
ing the Napoleonic years.41
   As addressed above and in other chapters in this volume, strategies of
evasion that could be combined with corruption and protest remained the
most obvious responses to merchant frustration with commercial restric-
tions. What follows is an account of accommodation and liquidation.
