                         Consequences of the Continental System for Amsterdam 273


However, from a personal angle, a voluntary dissolution of a firm and
retirement of business could be economically preferable to the continua-
tion of a losing enterprise. Several other distinguished firms also liquidated
after 1806, like Hogguer in 1808. Many Amsterdam merchants, however,
never had the choice to retire voluntary as they confronted bankruptcy.
Bankruptcies among merchants and merchant houses grew in number
during the Napoleonic years and some were very spectacular, like the bank-
ruptcy of De Smeth in December 1810, further proof of the economic dis-
tress caused by the Continental Blockade.46
   For Hope & Co., as a final remark, the dissolution of the firm in September
1813 appeared not to be the final act. Alexander Barings continued the firm’s
name, more or less as a prestigious façade to use as a front for a new firm.
The opening of the renewed firm, absent personal and commercial ties with
the Hope family, took place after the Napoleonic period. The new Hope &
Co., however, was no longer the prestigious and international leading firm
the former Hope & Co. had been in the years before 1806. London, with
the star of Rothschild sparkling, had surpassed Amsterdam in international
financial services. Amsterdam had turned into a city of demographically
mediocre European proportions, the commercial and financial capacity of
this former ‘Third City’ of the Empire devastated by the Continental System.

Conclusion

The Continental System was of major importance for Holland in the
Napoleonic period. The enforcement of the Blockade propelled Napoleonic
policies between 1806 and 1813 as well as the popular protest against it. The
Continental Blockade was particularly devastating for Amsterdam. Socially
and economically, the city was wretched by a total absence of trade, and a
large part of the population emerged dependent on poor relief. The reaction
of the Amsterdam merchants to the hostile commercial conditions was var-
ied. Merchants attempted a range of strategies to stay afloat amid economic
warfare. A special case is the firm Hope & Co., which was probably the most
important European banking company from the middle of the 1700s until
1806. As a result of the strict enforcement of the Continental System, all
profitable prospects faded away after 1810, resulting in the dissolution of
the firm in September 1813.
  Besides short-term effects, some long-term influences of the Continental
System can also be determined. Foreign trade, which was the economic
mainstay during the Dutch Republic, was fundamentally reshaped during
the Napoleonic period. Transportation over land replaced ocean-going and
coastal transport, and the transit trade between Germany and France became
increasingly significant and emerged as a substitute for the traditional
Atlantic and Asiatic sea trade. Moreover, the Continental System acted as
a catalyst in the process of economic reorientation, in which agriculture
