                         Consequences of the Continental System for Amsterdam 269


cent on the list were rentiers. According to Diderot, who had visited Holland
in 1773, merchants in Amsterdam were not considered ‘wealthy’ unless they
possessed more than one million guilders.33 With this almost iconic French
stereotype in mind, Napoleon found it genuinely hard to believe that mer-
chants in Amsterdam also experienced serious impoverishment after 1806.
He repeatedly pressed Louis and, successively, even more, Lebrun to show
no compassion to the Dutch merchants and their complaints as he sought
to squeeze this class of society financially from the first day of the annexa-
tion. As we have seen, the reduction of the interest of the national debt to
one-third and the extra payment of 50 per cent of the worth of their goods
by all merchants in colonial products were an integrated part of the Decree
of Rambouillet of July 1810. Within this framework, Lebrun’s policy was
more restrained. He continued to support merchants who petitioned the
Emperor in search of help and redress, and, unlike Napoleon, he was con-
vinced that a grim and genuine poverty was hidden behind the trimmed
façades of many canal houses.34

Merchant Strategies for Survival

The reaction of the merchants of Amsterdam on the hostile commercial
conditions was varied. Personally, people started to eat into their savings.
Professionals explored both traditional and new escape routes for com-
merce. Although a systematic study on this topic remains as yet unwritten,
research into the available case studies about Dutch merchant houses indi-
cates that at least seven merchant strategies, or types of strategies, may be
distinguished in order to overcome the economic barriers compounded by
the Blockade. Most of the time, merchants did not opt for one strategy, but
for a combination. Moreover, strategies could overlap, and within one type
of strategy, sub-strategies could occur. These seven main strategies include:
redirection, diversification, specialization, substitution, evasion, accommo-
dation and liquidation.
  In the case of redirection, the merchant continued his ongoing trade
in the same goods or commodities, but he redirected his transport routes.
Bienfait & Son, an Amsterdam merchant house that specialized in the trade
of French wines directly from Bordeaux prior to 1806, redirected the ship-
ments first to Altona before arriving in Amsterdam. Sometimes a ship with
the firm’s cargo was arrested at sea by the British, which resulted in a forced
stopover in Plymouth, as happened in 1809.35 In addition, merchants could
shift their usual supply and stockpiling activities to other neutral or safer
geographical places and areas. The northern European supply market for
English textiles and colonial goods became geographically very dynamic in
the wake of the Wars of the Third Coalition in 1805 and the defeat of Prussia
in 1806. It shifted from Hamburg to Emden, successively to Tönning, to
Altona and to other places in Denmark and even in Norway and was finally
