272   Johan Joor


split into Hope & Co. in Amsterdam and Henry Hope & Co. in London.
Labouchère was only offered a limited partnership. In practice, however, he
became the moving force of Hope & Co. in Amsterdam.
   Hope & Co. retained its image of a strong ‘Anglo-Orange’ merchant house
during the Napoleonic years, and, in this respect, it is remarkable that the
company nevertheless became of pivotal importance in Napoleonic finan-
cial politics. In 1804 the combination of Hope and Baring had provided
for a loan of more than 11 million dollars to settle the deal at the request
of France and the United States for the Louisiana Purchase. Following that
successful transaction, Napoleon invited Hope & Co. to complete a compli-
cated financial transaction regarding the encashment of Spanish payments
to France with Mexican silver as a guarantee in 1807.
   The company’s actions on behalf of Napoleon did not escape the atten-
tion of the Emperor’s relatives, to start with King Louis, who pressed Hope
& Co. to place a loan for the Kingdom of Holland of 40 million guilders in
1807. Next in the imperial family, Joseph approached the house for a loan
of three million guilders in May of the same year.44 In the meantime, Hope
& Co. continued its banking activities for Russia when it approached the
company for a new loan in 1808.
   The banking activities of Hope & Co. demonstrate well the firm’s remark-
able flexibility and, despite its Anglo-Orange sympathies, its willingness
and capacity to accommodate the new political and economic reality in
Napoleonic Europe. Without question, business became political in the
survival strategy of Hope & Co. In this respect, it is also noteworthy that
Labouchère was a personal friend of Talleyrand and that he was on very
good terms with many other high-placed French officials.
   The Incorporation of Holland in the French Empire turned out to be a
turning point in the history of Hope & Co. Profitable prospects quickly
faded and, much to the distress of the industrious Labouchère, the partners
in London put Hope & Co. on the back-burner by cutting its budget to a
minimum after July 1810. The next blow was the death of Henry Hope in
February 1811, after which John Williams Hope became obsessed with a
liquidation of Hope & Co. Labouchère was forced to retire at the end of that
year. The death of John Williams Hope accelerated the process of liquidation
in February 1813. Within five months a financial arrangement was con-
cluded between John’s widow and the two remaining partners of the Hope
family in London, Thomas and Henry Philip, two grandsons of the former
Amsterdam merchant Thomas Hope. This arrangement heralded the com-
plete dissolution of the partnership. On 3 September 1813 everything
related to Henry Hope & Co. and Hope & Co. was transferred to Alexander
Baring.45
   The developments of Hope & Co. after 1810 also make this house a note-
worthy example of the final merchant strategy of liquidation. As a means
to survive a crisis, the liquidation of assets is uncertain and disputable.
