Foreword to the Series
Rafe Blaufarb, Alan Forrest and Karen Hagemann




The century from 1750 to 1850 was a seminal period of change, not
just in Europe but across the globe. The political landscape was trans-
formed by a series of revolutions fought in the name of liberty –
most notably in America and France, of course, but elsewhere, too: in
Geneva and the Netherlands during the eighteenth century and across
much of mainland Europe by 1848. Nor was such change conﬁned
to the European world. New ideas of freedom, equality and human
rights were carried to the furthest outposts of empire, to Egypt, India
and the Caribbean, which saw the creation in 1801 of the ﬁrst black
republic in Haiti, the former French colony of Saint-Domingue. And
in the early part of the nineteenth century they continued to inspire
anti-colonial and liberation movements throughout Central and Latin
America.
   If political and social institutions were transformed by revolution in
these years, so, too, was warfare. During the quarter-century of the Rev-
olutionary and Napoleonic Wars, in particular, Europe was faced with
the prospect of ‘total’ war, on a scale unprecedented before the twen-
tieth century. Military hardware, it is true, evolved only gradually, and
battles were not necessarily any bloodier than they had been during the
Seven Years War. But in other ways these can legitimately be described as
the ﬁrst modern wars, fought by mass armies mobilized by national and
patriotic propaganda, leading to the displacement of millions of people
throughout Europe and beyond, as soldiers, prisoners of war, civilians
and refugees. For those who lived through the period these wars would
be a formative experience that shaped the ambitions and the identities
of a generation.
   The aims of the series are necessarily ambitious. In its various vol-
umes, whether single-authored monographs or themed collections, it
seeks to extend the scope of more traditional historiography. It will
study warfare during this formative century not just in Europe, but in
the Americas, in colonial societies, and across the world. It will anal-
yse the construction of identities and power relations by integrating
the principal categories of difference, most notably class and religion,
generation and gender, race and ethnicity. It will adopt a multi-faceted

                                   vii
