2   Nations in Arms, People at War


serve in distant countries where they encountered unknown peoples,
languages and customs, crossing new borders in more than one sense of
that word. Both soldiers and civilians experienced a further brutalization
of warfare, with war casualties rising to previously unheard-of levels.
Yet, because of their character as ‘national wars’, these conﬂicts were
closely intertwined with the process of political and cultural nation-
building in Europe. The monarchies of Prussia, Russia and Spain, as well
as the nation-states of France and Britain, appealed to national senti-
ment to mobilize not only men for military service, but also civilian
populations, men and women alike. They needed civilian support to
provide equipment for armies, militias and volunteers, medical services
for sick and wounded soldiers and war charities for invalids, widows
and orphans. Women’s scope for action steadily expanded, since they
often became solely responsible for supporting their families and carry-
ing on the businesses of their soldier-husbands and were entrusted with
wartime nursing and relief work.4

People at war

People were affected differently according to their circumstances – as
soldiers and civilians, young and old, literate and illiterate, men and
women, Protestants and Catholics, merchants and peasants. But few
remained unaffected over nearly a quarter of a century of conﬂict; that,
rather than any novelty in strategy or military hardware, is the distinc-
tive quality of these wars. They did not produce a new kind of warfare,
in the way that the First World War would do, or assume new tactics
that would qualify as a military revolution. Many of the individual bat-
tles were no more ferocious than those of the Seven Years War, and, like
the wars of the eighteenth century, they still belonged to the age of men,
rather than of machines and technology.5 But because they involved so
many people for so long and, at least in some areas of Europe, made a
permanent contribution to the creation of regional and national iden-
tities, it is possible to see in these wars something new and formative,
something that can be said to have had the attributes of a ﬁrst ‘world
war’ or as David Bell recently called them of a ‘total war’.6
   The Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars provide a rare insight into
the nature and variety of wartime experience in a period of transition
from early modern to modern warfare. Armies were much larger than
before, and they contained men from a far wider range of social back-
grounds, including the sons of the professional and mercantile classes.
Many more soldiers could write than in previous wars, and more were
