xii Notes on Contributors


(Durham, 1990); Napoleon’s Men: The Soldiers of the Revolution and
Empire (London, 2002); Paris, the Provinces and the French Revolution
(London, 2004); co-authored with Jean-Paul Bertaud and Annie Jourdan,
Napoleon, le monde et les Anglais (Napoleon, the World and the English)
(London, 2004). With Philip Dwyer, he recently edited a collection of
essays for Palgrave on Napoleon and his Empire (London, 2007).

Karen Hagemann is James G. Kenan Distinguished Professor of His-
tory at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Her research
focuses on the history of Germany and Europe from the eighteenth
through twentieth centuries, and women’s and gender history, in par-
ticular the history of welfare states, labour culture and women’s move-
ments, as well as the history of the nation, the military and war.
She currently directs the British-German research project ‘Nations, Bor-
ders, Identities: The Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars in European
Experience and Memory’, funded by the Arts and Humanities Research
Council and the German Research Foundation. Her most recent books
include Gendered Nations: Nationalisms and Gender Order in the Long
Nineteenth Century, co-edited with Ida Blom, Catherine Hall (Oxford,
2000); Home/Front: Military and Gender in 20th Century Germany,
co-edited with Stefanie Schüler-Springorum (Oxford, 2002); ‘Mannlicher
Muth und Teutsche Ehre’: Nation, Militär und Geschlecht zur Zeit der Anti-
napoleonischen Kriege Preußens (Manly Valour and German Honour:
Nation, Military and Gender in Prussia during the Period of the Anti-
Napoleonic Wars) (Paderborn, 2002); Masculinities in Politics and War:
Gendering Modern History, co-edited with Stefan Dudink and John Tosh
(Manchester, 2004); Militärische Erinnerungskultur. Soldaten im Spiegel von
Biographien, Memoiren and Selbstzeugnissen (Military Memory Culture:
Soldiers in the Mirror of Autobiographical Documents), co-edited with
Michael Epkenhans and Stig Förster (Paderborn, 2006).

David Hopkin is Fellow in Modern History at the Hertford College at
the University of Oxford. His current research focuses on oral culture
in nineteenth-century France (often with a military or maritime twist),
and, in collaboration with Breton colleagues, a history of the British
raids on Brittany in the Seven Years’ War. Recent publications include
Soldier and Peasant in French Popular Culture, 1766–1870 (Woodbridge:
New York, 2002); ‘Female Soldiers and the Battle of the Sexes in
France: The Mobilisation of a Folk Motif’, History Workshop Journal
56(2003): 78–104; ‘Sieges, Seduction and Sacriﬁce in Revolutionary War:
The “Virgins of Verdun”, 1792’, European History Quarterly 37: 4 (2007)
