Notes on Contributors

Katherine Aaslestad is an Associate Professor in the Department of
History at the West Virginia University. Her main research interests are
modern German and European history, especially political culture, the
experience and memory of war, and gender. Recent publications include
Place and Politics: Local Identity, Civic Culture, and German Nationalism
in North Germany during the Revolutionary Era (Leiden, 2005); chapters
in Patriotism, Cosmopolitanism, and National Culture: Public Culture in
Hamburg, 1700–1933, ed. Peter Uwe Hohendahl (Amsterdam, 2003), and
Gender in Transition: Breaks, and Continuities in German-Speaking Europe,
1750–1830, eds Marion Gray and Ulrike Gleixner (Michigan, 2006); and
articles in Central European History and European History Quarterly. With
Karen Hagemann, she was guest editor of a special issue of the journal
Central European History 39: 4 (2006): ‘New Perspectives on the Period of
the Anti-Napoleonic Wars, 1806–1815’.

Horst Carl is Professor of Modern History at the Justus-Liebig University
of Giessen. His research focuses on early modern Central European his-
tory, particularly military, social and cultural history. He was a member
of the research group on ‘Experiences of War’, funded by the German
Research Foundation and afﬁliated with the University of Tübingen,
and is now working with the research group on ‘Memory Cultures’ at
the University of Giessen. His own project is on ‘Experiences of War
and Religion in the Netherlands, Belgium and the Rhineland, 1792–
1815’. His publications include Der Schwäbische Bund 1488–1534. Land-
frieden und Genossenschaft im Übergang vom Spätmittelalter zur Reformation
(The Swabian League 1488–1534) (Leinfelden, 2000); Die Erfahrung des
Krieges. Erfahrungsgeschichtliche Perspektiven von der Französischen Revo-
lution bis zum Zweiten Weltkrieg (The Experiences of War) (Paderborn,
2001), co-edited with Nicolas Buschmann; Kriegsniederlagen. Erfahrungen
und Erinnerungen (Military Defeats. Experiences and Memories) (Berlin,
2004), co-edited with Hans-Henning Kortüm, Dieter Langewiesche and
Friedrich Lenge.

John Cookson recently retired from the School of History at the Uni-
versity of Canterbury, New Zealand, and is Adjunct-Professor there.
He continues to research in British (including Scottish and Irish)

                                    x
