8   Nations in Arms, People at War


closely-deﬁned public; the nature of the correspondence shaped the
narrative as much as did the time of writing and the distance in time
between the experienced event and the writing of the record. Autobio-
graphical documents like diaries produced in the immediate aftermath
of an event might be closer to the contemporary experience but they are
as much inﬂuenced by the collective memory of earlier events and by
time-speciﬁc discourses as are memoirs, which were often produced 20
or 30 years later.30
   On the other hand, because these accounts are time-speciﬁc and born
of particular, often unique circumstances, there is a need to historicize
and differentiate war experiences and perceptions much more radically
than has often been done in the past. People did not write in a void; and
neither is their writing free from the dominant discourses and cultural
constraints of their day. This implies that we must not read them in a
literary void, but quite consciously analyse the norms and paradigms of
the moment, the structural conditions that pertained to a given place
and time, with their dominant discourses and contesting voices. In
short, the writings have to be supplied with a context, and must be
treated as the writings of speciﬁc individuals and groups, produced in a
particular historical situation that may help explain their verbal, visual
and practical expressions. Experiences can be as diverse as the individu-
als who live them, and they can be tantalizingly difﬁcult to deﬁne with
accuracy.
   To take account of the sheer diversity of civilian and military experi-
ence during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, it is important to
focus on a range of circumstances, which help to nuance their writings.
We must be aware of the kind of army the population had to deal with,
the range of military operations in the ﬁeld, and the forms of warfare
that were practised. We have to understand the economic and social
situation of a region or community that was affected by war or by the
passage of an army, since not all a people’s ills had their origins in the
war itself. We must look at the political traditions and structures of the
area in question, the form of government, and the political assump-
tions that stemmed from it. Again, it is important to have some grasp
of the underlying belief systems and patterns of perception shared by
contemporaries, and to appreciate the inﬂuence of religion and of polit-
ical propaganda. And, of course, we must realize that opinions, and
the expression of these opinions, will reﬂect other social realities, most
notably the social status, generation, gender, confessional faith and eth-
nic background of the writer, for all these are circumstances which affect
expectation and help to explain the issues that are highlighted and the
