                             Alan Forrest, Karen Hagemann and Jane Rendall   11


cannot know the degree of emotion, the enthusiasm or fear, the extent
of human affection or of a sense of loss. We cannot, from letters and
diaries, however immediate and close to the events described, measure
those intangible elements – the willingness of the writer to tell all, fear of
the censor and of possible reprisals for rash revelations, a desire to please
or a preparedness to shock – which could determine what was written
and what was omitted. We cannot know the depths of affection between
a young soldier and his parents: did a lack of detail or a short, formulaic
letter mean that he felt little appetite for writing, or that he was too busy
with army duties, or that he simply struggled to transfer words to paper?
Again, what is written on the spur of the moment may be regretted
the next day, or the arrival of the postman may have meant that there
was time for only the sparsest of descriptions. In the uncertain physi-
cal and psychological world of war, there are so many imponderables,
with the consequence that even the most immediate and apparently
spontaneous of ego-documents have to be read with care.
   This leaves us with a rather different view of experience, or at least of
its expression in contemporary sources. If the recording of experience
is seen as a process, as the bit-by-bit construction of a satisfactory nar-
rative, then we can take account both of what is said in the immediate
aftermath of an event – a battle, or the siege of a town, or the passage
through a village of an enemy force – and the more measured account
of the same event that can be found in later writing, in the journal or
diary written up days later, or in the memoir or the collection of letters
edited for subsequent publication. The latter documents have no claim
to immediacy, of course; but they can compensate for that by what they
provide in coherence and the product of reﬂection. Memoirs, far more
than letters to relatives or the often sketchy lists of marches and des-
tinations that obsess the writers of military diaries, lend themselves to
the treatment of broader issues – the cause for which a man is ﬁghting,
questions of tactics and leadership, the quality of the enemy army, the
state of morale and military motivation, the landscape through which
he passes, even in some cases some thoughts on politics, ideology or
religious faith. And if some memoirs were put together decades after
the events described, others were written soon after the war was over,
while events remained fresh in the writer’s mind. Of course they do not
describe immediately the experience of war; that experience has been
mulled over and reconsidered, fermented and matured. Sometimes, as
in all wars, it has caused the writer agony and torment to recall and
make sense of what he had done. The closer in time it is to the events
it describes, the more clearly it can be equated with that experience;
