4   Nations in Arms, People at War


Tyrol, a heightened sense of patriotic or even of national identiﬁcation.
The wars were therefore indissolubly linked both with the changing
meaning of citizenship and with ideas of national belonging. Nev-
ertheless, although the terms ‘citizen’, citoyen and Bürger/Staatsbürger
carried a powerful rhetorical charge, across much of Europe their con-
crete meanings as well as their political, legal and social implications,
and the boundaries they drew between citizens, non-citizens and aliens,
remained deeply unclear. This was a world in which the membership of
a nation was simply one of a number of possible identities, including
the membership of an estate, the freedom of a town, and the privileges
of members of a guild.13
   A further suggestion has been that this period saw an increasingly
sharp separation between soldiers and civilians across Europe, and that
it was in these years that the idea of the ‘military’ as a self-contained
world – professional, introspective, with its own values and bonds – took
shape.14 Long years of war meant that young men grew old in the army,
separated from their families and their communities, and increasingly
cut off from the everyday world of civil society. In France the growth of a
discrete military culture helped to shape Napoleon’s coup d’état of 1799.
In Great Britain, Prussia and many other parts of Europe, the building
of barracks – ﬁrst for soldiers with families, and only later for single
soldiers – created physical barriers between the military and the civilian
population. Initially the barracks did include a certain number of wives
and children, who were deﬁned by most early modern army laws and
regulations as members of the army, ‘on the strength’ and subject to
military discipline. But this situation proved impossible to sustain. The
large number of soldiers in the new conscript armies could not be bil-
leted with their families in the houses of civilians, which had been the
standard practice in earlier standing armies. Recruits were increasingly
housed in barracks, apart from ‘civilian’ society. At the same time, army
leaders tried to exclude soldiers’ wives and children from any role in
military life. Soldiers’ wives lost their legal status as part of the army and
only a very few were still allowed to live with their husbands in their bar-
racks or quarters. Army leaders also tried to make dramatic reductions
in the number of camp followers. Taken together, these changes con-
tributed to the professionalization and masculinization of armies across
Europe.15
   In the eighteenth century there was no word, in English or French,
for ‘civilian’; those who played no part in army life were not identi-
ﬁed as a discrete category. In both languages the term then meant a
practitioner or student of civil law. However, the word ‘civilian’ was
