12   Nations in Arms, People at War


but all memoirs, even those written decades later, have this in common,
that they are written by those who took part in the events and who seek
to make sense of these events for their own satisfaction.33 The writer is
still an actor, whether a soldier or an ofﬁcer reminiscing about his war,
or a priest or a village schoolteacher describing the impact of war on
his community. The memoir, seen from this perspective, can be said to
constitute the last building brick in the construction of experience.


Revisiting the history of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic
wars

The essays in this volume reconstruct the wartime experiences of men
and women in Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Poland and the
Netherlands in a variety of different ways, drawing on a wide range
of personal documents and archival sources. Some position themselves
close to the moment of action, drawing heavily on letters and contem-
porary accounts to approach as closely as possible to the events they
describe: such is the case, for instance, with Horst Carl’s analysis of
the role of religion in Napoleon’s armies, John Cookson’s discussion
of the relationships that developed between British ofﬁcers and men,
or Catriona Kennedy’s analysis of women’s emotions behind the lines
at Waterloo. Others look to memoirs and later writings to help offer a
more reﬂective overview of wartime experience. Jarosław Czubaty uses
the memoirs and historical writings to expose the different meanings
that have been attached to the service of Polish ofﬁcers in these wars,
while Johan Joor uses both contemporary and later sources to recon-
struct popular protest in the Netherlands during the war years and to
relate it to popular notions of a moral economy. In every case the evi-
dence is used sensitively, with due regard to the context that produced
it and to the particular contribution it can make to the reconstruction
of the war years.
   Although they are organized into three sections relating to soldiers,
civilians and citizens, all the essays suggest the permeability of these
still very opaque categories. All counsel a caution that is born of close
attention to language, political context, and social, religious and cultural
speciﬁcities. In doing so, they demonstrate how speciﬁc contexts shaped
wartime experiences and inﬂuenced sharpening perceptions of identity,
among civilians as well as among the soldiers themselves.
   Some essays note the popular and literary paradigms which male and
female observers and participants might use to reconstruct their own
experiences. Thus David Hopkin, in his discussion of the role of female
