10   Nations in Arms, People at War


books – it is surely important to understand the constraints of class and
gender, and to accept what subjects were deemed appropriate for discus-
sion in polite society of the day. The silences can be as illuminating as
what is actually said. These documents come with their cultural baggage,
and with a considerable weight of foreknowledge and expectation. Thus
a soldier who had already experienced combat, or had known life in
previous campaigns, would often spice his account of the present with
assumptions gleaned from the past, assumptions which helped form
his understanding of the drama he was living through. In other words,
experiences are not static; they stand, as Horst Carl has expressed it, ‘in a
changeable socio-cultural context of meaning’ which makes them very
difﬁcult for the historian to capture at any ﬁxed moment.31
   According to this view, experience must be seen as a process, where
the most immediate records form an important but not unique part.
Reality must be seen as a social construction, and, like individual expe-
rience, as a construction that is in a constant process of manufacture.
Previous experience, whether of life before the campaign began or of
other battles, lived or related, feeds into their understanding of the
current war and helps determine current actions, just as what they
live through in the army affects their behaviour and assumptions once
they return to civil society. Some of these assumptions may be purely
personal and relate to their previous life as peasants, or Catholics, or
women. Others may be collective, the presumptions shared by wide seg-
ments of society, like a fear of grain-hoarders or a hatred of Jews. And
at a time when peoples across much of Europe were still evolving their
patriotic and national consciousness, patriotic and national identities
might also ﬁgure among these presuppositions, identities often marked
by assumptions about a gendered national character and fear of ‘the
other’ inside and outside the constructed nation. These identities exist
and are expressed, though, signiﬁcantly, rather infrequently in the writ-
ings that were penned in the heat of battle or at the time of the events
that are being discussed.
   This raises another question. Should ‘experience’ be seen as some-
thing static, something lived and recorded at a particular moment, or
does such a stringent deﬁnition risk making it wholly elusive to history?
An alternative view – that favoured, among others, by Ute Planert in
her recent study of the Napoleonic Wars in southern Germany32 – is
that experience is better seen as an evolving construct, a narrative that
can take a number of different forms and which can be changed and
enriched by the passage of time and the process of reﬂection. Experi-
ence itself, in its purest, most total form, will continue to elude us. We
