                             Alan Forrest, Karen Hagemann and Jane Rendall   7


women’s historians. In the context of the German history of everyday
life, ‘experience’ came to be seen as a site at which ‘abstract structures
of domination and exploitation were directly encountered’.23 Women’s
historians used a similar notion when they constructed a shared female
experience ‘of sexual oppression’ as the precondition for the develop-
ment of feminist consciousness and hence as ‘the basis for unity or
identity among women’.24
   A key moment in this debate came in Joan Scott’s 1991 essay on
‘The Evidence of Experience’, in which she challenged what she termed
the ‘authority of experience’ in social and women’s history. She ques-
tioned ‘the appeal to experience as uncontestable evidence and as a
fundamental point of explanation’ for subjective perceptions, identities
and practices.25 In particular she criticized those historians who adopt a
purely empirical approach and try to make experience ‘visible’, or who
take meaning as ‘transparent’ and reproduce rather than contest the
given ideological systems, because they believe that the ‘facts of history
speak for themselves’.26 She urged historians to look instead beyond the
experience of their subjects, which she deﬁnes as the process by which
subjectivity is constructed, in other words the ways in which individ-
uals and groups try to make sense of the historical contexts in which
they ﬁnd themselves. Historians, argues Scott, should analyse the dis-
cursive systems underpinning experience, the forms of representation
which those systems use, and the ways in which they operate, because
‘discourses position subjects and produce experiences’.27 In her view it
is not individuals who have experiences, but rather historical subjects
who are constituted through experience.28
   Thinking about experience in this way forces us to deﬁne the concept
differently. William Sewell – following Scott – suggested that we should
understand experience as ‘the linguistically shaped process of weigh-
ing and assigning meaning to events as they happen’, a process that is
embedded in the ‘cultural understandings and linguistic capacities’ of
historical subjects.29 This is a useful and sensitive deﬁnition. But what
does it mean for our analysis of war experiences and perceptions?
   It has, we believe, two principal implications. On the one hand it
forces us to focus more on the speciﬁc forms of articulation of war expe-
riences and perceptions and their narratives. The form used – whether
letters, diaries, unpublished or published memoirs – and its literary tra-
dition, which had an inevitable inﬂuence on the writing style, had an
important effect on what was said. So did the person to whom the
account was written. It mattered whether the addressee was a mem-
ber of the writer’s family, a friend, an employer or a broader, less
