                           Alan Forrest, Karen Hagemann and Jane Rendall   13


soldiers in the French armies, points to the cultural baggage carried by
a very small number of these women, and notes the difﬁculties of dis-
entangling experience from ﬁction. Popular representations of female
soldiers emphasized their relationship to the lovers and fathers in their
lives, and though these drew upon the evidence of real people, they
offered no guide to the reality of their wartime lives. The direct evi-
dence that we have from a very few such soldiers suggests that their
actions may well have stemmed from revolutionary enthusiasm and a
sense of adventure, as well as offering an escape from poverty, and that
in many respects they shared the same attitudes and experiences as their
male counterparts.
   Catriona Kennedy’s examination of the languages of war used by
upper-class British women encountering the battleﬁeld for the ﬁrst time
at Waterloo challenges any simple privileging of the soldier-narrator.
The aristocratic women of whom she writes claimed the authority of
the experience of eyewitnesses, though they also expressed a feminine
difﬁdence. But to express their reactions to the battleﬁeld they drew
upon contemporary literary models drawn from imaginative literature,
including the poetry of James Macpherson and Walter Scott, and the
Gothic novel, to allow them to write in both chivalric and Gothic
modes. A more fully gendered understanding of the writing of war expe-
riences would incorporate the extent to which both male and female
writers drew upon the languages available to them.
   Other essays remind us of the ways in which older national histo-
riographies, linked to the nineteenth-century development of nations
and nation-states, have obscured the understanding of wartime experi-
ences. Jaroslaw Czubaty suggests that nineteenth- and early twentieth-
century Polish historiography emphasized only the patriotic motives
of the Polish ofﬁcer corps in the service of the Polish nation, an issue
that was largely ignored by Polish historians in the second half of
the twentieth century. For the Netherlands, Johan Joor argues that the
conservative national historiography constructed at the end of the nine-
teenth century effaced the history of popular protest under Napoleonic
occupation, because it employed the traditional rituals of crowd action
and could not be associated with the modern nation-state established
in 1813 and 1830. Horst Carl, too, indicates the misleading nature of
twentieth-century paradigms of modernization in his comparative study
of the Netherlands, Belgium and the Rhineland, showing how the his-
tory of religion and the churches was associated only with traditional
and declining functions in a world of increasing secularization, rather
than with the strength of collective religious identities.
