                              Alan Forrest, Karen Hagemann and Jane Rendall   9


language that is used. All are important factors in constituting human
experience, and it is only by taking them all into account and noting
the interplay between them that we can gain a sufﬁcient grasp of the
full range of war experiences and perceptions. The battleﬁeld is only one
part of a broader social and cultural picture, and warfare must be under-
stood in its broad social context, that of civil as well as military society.
   By adopting a comprehensive approach of this kind, it is possible
to gain a ﬁrmer impression of how people lived through the war and
reacted to it, how those who wrote about their lives and their experience
of these years thought about what was happening and visualized their
own role and the roles of others. Through the various letters, diaries
and other forms of ego-documents that are extant – and their nature
and quality will depend on a myriad of circumstances from the cul-
tural habits of the elites and literacy rates in society at large to the value
placed on personal writings by the archivists and librarians of successive
generations – we can see how people responded to war at the time, or
very close to the time of the events they describe. These accounts rep-
resent the closest we can get to immediate personal response, and for
that very immediacy they are surely precious; while the fact that they
are often written by individuals in a private capacity, without any of the
bureaucratic sophistries imposed by ofﬁcialdom, can give the impres-
sion that they, more than any other form of documentation, transport
the reader into the conditions of wartime and share with us a potent
sense of what it was like to be there.
   The closest we can get; but it is salutary to ask the question, ‘how
close?’ Can a letter written by a soldier to his mother in a French village
on the day after a battle be said to express his ‘experience’, or merely
a selection of facts and images which it seemed to him important to
express? And why did he choose these? Was it because these were the
scenes that had left the most powerful mark on his mind, and thus
those which most formed his memory of the battle? Or were there other
considerations – what he had read in the bulletin from his general or
discussed with his friends in the bar, what he felt it was decent or appro-
priate to describe, or even what he felt a dutiful son should write about
without causing too much pain and anxiety? The letter might seem to
describe immediate experience; but all sorts of cultural constraints affect
the form and content of what was written down, not least the difﬁculty
many men in the ranks must have had in consigning their emotions to
writing.
   So with the correspondence of nobles or landed families – including
the women of these families, where they wrote letters or commonplace
