6   Nations in Arms, People at War


but on general requisitioning.20 The armies took what they needed from
the lands they marched through or fought for. Civilians had to accom-
modate and feed armies marching though their territory, and to ﬁnance
them through taxes and tributes.
   Economic warfare, too – and in particular the Continental Block-
ade, as Katherine Aaslestad demonstrates in this volume – affected the
livelihoods of millions of men and women through the disruption of
established patterns of trade and industry.21 It could, as for Great Britain,
mean expanding overseas markets, but it also led to periods of eco-
nomic crisis. Such changes brought unprecedented tensions between
the military and civilian spheres, including those relating to gender
roles. In Britain rapidly expanding textile production, associated with
new markets as well as with mechanization, increased the demand for
the labour of women and children.22 Many rural communities suffered
from a shortage of young men and a consequent loss of labour for
agriculture. Here women often took over the jobs of their husbands
or brothers on the farm, and over the years of war these shifts would
test assumptions about gender roles as much as they challenged rela-
tions across generations. In short, the wars not only presented people
with new experiences – tragic and painful ones for some, liberating and
empowering ones for others – but they also helped to redeﬁne people’s
assumptions and remodel their identities.
   These narratives of changing warfare provide promising ways to make
sense of a period of dramatic and unprecedented change. Yet they still
leave us at some distance from the lived experience of individuals, and
from the complexity of constructed identities that derived as much from
past memories as from present impressions, and which still lay some
way from the categories imposed by twentieth- and twenty-ﬁrst-century
historians. The essays in this collection suggest ways in which a focus
on the direct experiences of soldiers, citizens and civilians at war may
complicate and illuminate these patterns.

Analysing war experiences and perceptions

The subject of human experience has been widely discussed in recent
years in the light of postmodernist analyses of history and the devel-
opment of approaches derived from the ‘cultural and linguistic turn’.
If history is to be seen as composed of competing texts and voices,
then that raises the question of how ‘experience’ can be deﬁned; yet
the term is still a key category for social history and has been the subject
of considerable debate, not least among historians of everyday life and
