                             Alan Forrest, Karen Hagemann and Jane Rendall   5


used in English in the late eighteenth century to distinguish between
the military and non-military servants of the East India Company, and
the ﬁrst recorded usage more generally for a ‘non-military person’ was
in 1829.16 In France, too, it was 1835 before the term ‘civil’ was ﬁrst
used to deﬁne a distinct social condition that excluded both the mili-
tary and the priesthood, a usage that ﬁrst appeared in the Dictionnaire
de l’Académie and was given greater popular resonance in the works of
Balzac.17 Before then the concept of civilians as a clear category of men
was not part of the British and French mindset. Army ofﬁcers, in par-
ticular, enjoyed the respect of others both for their military role and for
their position as members of the local nobility.18 The distinction that
was made was between hired soldiers – the mercenaries who composed
such a large part of all European armies and who were often treated with
scant regard by those who encountered them – and the rest of society.
   In Prussia and other parts of Germany the situation was different. The
German language already differentiated at the end of the eighteenth
century between Militär- and Civilgesellschaft (military and civilian soci-
ety). An explanation might be that in the public understanding of the
educated classes, and in particular the Bürgertum (the middle class), the
military was an institution apart from ‘civilized’ civilian society. Until
the military reforms of the early nineteenth century, only nobles could
become ofﬁcers and the rank-and-ﬁle conscripts came mainly from the
rural poor. Before the introduction of universal conscription in 1813,
middle- and upper-class men and the inhabitants of larger cities and
some industrialized regions were exempt from military service. Such
men regarded the army and the policy of conscription as necessary, but
looked down on ordinary soldiers and ‘uneducated’ ofﬁcers.19
   Yet at the same time the changes in the conduct of warfare during
the period of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, in particular the
creation of mass armies and the economic impact of the wars, had
profound economic and social effects on the fabric of European soci-
eties. In warfare itself the boundaries between civilians and the military
became more and more blurred. Civilians became – in comparison with
eighteenth-century wars – victims of the wars in far greater numbers,
simply because of the unknown size of the new mass armies, as Karen
Hagemann argues in this volume. Civilians died during the bombard-
ment of villages and towns, from starvation in besieged cities, and most
often because of the epidemics (especially dysentery and typhus) which
soldiers brought to thousands of cities, villages and homes all over
Europe. The greater size of the armies made an enormous difference,
because their logistics were no longer mainly based on army provisions
