24   Regimental Worlds


the extent to which armies of the period were uniﬁed by nationalistic
ideals.
   My preferred framework of interpretation is not Colley’s nation-
making, but rather the intensiﬁed paternalism that characterized late
eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century British society. The focus of
this chapter is therefore mainly on the ofﬁcer–soldier relationship. Ofﬁ-
cers assumed a greater responsibility for the good order and welfare of
their men, much as the propertied classes in general sought greater con-
trol over the lives of the poor. They can be said to have belonged to an
elite that continued to see ‘deference’ as the key to social cohesion.3 In
the British army that came out of the wars, the soldier’s lot was much
improved, ofﬁcers had a greater sense of what was professional con-
duct, and regimental identities and loyalties were stronger. Furthermore,
the regiment can be understood as a near-perfect ﬁeld of paternalistic
operation. It was, to a large degree, an enclosed community (including
women and children as well as men) in which the authority and inﬂu-
ence of ofﬁcers could have great play and be used to create a world to
their liking.
   Ample material exists to interpret the experiences of British sol-
diers during the Napoleonic wars; its harvest by historians, however,
has hardly begun. The very numerous published reminiscences of ofﬁ-
cers and rank-and-ﬁle soldiers have mainly been used by conventional
military historians merely to add detail to their accounts of military
operations. In addition, very few scholars have made use of the immense
cache of records generated by the army as it developed a bureaucracy to
collect a wide variety of information from regiments. One important
purpose of this chapter is to show how personal, regimental and army
sources in combination open up rich opportunities for further work. It
can even be argued that investigating soldiers’ lives can make a valuable
contribution to the history of the wider society; probably more can be
found out about soldiers than about any other social group belonging
to the classes of the poor.

The ofﬁcer–soldier relationship

Paternalism should be understood to describe an unequal relationship
but not one without its own equilibrium. Soldiers in regiments had their
own collective strength. Without exception, only varying in degree,
the relationship between ofﬁcers and men was built on an important
element of reciprocity. Men had to be managed; ofﬁcers needed to exer-
cise leadership as well as command, especially when it came to the
