                                                       John E. Cookson   25


close-order warfare of the times and the often severe privations of cam-
paigning. Soldiers themselves distinguished between ‘come on’ and ‘go
on’ ofﬁcers.4 The honour of the regiment was no shibboleth either, for
regiments were subject to comparison, formally by periodical inspec-
tions and reviews, informally by the show and good order they exhibited
and by their battleﬁeld performance. Ofﬁcers had reputations to protect,
and a good deal of that reputation depended on how their men regarded
them.
   Soldiers, for their part, resented treatment that demeaned their dig-
nity and self-respect as men and disparaged their hardihood and skills.
They also expected their ofﬁcers to keep faith with them; the most seri-
ous trouble in the army – open mutiny – occurred when soldiers believed
the terms of their enlistment were being ﬂouted.5 It is not too much to
say that soldiers (and seamen) had a conception of their ‘rights’ even if
it often seemed to be nothing more than an elementary sense of justice
and resistance to servility at the hands of their superiors. The highest
encomium they could bestow on an ofﬁcer was to speak of him as their
‘father’. In all this they were hardly different from the poor in general.
   The naval mutinies of 1797 ‘fundamentally changed the attitudes of
ofﬁcers and men throughout the Navy’. The lower deck had felt its
strength and became more capable of organized representation. Cap-
tains paid closer attention to the happiness and harmony of their ship’s
company, not least because trouble was now more likely to be damag-
ing to their careers.6 The event for the army that paralleled the naval
mutinies may well have been the collapse of the royal army of France in
1789, for it produced deep anxiety in Britain concerning the loyalty of
the soldiery at high times of popular discontent and radical agitation.
The ﬁrst major success in improving the soldier’s lot occurred in 1792,
the year when a sudden eruption of radical politics produced an equally
powerful loyalist reaction. Army and politics were surely linked on this
occasion. A pay increase for soldiers had been sought for a long time,
the real value of their pay having deteriorated over 30 or 40 years; now
an increase was suddenly conceded, the army having warned that the
soldiers’ circumstances were desperate, with loyalists adding their own
concerns.7 The scenario was repeated in 1795, when again important
concessions on pay were made amid fears that soldier discontent would
coalesce with civilian disturbances over high food prices. Much the
same thing happened yet again in 1797 when the mutinies of seamen
threatened to spread to soldiers.8
   These pay increases and adjustments ended the pauperization of the
soldier which had been only too evident before the wars began when
