                            Alan Forrest, Karen Hagemann and Jane Rendall   15


more sharply, though not always wholly effectively, enforced, and the
image of the female soldier came to be associated with revolution and
social disorder, suggesting more clearly deﬁned gender roles in a military
setting.34
  In the civilian worlds discussed in Part II, on the other hand, the
gendering of wartime experience is not quite so clear-cut. Patricia Lin’s
paper analyses both the new responsibility taken by the British gov-
ernment in this period for the families of soldiers and sailors, and the
detailed information that was collected about them. Using these records,
she reconstructs the experiences of military and naval families, both
in Britain and on active service overseas, emphasizing the extent to
which war under these circumstances was ‘a family affair’, with a def-
inition of ‘family’ here stretching beyond immediate family members
to include more distant relatives and regimental comrades and ofﬁcers.
Katherine Aaslestad’s study of civilian experiences of economic warfare
points to the breakdown of the dichotomy between civilian and mili-
tary worlds in Hamburg, as the scale and impact of economic warfare
militarized a once peaceful and prosperous commercial society, turning
the city of Hamburg into ‘a war zone’. That experience was reﬂected in
the poetry of Christine Westphalen as in the correspondence of middle-
class men and women, and in the protests of similarly mixed crowds on
the Hamburg streets.
  Catriona Kennedy’s discussion of the writing on the battle of Water-
loo by upper-class British women emphasizes how their narratives might
reﬂect a broader collective identiﬁcation with a wider British patri-
otism or with the leadership and prestige of the British aristocracy,
thought they might also simply reﬂect immediate and personal loss.
Karen Hagemann analyses civilian experiences and perceptions of the
battle of Leipzig in October 1813. She demonstrates the far-reaching
consequences of the new warfare of mass armies for civilians, and dif-
ferentiates between town and countryside, between the educated and
the illiterate, and between the rich and the poor. She also points to the
important, but curiously neglected, subject of violence directed against
civilians during these wars. By analysing the consequences of mass war-
fare for civilians she contributes to the history of everyday life in a
civilian society at war.
  The essays in Part III, on protest and patriotic mobilization during the
years of war, relate less to the new deﬁnitions of citizenship emerging
from the French Revolution than to different responses to the political
challenges of war and occupation. They tend to suggest that while a
new vocabulary of citizenship and modernization may have come into
