14   Nations in Arms, People at War


   In Part I, which deals directly with military experiences of war,
John Cookson, Natalie Petiteau and Jarosław Czubaty, writing on Great
Britain, France and Poland, all question too easy an identiﬁcation
between military service and an overarching sense of patriotism and
identiﬁcation with the nation. Cookson’s examination of the rela-
tionship between ofﬁcers and soldiers stresses the signiﬁcance of an
intensiﬁed paternalism which, though characterizing British society
generally at this time, operated with particular ease in the closed world
of the army and its regiments. Soldiers’ letters and memoirs reﬂect the
expectations they drew from their roots in the culture of the poor or the
comradeship of the regiment, the qualities they associated with good
ofﬁcers, and the possibilities of advancement in such self-contained
societies. Ofﬁcers sought to build regimental rather than national iden-
tities; though soldiers might be identiﬁed as Irish, Scottish or Welsh,
‘Britishness’ existed ‘largely by default’.
   Writing of Napoleonic France, Petiteau similarly comments on the
extent to which military service was increasingly distanced from the
idea of the nation-in-arms. The form which conscription took served
to increase social distinctions and introduced young men to a separate
and cohesive military world. If the memoirs of French soldiers record
the harshness of the military conditions they experienced in Spain and
especially in Russia, they also reﬂect a sense of being part of a military
family, a family whose leader was the Emperor Napoleon. Reintegra-
tion into a civilian world after 1815 was to prove difﬁcult, though some
would make good use of their newly-acquired skills. Only in the 1850s
did the veterans of the Napoleonic armies attain that sense of common
identity which they bequeathed to the powerful national spirit of late
nineteenth-century France. For Poland, on the other hand, Czubaty sug-
gests that the Napoleonic period allowed Poles to hope to realize their
national aspirations, with a newly formed army taking up aspects of
the French republican tradition, a tradition which might also at some
points inspire motivation among the ordinary, largely illiterate, soldiers.
Yet Czubaty also emphasizes the diversity of recruitment and motiva-
tion among the ofﬁcer corps; the correspondence of ofﬁcers suggests
that patriotism, though perhaps the most important, was by no means
the only motive for military service. Dreams of glory, and pragmatic
possibilities of career advancement, were also signiﬁcant.
   Hopkin’s paper on the female soldiers of the French revolutionary
armies concludes by pointing to the attempt of the French Convention
to ban women, apart from those carrying out necessary support func-
tions, from the military. After 1793, the masculinity of the army was
