16   Nations in Arms, People at War


play, the language of popular politics was more closely related to older
assumptions of everyday life, to expectations of a ‘moral economy’ and
mutual obligations between classes, and to the collective bonds of reli-
gious life. Johan Joor’s recovery of the history of popular protest in the
Netherlands during the Napoleonic regime, directed against conscrip-
tion, heavy taxation and an alien government, shows how the men and
women in the protesting crowds, often from the families of artisans and
craftsmen, drew upon the notion of a ‘moral economy’. Their violence
was disciplined, targeted and often symbolic in nature. There was lit-
tle national dimension to such protests. Similarly, Kevin Linch, writing
of the artisans and craftsmen who joined the British volunteer move-
ment, shows that their mentalities were deeply imbued with the sense
of a ‘moral economy’ and of their just rights, even if such rights con-
travened military discipline. The volunteer who regarded himself as ‘a
citizen and not a soldier’ was expressing exactly that sense, that even the
part-time soldier had customary rights, rather than any sympathy with
the revolutionary concept of citizenship; he would probably not have
been entitled to vote, and did not conceive of citizenship in that con-
text. Nevertheless, the volunteers were exposed to the patriotic rhetoric,
festivals and celebrations of wartime Britain, and they came to some
degree to share a sense of national purpose.
   Horst Carl suggests that, though it has been assumed that the tra-
ditional structure of meaning derived from religious faith broke down
in wartime, the evidence of the letters of soldiers from Belgium, the
Netherlands and the Rhineland points to a rather different conclusion.
In these letters there is little reﬂection of the clergy’s rhetoric in support
of Napoleon, nor of any growing enthusiasm for the nation; soldiers
are identiﬁed mainly with their locality, their families and their confes-
sion. Only in later autobiographical accounts did they write of deeper
religious experiences. The period of the Revolution and Napoleonic
Empire did not see the emergence of a modern form of nationalism in
these areas, but a strengthening of the confessional divisions which had
offered soldiers and their families the collective identities and rituals
which gave meaning to their lives.
   The experiences and everyday lives of the soldiers, citizens and civil-
ians of this period cannot be fully understood through the broader
narratives of change imposed by historians. Yet close attention to the
personal documents and to the social and cultural practices of the
participants in the dramatic events of these years can help historians
to understand such individual and collective experiences, even if the
silences of participants also have to be recognized and are often as telling
