                                                       John E. Cookson   31


   Harris was exceptional only in the size of the capital sum (£200) he
was able to save. The informal arrangements by which men entrusted
their ofﬁcers to hold money on their behalf, sometimes as a regimental
fund administered by the quartermaster, is evidence that the pauperiza-
tion of the soldier can be overstated.30 Nor were savings necessarily the
plunder of war. Some soldiers seem to have regularly remitted money
to their families without the army putting in place the formal scheme
that Patricia Lin describes for the navy. In 1809 it was reckoned that
a prudent soldier could save 2s. 6d. per week out of his wages.31 The
great change that rescued the soldier from penury occurred with the
pay increases of 1795 and 1797 that protected his basic wage against
increases in the price of food. Much later in the war the army still
thought him ‘well and sufﬁciently paid’ and needing no further ﬁnan-
cial incentive to join in the ﬁrst place, or stay on.32 Windham’s reform
of military pensions in 1806 also made a generous enough provision
to secure the independence of many men on their discharge from the
army.
   The soldier’s (and sailor’s) pension, paid quarterly at a convenient
town, was a unique beneﬁt among the occupations and trades of the
poor. The army and the crown, in fact, showed real concern for the
soldier’s livelihood both while he was in the army and afterwards.
A corollary to the pension was the old soldier’s and seaman’s right to
set up in trade in any town, reafﬁrmed by an act of 1802 at a time when
large numbers of men were being released on to the labour market with
the reduction of the armed forces. Moreover, wives and children ben-
eﬁted from the same right. The idea clearly was to assist discharged
men to form households and achieve economic independence. The
same thinking explains the army’s interest in securing for soldiers the
family allowances paid to militiamen when embodied away from their
parishes. York and his advisers were running the proposal from 1805.33
Soldiers who had their wives and children with them in the army main-
tained a family economy through the paid work women obtained in
the regiment, particularly laundering. The change that was mooted was
to keep these dependents at home, preferably at regimental depots in
barracks, where the family economy would be secured by remittances
from the soldier, state-paid allowances, and work that women could
pick up. While ‘family money’ was never introduced, soldiers’ fami-
lies were an increasingly common presence at the rapidly developing
depots. A return of 1810 showed that in 18 line regiments stationed in
Britain – 11,000 men – there was, on average, one ‘lawful’ wife for every
eight soldiers.34 The reform of the pension and short service enlistment
