                                                        John E. Cookson   29


above were able to achieve. At the conclusion of the war the army was
more professional most clearly in the sense that years of campaigning
in many different places had added enormously to its fund of military
experience.
   Most ofﬁcers stayed in the army a long time; only about one in
eight, among those who did not die young, seems to have left within
ﬁve years.23 ‘Careers open to talents’ did not keep them in; the status
accorded army ofﬁcers by the wider society most certainly did. There
was a public perception of the army as an aristocratic world in which
ofﬁcers observed the code and behaviour of ‘gentlemen’ as well as hold-
ing the king’s commission and wielding authority over men. These
were all powerful indicators of status. However much the social base
of the ofﬁcer corps was broadened thanks to the war, its aristocratic
ethos remained intact, even becoming stronger with the army’s growing
prestige.
   ‘Gentleman’ in the society of the time was a broadening category, and
it had an elusive deﬁnition. One could be a gentleman by reputation and
appearances while possessing little property and little inﬂuence. Most of
the attributes can be tracked back to the values and behaviour associ-
ated with notions of ‘civility’ and ‘benevolence’ by which the socially
dominant acted in ways to maintain harmony among themselves and
accepted an obligation to lend assistance to those less fortunate. This
was where the Enlightenment played most strongly on the British army;
certainly no interest was shown in abolishing the venality of the pur-
chase system and very little in promoting the idea of the soldier as
citizen.24 But civility among ofﬁcers was taken very seriously indeed in
order to control personal disputes and ofﬁcer insubordination and to
emancipate the army from party politics. The former were threatening
because personal honour easily got into conﬂict with military authority
and because military commissions were a form of private property. As
far as politics went, the British army had suffered severely earlier in the
eighteenth century from royal control of military patronage which had
produced forced dismissals of political opponents. And the ﬁerce party
contentions of George III’s reign were kept at bay only by restraint on
the part of the crown and by the increasing outdatedness of the idea
that ofﬁcers owed a personal loyalty to the king. Soldiers had a duty
to the ‘public’ that took precedence over political differences within
the state; civility among ofﬁcers went hand in hand with this ethic of
service.25
   Benevolence was founded on the idea of a common humanity and yet
the existence of social hierarchy as part of the natural order of things,
