26   Regimental Worlds


labourers earned a better wage. They can count as the ﬁrst steps taken
towards re-building the soldier’s self-respect. To sunder any possible con-
nection between indiscipline in the army and political disaffection may
have been an immediate and, as it turned out, relatively short-lived con-
cern; but the larger view always kept in mind by the Duke of York and
insightful ofﬁcers was to develop the ‘profession’ (the word they used)
of soldiering for the lower as well as higher ranks.9 This was the point
on which paternalism in the army turned. What was being sought was
a rank and ﬁle that found ample satisfaction and pride in soldiering.
York and his generals saw themselves tackling the problem of form-
ing a military class among the poor in a commercial society seen to
be inhospitable to military interests.
   York, commander-in-chief from 1795 to 1827 (with one brief inter-
ruption), came to win the accolade of ‘The Soldier’s Friend’. His soldiers,
however, continued to be drawn overwhelmingly from those among
the poor who, for whatever reason, lacked security and independence.
Attempts to recruit the settled poor – most notably, by offering short-
service enlistment from 1806 – were never successful. Soldier illiteracy is
also evidence of soldiers’ origins among the deprived poor; no more
than half the men could sign their names, sometimes much less.10
The social distance between ofﬁcers and men therefore remained enor-
mous. Even though a long war and expanded army greatly freed up
appointment and promotion in the ofﬁcer corps, very few rankers got
commissions.11 Nothing bridged this class difference. Paternalistic atti-
tudes were rooted in the moral and intellectual superiority that ofﬁcers
assumed over the ‘thoughtlessness of the class of people’ from whose
ranks soldiers came.12
   Wellington’s ‘scum of the earth’ remark (made in-house) merely said
brazenly what ofﬁcers commonly said, and kept on saying well into
the nineteenth century. Soldiers drawn from the classes of the poor
belonged to the culture of the poor. In using the army as a haven from
the adversities and insecurities of civilian life, soldiers were improvis-
ing an existence as the poor were forced to do. They continued to take
advantage of opportunities in the army for the same purposes – for
example, supplementing their pay with earnings as regimental trades-
men, ofﬁcers’ servants and as labourers on public works. On active
service, among foreign populations, a ‘moral economy’ seems to have
operated in that soldiers assumed a ‘right’ of forage, requisition and
even plunder from civilians whatever the ‘law’, in the shape of mil-
itary authority, directed.13 Ofﬁcers, moreover, were quite prepared to
concede that right. Sergeant Lawrence of the 40th Foot recalled an
