                                                          John E. Cookson   27


incident when he and his comrades discovered a large stash of money in
their Portuguese billet which they contrived to keep with their colonel’s
connivance and in deﬁance of the major.14
   Not nearly enough is known about soldiers’ culture as an extension
of popular culture. The comradeship of the regiment in many ways
recalls the gangs and clubs that apprentices and workers organized
for themselves. After the war, discharged soldiers and seamen, usu-
ally pensioners, formed their own friendly societies.15 Soldiers’ religion
resembled the religion of the lower classes in general in that it scorned
personal piety while going through the motions of formal observance.
‘Methodists’ in the army were deliberately provoked by drunken assaults
and the swearing and lewdness directed at them.16 Marriage in the army
often seems to have been like common-law marriage among the poor
where couples came together without ofﬁcial cognizance but with the
approval of those most immediately concerned. Whatever the power-
ful authority the ofﬁcers wielded, soldiers lived in a world they largely
made for themselves, more than has sometimes been imagined. Yet a
paternalistic invasion came to be increasingly felt, where ofﬁcers inter-
fered in soldiers’ lives not merely for the sake of military discipline or to
improve their material conditions but also to engage with what many
conceived to lie at the heart of their brutalization – their moral and
spiritual poverty.

Gentlemen ofﬁcers

Soldiers’ popular culture contrasted with the aristocratic ethos of the
ofﬁcer corps. Army ofﬁcers seem to have acquired the status of ‘gen-
tlemen’ earlier in the eighteenth century. Yet the practice of buying
military ofﬁce obviously disadvantaged the less wealthy. On the other
hand, war always had the effect of diluting the social exclusiveness
of the ofﬁcer corps because it opened up so many opportunities for
appointment and promotion without purchase. During the Napoleonic
wars the dilution must have been extraordinary as the number hold-
ing commissions increased enormously, possibly to the point where the
ofﬁcer corps – at over 15,000 – was ﬁve times larger at the end of the
war than at the beginning.17 A measure of how much war freed up the
system is the number of commissions held without purchase. Unfortu-
nately there are no ﬁgures for these wars; but the later Crimean War
provides some indication when the number increased 12 times.18 Fur-
ther evidence is the huge number of Scots and Irish added to the ofﬁcer
corps. As they had done since the middle of the eighteenth century,
