                                                       John E. Cookson   35


   Such explicit paternalism was regiment-building in that it sought to
bolster the military authority of ofﬁcers with moral authority by work-
ing on the ‘good’ propensities of soldiers. Under such a benign regime,
in some regiments, especially those immured in garrisons, the soldier
came to lead an existence far removed from the stereotype of the devil-
may-care, predatory, brutalized ﬁghting man. At the Cape from 1804
to 1814 the 93rd supported a regimental library, missionary fund, wid-
ows and children fund and their own church for Presbyterian worship
(with NCOs and privates as the elders). The records over two six-month
periods and one twelve-month period show that 33 ﬂoggings occurred.
In comparison, the 1st battalion of the 87th, also at the Cape, ﬂogged
116 men in ﬁve months.56 Part of paternalistic concern in the army was
a search for alternative punishments that did not brutalize the men,
and the regimes that operated in different regiments came to vary enor-
mously. The governor of Guernsey in 1807, on receiving the weekly
reports from the regiments in garrison, noted that two regiments had
ﬂogged ‘nearly double the number punished in the other six corps’.57
York, in fact, in 1812 restricted the punishment regimental courts mar-
tial could award to 300 lashes, in effect requiring other options to be
tried. The previous year the establishment of regimental schools had
been ordered. A new model of regimental governance was being planted
in the army, largely by individual ofﬁcers acting in individual regiments;
its progress was accordingly slow, in spite of the ofﬁcers who found a
voice as reformers after 1815. But the real point of comparison should
not be with the dead hand of the ‘Wellington legacy’ in the Age of
Reform, but with improvements that ﬁnally found a place on the agenda
after the moribund years of the eighteenth century.


Regimental identities

Regiment-building also involved creating or strengthening regimental
identities. These advanced signiﬁcantly during the war, and even more
so afterwards as regiments consolidated around the honours and his-
tories bestowed on them. The outward show of regimentalism lay in
dress, ‘musick’ and regimental colours. It was the golden age of mili-
tary uniforms; immense variety was created as colonels strove for style
and effect within the regulations – with or without practicality – and
as the ‘national’ regiments of the Scots multiplied. The old drum and
ﬁfe music gave way rapidly to military bands with wind instruments
after the Duke of York brought in German musicians for the Coldstream
Guards in 1785, to open an entirely new repertoire of regimental tunes
