                                                        John E. Cookson   33


Higher-ranking non-commissioned ofﬁcers holding staff positions were
created; the establishment of an infantry battalion came to include a
sergeant major, quartermaster sergeant, paymaster sergeant, armourer
sergeant and schoolmaster sergeant, in addition to the company
sergeants.43 ‘Colour sergeants’ in each company were also appointed ‘to
meliorate the situation of the non-commissioned ofﬁcers of the infantry
and to hold out to the most deserving of them a station somewhat
raised above their comrades’.44 Sergeant majors and sergeants holding
staff positions continued to wear lace on their coats, a nice affectation
of their status. And chevrons for sergeants were introduced in 1802 in
place of the less conspicuous shoulder knots.45

The regimental world

These reﬁnements of the regimental hierarchy are a reminder that
regiments existed to a remarkable degree as self-contained societies.
Unfortunately, the interior life of the regiment is a frustrating gap in
our knowledge, frustrating inasmuch as it is well-known that regiments
came out of the war with strongly developed identities that have served
the British army ever since. It is easy to exaggerate the erosion of regi-
mental autonomy by the state during the eighteenth century. Recruits
were trained by their regiments, and regiments kept these men for them-
selves; fewer drafts and transfers occurred after 1795–1796 when York
had been forced to disband many ‘young’ regiments to make good
heavy losses in the rest of the army. Much else was kept within the
regiment – the appointment of non-commissioned ofﬁcers, the hand-
ing out of punishment for most offences, the detail of uniforms, the
cost to ofﬁcers of their mess and of the regimental band. Who belonged
to the regiment was precisely known, and included, of course, women
and children. With such a tight structure of authority and relationships,
the regiment provided the dominant setting in which its people lived.
Regiments existed for a speciﬁc purpose, to provide disciplined armed
force, and ultimately to meet other disciplined armed forces at a time
when survival might well depend on their unity and cohesion.
   Eighty per cent of soldiers served in a single regiment. In a sample of
2000 men who entered the army between 1803 and 1814, 1601 had no
record of service in another corps of the regular army, other than in gar-
rison and veteran battalions.46 Because most men were tied by service to
a single regiment, their loyalty to it had an exclusive, frequently intense
character not usually found among ofﬁcers. That loyalty was refracted
through comradeship; the regiment was the largest comrade group, the
