32   Regimental Worlds


established a deﬁnite term of service for the soldier, which must have
sharpened his anticipation of a return to civilian society. Old soldiers
were frequently kept in the depots to serve their time out instead of
wastefully being shipped out with their regiments overseas; and it seems
that it was then, in this state of semi-retirement, that they often married.
Veteran battalions could have more than a quarter of the men married.35
   The point to emphasize, then, is that the world of the army was
not closed to the aspirations of the poor, emotional as well as mate-
rial. Among soldiers, too, non-commissioned ofﬁcers and privates
constituted a hierarchy of status and achievement. Sergeant Mor-
ris’s complaint in his recollections that the British army, in contrast
to Napoleon’s, denied commissions to rankers and that even non-
commissioned rank was precariously held only highlights the ambitions
that soldiers could nourish.36 The establishment of an infantry regi-
ment provided for one non-commissioned ofﬁcer per ten or eleven men,
though it was common for the proportion to be higher than this, as reg-
iments kept the number of such ofﬁcers up to establishment strength
even while the number of effective men diminished.37 A fair estimate
is that one man in six achieved non-commissioned rank. Of 705 men
from seven line regiments discharged for the pension in 1814–1816,
one in ﬁve was a non-commissioned ofﬁcer, though this ﬁgure was
undoubtedly inﬂated by the disproportionate number of long-service
men included in the sample.38 If it is correct that one in six men was pro-
moted in this way, the army offered good opportunities for professional
advancement, especially for those who could read and write. A study of
the 28th Foot, where signature literacy was a mere 41 per cent, suggests
that literate men had at least a one in three chance of taking rank.39
   The authority and leadership bestowed on non-commissioned ofﬁ-
cers gave them signiﬁcant status. Too little is known about these
men, but there is good evidence that the army paid them increasing
respect, acknowledging their key role within the regiment. The Duke
of York was particularly concerned to increase their ‘respectability’ –
perhaps an indicative word – in the eyes of their fellows.40 In the
course of the war, their pay, pensions, ranks and uniforms were all
adjusted to advance their status over private soldiers’. In 1797 a pri-
vate’s pay was increased to a shilling per day, but non-commissioned
ofﬁcers received larger proportional increases. In the 1806 review of sol-
diers’ wages, a private’s pay remained at 1s., but a corporal’s pay was
advanced to 1s. 4d., and a sergeant’s to 1s. 10d.41 Pensions for non-
commissioned ofﬁcers were also ﬁxed at a higher rate, a maximum of
2s. 6d. per day for privates, 3s. for corporals, and 3s. 6d. for sergeants.42
