30   Regimental Worlds


imposing a social (and religious) duty on those with authority and
means to relieve hardship and misfortune and to uphold morality. It had
strong patriarchal overtones because the patriarch in domestic life was
seen to possess the same power of benevolent government as the phi-
lanthropist in the wider society. The brave and kind ofﬁcer, who again
and again is the type admired in rank-and-ﬁle accounts, had already
emerged as a role model in the late eighteenth century.26 A great many
ofﬁcers must have been susceptible to the idea of benevolent authority
because it was an idea of their class and also because it conformed to
the practicalities of leading men in war. A general, presenting colours to
the assembled 71st in 1807, surely used the occasion to say what was
expected of him: ‘Ofﬁcers, be friends and guardians to the brave fellows
committed to your care. Soldiers, give your conﬁdence to your ofﬁcers;
they have shared with you the chances of war; they have bravely bled
along with you.’27
   Soldiers’ reminiscences present a remarkably consistent stereotype of
the ‘good’ ofﬁcer. The adjectives that tumble out are ‘brave’, ‘gallant’,
‘daring’, ‘manly’, ‘just’, ‘kind’, ‘considerate’, ‘sympathetic’, ‘liberal’,
‘open-hearted’, ‘friendly’ and ‘devoted to his corps’.28
   Such deference should cause no surprise. Soldiers lived closely under
authority and on many occasions their physical survival could depend
on the leadership their ofﬁcers displayed. Their respect for the humane
and capable ofﬁcer represented the protection and assistance that the
dependent poor generally hoped for from their superiors.


Soldiering: aspirations and rewards

This does not mean that the soldier was servile; there was much about
his life that his ofﬁcers could not control or only ﬁtfully. Riﬂeman Harris
has been accused of obsequiousness for claiming that ‘in our army the
men best like to be ofﬁcered by gentlemen, men whose education has
rendered them more kind in manners than your coarse ofﬁcer, sprung
from obscure origin, and whose style is brutal and overbearing’. But
in another passage he acknowledged the rugged independence of his
class that made them dislike condescension and arrogance on the part
of their superiors: ‘They are a strange set, the English! And so determined
and unconquerable, that they will have their way if they can. Indeed, it
requires one who has authority in his face, as well as at his back, to make
them respect and obey him.’ Harris himself found a degree of indepen-
dence through the army, setting up shop in Soho on the proceeds of his
savings as a regimental shoemaker and battleﬁeld pickings.29
