28   Regimental Worlds


the Scots and Irish went on steadily increasing their share of commis-
sions, and a great many sub-aristocratic, minor gentry and ‘middling’
families must have contributed to that result.19
   The ofﬁcer of small private means and minor social consequence
who struggled to make his salary go a long way is a standard ﬁgure
in the army of this period. Such men proliferated in the infantry
regiments and knew their place. The ‘aristocratically inclined’ and con-
nected preferred the cavalry to the infantry, and, better still, a staff
employment among the generals.20 While ﬁrst appointment was on
recommendation – and therefore depended on ‘connections’ – future
promotion was by seniority which it was only within one’s power to
accelerate by exchanging into another regiment where the prospects
were better. An ensign could expect to become a lieutenant within about
two years, but the wait for a company and captain’s rank could take an
age, even in wartime when the turnover of ofﬁcers was high. In a sample
of 185 ofﬁcers appointed during the war, the average wait for a captaincy
from entering the army was between nine and ten years. Field rank was
even more out of reach; under 20 per cent got there and it took, on
average, 18 years.21 Professionalization is often the word applied to the
Duke of York and Wellington’s army; but it gave little recognition to
professional merit, at least at the regimental level; length of service and
wealth counted for far more.
   On the other hand, war certainly had the effect of weeding out those
ofﬁcers who valued a commission only as a social investment. Overseas
service, all too often in remote and insalubrious places, was inﬂicted
on the British army to a unique degree, and resignations, exchanges
and transfers multiplied in regiments ordered abroad, especially at the
beginning of a war. The same hardship opened up the army to a gener-
ation of young men in that old and inﬁrm ofﬁcers were forced into half
pay, home service battalions (including the militia) or out altogether.
Since the numbers on half pay remained fairly constant throughout the
war (around 3000), we can assume that many more left than stayed.22
The young age of Wellington’s ofﬁcers in the Peninsula has often been
remarked upon. Yet that and York’s efforts from the start of his com-
mand to improve the competence of the ofﬁcer corps did not mean
that the army served careers very well. True, a great many gained com-
missions that would, in other circumstances, have been denied them;
but, in spite of some advances, pay, promotion and professional recog-
nition within the army remained meagre. Only a ﬂimsy structure of
professionalism existed; as in the pre-bureaucratic state in general, it
is easy to exaggerate what regulation and periodical inspection from
