                                                       Natalie Petiteau   45


conscription underlined social inequalities. By the manner in which
it functioned, Napoleonic conscription did little to foster the national
idea, for it was, for many, a source of distinction and social division.
   Through the imposition of this system of conscription, the Grande
Armée saw nearly 2.5 million men pass through its ranks, 1,660,000
of whom were French. The Grande Armée constituted a social space in
which a minority of professional soldiers mingled with civilians who
had not chosen the profession of arms, but who now found them-
selves confronted with a war of unprecedented brutality. By adopting
an anthropological approach, we can observe the response to the chal-
lenge of army life from the large numbers of young men who had been
born into the popular classes of society. For the great majority of them,
peasant boys in the main and more familiar with the rigours of farm-
work, exposure to the army brought a need to change their most basic
assumptions and to adapt to new practices.4
   To submit to military discipline was to discover a whole culture that
was different from that of civilian life. It was to adopt a ﬁt and style
of clothing that none of them were accustomed to wearing; it was to
acquire a concern for correctness of dress, which no doubt appeared
strange and rather vain to many; it was to learn how to use riﬂes which
were very different from the hunting weapons that many among them
would have already been familiar with, or knives that were nothing
like those they might have handled in civilian life. They had to get
used to draining physical conditions, too. In the hour of combat, the
soldiers were very often exhausted, especially since they suffered from
poor living conditions during the long months when they were on cam-
paign.5 They were not issued with tents, with the result that, when they
were not sleeping in light bivouacs, they had to make do with what-
ever buildings were available – sometimes churches or monasteries, at
others uninhabited houses. In addition to these deprivations, they were
constantly short of money and supplies. The daily pay of a simple sol-
dier was no more than 35 centimes.6 The army provided only limited
rations: bread, of course, with meat provided only during military cam-
paigns. The men’s pay had to serve to provide them with the most
basic necessities, to buy food and to maintain their clothes and boots.
To make matters worse, their pay was often late, so that for long peri-
ods soldiers risked penury and near-starvation: at the end of 1806, for
instance, payments were overdue by as much as ﬁve months.7 Soldiers’
memoirs are full of complaints about their material condition.8 Sergeant
Faucheur, who served from 1812 in Napoleon’s last great campaigns,
gives a graphic description of the mashed meat and the ‘ratatouille’ of
