                                                        John E. Cookson   37


regiments were rallied at critical moments by battle cries that called to
mind previous triumphs. ‘Remember Assaye’, the 74th’s colonel told his
men as they prepared to hold their front at Busaco in 1810. ‘My brave
Highlanders! Remember Egypt!’ Sir John Moore shouted to the 42nd as
he led them in a charge at Corunna.63
   Regimental identities were well-kept, more deliberately worked on
than national identities. It is true that the rank and ﬁle of some regi-
ments had a strongly ‘national’ hue; the 42nd, 78th, 79th, 92nd and
93rd were at least 80 per cent Scottish; the 18th, 87th and 88th as
predominantly Irish.64 But these surface appearances were complicated
underneath by profound differences between Highland and Lowland
Scots and Catholic and Protestant Irish. In the end, the Scottish and Irish
‘national’ regiments were like all the others in that their identities were
contrived for the sake of regiment-building rather than authentic. The
point is well-made by the 42nd (Black Watch) – which one of its own
soldiers called the ‘most self-conceited’ in the army – in building itself
up as the epitome of ‘Highland’ bravery; a fair estimate is that nearly
half the regiment were Lowland Scots.65 Many regiments had long been
‘national’ in their ‘customs’ without having any stronger association
with Scotland, Ireland or Wales. The 23rd (Royal Welsh Fusiliers) annu-
ally celebrated St David’s Day, but Englishmen outnumbered Welshmen
two to one in the ranks.66 This ‘national’ occasion was obviously linked
to the regiment’s history and traditions. But there was a ‘national’ con-
tent in regimental symbols and ceremonial that was useful simply for
acknowledging and therefore accommodating the diversity that existed
within the ranks and also among the ofﬁcers. ‘The whole of our battal-
ion, English and Irish’, Edward Costello recalled, dressed themselves for
St Patrick’s Day in 1811 while on the march, though the 95th had been
formed as recently as 1800 and was only as Irish as there were numbers
of Irish in the regiment.67


Conclusion

Regimental identities as constructed by regiments were one thing;
the identities that soldiers carried quite another. Men clearly felt the
strong pull of regimental comradeship. But within the regiment, com-
rades were usually identiﬁed by their nationality; Colonel Mainwaring,
commanding the 51st, could describe his rank and ﬁle to their faces
as ‘John Bull from England; Swaney from Scotland, and Paddy from
my own country’.68 Sergeant Lawrence, a Dorsetshire man, described
encounters with ‘Mr Taffy’, ‘Paddy’ and this or that ‘Irishman’; he, in
