38    Regimental Worlds


common with other soldier autobiographers, tried to do justice to the
medley of accents heard and to the different national characters he
encountered.69 Sergeant Wheeler’s closest friendship was with another
Englishman, Edward Costello’s with a fellow Irishman; Thomas How-
ell from Edinburgh found a ‘bedfellow’ and ‘ﬁrm friend’ in Donald
McDonald from Inverness.70 There was jubilation when the 42nd, 79th
and 92nd, all Scottish regiments, met up for the ﬁrst time at Orthes
in 1814, a meeting repeated at Ghent in May the following year just
before Waterloo. Thomas Howell, the Scot, when on campaign in the
Peninsula, broke down in tears on stumbling across ‘four or ﬁve soldiers
seated on the turf, who sung in their turn Scotland’s sweetest songs of
remembrance’.71
   The conclusion must be that the Britishness of the British army sat
lightly on the country allegiances of its soldiers. While in the enclosed
world of the regiment a loyalty to comrades and the corps was created
that superseded national afﬁnities, this makes little sense as British patri-
otism. The huge Irish presence in the army from the beginning of the
war mitigated against ‘King and Country’ inﬂuences – not least because
Catholic Ireland up to the French Revolution carried a tradition of mil-
itary service outside the British army. In response the army discounted
the idea of the ‘Protestant nation’ by allowing Catholic soldiers to absent
themselves from Protestant worship.72 Britishness existed among the
soldiery largely by default, in the comparisons that were made with
allies and enemies. The British army was as polyglot, composite and
imperial as the other great armies of the period, including Napoleon’s,
with large foreign contingents of Germans, Portuguese and Spanish, not
to mention sepoy regiments in India and negro corps in the West Indies.
What British soldiers and ofﬁcers most admired about themselves was
their ‘steadiness’ under ﬁre; but they also admired French élan. Observed
Thomas Howell:

     How different the duty of the French ofﬁcers from ours. They, stim-
     ulating the men by example, the men vociferating, each chafﬁng
     each until they appear in a fury, shouting to the points of our bay-
     onets. After the ﬁrst huzza, the British ofﬁcers restraining their men,
     still as death. “Steady, lads, steady” is all you hear, and that in an
     undertone.73

  In this perception of the French ‘other’, there was little that was xeno-
phobic. Neither did British soldiers suppose that they had a monopoly
on humanity and the French one on cruelty. The real difference they
