36   Regimental Worlds


and marches, and, indeed, music for public entertainment. Meanwhile
the Scots went their own way with their pipers and pipe-and-drum
bands.58 The British were not a singing soldiery, unlike, say, the Ger-
mans;59 or perhaps the growth of regimental music suppressed what had
once existed. But no soldier could have been indifferent to the éclat and
spirit that bands and their music added to the regiment.
   Soldiers, however, knew their regiment also carried its reputation
from the past. Regimental histories as a genre belong to the period
after 1815; like soldier autobiographies they contributed to the ‘heroic’
mythology that grew up around Britain’s ‘Great War’. But every regi-
ment had a short history found on its colours, on uniform badges or
other appurtenances, from its nicknames, and from its ‘customs’ that
particularly celebrated the anniversaries of famous actions in which
the regiment had been engaged. Battle honours embellished regimen-
tal colours, though in the Napoleonic wars none were added until the
victories in Egypt in 1801 when the regiments involved were permitted
to include a sphinx, which, in the case of the 92nd, was also worn as
a crest on the men’s bonnets. The 74th proudly carried a third colour
besides the king’s and the regiment’s, granted by the East India Com-
pany in recognition of its gallantry at the battle of Assaye. The 28th
wore their regimental badges on the back of their shakos in recol-
lection of an incident during the battle of Alexandria in 1801 when
the rear rank faced about to beat off a cavalry attack.60 Nicknames for
regiments abounded in the army, often recalling notable incidents or
actions. After its 2nd battalion captured an imperial standard at Barossa
in 1811, the 87th was known as the ‘Aigle-Catchers’, a name further
advertised by the imperial eagle placed on its colours. Much of the
87th’s ‘custom’ developed around this triumph, with an annual ‘Barossa
Day’ when the ‘Barossa song’ was sung and the ‘Barossa cup’ passed
around.61
   There is good evidence that soldiers found satisfaction in all this
observance and celebration of their regiment’s history and traditions.
Sergeant Wheeler of the 51st, a self-educated soldier of exceptional intel-
ligence, found it fascinating to peruse an early account of his regiment.
It was his comrades, too, who persuaded him to put into print his ‘Jour-
nal’ of the Peninsular War and Waterloo. Sergeant Morris of the 73rd was
another who published in order to ‘place on record some of the exploits
of the regiment’, shamefully neglected, he claimed, by the ‘favouritism’
bestowed on more aristocratic corps. Sergeant Robertson of the 92nd
hoped that his account would inspire the ‘men who now compose this
gallant corps’.62 The same feeling for the past is evident in the way
