                                                          Natalie Petiteau   51


To qualify, however, the veteran had to produce documents certifying
that his injuries were truly the result of his service in the armies, a con-
dition that was to pose problems for many. A number of categories of
veterans felt themselves unfairly excluded from pensions and state ben-
eﬁts, for, concealed behind the July government’s apparent solicitude,
were measures that continued to exclude all those who had served the
homeland and returned unharmed, as well as those survivors who had
suffered wounds but found themselves deprived of their papers. Doc-
uments were easy to lose, and many soldiers had failed to look after
them carefully in the chaos of the last months of the war when they
were driven back by an invading army; they had lost them in the heat
of battle or during their frequently disordered dispersal across France
in 1814 or 1815. And due to the confusion of demobilization, many
soldiers returned home without ofﬁcial permission. They now found it
impossible to prove their military status or to provide justiﬁcation for
their claims to a pension.30
   Surprisingly, Napoleon III also demonstrated a degree of prudence in
the assistance he offered to former combatants in his uncle’s armies.
Admittedly, he instituted a more systematic aid policy and showed con-
sistent sympathy for the claims of the veterans, and went on to grant
pensions from his own purse to those former Revolutionary and Impe-
rial soldiers whom he judged to be in greatest need. But he still did
not consider offering assistance to the entire body of former soldiers:
state aid remained subject not only to proof of long service or of seri-
ous injury, but also to a certiﬁcate from the mayor or from the prefect
testifying to the veteran’s destitution. This inevitably created serious dis-
crimination, and those veterans who were hostile to the regime could
expect little help. In fact, it was not until 5 May 1869 that a law was
passed which established a pension that was available to all of the for-
mer non-commissioned ofﬁcers and soldiers of the Republic and Empire,
though, once again, on certain conditions. To qualify they had to have
completed two years of service or two campaigns, or to have suffered
a serious injury whilst serving under the First Empire; they also had
to prove that they had insufﬁcient personal resources to live indepen-
dently. But the veterans were not fooled. They realized that the state
was not making a huge ﬁnancial sacriﬁce, and that, by claiming their
pension, they would not, given their advanced age, weigh heavy on
state ﬁnances for long. The right to a pension still depended on the
conditions of a man’s service and on his material situation. He had no
automatic right to public support, as he would have in the twentieth
century, and society continued to believe that such ﬁnancial assistance
