                                                        Natalie Petiteau   47


prevent the degradation of their own bodies. During the nineteenth cen-
tury the levels of suffering experienced by the soldiers in Russia became
a poignant symbol of the Napoleonic wars as a whole.14
   But these were extreme cases. In other armies and other theatres of war
troop cohesion proved a source of strength. This was largely due to the
links that remained with each soldier’s native area, the sense of cohesion
reinforced by the fact that French conscripts of each classe were enlisted
in cohorts rather than being divided randomly across the regiments.
Each cohort of young recruits effectively brought to their assigned reg-
iment a solid group of men who came from the same locality, some of
whom may already have known each other in civilian life. The con-
scripts were not, therefore, faced with total isolation and the sense of
alienation that it could bring; the break from their community of ori-
gin was only a partial one. The solidarity between men who came from
the same place was even reinforced because of the sheer distances they
travelled. When confronted with an army that brought together young
men from across the entire nation, the soldiers continued to hear the
accents of their vernacular tongue or stories born of a common past,
and be alongside men who had the same customs as they did, knew the
same places, and had common points of reference. Correspondence with
home, letters received in far-ﬂung corners of Europe, also contributed to
their new sense of comradeship and collective identity.15
   But the regiment gradually became another essential point of refer-
ence for the young soldier, to the extent that it constituted for certain
men a substitute emotional unit within which the ties of friendship and
camaraderie were fundamental. Captain Bertrand refers to his regiment
as ‘his military family’.16 Victor Dupuy explains how such a sense of
cohesion is formed: ‘Nothing binds us together like the dangers we have
shared, like the happiness and the sorrow we have felt as a group’.17
More widely still, the whole army could be perceived as a new fam-
ily, or at any rate as a group in which the sense of belonging had
become particularly strong, to the point that there was a feeling of grief
among many soldiers when the Imperial army was ﬁnally disbanded
in 1815.18
   These factors, and especially the sense of belonging to the army, of
being part of a military family, shed light on the bravery and motivation
of the troops, for the tenacity of men in combat was often the result of
a desire to avenge the deaths of comrades. With time, too, the troops
gradually came to ﬁnd their occupation as soldiers appealing; the army
became for many a way of life, a culture to which they felt more and
more attracted.19 On the other hand, they did not necessarily know
