50   Assessing the Impact of War Experience


marginality, but for many it meant returning to the world of work, at
the risk, for those who had received the precious Legion of Honour, of
infringing the rules that they were supposed to obey. These rules were
quite restrictive: all functions that were more or less synonymous with
domestic service were deemed to be degrading, in the proper sense of
the word, and to accept one of these functions obliged a man to aban-
don wearing his decoration. For some individuals, therefore, the end of
the war meant a change of lifestyle, which they saw as a form of social
demotion, as a considerable drop in status. This was particularly true for
non-commissioned ofﬁcers.28
   In all, some 3.7 per cent of the population in 1815 found themselves
facing the social and economic consequences of their involvement in
war, while many had a long wait for recognition from the nation. Where
did the veterans of Napoleon’s campaigns stand in the hierarchy of
nineteenth-century French society? And how far was the state able or
prepared to answer their pleas or respond to their expectations? Legally,
retirement pay was granted automatically to all of those who had com-
pleted 30 years of service. Yet, even if the years of campaigning counted
for double, such an arrangement overlooked the majority of soldiers
who had enlisted after 1804, unless they suffered from injuries that led
to the loss of sight or the use of a limb. Those who did also had the auto-
matic right to retirement pay, but this was ﬁxed at a derisory sum: after
30 years of service, the ordinary soldier received 150 francs per year, or
300 francs if he had completed 50 years of actual service, a sum that
was not equal to the salary of a day labourer. As for those soldiers who
were deemed incapable of achieving 30 years of service due to disabili-
ties, they could ‘be nominated for retirement pay or for a simple bonus’,
the king reserving the right to determine the quota able to beneﬁt from
this compensation. Thus, a soldier who had participated in every cam-
paign since 1808, ﬁnding himself so badly wounded that he could not
remain in the army, but not suffering from the most serious categories of
disability, risked being sent back to his home without any kind of pen-
sion. In addition, there were many soldiers who saw their retirement pay
withdrawn for political or disciplinary reasons, most commonly because
they had accepted to serve during the Hundred Days.29
   It was the July Monarchy in 1831 that ﬁnally offered a slight improve-
ment in the conditions that were reserved for these soldiers, when it
passed legislation that protected from arbitrary discrimination the vic-
tims of wounds that did not result in amputation or loss of sight. Article
14 of the law speciﬁed that a pension should be granted to any veteran
prevented by his injuries from providing his own means of subsistence.
