                                                       Natalie Petiteau   49


the most to curb the diffusion of republican ideas among the working
classes of nineteenth-century France.23
   Contemporaries were quick to assume that Napoleonic veterans were
politically suspect, and they were often suspected of harbouring subver-
sive ideas and Bonapartist sympathies. They were frequently dismissed
as political outlaws, or as ‘Bonapartist brigands’.24 During summer and
autumn of 1815, they often ﬁgured among the victims of the White
Terror, particularly in the South. Incidents of violence and viliﬁcation
are legion in the months following the restoration. In Marseille, for
instance, a number of North Africans suspected of being veterans of
Napoleon’s campaigns – they were denounced for being ‘Egyptiens’ –
and hence of being closet Bonapartists, were lynched and massa-
cred.25 In Avignon, General Brune was murdered on 2 August 1815,
while in Toulouse, General Ramel met the same fate on 17 August.
In the Franche-Comté, men who sported Napoleonic uniforms were
subjected to threats and insults.26 The fact that the White Terror was
also directed against soldiers reveals how the army, at the beginning
of the Restoration, was absolutely not perceived as an incarnation of a
nation mobilised against a foreign enemy. This army was, on the con-
trary, regarded with suspicion, a force recruited and paid by an internal
enemy. For a signiﬁcant part of the population in 1815, being a soldier
also meant being Bonapartist. Because of the widespread confusion that
accompanied the dispersal of the army, veterans were often regarded as
deserters. The new regime did little to help them regularize their admin-
istrative position. And though the government was concerned about
some of the atrocities that took place, the general air of confusion was
exploited and suspicions of the veterans remained.27
   This was all the more true since these men had trouble reintegrat-
ing into the apparent anonymity of civilian life. They did not form a
recognised group as such, even if they shared the experience of having
worn military uniform for a substantial period of time. The diversity
of their situations and the very different periods they had spent in the
army served to divide the group into several distinct generations: the
experience of the relatively untried new recruits of the ﬁnal years of
war – the young men referred to as Marie-Louise in honour of the new
empress – contrasted with that of those old soldiers who had begun their
career under the Revolution. Because of their wide diversity of expe-
rience as soldiers, the veterans failed to appreciate that they shared a
common culture of war, and scarcely acknowledged the large amount
that they had in common. Besides, their paths often diverged once they
returned to civilian life. For some the return from the war was a time of
