54   Assessing the Impact of War Experience


The assertion of a common identity

The veterans were late to form a group identity: indeed, the image of the
veteran was formed only gradually through political struggles in which
only a small minority were involved, and through social protests which
often emanated from individuals. From the July Monarchy onwards,
they ceased to be looked upon by the rest of society as outlaws and
bandits – the ‘brigands of the Loire’ – and instead enjoyed a more pos-
itive reputation as men who inspired enthusiasm for Napoleon and his
Empire. But it was not until 1857, when the Second Empire honoured
them with the Médaille de Sainte-Hélène and gave them the oppor-
tunity to come together for ofﬁcial ceremonies, that the image of the
veteran and the reality of daily life began to converge, and that society
recognised the great sacriﬁce they had made. They were still not a single
group marked by shared views and politics; but there was at least greater
solidarity among them. However, the comparative unity of the group
became stronger with the invention of the term vieux débris – the only
term to be used to describe the former soldiers, and akin in its way to
the English ‘old contemptibles’ – in acknowledgement of what they had
done for their country. In the wake of the Great War, associations would
be formed in every commune to honour old soldiers, a circumstance
that surely owed much to the fact that their families were at last able
to convey to others the memory of those who had, for so long, faced
the aftermath of war, alone. Four generations separate Napoleon’s ‘grog-
nards’ from the ‘poilus’ of 1914, a long but not wholly unbridgeable
gap in time. Indeed, some of the young soldiers who defended France
in 1914 had been able to meet and mingle with the very old men who
were among the last survivors of Napoleon’s campaigns. With each suc-
ceeding generation, there was a growing awareness that the state too
often remained indifferent to the social misfortunes that resulted from
the consequences of combat, and left unrewarded the years of youth
sacriﬁced for the defence of the motherland.39
   By 1914, of course, there was far greater awareness in French soci-
ety of the cause for which the young were being asked to ﬁght. The
men who left in 1914 clearly knew why they were called to battle,
whereas those who had left in 1800, or 1812, or 1814 felt less strongly
the need to take up arms. This is an important social and psycholog-
ical change. By expressing, in the years following the creation of the
Medaille de Sainte-Hélène, a group consciousness forged by a shared
past, the veterans of the Empire reﬂected one of the processes of inter-
nalization of the national idea that occurred between the end of the
