46   Assessing the Impact of War Experience


biscuits which were their regular diet, and he makes the point that with
such a diet it was difﬁcult to face the rigours of a long march or to ﬁnd
the energy needed to ﬁght battles.9
   In many respects the Napoleonic army was still functioning like an
army of the ancien régime, and the ofﬁcers would forget that they had
citizen-soldiers under their command. There was a major contradiction
between the political aims which directed the war and the methods
that were implemented to achieve the victory to which Napoleon was
so deeply committed. When confronted with the constraints of a daily
existence that was marked by poverty and deﬁciency, the soldiers found
themselves deﬂected from the needs of war to those of simple survival,
showing great resourcefulness in the pursuit of food and booty that
could sustain them in their battalions. Not that they could remain deaf
to the call of arms, for they had to face some of the most brutal and terri-
fying violence on the battleﬁeld. Battles in the later eighteenth century –
during the Seven Years War, for instance – had already shown a propen-
sity to increased violence and higher mortality, but with the Wars of the
Revolution and Napoleon they became more frequent and still more
deadly in their impact, forcing men to confront a world where violence
was omnipresent, the sounds and sights of battle inescapable. It was
a time when the lives of soldiers were brutalised by what they expe-
rienced on the battleﬁeld, to the point where those who survived no
longer lived within the same mental boundaries as those who had not
been forced to submit to conscription.10
   These experiences were most extreme in Spain, where large numbers
of soldiers had to brave the speciﬁc conditions imposed by guerrilla
warfare, where the whole people, without distinction, were united in a
struggle for independence.11 The French soldiers who were sent to Spain
felt that it was their status as human beings, and not simply as war-
riors, that was threatened. The rules of war were no longer respected.12
In these conditions strength of character, that essential quality in win-
ning military struggles elsewhere, proved insufﬁcient to overcome fear.
Here, men were driven mad by war, something that would happen again
during the retreat from Moscow in 1812. In soldiers’ memoirs we ﬁnd
innumerable accounts of the impact of cold in the Russian campaign.13
Soldiers no longer lined up for battle, and they ceased to look like sol-
diers; they were without uniforms, and sometimes reduced to the ragged
remnants of clothing. In the view of many, even of the participants in
this miserable campaign, the troops had ceased even to resemble human
beings. The only struggle that remained for them – and even this proved
futile when they were confronted with the Cossacks – was to try to
