                                                        Natalie Petiteau   53


the army; they went on to become public letter-writers in village markets
or primary school teachers in the small towns of rural France. Others
again beneﬁted from those jobs that were reserved for former soldiers,
positions as forest wardens, rural policemen or tobacconists that offered
only modest social status but which provided them with a source of reg-
ular income, for a while at least. As a result, the rural population became
accustomed to ﬁnding former soldiers of the Napoleonic armies in posi-
tions where they held a fragment of ﬁnancial or police-related power.
Urban France, too, got used to the sight of Napoleonic veterans in minor
ofﬁcial roles, often as castle, town hall, or hospice wardens under the
Restoration or the July Monarchy. They found work, too, as hostel war-
dens, inn keepers, or reading room managers, jobs which again called
for a degree of discipline and a sense of order. It is true that, when com-
pared to the lives they had lived in the military, these jobs often implied
some loss of social prestige; but the veterans who took them found new
ways to participate in the supervision of the population and sometimes
even to place themselves at the heart of a clandestine political life on
the margins of respectable society.37
   Of course, not all army veterans enjoyed the same chance of reintegra-
tion, and they found very different niches once they returned to civilian
life. Their success must be judged by their previous social expectations,
the rank they had held in the army, and their ability to maintain a posi-
tion in civil society similar to that they had enjoyed while in uniform.
Not all could succeed. We can contrast those men who, beneﬁting from
their reputation in the military, succeeded in being thought of as nota-
bles within their villages, with others, often non-commissioned ofﬁcers
and subalterns, who failed to preserve in civilian life the position that
they had held in the army. The reasons for failure are numerous and
predictable. Some refused to look for work and preferred to rely on their
pension; others proved unable to ﬁnd work or to accept the discipline of
the workplace and, through their inability to commit to a professional
path, experienced a drop in both earnings and status. For them the pas-
sage from military to civilian life was often painful. It is these men who
inspired the legendary image of veterans dragging out an idle and mis-
erable existence in lowly taverns and hostels, where they would express
their fervour for Napoleon. But the fate of this hard core of nostalgic
ofﬁcers, condemned to poverty and public disdain, cannot in itself con-
vey the complex social realities which were hidden behind the fate of
every anonymous soldier. The unity of the group and their sense of col-
lective identity owed much to the Napoleonic years and to the military
past of each of its members.38
