56   Assessing the Impact of War Experience


experience; rather it led to a highly diverse range of circumstances –
political, social and cultural – to which its soldiers, like other citizens,
were exposed. Following a time of shared human experience through
their involvement in the Imperial armies, the men followed diverse per-
sonal itineraries that led them to undergo different experiences of war
and different emotional responses, demonstrating, through the various
paths they followed, how each individual might react differently and
personally to the experience of war. This is not, however, how history
remembers them. The legend that was formed around the survivors of
the Grande Armée was that of a group of men at the margins of society,
drawn to the person of their emperor by his success and his undeniable
charisma, and this ended up corresponding closely to the way the major-
ity of the veterans portrayed themselves when Napoleon III’s regime
ofﬁcially paid them tribute in 1857. That legend would prove aston-
ishingly powerful, and it explains why, during the second half of the
nineteenth century, the Emperor’s stock remained so high in military
circles. It also explains the apparent consensus between veterans of very
different backgrounds and army experience, till it seemed that even the
youngest soldiers, caught up in the wars only in their ﬁnal months, were
won over to the legend, and were as loyal to the Napoleonic myth as the
oldest veterans around whom it had originally been constructed.



Notes
 1. See Jean-Yves Guiomar, L’invention de la guerre totale, XVIIIe–XXe siècles (Paris:
    Editions du Félin, 2004); David Bell, The First Total War: Napoleon’s Europe and
    the Birth of Warfare As We Know It (London: Bloomsbury, 2007).
 2. See Karen Hagemann and Katherine Aaslestad (eds), ‘New Perspectives on
    the Period of the Anti-Napoleonic Wars, 1806–1815’, special issue of Central
    European History, 39, 4 (December 2006). Here the reader will ﬁnd further
    discussion of Central Europe, where this approach is more developed.
 3. Philippe Contamine, ‘Mourir pour la patrie, Xe −XXe siècle’, in Les lieux de
    mémoire. Tome II: La Nation, vol. 3, ed. Pierre Nora (Paris: Gallimard, 1986),
    pp. 25–29.
 4. Natalie Petiteau, ‘Pour une anthropologie historique des guerres de l’Empire’,
    in Odile Roynette (ed.), Pour une histoire culturelle de la guerre au XIXe siècle,
    numéro spécial de la Revue d’histoire du XIXe siècle, 30 (2005): 45–63.
 5. Gunther E. Rothenberg, The Art of Warfare in the Age of Napoleon (Blooming-
    ton: Indiana University Press, 1978), p. 82; Capitaine Gervais, A la conquête de
    l’Europe. Souvenir d’un soldat de l’Empire (Paris: Éditions du Grenadier, 2002),
    p. 138.
 6. Alain Pigeard, L’armée napoléonienne, 1804–1815 (Paris: Curandera, 1993),
    p. 322.
