64   Glory, Honour and Patriotism


this ensured their popularity among their compatriots, which was a
very important factor in an army built from scratch. They enjoyed the
conﬁdence of their fellow-citizens and could appeal to civic sacriﬁce.
  Young volunteers, mostly from the nobility, ﬁlled the ranks of the
lower ofﬁcers. Born in the 1780s or 1790s, they had no military experi-
ence, but were motivated by a passionate patriotic zeal. Moreover, young
men from aristocratic families were often ready to support the costs
of forming the units or even to found them.18 Usually they did so to
fulﬁl the dream of commanding their own regiment. This type of the
young aristocrat was portrayed later in Adam Mickiewicz’s epic poem
Pan Tadeusz (1834):

            . . . This was indeed the young Count,
            Joined up lately, but had spent a tidy amount,
            Out of his own vast income a regiment raised,
            In his very ﬁrst battle was justly much praised,
            And the Emperor today had him colonel created.19

Since money and family inﬂuence were the key determinants of their
promotion, the military authorities solved the problem of their inex-
perience by appointing older, better-qualiﬁed lieutenant-colonels and
majors to assist them.
   The method of forming the ofﬁcer corps in new regiments (based on
mixed groups of legionaries, veterans of the wars of 1792–1794 and vol-
unteers) that was established in 1806–1807 was applied again in 1809 in
Galicia, and in 1812 in Lithuania, with one modiﬁcation – the novices
of 1806–1807 now joined the group of experienced veterans. At the
same time many older ofﬁcers (who had brieﬂy returned to service in
1806) resigned. Another tendency could also be observed – an exodus
of ofﬁcers from the army of the Duchy to the regiment of the Chevau-
légers Polonais de la Garde or to the uhlans and infantry units of the
Vistula Legion.20 Though this involved a relatively small number of indi-
viduals, it irritated the Minister of War, Prince Poniatowski, who was
convinced that in this way his young army lost some of its most valuable
ofﬁcers.
   The diversity of recruitment methods meant that the cadre of ofﬁcers
in the army of the Duchy of Warsaw was a group composed of men
linked to very different political traditions. The levels of their military
experience were also very different. This stimulated rivalry between fac-
tions among the ofﬁcers, especially in periods of peace, when conﬂicts
over both personal and military issues found a new intensity.
