                                                       Jarosław Czubaty   65


Ofﬁcers and promotion

In 1812 the total number of ofﬁcers in the army of the Duchy of
Warsaw was 1882.21 It is difﬁcult to deﬁne their social background
with any precision. Many of the documents that emanated from the
Ministry of War in 1807–1815 were destroyed during the Warsaw Rising
in 1944, when almost all the regular reports, which included infor-
mation about the ofﬁcers’ background, property, marital status and
education, were burned. The lack of such materials makes any large-
scale prosopographical study extremely difﬁcult to undertake. But, using
other sources, it is possible to suggest the general pattern of an ofﬁcer’s
career.
   There is no doubt that the vast majority of them came from the nobil-
ity (which, including the petty, landless nobility, constituted up to 8
per cent of the population of the Polish lands). After 1807, the trend
for wealthy bourgeois to become ofﬁcers, which had begun in the pre-
partition era, continued.22 In the Polish Legions in Italy about 15 per
cent of the ofﬁcers belonged to the urban bourgeoisie.23 In the army of
the Duchy of Warsaw this percentage was probably a little lower. And
the forces organized after 1806 were devoid of the shade of republican
radicalism which had prevailed in the Legions. The relatively small con-
tribution of townsmen to the newly formed ofﬁcer corps could also be
explained by the small number of townspeople in Poland (about 14–17
per cent of population). The urban elite, which could deliver candidates
for the higher ranks in the army, was a rather small group. Moreover,
facing the competition of numerous nobles, traditionally accustomed
to military service, many educated young men of non-noble origins
preferred to follow civilian careers.
   In this context the example of the ofﬁcer cadre of the Chevau-légers
Polonais de la Garde is instructive. Although this regiment was not a part
of the army of the Duchy, it was formed in 1807 in Warsaw from vol-
unteers. Its social structure was in some ways typical of the military as
a whole, although the Chevau-légers were an elite unit, and the repre-
sentation of the aristocracy and wealthy nobility among the ofﬁcers was
probably a little higher than in other ‘line’ regiments.
   The representatives of the aristocracy and wealthy nobility consti-
tuted 7 per cent of the ofﬁcers of the regiment. Of the rest of the ofﬁcers
26 per cent came from the ‘middle nobility’ (the owners of few villages),
and 23 per cent from among poor nobles. The lack of information about
the ancestry and property of the other 40 per cent of the ofﬁcers whose
names can be found in heraldic registers suggests that they also should
