62   Glory, Honour and Patriotism


slogans among the ordinary soldiers. This process could be reinforced by
the strong inﬂuence exerted on their colleagues by those soldiers who
came from the poor nobility. In addition, the Polish army in 1806–1815
adopted some of the traditions of the republican army which they inher-
ited from     ´
           Kościuszko’s insurrection or from the Polish Legions in Italy
and Germany (1797–1801). The attempts by Poniatowski and by those
ofﬁcers who were former legionaries to inculcate in the minds of the
ordinary soldiers a consciousness that they were the defenders of their
country could also have had some effect.9 At the very least, relations
between ofﬁcers and men in the army of the Duchy of Warsaw were
based on similar principles to those in the French army and were very
different from the realities of service in the Austrian, Prussian or Russian
armies. This could only reinforce fellow-feeling between the men in
ranks and their ofﬁcers and make them more susceptible to the ideas
and opinions prevalent among the ofﬁcer class.
   The necessity for improvisation when the army of 1807 was being
created and in subsequent years when it was further expanded raised
the question of how ofﬁcers should be selected. They had to be brave,
of course, but they must also be competent. This was one of the most
important problems that the military leaders of the Duchy had to face.
   It would prove difﬁcult to bring the ofﬁcer corps up to full strength,
and there were few groups capable of providing suitable candidates.
In accordance with Napoleon’s orders, about 30 ofﬁcers from the for-
mer Polish Legions in Italy and Germany who were still serving with
Dabrowski in Italy arrived at the end of 1806.10 A larger group consisted
   ˛
of those of their colleagues who, after the disappointment of the 1801
peace treaty, had decided to return to Poland.11 The members of this
group, strongly connected with D ˛    abrowski, immediately answered his
appeal and joined the army, usually serving with ranks ranging from
captain to general. Among their most important qualities were expe-
rience gained during the campaigns of 1797–1800 and knowledge of
French tactics, regulations and methods of training. The posts they were
given conﬁrmed the high opinion in which this group was held: in
1807 they made up 45.6 per cent of the commanders of battalions and
squadrons,12 while almost half the generals who served in the army of
the Duchy of Warsaw in 1807–1815 were former legionaries.13 In spite of
their experience and military skill, it was not this which led to their pro-
motion; rather, the procedure of entrusting them with important posts
was in compliance with the instructions received from Napoleon, who
in this way tried to guarantee the loyalty of his new ally.14 The special
position granted to the legionaries in the army provoked comment and
