60   Glory, Honour and Patriotism


hero and liberator, to be compared in the popular patriotic poetry of
the time to the brave knights from the brilliant past of the country,
from the days of King Władysław Jagiełło or Jan III Sobieski. The paths
which they followed during their careers in the army, their ambitions
and their attitudes towards military service form the subject matter of
the present chapter. These are questions that were largely neglected by
Polish historians in the second half of the twentieth century, while
Polish historiography in the nineteenth and in the ﬁrst half of the
twentieth centuries preferred to concentrate on the patriotic motives
that lay behind their service. This approach reﬂected the common con-
viction of those times that the main aim of historiography was to draw
attention to models of patriotism and sacriﬁce in the service of the
nation. But it had the effect of omitting or marginalizing other reasons
for military service in years between 1806 and 1815, reasons which are
worthy of more detailed examination.
   The raising of Polish forces in 1806 was inextricably linked to the
activity of General Jan Henryk D ˛browski, a veteran of the Ko´ściuszko
Insurrection of 1794 and the commander-in-chief of the Polish Legions
in Italy.1 At the start of the campaign he was still in Italy, along with the
remnants of the Legions (the regiments of uhlans and infantry). After
the Battle of Jena, he was summoned to Berlin, where on 6 November,
after a brief conference with Napoleon and Józef Wybicki,2 he issued a
proclamation to his compatriots, appealing to them to give their support
to the French Emperor.
   After arriving in Pozna ´ ń and leaving the negotiations with inﬂuential
Polish aristocrats and noblemen to Wybicki, D ˛   abrowski concentrated his
activity on the organization of the Polish forces. Two other well-known
generals supported his initiative. The ﬁrst was Prince Józef Poniatowski,3
a nephew of the late King Stanisław Augustus, who represented the inner
circle of the aristocracy. The second, General Józef Zaj ˛czek,4 was a for-
mer Polish Jacobin and a veteran of the Egyptian campaign, who was a
member of Napoleon’s general staff.


Creating the Polish army, 1806–1812

During the seven months following D ˛   abrowski’s proclamation, the
number of Polish troops reached almost 30,000, a ﬁgure that must be
considered a real success when account is taken of the current ﬁnan-
cial problems, the lack of competent administration and the scale of the
devastation of the country by the Russian, Prussian and French forces.
The army of the Duchy of Warsaw grew to 60,000 soldiers by 1810;5
