                                                      Jarosław Czubaty   63


discussion. While some Poles – those who were conservative in outlook
or remained distrustful of Napoleon – saw them as light-minded adven-
turers or mercenaries, the majority of their compatriots recognized in
Dabrowski and his ofﬁcers steadfast and committed patriots.
   ˛
   Another method of improving the organization of the army and
ensuring a high level of professionalism was to transfer ofﬁcers from
the Grande Armée itself. Some, like General Zaj ˛czek or Colonels
Aksamitowski and Sokolnicki,15 were Poles. Napoleon also designated
some French ofﬁcers, like colonels Jean Pelletier and Jean Mallet, to be
inspectors of the artillery and the engineers respectively.
   The need to have ofﬁcers familiar with service in modern armies
also led to the appointment of Poles from the Prussian and (after the
1809 campaign) Austrian armies. It is perhaps signiﬁcant that many
of them had served in the Polish army before 1795. After the Third
Partition (1795), some Polish soldiers and ofﬁcers without landed prop-
erties or other means of subsistence decided to enlist in the armies of
the partitioning powers. Their appearance in the army of the Duchy in
1806–1809 was not particularly controversial (except for a few quarrels
and duels). It was commonly held that their resignation from enemy
forces proved their patriotism and that their previous service provided
a good training in military tactics which would be useful in the ﬁght
for Poland’s independence. Since their competence was widely appreci-
ated, the minister of war, Prince Poniatowski, ordered that 30 per cent
of vacant lieutenancies and captaincies should be reserved for them.16
   The rather small number of ofﬁcers coming from the Russian army
might at ﬁrst glance seem surprising. One explanation may be that ser-
vice with the Russians was more attractive to Polish volunteers when
compared to the career prospects offered by the Austrian or Prussian
armies. The Russian administrative and military system was more open
to foreigners because of the non-existence in Russia of the educated
cadres that were indispensable for the command of a large army. For
Poles the chances for rapid promotion were also greater in the Russian
forces because of the lack of a language barrier (thanks to the similarity
of the Slavonic languages), something that proved a serious problem for
Poles in the Austrian and Prussian armies.17
   Another important group among the ofﬁcer corps in the army of the
Duchy consisted of those ofﬁcers who had gained their rank before
1794, and who after the Third Partition decided to stay on in the coun-
try and lead a civilian life. Their military experience was not usually
as considerable as that of the legionaries, but they had other qualities.
A signiﬁcant percentage of them came from the wealthy nobility, and
