                                                       Jarosław Czubaty   61


and by 1812 it consisted of 75,000 ofﬁcers and men. It was composed
of seventeen regiments of infantry, one regiment of foot artillery, one of
horse artillery and sixteen regiments of cavalry (cuirassiers, chasseurs,
hussars and, most important of all, uhlans).6 The relatively high num-
ber of cavalry units resulted from a speciﬁcally Polish military tradition
and reﬂected Napoleon’s high opinion of Polish cavalrymen.
   In 1812 the Polish military effort – including Polish volunteers from
the Russian partition and Polish troops in French service – totalled
about 104,000 soldiers. Enormous casualties were sustained during the
campaign, and the army lost some 90,000 men. But thanks to the deter-
mination of Poniatowski and other generals, within a few months of the
defeat in Russia, the Polish army again numbered some 37,000 soldiers.
In 1813, 20,000 of them – a few veterans of previous campaigns bol-
stered by the arrival of new recruits – left the Duchy of Warsaw (leaving
                                                       ´ Modlin, Gda ´
behind only the garrisons in the fortresses of Zamość,               ńsk
and  Czestochowa) and fought on Napoleon’s side as the Emperor’s last
        ˛
ally in the months before his abdication in 1814.
   The enlargement of the army depended on political will as well as
the military situation of the country. The ﬁrst measure taken to create
new units was based on the tradition of the levée en masse long estab-
lished among the Polish nobility, whereby regiments of volunteers were
supplied with peasants from the landed estates of the aristocracy and
wealthy nobles.7 This measure was adopted when turned to when rapid
improvisation was required, notably during the campaign of 1806–1807
and the war of 1809, when Polish troops entered Galicia, or in 1812
in the territories of the Russian Partition. In more stable periods (1808,
1810–1811), the main source of new recruits for the army was conscrip-
tion based on principles similar to those introduced by the French. In
spite of the different methods of creating the units, the social structure
of the Polish lands ensured that the great majority of ordinary soldiers
came from the ranks of the peasantry. The majority of these soldiers
were illiterate, and service in the army often provided them with their
ﬁrst opportunity to visit regions located far from their own villages. It
is difﬁcult to speak of their patriotism or national consciousness in the
sense in which we would deﬁne it today, but there is no doubt that after
a few months in the regiment they imbibed at least some of the gen-
eral motivation towards the service felt by their commanders and their
colleagues from bourgeois or poor noble backgrounds.8 To some extent
this resulted from the fact that the Polish army was ﬁghting against men
they regarded as invaders from abroad, speaking German or Russian, a
circumstance that was conducive to the spread of national ideas and
