                                                         Jarosław Czubaty   69


honour of the Poles, my own and my regiment’s’.37 A similar mixture of
national pride and the desire for military glory can be found in Major
Kozietulski’s cry, which became the signal for the famous Chevau-légers’
charge at Somosierra in 1808: ‘Forward, damn it! The Emperor is looking
at us!’
   It can be difﬁcult to separate patriotism from dreams of glory. Both
notes sound in the march of the Chevau-légers regiment:

            We are conquering you
            For our Poland
            And our glory.
            Accustomed to victories
            We enter your town,
            Demanding from you politeness and hospitality.
            But you don’t need to
            Be afraid of us.38

It seems that the words of the march, together with the conqueror’s
pride in a sense of chivalry, reﬂected the elite character of the regiment,
in which the tone for the ofﬁcer cadre was set by rich, well-bred young
gentlemen. It is also possible that many of their colleagues from other
regiments would have preferred the French song written for the Chevau-
légers in 1808 by their friend General Antoine-Charles Lasalle:

               The French were in Poland
               Spain sees the Poles
               Europe will without disgrace
               Witness the reign of the French and Poles.
               Which nation is strong enough
               To resist their efforts?
               The French and the Poles,
               If they were inclined,
               Could put everyone to death.39

Sułkowski’s example shows that glory was not the sole motive for ser-
vice. Though he expected that a future war could bring ‘a thousand
laurels’, the young colonel did not forget about the more prosaic aims
of soldiering. Giving thanks ‘to his [lucky] star’ for the possibility of ser-
vice at Napoleon’s side, he hoped that this could allow him to pursue
‘the most beautiful career in the homeland’ – without such support, he
believed, he would fall victim to his compatriots’ envy. He appealed
