66   Glory, Honour and Patriotism


be classiﬁed as coming from the poor nobility. Townsmen, by way of
comparison, constituted only 4 per cent of the ofﬁcer cadre.24
   There were, nonetheless, signs that a process of social transformation
and modernization was beginning to take place in the army. Several
ofﬁcers from a bourgeois background reached the rank of major or
colonel. Two representatives of this group (Maurycy Hauke and Józef
Rautenstrauch)25 crowned their careers in the rank of general.
   Yet the example of these ofﬁcers only underlines the continued link
between promotion and social origin. Commanders from an urban back-
ground, like Hauke, usually followed the career path of a typical line
ofﬁcer and were promoted to the rank of colonel or general after about
20 years of service. It is signiﬁcant that none of the bourgeois ofﬁcers in
the Chevau-légers obtained his promotion until 1811.26
   The path to the pinnacle of the military hierarchy was shorter for
the young aristocrats – men like Antoni Paweł Sułkowski, Stanisław
Małachowski, Ludwik Pac, and Michał Radziwiłł, who became generals
within a few years of enlisting.
   As was customary, prospects of promotion depended not only on abil-
ity, but also on connections and acquaintances. The career of Benedykt
Ł˛aczy ´
      ński shows that this principle did not apply only to members of
                         aczy ´
aristocratic families. Ł ˛    ński was a brave ofﬁcer in the Polish Legions,
but his career could not be described as brilliant until the beginning of
1807 when, in the space of three months, he was promoted three times
and reached the rank of colonel. The acceleration of his career resulted
from the role played at the time by his beautiful sister Maria Walewska:
Napoleon’s mistress.
   Usually the decisive inﬂuence on ofﬁcers’ careers was exerted by pow-
erful military protectors, for instance, the French marshals or the three
most important Polish generals. The relationship between Poniatowski,
Dabrowski and Zaj ˛
   ˛                  aczek was plagued with conﬂict and controversy.
Poniatowski, who was chosen by Napoleon to be Minister of War, was
not connected with the pro-French faction in Poland or with the tra-
dition of freedom-ﬁghting after the Third Partition. On the basis of his
ministerial competence he issued orders to the other division comman-
ders. D ˛abrowski and  Zajaczek for a long time refused to acknowledge the
                            ˛
prince as their superior,27 and they appealed to Marshal Davout, who
until 1808 was the commander-in-chief of Polish, Saxon and French
forces in the Duchy, to mediate on their behalf. Each of the three rivals
protected the interests of their supporters, who took precedence over all
others in promotions and honours.28 In consequence, almost all the ofﬁ-
cer corps in the army of the Duchy could be divided into three mutually
