70   Glory, Honour and Patriotism


many times to his wife to maintain good relations with powerful
personalities (like Prince Poniatowski or the French resident in the
Duchy), who were able to accelerate the progress of his career. The same
pragmatic approach can be found in Sułkowski’s letter about a conver-
sation with Poniatowski’s sister, Maria Teresa Tyszkiewicz. The colonel
frankly described all the ﬂatteries he had addressed to Poniatowski’s ears
and the concealment of his critical opinions about the Minister of War,
and he ended his letter with the cynical conclusion: ‘But that’s poli-
tics, isn’t it?’40 Some remarks in the letters of other ofﬁcers prove that
Sułkowski’s attitude towards his service was not exceptional. Idealism
and pragmatism were in no sense incompatible.

Conclusion

The Duchy of Warsaw ceased to exist in 1815. At the Congress of Vienna
it was decided that 85 per cent of its territory should form a new
Kingdom of Poland ruled by Alexander I. The remainder was handed
back to Prussia and Austria. The end of the Napoleonic epoch and the
creation of the so-called Congress Kingdom forced Polish veterans to
decide whether or not to continue to serve in the Polish army now that
it was commanded by the tsar’s brother, Grand Duke Constantine. After
1815, many of the ofﬁcers from the aristocracy and wealthy nobility
retired. In some cases, their feelings towards the Napoleon were the
deciding factor. An example of this attitude can be found in the dec-
laration of General Józef Kossakowski, one of Napoleon’s ‘last faithful’,
at Fontainebleau in 1814. In 1815 he resigned arguing that ‘the man
who had been honoured to serve Napoleon could then serve only God
in Holy Mass’.41 Others left the army, discouraged by the Russian style
of command. The violent methods of training and the public humil-
iation of ofﬁcers by Grand Duke Constantine provoked widespread
indignation.42
   Despite this, many decided to stay in the army. Their decision owed
much to a belief that the Kingdom – like the Duchy of Warsaw before
it – was a transitional form of the Polish state, and that Alexander I’s
policies might lead to the future uniﬁcation of the Polish provinces.
Not all, however, acted from political motives. Many ofﬁcers from the
poorer nobility and the urban bourgeoisie had nowhere else to go, as
military service was their only source of income. The army offered them
comfortable, even high, salaries, as well as the prospect of a pension
on retirement; and the most meritorious could expect proﬁtable con-
tracts to lease landed properties from the state. In these circumstances
