                                                       Jarosław Czubaty   67


antagonistic factions, although – fortunately, perhaps – the sense of
faction was largely stiﬂed in the face of war.


Motives for service

What inspired so many volunteers to enlist? Undoubtedly, the princi-
pal reason was Polish patriotism. The majority of those inhabitants of
the former Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth who were interested in
public affairs shared a common desire to achieve nationhood, and the
belief that this could be achieved only by war and sacriﬁce attracted
thousands to the cause. They even came from those territories that were
under Austrian and Russian occupation, and that too in spite of a strong
risk of repression.
   But patriotism was not the only motive. It was both tradition and con-
temporary opinion that service in the army was an honourable career
path, worthy of a nobleman. In the case of many ofﬁcers coming from
the urban middle class and the landless nobility, however, ﬁnancial
inducements should not be ignored. Another motive was the high pres-
tige of the ofﬁcer corps in public life, a reﬂection of the inﬂuence of the
Napoleonic model of the role of the army in the state, but also the posi-
tive image of the soldier in Polish consciousness. Liberators and avengers
occupied a special place in social life and in women’s hearts. According
to one memoir, the balls of those days remained military parades: the
uniforms and epaulettes almost dislodged frock coats, and civilians were
treated by young ladies with disregard and irony.29
   For young men without military experience, the prospect of an ofﬁ-
cer’s career promised a life of adventure. Military service appealed
especially to those who dreamed of achieving fame. In this they did
not differ from the thousands of men wearing the uniforms of other
European armies. The examples of Napoleon and his marshals offered
powerful role models and persuaded them that the paradigms of honour,
glory and career were shaped by the battleﬁeld.
   Typical representatives of this group of ofﬁcers were two young aristo-
crats, Count Włodzimierz Potocki and Prince Dominik Radziwiłł.30 The
ﬁrst was the son of Stanisław Szcz˛esny Potocki, one of the opponents
of the Constitution of 3 May 1791 and a leader of the pro-Russian
Confederacy of Targowica, regarded by many Poles as a traitor. In
1808, the 19-year-old Włodzimierz Potocki founded a battery of horse
artillery and took part in the war against Austria, trying to atone
for his father’s failings and re-establish the ancient reputation of his
family.
