68   Glory, Honour and Patriotism


  Prince Dominik Radziwiłł, one of the greatest landowners in Europe
even though he was encumbered with enormous debts, foresaw in 1810
the future war with Russia and decided to take part in the struggle as
commander of a cavalry regiment.31 His plan came close to failure when
the military authorities of the Duchy told him that no regiments were
available – especially as the young aristocrat was completely lacking in
military experience. Radziwiłł’s friends and advisers were also against the
project; they pointed out that, since he was a Russian subject, his landed
estates would be inevitably conﬁscated by the tsar. But in spite of their
advice, the young aristocrat did not give up. He paid compensation to
one of the older commanders, who agreed to resign his command, and
broke the opposition of the Ministry of War by promising to supply
the army with a contribution of about 12,000 ducats.32 Obviously, his
landed estates in the Russian partition were conﬁscated, but the prince
fulﬁlled his dreams. Indeed, his regiment entered Wilno as the ﬁrst unit
of the Grande Armée.
  Dreams about military fame and an idealized image of war typiﬁed
many young ofﬁcers. Aleksander Fredro, a 16-year old volunteer in
1809,33 described his beginnings in military life as an exciting adven-
ture: ‘I jump into the war’, he wrote, ‘like a young deer into a meadow
full of ﬂowers’. There is no doubt that for many the realities of military
service appeared to substantiate such a colourful and joyous image. The
daughter of Fredro’s former commander, Adam Potocki (another young
commander from an aristocratic family), describing the return of her
father from the campaign of 1812, noted that the colonel was afraid of
the dark and spent all the time in the brightly illuminated salon: ‘That
night he saw terrible spectres of slaughter and ravages before his eyes.
He was crying and jumping out of his bed.’34
  A good example of the different competing motivations that came
into play is to be found in the correspondence of another noble Prince
Antoni Paweł Sułkowski, a richer relative of Józef Sułkowski, Napoleon’s
adjutant in Italy and Egypt.35 The young colonel emerges from the let-
ters he wrote to his wife as a man primarily driven by strong patriotic
feelings. Because Napoleon was the only ruler who could restore nation-
hood to Poland, Sułkowski treated service in faraway Spain as a sacriﬁce
which he was prepared to offer to the national cause.36 Besides patriotic
exaltation, his letters also reveal the typical mirage of personal military
fame. Marching to Spain, he wrote to his wife: ‘I have just learned the
words of the song ‘Il faut donc pour la gloire’. Being solicitous for national
pride, the colonel stressed that in foreign countries his regiment ought
to display ‘good bearing and reputation’, because it contributed to ‘the
