                                                      Jarosław Czubaty   71


the percentage of urban bourgeois among the ofﬁcers rose. Overall, in
1815–1830 they yielded 18 per cent of the generals.43 The changes in
the social structure of the ofﬁcer corps were similar to those in other
European military forces, though the process of transforming and mod-
ernizing the army would be interrupted for over 80 years by the defeat
of the November Uprising in 1831 and the subsequent liquidation of
the Polish military.
   The motivations that lay behind the decision to enlist in the army of
the Duchy of Warsaw in 1806–1815 are explained by a complex mixture
of patriotism, a desire for glory and pragmatic careerism. Polish patrio-
tism was an important motive, but it was certainly not the only one that
induced men to join the army as one of ‘King Sobieski’s successors’. It
is impossible to measure the scale of inﬂuence of these different factors.
It is also fairly pointless, since a military career in those days opened
up a wide range of vistas, from fulﬁlling personal ambition to carrying
out one’s national duty, and from gaining the esteem of one’s compa-
triots to achieving ﬁnancial enrichment. The varying attitudes of Polish
ofﬁcers towards military service in the new conditions of the post-1815
world reﬂected divisions among the ofﬁcers caused by their various emo-
tional, political and ﬁnancial concerns. It is signiﬁcant, though, that
no sharp distinctions can be drawn between those who took these dif-
ferent options (pro-Napoleonic patriots, pragmatic patriots and ofﬁcers
forced to stay in the army by their ﬁnancial situation). It is possible to
cite examples of individuals from the poor nobility who were dismissed
in spite of their difﬁcult ﬁnancial situation, or of former followers of
Napoleon from afﬂuent families who decided to stay in the ranks. The
decision whether to continue in military service was often the conse-
quence of a number of considerations; it is sufﬁcient to say that an
ofﬁcer’s career was perceived in very different ways, not only as patri-
otic duty, but as a source of income and, by many, as a very attractive
style of life.
   The different choices made by the Napoleonic veterans in the ﬁrst
years after 1815 did not seriously inﬂuence relations among the ofﬁ-
cers after the outbreak of the November Uprising. Many of those who
had retired came back to the army as volunteers during the ﬁrst weeks
of the insurrection. Only the few generals who continued their career
under the command of the Grand Duke Constantine opposed the upris-
ing or declared their loyalty to the tsar (and constitutional king of
Poland) Nicholas I. In the ﬁrst dramatic hours of the so-called November
Night (29/30 November 1830) they tried to use their authority to pacify
the insurgents – young ofﬁcers and cadets – treating their action as
