                                                          David Hopkin 81


involved. However, we will see that there were plenty of continuities in
the representations, including self-representations, of the female soldier.
   Whatever the varied motivations of female soldiers, this period was a
late ﬂowering for the tradition. Certainly women would continue to put
on uniform and take up arms during the nineteenth century: one thinks
of Louise Michel dressed as a fedéré,23 or Antoinette Lix who joined the
franc-tireurs of the Vosges in 1870.24 However, outside these revolution-
ary and other irregular military events, it was increasingly difﬁcult for
women to enter the ranks. The volunteer armies of the Old Regime
could not afford to look too closely at their sources of manpower, but
the conscript armies of the post-Napoleonic period introduced medi-
cal inspections, dormitory housing and other bureaucratic checks that
made continuous deception tougher. Yet it was not just the practical dif-
ﬁculties that deterred later female soldiers. The late eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries also saw an ideological shift, what Dror Wahrman
in the parallel case of England has termed ‘a cultural revolution’.25
Numbers sharply declined from the spring of 1793 onwards. Behaviour
deemed ‘amazon’, once tolerated and even applauded, was increasingly
reproved and outlawed. Some of the explanations for this change will
be considered below.
   Given that we are dealing with such small numbers, can one even talk
about a distinctive military experience for female soldiers? Dekker and
van de Pol make a convincing argument that there was in their Dutch
study, but the source material in the French cases is thinner and more
disparate. And, however carefully one approaches the topic, there are
real problems distinguishing between fact and ﬁction.


Fact and ﬁction in the lives of female soldiers

To start at the end, in June 1816 the workshop of Charles Pellerin, the
founder of the famous imagerie d’Epinal, was raided, as were many of
his stockists around the country. The object was to ﬁnd Napoleonic
images banned under the restored monarchy, and one that attracted
the prosecutor’s eye was entitled The New French Heroine dating from
late 1812 or early 1813. It told the story of Virginie Chesquière, a dis-
guised female soldier.26 Pellerin pictured Virginie receiving the cross of
the Legion of Honour from a Marshal of the Empire. The text was light
on biographical details, but noted that Virginie came from ‘Delémont’
in the Department of the Nord, and the song which accompanied the
image explained that she had been made sergeant at Wagram and had
served in Portugal. Her true sex was only discovered when she fell ill.
