82   The World Turned Upside Down


  It was not the notion of a female soldier that the authorities found
disturbing, but the mention of the ‘Great Napoleon’ in the song-text.
Nonetheless, the prefect of the Somme, when writing to his counterpart
in the Vosges, felt it necessary to remark that the story could only be
an invention.27 For Restoration bureaucrats, even ﬁctional female sol-
diers were further damning evidence of the revolutionary disturbance
in natural patterns of authority, whether in the state or in the home,
and they drew a direct analogy between the two. However, it was not an
invention, or at least not entirely. Pellerin’s inspiration came indirectly
from a story in the Journal de l’Empire of 31 October 1812. According
to this news report, Virginie Ghesquière (not Chesquière) was born in
Deûlémont, near Lille, in 1768. In 1806 she took her brother’s place in
the ranks of the community’s conscripts. The report goes on to detail
how she saved the life of her colonel and captured enemy ofﬁcers in
the Peninsular War. Her true sex was only recognized when she was
wounded in battle. However, according to Léon Hennet, the reality
of her military career was not quite as glorious. She was an inveter-
ate deserter, and it was after her arrest on the third occasion that she
was discovered to be a woman.28 Nor is it likely that she was admitted
to the Legion of Honour, as that organization refused to recognize the
requests of any woman until the revolutionary female soldier Angelique
Duchemin was decorated by Louis-Napoleon in 1851.29 Virginie did,
however, receive the Saint-Helena medal in 1857, ten years before her
death.
  The true adventures of Virginie Ghesquière raise a number of inter-
esting questions, such as why did she do it? The songwriter’s answer
that she was motivated by ﬁlial affection does not seem entirely satisfac-
tory, though there are other known cases of sisters replacing brothers.
The problem of how she was able to deceive the medical ofﬁcers who
oversaw the conscription is more readily resolved; although it is not
mentioned in the reports, her father was the mayor of Deûlémont,
and he no doubt enabled the substitution. Her ability to maintain her
disguise seems less easily explicable, though it is not without prece-
dent. Early modern commentators seldom considered such deceptions
implausible. In a corporatist society, where outward signs such as dress
were a more direct indicator of status as well as gender, simply putting
on male attire seems to have taken women quite a long way down
the road towards a convincing disguise. Female sailors were often ﬁrst
discovered when their ships docked in ports whose cultures did not
recognize the same dress markers. In France trousers made the man,
but in Polynesia they did not. Female soldiers seem to have been able
