                                                            David Hopkin 79


   It was not unheard of, then, for women to put on elements of mil-
itary dress, nor was it unknown for them to carry weapons. Although
women had largely been excluded from the ﬁeld of war in early modern
times, it was accepted that in exceptional circumstances, such as sieges,
they could participate in defence of their homes.13 In fact it is quite
difﬁcult to ﬁnd French women fulﬁlling this role during the Revolution-
ary and Napoleonic Wars (compared to Spanish women, for example),
but nonetheless the possibility was conceivable. The legendary Jeanne
Hachette of Beauvais, who defended her city against the Burgundi-
ans, underwent a revival in the eighteenth century, and was cited by
Théroigne de Méricourt in her speeches calling for a women’s militia.14
Michelle Perrot has argued that the ﬁgure of the ‘popular rebellious
woman’, so much part of the revolutionary events in Paris in both the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, might be considered an extension
of women’s militant role as defenders of home and community, which
also saw them to the fore in food riots.15 However, some of these women,
with pikes and red bonnets, also accompanied the volunteers of 1792
and the sans-culotte battalions of the Terror when they marched out of
Paris, perhaps in conscious imitation of the armed allegory of liberty.
The Revolution extended the concept of community to encompass the
whole nation.
   A type of female soldier particularly prominent in the Revolution-
ary armies was the woman who wore uniform and who fought in the
ranks, but who never disguised her true sex. About 50 examples are
known from the period 1792–1793. This does connect to a particular
revolutionary moment when all norms, in society as well as in politics,
were called into question. Unsurprisingly most served in volunteer bat-
talions; such women were only exceptionally found in regular units.16
Most, but not all, of these women, at least in their self-presentations
before the Convention, followed male family members into the army.
The best known examples are Rose Bouillon who fought beside her
husband in the 6th battalion of the volunteers of the Haute-Saône,
until he was killed at Limbach, and the recently married Rose Barreau,
known as Liberté, who joined the 2nd Battalion of the Volunteers of
the Tarn, in which her brother and husband served. Barreau in partic-
ular was celebrated in the ﬁrst year of the Republic as a revolutionary
counter-exemplar to Joan of Arc.17
   All of these sit slightly apart from the well-established tradition of the
disguised female soldier, although they do overlap. Reine Chapuy, who
served as a woman for six weeks in the 24th regiment of horse, undoubt-
edly borrowed the language of feminists like Méricourt and Palm in her
