84   The World Turned Upside Down


could be mistaken for a bridal crown, especially as in North-Eastern
France it was customary for brides to carry a laurel wand. In popular
culture the symbolism and language of conquest in war and of conquest
in love drew heavily on each other; so the laurel that, according to the
song, Virginie harvests, is vested with a double meaning.
   Female soldiers themselves were familiar with these cultural repre-
sentations. It seems probable that the diffusion of songs and prints
exercised an inﬂuence on their original choice. They drew on the famil-
iar narratives in fashioning their own image, emphasizing these tropes
of love and glory in their petitions to the authorities for pensions. Their
biographers sought to make the facts of their lives conform to estab-
lished models. Real-life female soldiers came to resemble their ﬁctional
sisters. Even Virginie Ghesquière passed into myth: according to a col-
lection of stories about female soldiers, her story was still told around
the ﬁreside in the Swiss canton of Berne.31 However, it was also easy
for romancers and impostors to pull off the reverse trick of turning
ﬁction into fact. The same collection includes the story of Ducond-
Laborde (in some versions Ducoud), better known by her nom-de-guerre
Breton-Double under which she served in the 6th Hussars from 1798
to Waterloo. Her biography was published in 1833, taking advantage
of a wave of Napoleonic nostalgia.32 Like Virginie, she saved her com-
rades, captured prisoners, was promoted and received a medal from the
Emperor, the one difference being that she never seems to have made a
secret of her real sex. She is one of the most commonly cited examples
of a female soldier in the Napoleonic armies, but as there appears to be
no record of her in any archive in France, Britain or Ireland (where she
supposedly retired), we must assume she was an invention. The decep-
tion worked, and still works, because the author was so familiar with
the expectations of the genre. The prefect of the Somme might be for-
given for his assumption that the Pellerin print was just another such
imposition.

The female soldier in popular culture

The ubiquity of the female soldier in popular culture – in song, folktale,
chapbook and vaudeville play – made such impositions possible, but
also made it very difﬁcult for the genuine voice of the real female sol-
diers to emerge. The dominance of cultural representations over reality
meant that female soldiers were always viewed by the public in terms of
their relationship to men – fathers, lovers, brothers or even ‘the Great
Napoleon’. This can be illustrated by reference to just one genre, the
