80   The World Turned Upside Down


petition to the Convention to be allowed to remain with her regiment,
just as her story was taken up as proof of women’s political capabili-
ties by female sans-culottes.18 In early 1793, Manette Dupont presented
a petition to the Convention, supposedly on behalf of 900 disguised
female soldiers, demanding the creation of a women’s army.19 These
overlaps between Parisian radical women, early feminists and women
warriors make it impossible to draw a clear distinction between female
soldiers and other forms of female military engagement.
   However, we can be sure that compared with the thousands of
women who followed the armies or carried weapons during revolution-
ary events, we are dealing with quite small numbers. Their numerical
signiﬁcance dwindles yet further when set against the hundreds of thou-
sands of Frenchmen mobilized for the war effort. At least one historian
has argued that the fascination that female soldiers exert has detracted
from the real story of women’s relationship to armies and to war.20 Why
have they attracted attention out of all proportion to their military con-
tribution? No doubt part of the answer lies in a general human interest
in the exceptional, in the picaresque, and (in some accounts of female
soldiers) in the pornographic. But there are at least three more reasoned
responses that the historian can make. First, women’s history has sought
out precursors whose ﬂouting of gender conventions revealed that the
limitations placed on women derived from culture rather than from nat-
ural differences between the sexes. Second, historical anthropologists
have investigated behaviour at the margins to understand the main-
stream: just as cross-dressing during carnival tells us something about
everyday gender relations, so do the activities of female soldiers. Third,
the handful of female soldiers carried with them a huge amount of cul-
tural baggage. Marie-Antoinette was just one woman, but no one would
suggest that historians have been unduly interested in her fate, because
we appreciate her wider symbolic signiﬁcance. The same is true of female
soldiers.
   Unlike women’s militias, disguised female soldiering was neither a
particularly revolutionary phenomenon nor a speciﬁcally French one.
Female soldiers were participants in a tradition known throughout
Western Europe since the late sixteenth century. Sylvie Steinberg lists
44 examples of French female soldiers from the Old Regime21 – quite
a small sample compared with the 119 Dutch cases studied by Dekker
and Van de Pol.22 To what extent do the explanations put forward by
historians for this behaviour in other periods and other countries con-
tinue to hold for post-revolutionary France? The increase in numbers
during the early years of the Revolution suggests that new factors were
