78   The World Turned Upside Down


wore uniform, nor every woman who carried arms, can be labelled a
female soldier, let alone all the women who accompanied armies. To
deal with the last ﬁrst, despite the occasional efforts of the French
military authorities to exclude women, numbers were to be found in
military encampments – either the wives (or mistresses) of soldiers, or
service providers (or both). Madame Lefebvre, washerwoman and wife
of the future Duke of Danzig, is exemplary of the type; she would later
be immortalized in the theatre as Madame Sans-Gêne (a name appropri-
ated from a genuine female soldier, Thérèse Figueur).7 In addition to
the authorized suppliers of food, drink and laundry – the cantinières,
vivandières and blanchisseuses – an informal service sector, including sex
workers, travelled with armies. All of these women might sometimes
wear aspects of military uniform, and some of them are known to have
participated in the ﬁghting on occasions.8
   Martial attire became more generally fashionable for women in the
early years of the Revolution – a sartorial rejection of the extravagances
of the Old Regime and a public statement of commitment to the patriot
cause. The early revolutionary feminists such as Théroigne de Méricourt,
Olympe de Gouges and Etta Palm d’Aelders were all famous for their
‘amazon’ dress.9 Their previous connections to the world of the the-
atre may have made cross-dressing more conceivable. How important
their choice of attire was to their political message is hard to assess,
but contemporary commentators found it difﬁcult to imagine emanci-
pated women without invoking the imagery of the ‘world turned upside
down’ with its pipe-smoking, gun-toting, trouser-wearing heroine.10
This popular motif was often used to undermine feminist claims, and yet
revolutionary feminists also had recourse to it. Constance Evrard, a rad-
ical Parisienne, declared to the editors of the Révolutions de Paris in 1791
that ‘If you need a tyrannicide . . . I would quickly throw off my women’s
clothes and don the garb of a sex whose courage I feel in myself.’11
   All three amazon feminists were also known for their calls for women’s
military participation in the form of female national guard units, to rein-
force women’s claims to citizenship. There are several reports of such
units between 1790 and 1792 (Etta Palm cited one such, the Amazons of
Vic-sur-Bigorre, as her inspiration and was made an honorary member of
another, the Amazons of Creil). Although some of the songs and prints
which historians have taken as evidence of genuine women’s regiments
were probably meant to ridicule feminist demands, even these satires
might be emulated. Olympe de Gouges quoted approvingly from the
declaration of the ‘Amazons of Bellona’, even though this unit probably
originated in a street-singer’s fantasy.12
