                                                           David Hopkin 85


theatre. The female soldier was a stock character on the Parisian stage.
She was the heroine of Isabelle hussard (1781) and Pariseau’s Lucy ou la
ﬁlle soldat (1785).33 Under the First Republic Parisian audiences could
catch her in Desfontaines’ La Fille soldat which played right through
1795 and 1796 at the Théâtre du Vaudeville, or in Cuvelier de Trie’s
La Fille hussard at the Théâtre de la Cité. This play remained in reper-
toire throughout the Directory and Consulate, and was revived under
the First Empire, Restoration and possibly the July Monarchy.34 La Belle
Milanaise, by Servières and Lafortelle, had its première in 1804.35 And
the tradition continued into the Restoration with Blache’s La Fille sol-
dat of 1818.36 There were others of which we only know the title, such
as Le sergent Lambert ou la ﬁlle soldat (probably from the Second Repub-
lic).37 No doubt yet others remain undiscovered, themselves disguised
by innocuous titles.
   All these plays have a strong family resemblance to each other. In
every case, the main source of the drama lay in the depictions of gender
relationships, particularly those between the female soldier, her father
and her lover. A plot summary of La Fille hussard, undoubtedly the most
popular of these plays, will illustrate the point. The scene is near Bel-
grade. Catherine, the daughter of Fritz-Hébert, an old soldier, is loved by
Christiern, a hussar, but she is captured by the Turks. Laureto, a Swedish
sergeant, frees Catherine. Laureto loves Sophie, whose father, the comte
de Caubor, is his commander. But the count has destined his daughter
for the odious Baron Traufmandorf. When the count suspects the liai-
son, he has Sophie locked in a tower, while Laureto is court-martialled
for raising his weapon to an ofﬁcer. Christiern is set to guard the tower,
and lets Sophie escape in his hussar uniform (hence the title). Sophie
dashes in just as Laureto is about to be made to run the gauntlet, and
swears to kill herself if he is harmed. Just then the Turks arrive, the odi-
ous Baron is killed, but Laureto saves the day. Both couples, Catherine
and Christiern and Sophie and Laureto, are now free to marry with their
fathers’ consent.
   Cuvelier de Trie is credited as the father of French melodrama, and
his plays were largely excuses for bangs, crashes and displays on horse-
back. In as much as historians now (or audiences then) can attach any
signiﬁcance to the plot, it is obvious that the military disguise is used
by Sophie to escape the power of her father in order to be with the man
she loves. Sophie is deﬁnitely an agent in her own story, she asserts her
autonomy in order to achieve her desires, but she does not join the army
for patriotic or political reasons, or even to escape domesticity. The play
ends with the creation of a new domestic unit. Sophie remains deﬁned
