                                                          David Hopkin 83


to pass themselves off quite convincingly as boys if not as men, one
reason why they were so often employed as drummers or trumpeters.
Although Virginie was 38, she occupied the shoes of a 19-year-old con-
script. And while it is true that these were societies with very limited
privacy (soldiers regularly shared beds in billets and camp latrines were
communal), yet precisely because intimate activities were carried out in
public, soldiers developed codes of behaviour that respected personal
space. Virginie appears to have had no problems adapting to the male,
not to say misogynistic, culture of the regiment, nor with the physi-
cal demands laid on her, nor with the violence that was the soldier’s
stock-in-trade, unless her repeated desertions can be taken as a sign of
her dissatisfaction. It would be interesting to hear her views on all these
matters, but unfortunately our sources are silent. Instead, as is so often
the case with female soldiers, they concentrate on heroism, patriotism
and heterosexual love.
   Recovering the experience of female soldiers is problematic because all
our knowledge of them comes with a thick overlay of such moralizing.
Real female soldiers were rare, but their representations were extremely
common. Hence, although few people had met a genuine female soldier,
everyone knew the tropes by which her life should be lived. She must,
for example, be a successful warrior whose feats of valour implied that
she was the exception that proved the rule of women’s physical inferi-
ority. The explanation for the female soldier’s initial act of disguise was
invariably love. She entered the army in pursuit of a lover or husband,
or, to preserve the honour of a beloved father. The ‘fraternal love’ that
motivated Virginie Ghesquière is an unusual variant, but pictorially she
conforms to type. Even though the events of Virginie’s life neither had
nor would provide her with a husband, imagists had difﬁculty imagin-
ing her without one, or at least they assumed their public would be so
challenged. Representing the disguised female soldier visually presents
an obvious difﬁculty: if the disguise was effective, how can the artist
simultaneously depict her femininity? The imagist solved this problem
by putting Virginie back into female costume, turning a 44-year-old vet-
eran of six years’ campaigning into a Jane Austen heroine. Although the
image celebrated the female soldier, this coyness about representing her
in military attire might indicate some unease about the portrayal of gen-
der transgressions. It also makes the image look like a wedding. We are
presented with two main protagonists, male and female, the Marshal
offering his hand to Virginie, while the Nike above could easily be mis-
taken for a Cupid. Although the male holds out a cross rather than a
ring, this too could be interpreted as a love token.30 The laurel wreath
