                                                          David Hopkin 89


stay at home and I take it on myself to shoulder his gun and his sabre in
order to ﬁll his place in the ranks’, Marie Morel stated after enlisting in
June 1793.49 Reine Chapuy was even more forthright in her conscious
rejection of gender norms: ‘I shall prove that the arm of the woman
is as good as that of a man, when its blows are directed by honour, a
thirst for glory, and the certainty of exterminating the great and pow-
erful [les grands].’50 Many female soldiers felt their characters unsuited
to social roles expected of women: Thérèse Figueur’s description of her-
self as a tomboy echoes statements by other, non-French cross-dressers
such as Mary Lacy, who wrote that ‘I had so much of my own will that,
when I came to have some knowledge, it was a difﬁcult matter for them
[her parents] to keep me within proper bounds.’51 But in 1792–1793,
this instinctive feminism and gender rebellion could take on a more
ideological tinge.
   Youthful adventurousness is an apparent motivation for the women
of 1792–1793, most of whom were young, just as it was for many male
volunteers, and the same can be said of female soldiers more generally.
However, if we use the more longitudinal studies of the tradition in
the Dutch and Anglophone worlds, we can also identify more everyday
explanations. Push factors were involved, as well as the better-advertised
pull factors. According to the archives of the Old Regime army, female
soldiers were as likely to be ﬂeeing men as pursuing them. Exploita-
tive or abusive fathers, brothers and occasionally husbands ﬁgure in
their excuses for their actions, alongside that stock character of fairy-
tales and soldiers’ autobiographies, the wicked stepmother.52 Soldiering
could be an escape from difﬁcult family circumstances. The ideologi-
cally charged atmosphere of the revolutionary era tended to keep any
such motivations hidden, but one can but wonder at the domestic sit-
uation of the Ghesquière family that led the father to collude with his
daughter’s disguise.
   Even more prosaic were the ﬁnancial incentives. Men’s occupational
opportunities were more numerous, and they were paid more. For pro-
letarian women facing unemployment and poverty, dressing as a man
was a readily available means of escape. If we widen our sample of
occupational groups from soldiers to include servants, labourers and
artisans then it may be that cross-dressing for economic reasons was
not so rare.53 In the case of soldiering, it is clear from the French Old
Regime records, as well as the Dutch and British studies, that poverty
was a driving force. For example, Geneviève Grondar joined the dra-
goons in 1711 because she could no longer afford to feed herself and
her children. In her case, Steinberg suggests, male disguise was a last
