86   The World Turned Upside Down


by her relationships with men. And this is true of almost all these plays.
Isabelle hussard puts on military uniform in order to ﬁght a duel with
her lover and thus test his feelings for her. La Belle Milanaise dresses as
a man to help her lover, the captured commander of the French forces,
escape from his tower, and so on. The only exception to this rule is
Desfontaines’ La Fille soldat, a more clearly political text than the oth-
ers. Here Julie, disguised as the volunteer Victor, is a female patriot who
joins the army not for love but to ﬁght. Julien, her lover, only meets her
there, and woos her in her disguise as a man. Nonetheless the action on
stage focuses on Julie’s tangled love-life and her relationship with her
father.
   This emphasis on the female soldier’s relationships to men is stan-
dard in other popular cultural genres, such as songs and tales, from
which theatre often drew its inspiration. There is an entire section in the
French folksong catalogue dedicated to her exploits.38 Isabelle Hussard
was related to songs like La Brave Claudine in which the disguised female
soldier challenges her errant lover to a duel. La Fille hussard and La Belle
Milanaise both borrowed motifs from the song-cycle about the woman
who helped her lover to escape from punishment by swapping clothes.39
Even Desfontaines’ La Fille soldat, the most overtly revolutionary of
these plays, made use of folkloric sources. In the play Julien, a captain
in the army, dreams that Victor is really a girl. He tries various stratagems
to trick her into an admission, what folklorists would call ‘tests of sex’,
which Victor/Julie foils with ease. He ﬁnally catches her out with a faked
letter from her father, which contains false news of his mortal illness.
Historians of the salon storytellers of the late seventeenth century will
recognize in this the same plot which inspired Mademoiselle L’Héritier’s
Marmoisan and Madame D’Aulnoy’s Belle-Belle, ou le Chevalier Fortuné, in
which a young woman goes to court to save her father’s honour, catches
the eye of the King who tests her sex, but is only revealed through her
ﬁlial piety.40
   Such stories, in whatever genre, seem to contain a proto-feminist mes-
sage: the female soldier’s success while disguised as a man belies the
notion that the gender hierarchy was natural. If a woman could out-
perform men as a soldier, as Julie/Victor does by capturing the enemy’s
colours, then it follows that the limitations placed on women’s lives
were culturally created, not just recognition of their physical or men-
tal incapacity. Yet each play ended with the ‘world turned right side
up again’, the soldier resuming woman’s dress and with it her ‘proper’
role as daughter, wife and mother-to-be. While Desfontaines acknowl-
edged that the post-revolutionary woman would have a public role as a
