                                                          David Hopkin 91


the wish to bear arms was sometimes defended as part of a struggle
for equal rights, it would be incorrect to view the female soldiers as
feminists.’59 The radical potential implicit in the female soldier was
seldom exploited by the women themselves.



Conclusion: the end of a tradition

On 30 April 1793 the Convention decreed that all women not required
in necessary support functions be immediately turned away from the
army. Women were, supposedly, overrunning military encampments;
they were spreading confusion, enticing men from their service, seduc-
ing them into counter-revolution, and emasculating them. This decree
was part of a year-long campaign against women’s involvement in
the political and military sphere which ran from Cavaignac’s blaming
the women of Verdun for that city’s rendition, through the cockade
war, the banning of women’s clubs, the expulsion of women from the
sections, to the execution of Marie-Antoinette. By the end of 1793, Etta
Palm would be in exile, Théroigne de Méricourt incarcerated in a mad-
house, and Olympe de Gouges guillotined. Revolutionary feminism was
effectively dead. Thereafter the Revolution retreated from even those
reorderings of the gender hierarchy that had been achieved before the
Jacobin seizure of power, such as divorce. If the punitive campaign
against women was relaxed after 1795, under Napoleon the boundaries
of gender were ever more ﬁrmly policed.
   Many feminist historians have argued that the Revolution, far from
being a moment of liberation for women, actually closed opportunities
and reinforced gender stereotypes. It is impossible to do justice to that
debate here. Nor is there room to do more than outline some of the
reasons historians have put forward for the Jacobins’ violence towards
political women. The masculine language of virtue had always been
present during the Revolution, but it was only in 1793 that this was
turned so directly against real women. Lynn Hunt has used the Freudian
concept of ‘the family romance’ to explore the impact of the revolt
against the king, the father to the nation, and how the rivalry between
his children, the French, led to an increased concern for proper gender
roles.60 Disorder in the house was equated to disorder in the state, as the
Revolution became less concerned with liberty than with authority. The
outbreak of civil war, a war between brothers, in March in the Vendée
may well have exacerbated such gender disquiet. Wahrman makes a
similar point about the impact of the American War of Independence,
