88   The World Turned Upside Down


was overcome and fainted, leading to the discovery of her true sex. She
stayed on in the regiment as a vivandière, but even this reversion to
proper gender roles could not save her and she was killed while tending
to a wounded soldier. How different to the image of Virginie Ghesquière,
the New French Heroine, issued 60 years earlier!



The real lives of female soldiers

If love did not explain the actions of real female soldiers, what did? For
the revolutionary period one should not discount ideological motiva-
tions. Obviously it was sensible for women to stress their patriotism and
loyalty to the Republic when petitioning the Convention for a pension:
the authorities were unlikely to be generous if they raised less worthy
motives. Female soldiers in the Old Regime had likewise strategically
trumpeted their patriotism and their loyalty to the king.44 However, the
inﬂux of women into the army in 1792–1793 suggests that there was
a genuine outpouring of revolutionary enthusiasm. ‘Unlike most other
women, who are perhaps led by foolish love to follow the army, I can
plead only my love for the fatherland . . . in my defence’ claimed Reine
Chapuy.45 The imminence of the danger also encouraged them. ‘When
the survival of the community demands it, women are permitted to
assume the tasks of men’, note Dekker and Van de Pol; wars ‘lowered
the threshold of resistance and made it easier for women to make the
decision to change gender.’46
   However it was not just the novel threat of invasion in 1792 that
inspired this response, but the prospect of the destruction of the revolu-
tionary regime to which many were committed. According to Godineau,
most women who joined the army in 1792–1793 came from ‘families
animated more by revolutionary spirit than by a military model’. She
cites the example of Catherine Pochetat, present both at the storming
of the Bastille and at the Tuileries, and who rose to the rank of sub-
lieutenant in 1793.47 Patriotism dispensed with the need for disguise, so
that Marguerite Genay of Epinal could write in July 1792 that ‘enﬂamed
by the desire to ﬂy to the defence of the Fatherland, through her courage
she would overcome all the obstacles that her sex seemed to present’,
and so asked that the administrators of the Department include her on
the list of volunteers.48
   At the same time these women challenged gender norms. The Revolu-
tion had upset so many established social hierarchies, so why not gender
too? ‘I leave my spindles and distaff to whoever is coward enough to
