                                                           David Hopkin 87


citizen, that role was resolutely traditional. The play concludes with the
cast singing that the duty women owe the state was to bear children,
who would grow up to be soldiers or the mothers of soldiers.
   Popular cultural representations of the disguised female soldier had a
paradoxical relationship to reality. They both drew on the examples of
actual women who entered the armed forces, and they probably inspired
others to follow their example. All these plays rely on the public knowl-
edge that women did sometimes dress as men to join the army, although
Desfontaines’ was the only one to claim direct inspiration from a real-
life female soldier. Yet her existence in culture was very different to that
experienced by actual women in the barracks and on the battleﬁelds of
Europe. As a cultural icon, her actions were overwhelmingly motivated
by her personal relationships with men. While certainly possessed of
audacity, she used her disguise not to escape the domestic sphere, but
rather to transform it into a more congenial environment. No doubt
this made her a less threatening ﬁgure to her male audience. Men who
enjoyed the idea of the female soldier were horriﬁed when confronted
with the reality. The volunteer Gabriel Noël liked to imagine his surro-
gate mother and mentor, Madame Durival, putting on a uniform and
being made to go through her military paces, but felt no such enthusi-
asm when he saw a woman leading a Parisian volunteer battalion just
before Valmy.41
   Dror Wahrman’s much more extensive study of female soldiers and
related characters on the British stage discovered a rapid shift from
positive to negative representations in the 1780s. The reappearance of
female soldiers in the French theatre in every regime from the Old
Regime to the Restoration might indicate that she suffered no such
falling off in popularity there, but this continuity may hide more subtle
changes. Dianne Dugaw’s research on ballads in the Anglophone world
suggests that, whereas in the early modern period a successful female
soldier was readily conceivable, in the nineteenth century her hands
became softer, her waist thinner, the physical and emotional burdens
of war harder to bear. Either her inability as a soldier quickly revealed
her true sex or she paid a much higher price for her gender transgres-
sion than her predecessors, ﬁnding death on the battleﬁeld rather than
triumph. In the age of separate spheres one could be ﬁtted for love,
or for war, but not both.42 A similar trajectory is apparent in French
popular cultural sources, including the Pellerin company’s prints. In
1874 it issued an image entitled The Child of the Troop which told the
story of another Julie who, in 1792, had followed her husband into
the army dressed as a man.43 However, at the ﬁrst sound of battle, Julie
