90   The World Turned Upside Down


resort before suicide.54 Given the economic dislocations of the late 1780s
and 1790s, it is unlikely that women’s needs then were less pressing.
Such rationales were only infrequently cited during the revolutionary
decade, but Dekker and Van de Pol argue that ‘Poverty was certainly the
prime mover in case of Madeleine Petit-Jean, widow, who joined the
cannoniers in 1793 at age 47.’55
   However, extreme poverty was quite a commonplace experience for
women in the 1790s, but few pursued soldiering as a way out. Poverty
alone was not a sufﬁcient, or even a necessary cause. For those who did
take this route, given they chose the most masculine profession, it seems
reasonable to consider their sexual motivations. Were women who
dressed as men transvestites, lesbians or caught up in some trans-gender
syndrome? Popular culture emphasized the heterosexual preferences of
female soldiers, but occasionally liked to play with the homosexual pos-
sibilities that their disguise made possible. In Desfontaines’ La Fille soldat
we ﬁnd Julien worried about his own feelings for his comrade Victor, for
whose affections he has a rival in the shape of Jacqueline, a farm girl.56
However, even if real female soldiers were so motivated, they probably
did not have the language to describe their own reasonings, and abso-
lutely no incentive for voicing them. Both under the Old Regime and
the puritanical Jacobin Republic, even the hint of sexual impropriety –
heterosexual, let alone homosexual – would close off the possibility of
a pension. The relative absence of detailed autobiographies from French
female soldiers also makes it hard to investigate this aspect of their lives.
Thérèse Figueur discusses courting girls in the disguise of a boy, but
it is clear from the context that this was mainly an attempt to ﬁt in
with the male culture of the regiment. Otherwise she deliberately says
nothing about her sexual life other than that ‘I could not be one of
those women who know how to separate the gift of their heart from
the gift of their body’. Dekker’s and Van de Pol’s speculations on their
fuller Dutch case-studies are probably as far as one can take this line of
inquiry.57
   Once female soldiers were in the army it is difﬁcult to separate their
experience from those of their male comrades. Some of those mentioned
here, such as Rose Barreau and Reine Chapuy, only served for a rela-
tively short time. Those whose service was measured in years rather than
months quickly adapted to the mores of the regiment. As Julie Wheel-
wright puts it, ‘The constant need for male acceptance is a feature of
[their] autobiographies . . . the women endured endless self-imposed tests
of their masculinity, proving over and over again that they measured
up’.58 For this reason Dekker and Van de Pol conclude that ‘although
