92   The World Turned Upside Down


widely perceived in Britain as a civil war, and the cultural revolution
against amazons.61
   To what extent were female soldiers caught up in this misogynist cam-
paign? The April decree was not primarily aimed at them; nonetheless
Rose Barreau, Reine Chapuy and Catherine Pochetat had their requests
for reinstatement turned down. Others who had escaped the immediate
impact were combed out of the army in the months that followed as
deputies on mission brought revolutionary government to the armies.
Madeleine Petit-Jean was ordered out of the army of the Vendée in
January 1794. However others, such as Thérèse Figueur (who mentions
the decree in her memoirs), were able to stay in the army, either through
subterfuge, apathy or positive dispensation. It is not clear why some
commanders were more accommodating than others.
   Perhaps more important than the fate of individuals is the impact of
the decree on the female soldier as a cultural icon. She took on increas-
ingly negative connotations, to the extent that Fabre d’Eglantine, in
the debate that led to the forced closure of the Club of Revolution-
ary Republican Women, condemned its members as ‘female grenadiers’
who forgot their proper duties as wives and mothers to make speeches,
demonstrate on the streets and demand guns.62 ‘The world turned
upside down’ was no longer a subject of humour, but rather of fear and
recrimination.
   The legacy of this period for the nineteenth century was that the
female soldier carried with her overtones of radicalism. Before 1789
‘the world turned upside down’ could be imagined as a social reversal
without wider political consequences, but after 1793 individual gen-
der revolt implied revolution in the state as well as the home. Every
period of revolutionary turmoil witnessed her re-emergence in popu-
lar culture, whether in the form of the Saint-Simonian legionnaires of
1830, the Vésuviennes of 1848 or the Amazons of the Seine in 1870.63
Conservatives used the image of the militant woman to ridicule fem-
inist ideas, but also as a way of undermining the claims of all social
revolutionaries. Not just Communard women, but the entire Commune
project, were tainted by their connection to the largely invented ﬁgure
of the hysterical pétroleuse.64 Further revolution was not just threaten-
ing to the bourgeois social order but might denature all men. And yet
on each of these occasions, some women perceived the radical possibil-
ities inherent in the person of the female soldier, and took the name of
Amazon or Vésuvienne to be their own. It was always the idea of the
female soldier, rather the reality of her experiences, which was the more
subversive.
