                                                    Patricia Y. C. E. Lin 107


   What was the impact of this money on the recipients’ lives? The
funds could not take away the pain of the loss of the seaman. How-
ever, the sums had the potential to make a radical and very positive
transformation in the lives of their recipients. At the highest level of
compensation, recipients could join the middle class.43 At a lower level,
they could enjoy security as members of the upper echelons of the work-
ing class. Were recipients, despite their lack of formal education, able to
use their monies to access these opportunities, and perhaps to estab-
lish a business, or in cases such as Mary Shackle and Margaret Hume,
to purchase property? Further research is necessary. At the very least,
for many thousands of very poor individuals, the French Revolution-
ary and Napoleonic Wars brought a substantial infusion of funds, funds
with which they could participate in the burgeoning consumer society
and, in some cases, radically transform their lives.

Family members as soldiers’ survivors

No such system of wage allotment was put in place for the families of
the 750,000 soldiers who served in the Revolutionary and Napoleonic
Wars. However, the records collected from some of the new programmes
for soldiers allow us to gain detailed insight into the lives of their
families and the impact of war on their welfare. These include the col-
lection of casualty records of privates and non-commissioned ofﬁcers,
a system by which family members could petition for effects and the
Royal Military Asylum, the progressive new boarding school for sol-
diers’ daughters and sons. Before this time, except for ofﬁcers, the names
of Army dead were not systematically collected by the British govern-
ment. As a consequence family members were unsure of the fate of
their loved ones. In 1797, this began to change. The Commander-in-
Chief ordered that all commanding ofﬁcers were to report the names
of the dead to the War Ofﬁce.44 This new record-keeping enabled the
introduction in 1809 of a systematic process by which family members
could petition for the effects of the deceased soldiers.45 The system was
neither as professionalized as that for naval allotment nor as organized.
Nevertheless, it introduced many soldiers’ families to interaction with
the central government, as well as marking the beginning of some sys-
tem of nationalized record-keeping about the lives of all soldiers and
their families.
   As part of this provision, the War Ofﬁce introduced a standard peti-
tion form for use by family members. As with the lump-sum allotment
system for seamen, the system recognized that the deﬁnition and
