5
Caring for the Nation’s Families:
British Soldiers’ and Sailors’
Families and the State, 1793–1815
Patricia Y. C. E. Lin




What was the experience of the families of over a million common
soldiers and seamen who fought abroad for Britain during the French
Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars? Traditionally it has been thought
that the answer to this question could not be fully known due to the
dearth of relevant documents. While such families might be mentioned
in the diaries of ofﬁcers, or be the subject of a few contemporary prints,
the fact that most of them were illiterate prevented us, it has been
believed, from really knowing their story.1 They are, to use a well-used
phrase, another group whose experience is lost to history.
  In fact, the experiences of these families are not lost. During these
wars the British national government, through its War and Navy Ofﬁces,
spent a great deal of time, energy and money on understanding the
details of the lives of these families, for the ﬁrst time systematically
collecting personal data about a signiﬁcant section of the non-elite non-
male population. They did so as part of the task of administering the
innovative new system of care for the military which the national gov-
ernment created and funded during these wars. The system included
access to programmes not available to the wider labouring poor from
which soldiers’ and sailors’ families came. These pioneering programmes
included schools for children and a system by which men could make
ongoing monthly remittances from their wages.2
  The data collected on forms such as standardized school applications,
wage remittance requests and casualty returns included, depending on
the programme, the names of women and children, their addresses,
information on places of marriage and birth, and testimony on families’
economic circumstances and travel with the regiment. These documents
reveal that families were integral to the British war experience at home

                                   99
