                                                    Patricia Y. C. E. Lin 103


census in 1800.25 Because of the wars, information was gathered with
a new precision, and the lives of women and children, and particularly
poor women and children, were much more closely observed.
   Depending on the form of beneﬁt for which they were applying, the
details collected on military family members included their ﬁrst and
last names, their relationship to the soldier or seaman, the number of
children distinguished by gender, and their exact place of residence.
For some programmes, such as the Royal Military Asylum, the data
collected included a soldier’s marriage certiﬁcate, the birth or baptism
certiﬁcates of his children, their full names, and information on the
family’s economic circumstances, including whether or not they were
currently living in the parish workhouse. Through these documents we
get a glimpse of women and children whose lives have never before been
exposed.

The lives of British sailors’ families

The British government tried to make it easier for the more than 240,000
naval seamen serving in the war to send half of their wages every month
to their wives or mothers.26 The commanding ofﬁcer of any man desir-
ing to use the scheme was legally required to assist him to complete the
requisite forms in triplicate. The information the sailor was required to
provide on these forms included his full name, his wife’s or mother’s full
name, the number of his children, with a separate count of boys, and
his wife’s or mother’s address.27 Once these forms were submitted, the
remittances remained in force until the sailor was discharged or died.28
  After these forms were signed by the seaman’s commanding ofﬁcer
and by three Navy Commissioners, one was kept by the Navy Ofﬁce,
one was sent to the revenue ofﬁcial, customs or excise collector, receiver-
general of the land tax, Clerk of the Cheque or Navy Treasurer – who
would distribute the remittance – and the third was sent to the desig-
nated wife or mother. Which revenue ofﬁcial the sailor’s wife or mother
would meet to collect her remittance depended upon where she lived.29
  In order for a woman to collect her monthly remittance from her
husband or son, she needed to prove her identity. The allotment form
assisted the revenue ofﬁcial in determining a woman’s identity in two
ways. First, in order to receive any remittances, the woman’s remittance
form had to match that which had been sent to the tax ofﬁcial by the
Navy Ofﬁce. Second, the remittance form should indicate her name
and address. She veriﬁed these by providing the revenue ofﬁcial with
an identity pass which she would have obtained from her minister or
