104   Caring for the Nation’s Families


churchwarden. Only after the revenue ofﬁcial had scrutinized the forms
and was convinced that the woman was indeed the person to whom
the wages were designated, was she allowed to collect her money.30 For
some of these women in impoverished circumstances, it was likely to be
the ﬁrst time they had interacted with a national government ofﬁcial.
   Numerous sailors, mothers and wives participated in the programme,
receiving much-needed regular income ranging from 3d to 5d depend-
ing on the rank of their husbands or sons. A tiny glimpse of the
nationwide impact of the provision on women can be seen by looking
at the ledger entries for the 62 men serving on HMS Theseus who initi-
ated remittances to their wives and mothers starting on 1 January 1802.
Many other men serving on the ship had in the past and would in the
future follow the same procedure. Similarly, men serving on hundreds
of others of His Majesty’s ships also initiated remittances to their wives
and mothers throughout the war.
   In February 1802, HMS Theseus would set sail for the West Indies
where in the coming years the men would do battle with the French
and the Dutch. Meanwhile their remittances would be sent to wives
and mothers who lived across the British Isles, in both rural and
urban areas, on the coast and inland, including in England, London,
Manchester, Plymouth, Berwick-on-Tweed, Sunderland and King’s
Lynn; in Scotland, Glasgow, Dysart and the Orkney Islands; and in
Ireland, Dublin, Stonetown near Dundalk, and Hoxton near Youghal.31
   Each of the women receiving remittances met regularly with the des-
ignated tax collector nearest to her home to collect her remittance.
Elizabeth Newman, mother of ordinary seaman Samuel Newman, and
a resident of Colchester, met monthly with the customs tax collector of
Colchester to receive her remittance of £5 11s 8d. Mary Blane, wife of
able-bodied seaman Joshua and living in Brampton, met monthly with
the excise collector of Brampton to receive her remittance of £6 14s.32
These women were among many thousands of seamen’s wives and
mothers who participated in the same transaction with the nearest tax
collectors of the national government, on the same dates. As such they
can be seen as being part of a virtual community of seamen’s wives and
mothers spread across the British Isles.
   Another likely by-product of the government’s use of tax collectors
to distribute remittances was the creation of physical communities of
seamen’s wives, mothers and children. These communities were not
only formed by women and children whose men were serving on the
same ship, but also by those related to men serving on many other
of His Majesty’s ships. All these women were required to collect their
