                                                      Patricia Y. C. E. Lin 101


from two factors: ﬁrst, the burgeoning costs of poor-relief to local
parishes, particularly those near seaports, and second, unprecedented
recruiting demands.10
   The conditions of service in the army and navy were so poor that,
unlike the home-based auxiliary forces of the volunteers and the militia,
only men in most desperate circumstances joined them voluntarily.11
Soldiers’ pay was a very low 6d per day, out of which they had to pay for
their own food and clothing.12 This pay was equal to one-seventh of that
of a bricklayer.13 Seamen’s conditions were not much better. Until they
mutinied in 1797, the pay was 8d per day for an ordinary seaman, a wage
established more than a century earlier; thereafter it was still only 11d.14
Harsh punishment was the norm in both services, death by disease was
common, and until 1806, men could only join the army for a life term.15
The problem of manning was so bad that hitherto the government had
used impressment to raise the number of sailors required. Now, however,
this was more problematic because it was labour-intensive, expensive
and, increasingly in the view of the public, a violation of civil liberties.16
   In an attempt to recruit more successfully, the British government
improved some conditions for soldiers. These included an option for
shorter army service and slightly higher pay.17 Despite these changes,
however, potential recruits stated that in order to enlist, they would
need more incentives, and in particular they insisted that provision
be made for their families.18 This was especially the case of militiamen
who were being encouraged to join the regular forces. However, by serv-
ing in the militia, their families were guaranteed a weekly allowance
equal to one week’s wages funded by the county.19 This assistance would
disappear if these men joined the regular forces, leaving their families
destitute.
   In reaction to these pressures, the national government, led by the
Duke of York, created and funded a number of modern and innova-
tive programmes to provide for soldiers’ and sailors’ families. Based on
the system of self-help, they were shaped by the contemporary debate
about poor-relief that was then raging. At the same time, they insti-
tuted for these particular members of the poor access to programmes,
such as education, deemed dangerous for the poor as a whole for fear
of causing revolution. These programmes included progressive boarding
schools for soldiers’ and seamen’s sons and daughters, teaching reading,
writing, arithmetic and training in skilled trades, a system by which sea-
men could remit one half of their wages to their wives or mothers every
month, and a new programme by which soldiers’ survivors could peti-
tion for their effects. The government also expanded and improved an
