106   Caring for the Nation’s Families


wives. Among those women whose men had transferred ships while
continuing to send their wages were Esther Jones, resident of Bristol and
mother of able seaman James Jones. From early January 1802 until late
September 1805, Esther met every month with the Customs collector of
Bristol to receive the wage remittance her son had sent her while serving
on HMS Theseus. On 21 September 1805, James was transferred to HMS
Powerful.39 However, Esther would not ﬁnd any changes in the process
of collecting her remittances. Only in the government ofﬁces was there
a change. From that date onwards, clerks for the Admiralty Allotment
ofﬁces would list Esther’s personal details, as well as the particulars of
the transactions, in the remittance records for HMS Powerful instead of
HMS Theseus.
   Sailors’ wives and mothers collecting their monthly remittances were
also joined by other sailors’ family members – sailors’ survivors – who
were meeting with the same revenue ofﬁcials just once to collect their
deceased’s effects. In the course of the wars more than 100,000 sailors
died, and many survivors met with customs and excise ofﬁcials for this
purpose.
   Survivors’ funds were distributed through the lump-sum allotment
system, which shared many similarities with the system distributing
monthly remittances in terms of the paperwork involved and the pro-
cess of payment.40 The records of the allotments call attention to the
extent to which a broad spectrum of a sailor’s family, not merely his
wife, children and mother, could be affected by his national service.
Of 36 survivors’ cheques made out on 12 September 1800, 12 each
went to seamen’s mothers and fathers, ﬁve to seamen’s widows, three
to seamen’s brothers, two to seamen’s aunts, one to a seaman’s ﬁrst
cousin and one to a sailor’s executor who was not a familial rela-
tion. The laws behind the system also allowed allotments to be sent
to grandparents.41
   These lump-sum payments were usually much larger than the
monthly remittances. They included prize money that men may have
received as a result of victory in battle as well as any pay that a sailor had
not chosen to remit to his wife or mother. Totals were often between
£20 and £50 and could exceed that. Mary Shackle, widow of James
Shackle, late of HMS Zealous, living at William Rose’s, West Court Street,
Gillingham, Kent, received £110 17s from the Clerk of the Cheque at
Chatham on 29 December 1800; and Margaret Hume, of New Foundry
Street, Greenock, Scotland, sister of John Hume, late of HMS Hussar,
received £153 8s 6d on 17 October 1815 from the customs collector at
Greenock.42
