102   Caring for the Nation’s Families


existing but hitherto seldom utilized provision, which enabled sailors to
make one-off lump-sum wage transfers to their extended family.
   Huge amounts of national funds and manpower were invested in
these new provisions. By the end of 1796, the use of the seamen’s wage
remittance scheme was so common that the Navy Ofﬁce established a
new branch, the Allotment Ofﬁce, speciﬁcally to deal with the paper-
work and record the details relating to seamen allotting wages to their
families.20 The Royal Military Asylum, the school for soldiers’ sons and
daughters, was allotted more than £300,000 in government funds by the
end of the wars.21 This was the largest sum the national government had
ever granted to an institution dedicated to the welfare of civilians. With
these funds, the Asylum educated more than 2000 children.22 Thou-
sands of other children were educated in many restructured regimental
schools whose teachers were now being ofﬁcially trained at the Asylum.
   To organize and administer the beneﬁts for military families, the
national government mobilized the personnel and administrative struc-
tures of the nation’s ﬁscal-military state. During the late seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, Britain underwent a radical transformation
of government to enable it to fund the war effort more efﬁciently;
ﬁnancial, tax and administrative structures and personnel were pro-
fessionalized and modernized.23 However, the work and impact of the
ﬁscal-military state went beyond the strict funding and pursuit of war;
it also extended to caring for eligible veterans, including the distribution
of veterans’ pensions. Customs and excise ofﬁcials were responsible for
distributing pensions to veterans throughout Britain. With the French
Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, the work of tax and military per-
sonnel extended further into the civilian population as they played
critical roles in the functioning of the system providing care for soldiers’
and sailors’ wives, mothers, children and other relatives.24
   Moreover, with the new programmes, the national government used
modes of information collection, categorization and surveillance which
had never before been used with women and children in the general
population. Because of the French and Napoleonic Wars, the state began
to gather an increasing amount of information about the nation and its
people. It instituted the use of standardized forms requesting the input
of detailed information and later, through its professionally trained
clerks, transferred all that data on to well-organized ledgers where to this
day much of it remains. These include returns under the Defence of the
Realm Act of 1798 which sought to take stock of Britain’s civil defence
resources – including, for each county, the number of able-bodied men
and their availability and willingness to serve, and Great Britain’s ﬁrst
