                                                  Patricia Y. C. E. Lin 105


remittances from their nearest customs or excise collectors. Thus Mary
Blane, noted above, collected her remittance from the excise collector
of Brampton as did other women living in the area whose men served
around the world on other vessels.
   By looking at a sample of the records detailing wage remittances
begun on a single date for a single ship – on 1 January 1802 by men
serving on HMS Theseus – to women residing in the coastal town of
Kirkcaldy, in Fife in Scotland, we can see, on a very small scale, how
local communities could develop and what they might entail.
   From early January 1802 until late November 1804, four women who
were related to men serving on HMS Theseus met every month with
the customs collector of Kirkcaldy to collect wage remittances. These
women were seamen’s mothers, Jenny Todd of Dysart and Margaret Ross
of Kirkcaldy, and seamen’s wives, Margaret Watson of Kinghorn and
Ellen Wilson of Pathhead. Mrs Watson and Mrs Wilson were mothers
as well as wives, with the former currently raising on her own two boys
and the latter a large family of three boys and four girls.33
   The women met the customs collector every month for two years.
Thus it is conceivable that these women, and their children, knew each
other and established some sort of relationship, be it distant or close.
The fact that their husbands were serving on the same ship would have
provided a further bond. Perhaps a connection was formed between
the young mothers, or perhaps one of the sailors’ mothers became a
mentor to one of the young women. The tragic news and circumstances
resulting from the wars might also have brought them together.
   Margaret Ross was the ﬁrst in the group to receive bad news. Her son
James died on 11 November 1803.34 The other women might have given
her comfort when she went to get her last remittance. Only one year
later, most of the other women experienced similar grief. On 16 Novem-
ber William Wilson perished, leaving Ellen a widow and his seven
children without a father.35 That same day, Margaret Watson’s husband
was involuntarily discharged, in his case because he had become dis-
abled.36 Four days later, Jenny Todd, the last member of the group, lost
her son George.37
   Not all seamen’s wives and mothers would lose their husbands and
sons. Of the 62 men on HMS Theseus who began monthly wage remit-
tances to their mothers and wives on 1 January 1802, only 12 women –
eight mothers, and four wives – lost their loved ones while they served
on that ship.38 More commonly, their sons and husbands, after a period
of serving on the ship were discharged to serve on another naval ves-
sel, where they continued to send remittances to their mothers and
