108   Caring for the Nation’s Families


experience of ‘family’ for soldiers could extend far beyond the nuclear
family. In this case it included uncles and aunts and nephews and nieces
as well as immediate family members.
   In order to maximize the chances that family members could suc-
cessfully petition for a soldier’s effects, the War Ofﬁce ordered all its
commanding ofﬁcers to ﬁll in, carefully and precisely, a revised casualty
return which this time included not only the soldier’s name and date of
death, but the extent of his debts and credits, the person whom he had
named as his next of kin, and the circumstances of his death.46 This last
material would be of particular interest to relatives who in previous wars
had known only that their loved one had not returned.
   Unfortunately, commanders did not complete their returns as pre-
cisely as they were asked to. Nevertheless, the returns provide a unique
lens through which to consider the experience of soldiers’ families. Con-
sidering the returns for the 12th Light Dragoons for the years from
1811 to early 1817, among others, it is clear that the ﬁnancial experi-
ence of soldiers’ survivors was radically different from that of relatives
of deceased seamen. While it would be conceivable for some seamen’s
widows, mothers, fathers and other relatives to enter or contemplate
entering the middle class from their survivors’ beneﬁts, the surviving
relatives of soldiers received more modest amounts which, while cer-
tainly welcome, would only help ensure that they could purchase life’s
necessities during the following months.47 Payments to next of kin by
the men of the 12th Light Dragoons ranged from around 9s ¾d to a
high of £11 11s 8d. In November 1813, the regimental agent paid the
latter amount to the wife of Corporal William Hammon, who had been
reported missing in action.48 The sum most commonly distributed was
around £3.
   Most men named their wives, parents, siblings or children as their
next of kin. The casualty records of the men of the 1st Foot for 1810–
1816 remind us that because of the distant corners of the globe in
which the army was ﬁghting, and the far-ﬂung areas of the nation’s
empire from which troops came, members of military families were
often culturally, ethnically and racially diverse.
   During the time covered by the return, the regiment was serving in
India, and some of the men listed had died at Poonamallee or on the
march there. Of the 19 men who were listed on the casualty return,
10 left their effects to ‘his Native Woman’, ‘his Native Girl’, or to a
named woman followed by the term ‘a Native Woman’. Private Matthew
Monks, for example, died with the regiment on 19 December 1813 and
willed his effects to ‘Booba, a Native Woman’.49 Eight months earlier,
