                                                         Patricia Y. C. E. Lin 113


returning to the casualty roll of the 1st Foot. Not uncommonly, men
willed their effects to fellow soldiers. These include Drummer George
Bowman who named ‘Drummer Tandy’ of the 2nd Battalion as his next
of kin, and Private Denis Treacey who willed his effects to Sergeant
Grogan.80 To take care of a deceased comrade’s child was, for some
soldiers, to care for a relative, of a brother’s child.


Conclusion

War is often a family affair. This was certainly the case for the British
during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, when the wel-
fare of the families of common soldiers and sailors became a matter of
national importance. New support programmes were developed by cen-
tral government, which also began systematically to record details of
the lives of the whole service community, men, women and children.
By studying the information collected, it is possible to see beyond well-
worn stereotypes about military families. More broadly, the documents
reveal that the experience of military families was truly national and
international.
   Behind the familiar ﬁgure of the drunken soldier and sailor, we see
the identity of a family man who while serving abroad elected to make
provision for his family. Behind the image of the weeping wife, we ﬁnd
strong women who travelled across national boundaries, regularly inter-
acted with the state administration to provide for themselves and their
children, and were sometimes given the opportunity to improve their
class standing. And behind the distant ﬁscal-military state, we discover
something rather more humane, a state that was beginning to take care
of servicemen and their families and to enter the lives of ordinary men,
women and children.


Notes
Research for this article was funded by a Fulbright Scholarship to the United King-
dom and a fellowship from the Institute on Global Conﬂict and Cooperation at
the University of California, San Diego. The author thanks Jane Rendall, Karen
Hagemann, Linda Colley and the participants of the ‘War Experiences and Identi-
ties: The Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars in Contemporary Perception’, Joint
Workshop at the German Historical Institute, London, 24–25 February 2006,
and ‘Gender, War and Politics: the Wars of Revolution and Liberation’ Interna-
tional Conference at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 18 May 2007,
for their comments on earlier versions of this article. Marsha Jaeger and Leslie
Sternberg provided critical support in the ﬁnal editing stage.
