                                                     Patricia Y. C. E. Lin 109


Private John Verblaken, himself a ‘foreigner’, died on 21 April 1813,
leaving his effects to ‘Mutamah (a Native Woman)’.50
  It is not surprising that soldiers had relationships with women in the
local population. This was common in many parts of the world where
the army served. However, the fact that they were listed as next of kin
on equal terms with the soldiers’ brothers, daughters and fathers, and
that the national government recognized them as such, suggests that
for the soldiers themselves these women were more intimate and more
equal than the term ‘his Native Woman’ implies. This seems particularly
so where the records indicate that the soldiers legally willed their effects
to the women. The entry for the late Sergeant William Lake suggests
that some if not all of the relationships between soldiers and ‘native
women’ did not merely mimic those between married couples but had
been codiﬁed in law. When William died in September 1815, his effects
were sent to ‘Mary Lake a Native Woman’.51 The fact that Mary and
William have the same last name, despite her being ‘a Native Woman’,
makes one suspect that their relationship had been legally endorsed.
  Records that were collected as part of the running of the Royal Military
Asylum indicate that such interracial and international relationships
were common, and that with them came multi-racial, multi-cultural
and multi-national children. More broadly, the Asylum records offer us
a window into the lives of women and children who lived abroad with
their soldier husbands and fathers.52



Life on the march for soldiers’ families

As suggested by the casualty records of the 1st Foot, some women met
and married their soldier husbands while these men were serving with
their regiments abroad. These included Mary Foster, who was married
to her husband David, a private in the 4th Foot, in Bobadilla, Portugal
by the regimental chaplain on 1 January 1813.53 Mary Draycott married
her husband Joseph, sergeant in the 11th Foot, while he was serving in
Martinique in the West Indies.54
  Since most women were not allowed to join the regiments unless they
were married to soldiers prior to embarkation, it is most likely that these
women were natives of the countries where these couples married. This
was certainly the case for Caroline Koskloskie who on 1 January 1801,
married her husband Ferdinand when he was serving in Amsterdam.55
Her application for the admission of her son to the Asylum stated that
she was in desperate circumstances following the death of her husband,
