110   Caring for the Nation’s Families


‘being a Foreigner and incapable of supporting’ her three small chil-
dren.56 Despite his foreign-sounding name, we know that Ferdinand was
British because his children were admitted into the Asylum, an insti-
tution whose admission was strictly limited to the children of British
soldiers.57
   One major barrier that faced foreign women who married British sol-
diers was that of language. In 1802, Rosanna Daft married Sergeant
Major John Daft of the 85th Regiment in her ‘native country of Madeira’
during the regiment’s stopover on the way to the West Indies. Travelling
with her husband in the West Indies, she gave birth to three children
and returned to the Isle of Wight six years later. Unfortunately, when
Rosanna’s husband died, she found that her knowledge of ‘very little of
the English Language’ posed a huge problem. Not being a native of Eng-
land, and unable to discover her husband’s parish of settlement, the one
place in Britain where she would legally be entitled to poor relief, she
was unable to secure any aid. Instead, she found herself and her children
penalized and placed in a workhouse on the Isle of Wight. She applied
for her children to go to the Asylum in the hope that there they would
be well cared for and that she could then return home to Madeira.58
   Rosanna was one of many soldiers’ wives to give birth while travel-
ling abroad. Another was Ann Harvey, whose husband William was a
sergeant in the 4th Royal Veterans Battalion. Ann gave birth to her son
William Jr in Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia on 10 April 1807 after marry-
ing William Sr in St Vincent in the West Indies almost ﬁve years earlier.59
The birthplaces of other children admitted into the Asylum included
Minorca, Malta, Corsica, Jamaica, Ceylon and New South Wales.60 Due
to the demands of the regiment, some women had no choice but to
give birth to their children while on the move. James Lynch, the son
of Private Patrick Lynch and his wife Caroline, arrived in this world
on 16 December 1805 while Caroline was ‘on the transport to the
Cape of Good Hope’.61 Catherine Smith gave birth to her son John on
11 March 1801, while ‘on the passage to the West Indies’.62 As ships
were cramped – incubators of disease – limited in provision of fresh
water and food, and regularly at the mercy of both rough seas and the
enemy, it is a small miracle that the mothers and their newborn sons
survived.63
   Death was an ever-present risk for these women as it was for their hus-
bands. Sometimes the women were the survivors. Ann Harvey survived
the sinking of the ‘Harpooner Transport’ from Quebec. However, her
husband and three of her four young children perished. Destitute and
in mourning, she petitioned to the Asylum for the care of her remaining
