                                                     Patricia Y. C. E. Lin 111


child, nine-year-old William.64 In Antigua, Louisa Bond found herself
unable to care for her three-year-old son Christopher after the death of
her husband, Sergeant John Bond of the 70th Foot, from yellow fever
on 13 July 1804.65
   Often, and it is a fact sometimes overlooked by military scholars,
women were themselves among the deceased. Like soldiers, they were
most commonly felled by disease rather than enemy action. A number
of women succumbed to the deadly fevers that spread in the tropics.
These included Judith Hoy, who ‘died in Gibraltar of the Dreadful Fever
of 1813’, leaving behind three young children and her husband Private
James Hoy who in the year after her death became ‘subject to acts of
derangement’.66 The wife of Private Michael Corrigan of the 8th Foot
died on the same island leaving behind six children aged two to twelve
as well as her husband.67 Other mothers died and left their families
behind in Canada, India and in the various islands of the West Indies.68
   In dying, these women left their husbands as widowers, but also as
single fathers. The long-service requirements of the army did not make
it easy for these men to succeed in their new role. The records make
clear, however, that despite these challenges, many of these fathers ded-
icated themselves to fulﬁlling their parental responsibility. The fact that,
although they were themselves often illiterate, they made such great
efforts to prepare the complex admission application for their children,
and collected the required documents and signatures, is testament to
their dedication.69
   Following their wives’ deaths, many fathers cared for their children in
the regiment while simultaneously serving the nation. Private George
Lonsdale of the 56th Foot remained stationed in India while caring for
his two-year-old son Richard and his ﬁve-year-old son Martin. His wife,
Jane, had died in 1807 at ‘Calabah near Bombay’.70 In Kingston, Jamaica,
Private James Fair of the 60th Foot had been caring for his now ﬁve-year-
old son William for two years following the death of his wife Phoebe.71
   Simultaneously parenting and soldiering was no doubt challenging
both economically and practically. While the government created some
new provisions for military families, it did not supplement the wages of
soldiers who suddenly found themselves in that position. Consequently
men needed to ﬁnd some way to pay for their children’s basic necessities
such as food, clothing and childcare. Some were quite creative. Edward
McMurdy, a gunner in the Royal Artillery, augmented his salary while
his regiment was in Jamaica by being employed ‘as a singing man’. This
enabled him to provide for his two sons, Edward and John, aged ﬁve and
ten, who had been left behind following his wife’s death. However, upon
