126   War without Battles


over 10 million francs.36 In 1808, Beneke complained in his diary more
about the growing costs of quartering and ofﬁcial contributions than
the decline of trade, which reached its nadir that year.37 In a letter to an
American correspondent, one contemporary explained the depressing
interconnection between economic warfare and military occupation:

   All the conquered lands are exhausted by paying exorbitant contribu-
   tions, by continual requisitions, by victualling the troops marching
   through their towns and villages, and all that at a time when trade is
   disturbed and stopped everywhere, when all is exceedingly dear, and
   even the necessaries of live [sic] not to be got at any rate.38

Two years later, in 1809, this same correspondent prophesied the ruin
of Europe based on the destruction of civil society and the annihilation
of commerce.39
   Hamburg’s annexation into the French Empire in 1810 made a bad
situation worse; it reinforced the Continental System and subjugated
Hamburgers to commercial relationships intended to beneﬁt France. Ini-
tially annexation into the Empire generated hope among merchants. As
new members of the Empire and part of its preferential market zone,
they hoped to beneﬁt from imperial reforms and trade with France
on equal terms. To their bitter disappointment, tariff barriers remained
as the expansion of the Empire sought to meet short-term logistical
needs. Napoleon’s licence system privileged French ports at the expense
of annexed ports. Moreover, the reforms offered to the new territo-
ries could not mitigate the deepening negative consequences generated
by ongoing war: economic decline, unemployment, and requisitions of
men, money, and goods. The city also provided resources and strategic
location for eastward military operations.
   After 1811, the quality of life in the Hanseatic cities degenerated
further. With the expansion of the imperial army and navy into the
rivers and mudﬂats, transporting colonial goods through Heligoland
became too risky, and the island lost its prominence as a smuggling
emporium.40 If blockade enforcement, high taxes, and arbitrary fees
caused many north German wholesale merchants to relocate to London,
St. Petersburg, Gothenburg or Kiel, mid-sized ﬁrms, no longer able to
bribe the French to secure their existence with false papers, folded.
In 1811, a record number of such businesses failed.41 Illicit com-
merce, as well as investments and ﬁnance, retreated east toward Sweden
and the Baltic.42
   If ongoing economic decline forced merchants and bankers from their
villas into exile or diminished their proﬁts, it drove the vastly larger
