                                                Katherine B. Aaslestad   121


the Elbe became the gateway distributing English and American goods
to the continent.10 Trafﬁc through Hamburg’s port increased dramati-
cally, and though most cargo arrived in Hamburg in foreign ships, the
republic’s own neutral merchant marine expanded. The rapid growth
of the Bank of Hamburg and a marked increase in insurance compa-
nies signalled Hamburg’s emergence as a critical site of international
ﬁnance. Yet many contemporaries noted with worry that the booming
economy generated reckless speculation, staggering insurance rates, and
rapid inﬂation. A succession of bankruptcies in 1799 demonstrated com-
mercial instability. Moreover, this tremendous economic activity and
prosperity depended on the neutrality of the city-state and free ﬂow of
trade through its harbour. By 1795, following the temporary occupa-
tion of Bremen by Hanoverian and British troops, it was clear that the
wars that provided commercial opportunity also threatened Hamburg’s
sovereignty.
   Throughout the eighteenth century, Hamburg successfully countered
territorial and monarchical ambitions to defend its autonomy through
imperial law and diplomatic negotiations. To ensure their survival as
neutral autonomous republics, Hamburg, Bremen, and Lübeck sought
to redeﬁne themselves as a neutral free-trade zone. Throughout the
1790s the cities contemplated a common neutrality programme and
waged a public campaign in the press to gain international recognition
of Hanseatic neutrality. Hanseatic statesmen sought to convince France
and Great Britain that the independence and neutrality of Hamburg,
Bremen, and Lübeck served the trade, banking, transportation, and
communication interests of all nations.11 Hamburg and Bremen also
sought to purchase French support; yet after years of diplomatic negotia-
tions and numerous ‘gifts’ and ‘contributions’, appeals for international
recognition of Hanseatic neutrality came to nothing.12
   The escalating conﬂict between France and Britain – both per-
ceived as equally dangerous – engulfed the Hanseatic cities even before
Napoleon’s armies occupied them in 1806. In response to the French
occupation of Hanover and Ritzbüttel in 1803, the British blockaded
the Elbe, Weser, and Eider rivers, underscoring the growing pattern of
great power reprisal by targeting small neutral states. In Hamburg, the
blockade caused serious economic hardship as overseas trade became
dependent on smuggling and the expensive and risky transport of
goods by land. Trades associated with shipping – ships’ carpenters,
rope makers, loaders, grain clerks, and wine haulers – lost their work,
regular income, and savings.13 The local press lamented the social con-
sequences of skyrocketing food prices and unemployment generated by
