                                                 Katherine B. Aaslestad   119


occupation in 1806 to its mobilization for war against and liberation
from the French in 1813–1814.
   When measuring the impact of Napoleon’s Continental System,
historians have explored such long-term consequences as structural
transformations based on institutional and administrative reforms or
the geographical shifts in trade inland from the Atlantic seaboard to
the European heartland.2 Recent studies emphasize that the impact of
Napoleon’s economic strategies were far from uniform on the conti-
nent and largely ineffective against his enemy, the British.3 This article
places the Continental System and economic warfare at the centre of
relations between civilians and military operations to illustrate an often-
overlooked dimension of war experiences during the Napoleonic era.
By 1813, the deterioration of livelihoods brought on by imperial com-
mercial warfare and exploitation generated an ever-growing anti-French
sentiment that would become increasingly explosive. In this case, eco-
nomic warfare played a signiﬁcant role in militarizing a commercial civil
society for war.
   Recent historians emphasize that the Napoleonic era, like the world
wars of the twentieth century, must be examined beyond the ‘drums
and trumpet’ genre of conventional military operational histories. Only
multi-dimensional scholarship on the Revolutionary and Napoleonic
Wars can uncover the full impact of war on individuals and society.4
Recent studies on twentieth-century warfare illustrate how economic
instability, scarcity, and declining livelihoods brought war to the home
front. Similarly, this case study on the consequences of economic
warfare in Hamburg analyses connections between civil society and mil-
itary combat, suggesting that expanding military actions often target
civilians and in turn mobilize them for war. If traditional scholar-
ship tacitly accepted the dichotomy between the civilian and the
military as well as the contrast between the ‘home front’ and the
ﬁeld of battle, the experience of military occupation and economic
warfare breaks down this dualism for north Germany between 1806
and 1813. As one contemporary recorded in 1809, ‘Everyone, even
those who do not hear the resounding drums of war, feel themselves
oppressed, half numb, hopeless, and reduced to desperation’.5 French
policies in Hamburg and along coastal areas across Europe brought
the consequences of war to businesses, shops, and homes. By 1813,
the scale of economic dislocation, unemployment and poverty, com-
bined with the mobilization of material and manpower against the
Napoleonic army, dramatically transformed the home front into a
war zone.
