                                                 Katherine B. Aaslestad   125


into Hamburg could bring the equivalent of a day’s wages.27 Such Kaffé
Trager, as they were known, multiplied like mushrooms and by 1810
‘all types’ engaged in smuggling, noted lawyer Ferdinand Beneke in his
diary.28 Authorities in Hamburg estimated that some 6000 to 10,000 per-
sons smuggled goods between the two cities each day. French authorities
conﬁscated no more than 5 per cent of this contraband.29 Indeed, smug-
gling between Altona and Hamburg developed into a quasi-legitimate
business involving ﬁxed business transactions, including commissions
and insurance rates.30 In the long term, even black market trade could
not replace steady employment for the mass of the population.
   A complete understanding of the difﬁculties associated with
Napoleon’s Continental System must include the costs and burdens
of French occupation. The obligation on the general population to
billet and support the occupying Grande Armée aggravated economic
decline. Military occupation in 1806 brought a variety of transient
Dutch, Spanish, and French ofﬁcers and soldiers who lodged in domestic
quarters. In Hamburg’s, residents were obliged to provide the occupy-
ing troops with daily rations of meat, bread, vegetables, rice, a bottle
of beer, and a glass of brandy, and, in addition for ofﬁcers, mone-
tary allowances.31 As the number of soldiers increased, so did the costs
demanded of the population.
   Occupying forces changed the face of the former trade republic. For-
eign soldiers replaced hawkers, merchants, and shoppers on the city
streets, rendering the city more a military establishment than a com-
mercial centre.32 In December 1807 Ferdinand Beneke reﬂected in his
diary on this transformation, ‘we have seen French, Italian, Dutch,
and Spanish [soldiers] celebrate as we lost our peace, trade, prosper-
ity, and freedom. Plundered one and all, slaves to foreign occupation,
and cut off from all sources of acquisition . . . .’33 The French military
requisitioned private and public buildings as barracks and obliged the
Hanseatic cities to procure coats, boots, shirts, and medical supplies for
imperial armies.34 With the arrival of more French troops in August 1810
Beneke complained that ‘quartering is oppressive. Only well-fed and
ﬁne-clothed soldiers strut around the market places that once engaged
in commerce.’35 Regardless of the city’s economic decline, the Empire
obliged occupied territories like Hamburg to provide the Grande Armée
with increasing requisitions of horses, waggons, food, clothing, and
other equipment.
   Expecting the cities to ﬁnance his wars, Napoleon demanded in
October 1807 that the Hanseatic cities pay 400,000 francs monthly in
salary for his troops at a time when occupation costs alone had risen to
