120   War without Battles


Commercial and civil society amidst international warfare

Eighteenth-century Hamburgers gave the credit for their city-state’s
autonomy, republican freedom, and prosperity to their constitution
and commerce. The self-governing republic’s constitution represented
freedom from arbitrary state interference and encouraged the repub-
lic’s residents to expend their energies in their own and the public’s
interests, which in turn facilitated economic development. The vital-
ity of commerce penetrated all areas of life in the city, leading one
native to remark, ‘The spirit of trade provides the city with its soul’.6
Within this commercial republic, merchants enjoyed elevated civic,
economic, and social status: the Senate reserved half of its seats for
merchants. As contemporaries frequently noted, commerce occupied
most of the attention of Hamburgers. Most of the city’s 100,000 inhabi-
tants – merchant bankers, insurance agents, dock labourers, sail makers,
and sugar reﬁners alike – depended either directly or indirectly on
commerce.7 Trade necessitated freedom, open competition, and political
equilibrium, all features characteristic of republican Hamburg. Thus, the
requirements of commerce inﬂuenced all elements of the city’s political
life. Trade dictated a policy of neutrality, independence, and nonalign-
ment in international affairs as well as the adoption of liberal economic
practices.
   More than just a mercantile centre and gateway to international trade,
Hamburg functioned as a ﬁnancial, diplomatic, and communication
hub as well. The port city was a natural gathering place for all kinds
of information and news, and by the second half of the eighteenth cen-
tury, Hamburg possessed the most sophisticated press in Central Europe,
second only to London in the number and circulation of newspapers
in Europe.8 In fact, the city’s press, like the dense overlapping social
networks located in the Stock Exchange, coffee houses, and civic asso-
ciations, embodied the republic’s particular utilitarian Enlightenment
experience.9 Hamburg represented one ideal form of eighteenth-century
civil society, with a literate, well-read, politically informed, and engaged
population focused on commerce, prosperity, and practical reform.
   After 1792, the course of the French wars profoundly inﬂuenced the
north German coastal economy. Warfare and French conquest elsewhere
in Europe prompted many foreign banks and merchants to relocate
to the neutral Hanseatic cities. The volume of and proﬁt from trade
and shipping peaked in the 1790s as Hamburg dominated continental
wholesale trade, and hundreds of new businesses ﬂourished. Follow-
ing the ﬂight of capital and trade from Holland to north Germany,
