124   War without Battles


extensive searches, and seizures combined with the eastward shift of
contraband to Sweden and the Baltic restricted most large-scale smug-
gling operations by 1812. Annexation combined with enforcement of
the blockade produced new levels of damage in a battered northern
European economy blocked from legitimate international commerce.


The consequences of economic warfare and military
occupation

Flexible enough to adapt in the short-term to the Continental System,
many of Hamburg’s leading merchants continued to prosper after 1806,
though their proﬁt margins may not always appear on their merchant
ledgers.21 But if the commercial elites continued to indulge their fan-
cies in balls, concerts, and parties, this was not so for the majority
of the population. All who had been dependent on the once thriving
import and export trade lost their livelihood.22 As one contemporary
observed, ‘In a city where the poorest and the wealthiest members live
from commerce . . . the stagnation of that industry can only result in the
worst kind of long-term misery’.23 Shortages of coal as well as imperial
taxes on sugar, rum, and tobacco supplies dismantled local industries.
Dock labourers, ships’ carpenters, sail makers, artisans, cigar-rollers, oil
pressers, and brewers faced destitution. As contemporaries pointed out,
shipping and commerce formed the framework of the city’s economy:

   This hardship is not simply felt by one area of commerce, rather all
   trades on land or sea are coerced, destroyed, and restricted. . . . The
   merchant is not alone in his decline, those who depend on him –
   brokers, agents, accountants, sailors and boatmen, loaders and all
   kind of labourers – have their existence threatened.24

Even solid middle-class lawyers severely economized their households
out of necessity.25
  For most of the population, thrown out of work by the Continen-
tal System and new export tariffs, smuggling provided the only means
of subsistence. For the local population smuggling developed into a
guerrilla war against imperial toll inspectors and customs agents.26
Small-scale smuggling, pervasive at city gates, relied largely on women,
youth, and servants who concealed bags of coffee beans, sugar, pep-
per, and syrup in their clothing, stockings, boots, and hats. Despite
the danger and harassment entailed in small-scale smuggling, it paid
well. One pound of coffee slipped from neighbouring Danish Altona
