122   War without Battles


the blockade.14 As the number of the impoverished grew, the city gov-
ernment implored the British to permit ships bearing food through the
blockade to avert complete social catastrophe.15 Notorious for the ruth-
less exploitation of their naval superiority, the British punished small
powers to retaliate against French actions. Britain’s command of the sea
ensured that it could blockade French ports as well as the continent in
general.


The Continental Blockade 1806–1812

Napoleon’s victorious war against Prussia in October 1806 extended
French military power across northern Germany and ended any lin-
gering hope of Hanseatic neutrality or non-involvement in the inter-
national conﬂict. After occupying the Hanseatic cities, Napoleon issued
the Berlin Decrees in November 1806, designed to deprive his enemy of
continental trade and destroy the British economy. Under the Emperor’s
dictate, all trade, trafﬁc, and correspondence between Britain and the
continent were to be immediately halted, British nationals imprisoned,
and all British property, merchandise, and correspondence conﬁscated.
Britain’s Orders in Council and Napoleon’s 1807 Milan Decrees further
extended the war to neutral shipping and broadened economic warfare
throughout the Atlantic. If economic warfare generally sought to reduce
the military and civilian capacity of an enemy to wage war, both France
and Britain expanded blockades to target civilians in allied as well as
neutral states.
   Moreover, Napoleon’s Continental System set out to do more than
simply damage the British economy. He sought to subjugate and reshape
the continent’s economies to serve France. By denying British indus-
trial products and colonial re-export outlets in traditional continental
markets, the blockade strove to disrupt British commerce, generate a
balance-of-payments deﬁcit, and thereby reduce its capacity to wage
and ﬁnance war. Equally important, it also aimed to establish French
industrial and commercial hegemony on the continent. Thus, the
blockade established in 1806 had far-reaching goals beyond subduing
Britain; in fact, the real target of French economic restructuring was the
continent.16
   Isolated from trade with Britain as well as deprived of continental mar-
kets following Napoleon’s export restrictions, port cities along the North
Sea coastline experienced immediate commercial and industrial decline.
Sustaining the blockade, however, proved difﬁcult, and French military
power could not ensure consistent or adequate implementation of the
