                                                  Katherine B. Aaslestad   127


urban lower class to complete impoverishment and ruin. Economic
warfare shattered livelihoods and left poverty in its wake. French ship-
building programmes did not provide sufﬁcient work to compensate
for the economic dislocation of workers on such a vast scale. Unstable
market prices and rampant inﬂation further impoverished the unem-
ployed. All inhabitants of the cities paid heavy direct and indirect taxes
to support the French administration and military. As a French city,
Hamburgers paid a wide range of taxes on property, workshops, and
patents as well as on tobacco, spirits, playing cards, jewellery, carriages,
and public transport. Far worse for the general population were the taxes
on daily necessities such as bread, animal feed, and wood.43 In addi-
tion, after 1811 tolls on imports and exports, including basic foodstuffs
entering Hamburg from Danish Holstein, increased the price of daily
groceries. As elsewhere conditions of war aggravated inﬂation; bread
sold for 1 mark in 1798 and rose to 16 marks by 1813.44 Since it was
impossible to obtain overpriced coffee and sugar, Hamburgers drank
‘German’ or ‘Continental Coffee’ made from chicory and acorns.45
   With the collapse of legitimate seaborne commerce and reduction in
smuggling, the harbours of the city were dead. Sailors and ﬁshermen
alike abandoned Hamburg; river trafﬁc on the Elbe was limited to the
transport of food, travellers, and soldiers.46 One contemporary wrote
of Hamburg, ‘All traces of wealth have slowly vanished. There is no
mention of trade.’47 Sugar reﬁning and the textile industry collapsed;
of Hamburg’s 435 sugar reﬁneries only 40 survived the city’s annexation
and decline in colonial trade. Likewise, of the 27 calico printing work-
shops that employed 5000 workers in 1800, only 4 remained in 1811.48
During 1811–1812 an estimated 15,000 labourers lost their livelihood
in manufacturing, and at least twice as many working in shipping.49
The high taxes and arbitrary fees that plagued the city’s remaining busi-
nesses caused many to relocate to neighbouring Altona or as far away as
Sweden and Russia.
   Many unemployed labourers emigrated, but others resorted to beg-
ging or banditry, and charity. By early 1811, over 17,000 inhabitants
of Hamburg lived off welfare and support from charitable institutions,
which themselves faced ﬁscal crisis. Hamburg’s General Poor Relief, once
recognized as the best welfare programme in Europe, deteriorated from
a holistic system that focused on poverty prevention to a mere alms-
giving institution.50 As economic life worsened under Imperial rule,
the French undermined civic institutions that had traditionally assisted
the impoverished and rendered urban poor relief incapable of assist-
ing the unemployed. When the merchant, philanthropist, and former
