                                                 Katherine B. Aaslestad   123


blockade during the ﬁrst four years. In fact, the Continental Blockade
is best understood as two phases: from 1806 to 1810 and from 1810 to
1812. Economic stagnation and decline with short-term ﬂuctuations in
illicit trade characterized the ﬁrst phase, and an abrupt halt to trade and
limited food supplies distinguished the second.
   Napoleon’s Continental System encouraged a shadow economy
(Schattenwirtschaft) across the European continent. Smuggling, fraud,
bribery, and alternative trade routes emerged along the North Sea coast-
line to ensure the survival of commerce with Britain and her colonies.
Trade between Britain and Hamburg revived in small harbours in Danish
Tönning and Glückstadt. Coastal geography supported smuggling, as
river deltas, mudﬂats, marshes, coastal islands, and sand dunes were
particularly difﬁcult to monitor and secure.17 In 1807 Britain seized the
Danish island of Heligoland to facilitate its illicit commerce. As a key
transit station for smugglers, it emerged as the ‘warehouse of Europe’.18
British colonial goods as well as cotton and tobacco from the United
States continued to make their way to Hamburg’s warehouses. Cor-
ruption among the French administrators, soldiers, and even customs
agents also undermined the blockade. Merchants passed English mer-
chandise under the cover of false certiﬁcates that attested their origin in
Denmark, Sweden, America, or Russia. Hamburg spent 1.5 million francs
to encourage the new French authorities to overlook trade on the Elbe,
and in the six months following the Berlin Decree, 1475 vessels arrived
in Hamburg without impediment. British goods estimated at 590,000
tons were sold openly without any seizures.19 In 1807 a French police
report stated, ‘Trade with English goods in the city continues as prior to
the decree.’20
   The porous nature of the blockade along the North Sea coastline
ceased dramatically after 1810. The Fontainebleau, Trianon, and Saint
Cloud Decrees generated a new level of economic warfare, and Napoleon
annexed the north German coastline into the Empire. In a frontal
attack against illegal British goods and smuggling, Napoleon strength-
ened the already privileged position of French industry and commerce
by raising imperial tariffs and issued special licences for agricultural
exports and imports in order to turn smuggling to the advantage of the
French Treasury. Napoleon enforced the blockade with growing num-
bers of customs ofﬁcials and imperial troops along the recently annexed
coastline, punished smugglers brutally, and burned conﬁscated British
goods in public bonﬁres in the last months of 1810 and ﬁrst months of
1811. Though some illicit trade based on falsiﬁed documents continued,
imperial reinforcement of the blockade with arbitrary nocturnal arrests,
