                                                 Katherine B. Aaslestad   131


grievances and popular hostility. The French were hated and despised
because their rule brought war, poverty, and misery. As the angry crowds
vented their frustration on the French authorities, they sang the popu-
lar civic anthem Auf Hamburgs Wohlergehn, relating their actions to the
French destruction of their city’s prosperity and their own livelihoods.66
Those who revolted had nothing left to lose. Faced with growing popu-
lar hostility and approaching Russian Cossacks, French forces withdrew
from Hamburg in early April 1813.


Conclusion: economic warfare and the militarization of
civil society

One month later, in March 1813, Hamburgers established a Citizens’
Militia and united with the liberated citizens of Lübeck to form a vol-
untary militia, the Hanseatic Legion, to protect their cities. Up to this
point, most Hanseatics were content to let other Europeans ﬁght and
simply await liberation from French rule. The formation of local militias
during the spring of 1813 represented a noteworthy break in Hamburg’s
political culture. The city’s residents, men and women alike, underwent
an intense militarization and mobilization for war in 1813.67 Mate-
rial distress and economic decline combined with imperial occupation
alienated the populations of northern Europe from Napoleon’s Empire
by 1813 and fostered a new militarized ethos. The Continental System
radicalized economic warfare and aggravated the day-to-day experience
of military occupation, billeting and requisitions, and increased poverty.
It brought war into the harbours, warehouses, marketplaces and homes
and ensured that the home front became a war zone. As Hamburg
reveals, civilians became soldiers in 1813.
   The Continental System left a lasting legacy in Hamburg. Its popular
memory was carefully cultivated during the long nineteenth century
to associate it with the worst forms of ‘slavery and misery suffered
under the oppressive French yoke’, remembered ominously as the
Franzosenzeit.68 It was recalled to mobilize Hamburgers against the
French in the Franco-Prussian Wars. In fact, based on their collective
memories of the Napoleonic experience more than 60 years before,
Hamburgers responded to the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War with
deep anxiety. Fearing bombardment of the city, blockade of the Elbe,
and a total breakdown of commerce, ship-owners ordered their ﬂeets
to safe ports, and north German civilians volunteered to protect the
coastline and dismantled lighthouses to prevent a French invasion.69
Triggered by memories and lore from the last struggle against the French,
