128   War without Battles


director of the city’s poor relief Caspar Voght returned to Hamburg in
September 1812, he noted with despair:

   With what misgivings, in what spirits did I approach the city from
   Harburg, the once fortunate shores, the towers of the once so pros-
   perous city! I landed. Everything I saw and heard demonstrated the
   ruin of earlier prosperity, [the city] stripped of its attributes, cloaked
   in the fog of a threatening future. How my heart bled . . . The city
   empty and desolate, benefactors of the poor impoverished, the poor
   without help, my life’s work destroyed.51

Voght’s observations underscore the rapid and deep economic decline
that Hamburg experienced during the Napoleonic era.


Sites of conﬂict: city gates, douaniers, and popular revolt

Hamburg’s residents faced the 1806 occupation and 1810 annexation
of their city without resistance. Indeed, the city government sought
to cooperate with the French in the hope of gaining some sort of
local autonomy and economic concessions. The Senate continually
urged residents to comply peacefully and in an orderly manner with
French ofﬁcials, and reminded them that anyone who deﬁed the French
would answer for it themselves. The government would not put the
city in jeopardy to protect individual residents. Even when the econ-
omy declined, most Hamburgers complained bitterly and appealed to
Napoleon for relief, but they did not openly challenge French rule.52
French ofﬁcials noted that despite popular dissatisfaction with Imperial
policies, and in particular resentment toward the Continental Sys-
tem, the populace remained surprisingly tranquil and attributed public
demeanour to the merchants’ desire for order and stability. Indeed, pop-
ular resistance seemed futile in a city without a strong military tradition
and accustomed to bribes (known as gifts) or negotiation to resolve
international difﬁculties.
   Increasing popular frustration with the declining standards of living
and unceasing exploitation associated with warfare, however, fed hostil-
ity against Napoleonic rule. In fact, between 1811 and 1813, Hamburg’s
inhabitants transformed themselves from a resigned and compliant pop-
ulace into a hostile, desperate, and lawless one. The city gates emerged
as the site of growing anti-French sentiment. Even prior to annexation,
numerous altercations took place between the local population and the
toll ofﬁcials (douaniers) at the city gates, and in 1810 one dispute led
