132   War without Battles


Hamburgers could not conceive of a war that would be fought and won
far from their harbours and homes and that would be over in a matter
of months.
   During the centenary celebration of the Wars of Liberation in 1913,
accounts of the Continental System and French occupation reminded
another generation of Hamburgers of past French malevolence. Mem-
bers of the civic club from Harvestehude-Roterbaum, dressed as smug-
glers and douaniers, marched in a commemorative parade depicting
prominent moments leading to the Wars of Liberation.70 The hardships
associated with the city’s occupation and commercial decline appeared
in all forms of festive literature as well as in an exhibit in the Museum
of Hamburg History. Yet within two years, the British, not the French,
emerged as the new masters of economic warfare. During and after
World War I, the Continental System was compared to the British block-
ade.71 In this ‘total war’, the north German home front once again
emerged as a site of civilian militarization and radicalization.
   Between 1806 and 1812 economic warfare shattered livelihoods and
left unemployment and poverty in its wake. Examining the experience
of war from the perspective of civilians on the home front provides
a broader understanding of Napoleonic warfare and demonstrates the
signiﬁcance of material hardships in radicalizing and ultimately mil-
itarizing civil society. By targeting civilian life, the Continental Sys-
tem contributed to the military mobilization of Hamburg by 1813
and transcended the increasingly ﬂuid borders between civil society
and armed combat.


Acknowledgements

I would like to extend my thanks to John Lambertson and Frank Hatje
for their insightful and helpful comments as well as my appreciation to
the ‘Hamburger Stiftung zur Förderung von Wissenschaft und Kultur –
Beneke Edition’.


Notes
 1. Christine Wesphalen, Gesänge der Zeit (Hamburg: B.G. Hoffmann, 1815),
    p. 25.
 2. For an overview see Wolfram Fischer, ‘Wirtschaft und Wirtschaftspolitik
    in Deutschland unter den Bedingungen der Britisch-Französischen
    Blockade und Gegenblockade (1797–1812)’, in Historismus und Modern
    Geschichtsweissenchaft, ed. Karl Otmar von Aretin (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner,
    1987), pp. 243–254.
