                                                 Katherine B. Aaslestad   129


to open violence and the shooting of several civilians.53 The local press
reported popular disturbances at the Altona gate in 1809 and new regu-
lations for the Millern and Deich gates in 1810.54 Following annexation
and the strengthening of the Continental System, controls at the city
gates were further augmented with more inspectors, harsher punish-
ments for smugglers, and single-ﬁle access through the gates. Opened
in June 1812 to prosecute infractions against the Continental System,
the Toll Court appeared another tool of French oppression as punish-
ments grew increasingly harsh. For example, smugglers caught with
sugar and coffee received ten years of hard labour and branding, and
two smugglers faced death for possessing 220 pounds of illicit tobacco
in November 1812.55
   In letters, memoirs, and contemporary accounts of Hamburg’s French
occupation, the douaniers are consistently portrayed as the most hated
French ofﬁcials. Along with gendarmes, Ferdinand Beneke described the
douaniers as ‘the vampires of our trampled freedom’.56 Easily identiﬁed
in their green uniforms and three-cornered black hats, their enforce-
ment of the Continental System brought them into direct confrontation
with the local population. At the city gates, they searched wagons, carts,
clothing, baskets, containers, and bags of all sorts. They rummaged
through the carriages of elderly grandmothers, vegetable baskets carried
by housemaids, cofﬁns en route to burial, and the boots and socks of
children.57 Many contemporaries were outraged that women, regardless
of their social standing, were bodily searched – by other women – in
the gatehouses.58 In fact by 1811, the women in Beneke’s family, fearing
harassment or ‘a scene’ at the city gates, refused to traverse them and
encountered difﬁculties when they did.59
   In their quest to track hidden colonial goods, English merchandise,
and forbidden journals, pamphlets, and English correspondence, the
douaniers’ arbitrary nocturnal arrests, extensive searches of private prop-
erty, seizures of contraband commodities, and arrogant conduct fed
popular hostility. As they became the target of popular fury and jest
by 1812, the French reinforced the police presence at all Hamburg’s city
gates to quell daily conﬂicts between the population and toll ofﬁcials.
Imperial police reports also document local economic hardships and
the growing tension between the populace and French ofﬁcials. General
Police Director Louis Philippe Brun d’Aubignosc arrived in Hamburg in
1811 and, though understaffed, sought to enforce the Emperor’s poli-
cies. He provided Paris and Governor-General Davout with vast amounts
of information regarding the political, military, economic, and social
milieu in Hamburg.60 He recognized the link between severe economic
