130   War without Battles


decline among the lower classes and smuggling, and noted that only
extreme physical punishment could hope to halt business dealings
that were based on such great social need. In early spring 1812, he
reported on the growing tensions between the local populace and the
toll and tax inspectors and the increase in anti-French sentiment in
general.61 Similarly, he reported merchants’ complaints voiced in coffee-
houses about the fall of commerce. Public dissatisfaction, d’Aubignosc
stated, concentrated on concrete economic grievances, rather than polit-
ical conspiracy. In another report he emphasized that in Hamburg, ‘all
energy, all ideas, all calculations are directed solely toward commerce’.62
   Despite dissatisfaction with the French authorities, the public mood,
according to French police documents, remained surprisingly tranquil.
Local people usually expressed hostility to the French by throwing mud
or excrement at the Napoleonic eagles which had displaced Hamburg’s
crest at all gates and public buildings, and the police handled the
few occasions of disorder without the assistance of French troops until
February 1813.63
   Following the retreat of the Grande Armée from Russia and in antic-
ipation of imminent liberation by Russian forces, the popular mood in
Hamburg hardened against the French in January 1813. The arrest of
petty smugglers in front of an angry and impoverished crowd, com-
bined with the escape of a few incarcerated conscripts, aggravated
public discontent, and a spontaneous revolt quickly spread throughout
Hamburg on 24 February. Unemployed workers, women, and children
attacked and destroyed palisades, customs, and watch houses. Angry
throngs stoned the despised French ofﬁcials and threw many of them
into the canals.64 Gaining strength in numbers, protesters tore down
French ﬂags, signs, and imperial eagles. More concerned with dispens-
ing ‘natural justice’ than with driving the French from Hamburg, they
focused their hostility on the hated tax collectors, customs agents,
and police, rather than the imperial army or individual French fami-
lies.65 The French authorities attempted to forestall any further rebellion
through harsh reprisals and rapid executions, but these brutal tactics
misﬁred. Hostility toward the French intensiﬁed. Though it was short-
lived, the revolt triggered subsequent insurrections in the neighbouring
cities of Harburg, Lübeck, Stade, and Lüneburg, as well as in towns along
the Elbe.
   Popular unrest against the Empire, even when violent, was very
symbolic. Protesters attacked tollhouses, administrative buildings, and
imperial ensigns, representations of French authority. Targeting ofﬁ-
cials like toll inspectors and tax collectors illustrated the source of local
