144   From the Ballroom to the Battleﬁeld


Englishwoman. Acknowledging the many other works that had since
appeared on the subject, she nevertheless asserted the superiority her
own account of Waterloo could claim as an eyewitness report:


   The Author must be permitted most earnestly to disclaim all idea of
   entering into competition with the writers whose talents and genius
   have been so well displayed in describing the battle and the ﬁeld of
   Waterloo. But they were not, like the Author of this Narrative, on the
   spot at the time these glorious events took place.38


An insistence upon the authority of experience would feature repeat-
edly in women’s narratives of Waterloo, as they maintained that the
true horrors of war could not be understood by a nation that had been
shielded from its destructive forces. Justifying her graphic description of
the corpse-strewn battleﬁeld, Eaton maintained that it was necessary to
‘dwell upon those scenes of horror’ in order to impress upon the British
nation, ‘hitherto preserved from being the theatre of war’, the devas-
tation wrought by conﬂict and the sacriﬁces made on their behalf by
the British army.39 Thinking of those in England who lived in ‘peace-
able comfort . . . surrounded with every luxury’ but nonetheless thought
themselves unhappy, Lady de Lancey reﬂected bitterly: ‘I can fancy no
better cure for all imaginary evils, than a week’s residence at Waterloo’.40
Though the sound of cannons and guns ﬁring would have been famil-
iar to British civilians from military reviews and theatrical set pieces,
such mock military enactments could not compare with the actual roar
of artillery. As Caroline Capel explained to her mother, ‘To an English
Ear unaccustomed to such things, the Cannonading of a Real Battle is
Awful.’41
   An emphasis on the limited and partial perspective available to
the author has been identiﬁed as a common characteristic of battle
narratives.42 Eschewing the objective, elevated view of the military
historian who describes battle formations, tactics and strategy, soldier-
narrators reinforce the authenticity of their account by conﬁning it to
a description of their individual, subjective experience. This commit-
ment to record only what they had seen and experienced also featured
in women’s narratives of Waterloo. In doing so they asserted a con-
ventional feminine difﬁdence regarding their encroachment on to the
masculine domain of war and politics, whilst simultaneously afﬁrming
their status as eyewitnesses. Fanny Burney thus opened her retrospective
narrative of Waterloo by declaring that she would not write ‘an account
of those great events, which have been detailed so many hundred
