                                                     Catriona Kennedy   147


   These efforts to reconﬁgure the battleﬁeld as a romantic or picturesque
landscape, however, were invariably disrupted by the still visible detri-
tus of war. Women did not shy away from describing these gruesome
details. Georgiana Capel wrote of the ﬂocks of birds of prey hovering
above the open graves and the caps ﬁlled with congealed blood that
lay upon the ground.56 In Eaton’s account of the ﬁeld of Waterloo,
she described her horror at perceiving a human hand reduced almost
to a skeleton reaching out from one of the mass graves.57 The ﬁxation
upon such arresting and grotesque details is a common feature of sol-
diers’ memoirs, a narrative mode that Hynes has dubbed the ‘battleﬁeld
gothic’. Whilst he understands such episodes as reﬂecting combatants’
unﬂinching engagement with the ‘realities’ of war, in the context of the
early nineteenth-century they must also be understood as indebted to
the imagery of the gothic novel. Indeed, Eaton had written a draft novel
in the gothic style, and Georgiana Capel confessed that in the weeks
following Waterloo she and her sister endlessly discussed the horriﬁc
details of the battleﬁeld, seemingly deriving from such macabre discus-
sions a thrill not dissimilar to that provided by popular horror novels.58
The appropriation of available literary models can help to explain the
contradictory impulses in these female responses to Waterloo and their
desire both to romanticize war and to focus on its gruesome details.
By ﬁltering the experience of war and its aftermath through established
narrative frameworks, whether chivalric or gothic, it could be rendered
less disturbing.
   In her letters to her grandmother Georgiana Capel reveals some aware-
ness of how contemporary literary genres may have shaped her narrative
of Waterloo. Relating an encounter with the sweetheart of a British
ofﬁcer who had been killed during the battle, she described how the
‘poor creature’, having retrieved the portrait of herself that her lover
had worn into battle, had now, in her grief, got it ‘shivered almost to
pieces’. Georgiana immediately followed this sentimental vignette with
a self-conscious admission of its debt to romantic ﬁction. Entreating her
correspondent to excuse this lapse into sentimentality, she pleaded in
her defence that ‘the fertile inventor necessity makes me compose my
ideas into romance to please myself and amuse others’.59 A sense that the
feminized language of the sentimental novel could not convey the full
experience of war was combined with a recognition of her own exclu-
sion from a more masculine discourse of war. On one of her many visits
to the ﬁeld of Waterloo, she expressed her desire to hear an account
of the battle from one of the British ofﬁcers who had actually been
there and could ‘explain all I wish to know in their own language, not
