140   From the Ballroom to the Battleﬁeld


of the ‘penumbra of service and support groups’ that surrounded the
army, British camp followers, like their counterparts in other national
armies, provided key services as laundresses, sutlers, cooks and nurses.17
Nearly all of these women were attached to the rank and ﬁle. While
some ofﬁcers’ wives accompanied their husbands to British garrisons in
Ireland, the Mediterranean and the West and East Indies during the Rev-
olutionary and Napoleonic wars, they did not, as a rule, follow them on
expeditions abroad. There were some exceptions, but we can only spec-
ulate as to the impact of campaign and battle on ofﬁcers’ wives and the
other women of the regiment as no ﬁrst-person accounts survive.
   The presence of female camp followers with the British army at Water-
loo is well documented. Several women were killed during the ﬁghting
and there are numerous stories of women giving birth on the battle-
ﬁeld.18 But how can we account for the large numbers of women of
higher rank who were in Brussels at this time? The women whose nar-
ratives are considered here were drawn to the city for various reasons.
Fanny Burney had been living for many years in Paris when Napoleon
escaped from Elba and was dispatched to Brussels by her French hus-
band, General d’Arblay, a member of Louis XVIII’s royalist guard, in
the belief that she would be safer there.19 The 20-year old Georgiana
Capel had accompanied her parents, the Hon. John Thomas and Lady
Caroline Capel, to Brussels in June 1814. Like many other cash-strapped
British aristocrats, the Capels were attracted to the city by the prospect
of being able to live more cheaply on the continent. The stationing of
a British garrison in Brussels ensured an atmosphere of a lively socia-
bility for the British expatriate community during the ‘false peace’ that
preceded Napoleon’s return to power, and Georgiana’s letters from this
period record a pleasurable round of picnics, parties and balls. As a mem-
ber of one of the foremost British families in Brussels, she was amongst
the select group invited to the Duchess of Richmond’s ball for the Duke
of Wellington held on June 15.20 Magdalene, Lady de Lancey was one
of several ofﬁcers’ wives who joined their husbands on the campaign in
Flanders. She declined an invitation to the Duchess’s ball, preferring to
spend the evening with her husband, Colonel Sir William de Lancey, to
whom she had been married for only two months prior to his appoint-
ment as Quarter Master General at Brussels, where she accompanied him
at the beginning of June.21 Though Charlotte Anne Eaton had no imme-
diate military connections, she also sailed with her brother and sister to
Ostend on 10 June to begin an ill-timed tour of the continent, arriving
in Brussels only a few days before the battle of Waterloo. As it was clear
by this stage that a confrontation between Napoleon and the Coalition
