                                                     Catriona Kennedy   145


times, & in so many hundred ways’ but would write instead ‘simply
the narrative of my own history at that awful period’.43
   While they may have been committed to recording only those aspects
of war which they directly experienced, women’s Waterloo narratives
were also framed by an understanding of the ‘in-between’ position
which they occupied within war’s home/front dichotomy and an aware-
ness that their experience of battle remained indirect. They could only
bear witness to the backwash of battle; physical knowledge of combat
was beyond them. In his analysis of soldiers’ war narratives, Samuel
Hynes identiﬁes embodied experience and the ‘reality’ of fear, dis-
memberment and death on the battleﬁeld as the deﬁning aspect of
war experience, stressing the importance of ‘seeing and smelling and
feeling war’.44 It is a viewpoint that tends to exclude women and non-
combatants from the narration of war experience. In Charlotte Eaton’s
account of Waterloo, however, we can discern an effort to displace the
body as the key site of experience as she, like the Romantic poets,
emphasizes the power of imagination in visualizing war. Though she
could not be physically present on the battleﬁeld, Eaton repeatedly
referred to herself and her family during the engagement as being like
‘moving automatons’ or ‘bodies without souls’. ‘Our persons and our
outward sense were indeed present in Antwerp’, she wrote’, ‘but our
whole hearts and souls were with the army’.45 And, while Eaton sym-
pathized with the sufferings of the wounded returning from the fray,
it was her imagining of their comrades still lying upon the battleﬁeld,
which, she claimed, agitated her most. ‘Dreadful, indeed, is the sight
of pain and misery’, she wrote, ‘but far more dreadful are the horrors
imagination pictures of the scene of carnage’.46
   If Eaton’s imagination enabled her to transport herself to the battle-
ﬁeld and to visualize the ‘scene of carnage’, she also drew upon her
imaginative resources to roam back to ‘Albion’s shores’ in order to envis-
age the domestic impact of the battle. Employing an image common
to British women’s writing about war, she drew attention to the tragic
cost of the victory at Waterloo for the mothers and wives of the fallen
soldiers. The inﬂuence of women’s war poetry and its sentimental evo-
cation of the victims of war is evident as she shifts from prose to verse
to picture, ‘Ye dames of Albion! . . . Who sadly sitting on the sea-beat
shore,/Long look for lords who never shall return!’47

The language of war

Reviews of Eaton’s narrative readily acknowledged the advantages it pos-
sessed as the work of a ‘personal witness’; they were, however, more
