                                                     Catriona Kennedy   149


   Charlotte Eaton’s account of the battle struck a more emphatically
patriotic note designed to chime with the anticipated audience for her
text. As the only work written expressly for publication, Eaton addressed
her account to the British reading public, adopting a public and national
persona that was clearly signalled in her narrative’s titular claim to have
been written ‘by an Englishwoman’. English and British were often used
interchangeably during this period, and it is clear from her account
that Eaton’s sense of national identity encompassed more than iden-
tiﬁcation with England alone. Although Eaton had been born in the
north of England, her father was Scottish, and she lived for many years
in Scotland. As a result she felt a particular afﬁnity with the High-
land regiments who fought at Waterloo, and throughout her narrative
paid tribute to their good behaviour, good humour and gallantry. While
Eaton was quick to point out the horrors of war and the tragic cost of
victory, she nevertheless advanced a conception of British patriotism in
which the nation’s military prowess was understood as both the most
important component of British national identity and the guarantor of
all the other elements upon which British pre-eminence rested. In reply
to those who might query what Britain had gained from years of war and
bloodshed, Eaton was insistent that national glory alone was sufﬁcient
to justify these sacriﬁces:

  Glory is the highest, the most lasting good. Without it, extent of
  empire, political greatness, and national prosperity are but a name,
  without it, they can have no security . . . Fortune may change; arts
  may perish; commerce may decay; and wealth and power, and
  dominion and greatness may pass away – but glory is immortal and
  indestructible.66

National glory, Eaton was keen to stress, rested upon more than the
heroic actions of the British army’s aristocratic leaders. At Waterloo, she
wrote, ‘every private soldier acted like a hero’, and in her reﬂections on
the domestic suffering of these soldiers’ wives and mothers, she sug-
gested how British glory also depended upon women’s sacriﬁces. By
elaborating such an expansive vision of British patriotism, one which
transcended rank and gender, Eaton was able to stake her own claim to
a share in this national glory, a claim that was enhanced by her experi-
ence as an eyewitness to this momentous British victory. ‘I returned to
my country’, her narrative concluded, ‘after all the varying and eventful
scenes through which it had been my lot to pass more proud than when
I left it of the name of AN ENGLISHWOMAN.’67
