152   From the Ballroom to the Battleﬁeld


at home and the direct experience of the realities of conﬂict at the
front, their own experiences were, nonetheless, mediated through avail-
able literary discourses. While I have attempted to identify some of the
common features of women’s Waterloo narratives, the varied subject
positions adopted by these authors – from the public and national per-
sona of Charlotte Anne Eaton to the private and personal voice of Lady
de Lancey – point to important differences in the interpretation and
presentation of their experiences.
   What emerges from these female-authored accounts, however, is an
understanding that their experiences were worth recounting and that,
like the more familiar ﬁgure of the soldier-narrator, they also had war
stories to tell. Recent theoretical literature on gender and war writing
has emphasized how the ‘fetishization’ of male combat experience acts
to marginalize women’s writing about war in the twentieth century.
Though women’s exclusion from combat undoubtedly imposed certain
constraints on their narratives of Waterloo, the link between the lived
experience of battle and the narration of war was not necessarily so
ﬁrmly established in the early nineteenth century. The value of soldiers’
war testimony was even challenged by the Duke of Wellington. In his
scornful dismissal of the ﬂood of Waterloo narratives that appeared in
the decades after the victory, Wellington famously likened the history
of a battle to the history of a ball, insofar as no one could accurately
remember what exactly had happened.75 It is a telling comment, hinting
that the gendered gulf between ballroom and battleﬁeld is not always as
wide as we may sometimes imagine.


Notes
 1. Claire Harman, Fanny Burney: A Biography (London: Harper Collins, 2001),
    p. 363.
 2. Fanny Burney, ‘Waterloo Journal’ in Peter Hughes et al. (eds), The Journals
    and Letters of Fanny Burney (Madame d’Arblay), vol. 8 (Oxford: Clarendon,
    1980), p. 424.
 3. See, for example, Lord Byron’s evocation of this chivalric gathering of
    ‘fair women and brave men’, in Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, canto III, line
    184, in Lord Byron, The Major Works ed. Jerome McGann (Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2000), p. 110.
 4. John Carey, ‘Introduction’, William Makepeace Thackeray, Vanity Fair
    (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2001 [1847–1848]), p. xxviii.
 5. Gleig’s account of the campaign only devotes one brief chapter to the expe-
    riences of the civilian community in Brussels, tellingly entitled ‘State of
    Feeling Where the War Was Not’. George Robert Gleig, The Story of the Battle
