                                                       Karen Hagemann   163


Grande Armée lived exclusively from requisitions. Because the demand
for supplies increasingly could not be met, as all reserves had been
exhausted, violent pillaging became more common.31 Many accounts
emphasize that higher-ranking ofﬁcers tried to maintain military disci-
pline and prevent plundering, but the hungrier and more wretched the
soldiers became, the less successful these efforts proved. Those civilians
who spoke French and could thus communicate with the ofﬁcers and
men had the best chances of being spared. This was mainly the case
with the better-off and correspondingly more educated citizens, who
had less difﬁculty in supplying the occupying troops.32
  Ludwig Wilhelm Gottlob Schlosser, who for many years served as pas-
tor at Großzschochau near Leipzig, describes how in early October, after
the lost battle at Wartenburg, 600 Württemberg cavalry and 600 French
infantry soldiers fell upon the village without warning ‘and set up camp
in a large ﬁeld of vegetables outside the village and on the beds of
plants’:

   From our houses they proceeded to remove tables, chairs and
   benches, saw-jacks and planks, doors and shutters, wood, straw, hay,
   sacks, pots and pans, plates, basins, wheelbarrows, axles, buckets
   and pails, candlesticks and lamps. They not only fed their horses
   very well, but also took away with them forty bushels of oats. The
   Württembergers played the master . . . on 6 October the village had to
   supply 1800 lb. of bread, an ox, eight hundred rations of oats and
   four waggons of hay. On the seventh we had to send to Lindenau
   two hundred full rations of oats and hay, and two hundred of bread,
   butter, meat, beer and brandy. On the eighth we thought we would
   be let off, but that night we were obliged to produce two hundred
   rations of oats and hay, and as many portions of meat and bread.33

Such incursions continued until the Battle of Leipzig. Not all units
marching through were satisﬁed to set up camp outside the villages.
Others, like a unit of 800 French dragoons and 400 infantrymen,
demanded to be quartered in villagers’ farms and cottages, with the
result that some householders had to house and feed 80 or even 100
men.34
  In the course of the month of October, both sides assembled more and
more troops in the Leipzig area. The front lines shifted almost daily with
many troops marching through. Badenese, French, Italian, Austrian,
Russian and Württemberg units alternated in the days before the battle.
In the perceptions of villagers, it made little difference to their everyday
