                                                       Karen Hagemann    159


   By now, the Leipzig battle has been researched relatively well from the
perspectives of both military history and the history of memory. Rather
remarkably, however, we still lack a study of this central battle, as well as
of the wars of 1813–1815 more generally, from the viewpoint of social
history, everyday life and experience. Ute Planert has recently under-
taken such a study for southern Germany.10 Nothing comparable exists
for Prussia, Saxony and the entire North German region. The scholar-
ship on Napoleonic Germany since the late 1960s has focused on three
main subjects: military campaigns and alliances, emerging sovereign
states and reform movements, and early articulations of modern nation-
alism. It has ignored the economic, social and cultural dimensions
of the Napoleonic Wars and the plurality of local war experiences in
the German-speaking region. Most importantly, it has failed to explore
the often violent and destructive everyday experience of these wars by
soldiers and civilians.11
   As a result of this gap in the literature, scholars have tended to over-
look the modern character of these ﬁrst ‘total wars’ as David Bell recently
termed them, which were conducted by mass armies, were mobilized by
intensive patriotic and national propaganda, and affected millions of
people all over Europe and beyond.12 These wars altered the everyday
lives of women and men of different regions and social strata in var-
ious ways, because the vast scale of the new mass armies, combined
with intensiﬁed forms of economic warfare such as the Continental Sys-
tem, had far-reaching consequences for the military and for civil society
alike.13 Detailed study demonstrates that – contrary to Bell’s argument
that the Napoleonic Wars, the ﬁrst ‘total wars’, saw increasing separation
between the military and civilian society – at least in Central Europe the
opposite took place. Bell’s argument may be true in times of peace, even
if it is often difﬁcult to identify exactly when war begins and ends in
this period. It may also be true for regions which did not experience
war. However for all areas directly involved in warfare, and in particular
those which experienced battles, occupation, and the passage of troops,
the separation between the military and civilian society was much less
clear-cut. The sheer mass of the number of soldiers involved had far-
reaching consequences not only for the military but also for civilian
society. Civilians were much more often involved in the business of
warfare than they were in the eighteenth century.14
   An approach that relates the analysis of the military and warfare to
social, political, cultural and gender history and focuses on the diversity
of war experiences and perceptions could help us to grasp the char-
acter of the period of the Napoleonic Wars, with all its ambiguities
