                                                           Karen Hagemann     167


encamp these masses of soldiers. Because of the rain, many soldiers who
would otherwise have camped outside sought a roof over their heads.
   The battle began on 16 October with a Coalition offensive, which
achieved little, and the troops were soon forced back. Napoleon’s out-
numbered forces, however, were unable to break the Coalition lines,
resulting in a hard-fought stalemate. The villages of Markkleeberg,
Wachau, Liebertwolkwitz and Möckern were the main scenes of battle
on this day, and suffered greatly as a consequence. The ﬁghting was
largely suspended on 17 October. The Coalition forces obtained further
reinforcements which allowed them to gain the upper hand.
   On 18 October Napoleon and his troops came still closer to Leipzig,
and entered the city while at the same time securing their withdrawal
to the west. After Austria refused Napoleon’s offer of an alliance, the
Coalition forces began ﬁerce attacks at Probsheida and Schönefeld. A
bitter struggle ensued over a number of individual villages, which the
French had often turned into little fortresses. The Napoleonic army lost
one village after the other. During the day, ﬁrst Saxon and then Würt-
temberg units went over to the Allied side. ‘The night of 18 October was
at ﬁrst clear and starlit . . . . The ﬁres of twelve burning villages . . . glowed
and everywhere the countless watchﬁres blazed as well.’50 After night-
fall Napoleon ordered a withdrawal through Leipzig towards the river
Saale, which was supposed to be covered by the remaining troops of the
Confederation of the Rhine.
   On 19 October Coalition forces attacked Leipzig, entered the city
despite ﬁerce French resistance, and pursued the enemy. The suburb out-
side the city walls was especially embattled and extensively destroyed.
The Allies spared the city itself, whose representatives had begged for
‘mercy’, in as far as that was possible, but bombardment was neces-
sary since the French refused to deliver Leipzig without a ﬁght.51 The
howitzer shells and cannonballs reached the city centre: ‘As they hit
roofs and walls a ﬁre broke out . . . in a hay storehouse, and the ﬂeeing
[from the bombardment] and loudly crying inhabitants of the suburb
increased the terror and dismay’ of Leipzig’s citizenry.52 Many dwelling
houses were hit by cannonballs. Unlike in the deserted villages, where
nobody was left to put out the ﬁres, the people of Leipzig managed to
prevent a major conﬂagration.53
   On this day additional Saxon and Württemberg contingents went over
to the Allies. Conditions were increasingly chaotic in the completely
overcrowded city. The premature demolition of the bridge over the river
Elster cut off the escape route for thousands of soldiers of the Grande
Armée, and they drowned trying to cross the river or were killed or taken
