166   ‘Unimaginable Horror and Misery’


similar reports by local pastors, and occasionally also by estate own-
ers or schoolmasters, survive for most of the other villages affected by
the battles around Leipzig. In 1843, the ‘Association to Commemorate
the 19th of October in Leipzig’ began collecting eyewitness accounts
and published them in a voluminous documentation marking the 50th
anniversary.46 All of these accounts indicate that the destruction and
pillaging in the wake of the ﬁghting destroyed the livelihoods of many
people in Leipzig’s rural environs. This was particularly true of those
who possessed little and who, unlike many of the wealthy landowners,
did not have a main or second residence in town.
   At ﬁrst, the people of Leipzig experienced actual combat only from
a distance. By 14 October, the rapidly swelling number of refugees
from the surrounding villages was a clear harbinger of the impend-
ing battle that would soon reach them as well. Anyone with a second
home in the city or friends or relations there left their villages and ﬂed
either to Leipzig or to another, more distant town.47 Christian Hussell,
a scholar and journalist living in Leipzig, captured these impressions in
an eyewitness account published only one year after the battle:

   As soon as the advance columns in the bivouacs had reached the
   nearby villages thousands of harbingers appeared . . . . Weeping moth-
   ers with featherbeds packed into baskets, two or three nearly naked
   children in tow, their infants on their backs; fathers looking for their
   wives and children; children who had lost their parents in the crowd;
   sick people in wheelbarrows being pushed through the throng of
   horses; everywhere weeping and lamentation – these were the heralds
   and trumpeters.48

The inhabitants of Leipzig had to house and feed these many refugees
alongside the rapidly growing number of sick and wounded soldiers
brought into the city. This led to a serious food shortage even before
the battle, so that bread, a staple of the diet, was then provided only to
members of the French occupying army.
  The citizens were cut off from all news, although those with access
to an attic window could imagine the scope of the battle to come. A
remarkable image presented itself to the beholder: the swelling columns
of approaching Coalition forces covered entire ranges of hills.49 On the
eve of the battle some 200,000 Coalition soldiers faced the same number
from the Grande Armée. The total count of soldiers continued to grow in
the days that followed. Persistent rains had left streets, roads and terrain
in very poor condition, which made it far more difﬁcult to move and
