                                                      Karen Hagemann   165


following account of his village’s experiences on 14 October. Still occu-
pied at that time by French troops, they found themselves suddenly
besieged and bombarded by the Coalition on that day:

  In this great emergency we knew not where to turn and seek shelter,
  which we could no longer ﬁnd in our houses, and a large number of
  the local inhabitants ﬂed to the church, which they believed to be
  safe from the shells because of the thick masonry; others hid in the
  cellars of their houses . . . . 42

Goldschab goes on to say that others took refuge on the nearby
estate, hiding in the cellar. The ﬁghting continued all day, and the
bombardment intensiﬁed. Even the church was not spared:

  The groaning and lamenting inside the church was heart-rending,
  particularly because the church doors had been blasted open and the
  shells fell in through the windows . . . Our wretchedness increased still
  further when some of the men noticed through the narrow openings
  in the tower that the greater part of the houses on Windmill Lane
  had gone up in ﬂames.43

In the end, the church was ﬁercely besieged. Before it was bombarded, a
French ofﬁcer ordered those sheltering inside to leave and ﬂee to Leipzig.
Goldschab also described people’s perception of this situation:

  Now a terrible spectacle presented itself to us outside the church as
  well. Dead and dying soldiers lay all about, and the massacre con-
  tinued, particularly on the market and in the lower reaches of the
  village, while a large part of our homes appeared to us as smoking
  ruins. Human misery could scarcely be any worse. Bereft of every-
  thing, even the most basic necessities, separated from our loved ones,
  husbands having lost their wives, parents their children and chil-
  dren their parents, we now found ourselves ﬂeeing to Leipzig, and
  behind us we saw one structure after another in the village going up
  in ﬂames.44

The ﬁghting in this village ended only on 17 October. Fifty buildings
had burnt down, and everything left standing, including the church,
was completely stripped by the soldiers. The church was so badly dam-
aged that its reconstruction took an entire year. All the next winter the
inhabitants suffered ‘the greatest hardship and extreme want’.45 Quite
