160   ‘Unimaginable Horror and Misery’


and paradoxes, better.15 Because of its extraordinary signiﬁcance in its
own time but also in national memory, the Battle of Leipzig provides
an excellent example for such a study. Focusing on the battle as the
most violent culmination of the war, one can explore how the con-
duct of war with mass armies affected soldiers and civilians, how they
interacted with each other, and how they experienced and perceived
events. In the case study that follows, these questions will be applied
to the civilian population. My focus will mainly be on educated civil-
ians who lived in Leipzig and the surrounding villages and towns where
the battle took place, for the simple reason that many more primary
documents – letters, diaries, accounts and memoirs – produced by these
literate eyewitnesses have come down to us.



The historical context

The population of Saxony, particularly in the region around Leipzig,
had already suffered greatly during the years and months of war pre-
ceding the Battle of Leipzig. They had to bear the usual burdens of
billeting, requisitioning, taxes and duties. Saxony, whose territory at the
time stretched over some 40,000 square kilometres, was among the most
densely populated German regions. Because of its location in the mid-
dle of Germany, the trade fair city on the North German Plain with its
approximately 40,000 inhabitants was a commercial and transport hub
as well as the centre of the book trade.16
   Apart from agriculture, the most important branches of the Saxon
economy were mining, metal production and metalworking, textile
manufactures and musical instrument making. Like the Prussian econ-
omy, the Saxon economy suffered under the Continental Blockade,
albeit not to the same extent, since it still had access at least to the
markets of the Confederation of the Rhine and the Grand Duchy of
Warsaw, and until 1810 de facto of Russia as well. Protected from British
competition, the textile industry in particular developed impressively
after Saxony joined the Confederation of the Rhine, doubling its pro-
duction. However, the growing material obligations of membership of
the Confederation, including the payment of substantial taxes, duties
and tributes and the raising and equipping of a large army, increasingly
had a negative impact on the monarchy’s ﬁnances and economy. From
1810, when Napoleon intensiﬁed the Continental Blockade and eco-
nomic problems grew as a result, popular discontent with French rule
also increased, as it did in other regions.17
