158   ‘Unimaginable Horror and Misery’


failure of peace talks. In August and September 1813 Napoleon suffered
his ﬁrst defeats on German soil in many years. On 8 October, Bavaria left
the Confederation of the Rhine. All other member states of the Confed-
eration of the Rhine followed this example, with the exception of Baden
and Saxony. The ‘Battle of the Nations’ did not, to be sure, bring an end
to the Sixth Coalition War – Napoleon was not deposed until 2 April
1814 after the entry of Coalition troops into Paris – but it did repre-
sent a dramatic defeat for him. In his book on the Franco–Prussian War
in North Germany in 1813, Michael V. Leggiere recently compared the
consequences of the battle with those of the Russian campaign a year
earlier. ‘Germany was lost for good. Following Leipzig, the remnants
of the Grande Armée of 1813 retreated to the Rhine River to defend
France’s natural frontiers as Napoleon’s empire crumbled.’4
   In this assessment of the military signiﬁcance of Leipzig, the new
military history differs little from the old.5 Since the end of the ‘Wars
of Liberation’ of 1813–1815, hundreds of books and articles have been
written on these wars and this battle in the centre of Germany. It occu-
pied a key position in German national historiography as well as in
the collective memory of the long nineteenth century. The ‘victory of
the united German people’ was at the heart of the national myth of
Germany’s ‘renewal’ in 1813–1815 after the crushing Prussian-Saxon
defeat of 1806–1807, which was interpreted as a ‘national debacle’. In
the popular memory of this time, revived especially on the occasion of
the 100th anniversary in 1913, the ‘Battle of the Nations’ became the
central event leading to the ‘liberation of Germany’. This ‘mighty, ulti-
mately successful struggle’ had given back to ‘Germany’s peoples’ their
‘righteous anger, their joyous, resolute belief in their own strength’.6
It was not just the countless historical treatises, popular commemora-
tive books, biographies, autobiographies, historical novels, songs, poems
and prints that recalled the battle and its ‘heroic age’. Local memorial
stones and plaques were also erected and, in October 1913, a national
‘monument to the Battle of the Nations’ near Leipzig.7 Naturally, the
anniversary of the battle also gave rise to commemorative ceremonies.
These celebrations were already popular in the immediate post-war years
of 1814–1817. The ﬁrst ‘National Festival of the Germans’ was cele-
brated in many parts of Germany on the ﬁrst anniversary of the Battle
of Leipzig in 1814. A festival volume 1146 pages long documented more
than 780 events attended by tens or even hundreds of thousands of
people.8 Not until the 50th and 100th anniversaries of the ‘Battle of
the Nations’ was this historical event again marked on such a lavish
scale.9
