                                                         Karen Hagemann    169


villages in the region suffered serious direct damage from several days
of combat.59 The transport of all the wounded and the removal of the
dead from the battleﬁelds around Leipzig lasted more than a fortnight.
Prisoners of war were deployed for this purpose, and citizens of Leipzig
and its environs were also conscripted to help.60
   The ﬁgures for the number of soldiers left sick and wounded after the
battle vary substantially. In a report of 26 October to Freiherr von Stein,
head of the Allies’ central administrative council, which oversaw the
liberated territories, Johann Christian Reil, the physician and Halle pro-
fessor responsible for organizing the Prussian ﬁeld hospitals, estimated
that there were 5000 wounded men in Halle and 20,000 in Leipzig.
Other contemporaries in Leipzig estimated the number of injured and
sick soldiers of all nations in the city in the days immediately follow-
ing the battle at around 38,000, only slightly less than the city’s entire
population. The latter ﬁgure appears more realistic, but it quickly fell
because of the high mortality rate. Every day, 600–800 wounded men
died. At the end of November there were still more than 18,000 sick and
wounded soldiers in the city.61 Fifty-four large private and public build-
ings – the poorhouse, inﬁrmaries, schools, storehouses, churches, large
town-houses, manor houses on the farms outside the city gates – were
turned into military hospitals, in which more than 800 local men and
women cared for the sick.62 In addition, the military hospitals employed
17 doctors and 23 surgeons. Ofﬁcers with less serious injuries were put
up in private homes.63
   The situation in and around the city was catastrophic in the days
and weeks following the battle. Despite the gradual arrival of aid from
elsewhere in Germany, the inhabitants struggled to cope with the large
number of wounded. They lacked not merely adequate medical assis-
tance, but also the means of housing and feeding all of these people
properly.64 Christian Reil described the situation as follows in his report
to Stein:

  The wildest fantasy would be incapable of painting a picture of the
  misery in as garish colours as I found here [in Leipzig] in reality . . . Our
  wounded had been dumped on places which I should not like to
  offer the grocer’s wife for her sick pug. They lie either in stuffy,
  damp gin-shops in which even underwater creatures would not ﬁnd
  enough oxygen, or in windowless schools and vaulted churches,
  where the cold atmosphere increases as the corruption diminished,
  until eventually individual Frenchmen are pushed into the air, where
  the heavens are the ceiling and where howling and teeth-chattering
