170   ‘Unimaginable Horror and Misery’


   prevail. On one side lack of air kills the sick while on the other it is
   frost which destroys them.65

Others were equally shocked by the situation. Pastor Ludwig Wilhelm
Gottlob Schlosser described the following scene, which he observed
during his ﬁrst visit to Leipzig:

   Outside a brick barn which had been converted into a hospital I saw a
   French soldier sitting on a dead horse and cutting from it large slices
   of ﬂesh which another man carried away to a third who roasted them
   on a wooden spit over ﬁre. All three of them looked black and bloody,
   like cannibals.66

Many other reports also recount that the hunger of the French wounded
and prisoners of war remaining in the city was so terrible that they
consumed anything that looked edible to them.67 Their plight was so
wretched not simply because of the general lack of necessities, which
meant that the majority of civilians also went hungry, but because
the little that was available was distributed so unequally. The Coali-
tion soldiers received the ﬁrst and best provisions. The Coalition army
commands ran the military hospitals, and their main responsibilities
were for their own sick and wounded soldiers, and in ensuring that the
greatest number of men were made ﬁt for deployment.68
   The vast number of sick and wounded soldiers brought typhus and
dysentery back into the city. In the ﬁnal three months of 1813 ever more
citizens fell ill, an average of 700–800 every week. Of these, 5–10 per cent
died. The mortality was particularly high among doctors and nurses, of
whom nearly 50 per cent sickened and died. In all, some 13,500 citizens
of Leipzig were infected with typhus in 1813, and 2700 perished.69 By
June 1814 a further 1000 had succumbed to the disease, which killed
one-tenth of the population of the city and its environs.70 The epi-
demic spread so widely not least because, even months after the battle,
the population was still suffering the ‘greatest hardship and want’, and
children and old people in particular were much weakened.71
   It would be nearly a year before most of the wounded and sick soldiers
left the cities, the refugees could return to their provisionally rebuilt vil-
lages, and the most obvious signs of the ﬁghting had been removed.
Many villages and most ﬁelds and gardens were so devastated as to be
unrecognizable. Building materials were scarce. Harvests and livestock
had been destroyed. Seeds were hard to come by. When the ﬁelds were
tilled for the ﬁrst time in the spring the epidemic returned, for the
