                                                       Karen Hagemann    173


thanksgiving at the garrison church. Services were held simultaneously
in all of the city’s churches, with a collection for victims of the war at
the end. Afterwards the king participated in a great parade of the troops
stationed in the city outside the palace. In the evening the city was fes-
tively illuminated, and the elites ﬂocked to a festival performance at the
opera house.80
   At ﬁrst, joy at the victory overshadowed people’s fears for their male
relations in the army, which, in Prussia at least, affected nearly every
family. Like other eyewitnesses from Berlin, Sophie Schwerin described
strangers falling into each other’s arms. ‘Not one eye was dry, not a face
unmoved. Acquaintances sought out one another in the crowd and did
not avoid strangers.’ But everybody avoided asking for news of relatives
in the military.81 In the ﬁrst ﬂush of happiness over the victory, worries
about fathers, sons, brothers, ﬁancés and husbands ﬁghting in the war
were suppressed.
   At the same time, she describes the great spirit of self-sacriﬁce in large
segments of the population, who gladly made donations for war victims
and tended to the growing number of wounded soldiers brought into
the city. Since everyone hoped that people elsewhere would care for
their own family members in the army, they were more than willing to
help the sick and injured soldiers who were billeted in the city in large
numbers.82 This impression is substantiated by an account by Priscilla
Wellesley, who came to Germany with her husband Lord Burghersh, the
commissioner appointed to the headquarters of the Austrian army. She
was in Berlin just after the battle, and wrote to her mother on 27 October
in these terms:

   It is certainly a most interesting moment to be here. Everything is
   so enthusiastic, and there is a patriotism and eagerness of which
   we have no idea in England; nor have we any conception of what
   these poor people have sacriﬁced in the good cause, for the poverty
   and wretchedness to which they have reduced themselves are quite
   shocking. There are now 38,000 wounded in this town and the
   princesses and ladies have many of them sold their jewels to assist
   them . . . . Tout respire le militaire throughout the country.83

Accounts from other towns in the German-speaking region reveal a sim-
ilar mood after the victory at Leipzig and increasing activities by the
newly founded patriotic women’s associations which took care of sick
and wounded soldiers, war widows and orphans, as well as impoverished
soldiers’ wives and their children.84
