174   ‘Unimaginable Horror and Misery’


Conclusion

With its focus on the Battle of the Nations in Leipzig, this article has
tried to show what impact the conduct of war with mass armies had
on the everyday lives of the civilian population directly affected by the
ﬁghting. Analysis in the form of ‘thick description’ points to several
especially important factors that inﬂuenced the experience and percep-
tions of the war.85 These factors include differences between the urban
and rural population and the educated and illiterate, but also a vari-
ety of social factors such as class, gender, family status and age. As
in many other cases, the rural poor were hit particularly hard, losing
everything they owned as a result of the ﬁghting. While the better-off
rural and urban population also suffered severe material losses, they
were not deprived of their entire means of livelihood. Moreover, peo-
ple who spoke French could communicate with ofﬁcers and soldiers,
which, as many eyewitnesses indicate, protected them from the more
extreme forms of plunder. Family networks were also important for sur-
vival amidst warfare: relatives offered refugees shelter and food, nursed
the sick and helped in rebuilding homes. Since many men of military
age had been conscripted, numerous women were left without the sup-
port of a partner and thus more in need of assistance from their families.
Like children and the elderly, they seem, along with doctors and nurses,
to have been among the ﬁrst victims of epidemics, since starvation and
exhaustion had left them in poor health. Women and girls on their own
were presumably also vulnerable to sexual violence, but the sources are
virtually silent on the subject.86
   The case study illustrates the dramatic and varied ways in which the
new warfare with mass armies affected the civilian population. Even in
areas far removed from the theatre of war, civilians ﬁnanced the ﬁght-
ing with taxes and duties and everywhere suffered more or less from
the effects of economic warfare in the form of the Continental Block-
ade. They had to bear the burdens of billeting, outﬁtting and arming
the troops. They were subject to plundering by armies, whose soldiers
seldom distinguished between friend and foe when they needed food
and shelter. Under the requisition system, soldiers had to fend for them-
selves in the everyday life of war. When the ﬁghting came to their towns
or villages, the civilian population had either to ﬂee, leaving their prop-
erty unprotected, or to wait out the bombardment in terror. Apart from
loss of property and the fear of violence, the physical effects of war
were particularly ominous: shortages, exhaustion, hunger and disease.
Epidemics of typhus and dysentery, brought to the city by sick and
