                                                      Karen Hagemann   171


farmers unearthed half-decayed corpses hastily buried during battle.72
The sum of the damage to Saxony as a whole as a result of the war of
1813–1814 was estimated at 100 million taler.73 Above all in the villages
around Leipzig, which had suffered most from the battle, reconstruction
took years. The city itself, in contrast, where the destruction had been
limited, recovered relatively quickly from the trauma of the battle and
the war.



The public perception of the battle

While Napoleon’s army was beginning its retreat and the commanders
of the Coalition army were planning their pursuit, doctors and nurses
were doing their best to help the sick and wounded soldiers, and local
civilians were coping with the trauma of the battle and its aftermath.
Staff ofﬁcers drafted ofﬁcial dispatches and sent out their couriers to the
capitals of Europe with the news of victory. It took some time before the
news reached the press in other places.
  The ﬁrst newspaper to report the victory was the Deutsche Blätter,
which had appeared since 13 October 1813 as the ofﬁcial organ of Allied
headquarters. The paper’s editor was the early liberal publisher Friedrich
Arnold Brockhaus, whose publishing house was located in Altenburg
near Leipzig. Beginning on 14 October, the paper appeared every day
with the most recent news from headquarters. Number 7 for 21 October
reported:


  Leipzig has been occupied by the Allies following the complete and
  most splendid victory of the 19th. The ofﬁcial and detailed reports of
  the great events of the last days, which decided the fate of the French
  army and the liberation of Germany, will follow forthwith.74


The more detailed account promised here appeared on 22 October,
describing the battle primarily as a military event, stressing individual
particularly heroic skirmishes and otherwise providing factual informa-
tion on gains and losses. At this time other German newspapers were
only just informing their readers of the French defeats of 16 October. It
was not until the end of October that the national press disseminated
as certain the news of the victory at Leipzig and the hasty retreat of the
French army. Most accounts repeated the wording of the ofﬁcial army
reports and were composed in the style of the article in the Deutsche
