172   ‘Unimaginable Horror and Misery’


Blätter described above. Contemporaries elsewhere generally heard lit-
tle in the press about the scope of the battle, the violence and the
‘unimaginable horror and misery’ expressed in eyewitness accounts.75
   Thus initially it was mainly rumours spread by refugees and travellers,
and soon by letters, that proclaimed the victory and the sacriﬁces made
by soldiers and civilians, ﬁrst in other parts of Saxony, and later through-
out Germany. Philippine von Griesheim, who lived with her parents on
an estate near Köthen in Saxony-Anhalt, heard the news from a Prussian
army courier who stopped there on 20 October on his way from Leipzig
to Berlin. That same day she wrote in a letter to her friend Charlotte von
Münchhausen:

   Triumph, triumph, dearest Lotte. The cause of right has been vic-
   torious and the enemy defeated! A stormy October evening, which
   tempted one to have a cup of tea by a warm stove and to enjoy a cosy
   chat with our neighbours, was interrupted by a loud knocking at the
   door. An ofﬁcer who had formerly been billeted on us rushed into
   the room all out of breath to tell us the joyful news of the glorious
   victory won at Leipzig. . . . I have no words to describe our joy, after
   our expectations of the outcome [which were] most agonising! The
   ﬁghting is said to have been awful. The entire axis of world history
   has turned as a result of this great battle of nations . . . . 76

Word of victory spread simultaneously to Berlin and other distant cities.
In her memoirs, Countess Sophie Schwerin describes how rumours of
a great battle began to circulate in Berlin on 19 and 20 October: ‘For
the ﬁrst time the rumours fell far short of the truth, and for the ﬁrst
time people still thought it exaggerated . . . . So people did not absorb the
full effect. But how did we feel when the certain and credited news far
exceeded that rumour, that dream even!’77
   The Prussian army’s ofﬁcial courier entered Berlin on 21 October
accompanied by 24 trumpeting postillions. All the city’s bells rang out.
Amidst the ‘continual crowing of the populace’, the procession arrived
at the palace square where the announcement of the victory was read
aloud.78 The actual celebration of thanksgiving and victory to mark
the Battle of Leipzig, which was centred on a service of worship, took
place everywhere in Prussia and Saxony on Sunday, 24 October 1813.
It had been proclaimed the day before in an ofﬁcial ‘Announcement
of Victory’. Even the tiniest hamlets tried to organize a worthy vic-
tory celebration.79 In the royal residence the King, who had travelled
from Leipzig for this express purpose, personally attended the service of
