168   ‘Unimaginable Horror and Misery’


prisoner. While the ﬁghting continued in many places, the rulers of the
Coalition states were already entering Leipzig with large retinues, wel-
comed by tolling bells. ‘A protracted cheer rang out from a thousand
throats’ to greet the Russian and Prussian monarchs, who were the ﬁrst
to enter the city. ‘White cloths waved from all the windows. It was an
overwhelming spectacle when the Allies with Prince Schwarzenberg and
the highest ofﬁcers of the victorious armies passed through Grimmais-
che Straße to the marketplace at the head of their guards, to the sound
of martial music’, a contemporary reported.54
  Contemporaries all agreed that the presence of the monarchs and
the Allied military leadership in the city contributed signiﬁcantly to
the troops’ considerate treatment of Leipzig after the victory. Leipzig’s
mayor at the time, Dr Johann Groß, for example, wrote in his memoirs:

  There is no question that the presence in the city of the Emperor of
  Russia and the King of Prussia was of the greatest importance, and
  contributed a good deal to preserving the city – with a few, on the
  whole insigniﬁcant exceptions – from the horrors that threatened a
  town taken by storm.55

Unlike other cities taken by force, Leipzig was not plundered, and no
violent excesses occurred. There were also no reports of sexual violence –
which does not mean, however, that it did not take place. There are sur-
prisingly few reports on this subject, which seems to have been taboo,
discussed only in metaphorical terms as a threat to the honour of the
nation or men. The Russian and Prussian monarchs had ordered the
strictest military discipline, to be implemented by force, if necessary,
and had also issued an order for the troops to camp outside the city.
Marauders were to be arrested along with plunderers from the civilian
population who sought to exploit the chaos in the city and the sur-
rounding countryside. Private civilian property was to be protected.56
All those Russian irregulars, especially the Cossacks, who had been wan-
dering the environs weeks before the battle, were ordered to return
immediately to their (generally quite distant) home units, bypassing the
city.57
   Napoleon withdrew to France with only 60,000 soldiers. Of 470,000
soldiers deployed on both sides, some 120,000 were killed. The Coali-
tion forces estimated their total losses at 54,000 men. Napoleon lost
approximately 73,000 men, including 30,000 prisoners of war and 5000
German deserters.58 Twenty villages around Leipzig had been heavily
shelled during the ﬁghting and largely burnt down. In all, at least 60
