                                                          Johan Joor 183


The Napoleonic period in Dutch history

The Kingdom of Holland (Koninkrijk Holland) was proclaimed on 5 June
1806 in a typically Napoleonic way. There was an ultra-short ceremony
in the Tuileries in Paris that was deliberately informal and crammed
between an ofﬁcial imperial welcome for the Turkish ambassador and
the obligatory and elaborate admiration of his gifts. By doing this, the
Emperor Napoleon made it perfectly clear to the Dutch (‘Batavian’)
envoys that they should be under no illusions about the true position
of their new state. During the ceremony itself Napoleon brieﬂy pro-
claimed his younger brother Louis King of Holland, after which the new
king was forced to promise never to forget to be ‘French’ ﬁrst and fore-
most. Louis, who after his more-or-less forced marriage with Hortense
de Beauharnais, was also Napoleon’s son-in-law (not an insigniﬁcant
relationship from a psychological-historical point of view), obeyed his
brother whom he humbly called ‘sire’.5
  With the proclamation of the Kingdom of Holland, the unique Dutch
Republic, which de facto had been in existence for more than 200 years,
ﬁnally came to an end. At the same time, the proclamation marked a
new period in Dutch history, which can accurately be deﬁned in Dutch
historiography as the ‘Napoleonic period’. During the ﬁrst four years of
this period, from June 1806 until July 1810, the Netherlands were nomi-
nally an independent Kingdom under Louis. In the last three years, after
Louis was forced to take ﬂight because of his ambiguous attitude towards
Napoleon’s blockade politics, the country was a part of the French
Empire. In this period of ‘Incorporation’ (Inlijving), which lasted from
July 1810 until the middle of November 1813, Holland lost its national
independence completely, although the northern part of the territory,
above the rivers, remained a separate administrative entity with its own
administration (Gouvernement Général) in Amsterdam, with the former
third Consul Charles François Lebrun as Governor-General. This area
was divided into seven French départements and would be referred to for
administrative purposes as the ‘Dutch Departments’ (Les Départements
de la Hollande or Hollandse Departementen).
  As we have noted, the Napoleonic period ended with the collapse of
the French regime in November 1813. After the ﬂight of Lebrun on
21 November 1813, a group of three men under the direction of the
leading Orangist Gijsbert Karel van Hogendorp proclaimed a ‘General
Government’ (Algemeen Bestuur ) named the House of Orange. Subse-
quently the son of the late Stadtholder William V sailed from England
