184   ‘A Very Rebellious Disposition’


in a ﬁshing boat and stepped ashore on 30 November at Scheveningen,
a little ﬁshing village near The Hague. Soon afterwards he was sworn in
as ‘Sovereign’ (Soeverijn Vorst). In 1815 he became King William I of the
extended Kingdom of the United Netherlands, which remained intact
until 1830 when the Belgians proclaimed their own independent state.
   At the time when Louis was proclaimed king, Holland was a coun-
try of around two million inhabitants. Most Dutch people, 56 per cent
of the population, lived in the urbanized western part of the country.
Amsterdam was by far the largest city with a population of 200,000, fol-
lowed by Rotterdam with 60,000.6 In March 1810, in line with a more
severe blockade policy and in anticipation of full-scale incorporation,
Napoleon annexed the southern part of Holland, the land below the
Waal, the southern branch of the river Rhine. This partition left 1.7 mil-
lion Dutch people in Louis’s realm, including the inhabitants of East
Frisia (Oost Friesland), a department in Northern Germany that had been
transferred to Louis in 1807. The rump Kingdom of Holland was over-
run in the spring of 1810 by a French army accompanying a corps of
French customs ofﬁcials; and though it was ofﬁcially limited in its task
to the conduct of the blockade, in practice it functioned as an occu-
pation force. The ﬁnal march by French military forces on Amsterdam,
announced at the end of June 1810, led Louis to abdicate and ﬂee to
Austria, leading, as we have seen, to the incorporation of the remaining
parts of his Kingdom into the French Empire.
   From a demographic and economic point of view, the Napoleonic
period was beyond doubt a difﬁcult time in Dutch history. Poor med-
ical and sanitary conditions, especially in the densely populated west,
caused high levels of mortality, with the annual rate peaking at more
than 35 deaths per thousand.7 Commerce and shipping, the mainstays
of the economy of the Dutch Republic, came to an almost complete
standstill. Because trade had functioned as the driving force behind
other industries, especially shipbuilding, this decline contributed sig-
niﬁcantly to unemployment, already very substantial in the towns.
Agriculture was the only bright spot in these dark economic times. This
sector was ﬂourishing because of growing foreign demand for butter and
cheese, with high prices for all agricultural products. As a consequence
agriculture became an autonomous force for economic growth.8 For the
majority of the population, however, the high food prices imposed an
exceptionally heavy burden on daily life. But this was not the only sig-
niﬁcant change, and, though relatively short, the Napoleonic period
turned out to be of great importance in Dutch history. Through the
implementation of a single executive authority, a strict hierarchy and
