                                                            Johan Joor 187


   Although ﬁgures need to be interpreted with care, it is telling that the
research identiﬁed over 580 collective actions in the category of ‘unrest’,
a qualitatively very signiﬁcant category, though it was not the most
important numerically. These actions included more than 80 revolts,
deﬁned as disturbances of the peace in which 20 or more people col-
lectively and violently challenged the authorities in public. The other
protests that were classiﬁed as ‘unrest’ consisted mainly of non-violent
gatherings and riots, in which small numbers of people participated. In
spite of their small scale, these riots could, however, have a dispropor-
tionate impact. This was the case with a confrontation in May 1810 in
Amsterdam, in which six people molested the (Dutch) servant of the
French ambassador, and which became Napoleon’s ﬁnal justiﬁcation for
occupying Holland.12
   The research also identiﬁed six conspiracies, also categorized as
‘unrest’. Half of these conspiracies were aimed against the regime of
Louis, half against the French regime during the ‘Incorporation’. Almost
all were primarily ﬁgments of the government’s imagination, or were
strictly limited in their effects. However, the conspiracy against Lebrun,
which was discovered by the police in February 1813 in Amsterdam,
does seem to have had a basis in reality, and it certainly made a deep
impact. Several people were arrested and accused of helping English mil-
itary agents. One of the suspects, Augustijn Maas, a former army ofﬁcer,
gave in to police pressure and, in return for promises of release, provided
an ofﬁcial statement in which he conﬁrmed his revolutionary plans. The
promises of release, made by a high police ofﬁcial, soon proved to be
false. Maas was brought before a Military Commission, a special mili-
tary court whose purpose was to intimidate the people rather than to do
justice, was sentenced to death, and, together with a friend, Thomas de
Jong, was executed on 23 February 1813 by ﬁring squad.13
   Besides the large number and the extreme variety of these protests,
this new research also pointed to the rapid outbreak of rioting that
followed Louis’s coronation. Already before his arrival on the throne
the radical pamphlet ‘Appeal to the Batavian People’ (Oproeping van
het Bataafsche Volk) had denounced what its author termed the ‘for-
eign oppressor’. This pamphlet was written and illegally distributed in
several large towns by the radical Maria Aletta Hulshoff, the daughter
of a dissenting minister. She was in close contact with certain for-
mer Batavian democratic leaders, especially Samuel Iperusz Wiselius
and Johan Valckenaer. The pamphlet explicitly praised the democratic
Batavian Constitution proclaimed at the beginning of 1798. Maria
Hulshoff was quickly arrested and sentenced to two years in the House of
