                                                          Johan Joor 185


a professional civil service, successive Napoleonic regimes enforced the
process of centralization in the Netherlands, a process which had already
started after the Batavian Revolution in 1795 but had come to an
almost complete standstill after the conservative regime change which
Napoleon had ordered as First Consul in 1801. In the years after 1806
the administration was further centralized, the judicial system uniﬁed
and a new ﬁscal system, developed under Schimmelpenninck, imple-
mented. In short, it was under successive Bonapartist regimes that the
nation-state was shaped and the process of modernization really began
in Holland. This transition to modernity would contribute powerfully
to Dutch popular protests in the Napoleonic period.

Recovering Dutch popular protest in the Napoleonic period

For Dutch historians ‘popular protest’ and ‘Napoleonic regimes’ were for
a long time incompatible. In Dutch historiography the Napoleonic years
have been known as a time of general calm in the country and extreme
passivity amongst the people. This image was largely constructed at the
end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth. It
was based on a selective choice of sources, an aversion for mass activ-
ities, conservative ideas about the role of elites, and, most importantly
of all, a historical determinism, partly inspired by particular national
and class concerns, in which the foundation of the centralized state in
the form of the constitutional monarchy under the House of Orange
after 1813 was seen as the natural continuation of a historical process
begun in Burgundian times and temporarily disrupted during the Dutch
Republic.9 As a result the ﬁrst 13 years of the nineteenth century were
stigmatized as rather dull and barely worthy of historical study, and the
image of a veil of lethargy draped over Napoleonic Holland has grown
stronger in what is now known as the ‘collective memory’.
   One exception was made to this general view: the forced introduction
of the Registry Ofﬁce for the civil registration of births, marriages and
deaths was, according to oral tradition, ﬁercely opposed, and for a long
time it was maintained that many people had registered with ‘protest’
names, often funny and indecent names, and nicknames. But in fact the
opposite was true: the use of nicknames was common practice in most
of the Netherlands well before the Napoleonic period and even before
Napoleon was born, and therefore their use cannot be seen as proof of
opposition. On the other hand, there were other ways in which popular
opposition was expressed, and in general the population was not at all
lethargic.10
