182   ‘A Very Rebellious Disposition’


state in the person of the diplomat Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck,
who was instructed to keep Holland under ﬁrmer imperial control.
Schimmelpenninck was installed with the title of ‘Grand Pensionary’
(Raadpensionaris) in April 1805.
   In the same year the wars of the Third Coalition, which resulted in
British hegemony at sea and French dominance on the continent, pro-
pelled Napoleon’s policy towards his ‘Continental System’. His aim was
both to reinforce French military, political and economic supremacy
on the continent, and to defeat his arch-enemy England through a
blockade conducted by France and a chain of satellite states. To be suc-
cessful, it was crucial to have highly loyal regimes in the dependent
states, and to this end members of the extended Bonaparte family were
recruited as heads of state. In March 1806 Napoleon drew up a Family
Statute that made him ofﬁcially chef de famille and imposed obedience
on other members of his family. As one of this constellation of rulers,
Napoleon’s younger brother Louis was proclaimed King of Holland in
June 1806.
   The Napoleonic period can be considered as a ‘neglected’ part of
Dutch history. For a long time traditional historians focused on the years
of the Dutch Republic in the ‘Golden Age’ or on the Kingdom of the
Netherlands established after 1813. It is only in the last two decades,
partly because of the bicentenary of the French Revolution of 1789,
that historical research into the ‘Patriots’ and the Batavian Revolution
has been intensiﬁed.2 However, historians have continued to ignore the
years from 1806 to 1813. Though there are some notable exceptions,3
this was – and in many ways still is – especially true of the social and
economic history of the Napoleonic years.
   This paper deals with popular protest in Holland in the Napoleonic
years. Its focus is not primarily on the elite but on ‘the people in the
street’. The study is based on extensive and systematic research into the
archives of administrative, judicial, police and military authorities on
different operational levels, central, departmental and local. The main
sources are series of administrative documents, including minutes and
correspondence, and police reports and judicial records, such as arrest
warrants and court verdicts. Although this information strongly reﬂects
the ‘ofﬁcial’ view on the protest and the people, and therefore has
certain limitations, it gives historians a useful tool with which to recon-
struct, at least partially, the experience of ordinary people at a time when
other windows on public life, such as a free press, were closed by state
repression.4
