188   ‘A Very Rebellious Disposition’


Correction, which did not prevent her after her release from distributing
at least one and possibly two pamphlets directed against the King.14
   The new King of Holland was also quickly confronted with unrest. The
ﬁrst disturbance, in the very month of his arrival, came in response to
the new tax system already introduced by his predecessor, the Batavian
head of state Grand Pensionary Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck. From
October 1806, however, Louis’s own measures on conscription – or
rather his attempt to prevent its implementation – were the cause of
protests. As we have seen, the King of Holland hoped to fulﬁl his mili-
tary obligations through the recruitment of orphans and poor boys from
charitable institutions, which would prevent the introduction of con-
scription and bring the charities ﬁnancial relief. However, to his great
surprise, his measures were rejected, and to prevent such recruitment
abuses petitions were organized throughout the country. On 12 October
1806 there was even a large-scale riot in Sneek in the province of
Friesland, in which crowds freed several boys from the grip of a mil-
itary escort.15 Shocked by such resistance, Louis decided to withdraw
his plans, at least temporarily. New attempts to recruit orphans in 1808
and 1809 met with the same result. Again massive revolts occurred,
especially in 1809 in Amsterdam and Rotterdam, where citizens sur-
rounded the orphanages and fought to prevent the recruited boys from
being taken away. The ‘orphan’ revolt in Rotterdam lasted for three
nights and was only stopped by the intervention of a hastily despatched
military force.16
   Louis’s policy of recruiting orphans and poor boys was not the sole
cause of conﬂict. Fiscal measures frequently sparked off street protests,
especially the collection of the tax on ﬂour (Gemaal). Many of these
riots took place in the eastern part of the Kingdom, as did a massive
and extraordinarily violent attack on a tax servant in January 1808 at
Wamel, a little village in the department of Gelderland.17
   Public holidays were also sometimes an occasion for unrest. In 1806,
the ﬁrst year of Louis’s reign, the name day of Louis Napoleon on 25
August was, in line with the French Roman Catholic tradition, the
day for public festivities. But from 1807 onwards Louis followed the
Dutch Protestant tradition and declared his birthday on 2 September
the day of ofﬁcial and national celebration. In 1806 serious unrest was
reported in Flushing (Vlissingen), a strategically important naval town
in the province of Zeeland, and in Groningen. In the latter town, in
the northern part of Holland, a man was shot while he was standing
on his doorstep and criticizing the festivities in the town.18 Outbreaks
of rioting also occurred in 1807 and 1808 in Meppel, in what is today
the province of Drenthe, and in Amsterdam.19 In 1809 the celebration
