186   ‘A Very Rebellious Disposition’


   Some years ago the need to reconsider this image of absolute peace
and passivity became necessary, because of the discovery of new pri-
mary documents in the archives of an orphanage in Amsterdam, which
report on popular protests at the time of Louis Napoleon. It seems that
Louis, under pressure from his brother, who insisted on raising more and
more soldiers for his campaigns, had attempted to recruit boys from the
charitable institutions for the army and the navy. The King of Holland
hoped to fulﬁl his military obligations with this recruitment of orphans
and poor boys, without having to introduce widely hated French mea-
sures of conscription. An added beneﬁt of this policy was that it offered
structural relief for the deplorable situation of the charities. Totally
against his expectations, his plans, which had seemed so perfect on
paper, encountered ﬁerce resistance, and even led to outbreaks of pop-
ular violence as crowds tried to prevent the military transportation of
the boys.
   A further investigation in the provincial administrative archives
revealed an elaborate secret report by the landdrost, Louis’s version of
the French prefect, in which more public disturbances were systemati-
cally and carefully registered.11 These discoveries put the Napoleonic era
in a new perspective and encouraged systematic research into the extent
and character of popular protest in Holland between 1806 and 1813. The
central point of this research became, as indicated in the introduction,
an intensive and systematic examination of the archives of local, depart-
mental and central authorities in which evidence for all forms of protest
was collected and analysed.
   For this research it was necessary to differentiate the concept of
‘protest’ and introduce three sub-categories: ‘unrest’, ‘incitement’ and
‘unwillingness’. ‘Unrest’ is deﬁned as popular action which was consid-
ered by the government to constitute an actual or potential disturbance
of the peace or to pose a threat to public safety; and ‘incitement’ as the
public expression of dissatisfaction with the government, government
decisions, or government ofﬁcials, where elements of rebellion were evi-
dent. ‘Unwillingness’ is used to describe people’s deliberate evasion of
rules or of the requirements forced upon them by the government.
   The results of the intensive archival research were, given the prevail-
ing interpretation in Dutch historiography, remarkable. The research
uncovered literally thousands of documents reporting protest activi-
ties. They varied from the spreading of anti-French rumours and the
relatively harmless mockery of civil servants to massive draft evasion
and large-scale riots, which caused casualties and sometimes lasted
for days.
