198   ‘A Very Rebellious Disposition’


was ﬁnally shaped, and subsequently the ﬁrst phase of the moderniza-
tion process began in earnest. In Dutch historiography the Napoleonic
period has long been considered as a time of internal peace, char-
acterized by the extreme passivity of the Dutch people. However,
detailed research in the archives of the administrative, judicial, mili-
tary and police authorities has resulted in a quite different image of the
Napoleonic years. Many and varied protests, across the whole period
1806–1813, come to light. The main reasons for protest were conscrip-
tion, ﬁscal measures and hostility towards the regime. At a secondary
level there are economic, social and political explanations for protest. Of
special historical importance are the traditional form, targets and extent
of popular actions. Because of its traditional character Dutch popular
protest has been long neglected in Dutch historiography: the focus of
leading historians for this period was on the modern nation-state under
the House of Orange, established after 1813. The traditional elements
make the Dutch protest congruent with popular protests in other parts
of Napoleonic Europe, though some aspects are typically Dutch: the
protest was relatively non-violent, strongly inspired by the Protestant
church and never directed against the Enlightenment.
   The study of popular protest based on governmental material in cen-
tral, departmental and local archives can make a valuable contribution
to our understanding of the experiences and perceptions of ordinary
people during the French Wars, even where ego-documents do not
exist. Such research can make even ordinary soldiers, citizens and civil-
ians from the early modern period visible to the twenty-ﬁrst-century
historian.


Notes
 1. ‘Les dispositions éminemment séditieuses de la populace de la Hollande’.
    See Archives Nationales (AN), F7 3064, report by Devilliers Duterrage, Direc-
    tor of Police in Holland, to the Ministry of Police, 22 November 1813,
    concerning the uprisings in the Dutch Departments.
 2. For a historiographical overview in 1989, see Willem Frijhoff and Joost
    Rosendaal, ‘La Révolution régénérée: Nouvelles approches et nouvelles
    images de la révolution néerlandaise’, in L’image de la Révolution Française.
    Communications présentées lors du Congrès` Mondial pour le Bicentenaire de
    la Révolution, ed. Michel Vovelle (Paris: Pergamon Press, 1990), vol. 1,
    pp. 543–561.
 3. See the work of such Dutch economic and social historians as H. F. J. M. van
    den Eerenbeemt, P. M. M. Klep, L. Noordegraaf and J. L. van Zanden.
 4. The text is primarily based on my book De Adelaar en het Lam. Onrust,
    opruiing en onwilligheid in Nederland ten tijde van het Koninkrijk Holland en
