                                                            Johan Joor 191


executed was Jacob Rek, a commissioner of the barge services. As a
man with a distinctive local position and authority he had urged the
insurgents to act in a disciplined way. Subsequently he had become an
informal leader of the revolt and negotiated with Lebrun’s government
to restore peace.
   The new research has also yielded information about the geograph-
ical distribution of the protests, and especially of unrest. Protest was
distributed throughout the country, with a considerable number of col-
lective actions taking place in the countryside, during the Kingdom of
Holland as well as in the years of Incorporation. This last ﬁnding is
quite remarkable, as the countryside, because of the booming agricul-
tural sector, was relatively well-off. This shows that economic hardship
and poverty were not necessarily a determinant of protest. Most protests
and the largest uprisings took place, however, in the poorer west of the
country and its larger cities. Napoleon was very much aware of this
during the years of Incorporation. The western part of Holland was con-
sidered a turbulent region of the Grand Empire, and as a result, until late
in 1813, the Emperor attempted to maintain a large army in the area,
averaging some 15,000 men.26
   Military obligations, particularly conscription, were one of the most
important causes of popular protest during the Kingdom of Holland
and the period of Incorporation; in all, 35 per cent of incidents can be
traced to dissatisfaction about military measures and especially conscrip-
tion. However, as suggested earlier, it was clearly not the only reason for
protest. A second signiﬁcant motive was ﬁscal, including the measures
proclaimed as part of the blockade or Continental System: 26 per cent
of the unrest was generated by taxes and the blockade policy. The third
important cause of protest was the direct dissatisfaction of the people
with the regime or with Louis or Napoleon: 24 per cent of the unrest can
be attributed to this category. Examples of this are riots during public
celebrations, such as those on Louis’s birthday on 2 September, and after
the annexation on ‘Napoleon’s Day’ on 15 August and ‘Coronation Day’
(Sacre) in the ﬁrst week of December. Of the remaining 15 per cent the
majority can be traced back to conﬂicts between citizens; only 4 per cent
can be considered religious in origin.
   Although the religious element indirectly played a larger part, the
relatively small amount of protest with a distinct religious character –
such as riots resulting from the restitution of churches from Protestants
to Catholics – is again a very unexpected ﬁnding. The Dutch revolt
against Spain in the sixteenth century stemmed directly from the
heart of the Reformation, and the relationship between Calvinists and
