190   ‘A Very Rebellious Disposition’


brutally pushed away by the military escort. Immediately the outraged
crowd started to throw stones. Most of the soldiers and recruits ﬂed, but
some tried to respond and started to ﬁre into the crowd, resulting in
several casualties. The ﬁghting spread to other districts, and soon thou-
sands of people were demonstrating shouting, ‘Death to the French!’.23
A strong police and military force was needed to end the protest late
that night. In the aftermath, a Military Commission was installed, again
more as an instrument of terror than a vehicle of justice. Three men
were sentenced to death, including Francis Staargaard, who had played
no part at all in the revolt but was arrested because a police spy had
reported him for insulting Napoleon in a private conversation. To the
horror of the people of Amsterdam the sentences were carried out the
same day by ﬁring squad.24
   The conscription protest was not limited to Amsterdam or to a sin-
gle month. Incidents were sparked by the registration of conscripts, the
drawing of lots (le tirage) and the departure of recruits, with at least
20 revolts taking place in villages and towns all over the country in
1811 and 1812. In April 1813 the protest against the draft for a National
Guard (Garde Nationale) involved a chain of uprisings, which started in
a few villages in the countryside around Rotterdam. Rumours spread
that this time not only young ‘recruits’, but also men of the age of 26
and above, would be drafted. In several villages farmers assembled by
the town hall and attempted, sometimes with violence, to gain posses-
sion of the enrolment registers. When these were successfully destroyed
in one village, the farmers continued to the next village to repeat their
action. This form of opposition quickly sparked unrest in the towns, and
in April 1813 the larger cities of the present province of Zuid-Holland –
Leiden, Den Haag, Dordrecht and Rotterdam – revolted. The citizens
of Amsterdam, probably still impressed by the ﬁerce repression of the
conspiracy of Maas, stayed calm. However in Zaandam, a town in the
immediate hinterland of Amsterdam, the people sided with the revolt
and forced a hasty retreat by the local French military and civil ser-
vants. Both uprisings were suppressed with heavy military force. French
soldiers aimed at the crowds with live ammunition, which resulted in
many wounded and possibly dozens dead. The Governor-General even
decided to send a warship to put an end to the revolt in Zaandam.25
   The repression did not end after public order was restored. As before,
Napoleon ordered the installation of repressive Military Commissions,
which brought more than 60 people to trial. Nineteen received death
sentences. In Zaandam six men were sentenced to death by military
judges, most of whom did not understand Dutch. Among the men
