                                                              Johan Joor 197


time of growing tension ‘all over the Empire’.46 These details correspond
surprisingly well with the ﬁndings of the research into Dutch popular
protest.47
   However, much more important from a broader comparative view-
point is the essentially local and traditional character of popular resis-
tance in Napoleonic Holland. The absence of a ‘modern patriotic’ or
‘modern national’ direction certainly coloured popular protest in other
regions of Napoleonic Europe.48 Although some qualiﬁcations can be
made, the results of the research into Dutch protest largely conﬁrm
Broers’s conclusion that ‘The struggle against Napoleon was one of
diversity against standardization, of tradition against innovation . . . .
It was a popular struggle . . . , but it was about preserving the past, the
past in which the “nation state” had no part’.49
   Even so, there are some differences. The Dutch protest was relatively
non-violent and was unlike that of southern Europe, especially Spain,
Italy and the south of France, in that it was not Roman Catholic but
Protestant in inspiration. It was strongly encouraged by reformed min-
isters, yet was not religiously motivated and legitimated to the same
extent as in other European regions, in particular Russia, Spain and
the Tyrol. As a result of the Batavian Revolution, the State and the
(Reformed) Church were already ofﬁcially separated in 1796. Moreover,
the troubles which were generated by the Concordat, Napoleon’s pol-
icy towards Pius VII and the introduction of civil marriage, including
the legalization of divorce, which infuriated pious Catholics all over
Napoleonic Europe, did not antagonize the Protestant Dutch.50 The lack
of religious fanaticism is one of the reasons why the protest never devel-
oped into a complete reaction against the Enlightenment. Apart from
the role of the Protestant ministers, this lack of anti-Enlightenment feel-
ing can also be ascribed to the civil (burgerlijke) inclination of the former
Dutch Republic and to the political and scholarly work of the Patriot and
Batavian revolutionaries, who were active in the last two decades of the
eighteenth century. Although the modern institutional nation-state had
yet to be constructed in the Netherlands, the relationship between the
political government and civil society in the Netherlands was in several
aspects already ‘rationalized’ before the Napoleonic regime was formally
imposed on the Dutch by the proclamation of Louis Napoleon as King
of Holland in June 1806.

Conclusion

The Napoleonic period (1806–1813) is a short but important phase in
Dutch history. Under successive Bonapartist regimes the nation-state
