                                                             Johan Joor 193


society, as was often claimed by the high ofﬁcials of the regime. On the
contrary, most people who took to the street to protest were common
craftsmen, often fathers with families, with a regular and decent exis-
tence. Moreover, during the protests rebellious citizens almost always
acted in a disciplined and purposeful manner. Most of the revolts devel-
oped a regular pattern, with a march to the town hall or the ofﬁce of
the highest representative of the government and the freeing of politi-
cal prisoners playing an important part. The violence used by the people
was almost always ‘functional’, in as much as that it was aimed at the
subject of dissatisfaction, and the ‘collateral damage’, especially looting,
remained very limited. Where violence was used, it mainly destroyed
buildings and material objects. Excessive violence against other people
was rare. Most of the time, in personally aimed actions, the rioters were
satisﬁed with a symbolic humiliation, such as the removal of hats, caps
and other distinctive symbols by which those in authority were wont
to distinguish themselves. During the ‘orphan revolt’ in Rotterdam in
1809, the crowd almost systematically collected the metal shields or
ringkragen, the distinctive emblems of the ofﬁcers of the local city guard.
During the same uprising, according to the court reports, a Sergeant Vos
had to retreat from the turbulence bareheaded, because his hat ‘which
cost seventeen guilders’ was deliberately destroyed (‘cut into pieces’) by
the people.29 The total number of those who died as a result of rebellious
crowd violence was probably not more than ten. This was far fewer than
the number of victims killed by government repression, including the
sentences of the Military Commissions.


Tradition versus modernity: the Dutch protest viewed
from a European perspective

Compared with other periods in Dutch history, the Napoleonic era was
more a time of turmoil than one of calm. The number of protests, which
included more than 80 revolts, and the variety of protest forms, could
even be regarded as impressive, if we compare these ﬁndings with the
results of one of the few other studies of popular protest in Dutch histo-
riography, that on unrest in the province of Holland during the ancien
régime by the Dutch historian Rudolf Dekker. Although direct compari-
son is difﬁcult because of Dekker’s indirect quantitative presentation of
his material, his use of a different method and a different geographical
scope, it is still striking that he found only some 80 revolts across two
centuries, compared to over 40 revolts in the same area in the seven
years of Napoleonic rule.30
