                                                            Johan Joor 195


no documentary evidence for this, and it is the traditional character of
popular protest, in which the people who took action in the streets did
not act according to the concept of the nation-state to be founded after
1813, that has dominated the historiography of the Napoleonic period.
Historians have seen the lack of any modern national protest as being
equivalent to no protest, with an image of ‘peace’ and ‘passivity’ as a
consequence.
   When we consider these protests from an international point of
view, the mere presence of substantial Dutch popular resistance in the
Napoleonic period is the ﬁrst, if not the most important, point that
should be made. A second point is that substantial protests also took
place in the early phase of the Napoleonic period in Holland during
Louis’s Kingdom. The brilliance and the overall validity of the work of
Stuart Woolf on the opposition to Napoleon are not questioned, but the
ﬁndings here may very slightly modify his general conclusions. In par-
ticular, they may qualify his emphasis on the almost total concentration
of disorder in the ‘remoter areas of the European countryside’ during the
Napoleonic years, and his claim that the characteristic form of collec-
tive political opposition in this period lay in revolts which, in his words
‘until the ﬁnal years . . . seemed of Mediterranean Europe, rather than the
northern or central areas . . . ’.35
   In addition, some minor qualiﬁcations should be made in relation
to Woolf’s conclusion that ‘apart from Spain, only two revolts seri-
ously challenged French authority: the endemic war in Calabria and
the Tyrol rising of 1809’.36 Although popular protest in Holland could
prevent neither the establishment of Louis’s kingdom in 1806 nor its
annexation in 1810, the protests and the threat of protests were cer-
tainly not without impact on the Napoleonic regime. Louis frequently
changed or withdrew his plans when he was confronted with popular
opposition, and even the authorities during the Incorporation were will-
ing to adapt unpopular measures under pressure of collective action,
as when they adopted a more relaxed approach to the use of replace-
ments in the National Guard.37 It is also very likely that Napoleon
postponed the ﬁnal incorporation of Holland – which he planned from
1809 and was considering the previous year – partly because of his
fear of protest.38 And it is certain that the revolt of the people of
Amsterdam in November 1813 led directly to the fall of Lebrun and
his administration, which in turn caused the collapse of the French
regime in Holland. In conclusion, although popular protest could not
prevent its imposition, it did modify and shorten the Napoleonic
regime.39
