                                                            Johan Joor 189


of Louis’s anniversary was cancelled because of the English invasion
of Zeeland. However, August and September 1809 were still very tur-
bulent months, not least because English military manoeuvres, which
had been aimed at Antwerp but soon proved to be abortive, triggered a
series of uprisings in various towns and villages in Holland, largely and
unsurprisingly in the south-west.20
   The revolt in Rotterdam on 23 May 1810 is the ﬁnal example of large-
scale unrest in the years of Louis Napoleon. In this riot over 6000 people
gathered when a detachment of the French occupation force entered the
town. The French were shouted at and pelted with cobblestones. The
gatherings around the military barracks continued for several days, and
it again took the arrival of a military reinforcement to restore peace.
Measured in quantitative terms, the Rotterdam revolt was one of the
largest collective actions during the period of the Kingdom of Holland,
and one of the last of Louis’s reign.21
   If all forms of unrest are considered, 45 per cent (261 instances) took
place during the years of the Kingdom of Holland. Focusing only on
the revolts, 33 per cent occurred before 1810. As this last ﬁgure shows,
protests and violent unrest intensiﬁed after Holland was incorporated in
the French Empire. Not only did the number of revolts rapidly increase
after July 1810, but other forms of collective action were to be more
violent. Even though the revolts in Rotterdam in 1809 and 1810 had
already reached considerable proportions, the most signiﬁcant uprisings
took place during the period of Incorporation.
   The intensiﬁcation of protest during the period of Incorporation was
a response to the grim character of the French regime. Where Louis
Napoleon had preferred a policy of reconciliation and was reluctant to
use violence, Napoleon ordered from the start of the annexation a pol-
icy of harsh repression to nip all forms of protest in the bud. In a letter
to Lebrun, in response to an uprising in Amsterdam on 20 September
1810 caused by the violent actions of customs ofﬁcials, he angrily stated
that ‘[t]he people are never right to start a revolt’.22

The causes of unrest

The most serious Dutch revolts in the Napoleonic period were the
result of conscription. The draft was ﬁnally introduced in Holland on
1 January 1811, when the French regime and laws ofﬁcially came into
force. In April 1811, Amsterdam was again the scene of a major revolt.
This time the uprising was triggered by the transport of the ﬁrst con-
scripts. A girl wanted to say goodbye to a departing conscript but was
