192   ‘A Very Rebellious Disposition’


Roman Catholics had remained a source of conﬂict until well into the
eighteenth century.


The faces in the crowd

The source material, especially the police reports, the law court reports
and the sentences passed, contains detailed information about the riot-
ers and those protesting; this allows, in the words of the historians Asa
Briggs and George Rudé, a reconstruction of ‘the faces in the crowd’,
their sex, age and social background. From the sentences it seems that
women played only a minor part in unrest, especially in revolts. Only
10 of more than 100 participants in collective actions brought to trial
and sentenced were women. The sentences, however, give a somewhat
distorted picture, because it would appear that the police and judicial
authorities were reluctant to arrest and prosecute women. A wide vari-
ety of other reports suggest that a substantial number of women took
part in the protest. According to police reports women were particu-
larly active at the beginning of riots as instigators of the protest. Various
collective actions started with marches by women and children, often
to the town hall or to representatives of the government, where they
loudly and dramatically expressed their feelings of injustice. Examples
of this are a ﬁshermen’s uprising in Scheveningen in 1812 and the revolt
in Amsterdam on 15 November 1813, which ﬁnally resulted in the ﬂight
of almost every member of the Dutch administration, including Lebrun
and the head of the police, Devilliers Duterrage, who was chased from
his ofﬁce by an angry crowd.27
   The sentences also provide a great deal of information about the
socio-economic background of the protesters, not least because the pro-
fession of the accused is almost always mentioned. These data show that
the large majority of rioters were craftsmen, followed by day labourers,
shopkeepers, farmers, skippers and bargemen, and domestic servants.
Amongst the condemned were also people with better-paid jobs, such
as white-collar workers and even a bailiff from the court in The Hague,
but, strikingly, no beggars or paupers, the real poor, can be found among
them.
   This social proﬁle of the Dutch protesters during the Napoleonic
period strongly conﬁrms the conclusions of George Rudé in his semi-
nal work on The Crowd in History.28 Their average age, which, according
to the sentences, was 28, their marital status – many of them were
married – and also the lack of recidivists prove that participants in
revolts were not criminal elements or canaille from the lowest rungs of
