194   ‘A Very Rebellious Disposition’


   As is almost always the case, economic, social and political grievances
reinforced each other. Economic hardship was surely an important
motive in Napoleonic Holland too. Trade and industry almost came to a
standstill, and there is no doubt that the slump and poverty encouraged
dissatisfaction. During the revolt on 15 November 1813 in Amsterdam,
for example, a banner For Peace and Trade! was carried.31 Nevertheless,
economic circumstances were not always decisive, since uprisings also
occurred in the relatively prosperous countryside. Moreover, the years
1806, 1807 and 1812, when food prices were extremely high, were the
quietest of the period, and a closer look at the sentences passed on those
convicted of taking part in the unrest suggests that those who lived on
charity seldom ﬁgured among the rioters.
   The prime motive for protest was more often political and social
outrage. It would appear that the rioters were inspired by a ‘moral pol-
icy’, almost parallel to Thompson’s concept of ‘moral economy’.32 The
political component of the protest is apparent when the main reasons
for the unrest are considered. In the main it was caused by an aver-
sion to government decisions or to the supreme government itself – in
particular conscription measures, higher taxes or other newly imposed
regulations – and was explicitly anti-French or anti-Bonaparte.
   Furthermore, the distinctive character of the Napoleonic period gave
the protests an extra, deeper socio-political dimension. The process
of modernization, generated by the Napoleonic regime through the
construction of the nation-state, inevitably involved an attack on tradi-
tional patterns of authority and the morality of the socio-political order.
Therefore the protest could also be interpreted as a conﬂict between
tradition and modernity. In their confrontations with the regime, the
protesters acted according to traditional patterns, in their operational
framework and in their assumptions, and, as such, showed themselves
to be the defenders of the old order and its value system.
   There are many indications of this. The participation of women in
collective actions was, as in other early modern forms of protest such
as hunger riots, considerable. Regarding timing, protesters preferred, in
the words of Cobb, the traditional ‘riot days’ (Sundays, market days
and public holidays).33 There was, not surprisingly, a lack of collec-
tive action in the ‘modern repertoire’ (demonstrations and strikes), in
Charles Tilly’s terminology.34 Above all the protest had a strong local
character. Complementary to this strong traditional and local orienta-
tion was the lack of a national dimension to the protest. Only in the
case of the protest of Maria Aletta Hulshoff does there seem to be a
kind of supra-local network of former democratic activists. But there is
