208   ‘A Citizen and Not a Soldier’


of the volunteer force neatly sums up the contemporary and historical
problem of the novelty of mass mobilization in Britain: volunteering
‘compelled you to blend with your innocent and peaceable employ-
ments, the study of military arts’.14 There were major concerns over
discipline, ﬁrst over how to create a viable military force out of part-
time soldiers and then, once the volunteers became a mass force,
over maintaining discipline when recruiting from a potentially discon-
tented population.15 The British government had the example of the
Irish volunteers in the American War of Independence as a warning,
and fears of mass arming were further fuelled by the French Revo-
lution and re-invigorated radicalism in Britain.16 On the other hand,
some were prepared to see volunteering as a positive movement in
Britain, fostering a sense of loyalty. In particular, William Pitt, British
prime minister from 1783 to 1801, and again from 1804 until his
death in 1806, was the keenest advocate of volunteering as a cohesive
and unifying force within society, to the point that he felt bringing
in the disaffected into volunteer corps would actually help to inte-
grate society rather than present the government with a potentially
volatile situation. In some sense, Pitt was correct since the volunteers
remained largely apolitical throughout the period, as Austin Gee has
shown.17
   Understanding the experience of part-time soldiering in Britain is a
difﬁcult task. The Napoleonic Wars generated a signiﬁcantly larger vol-
ume of memoir material and recollections of personal experience than
previous conﬂicts. Unlike the British Army, explored in this volume
by John Cookson, volunteering was a limited time investment, usually
20 days training a year, and so little direct testimony of volunteering
exists. Furthermore, the volunteers were never used in anger and saw no
active service, a key feature of many of the personal testimonies from
this period. There is, however, abundant material from those involved
in organising and training these part-time soldiers and detailed reports
of their activities. Needless to say, relying on secondhand material has
its own problems, but the most difﬁcult issue is dealing with the amount
of material. Even in the early twentieth century, the Hon. J. W. Fortescue
recognised that surveying the ofﬁcial papers alone would be a lifetime
commitment.18 And in working with these sources it is difﬁcult to ascer-
tain the impact of volunteering. Historical interpretations range from
viewing them as an expression of the overt loyalty of the vast majority
of the British population, to indicating the growing power of the state to
mobilize its population outside politics, using local elites, by appealing
to an ethic of service.19
