                                                          Kevin B. Linch 209


   Leaving aside these questions for the moment, even some of the basic
information on the volunteer force, and the potential experience of part-
time soldiering, is not widely known. Not least amongst the challenges
surrounding the study of the volunteers is their tortuous development,
particularly given the frequent shifts in parliamentary policy towards
them in the turbulent military and political situation of the Revolution-
ary and Napoleonic Wars. Describing them as a single entity does not
do justice to the complexities of this force. Brieﬂy, four phases of vol-
unteering can be discerned after their establishment in 1794. From the
small force of the early Revolutionary Wars, characterised by defending
the local order, a second phase of expansion occurred in 1797–1798,
although it should be noted that the Irish volunteers never moved into
this phase of expansion.20 Linked to the collapse of the second coalition,
this expansion was a result of the dearth of military forces in Britain
and a sense that the war was now ‘defensive’. These forces were given
approval and support from the government under the 1798 Defence
Act.21 The volunteers (but not the volunteer cavalry, also known as the
yeomanry) were disbanded peacefully in 1802, although their strength
and efﬁciency were beginning to wane before they ended. The resump-
tion of the war in 1803 saw a third phase with the re-establishment
of the volunteers, their numbers reaching a peak in 1804–1805. This
force was organised under various volunteer acts and regulations in 1803
and 1804, with numerous revisions, and is often what is referred to
when volunteers are discussed, the classic example of this being Linda
Colley’s Britons.22 The last phase was one of mass mobilization through
the local militia, created in 1808 by Lord Castlereagh (then Secretary
for War), a quite different force backed by compulsory service if quotas
were not met. In the ﬁrst instance, it consisted mostly of volunteers who
transferred their service.23
   A further level of complexity in the volunteer force was added by
the different types of units that were raised. The titles of units include
volunteer infantry, volunteer cavalry, riﬂe infantry, armed associations,
volunteer artillery, legions, yeomanry, corps of guides, and sea-fencible
units (naval volunteers under the direction of the admiralty),24 indicat-
ing the variety of military roles that a volunteer could be expected to
perform.25 As an example, on the south coast in Sussex around Lewes
and Brighton, in 1803 there were two volunteer artillery companies at
Newhaven and Brighton, with units of sea fencibles also in these towns,
three troops of yeomanry, two volunteer infantry units, and a small
corps of guides.26 The differences between infantry, cavalry and artillery
are fairly straightforward militarily, but in terms of their experience it is
