                                                        Kevin B. Linch 213


particularly the more ‘independent’ yeomanry or volunteer cavalry, had
strong democratic tendencies: any monies received were put into ‘stock
purses’ and split regardless of rank; ofﬁcers held their commissions by
vote in a frank admission that this was a collection of equals; and the
units were run by committees.41 Needless to say, instilling military dis-
cipline in a gathering of respectable men proved to be a subject of some
debate.42
   Externally, the volunteers’ position within and towards society was
also subject to some negotiation at an early stage. Quickly, they became
established as a defensive arm of the church and state. During the
numerous presentations of colours that took place in 1794, the sermons
that were preached often spoke of defending the constitution, both civil
and religious.43 However, these presentations reveal a change taking
place. First, the colours were almost always presented by women, usually
the wives of commanding ofﬁcers or local aristocracy (not necessarily
the same). Quite overtly, then, the volunteers were staking their position
as defenders of the female kind, and the family more generally.44 The
blessing of the colours then sanctiﬁed this agreement between the vol-
unteers and the rest of society in a very public manner. The increasingly
gendered role that the volunteers were taking was an almost natural
progression of an increasingly military outlook, but these ceremonies
also reveal another trend, one that was to become increasingly obvious
from 1797. All of these ceremonies were very military, in the sense that
they aped military conventions, forms and appearance. This may seem
logical, but soon it became apparent that increasing militarization of
the force, coupled with a huge expansion, reduced their overtly political
nature.
   For the volunteers involved, these ceremonies were a very public act
of participation and alongside the ceremonial gift of colours, there were
Church parades and the King’s birthday, as well as military parades.
Volunteer parades attracted signiﬁcant local attention, not only being
regularly reported in the local press but also attracting sizeable crowds.
At the ‘Military Festival’ held in Leeds in 1795, which units from all over
the West Riding of Yorkshire attended, it was reported that ‘a great con-
course of people, and numbers of horses and carriages on Chapel Town
Moor, exceeded all expectations’.45
   Public appearances sometimes attracted the wrong kind of attention.
In a scathing handwritten poem entitled The Alarm, the Upper Agbigg
Volunteers of the West Riding were savaged as a social club sent into
disarray when ‘some wag rushed in and boldly swore/The Beacon long
had blazed’ signalling that an invasion had occurred. The stanzas then
