                                                        Kevin B. Linch 211


duty for up to a week.30 The local militia of 1808 dispensed with the
odd drill days entirely, and the force was embodied for annual training
each year.31 The pattern of part-time soldiering in a man’s life, then,
varied according to when he was a member. Just as important when
considering their identity is what they were being asked to do. The early
volunteers were very much a civic police force, who also added some
military ceremony to public events. By the time of the local militia,
however, these men were being asked only to attend drill camps once
a year, and so they had a very different character, and were perceived
differently.
   Not only were there changes across the period under discussion which
need to be borne in mind, but volunteering also had a complex regional
history. As the force grew to its peak in 1804, it necessarily expanded
geographically. Typical of this is the expansion in the West Riding of
Yorkshire, where it moved from the large towns out into the coun-
try. However, the volunteer movement also intensiﬁed in certain areas.
Leeds, for example, had 300 volunteers in 1798 and 1400 by 1803.32 As
Linda Colley has indicated, at a county level there were wide variations
across the United Kingdom in the response to volunteering.33 Further
down the administrative scale there were also differences, particularly
between town and country. However, these regional variations should
be looked at carefully. In the West Riding, the Lord Lieutenant, Earl
Fitzwilliam, collected all the volunteer offers in 1803, and then accepted
offers from rural areas rather than urban corps as he wished ‘for the
counterpoise of the agricultural parts of the county’.34 Consequently,
the sub-division (known locally as wapentakes) of Leeds and Skyrac had
23 per cent of its men aged between 18 and 45 in the volunteers in
1803, whilst the rural Barkston Ash attained 54 per cent; in contrast, the
wapentakes of Agbrigg and Morley, containing Bradford, Huddersﬁeld
and Halifax, had only 11 per cent. In Sussex, the Duke of Richmond
set more equitable volunteer quotas across the county; but the impor-
tant point is that volunteering was being restrained and organised much
more than is often suggested.35 Urbanization also facilitated the training
of volunteers, and although rural units often united parishes, they usu-
ally trained separately and so were unable to attain the urban units’ level
of training. In the West Riding, it was often the corps based around the
large towns that were often reported as suitable to ﬁght alongside regu-
lar troops, whilst the more rural units only reached a standard suitable
for garrison duty.36
   The difference in the training between the urban and rural units
points to a very different experience for the men who formed the
