216   ‘A Citizen and Not a Soldier’


Volunteers, and units were involved in the Jubilee celebrations besides
other regular, less high-proﬁle, parades such as those held on the King’s
birthday.60 Such actions placed the volunteers in a relationship with
each other in their units, and with their wider society, such that in
some towns volunteer units were raised because it was thought to beﬁt
municipal dignity.61
   One of the few individual memoirs which provide evidence of the
transforming power of the volunteers is that of Sergeant Thomas Morris.
As a 16-year-old volunteer in the Loyal Volunteers of St. George’s
Middlesex in 1812, he felt so ashamed of being a part-time soldier whilst
hearing of the ‘glorious achievements of the British troops in Spain’ that
he enlisted in the second battalion, 73rd Regiment. This is not to say
that his experience in the volunteers was the exclusive reason Thomas
joined up, as his brother was in the unit he later joined, nor that he
did not have doubts, as he witnessed the punishments parade whilst
he was in the act of signing up, which had ‘almost overcome . . . my
desire for glory’. The 2/73rd was dispatched to north Germany, where
Thomas saw action at the battles of Göhrde, Holland and Waterloo. It
may be no coincidence that he experienced volunteering in London,
which witnessed the largest volunteering events in the country and was
perhaps the most active in terms of training and appearances. Thomas
was involved in a sham ﬁght between his volunteer unit and the Rat-
cliff Volunteers, and the proﬁciency of his drill was noted whilst he
was training with the 2/73rd.62 Another example of the transforming
nature of volunteering is provided by Henry Redhead Yorke, in this case
an act of reconciliation. Henry Redhead Yorke was a notorious radical in
Shefﬁeld in the 1790s, yet in 1798 the then Captain Yorke was recruiting
for a volunteer company. Despite some protest, Fitzwilliam supported
the reformed radical; as for Yorke himself, the volunteers were part of
the ‘road to fortune and an honourable establishment’.63



Conclusion: negotiated identities

It is clear that the volunteers were a complex social phenomenon. How
can one account for the spectacular turnout in 1805 of the West Riding
Volunteers after a false alarm, which witnessed 3500 men on the move
according to a pre-arranged military plan, with their obvious civilian
mindset expressed during the Luddite troubles, mutinies over discipline
and issues of pay?64 Even more startling is the example of the Halifax
Volunteers who dutifully trooped off to suppress riots in Lancashire
