210   ‘A Citizen and Not a Soldier’


worth considering the different training and attributes they required.
The heavy physical exertion of being a member of the Eastbourne
Artillery Volunteers in Sussex may explain its relatively high turnover in
manpower. During 1803–1805, on average 9 per cent of its privates quit
each quarter resulting in 54 men leaving in these years from the unit’s
strength of just over 100. This compared to 40 men from the nearby
Hastings Volunteers who left their corps during 1804, out of a total of
590. We can only speculate on the reasons why such men as John Hart,
Neal Taylor and William Riddle left the Eastbourne Artillery in 1804,
but the fact that the unit trained 85 days a year, compared to 20 in the
majority of volunteer units, allied perhaps with heavy manual work and
an eighteenth-century military hierarchy which placed artillery at the
bottom of the pile in social standing, may have contributed.27
   It is also worth highlighting the individual history of volunteer
units in considering the experience of the men who served in them.
A signiﬁcant proportion of volunteer units existed in one form
or another, even sometimes under different names, throughout the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, with the Amiens truce proving to
be a temporary lapse in their existence. A very select few had a longer
history. Particularly noteworthy is the London and Westminster Light
Horse Volunteers, raised in the American War of Independence and very
consciously resurrected in the 1790s. Most, however, were a new fea-
ture of the political and social landscape of Britain, and the only units
to survive the Napoleonic Wars were the yeomanry units, which con-
tinued into the nineteenth century, becoming a permanent feature of
the county establishment.28 At the other end of this spectrum, many of
the armed associations were ephemeral organisations, barely leaving a
trace of their existence. Continuity of service also played a part in shap-
ing a volunteer’s identity, even though it could be in different units.
On resigning his commission in February 1813, John Hardy could tes-
tify that ‘I have now borne arms as a domestic soldier in one capacity
or another since the year 1794’, amounting to 18 years service even
accounting for the Amiens truce.29
   These variations of existence, regulations, and laws under which the
volunteers operated changed the impact that being a volunteer could
have on a man. The early volunteers decided for themselves how many
drills they had to attend; but as government intervention increased from
1797, new terms were set for them if they were to be able to claim the
government’s incentive of pay and uniforms. Under the August 1803
allowances, volunteers could receive pay for a maximum of 20 days
drill a year, and not long after they were permitted to go on permanent
