                                                          Horst Carl   225


representative of the Belgian clergy, described the French as the enemies
of God and humanity, whose armies had been sent under their sacrile-
gious and blood-streaked banners for renewed invasion of Belgium. But,
the letter continued, it was only the most worldly who appealed to God
to punish the crimes of the revolutionaries. The true Christian recog-
nized in these events, for which there was no parallel in history, God’s
anger at the ingratitude and lack of faith of humanity.14
   The example of the northern Netherlands provides an informative
contrast. Here there was a long tradition of commentary during ser-
mons on current political questions during days of repentance (Bid- and
Bededagen). Facilitated by the authorities, these Bededagen can be seen
as an early, quasi-nationalist ritual of collective identity afﬁrmation.
On speciﬁc occasions, such as the outbreak of war or the conclusion
of peace, the Dutch States-General would announce a countrywide day
of thanksgiving to ask for God’s blessing. The States-General used the
printed announcements sent to the provincial estates (Biddagsbrieven) as
a means of making public their views on the condition of the state or
foreign events. As a result the tenor and content of the sermons were
predetermined, the priests having only to select the relevant biblical
readings. Sermons, especially those of the preachers of the established
Dutch Reformed Church, were often printed alongside the ofﬁcial let-
ters of thanksgiving. These documents provide an extraordinarily rich
and extensive source for examining the combination of religious and
political inﬂuences on believers in the early modern Netherlands.15
   However, the authorities’ control of sermons was already a political
issue due to the partisanship of the preachers in the intense confronta-
tion between the Patriots and the Orangists. In 1793 a satirical poem,
which characterized the faithful as ‘dumb dogs’, sparked a passionate
polemic for and against the Reformed Church.16 The ‘general political’
mandate of the preachers was completely undermined, when the same
preachers, who only a year before had proclaimed the danger posed to
every temporal and spiritual order by the godless French, thanked them
in 1795 for their ‘liberation’ and the imposition of peace through the
new Batavian Republic. Consequently, despite individual attempts to
whip up religious outrage, there was no mass religious mobilization in
the area against the French Revolutionary armies.


The churches’ struggle and the ‘distress’ of the faithful

In Belgium – and in a weaker form in the Rhineland – the confrontation
between the Revolution and the Christian churches reached its peak
