224   Religion and the Experience of War


by the experience of war, or whether it acquired a new force during a
time of massive dislocation.


The churches in conﬂict with the revolution

Belgium had experienced a high degree of politicization in the years
before the confrontation with the French Revolution.10 Yet despite the
disorientation of the laity, the pre-revolutionary unrest of 1789–1790
was characterized by an immense, widespread support for the Catholic
Church. The higher clergy had led the resistance to Joseph II’s reli-
gious reforms, and the leaders of the Brabantine Revolution of 1789,
whether middle-class liberals or aristocratic conservatives, maintained
a close relationship with the church.11 They inscribed the defence of a
time-honoured republican constitution as well as the Catholic religion
on their banners. The peasant uprising in Flanders in 1790, which was
directed against the new Belgian Republic and its middle-class elite, was
also closely linked to the Catholic Church, but had exactly the oppo-
site goal: the reintroduction of monarchical order.12 On the other hand,
the Lüttich uprising of 1789 against the Prince-Bishop contained an
expressly anti-clerical, even anti-religious, tone.
   The position of the Belgian clergy was soon the concern of revolu-
tionary France. The victory of the Revolutionary armies in 1792 and
their conquest of Belgium not only threatened the material position
of the clergy, but also the very existence of the Church as an institu-
tion. In turn, the Catholic laity had to assume that the exercise of their
traditional religious practices was under threat. However, attempts to
use religion to incite believers to oppose the Revolution occurred only
occasionally. The clergy already had a stereotype of the enemy in the
notion of the ‘godless French’, an anti-French image that had deep roots
stretching back into the early modern period and was mainly equated
with immorality. The Church could also reach back to a traditional the-
ological concept, that of the ‘just war’. But in the pastoral letters of the
Belgian bishops in 1793 and 1794, at a time when the Austrians toyed
with ideas of arming the people as a response to the radical challenge of
the levée en masse, there were no new elements. The bishops presented
a very traditional argument and did not advocate a radicalization of the
war. They preferred to present the war as ‘God’s punishment’ for individ-
ual sins, a view that scarcely provided a basis for mobilizing the people,
but preached suffering and acceptance.13 Admittedly, the last Lent let-
ter before the ﬁnal conquest of Belgium, presented in February 1794 by
Cardinal von Franckenberg, the Archbishop of Mechelen and highest
