228   Religion and the Experience of War


and under the inscription of the Emperor Constantine, ‘by this sign you
will triumph’, that they marched against the revolutionary enemies of
true religion.25
   The trigger for the uprisings was not, however, anti-church policies,
but rather the unprecedented intervention into the lives of urban and
peasant families, that was conscription. The introduction of conscrip-
tion into the annexed Belgian departments meant a widening of the
pool of men liable for military service. That a policy of forced recruit-
ment by an occupying regime could act as the ﬁnal straw in provoking
armed resistance had been clear in earlier, larger, peasant revolts in the
Reich, the most spectacular of which, the great Bavarian peasant upris-
ing of 1705, had been cruelly put down in the so-called Sendlinger
Christmas Murders. A mixture of military and religious grievances was
inﬁnitely more explosive. The revolutionaries should have foreseen the
likely consequences of their policies, since just such a combination
had provoked civil war in the Vendée in 1793. They also underesti-
mated the intertwined nature of war experiences and religion in Belgium
and were surprised by the intensity of the rebellion. In essence the
rebellion remained a traditional, early modern peasant uprising. It
was based on the region, and there was no interregional co-operation
between different revolts. In their defence of ‘home and altar’ – family
and religion – against the unholy alliance of conscription and anti-
religious legislation, these uprisings were part of the local resistance
to state-led attempts to modernize that characterize the early modern
period.26
   Contemporaries recognized the religious component of these upris-
ings. In the neighbouring Rhineland conscription had not been intro-
duced and the actual trigger for the revolts was lacking. Yet there were
numerous oblique demonstrations of sympathy for the ‘Brabanters’.
Among the most effective was that of the population of Cologne, who
sent their children into the street clothed in the colours of the rebels.
At ﬁrst glance, the children, clad in red, yellow and black, represented
nothing more than innocent processions.27 There were other reactions
in the Rhineland. North and east of Aachen, in the mixed confessional
provinces of the former Duchy of Jülich, news of the Belgian revolt led to
clashes between Catholics and Protestants.28 The Catholics were accused
of insulting vicars, smashing the windows of Protestant churches and
exhuming the bodies of Protestants buried in Catholic cemeteries.
Meanwhile, the Catholics claimed that the Protestants had bought the
right to prohibit processions or destroy the external iconography of the
Catholic faith.
