                                                            Horst Carl   223


   If we take the area of north-western Europe made up by Belgium, the
Netherlands, Luxembourg and the left bank of the Rhine as the focus
for such an approach, we are presented with a set of political conditions
that converged between 1780 and 1815, although they had very differ-
ent starting points. Already in the 1780s this pre-revolutionary corner
of Europe had experienced the most spectacular political unrest. In the
Netherlands this culminated in 1787 in civil war between the Patriots
and the House of Orange. In the same year open resistance to Joseph
II’s reforms broke out in Belgium, and ultimately led to the violent
secession of the Austrian Netherlands from the Habsburg Monarchy.
Finally, neighbouring Lüttich and the two most important cities in
the Rhineland, Aachen and Cologne, were plagued by serious inter-
nal unrest from 1786.7 In all these confrontations Enlightenment ideas
about the proper relationship between state and church, and the prin-
ciple of religious tolerance, played a decisive role, and the churches and
their representatives were inescapably drawn into these conﬂicts. The
struggles not only culminated in confrontation with the French Revo-
lution and the Napoleonic Empire, but were played out in increasingly
similar political situations. From 1795 Belgium and the Dutch border
regions formed an integral part of the French state. The left bank of
the Rhine followed in 1801. Finally, after the interregnum from 1801 to
1805, the Netherlands was ﬁrst formed into a satellite kingdom under
Napoleon’s brother, Louis, before being annexed by France in 1810.8
The absorption of the neighbouring territories into one state structure
remained a political option for the future following the downfall of
Napoleon. Indeed, the Dutch King William I in 1814 demanded that
the area from the Rhineland to the Moselle be combined into one ter-
ritorial unit. The variant that was realized in 1815 retained Belgium
and the Netherlands as a single state, although uniﬁcation eventually
broke down in the 1830 Belgian Revolution. This failure was the result
of continuing structural and, above all, confessional differences. The
Napoleonic political settlement could not be effaced easily.
   As a result, the question remains: what meaning did religion – or more
speciﬁcally, the church-based Christianity of different confessions –
have in this period of radical change around 1800? Since the most recent
research has convincingly shown the extent to which this period was
shaped by warfare, it is possible to focus speciﬁcally on the meaning and
importance of religion.9 This is not simply a question of the institutional
consequences of war for churchmen and their congregations. This paper
asks rather whether the traditional system of meaning which interpreted
military violence in religious terms was undermined and disempowered
