                                                             Horst Carl   227


miraculous cures and miracles of 1798–1799 in Catholic Belgium and
the neighbouring Rhineland provide ample evidence of this trend.
Among the latter was a direct intervention by God: the ‘lettres tombées
du ciel’. In these letters, which supposedly fell directly from heaven,
God expressed his contempt for the revolutionary decimal calendar and
called upon the faithful to maintain the sanctity of Sunday.21
   The religious excitement of the crisis year of 1800 also fed into
the belief that the year would see the coming of the millennium,
the medieval and early modern religious interpretation of crisis par
excellence.22 Among the Protestants of the northern Netherlands this
eschatological perspective on their own history – that they were one
of the new peoples of Israel – had a long tradition. The legal emancipa-
tion of Catholics between 1796 and 1802 and the consequent loss of the
Protestants’ dominant position merely reinforced the belief among both
orthodox and pietist Protestants that this immense change represented
the ‘beginning of the end’.23 Although this eschatological reading of his-
tory was more widespread among Protestant circles, the same patterns of
interpretation and meaning can be found in Catholic attitudes towards
the Revolution. Here, too, it was regarded as the last stage in a path that
ran from the conﬂict with the atheistic enlightened elite, through the
struggle with the Josephist reformers of the 1780s, and terminated in
the existential threat to the church itself posed by the Anti-Christ, the
Revolution.
   It would therefore be a fallacy to assume that a crisis of institution-
alized religion in areas conquered by the Revolutionary armies was
coupled with a wider process of dechristianization. Indeed, a greater dif-
ferentiation of religious practice and behaviour can be observed. The
conﬂict between the churches and the revolutionary state meant that
religious practice and beliefs were no longer self-evident or taken for
granted. Instead, adherence to a confession increasingly took on the
character of a conscious decision. In a divided society such a decision
also had a political dimension. In Belgium, this process, which had
begun here earlier than in other regions of Europe, occurred within
the context of war and occupation. As a result, the experience of the
churches’ struggle hardened into a crucial part of the experience of war.
   At the high point of the crisis in late autumn 1798, the laity’s involve-
ment in their own salvation culminated in the peasants’ uprising which
spread from the Flemish departments between Antwerp and Maastricht
to the eastern border regions, the Eifel and into Luxembourg.24 For the
rebellious peasants – and for contemporary observers – the uprising was
in defence of traditional religion. It was under banners showing the cross
