226   Religion and the Experience of War


between 1795 and 1799.17 The confrontation can be divided into two
phases. The ﬁrst phase was dictated by the requirements of the French
military. Anti-church measures aimed at driving the Catholic Church
from its public position and at bringing about its economic ruin through
requisitions and the sale of secularized church property. The second
phase began with the Jacobin coup of 4 September 1797, which restored
the struggle against the Church to the level of state doctrine.18 Priests in
both France and the annexed areas of Belgium were expected to swear
a stronger oath of loyalty to the Republic, which included ‘hatred of
monarchy and anarchy’. The majority of the clergy rejected the oath in
the belief that an obligation to hatred was unchristian. Consequently,
the Belgian clergy experienced the same split that occurred among the
French clergy in 1791 when they had divided over the oath of loyalty
to the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, the majority rejecting the oath.
Fundamental positions were marked out, and the revolutionary state
began persecuting dissenters, a policy which culminated, as in France,
with the deportation of refractory priests.19
   The Catholic Church in Belgium, as in France, lost much of its social
status after 1797 and was plunged into a deep crisis of identity. This
was paralleled by a growing spirit of independence among the laity.
This did not necessarily mean a break with the Church. Some of the
laity, both those who had sworn the oath and, more often, those who
had rejected it, were from rural areas that lay away from the urban
centres of the de-christianization policy. Since priests who had refused
the oath were prevented from fulﬁlling their pastoral functions, laymen
were forced to assume responsibility for church life and culture to an
extent that, until now, has remained unrecognized.20 They took over
the duties of prayer leaders, the recitation of the catechism, funerals
and other rituals. Personal forms were developed for church services, like
the so-called dry Mass, which usually involved saying the rosary. Ofﬁ-
cial reports noted, disparagingly, that it was mostly women and children
who participated in these events. However, they misjudged the essential
roots the churches had in daily life and especially their inﬂuence upon
the family and on education. That the individuals who took over these
duties as leaders of the faithful, teachers or church ofﬁcials were often
‘devout ladies’, drawn from the circles of the local notables, underscores
the point that in this situation women had greater opportunity to play
a role in public life.
   The functions of the established churches were not, however, entirely
displaced. During the crisis years between 1797 and 1800 there was a
growth in popular religious traditions. The spontaneous pilgrimages,
