                                                            Horst Carl   235


wives’ superstitions’. On the other hand, it is clear from some letters
that relatives had asked young soldiers to remain true to their tradi-
tional beliefs. The army seems to have been perceived as a place where
a soldier could unlearn his prayers.
   The letters provide an insight into everyday life while on campaign,
but not into the shock of battle which disrupted this routine. The
soldiers’ letters provide no indication as to whether war, through the
threat it posed to life, encouraged prayer. The concept of a ‘religious
experience’ through confrontation with the extraordinary is best not
sought in soldiers’ letters, but in the many autobiographical accounts
written soon after the Napoleonic period.67 Accounts written by former
Dutch and Belgian conscripts describe battles during which the soldiers
broke into prayer or sang hymns.68 Others describe how in the hos-
pitals some wounded soldiers asked to be attended by a priest.69 Such
descriptions are found predominantly in accounts written by those who
had participated in the 1813 campaign and were therefore not long-
service veterans of the Napoleonic armies but recruits from the ‘last
levy’. They often came from social groups who had previously managed
to avoid conscription by employing replacements. For them the war rep-
resented a deep break in their civilian lives and was clearly a traumatic
experience. They were confronted with the reality of war before their
socialization into the military was fully complete, before the routine
of army life had invested them with a certain insensitivity. Veterans’
autobiographies, on the other hand, rarely describe praying soldiers,
underlining the point that long-term military socialization weakened
civilian modes of behaviour and with it the bonds of traditional
religion.
   In general there is little afﬁnity between the modes of expression in
the soldiers’ letters and the religious interpretation of warfare present
in the rhetoric of the clergy. Similarly, there is little congruity between
the autobiographical accounts and the cult of Napoleon promoted by
the authorities or the stylized, religiously inﬂuenced pathos of the Wars
of Liberation.70 The war was a calamity and it was expressly depicted as
such in the soldiers’ letters. They accepted their fate with a good por-
tion of fatalism.71 Even harder to ﬁnd are any traces of a burgeoning
enthusiasm for the nation.72 The most important points of reference
remained the immediate region along with a soldier’s family and con-
fession. Nowhere is there expressed a consciousness of belonging to a
wider national entity, let alone a sense of being duty-bound to serve the
nation. Ultimately, the soldiers seem to have accepted Napoleon as their
sovereign without any recognizable prejudice.73
