236   Religion and the Experience of War


Conclusion

Recent research on north-western Europe during the Revolution and the
Napoleonic Empire has downplayed the caesura of 1800 by indicating
the partial modernity of the pre-revolutionary period.74 Yet this research
remains wedded to a master narrative of modernization and is limited
by governmental or social perspectives. However, if one analyses reli-
gion and mentalities in their widest sense, and concentrates upon the
challenges posed around 1800 by radical and violent change, then other
narratives of this process become more meaningful. At ﬁrst glance the
churches and confessions of north-western Europe in the ﬁrst half of the
nineteenth century appear to have asserted their traditional roles with-
out any break in continuity. Yet when looked at in the context of the
wars, changes in the place and function of religion in society become
more clear.
   The soldiers experienced the Revolutionary and, even more so, the
Napoleonic armies as ‘total institutions’, separated from religious spaces.
The churches suffered the ideological and political conﬂict that had
occurred earlier in Belgium and the Rhineland, as a result of the anti-
church policies of the revolutionaries in the late 1790s, for a second
time. Again they were driven out of the public sphere. In return for sup-
porting Napoleonic rule, and especially its military aspects, the churches
were permitted to return to that space. But their support of conscription
made it clear that their place in society had altered. The conscript armies
absorbed young men in unprecedented numbers. As a result, families
were both socially and spatially separated. The churches either played a
ritual and organizational role in facilitating the transition from civilian
to military life through accepted rites of passage or they concentrated
their activities on the families, and especially women, on the ‘home
front’.
   When the motivation for ﬁghting is examined, religion does not seem
to have provided a strong means of identiﬁcation. On the one hand,
recruits from the Rhineland, Belgium and the Netherlands did not share
the outlook of French revolutionary soldiers who had internalized patri-
otic impulses, or that of the French armies of the Napoleonic period
in which there remained a residue of anti-religious sentiment. Yet, on
the other hand, religion provided no basis in north-western Europe for
mobilizing wars of liberation against Napoleon as it did in Spain, Russia
and Prussia.
   After 1815 the Dutch, Belgians and Rhinelanders did not have at their
disposal a religiously inspired narrative of a war of liberation for the
