232   Religion and the Experience of War


and its system of conscription. This symbiosis was clear in the public
presence and presentation of the churches. The return of the churches to
the public sphere after the persecution of the revolutionary phase was an
indicator of their usefulness to the state. They had to contribute to the
legitimization of Napoleon’s wars. This took many forms – the inclusion
of victory sermons in the Te Deum, bishops’ pastoral letters and consis-
torial announcements, calls for respect for the authorities, support for
military service, and the involvement of soldiers or the National Guard
in church festivals and processions.45
   The conscription system functioned relatively smoothly for so long
because state pressure was effectively applied to local communities,
which were threatened with punitive collective ﬁnes if recruits dodged
the draft.46 In these local communities it was the priest, and not a rep-
resentative of the state or the military administration, who preached
publicly the necessity of obedience to the authorities.47 His role in pro-
moting respect and obedience among young recruits meant that the
priest often appeared inseparable from the temporal authorities. Corre-
spondingly, the churches also celebrated their religious justiﬁcations for
military service, and co-operated with the states in the rites de passage
for young urban and rural recruits. Before new recruits marched out
the whole community gathered, not in the town hall, but in the local
church, where the priest held Mass and provided blessings. Thus the
churches helped establish conscription as part of everyday life in both
urban and rural communities.48
   Church ofﬁcials undoubtedly had reservations about the strict mili-
tary system, but they did not express their reticence openly. There is
little evidence of priests supporting deserters.49 In the last years of the
regime many Belgian priests were arrested. Characteristically, however,
this was a result of their refusal to perform obligatory prayers of inter-
cession for Napoleon following his arrest of the Pope and his divorce.
No cases of priests suspended for advocating desertion or the refusal of
military service have been uncovered. Naturally, this does not exclude
more subtle forms of dissent, but within the context of conscription the
reticence of the church did not receive practical expression.
   These ﬁndings do not apply to the Catholic Church alone. The
Protestant churches were sometimes even more enthusiastic in their
recognition of Napoleon and in their support for the warlike nature of
his regime. This was especially the case in those parts of the Rhineland
where Protestants were in a minority and had been recently emanci-
pated. Even after the Battle of Leipzig, the Protestant churches there
continued to celebrate Napoleon as the instrument of God because he
