                                                          Horst Carl   229


   The extent to which confessional stereotypes were drawn upon and
resurrected to give meaning to the consequences of the Revolution
and events in Belgium is striking. This was in no way an isolated
or speciﬁcally Catholic phenomenon. Looking back, the President of
the Reformed Consistory in Maastricht also interpreted the uprising in
the spirit of confessional antagonism.29 In an extensive report to the
Ministry for Cultural Issues, he presented a positive image of peace-
ful co-existence between the confessions in Maastricht under the ancien
régime. In fact, Maastricht was something of a special case. Since 1632
the city had been under the bi-confessional authority of the States-
General and the Bishop of Lüttich. Both authorities had sought to
ensure the tricky co-existence of Catholic and Protestant in the city
by governing through consensus. This balance had been disrupted by
the Revolution and the peasant uprisings, during which ‘a number
of Catholics from the surrounding countryside indulged in sickening
atrocities, . . . and were involved in seditious movements which pro-
voked the murder and looting of local Protestants . . . ’.30 The level of
violence would doubtless have been even greater had the state not
intervened to put down the riots.
   For the reformed Protestants of Maastricht the peasant violence in
the city’s hinterland was a new religious war. Although it was a rural
phenomenon and the enlightened Catholics of Maastricht itself were
not involved, they could no longer trust there would be peace between
the confessions since the spectre of fanaticism had been reawakened.
The peasants’ war of 1798 precipitated a rapid deterioration in the rela-
tions between the confessions, despite the fact that Revolutionary and
Napoleonic legislation had enshrined religious tolerance and equality
in law.

The concordat churches, the cult of the state and war

Inclusion in the Napoleonic state meant that the regions had to
accept the departmental system and other aspects of French centralized
administration. After some delay the Netherlands also adopted a reli-
gious policy characterized by unprecedented and rigid state control.31
Napoleon’s post-Concordat church policy provided a model, and from
1807 it inﬂuenced the Dutch authorities in their attitudes towards reli-
gious questions.32 Of more importance for the population in general
was military policy, speciﬁcally conscription. This was introduced into
the Netherlands in 1810, although the newly formed Dutch army had
fought on the side of France since 1806.33 It was under French ﬂags that
