                                                            Horst Carl   231


persecution they had experienced under the Jacobin dictatorship and
Directory.38 Not only were they materially and organizationally depen-
dent on the state, they also had to accept a supporting role in the
post-revolutionary, Napoleonic social order, including the military sys-
tem. It was but a short step from that to using the notion of the just war
to deﬁne conscription and military service not merely as a national, but
as a religious, duty.
  The representatives of all the churches in the Rhineland, Belgium and,
somewhat later, the Netherlands concurred with the panegyrics offered
to the heroic image of Napoleon by temporal authorities. Moreover, the
extent to which they were involved in legitimizing the wars and pro-
viding a spiritual basis for the mobilization of the populace has long
gone unrecognized.39 The portrayal of Napoleon as the saviour of the
church and a Redeemer reached a high point in the pastoral letters of
the bishops of Lüttich and Aachen, and Zaepffel and Berdolet. Both were
from Alsace and had attained their positions because of their loyalty to
the state. In their sermons and pastoral letters both bishops portrayed
Napoleon before his coronation as Emperor as a ‘new Kyros’, who had
led God’s chosen people from their exile in Babylon.40 Yet, despite state
pressure to provide spiritual support for mobilization after 1802, the
churches tried to maintain a degree of spiritual autonomy through the
choice of biblical quotations and theological formulations.41 Napoleon
was certainly feted as a ‘saviour’, and the churches thereby contributed
to the construction of the ‘myth of the saviour’ in collective memory in
the Rhineland and in Belgium.42 But it was no coincidence that although
prominent examples of Christian monarchs, such as Constantine and
Charlemagne, were available to them, the image chosen was that of a
heathen ruler. Napoleon’s holy mission was thus recognized, but also
limited. The new Kyros had saved the people from oppression, but his
authority ended at the steps of the temple, which remained the domain
of the church alone. Should the saviour overstep these boundaries and
involve himself in church matters, then he betrayed his mission. For
many priests, however, Napoleon had already overstepped his authority
by introducing the imperial Catechism of 1806, which had deﬁned the
refusal of military service and desertion as mortal sins.43 The step from
a new Kyros to a new Nebuchadnezzar was small, and the notion that
Napoleon was the instrument of God was mocked by a widespread joke
in the Rhineland: ‘Out of Christian conviction one died for many. Now
many must die for one’.44
  The potential for establishing a theological, and after 1809 a political,
distance scarcely impaired the churches’ function in supporting the state
