234   Religion and the Experience of War


ofﬁcial attestat d’authenticité from a superior ofﬁcer or a letter from their
son currently serving with the military.60
   Since the letters themselves were not intended for the authorities it is
rare to ﬁnd multiple letters from one soldier. The portrait of the soldiers
remains therefore a snapshot. The formal diction of the letters resulted
not only from lack of articulacy, but also from the trivial reason that
the form letters provided by the army meant that unpractised writers
had very little space upon which to write. Moreover, it is often unclear
whether the author wrote the letter himself or dictated it to a more
literate comrade who then converted sentiments that were expressed
verbally into standard written formulations.
   For these reasons the soldiers’ letters seem on ﬁrst glance a brittle
source. But the quantity of letters alone allows access to the daily life of
the soldier, which, in the context of the relationship between religion
and the experience of war, goes beyond simplistic ideas of cause and
effect.61 For example, letters written by Catholic soldiers from rural areas
illustrate the inﬂuence of religion in shaping experiences in the total
institution of the army. The word ‘God’ is most often used in relation
to the state of the author’s health, in the sense of ‘thank God I am still
well’. Death is also present and often invoked for prudence or empha-
sis. In more than half the letters addressed to fathers and mothers, the
son promises in the closing sentence to be ‘true until death’.62 For a
soldier who had just survived a battle, or was preparing for the next
one, such phrases had a special resonance. Perhaps these phrases were
also meant to reassure parents that their son had accepted his destiny
as determined by God and would not desert, an action that could have
ruinous consequences for the family.63
   Alongside expressions of religious devotion, soldiers often requested
relatives to pray for them or undertake a pilgrimage.64 Soldiers also
promised to conduct pilgrimages of their own should they return home
unscathed. Requests for relatives to pray are particularly common in let-
ters sent from Spain and can be interpreted as a reaction to changing
experiences of war. In many letters reference is made to the different
nature of the war in Spain, to the ever-present guerrilla threat, and to
the constant danger of meeting a ‘bad’ death.65 In only three letters is
there any reference to wider church issues, such as the Concordat or
fears of renewed persecution after 1809.66 What were central issues for
the clergy were clearly of minor importance to the soldiers.
   Traditional religious bonds did, however, hinder the process of social-
ization in the military. Around 10 per cent of the letters complain that
religious services had been banned or that prayer was dismissed as ‘old
