230   Religion and the Experience of War


soldiers from the area marched with the Grande Armée to the catas-
trophe in Russia in 1812 and to the Battle of the Nations at Leipzig in
1813.
   Statistical research on the impact of conscription and war leaves no
doubt that the social burden of conscription was devastating. In rela-
tive terms and, in some areas, even in absolute terms, the war losses
in the affected departments were greater than those suffered during the
two World Wars. Even in the Netherlands, where the French conscrip-
tion system applied only from 1810 to 1813, losses were considerable.
Out of around 28,000 recruits raised, 70 per cent did not return. The
four Rhineland departments present a similar picture. Between 1802 and
1813 around 80,000 recruits were drafted.34 This represented almost 30
per cent of the young male population capable of bearing arms, a per-
centage that completely overshadows subsequent epochs. Admittedly
the record is incomplete, since replacements could be provided.35 Rates
of recruitment also varied over time. The burden of recruitment for the
classes up to 1806 was comparatively low, but of those in the youngest
age band, those born between 1790 and 1795, some 60 per cent were
eventually drafted. In 1812 the Grande Armeé was raised and, although
the regime attempted no fewer than six levies in 1813, it despaired of
compensating for the losses in Russia and of raising a new army for the
war in Germany.36 It was now under such extreme strain that the recruit-
ment systems, which had reached the peak of bureaucratic perfection
and rigidity, collapsed. In the second half of 1813 the number refusing
to serve – the réfractaires and deserters – reached a critical mass. Until
then the annexed provinces of Belgium and Rhineland had had a deser-
tion rate of around 7 per cent. This placed them in the middle range
for levels of desertion for all French departments, and rates were lower
than those in the central French provinces. News of the decisive defeat
at Leipzig in 1813, however, resulted in a massive increase in desertion.
Recruits deserted en masse and returned home to await the arrival of the
Allied armies. ‘Liberation’ in the annexed provinces was experienced as
liberation from conscription, not as an act of national rebirth.37
   That the conscription system in the annexed provinces was able to
function almost to the very end, despite the hardship it caused, was not
only due to state action, such as the introduction of mobile columns
in 1811 to hunt deserters, but also due to the churches. Following his
victory over the Second Coalition, Napoleon sought to secure internal
peace and regulate relations with the churches – and speciﬁcally the
Catholic Church – through the Concordat of 1801 and the Organic
Articles. However, the churches had to pay a high price to end the
