s often occurred in other provinces, and so this book can be accurately characterized as addressing the culture of credit in European Russia but leaving out the smaller credit centers on Russia’s western and southern periphery, such as Odessa, Berdichev, and Warsaw. The level of detail in these cases varies, but taken together, they bring to life real nineteenth-century men and women—both rich and poor but almost none of them completely destitute—who left no record of their lives apart from the legal matters in which they were involved. A retired military officer, Andrei Blaginin, issues a debt note to reward a poor townswoman who was taking care of him in his old age and who is now suing the man’s heirs. A young nobleman named Petr Veselkin, his wife, and two former merchants set up a complex scheme of mortgaging nonexistent landed estates. An illiterate middle-aged female fish-merchant, Mavra Bubentsova, alleges that as a woman she is weak and inexperienced in business and so should be excused from paying her debts. Some of these stories could inspire a novel, while many are routine, but all of them show that personal debt affected every aspect of Russian life in ways that are at once strange and familiar to the modern reader. Introduction 5 The Early Industrial Culture of Credit Everyone understands the need to repair homes, to pay doctors, and to educate children and that to this day these tasks can rarely be accomplished without borrowing money. Because debt-free life is virtually inconceivable, borrowing and lending shapes people’s perceptions of their material possessions, such as land, homes, personal and intellectual property, and, of course, money.13 But compared to our world of credit cards and multinational banks, private incomes in imperial Russia and other early industrial societies were even more erratic, cash in circulation insufficient, and credit institutions inadequate. Baron Andrei Delvig, a successful public works engineer and government contractor, reminisced that in 1847 “it was possible to receive a decent education, have a rather considerable turnover in one’s financial affairs, and yet to live, as I did, to be 34 years old without having any understanding of banking.”14 As a result, individuals from all social groups and levels of income, both merchants and consumers, were deeply embedded in a network of debt relations with their relatives, colleagues, and neighbors but also increasingly with individuals they never met in person. This credit network relied not merely on objective information about borrowers’ economic conditions and prospects but also on their reputation in the community, which in turn depended on a shared set of cultural attitudes about personal autonomy and responsibility, honor, failure, punishment, and property. The key features of the Russian culture of credit—informal and personal connections, the moral economy of debt, and its influence on diverse non-­ economic aspects of life—were also present in other early industrial societies and are particularly well documented for the Anglo-American world.15 This literature dispenses with the purely economic view of credit and emphasizes its influence on many aspects of life, from political ideology and literature to family dynamics and gender identities. It also shows how the perceptions and practices of credit changed as part of the West’s capitalist transformation, most notably toward treating certain categories of debtors as legitimate risktakers deserving leniency while reserving a harsh moralistic attitude toward others. In short, the transition to “modern” credit is shown to be incomplete and ambivalent. In light of this literature, the development of Russia’s law and practice of personal credit appears to have generally followed that of its Continental counterparts, revealing little or no so-called “backwardness.” 6 Introduction Adam Smith and his followers and critics, most notably Marx, treated credit as an impersonal “abstract factor of production,” while its cultural and social aspects became less relevant.16 In the Russian setting, consider an 1852 work on the theory of credit by Professor Nikolai Bunge, who went on to serve as the finance minister in 1881–1886 and oversaw several important economic and social reforms. Bunge acknowledged older definitions of credit, such as that by the Scottish economist John Law (1671–1729), which highlighted its non-economic aspects, including the role of a debtor’s honesty and promptness and the protections supplied by the legal system. However, Bunge claimed that these were irrelevant to the bulk of his analysis and dedicated his treatise solely to the “material” underpinnings of creditworthiness. These included the debtor’s skills and whether the borrowed money would be put to productive use, but the most important factor was the possession of property that would ensure repayment.17 Bunge’s analysis is particularly remarkable for his haste to dismiss the cultural, ethical, and legal aspects of debt. An exceptionally influential version of this view can be found in the unfinished third volume of Marx’s Das Kapital (published in 1894), which posed the dichotomy of usurious and capitalist credit. To be fair, the notion that merchants and entrepreneurs did or should operate in a separate legal and financial universe had existed in Europe for centuries. As Laurence Fontaine argued for an earlier period, the two economic cultures, “feudal” and ­“capitalist . . . existed together, came close to and clashed with each other but also influenced and merged in each other, emerging transformed from these encounters.” According to Marx, pre-capitalist usurious loans were used to support consumption, either by profligate nobility or by subsistence peasantry, and they were predatory in character; that is, the interest rate was so high that such loans could never be repaid and so such loans were used mainly by persons of higher social status to establish and maintain their power. Marx therefore argued that usury had led to enslavement in the ancient world; in a similar vein, the imperial-era historian Vasilii Kliuchevskii argued that usury and debt led to the emergence of Russian serfdom in the seventeenth century.18 Marx’s framework underpinned all Soviet-era and many post-Soviet analyses of credit, which have been compartmentalized within the subfield of economic history and focused upon the emergence of modern capitalist banking. Personal and informal commercial credit in these works is treated briefly if at all and equated with misery, failure, and stagnation. For example, Introduction 7 the Soviet historian Saul Borovoi, in his groundbreaking study of government-­ owned and capitalistic banks in “feudal” pre-reform Russia, recognized that private lending was also widespread and that it was the background against which government credit policies should be measured, but he was still ­obligated to follow the Marxist framework and so assumed “usury” to be an archaic predatory activity without examining it even superficially.19 Standard Western works by Alfred Rieber, Thomas Owen, William Blackwell, Arcadius Kahan, and Jerome Blum rely on works by Borovoi and other Soviet historians.20 The same framework is also used in the handful of Soviet and post-Soviet studies of early modern credit, especially those focusing on merchants of the Petrine era and on the large medieval Orthodox monasteries that conducted extensive and diverse credit operations and that have been viewed as precursors to modern banks. These works suggest that the network of private credit in Russia was extensive, active, and diverse for centuries before the Great Reforms of the 1860s and even before Peter the Great. However, they do not connect private debt with larger social, political, and cultural developments.21 More recent historiography focuses on changes in cultural and legal attitudes toward debt that accompanied the European commercial and industrial expansion of ca. 1750–1850. Craig Muldrew has shown that in England this expansion was preceded in the sixteenth century by an explosion in consumption, borrowing, and debt-related legal disputes. In the course of the eighteenth century, financial failure and bankruptcy—at least for the wealthy—began to be viewed by politicians, theologians, and lawyers as no longer a moral failing deserving punishment but rather a risk inherent in, and useful for, commercial operations. Bruce Mann has done the same for colonial America and the Early Republic. Debt came to be seen as an opportunity rather than a burden, and the law changed accordingly: by the late nineteenth century most major Western legal systems introduced bankruptcy discharge and limited or abolished debt imprisonment and anti-usury laws.22 The transition to capitalist credit in the West was ambivalent and incomplete, as moral and political considerations continued to hold considerable sway over economic calculations. Even in Great Britain, which experienced a revolution in credit and finance much earlier than Russia, debt relations that were informal and deeply moralizing—and more punitive and restricting toward the lower classes—persisted into the twentieth century. In the United States, the modernization of laws relating to bankruptcy, debt imprisonment, and interest rate restrictions proceeded in fits and starts throughout the 8 Introduction nineteenth century, so that a permanent bankruptcy statute appeared only in 1898. According to Lendol Calder, even in the twentieth century the development of modern consumer credit in the United States was enabled by persisting older values of “prudence, saving, and industry” that paradoxically opposed excessive borrowing. Similarly, in France—on which Russia’s laws of bankruptcy and many others were largely modeled—the traditional antidebtor moralistic attitudes remained very strong for most of the nineteenth century. In the German region of the Palatinate, “the nineteenth century was a high point for the free disposition of property in a market,” yet the terms of market transactions were determined by personal relationships that “wove around a multitude of cultural assumptions about trust, independence, competence, manhood, and family expectations about the uses of property.”23 In the Russian case, there are only a handful of studies briefly touching upon social and legal aspects of credit: Yurii Lotman and Jerome Blum argued that pre-reform nobles were crippled by debt, whereas Kahan, Rieber, Owen, and Blackwell in their histories of Russian capitalism and capitalists suggest that merchants’ activities were handicapped by a lack of credit and a lack of trust more generally.24 More specialized works disagree: for instance, Iosif Gindin argued that the development of large-scale banking in Russia did not lag very much behind that in other Continental nations. Gindin and other historians who examined the noble debt burden to the state before the serf emancipation, especially focusing on the often-quoted figure of twothirds of all privately owned serfs being mortgaged to government banks by 1859, found this burden to be not nearly as staggering compared to the overall assets available to serfowners. Boris Litvak in particular argued that the more efficient noble estates were also more heavily in debt and that borrowing therefore indicated economic vitality and prosperity rather than insolvency or unprofitability. But the impact of debt upon the Russian nobility is still very poorly understood, in contrast to the rich discussion of English aristocratic debt.25 Similarly, Andrei Vvedensky’s superb study of the Stroganovs’ commercial empire in North Russia noted that their initial fortune arose in the fifteenth century from credit and mortgage operations but unfortunately spent less than a page discussing these operations.26 Viktor Zakharov’s work on Western European merchants in Petrine Russia conveys a sense of simultaneous collisi