private lending was not completely clear-cut. The funds loaned to serfowners were often then transferred into the network of private credit by being reissued to other individuals at higher interest rates. Even more interestingly, some serfowners deposited their loans back in the same government banks at four percent interest and then used their deposit receipts— which circulated like cash—to issue private loans and collect additional interest.106 Moreover, the Commercial Bank, despite its reluctance to make risky loans to entrepreneurs, did support economic development by purchasing ­commercial debt documents and thereby supporting the system of commercial credit. In 1859, the state banking system was shut down. Technically, this happened because after the Crimean War there was too much cash in circulation without enough potential borrowers; servicing the swelling volume of deposits became expensive, inducing the state to reduce the interest rate. This led to a run on the banks and to their financial collapse, as recounted by Stephen Hoch.107 Memoirists remembered the event with bitterness. Pushechnikov thought it was “not only a reckless affair, but a blasphemous one, and even the most ardent enemy of Russia would not dare to commit such barbarity.” In his view, the government held such valuable collateral that it could easily borrow money in Europe to deal with the crisis.108 It was also hinted that the bank fiasco was a subtle way to wrestle serfowners into acquiescing to the impending emancipation.109 As Seymour Becker has noted, government-issued mortgage banks for the nobility were successfully revived toward the end of the nineteenth century, even though they made far riskier investments.110 Government banks were established to make private credit cheaper for privileged property owners, especially serfowners but also merchants. The 32 Introduction banks were also unique sites where public and private credit and finances intersected—although this aspect of their activity is still poorly understood. Despite all of their unprecedented authority to collect their debt and discipline their debtors, largely in circumvention of the court system, the banks and government policy in general left a surprising amount of decision-making to private individuals. For instance, there were no restrictions on what the borrower could do with the money borrowed from a government bank. Compared to the state-run credit system, private lending was even less restrictive; most importantly, there were no requirements, such as licensing or registration, on who could act as a lender, making the world of “usurers” a financial free-for-all. Part I T h e C u lt u r e of Deb t Figure 1.1. V. G. Astrakhov, At the Market. Playing Checkers (1857) Source: State Historical Museum (Moscow) chapt e r 1 Usurers’ Tales She was a tiny shriveled old thing, around sixty, with sharp and mean little eyes, with a small sharp nose and uncovered head. Her flaxen-­ blond hair—barely touched by gray—was thickly smeared with oil. Her thin and long neck, rather like a chicken leg, was wrapped in some kind of flannel rag, and on her shoulders, despite the heat, was flapping a tattered and yellowed fur jacket. The old thing was constantly coughing and wheezing.1 This of coursedescribes Aliona Ivanovna, the fictional pawnbroker from Crime and Punishment. The university students and young army officers who were her clients said that she was “able to hand out five thousand all at once, while never snubbing a ruble’s pawn.”2 The most striking element of the cultural stereotype captured by Dostoevsky is not simply Aliona Ivanovna’s pathetic appearance or viciousness but also her social margin­ alization, which is exaggerated to the point of caricature. Her only known social interaction is to bite her ­half-sister Lizaveta, her clients appear as ­parasitical as herself, and her wealth would remain lost to society even after her death by being bequeathed to a remote monastery.3 Consider also Grushenka, the femme fatale of Dostoevsky’s last great novel, The Brothers Karamazov: It was also known that the young woman, especially during the past year, embarked upon what is known as “gesheft,” and that in this respect 35 36 The Culture of Debt she turned out to have extraordinary abilities, so that in the end many christened her a true Jewess. Not that she lent money on interest, but it was known, for example, that for some time, in partnership with Fedor Pavlovich Karamazov, she had really been engaged in buying up bills of exchange for a trifle, ten kopecks to the ruble, and later made a ruble to ten kopecks on some of them.4 To Dostoevsky’s early readers, this passage would illustrate the moral defectiveness of both Grushenka and the soon-to-be-killed Fedor Karamazov because individuals who bought up bad debt and then used their knowledge of legal procedures to collect it were known as diskontery (for “discounting” a debt document, which means buying it from the original lender for less than its face value) and considered to be “the most greedy and predatory” type of usurer.5 Real-life Russian moneylenders and pawnbrokers, in contrast to their prominent fictional counterparts, were hardly ever discussed in the press or remembered in memoirs, even when they were murdered. Even imperial-era works on rural usury, such as those by Roman Tsimmerman (Gvozdev) and Georgii Sazonov, provide detailed information about credit networks and lending practices but very little information about lenders as human beings as opposed to abstract economic actors. These authors show wealthy peasant lenders (known as kulaks) as fundamentally in opposition to their communities even while arguing that any peasant would gladly turn into a kulak if given a chance. Incidentally, this point also applies to histories of credit in Western Europe and North America, which are written entirely from the debtors’ perspective.6 Similarly, Marx’s framework, which guided the few brief explorations of “usury” by Soviet historians, equated private informal lending with the archaic “usurious” variety, which he interpreted as predatory and nonproductive and therefore not worthy of a detailed analysis except as the backdrop for the development of modern capitalist banking. The data presented in the few Soviet-era studies of “usury” in early modern and Petrine Russia do not at all fit this theory, showing that although credit could indeed be expensive and even exploitative, the web of credit ties linked all social strata, and private lending could not be characterized as unambiguously or predominantly predatory or archaic or as financing mainly wasteful consumption.7 Nineteenth-century lenders likewise were a diverse group, ranging from the wealthiest aristocrats to illiterate peasant pawnbrokers, and from a Usurers’ Tales 37 ­ ultitude of one-time investors to a few individuals who can be characterm ized as professional usurers. It is as difficult to single out the latter group of high-risk lenders as it is to identify the rates they charged. Moreover, even “professional” lenders still depended not upon Aliona Ivanovna–style hostile estrangement from the world but upon being successfully embedded in existing networks of kinship, state service, and locality. Like the motley group of entrepreneurs who prepared the way for Russia’s capitalist transformation or the jurists who prepared the legal reform, these individuals—who had to fit in in the absence of large banks—prepared the way for the Russian financial revolution that began in the 1860s. Equally importantly, lenders relied on their knowledge of legal rules and procedures. Their legal knowledge and skill level varied but nearly always made the laws limiting maximum interest rates practically unenforceable except in rare circumstances.8 The task of upholding private property and supporting the elites who owned it required the security of private-law transactions, including loans and mortgages, even though actual interest rates exceeded the legal limit. This contradiction potentially subverted the tsar’s law and his officials’ authority and caused no small concern to the latter. Governors, police officers, and jurists needed to determine whether they could effectively regulate private credit and, if so, where to start. For instance, how were they to gather the necessary information, and how were they to justify their intervention in legal, political, and moral terms? Provincial governors with their extensive police powers, and the officers of the Third Section of His Imperial Majesty’s Own Chancellery—Russia’s political police in 1826–1879, with broad authority to monitor and regulate public morality— did find the time in their busy schedules to examine private lending by conducting surveillance operations that were remarkably sophisticated for the mid-nineteenth century and by gathering and responding to individual complaints and secret reports about individual lenders. In the process, officials had to make important judgments about such things as individual authority, responsibility, and failure and, above all, about the tension between morality and the law.9 Whereas the authorities suppressed political dissent quite rigorously and had no qualms about using agents provocateurs and secret informants to sniff out other kinds of organized crime, I have not located any instances of similar kinds of entrapment being used to catch usurers. Virtually all private lenders were left unmolested, with the exception of a few individuals perceived as not playing by the rules, such as by offending powerful interests or 38 The Culture of Debt attracting an unusually high volume of complaints. If possible, these were prosecuted in court, but more commonly the government combined outof‑court negotiations and extra-legal—or, rather, quasi-legal—sanctions, including police surveillance and administrative exile. Ultimately, none of these measures could satisfactorily address deep-seated anxieties about the morality of the market and the government’s role in regulating it, but then what could?10 Morality, Policy, and the Law Dostoevsky’s deep aversion to moneylenders was fueled by his well-known personal experiences with debt, but ultimately it was grounded in a longstanding cultural and religious tradition extending far beyond Russia. Aristotle condemned usury as unjust and unnatural because “interest was money born of money,” and money was an arbitrary medium of exchange that was not supposed to breed. The Biblical and Christian denunciations of usury could be interpreted as allowing it under certain circumstances but still considering it incompatible with life in a peaceful community.11 The most common Russian word for usurer—rostovshchik—was a term of abuse that could easily lead to a lawsuit for insult and slander.12 A brief anonymous tale from the late seventeenth century depicted a usurer who died and fell directly into hell when he was buried; his lot was improved after his widow donated all of his wealth to the church and to the poor, but only after long negotiations and with the participation of a folk minstrel (skomorokh). The devil in this tale—vicious and mistrustful—appears to be little different from the usurer himself, and the negotiations closely resemble the procedure of collecting a debt.13 In nineteenth-century fiction, for example in Nikolai Nekrasov’s 1841 short story, usury involves a “hardening” of one’s soul and is associated with vengeance and sexual predation: the lender enticed his victim, a skilled but modest artisan, with an interest-free loan just so he could eventually engineer his ruin and attempt to possess his wife.14 In our own day, it is commonly accepted by economists and laypersons alike that low interest rates reflect a nation’s “intelligence and moral strength.”15 Occasionally, oppressed debtors took matters into their own hands. The barely veiled threat of popular violence is expressed in one of Ost