rovskii’s plays published in 1872, in which a character from Moscow’s lower middle class opines that “these usurers should be robbed, my friend, because thou shalt not drink another’s blood.”16 After public criminal trials were Usurers’ Tales 39 introduced in Russia in 1866, several notorious cases involved the murder of a usurer by his or her client: only weeks before the first installment of Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment was published in 1866, a Moscow University student, Danilov, killed a usurer and her servant.17 In 1879, another prominent usurer, Vlasov, was murdered in St. Petersburg by his client and friend, Karl Landsberg, an officer in the Imperial Guard, who became worried that the lender intended to ruin his upcoming marriage by revealing his precarious financial condition. After slitting the usurer’s throat with a razor blade and then killing his maidservant as well, Landsberg found out that Vlasov had just written a letter forgiving all his debt as a wedding present.18 More coordinated attacks were also possible, especially when a lender happened to be in a vulnerable position. In 1864, a sixty-four-year-old merchant and moneylender, Andrei Lukin, was imprudent enough to visit the inner chambers of the Moscow debtors’ prison. He was attacked by a group of inmates, who beat him, called him a scoundrel (podlets) and a usurer, and told him in the presence of a police officer who was helpless or unwilling to intervene that he was being beaten for “charging a very large and merciless interest rate, namely fifteen percent per month.”19 Rural usurers risked a visit from robbers and highwaymen. In 1838, a gang of approximately twelve men led by an escaped convict broke into the house of Mr. Glinka, a rural landowner in Smolensk province. Glinka, who lived in a dilapidated house with only three girls and one boy as his servants, was known for his wealth and miserliness. The robbers had no difficulty breaking the rotten window frames and subduing the servants, after which they took away a chest containing pawned property and cash.20 The majority of the population who were law-abiding took their grievances to the authorities. Popular complaints about usurers preserved in legal and official documents show no awareness of ancient philosophical arguments, such as the Aristotelian critique of usury as unnatural and unjust. Nor were the Biblical and Christian denunciations of usury of much help: early modern Russia had a centuries-long tradition of interest-bearing lending that was pioneered by its greatest property owner, the Orthodox Church.21 Finally, it was futile to claim that moneylenders were useless parasites similar to Aliona Ivanovna because, much as we might admire the art of Dostoevsky, Ostrovskii, and Nekrasov, real-life usurers were exceedingly well integrated into society, generally much more so than their clients. Consider the wellknown memoirs by Elizaveta Yankova (1768–1861) recorded by her grandson Dmitry Blagovo. One of Yankova’s relatives, a girl from the old Muscovite 40 The Culture of Debt Mamonov family, married an old and wealthy moneylender, Stepan Shilovskii. His craving for money allegedly resulted in chest spasms whenever someone would come to ask him to pay household expenses, and apparently he eventually died from despondency after losing a large investment. The narrator noted that even if these stories were not true, they still showed that Shilovskii was thought to be capable of severe depression on account of money, something apparently considered bad form among old gentry families.22 Reading this passage, it is easy to miss the fact that Shilovskii, described as a stereotypical miser found in fiction throughout the world, was nonetheless deeply and comfortably entangled in the network of kinship, property, and influence that Yankova’s memoirs describe so vividly. Indeed, Shilovskii’s son Peter rose to become a member of Russia’s Council of State.23 His daughter Anna married a member of the prominent Voeikov family but apparently continued his father’s occupation as a moneylender and a woman of business. Rather than condemning usury as such, the typical victim’s narrative submitted to the courts or to the police alleged excessive avarice and shrewdness that preyed on personal misfortune and subverted the tsar’s law through its loopholes and imperfections. For example, a civil servant in Petersburg, Grigorii Popov, complained to the police in 1859 that On January 20 of this year, in extreme need of 300 rubles, I followed the advice of dressmaker Schlesinger and turned to Collegiate Secretary Mikhail Ivanovich Yefimov who after long negotiations agreed to loan me that amount minus 30 rubles as interest and on the condition (1) that I would take from him an old piano that he valued at 600 rubles; (2) would issue him a document for 2,000 rubles due in two months and guaranteed by two persons and moreover, would give him a receipt for the entire amount. For a long time I would not agree to such conditions and decided to accept them only because of my inexperience and extreme need of money and having believed Yefimov that he would treat me honorably, take the debt document only to protect himself, and never actually charge me that kind of interest, and that if I could not pay him the debt, i.e., 900 [sic] rubles after one month, he would wait for another month.24 In fact, Yefimov sued for the entire amount only one month later, but there was virtually nothing a borrower like Popov could do to defend himself when a usurer had followed the letter of the law. Usurers’ Tales 41 A more persuasive set of arguments against usury invoked societal interest and came both from the victims and from police officials. For example, this is how one Moscow merchant of middling wealth complained in 1863 about a pawnbroker who had embezzled his collateral: [This case reveals] the dark side of the faithlessness not only on the part of the Draevskys [the pawnbroker and his wife], but of all such enterprising usurers who entice poor folk with an attractive bait of lending out money secured by collateral—for moderate interest and on attractive conditions, as published:—but then, based on some fictitious receipts, using poor people’s extreme need, lending a dime for something worth a ruble,—allow themselves, not binding themselves by any conditions—to embezzle at will the property they are entrusted with— without any mercy or pangs of conscience, solely for their enrichment; depriving nakedness of its last cover . . . With such means, and with non-suppression of this evil by the Government, such enterprising types, given such principles of their enrichment, are capable through their avarice of fleecing the entire poor class of entire Moscow!—Into which category, under the stated enticement, I likewise fell unforeseeably, with my pawned items, into the hands of the Draevskys. Who embezzled my things, while the term of the loan had not yet expired, and while I was paying the interest!25 Although this merchant owned several fur coats and so could hardly qualify as poor, arguments that the government had a policy interest in preventing the ruin of an entire population class or group were readily heard by the authorities. As already discussed, mortgage banks for serfowners were ostensibly established to protect them from high interest rates charged by private lenders. But the government also targeted usury directly through police surveillance, as well as formal anti-usury legislation. Surveillance was carried out by the Third Section and its military arm, the Corps of Gendarmes. Aside from their well-known function as political police, they were also tasked with keeping an eye on various nonpolitical undesirables, such as gamblers, swindlers, and usurers. It is to the gendarmes that we must be grateful for revealing information about the real-life counterparts of Dostoevsky’s Alena Ivanovna that is simply not available from any other sources. Incidentally, the most detailed lists of usurers and the most colorful anecdotes about their activities come from 1859–1867— the precise time of Russia’s revolution in banking and finance—as if the government strove not 42 The Culture of Debt simply to educate itself about existing private lending practices but to become convinced that the existing practice of “usury” was deeply flawed and in need of reform. At the same time, even at the highest levels the government realized that it was both impossible and undesirable to eliminate interest rates that exceeded the legally mandated maximum. For example, an 1861 memo prepared by one of the tsar’s closest aides and a general in the Corps of Gendarmes, Ivan Annenkov, recognized that usurers in Russia enjoyed “complete immunity” but urged that “we must not [condemn as usurers] all persons who loan money for interest, even if under private agreements such interest would exceed the limit defined by the law. Everybody knows that no one has so far placed his capital in private hands in return for the legal 6% . . . [government’s policies] must not touch upon those private obligations and conditions that are founded upon mutual benefit.” Annenkov ­proposed a systematic procedure of identifying as many individual lenders as possible and then focusing on those known to engage in particularly abusive practices.26 One method of compiling information was for the agents to openly visit notarial offices and examine their records, to search through court records, or to summon and interview individual lenders at the Third Section. Another method was to collect personal complaints against individual lenders, as well as anonymous denunciations and reports by paid informers. In 1859, the gendarmes produced two lists of Petersburg lenders. The first list, extracted from notarial records, focused on lenders to young aristocrats. It contained 39 names, all but 3 of them males, and almost equally split between noble and commercial estates. The range of the numbers of borrowers per each usurer—only 8 had more than 10, and 12 had only 1 or 2—and the differentiation in the amount of the lenders’ portfolios—from about 200 rubles to over 300,000—show that this list was compiled without much system or pattern. The gendarmes targeted several truly wealthy lenders but also those who were rather modest by St. Petersburg standards, since the median size of the portfolio was just over 10,000 rubles. The investigation then produced a short list of 16 lenders, with 2 new names added, but 10 of these held debt worth less than 50,000 rubles. An even shorter list identified those lenders who were considered especially infamous: Collegiate Secretary Yefimov, tailor Greib, notary Kalugin, and nobles Fokin and Bogomolets. To give the gendarmes justice, they were interested not simply in the Usurers’ Tales 43 volume of a lender’s operations but in lending practices they viewed as ­prejudicial.27 Colonel Fedor Rakeev, the Corps of Gendarmes’s expert on financial crime, argued that the list contained two individuals who “did not at all engage in reprehensible lending.” One was a wine merchant, Ivan Odintsov, and the other was Lieutenant Margarit, “known under the nickname of Margaritka [Margaret], who has for a long time been a supplier to the Guard Corps, and virtually all of his lifelong profits dispersed into hopeless loans.”28 Journalist Mikhail Pyliaev in his well-known collection of anecdotes about Petersburg eccentrics claimed that Margarit was from the Greek colony in the Ukrainian town of Nezhin and that he had served as a spy as well as a peddler. Apparently Margarit was the first Petersburg merchant to sell khalva and Turkish delight, and he ended his life tragically, being knifed down by his ward. He lent primarily to military officers and, according to Pyliaev, owned documents worth hundreds of thousands of rubles.29 This is much more than Rakeev’s estimate of 20,000 rubles; we may only speculate about the reasons Ra