on and accommodation between Muscovite and Western ­cultures of debt but unfortunately does not make this argument explicit.27 In the absence of academic works documenting the changes in social, cultural, and legal aspects of credit, one must turn to fictional descriptions by Introduction 9 some of Russia’s leading novelists and playwrights. Perhaps the most recognizable is the classic play It’s a Family Affair—We’ll Settle It Ourselves (1849) about the culture of traditional Muscovite merchants written by Alexander Ostrovsky, a son of a lawyer and himself a former court clerk. Originally titled The Bankrupt, the play—in my own departure from conventional ­interpretations—captures a growing acceptance of bankruptcy, and legal regulation in general, as a regular aspect of commerce in Russia; the way bankruptcy highlighted age-old tensions between morality and power; and the way it irreparably damaged the traditional practices of credit based on personal character and reputation.28 The late stage of this transition is depicted in perhaps the most detailed fictional portrayal of capitalism and credit in imperial Russia, Dmitrii Mamin-Sibiriak’s 1895 naturalist novel, Bread, about the rise of a modern joint-stock bank in a small town in the Urals. The owners of the bank quickly take over grain production and liquor distillation in that rich region and disrupt the old system of credit that was based on longstanding social and kinship relations. Paradoxically, the growth of organized capitalist credit in the novel also leads to more lively traditional “usurious” operations instead of replacing them.29 Perhaps the main reason why these fragmentary though fascinating insights concerning the development of credit in Russia were not developed further has been the widespread use of idealized Eurocentric and especially Anglocentric models of credit and capitalism. The above-mentioned literature on the culture of credit in Western Europe and North America shows that in practice these models turn out to be as fractured and contested as they were in Russia, and that their rules were, as Paul Johnson has argued, “neither natural, nor neutral, nor . . . in any conventional sense socially or economically optimal.”30 Nineteenth-century Europeans and Americans were anxious and divided about many key aspects of modern capitalism, such as l­ imited liability, bankruptcy discharge, paper money, white-collar crime, the courts and the legal profession, and the morality of the entrepreneurial class. As Sarah Maza has proposed in her study of the “myth” of the French bourgeoisie, “It is high time . . . to stop projecting the Anglo-American model, with its inevitable linking of capitalism, liberal democracy, and ­middle-class individualism, onto continental societies. And it may be time to start ­wondering whether that Anglo-American model does not constitute the ­exception rather than the norm in the development of Western culture.”31 More fundamentally, earlier works on Russian, as well as Western, capitalism assume that the ideal itself, however defined, is an unqualified good 10 Introduction and that the proper response by all clear-thinking Russians at the time would have been to emulate it as closely as possible. This premise is something that newly invigorated literature on the development of capitalism in the West is now continuing to undermine, using a rich variety of sources and reconceptualizing some discomforting connections between capitalism and genocide, slavery, imperialism, and criminality. Daniel Lord Smail in his study of the legal and economic culture in early modern Marseilles has reasserted the connection between coercion—legal and extralegal—and economics as “a lubricant that eases the transfer of wealth from one to the other,” suggesting that this insight continues to hold true in our own day. Similarly, the wellknown theory of Douglass C. North that “free” institutions must result in economic growth and cheaper credit has been questioned on empirical grounds. Even private property itself, as Ekaterina Pravilova has noted, is now increasingly seen as a disciplinary project “symbolically associated with state coercion and prescriptive rules.”32 As in any other European country, private credit in nineteenth-century Russia departed from some of the prevailing practices of its day, and was in step in others. As a living daily practice of capitalism, the culture of credit was fractured among various personal and institutional interests and it merged practices of coercion—virtually never of the extrajudicial variety, as opposed to the early modern period—with those of accommodation and consensus. In sum, why Russia was not Britain is an important question but one that for the present purposes is subsidiary to understanding what Russia actually was. Society, Property, and Capitalism in Russia The persistence of informal personal credit in Russia, among other “old-­ regime” structures and practices, can be easily misinterpreted to blend into the grand narrative of Russia’s fundamental inferiority, or “backwardness,” which regards all the major aspects of its civilization as having failed in some way. Even historians labeled as “optimists” contend, for instance, that imperial Russia remained fragmented along early modern estate divisions, that peasants failed to become capitalist farmers, that nobles—and then educated professionals—failed to become an effective ruling class, that merchants and other urban groups failed to develop a Western-style bourgeoisie, that capitalism failed to develop, that the government was dysfunctional, and that the rule of law and private property was rudimentary or completely absent. It is not unheard of in academic literature to claim, for instance, that “Russian Introduction 11 nobles often possessed land, but never enjoyed private property.” While only a few works contain these claims in such a concentrated form, they are almost invariably accepted at their face value.33 This narrative of failure is being revised by works taking advantage of post-Soviet access to archival materials that were not available to earlier ­generations of historians. Recent scholarship incorporates the long-absent microhistorical perspective into existing narratives of institutions and policies and thereby destroys some of the most cherished myths about Russian peasants, nobles, and merchants. One key scholarly debate concerns the fact that Russian society was officially compartmentalized into legal categories, or estates, which persisted until 1917 and continued to impact people’s lives long after the Revolution. The estate system—consisting primarily of peasants, nobles, the clergy, and several urban and commercial categories—is usually understood as a major limiting factor in Russia’s social development, hindering social mobility and the formation of shared identities. At the same time, newer identities based on property and education resulted in what Catriona Kelly calls a “convergence of taste” of Russia’s landowning, commercial, and service classes, in a similar way to the process that occurred in a slightly earlier period in Georgian England. Alison Smith has shown the estate system to be imbued with a multiplicity of meanings—“as obligation, as opportunity, as belonging, and as hierarchy”—which were contested and negotiated by the agencies of the tsarist government, by local communities, and by private individuals.34 Russia’s culture of private property and credit was similarly complicated, and debt relations did not fit neatly into the estate structure. Although individuals often preferred to deal with persons of similar status, debt connections also cut across social and economic boundaries and formed between persons who were not even personally acquainted. An act of borrowing, even when it was the only interaction between persons of vastly different position, had to rely on a set of shared assumptions and experiences. These could be that debts must be repaid, that relatives usually helped each other, or that the lender would be willing and capable of using the courts to induce repayment.35 Another fundamental stereotype about Russia presents its vast peasant population as an exotic, undifferentiated mass of subsistence farmers who were poor, ignorant of market relations, and lacking any appreciation for “Western” law. By contrast, David Moon, Jane Burbank, Tracy Dennison, and Alessandro Stanziani have found that peasants were differentiated by wealth and occupation, actively participated in the market, and readily used the law to resolve property and other disputes. These factors, added to the 12 Introduction seasonal and unpredictable patterns of the agricultural cycle, made credit indispensable for peasants who worked the land, for the nobles who ruled over—and lived off—a large proportion of them, and for the government that collected taxes from both, directly and indirectly.36 Serfowning nobles themselves are often regarded as wasteful and inefficient and, therefore, hopelessly indebted but still jealous of their economic privileges.37 However, these older accounts focused on the wealthiest layer of fewer than 3,000 proprietors who could afford princely lifestyles and vast debts and ignored the tens of thousands of educated but mostly conservative and religious landowners who could afford to live comfortably but needed to manage their properties effectively to do so. Works by Seymour Becker, Michelle Lamarche Marrese, Katherine Pickering Antonova, and Valerie Kivelson show a variety of legal and social strategies used by such middling families. These included the legal rules allowing married women to own and control property, extensive horizontal and vertical social and kinship ties, and even the often-criticized custom of partible inheritance. In a similar vein, Ekaterina Pravilova has examined the emergence of the notions and practices of public, as opposed to private, property in imperial Russia. These works analyze patterns of property ownership—complex and never absolute or exclusive—that closely resemble their nineteenth-century Western counterparts. Studies of the nobility also reinterpret the longstanding view of provincial life as a stagnant backwater: in addition to Antonova, works by Susan SmithPeter, Mary Cavender, and Catherine Evtuhov show varied and rich provincial lives in which no Chekhovian desire for the city is evidenced; in fact, the city was viewed as undesirable.38 In contrast to Lee Farrow’s and William Wagner’s interpretations of “clan” structures as backward, middling gentry networks allowed for a self-sufficient and apparently self-satisfied rural culture that was conservative but not reactionary.39 Provincial self-sufficiency was not, however, possible without credit ties, which, as Antonova notes, were deeply interwoven with all other social interactions on a noble estate and simultaneously linked serfowners to the state, to their relatives and other peers, and to their peasants and other dependents. Money and debt are therefore shown as part and parcel of the nobles’ daily life rather than a disaster or an unrealized aspiration. Finally, urban and commercial groups in Russia consisted primarily of merchants, who had to pay a special annual tax to retain their privileges, and of townspeople (meshchane) and craftsmen (tsekhovye) whose prosperity Introduction 13 varied but who like merchants possessed their own corporate organization. All but the wealthiest merchants were subjected to conscription, taxation, and corporal punishment, just like peasants. Historical memory has not been kind to these people: condemned during the Soviet era for being capitalist and critiqued in the West for not being capitalist enough, traditional Russian merchants became an object of ridicule and exoticization, dismissed as unable to lead Russia’s capitalist development due to their alleged backwardness, dishonesty, and a caste-like mentality that suppo