te). In addition to these courts, each county also had its own administrative system. This court hierarchy existed until the new courts opened after the reform of 1864, and another set of reforms greatly expanded the local elected component, but otherwise this administrative framework remained in force until 1917. Alexander I (1801–1825) added two important central institutions: he established the Council of State (1810) as the highest legislative body, but its other function was to serve as essentially a form of constitutional court, handling a small number of appeals that rested on the interpretation of a particular statute or decree. Second, the ministerial system established in 1802 included the Ministry of Justice, which was charged with the oversight of all courts of law in the empire, except for the ecclesiastical and military courts.63 Under Nicholas I (1825–1855), the two major administrative innovations pertinent to this study were, first, the establishment of the Third Section of His Imperial Majesty’s Own Chancellery as the empire’s “highest” police responsible personally to the tsar. Most of its officials belonged to the Introduction 23 ­ ilitarized Corps of Gendarmes, so that in this study, and in most existing m literature, the Third Section and the Corps of Gendarmes are used interchangeably. The Third Section is remembered today for its role in suppressing political dissent, but at least before the Great Reforms, it in effect constituted a parallel system of justice with extensive authority to investigate particularly important criminal cases and property, inheritance, and family disputes that were brought to their attention. However, the Third Section was not authorized to actually try cases, and in private-law disputes it was limited to serving as a mediator.64 The second great innovation was the massive codification effort carried out under the direction of the statesman Mikhail Speranskii. This included the Complete Collection of the Laws that had been issued after 1649, published in three series beginning in 1830; and the Digest of the Laws, which compiled the laws that were actually in force and went into effect in 1835, with subsequent editions issued in 1842 and 1857. The Digest is often described as not a true “code” in the sense that it did not claim to establish general legal principles in the manner of the French Napoleonic Code, but this view is misleading because the Napoleonic Code was itself drawn from existing legal tradition and was a compromise between old-regime legal rules, revolutionary innovations, and Napoleon’s own views.65 The Digest, despite its imperfections and frequent casuistry, was a functioning code of law with separate volumes on substantive criminal and civil law and codes of procedure in addition to massive administrative regulations. In making their decisions, judges only had to refer to the Digest, not to the legislative acts from which it was extracted. Viewed in a general nineteenth-­ century context, when codification was often painfully drawn out and incomplete, it was as remarkable an achievement as its 1649 predecessor, reflecting an interest on the part of Russia’s elites in promoting legality. Finally, the judicial reform of 1864 was a landmark event in the history of Russian law, although it only affected court structure and procedures, not substantive laws. The courts’ authority and prestige were greatly strengthened, and civil and criminal procedure were streamlined by the introduction of public oral trials with criminal juries and the professional bar. The system of formal proofs that limited judges’ ability to evaluate evidence was discarded, as were the first-tier, estate-based courts. The reform also established a system of local justices of the peace for smaller claims and disputes. Their equivalent for the peasants were the local township (volost) courts established by the emancipation reform of 1861 and administered by the peasants 24 Introduction themselves. Because these courts were limited to the peasants and because their decisions could not be appealed to the regular court system, these courts have been misleadingly criticized for fragmenting the legal system. They were in fact concerned with small matters that were not meant to clog up the regular courts in any legal system. Moreover, Jane Burbank has conclusively demonstrated that their foundations in peasant “custom” did not result in any kind of legal anarchy.66 Private Credit and Legal Regulation In addition to the legal structure, the culture of credit was shaped or at least heavily affected by two sets of government policies. One was closely related to official efforts to compartmentalize Russian society into separate legal estates. This long-term project encompassed legislation that sought to create two separate networks of private debt—one for commercial loans and one for noncommercial ones—by regulating the legal forms required for each category. This thinking reflected the common European sentiment that ­merchants as risk takers were entitled to a separate legal regime, upholding different values than nobles or peasants, even though the two legal and ­economic cultures could sometimes merge and influence each other.67 Pre-Petrine law did not formally distinguish between commercial and non-commercial debt. Legally enforceable credit transactions required witnesses and had to be registered at a court or an administrative office. As a practical matter, borrowers were required to provide some property as collateral or to have other individuals guarantee the loan.68 Western European merchants who began visiting Muscovy more frequently toward the end of the seventeenth century introduced another form, known in English as the bill of exchange (Wechsel in German and veksel in Russian, pl. vekseli or vekselia).69 Bills of exchange were invented by European Renaissance bankers to facilitate long-distance commerce: a merchant, instead of transporting cash, deposited cash with a banker, who issued a document asking another banker in a different city to pay that amount to the bearer.70 Bills of exchange were convenient because they required fewer formalities; for example, they did not require witnesses or registration.71 They also benefitted from a stricter enforcement mechanism, including the quick imprisonment of a delinquent debtor or a quick sale of his property, and were more difficult to challenge in court because any legally relevant information had to be inscribed on the document itself, and no extraneous evidence was admissible.72 Introduction 25 Vekseli soon became popular in Russia, although mostly specifically as debt documents rather than as instruments for long-distance money transfer.73 The first Veksel Statute was adopted in 1729, during the brief reign of Peter II, with its text inspired by German models and published simultaneously in German and Russian.74 In practice, by that time both native Russian and European merchants doing business in Russia had already switched to using vekseli for commercial credit transactions.75 By the late eighteenth century, Russian merchants had de facto created a system of short-term commercial credit based on the use of vekseli, as shown by George Munro.76 Subsequently veksel law was modified by the Bankruptcy Statute of 1800 and replaced by another complete statute—this time with strong French influences—in 1832, and then again in 1903.77 This legislative attention to what is usually assumed to be a minor area of the law is remarkable, given that the fundamental civil and criminal statutes in imperial Russia were updated extremely slowly if at all. From the beginning of their use in Russia, vekseli were viewed as a special privilege of merchants, although under Russia’s original Veksel Statute of 1729, this privilege extended to all persons who had financial dealings with merchants, and so a person of any estate could issue a veksel to a merchant or accept it from one. However, the government soon became alarmed by the easy availability of vekseli and sought to limit their circulation, ostensibly to protect nobles and peasants from excessive debt, although the measure could not effectively affect predatory moneylenders.78 The restrictions on the use of vekseli were part of a larger and unsuccessful policy to separate nobles’ and merchants’ financial dealings. For instance, the government tried to prevent nobles from standing surety for merchants; however, this cannot conceal the fact that the two major propertied groups actively cooperated to take advantage of each other’s unique privileges, often by acting as each other’s front men.79 Peasants were prohibited from issuing vekseli in 1761.80 This prohibition was extended to nobles by Paul I’s Bankruptcy Statute of 1800. As finalized in 1832, the privilege to issue vekseli was available only to persons specifically listed in the statute; as of the 1857 edition, which was in force during the Great Reforms, these were (a) merchants enrolled in a guild; (b) nobles enrolled in a merchant guild; (c) foreign merchants; (d) meshchane (townspeople) and tsekhovye (craftsmen) in the two capital cities; and (e) peasants engaged in commerce with a special license.81 Yet another restriction was that married women and unmarried daughters who were not legally emancipated from their parents were not allowed to issue vekseli without their husbands’ or fathers’ permission—even if they 26 Introduction belonged to the five categories just named—unless they engaged in commerce in their own name. This restriction against women came to Russia directly from the Napoleonic Code and did not fit within Russia’s regime of separate marital property. As imperial-era legal scholar Gabriel Shershenevich noted, the restriction also raised the practical challenge of determining whether a given debt related to commerce and whether a woman was emancipated. After all, a woman could own vast property in her own name but live with her parents and, conversely, it would be impossible to determine whether a young woman was “emancipated” if her parents did not own any property that could have been transferred to her. However, vekseli issued by individuals not legally entitled to issue them did not become void but merely lost the special advantages conferred by veksel law and became equated with ordinary debt documents.82 The Bankruptcy Statute of 1800 also envisioned a separate credit system for the noncommercial classes, especially nobles and peasants, based on the “loan letter” (zaiomnoe pismo).83 It required witnesses and registration, but these requirements were relaxed for the “private” (domovoe) loan letter, as opposed to the “registered” (krepostnoe) one, which provided the lender with enhanced legal protections.84 A loan letter did not legally require collateral or surety, although lenders were of course free to demand them. While the statute provided sample forms for different types of loans, a loan letter could be written in any form, as long as the word “borrow” (zanimat) was present. A separate model was provided for loans secured by land (zakladnaia krepost or—in the abbreviated form more familiar to readers of Russian literature— zakladnaia), requiring a description of the property being mortgaged. In practice, actual loan letters closely followed the models provided in the statute, showing that legal rules and legal forms in imperial Russia were far from fictitious or superfluous but, rather, were closely integrated into Russia’s culture of debt and its regime of private property. But although the legal forms had real practical effect on the culture of debt, this effect naturally differed from what was intended by the legislation. The technical legal distinctions between vekseli and ordinary loan letters remained blurry. Eighteenth-century decrees voided vekseli issued to pay gambling debts and also treated vekseli issued by nobles who were in state service as ordinary deb