eedoms failed to fully live up to these standards of the rule of law, and especially to the Anglo-American version.53 However, the standards themselves are vulnerable to criticism both on empirical and on conceptual grounds. Empirically, it is important to remember the many failures of the rule of law in other major legal systems, including Britain, Germany, and the United States, despite the fact that their citizens elected many of their officials and that their political rights were better protected than in Russia. The list of these failures is long indeed, including a pervasive court-sanctioned racist regime in the United States; national, class, and gender oppression in Victorian Britain; and the history of political oppression in Germany. As Nancy Kollmann has noted with respect to an earlier period of Russian ­history, “On the ground, European “rationalizing” states look less rational and Muscovy’s proclaimed “autocracy” looks less autocratic.”54 By contrast, historical and empirically grounded conceptions of the law are more suitable for comparisons of specific practices in Russia and elsewhere, such as 18 Introduction punishment for intentional bankruptcy or prosecution of usury, or women’s property rights, with the aim of identifying general patterns, which Russia may or may not share with other major legal systems. In short, relying on an idealized image of English or American law and finding that Russia failed to measure up is no more helpful than would be, for example, claiming that Orthodox Russians were not truly Christian because they failed to live up to some “Western” Christian model. Conceptually, although there has not been a study systematically and vigorously applying Weber’s ideas about law to the Russian case, sociologists of law have complicated such a project by arguing that Weber himself, despite all of his partiality for “formal-legal” rationality, was ambivalent about its possible benefits and realized that it could never be achievable in practice. Weber’s theory of law arguably viewed Western legal systems as riddled with “irreconcilable tensions between process and substance—between formal and substantive rationality” rather than as the triumphant progression of the former.55 But despite these problems with the standard definition of the rule of law and the rational versus despotic dichotomy, I am far from suggesting that law has been merely an instrument of social and political oppression, in pre-­reform Russia or anywhere else. Many historians and legal scholars have examined the law as a process of contestation and negotiation, which is typically subject to individual and group discretion, and which does not necessarily serve as a noble tool of dispute resolution but could be just as easily deployed as a weapon of social strife. For example, Paul W. Kahn has argued against legal scholars’ focus on the abstract image of the rule of law—which he compares to ­theology—and their consequent emphasis on the project of legal reform. Instead Kahn prefers to see the law as a “set of sites of social conflict, and a set of resources—institutional and rhetorical—for those involved in these conflicts.”56 E. P. Thompson in his study of one of the most notorious examples of corrupt class-based legislation in eighteenth-century England nonetheless came out in defense of the rule of law, which, he argued, could support existing power structures only by being perceived as occasionally operating to benefit subordinate individuals and groups: “If the law is evidently partial and unjust, then it will mask nothing, legitimize nothing, contribute nothing to any class’s hegemony. The essential precondition for the effectiveness of law, in its function as ideology, is that it shall display an independence from gross manipulation and shall seem to be just. It cannot seem to be so without upholding its own logic and criteria of equity; indeed, on occasion, by actually being just.”57 In Introduction 19 Russia, too, the legal system was susceptible to extrajudicial pressures and was itself a battlefield for competing interests. However, it retained enough integrity to occasionally punish a corrupt official and to rescue a wrongfully accused serf, and even before the reform of 1864 fulfilled—however imperfectly—its ideological, as well as practical functions. Government and the Law A guidebook to Moscow published in 1827 proudly introduced the ­“enormous . . . beautiful building of the newest Architecture,” which housed the municipal and provincial governmental offices (prisutstvennye mesta) It was located on a prominent spot just outside the Kremlin and Red Square, to the right of Resurrection Gate, on the site of today’s Lenin Museum. The building, depicted on the Figure 6.2 below, was originally a seventeenth-­ century Mint complex, converted to offices under Catherine II and given its final neoclassical appearance after renovations completed in 1820.58 Perhaps symbolic of the general state of the Russian bureaucratic world, the elegant exterior was the complete opposite of its busy and cramped inside, which was divided into hundreds of small chambers, staircases, and corridors, with the debtors’ prison occupying part of its left wing (see Figures 7.3 and 7.4). The guidebook listed all the offices located in the building—in addition to the courts of law, it housed such key provincial and municipal institutions as the city council, the main police office, the Noble Board of Trustees, the provincial Treasury, and the provincial administrative office—and then noted with a touch of irony: “each of our readers, I think, has some knowledge of the function of each of these governmental offices.”59 There were several other important official buildings, including the Board of Trustees of the Imperial Orphanage on Solianka Street (built in 1825), the Senate building inside the Kremlin (1788), and the 17 police precincts spread throughout the city. The two most important city officials, the governor general and the police chief, each had a spacious residence in the city center, where he conducted business and received visitors and petitioners. The guidebook’s readership, no doubt mostly persons of some property, could hardly avoid visiting these buildings, either in person or through a representative, on a multitude of errands and matters that bound the early industrial state and its subjects, whether it was to register a debt transaction, to request a police debt collection proceeding, to purchase the stamped 20 Introduction paper used for all official business, or to pursue a court case. Much like this architectural landscape, the legal and administrative framework of the Russian Empire—summarized in Tables 0.1 and 0.2—was largely erected by Catherine II’s Provincial Statute of 1775, but ultimately it rested on the personal power of the tsar and on the ethos of state service, both of which ­originated in the Muscovite period. Peter the Great’s reforms introduced the Governing Senate as the highest administrative body in the empire, but by the mid-nineteenth century it served primarily as the highest court of appeals. Another major Petrine innovation was the replacement the Muscovite system of ranks with the Table of Ranks—reproduced in Appendix B—which divided all civil servants and military officers into fourteen classes and legally separated them from lower-­ level servitors of the tsar such as noncommissioned officers and chancery clerks. The table provided an automatic avenue of advancement to personal and potentially hereditary nobility; it also made it easier to determine an official’s position in the service hierarchy.60 Table o.1. Russian Legal System before the Judicial Reform of 1864 Level Institution Date Est. Primary Function Central Emperor Issue laws and decrees, accept pettions State Council 1801 Legislation; statutory interpretation Governing Senate 1711 Appellate court Third Section 1826 Special investigations of civil and criminal matters Province Provincial Chambers 1775 Non-estate first-tier of Civil and appellate courts; Criminal Justice special cases Equity Courts 1775 Minors; parents vs. children Commercial Courts 1808–1833 Bankruptcy; commercial disputes Local County, Magistrate, Aulic Courts 1775 Estate-based trial courts Introduction 21 Table 0.2 Court Caseload in 1858a Court Criminal Civil First-tier courts 137,950 143,194 Provincial Chambers 62,407 108,866 Equity 1,639 Commercial (incl. bankruptcy) n / a Senate 3,643 17,449 Senate Joint Session 66 Total 404 26 State Council Ministry of Justice 4,219 (394) 2,328 2,589 251,568 232,864 a. Data include all cases processed by the courts, even if they were not decided during the year. Administrative and technical (rasporiaditelnye) proceedings are not included. Data source: Zhurnal ministerstva iustitsii 4 (1860), 24-33. Catherine’s legislation above all established a uniform system of provincial administration, dividing the entire empire into provinces (gubernii), each with originally the equivalent population and generally corresponding with the regions (oblasti) of contemporary Russia. At the top of the local hierarchy was the civil governor, with some exceptionally important regions like St. Petersburg and Moscow also assigned the higher-ranking military governor general. Governors’ power steadily grew in the early nineteenth century, so that an 1837 law referred to governors as “masters of the province.” These powers included the authority to expel undesirable persons, such as swindlers and “usurers,” to oversee the police, which collected debts and conducted criminal investigations, and to exercise a limited set of judicial functions. Represented in fictional works as local tyrants, provincial governors are shown by archival-based research to have been limited in several ways, not only by their minders from the secret police but primarily by the necessity to find accommodation with local elites.61 Formal restrictions were also significant, especially with respect to judicial institutions. Provincial Chambers of Criminal and Civil Justice—second-tier courts—carried out the bulk of justice administration before the 1864 reform; they were all-estate courts, staffed by trained lawyers. Their chairmen were confirmed personally by the emperor from candidates proposed by the 22 Introduction Senate, although in the nineteenth century candidates in most provinces were elected by the nobility. Assistant chairmen were selected by the minister of justice, and lay assessors were selected by nobles and by the provincial urban community (two from each).62 Although the police and the administration subordinate to the minister of the interior were better funded, more numerous, and more powerful than the judiciary, it is still a gross exaggeration that the pre-1864 system commingled judicial and executive functions and that therefore Russia had no real justice system before 1864. In addition to the chambers, provinces had several ancillary courts: Commercial, Equity (Conscience), Verbal, and the Orphans’. Commercial courts were particularly important because they were responsible for commercial litigation and for overseeing merchants’ bankruptcy proceedings. They were officially equal to the chamber, despite their smaller caseload and relatively narrow jurisdiction. Provincial institutions also included various elected bodies that enabled local elites to participate in ­government in at least a limited way. Finally, the chambers oversaw and reviewed the proceedings of the firsttier trial courts, whose jurisdiction was divided according to Russia’s system of legal estates: the County Court (Uezdnyi sud) tried cases involving nobles and peasants, the Magistrate Court (Magistrat) had jurisdiction over merchants and townspeople, and, in the two capitals, the Aulic Court (Nadvornyi sud)— over government officials who did not own property there and over the raznochintsy (i.e., individuals who did not belong to any esta