---
source_url: "https://ebin.pub/bankrupts-and-usurers-of-imperial-russia-debt-property-and-the-law-in-the-age-of-dostoevsky-and-tolstoy-9780674972599.html"
final_url: "https://ebin.pub/bankrupts-and-usurers-of-imperial-russia-debt-property-and-the-law-in-the-age-of-dostoevsky-and-tolstoy-9780674972599.html"
provider: "exa"
text_sha256: "750cb115ca6db04c1b17a3d9272b8b2f1d7c808970494fee8846d3b5e4edd3f6"
title: "Bankrupts and Usurers of Imperial Russia: Debt, Property, and the Law in the Age of Dostoevsky and Tolstoy\n 9780674972599 - EBIN.PUB"
content_kind: "page_text"
---

Bankrupts and Usurers of Imperial Russia: Debt, Property, and the Law in the Age of Dostoevsky and Tolstoy 9780674972599 - EBIN.PUB

# Bankrupts and Usurers of Imperial Russia: Debt, Property, and the Law in the Age of Dostoevsky and Tolstoy 9780674972599

##### As readers of classic Russian literature know, the nineteenth century was a time of pervasive financial anxiety. With in

 English Pages 350 [400] Year 2016 

Harvard Historical Studies s 187 Published under the auspices of the Department of History from the income of the Paul Revere Frothingham Bequest Robert Louis Stroock Fund Henry Warren Torrey Fund Bankrupts and usurers of ImperIal russIa Debt, Property, and the Law in the Age of Dostoevsky and Tolstoy sergeI antonov c a m br id g e, m assac h u se t t s, & l ond on, eng l and • 2016 Copyright © 2016 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America First printing Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Antonov, Sergei, 1977– author. Title: Bankrupts and usurers of imperial Russia : debt, property, and the law in the age of Dostoevsky and Tolstoy / Sergei Antonov. Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : Harvard University Press, 2016. | Includes bibliographical references and index. Identifiers: LCCN 2016017879 | ISBN 9780674971486 Subjects: LCSH: Debtor and creditor—Russia—History—19th century. | Credit—Law and legislation—Russia—History—19th century. | Debt—Russia—History—19th century. | Credit—Russia—History—19th century. | Usury—Russia—History—19th century. | Russia—Social conditions—1801-1917. Classification: LCC KLA1946 .A96 2016 | DDC 346.4707/709034—dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016017879 For Katya, Anya, Marina, and Nadya Contents Introduction 1 Part I : T h e C ultur e o f D e bt 1 Usurers’ Tales 2 Nobles and Merchants 35 74 3 The Boundaries of Risk 105 5 Kinship and Family 159 4 Fraud, Property, and Respectability 133 Part I I : D e bt and th e L aw 6 Debtors and Bureaucrats 193 7 In the Pit with Debtors 228 9 Creditors and Debtors in Pre-Reform Courts 284 Conclusion 311 Appendix A: Glossary 317 Appendix B: The Table of Ranks (as of 1850) 319 Appendix C: St. Petersburg Pawnbrokers, 1866 321 8 Intermediaries, Lawyers, and Scriveners 261 viii Contents Appendix D.1: Objectives of Legal Representation, Based on the Powers of Attorney Registered at the Moscow Chamber of Civil Justice 323 Appendix D.2: Legal Representatives Registered at the Moscow Chamber of Civil Justice 325 Appendix E: Agreement to Provide Legal Services, 1865 327 Abbreviations 329 Notes 329 Acknowledgments 373 Index 377 Ba n k r u p t s a n d U s u r er s o f I m p er i a l R u s s i a Introduction R e ad e rs o f T o lst o y may recall the scene from Anna Karenina (1875–1877) in which Count Aleksei Vronsky, Anna’s lover, sat down to organize his financial affairs as was his custom “five or so times a year.” Finding out that his available cash could barely cover a tenth of his debts, he divided all of his obligations into three categories. The first consisted of debts of honor, such as a gambling debt that Vronsky had guaranteed for a fellow officer. These absolutely had to be paid upon demand. The second category, requiring only partial payment, came from Vronsky’s hobby of horse racing and included debts to the oat-seller, the saddle-maker, and “the Englishman”—presumably a horse trainer or a groom. The third and largest category of debts consisted of bills from shopkeepers, hotelkeepers, and a tailor. These Vronsky considered “not even worth a thought.”1 The rule that a card swindler was to be paid, but retail merchants were not, was as “unreasonable” and “not very decent” for Tolstoy the narrator as it was “unquestionable” for Vronsky. Although card and betting debts were not legally enforceable, a gentleman’s entire financial well-being depended on paying them promptly to reassure merchants and moneylenders about his creditworthiness. Failure to do so would become immediately known, and according to Peter Vistengof, the author of popular sketches of Moscow life in the mid-nineteenth century, insolvent gamblers in the city’s fashionable clubs resorted to “most extreme measures” and agreed to exorbitant interest rates for a quick infusion of cash from loan sharks.2 According to an 1861 police investigation of professional gamblers in St. Petersburg, the opinion that card debt was an “affair of honor” had “taken root in the entire society.”3 1 2 Introduction In real-life situations, as opposed to fiction, cultural norms and practices relating to debt—and distinguishing it from sales, gifts, or arbitrary ­exactions—were anything but unquestionable. Gamblers could choose not to pay and be blacklisted by their clubs.4 Yet other debtors, even ones far more powerful than the fictional Vronsky, made a point of paying their vendors, landlords, and domestic servants.5 Credit relations created an intricate pattern of morality, power, and self-interest that was far more complex than the familiar literary and cultural stereotype of Russian nobles being profligate, moneylenders vicious, and merchants backward. Assumptions and decisions about trust- and creditworthy, honorable, respectable, or reasonable behavior, about ways to identify failure and fraud, what to do when a debtor did not pay back, and which creditors were to be repaid first were all highly contingent and vigorously contested both in courts of law and by the exercise of informal influence and patronage. These assumptions were often vague and articulated only in the breach, but enough of them were shared by legally and socially fragmented groups of property owners to link them into a vast, but diffuse, network of personal credit.6 This book re-creates the lost world of ordinary lenders and borrowers, and of not-so-ordinary bankrupts, usurers, and forgers, during the transition from the conservative reign of Nicholas I (1825–1855) to the period of reforms that followed his death and Russia’s defeat in the Crimean War. The new tsar Alexander II (1855–1881) abolished serfdom in 1861 and reorganized the courts and legal procedures in 1864. The new courts featured public adversarial trials, criminal juries, and a newly organized bar. Yet another set of reforms revitalized Russia’s economic and financial structure and its culture of private property, in what contemporaries praised as the emancipation of capital. These included a growing railroad network, the use of joint-stock companies, improvements in the system of taxation, and the rise of private joint-stock banks, which replaced the state-owned banks established in the eighteenth century.7 Historians often point out that the reforms did not solve all of Russia’s problems and indeed created many new ones. Many fundamental but questionable features of Russian life were left untouched. For instance, Russia remained an autocracy until 1905 and officially retained its eighteenth-­ century social hierarchy of legally circumscribed estates; although censorship was relaxed in the 1860s, for the rest of the century lawyers’ courtroom speech remained the only forum for relatively unfettered expression within the empire. Moreover, the Great Reforms did not generate immediate Introduction 3 e­conomic abundance, and an industrial takeoff only began in the 1880s. Nineteenth-century Russia participated in the world market primarily as a source of cereals and other raw materials and as a market for industrial products; while its economy equaled or exceeded that of France, per capita incomes remained low. Interpretations of imperial Russia’s economic and social development usually suggest that one of its underlying—and ultimately fatal—problems was Russians’ alleged inability to create a robust culture of private property ­ownership, including credit, and to fully introduce the rule of law.8 Both capitalism and the law are regarded as either underdeveloped or as importations from Western Europe that failed because they supposedly lacked proper grounding in Russia’s society and historical traditions. The significance of private property and credit for these debates may seem self-evident, even when we discard, as Ekaterina Pravilova has done, a simplistic understanding of private property that equates it with modernity, progress, and political freedom and recognize that “other forms of non-exclusive and non-absolute ownership represented the modern alternative to the Western concept.”9 Yet both personal credit and the culture of private property in imperial Russia are still very poorly understood: existing histories of Russia’s Great Reforms, capitalism, and property structures barely even mention credit and do not at all explain its parameters or how its economic aspects were related to social, political, cultural, and legal developments.10 The only exception is a fascinating specialized literature about the growth of modern banking, which, however, largely overlooks the perspective of the banks’ borrowers and clients and completely neglects the variety of informal interpersonal credit arrangements used by the overwhelming majority of Russians without regular access to banks.11 My central contention is that informal personal credit pervaded all aspects of life in imperial Russia and underpinned its entire regime of private property ownership and its entire social order; and that it relied upon reasonably effective legal arrangements that were established largely for the purpose of protecting private property interests. The law of debt as conceived and as put into practice thus connected the abstract world of money and exchange with the concrete world of families, neighborhoods, and merchandise. Part One of this study focuses on the shared culture of credit of Russia’s propertied groups. It examines the activities of private moneylenders and places personal debt in the context of social and kinship relations and of 4 Introduction cultural attitudes and practices concerning wealth, personal autonomy, and failure. Part Two focuses on engagement between private individuals and the tsarist legal and administrative apparatus, including the police and the courts, legal practitioners, and debtors’ prisons. Both parts are closely related and should be regarded as part of a single narrative because the culture of debt to a large extent operated through legal norms and practices, whereas the law cannot be understood apart from the interests and strategies of individuals who used the courts and served on them. This study is not a work of economic history, although it contains some numbers that are essential for my arguments but are not available from any other published sources; instead, I use perspectives from social, cultural, and legal history as necessary to address a subject as multifaceted as credit. Similarly to several other recent works of Russian history, this study focuses on the lives of ordinary individuals to balance the more familiar top-down narrative of institutions and policies.12 My sources are largely, although not exclusively, legal cases that have not been previously examined, much less published. Most of them were processed in Moscow, imperial Russia’s financial and commercial hub, or in St. Petersburg, its center of government and foreign trade. However, actual transactions and life stories depicted in these cases just a