hikhachev family, at the center of a patriarchal village-based community. Chikhachev’s personal response was to limit his consumption and to improve his estate’s economic condition in partnership with his wife, which enabled the family to continue its lifestyle of rustic nationalism by paying off their substantial inherited debt.52 A similar life strategy was adopted by another middling nobleman and landowner, Nikolai Petrovich Makarov (1810–1890), best remembered today for his Franco-Russian dictionary and for popularizing classical guitar in Russia. Before settling down to a quiet life on his country estate, Makarov left the Imperial Guard to become an entrepreneur and an associate of the liquor tycoon Vasilii Kokorev, and also dabbled in moneylending only to eventually go bankrupt. A graphomaniac like Chikhachev, Makarov claimed 84 The Culture of Debt as one of his life principles, “without extreme necessity, unavoidability, so to say, never to borrow, go into debt. And when it were unavoidable, then do it only in small amounts, and for a short time, and only borrow from my close acquaintances, who know me completely and trust me unconditionally. And then, even if I had to ‘lay down my life’, to repay the debt entirely and on time.” Makarov’s principles vacillated between those of a prudent manager and a miser: he professed to have never gambled and, moreover, to have “constantly denied myself not only expensive pleasures, but also cheap ones.” However, he added: “I did not spare money only for those things, which a decent [or “respectable”] man could not do without.” As a young officer in the Imperial Guard, Makarov once had to stay in bed after a riding accident and was left without food other than milk and bread because the government did not pay the officers on time. According to his own story, it would have been the easiest thing to ask for a small loan from his friendly company commander, who lived right across the staircase. However, Makarov’s principle was that “to ask for a loan from someone who might be the most wonderful person and a comrade, but with whom you were not on [sufficiently familiar terms], this would be so against my rules or concepts, seemed to me so monstrous, that I did not even once consider it.” The commander still forced Makarov to take the money as soon as he learned about his difficulties.53 A few families and individuals seem to have attempted to live entirely without debt. One example is shown in the memoirs of feminist educator Elizaveta Vodovozova, née Tsevkovskaia (1844–1923). After her father, a landowner and a small-town judge in Smolensk province, died in the 1848 cholera epidemic, her mother paid off all of their inherited “town debts,” many of which were incurred to cope with the illness, and retired to her modest country estate with all the children and servants.54 From then on, the family strove to minimize expenses by purchasing as little as possible for cash and producing as much as possible on the estate; most household serfs were sold or forced to work the land. As a result, the family gave up many of the customary attributes of the genteel lifestyle, such as sugar, tea, coffee, and white bread. A lack of suitable clothes and of a decent carriage severely limited the family’s social engagements with nearby landowners and even trips to the local church.55 While Tsevlovskaia’s story is perhaps not common for the better-off ­serfowners, it may have been more familiar to the nearly 84 percent of the ­nineteenth-century gentry who owned few or no serfs. For example, the Nobles and Merchants 85 c­ hildren of Lieutenant Colonel Aleksandr Iukichev, who died in 1851, inherited only twenty-seven serfs, bringing 100 rubles of total income. When the mother needed the money in 1854 to prepare one of her sons for military service, she preferred to do so by accumulating arrears on her taxes rather than by borrowing from private persons. In 1861 she did have to borrow a few hundred rubles from fellow gentry, but already by 1863 she had repaid some of the debt.56 Similarly, deceased Moscow merchants and townspeople whose minor children were placed under court-ordered trusteeship often left a debt-free inheritance, whether they were poor townspeople or merchants worth several thousand rubles in cash.57 This is remarkable even taking into account possible undocumented debt and the custom of paying off one’s debts when old or ill.58 First, creditors would not have hesitated to submit undocumented debt for collection even if they were ultimately unsuccessful.59 Second, if these individuals were indebted during their lifetimes, it is significant that they were able to repay before their deaths. It was far less common, but still possible, even for wealthy merchants to conduct business entirely without using credit, as Vladimir Vasilievich Pegov did in the 1860s, when institutionalized commercial credit had already become far more accessible.60 Perhaps more common were individuals who never aspired to complete self-sufficiency but who avoided excessive debt by paying close attention to managing their properties and regulating their level of luxury consumption.61 Their stories should be seen as counterbalancing those of aristocratic spendthrifts, who in any case were becoming less common as the nineteenth century progressed. In addition to Chikhachev, Makarov, and Bolotov (all three representing the middling gentry), much wealthier and more powerful nobles managed to rebuild their own or their family’s fortunes. For example, Prince Pavel Aleksandrovich Urusov—married to the daughter of Count Sergei Uvarov and therefore expected to maintain a grand lifestyle— in the early 1850s painstakingly worked on clearing his wife’s property, populated with 6,400 serfs, from private debts of 140,000 rubles. Originally the estate was producing no income, but Urusov remortgaged it to the government bank, paid off private debts, and made improvements so that in a few years he was receiving an annual income of 101,000 rubles. In addition to servicing the bank loan and maintaining his wife and children, Urusov used approximately 20,000 rubles each year for improvements. For instance, Urusov claimed to have purchased a steam engine, built two distilleries, and bought elite livestock.62 86 The Culture of Debt Even individuals who were much more heavily burdened with debt had the ability and the will to either repay it completely or make substantial progress toward repayment. One type of documentation showing this is the trusteeship records of the Moscow provincial Noble Trusteeship Board (Moskovskaia Dvorianskaia Opeka), an elected body that appointed guardians for the estates of underage, profligate, and legally insane noble landowners. For example, the guardians over the children of Actual State Councilor Prince Iurii Ivanovich Trubetskoi (d. 1851) encountered debts of almost 600,000 rubles to the Board of Trustees and of over 80,000 rubles to private lenders; by 1857 this debt had shrunk to under 500,000 and just over 50,000 rubles, respectively, with annual maintenance payments made to the prince’s widow and children amounting to tens of thousands of rubles.63 The estate of more than 10,000 serfs brought 84,000 rubles in 1851 and 100,650 rubles in 1857, and it could have allowed an even faster repayment. For example, in 1825, the governor of Moscow placed the young Prince Nikolai Fedorovich Golitsyn under trusteeship because of the “weakness” of his behavior, which involved incurring private debts of over 165,000 rubles. His property was enough to repay his debts in just a few years while at the same time paying Nikolai the staggering annual stipend of 40,000 to 60,000 rubles for his living expenses.64 Another somewhat smaller estate (2,395 serfs) that had belonged to Guard Captain Rakhmanov and was inherited by his legally insane wife, also in 1851, was burdened with over 66,000 rubles in debt to the Moscow Board, and that debt was completely paid off by 1857.65 Nobles whose property was not under trusteeship still routinely made payments on their loans, even when they eventually became bankrupt. Even those debtors who were ill and elderly, like Guard Captain’s widow Anna Bestozheva, refused to deal with debt in the manner of an ostrich: when she petitioned for insolvency in 1870, 6 out of her 21 loans were partially repaid.66 Another widowed debtor, a teacher’s wife, Pevnitskaia, when faced with the persistent legal action of her creditors who were trying to sell off her ­property, managed to fend them off at least from 1847 to 1853 by making partial payments, which she, in turn, could afford by retaining control over her estate.67 Finally, in contradiction to the stereotypical image—immortalized by Tolstoy in Anna Karenina—of an aristocrat disdaining the task of repaying his retail debt to innkeepers and vendors, real-life cases provide examples of meticulous attention to such obligations. For example, the trustees over the estate of the Princess Natalia Saltykova-Golovkina, who died in 1860, specifically gave priority to wages owed to her servants, to unpaid rent for her Nobles and Merchants 87 apartment, and to small debts owed for supplies and provisions.68 It was considered good form and even a point of honor for a gentleman to repay his consumer debts when leaving town. For example, in 1801, the recently enthroned tsar Alexander I commanded that one of the aristocrats who led the coup against the late tsar Paul, Count Peter von Pahlen, leave Petersburg within three days. One of Pahlen’s aides, lawyer and memoirist Vasilii Gettun, recalled that the count was forced to sell his house cheaply but still made sure to set aside 25,000 rubles—a huge amount—to repay his petty debts. However, the clerk entrusted with the task embezzled the money, and the count, already in the carriage and ready for the road, was beset by peddlers and shopkeepers asking for payment. The count opened his personal money-­ chest and paid them in person.69 It is also often assumed that because of the generous terms of government loans, as opposed to high-interest private ones, debtors were not in a hurry to repay them.70 However, claims that the government banks were financially unsteady or that the Russian state propped up the nobility via credit are inaccurate.71 On the contrary, during the difficult years of the Crimean War and the financial crisis, it was the nobility that propped up the state with its loan payments and bank deposits that the state used to bolster its finances.72 Although government-run banks were indeed originally established to support the nobility, and though estate owners in provinces stricken by famine or rebellion received payment holidays, the banks’ chief consideration still was to ensure a steady income stream. Accurate payments were required even by the less successful eighteenth-century banks.73 During the last ten years of its existence, the Moscow Board of Trustees consistently enjoyed a significant positive balance in its accounts; that is, the nobles paid back more than they borrowed, in contradiction to the commonly held view that the government loans were essentially a subsidy for the nobility. According to the Board’s account books, in 1852 it collected 7,397,497 rubles more in principal and interest payments than it issued as loans; in 1854 this figure was 7,489,978; in 1856 it was 8,757,878; and in 1858 it was 5,615,996.74 The Loan Department (Ekspeditsiia zaimov) of the Board routinely transferred up to 10 million rubles at a time to the Deposit Department and to the government directly. Thus, it was actually the gentry that subsidized the government rather than the other way around. A similar pattern existed for commercial credit: the records of the Commercial Bank in St. Petersburg show that out of hundreds of millions of rubles’ worth of vekseli that it purchased at a discount during its existence, bad debt amounted 88 The Culture of Debt