ourt connections. Nor did Bolotov feel the need to go to one of the usurers said to be exploiting and often ruining profligate nobles. As discussed above, high-risk lenders did exist, but most loans took place outside the framework of “capitalist” versus 74 Nobles and Merchants 75 “usurious” credit. Borrowing money inherently involved power and inequality, but not necessarily wasteful consumption or ruthless exploitation. Instead, we find that men and women in all positions in society and the service hierarchy operated in a complex network of relationships, whose size and composition have been so far left unexplored in any systematic way. This lack of attention stands in sharp contrast with the relatively well-known history of banking in imperial Russia, which emphasizes the scale and influence of government-run credit operations before large private banks appeared in the late 1860s. However, individual debt portfolios and official debt registers show that private credit greatly exceeded state credit operations. In other words, private lending was not, as was previously assumed, a somewhat embarrassing appendage to organized credit, but was instead at the center of Russia’s economic and social structures. Moreover, the alleged burden of debt was not as oppressive as is often claimed. Property-owning Russians in the nineteenth century were as a group wealthy enough and prudent enough to evade bankruptcy and financial ruin. Even more importantly, we should not assume that large-scale indebtedness necessarily implies failure and that a debt-free life necessarily means prosperity. Finally, just as in Bolotov’s day, nineteenth-century credit ties combined “horizontal” and “vertical” connections, which were also common in other early-industrial societies. As Laurence Fontaine noted for early-modern France, “far from strengthening the compartmentalization of society, the web of credit cuts through it vertically, links together social groups, institutions and regions in dependencies in which each one finds himself both a lender and a borrower.”2 Russians certainly liked to borrow from individuals of the same rank or social status, but they were unable or unwilling to do so exclusively. Therefore, Russia’s peculiar social and cultural divisions—and especially its robust system of legal estates that persisted until 1917—cannot be said to have fostered a qualitatively different or particularly fragmented system of credit relations, although credit paradoxically divided persons and communities while at the same time connecting them. Private Credit Network Recall that by 1859, two-thirds of all privately owned serfs were mortgaged at state-owned banks for 425.5 million rubles and that the average annual increase of gentry debt to the state in 1829–1859 was 9.3 million. These large 76 The Culture of Debt and well-known figures have obscured the relative size and importance of private credit even for those few historians who were mindful of private lending.3 In contrast to the accounts of state-owned banks, records of private transactions were virtually impossible to study systematically before the post-Soviet opening of the archives and even today require some detective work. The one commonly cited estimate of private indebtedness in the mid-nineteenth century put the total private gentry debt in southern Russian Voronezh province in 1859 at 17 percent of the debt to the state.4 This number came from research by military statisticians who provided surveys of all the provinces and seem to have relied on provincial authorities for their data. In the absence of more reliable data, this estimate has also been used by modern scholars,5 although Nikolai Pavlenko has argued that lending was the single most important non-agricultural activity for eighteenth-century nobles— more important than government contracts, distillery, commerce, or industry.6 A more careful examination indicates that earlier estimates should be greatly revised upward to rival and almost certainly exceed government-­ issued credit. Private lending no longer appears as the marginalized and somewhat disreputable activity portrayed in most existing literature but must be reconceived to be at the heart of the empire’s system of private property and, by extension, its social order. I have estimated the size of Russia’s network of private credit by considering each major type of debt transaction separately, beginning with the three most common varieties: “loan letters,” or ordinary promissory notes originally designed to be used by nobles; mortgage notes that could be used by any owner of real estate; and commercial bills of exchange (vekseli). Loan letters came in two varieties. First, there were “registered” loan letters that enjoyed certain enhanced legal protections. In Moscow, the value of such transactions was 6 to 7 percent of the annual value for government-­ issued loans. For example, in 1850 the Moscow Chamber registered debt transactions for nearly 930,000 rubles, and in 1852 for 1,118,073 rubles; in 1854, at the height of the Crimean War, the amount was down to 636,238 rubles; in 1864, when more convenient bills of exchange became available to all nobles and cheap government credit was no longer available, the partial amount was 606,900 rubles.7 It is important to note, however, that unlike government debt, loan letters could be registered in any provincial capital, and, moreover, county (uezd) courts, such as the Moscow County Court, kept their own debt ledgers—unfortunately poorly preserved—and so the actual number even for “registered” loans must have been much higher. Nobles and Merchants 77 The other variety was the “private” loan letter. These letters were not required to be executed and registered at a court and did not require witnesses, although they did have to be notarized within a week of being signed. The ledgers for this category are not as complete as for the registered loans, and at least in Moscow they were preserved only for the first half of the century. In 1850, there were 40 entries in the amount of 218,685 rubles, and the average and median amounts did not differ from those for registered loan letters.8 There is no indication that a certain type of borrower or lender was likely to favor private letters. This suggests that there was no strong rationale to use one form or the other except convenience or a desire for additional legal protection. The second widely used type of transaction was a loan secured by mortgages. These loans came in two varieties, each with its own set of registers. One set included mortgages of rural properties, most importantly serf-­ populated estates but in some cases also vacant lands that could be owned by merchants or wealthy peasants. In 1862, the amount of such loans recorded by the Moscow Chamber was 1,899,045 rubles.9 Mortgage records are not ideally preserved, but when estimating the amount for the earlier years, it is important to account for the wartime slump of 1854–1856, considering that the Crimean War negatively affected both state-issued mortgage loans and private loan letters. But the impact of the wartime slump should not be exaggerated, considering that government-issued credit was not as readily available to the gentry during the Crimean War, when the state took money from the Board of Trustees to make up for its increased expenditures, and so private lending would have had to make up for the difference. For the pre-1854 period, competing government mortgage loans were more readily available to landowning nobles, potentially reducing the demand for private loans but perhaps not greatly, since the demand for credit was clearly very high. Moreover, private loans secured by land would have been preferable to unsecured loan letters during a time of economic instability. Mortgage loans could also be secured by various urban properties, including houses, shops, and even empty plots of land. These seem to have been comparable to the value of registered loan letters, based on the evidence of 1850, when such mortgages amounted to 1,158,587.95 rubles.10 In 1855, the amount was 518,843 rubles; both ledgers appear to be incomplete.11 Considering that 1855 was much worse for Russia’s credit than 1854 because of the Crimean War, it is remarkable that the amounts for urban mortgages issued in 1855 were only slightly less than amounts for loan letters for 1854 78 The Culture of Debt (636,238 rubles). This type of loan would have been proportionately larger for Moscow and other large cities with many eligible buildings, such as Petersburg, Warsaw, and Odessa. The third major type of documented debt was the veksel, or commercial bill of exchange. Before 1862, the use of vekseli was restricted by law to individuals enrolled in a merchant guild, to peasants with commercial licenses, and several categories of townspeople, whether or not they were engaged in commerce. Already in the early eighteenth century, “the overwhelming majority of merchants conducted their commercial operations on credit.”12 One way to estimate the volume of commercial credit in the nineteenth century is through the operations of the State Commercial Bank, which discounted the bills issued by individual merchants. In 1853 the bank discounted bills for 25.8 million silver rubles; during the Crimean War, this amount decreased (under 20 million), but in 1859, due to the post-war economic upturn and inflation, it reached 47.7 million rubles. The discounting operation was primarily conducted in the bank’s Petersburg office, the only office permitted to purchase the bills using the bank’s privately deposited funds and not just its relatively small principal capital.13 Yet another way to estimate the volume of commercial credit is by looking at the great annual fair at Nizhnii Novgorod, which the imperial-era economist Vladimir Bezobrazov described as a crucial element of the Moscowbased credit system. The fair served as a great credit exchange for merchants and industrialists coming from all over European Russia, furnishing a unique forum for borrowers and lenders to meet face to face, conduct business, and evaluate each other’s further prospects.14 According to ethnographer and novelist Pavel Melnikov (Pecherskii), ready cash was a rarity at the Nizhnii fair, “where almost all commercial deals are executed on credit.”15 He estimated that ready cash available at the fair was sufficient to cover less than 17 percent of the merchandise traded and that less than 7 percent of the 40 to 50 million rubles of actual overall sales were made for cash during the economic downturn of the 1840s.16 In sum, even allowing that some bills of exchange never made it to Petersburg or Nizhnii Novgorod, the annual credit operations of Russian merchants were far more extensive than those of the much more numerous nobles. In addition to the three major varieties of debt documents, there were several other forms that were not specifically contemplated by imperial legislation and, moreover, are still more difficult to estimate because the evidence is very fragmentary. One category included the “safekeeping receipt” Nobles and Merchants 79 (sokhrannaia raspiska), which, as discussed already, employed the legal fiction that lenders entrusted their borrowers with a sum of money in exchange for a fee. This form was favored by professional and high-risk lenders. A connected type of operation were the pawnshops and pawnbrokers, who preferred to document their transactions as sales. One estimate for their ­business is available for the licensed (glasnye) pawnshops in Petersburg in the early 1870s: 3 million rubles in loans annually.17 Another distinct category of debt was informally documented or not documented at all, including oral transactions and informal receipts that occupied an ambiguous in-between zone. According to Melnikov’s calculation for the Nizhnii Novgorod fair, such debt accounted for up to half of all transactions th