ing with a tiny estate she acquired—through the noble enterprise of collecting interest [blagorodnyi protsent] and selling the items that were pawned to her—over 4,000 serfs and 18 million assignat rubles that her son inherited. If His Excellency, utilizing his hereditary talent, acquired the same fame through his own exploits, then he has even less reason to insult through slander a man who cannot in a conscionable and legal manner be convicted or accused of any action contrary to the honor of a nobleman.68 In this account, the general’s mother appears as a real-life—and far more successful—counterpart to the fictional Arina Petrovna who was so eloquently imagined by Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin in his famous novel, The Golovlyov Family (1875–1880). Arina Petrovna created a fortune through the clever manipulation of landed property only to lose everything through her inability to manage her family relations.69 We can also recall another gentry capitalist fortune, this time in real life, created by the powerful and eccentric Agathoclea Aleksandrovna Poltoratskaia (1737–1822) and developed by her son Fedor Markovich Poltoratskii (1764–1858).70 The subject of aristocratic usury in tsarist and imperial Russia is still poorly understood, for obvious reasons: the aristocrats themselves were not eager to publicize such activities. However, moneylending seems to have strengthened and sometimes created aristocratic patronage networks centered on the Usurers’ Tales 57 great princely families. For example, the fabulously wealthy Morozov boyar family in the second half of the seventeenth century was involved in extensive credit operations with their peers and subordinates alike.71 While initially merchants rather than aristocrats, the Stroganov family spearheaded Russia’s early modern expansion into the Urals and Siberia and built a fortune vastly exceeding that of princes and boyars. While their trading and salt-mining operations are well documented, less well known is the fact that the original wealth that allowed them to undertake this expansion arose in the late fifteenth century from moneylending.72 The legendary Yakov Bruce (1669–1735), one of Peter the Great’s closest collaborators, was a wealthy and active usurer.73 Yet another famous example is Prokofii Akinfievich Demidov (1710–1788), from the clan of industrialists and merchants, who became a prominent agent and sponsor of the Russian Enlightenment. After selling most of his factories and mines, he financed his fabulous charitable and scientific projects with income from lending to Russia’s top aristocrats and Catherine the Great herself.74 In the nineteenth century, Prince Boris Nikolaevich Yusupov (1794–1849) was remembered for liberating his serfs. However, he was also a practical man who acquired vast new properties and, according to the whistleblower Prince Peter Dolgorukov, vastly increased his fortune by secretly engaging in usury: “Thanks to his noble profession as a usurer, Prince Boris had an office in Petersburg, and in Moscow he employed as his agent the famous industrialist Gavrila Volkov, who told me once: ‘The late Prince Boris Nikolaevich was a commercial man; he and I never missed; we shot fat black grouse and small snipe alike.’”75 Unlike even wealthy non-aristocratic lenders, individuals with famous surnames could feel themselves quite safe from police harassment. For example, Prince Fedor Andreevich Golitsyn, despite his modest rank of collegiate assessor, in 1863 felt free to be cheeky with gendarmes and with the tsar’s own aide-de-camp, General Boris Perovsky, without any repercussions whatsoever.76 Compared to the likes of the Yusupovs, Stroganovs, and Golitsyns, the branch of the Buturlins discussed here were nouveau-riches in terms of their wealth, if not their pedigree, illustrating the onion-like character of Russia’s networks of power and property ownership.77 High service rank and entrepreneurship often went hand-in-hand, and General Buturlin’s youthful bravery on the battlefield quickly turned into a lucrative expertise in army logistics, especially food supply. Considering the reputation of Nicholaevan-era supply 58 The Culture of Debt officers for embezzling on a massive scale, this aspect of Buturlin’s service must have conveniently complemented his moneylending activities. Interestingly, General Dubensky freely admitted Chestnokov’s allegation, while attempting to present it in a favorable light: “His Excellency, as far as I know, by issuing loans out of his capital, truly benefits many persons with insufficient means, in return for the legally permissible interest or even without any interest at all, but in any event not according to the rules of malicious “debtofacturers” [Dubensky’s neologism rendered in the original Russian as dolgopromyshlenniki].78 We do know that at least some of Buturlin’s operations extended to Moscow, since a random look into that city’s debt registers indicates that in 1854 he issued 5,400 rubles, unsecured by any collateral to retired Lieutenant Sergei Korob’in, and in 1860 loaned 25,000 rubles to retired civil servant Prince Aleksei Golitsyn, secured by a masonry house in the prestigious Tverskaia precinct of Moscow.79 In his defense, the younger Buturlin portrayed himself as an innocent victim, claiming that he only received approximately 15,000 rubles from Chestnokov and Mironov and wrote the letters that inculpated him at the dictation of his creditors, who wanted additional security in the form of a threat of criminal prosecution. However, Buturlin did admit that he signed the letters and that he did lie about his age. This admission was potentially damning to the young officer, although it did not necessarily help Chestnokov, who by law was not entitled to rely on someone’s claim to be of age without requiring additional proof. The only factor that worked in the young Buturlin’s favor, aside from his father’s influence, was his youth and lack of experience in financial matters. General Buturlin asserted that his son would have been too illiterate to compose the letters in question. Colonel Rakeev, the Corps of Gendarmes’s expert on financial crime, agreed: “Chestnokov’s loan to Buturlin was formalized through receipts and letters of such content that could only be composed by Chestnokov who was skilled in business affairs, and not by Buturlin who barely possessed the ability of simply expressing his thoughts on paper.”80 General Dubensky agreed, reporting that Buturlin was “unable to compose such letters even to save himself from a death sentence or from a horrible death by starvation.” Rakeev also wrote that “one only had to be present during one of the face-to-face meetings of Chestnokov and Mironov with Buturlin . . . to become completely convinced morally in the fraudulent scheme of these persons, with which Mr. Chestnokov in particular had entangled the thoughtless young man.” All this sounds plausible enough, Usurers’ Tales 59 although one might still wonder how an officer of the Imperial Guard, no matter how stupid and poorly educated, would have agreed to sign a letter openly admitting dishonorable, as well as criminal, behavior, if he were entirely blameless. After collecting the evidence, the commission faced the difficult task of drawing its conclusions. Its reasoning curiously resembled that of Chestnokov, again highlighting the tension between the morality of business transactions and the requirements of the law that was incapable of ensuring it. Part of the problem was that according to the rules of evidence that existed before the court reform of 1864, a conviction required documentary proof, personal confession, or testimony from at least two witnesses. But because the Third Section was not a court of law, it was not officially bound by these rules and was free to employ circumstantial evidence and rely on “moral conviction.” Both the documents and Buturlin’s personal admission unambiguously spoke in Chestnokov’s favor. However, while there were no “direct factual proofs” of Buturlin’s position, there was “enough basis,” in the opinion of the gendarmes, “to form a moral conviction that Buturlin’s loan did not take place in the way described by Chestnokov.” Conversely, even before they gathered all the facts, the gendarmes became sure that Chestnokov’s guilt “cannot be denied, although it is impossible to prove with positive facts.” Colonel Rakeev likewise argued in his memo that “it is impossible not to form a moral conviction” that General Buturlin’s complaint was well founded. In order to justify their “moral conviction,” the gendarmes then conducted a logical analysis of the kind that would be perfectly acceptable for any criminal investigation after the 1864 reform, or indeed in our modern day, but that the system of formal proofs was specifically designed to prevent.81 The first basis for the “moral conviction” of the gendarmes was that they thought it implausible that Chestnokov would lend 120,000 rubles without first gathering information about Buturlin’s finances, checking whether he really did have the authorization from his father, and which property he was intending to purchase. This was customary even for relatively small loans of only a few hundred rubles. However, Chestnokov replied to this argument that he knew that General Buturlin had a fortune of 10,000,000 rubles, and so it was perfectly reasonable to entrust 120,000 rubles to his son, who swore on his honor as an officer in the Chevalier Guard, and who was not asking for a loan for the purposes of carousing but in order to fulfill his father’s commission.82 Debt transactions by other individuals the gendarmes suspected of being predatory usurers were all exponentially smaller in amount 60 The Culture of Debt (usually just a few thousand rubles), suggesting that Chestnokov did in fact think that he was lending to the older Buturlin. This entire exchange is yet another indication of the deeply conflicted mindset of Russian elites on the issue of credit: while ostensibly upholding an officer’s honor, the gendarmes at the same time assumed that this honor was worth nothing and had to be carefully checked. Second, a key argument that damned Chestnokov in the eyes of the gendarmes was that when they searched his house, they found account books in which he recorded the tiniest details of his household expenses but not an account book that detailed his financial dealings. Chestnokov claimed that he never had one. The gendarmes did not believe this, and they were no doubt correct to conclude that Chestnokov had hidden or destroyed it. Nonetheless, other legal cases from the mid-nineteenth century show that Russia’s merchants and entrepreneurs never revealed their real account books to police investigators or bankruptcy boards, if possible, but doctored the accounts or claimed to have lost them or never to have kept them in the first place. They did this even under threat of the criminal prosecution mandatory for insolvent merchants who did not keep account books according to prescribed forms. While Chestnokov was neither a merchant nor a bankrupt, and possibly not a professional lender either, he must have shared that same concern with preserving his partners’ and clients’ business secrets. Third, the gendarmes reasonably thought it suspicious that Chestnokov could not provide the dates and numbers of the bank deposit receipts that he supposedly issued to Buturlin. It was not plausible that someone would keep 120,000 rubles at home without writing down this information somewhere in the event the notes were lost or stolen, because the bank would then be unable to render the money. Suspiciously, Chestnokov did keep detailed information for stock certificates that he also owned, which did not require the same precautions as anonymous bank notes. The rest of the gendarmes’ reasoning on this point was more questionable. They visited the Sokhrannaia kazna (the government bank used by