nokov owned a mansion near the Kharlamov Bridge in a prestigious area of Petersburg, worth approximately 150,000 rubles. His overall fortune was said to be 500,000 rubles. This was much less than General Buturlin’s estate, which Chestnokov thought to reach 10 million rubles, but it was still sufficient to maintain a modest provincial noble family in comfort for at least a century. Chestnokov’s level of wealth should be ­compared to that of other prosperous moneylenders, such as Moscow’s Second Lieutenant Aleksandr Tersky who died in 1856, leaving his heirs with 16,000 rubles in cash and 60,000 in debt papers.59 A smaller lender, Nikolai Popov, was an honorary citizen from the small town of Kashira who inherited around 15,000 rubles from his father and invested it in loans, which allowed him to live more like a well-dressed Parisian rentier than a Muscovite merchant, spending his days courting pretty seamstresses and taking strolls in central Moscow.60 Compared to other lenders who ended up on the Third Section’s list during the investigation, Chestnokov’s portfolio was large in its overall amount (43,000 rubles) but included only six transactions, unlike the port­ folios held by real “usurers” such as Tersky or Chestnokov’s alleged partner Mironov, which were composed of dozens of transactions. Moreover, while the Third Section list of 38 alleged usurers included 20 portfolios over 10,000 rubles, none of them came even close to the extravagant sum that Chestnokov allegedly loaned to Buturlin. This suggests that Chestnokov was either an investor rather than a professional moneylender or that he loaned his money through Mironov or another front man, which was not at all unusual. The Third Section’s 1866 investigation of Petersburg pawnbrokers showed that out of 28 lenders—all of them of moderate wealth—5 were known to operate with other people’s money.61 Because it was considered to be unethical for Russia’s traditional merchants to sell other merchants’ bills of exchange to the Commercial Bank, they used brokers who dealt with the bank directly.62 Highly ranked aristocrats who wished to engage in business frequently operated through merchants: Prince Boris Yusupov did so in the nineteenth century, and Catherine II’s top financial and judicial official, Prince Aleksandr Viazemskii, preserved his reputation for exceptional honesty by conducting business through the wealthy usurer and tax farmer Vasilii Zlobin.63 Even in the late nineteenth century, when Russia already had a Usurers’ Tales 53 modern banking system, individual investors were still known to use go-­ betweens to place their money.64 Aside from his wealth, Chestnokov was known to be widowed and living with a lady friend and housekeeper (khoziaika), “a young and very interesting person.” He also had a married daughter and a son who was a for-pay military cadet. Chestnokov had ambitions for his son, but because he did not qualify for one of the government-paid spots usually reserved for sons of officers, he most likely was not fully accepted as part of the service establishment. Finally, Chestnokov also cared for three small, orphaned nephews and had a brother with whom he was close enough to entrust him with submitting legal documents on his behalf. Everyone agreed that Chestnokov lived modestly and was not involved in any “questionable affairs,” although he was rumored to be worried about his loan to Buturlin because he feared that “this matter has been reported to the Sovereign in a bad light.” He was also said to be a “rather efficient [del’nyi] and quite clever man, of strict character.” Another report that was prepared by General Dubensky, the military’s representative, also described Chestnokov as an “old dealer [delets—which has a negative connotation, unlike the positive del’nyi], with practical experience and nimbleness acquired at different times in different positions.” The only— most likely false—rumor sullying Chestnokov’s personal life was that he at one point had his son imprisoned for some minor prank, and that the young man died while at a penal company (arestanskie roty). In short, after spending over twenty years in St. Petersburg, Chestnokov was positioned in a dense web of personal, family, and business relationships, much like Moscow’s Stepan Shilovskii, mentioned above, and completely unlike the stereotypical image of a miser or a usurer found in contemporary fiction. One of this image’s central motifs—also found in Western European literature, such as in Dickens’s Nicholas Nickleby—was the mistreatment of the miser’s own family members. For instance, Ostrovskii’s Krutitskii starved himself and his wife for twenty years, and Nekrasov’s Korchinskii caused his wife to run away with their son. Whereas the real-life Chestnokov obviously took great care of his family; it is remarkable in fact to see the popular rumor imposing the familiar cultural stereotype around his actual person.65 After the commission gathered this preliminary information, it interviewed all the parties involved. Surprising both to General Dubensky, who advocated more forceful action, and to the modern reader, who would have expected it, the gendarmes did not conduct any sudden raids or seizures, explaining that they did not want to be punished in the event that Chestnokov 54 The Culture of Debt ended up winning the case and giving Chestnokov and the others sufficient time to remove any inculpating evidence. Only after preliminary interviews of Chestnokov and Buturlin proved inconclusive did the commission ask the chief of the Corps of Gendarmes for special permission to search the targets’ houses. The men were never detained aside from a prohibition against leaving the city, and at least Chestnokov was able to study the materials of the investigation freely at his home and make extracts from these materials to prepare his own responses. This treatment was radically different from that of political suspects, who were reasonably well-housed and fed but often not even informed of the nature of the charges against them or given much opportunity to defend themselves. At one point the gendarmes wanted to inspect Chestnokov’s notes, but he abruptly refused, stuffed them in his pockets, and even allegedly shouted abuse. Again the gendarmes did not insist any further. The restraint of the gendarmes is surprising because while Chestnokov was wealthy and experienced in legal matters, he was by no means aristocratic or particularly well connected, and there was no obvious reason to tolerate any behavior on his part that they thought to be inappropriate. Needless to say, this restraint is also surprising in light of the stereotypical image of the Russian gendarmes that persists in fiction and academic literature alike and does not encompass much respect for personal privacy. Before the investigation proceeded any further, merchants Mironov and Lipgardt announced that Buturlin never owed them any money at all, although Buturlin himself said that he issued them debt notes for 120,000 rubles. Their behavior shows how moneylenders’ strategies when engaging with tsarist bureaucrats varied along with their social standing and connections in the official world: even though Mironov and Lipgardt lost any possibility of collecting this debt, they were hoping to avoid further trouble with the powerful Buturlin family. Shoemaker Goze, however, held out, determined to collect his much smaller—and, more likely, genuine— debt of 8,700 rubles and maintaining that he had friendly relations with Buturlin, despite the difference in their official rank. Chestnokov, likewise, was fully intent on collecting his debt of 121,500 rubles plus interest; we may suppose that if Buturlin had not actually owed him a large sum of money, Chestnokov would have probably given up his claim at that point. As discussed throughout this book, it was a common practice for provincial governors or Corps of Gendarmes officers to attempt to broker a settlement: such attempts are usually carefully recorded in case files. Nor was it Usurers’ Tales 55 unusual for lenders to reject such proposals. In the Chestnokov case, the gendarmes seem never to have attempted to broker a deal but proceeded directly to assemble their case. The procedures employed do not resemble the high-handed arbitrary imposition commonly associated with the Third Section and pre-reform justice in general. Officers carefully recorded and compared testimony from both sides, incorporating the results of searches—when these were finally ordered—and face-to-face meetings (known as ochnye stavki) between the parties, as well as comments from General Dubensky, who provided something of an outsider’s perspective on the investigation. Chestnokov also submitted several carefully crafted petitions to the chief of the Corps ­ of Gendarmes Dolgorukov and to the tsar personally. His petitions to Dolgorukov eloquently and emotionally appealed to the prince’s “hereditary” love of truth and loyal service to the throne, even invoking the historic Prince Yakov Dolgorukov, who fearlessly argued with Peter the Great himself; Chestnokov’s petitions to the tsar appealed to his image as the enlightened reformer and liberator of the serfs. As to Chestnokov’s specific arguments, he categorized them as legal and “moral.” First, he raised the stakes by formally accusing Buturlin of fraud. This offense—unlike usury—was punished by penal settlement in Siberia and would be easy to prove according to Russia’s rules of evidence since Buturlin himself admitted it in writing. As a military officer, Buturlin would be demoted to the ranks and deprived of his noble status. Russian law set the age of majority for criminal cases at seventeen, and so he would be fully responsible for any criminal offense, even though he was still underage for the purposes of civil law.66 The “moral” issues of the case seemed to be more important to the Third Section because no one disputed that the law was on Chestnokov’s side. He argued that, having lived in Petersburg for twenty years, he only had financial dealings with seven individuals who were all questioned by the gendarmes and did not report anything negative about him. If he really was an unprin­ cipled usurer, it would be impossible for Petersburg courts, police, and notaries to retain no records of his dealings with his borrowers, unless (we might add) he followed the practice of the time and used a front man for his transactions. Instead, Chestnokov claimed that his main occupation was “scholarship.” Merchant Mironov, he claimed, was actually Buturlin’s accomplice, and it was the two of them who formed the real “gang” that fleeced him. Chestnokov’s account portrays Buturlin as a young aristocratic swindler, 56 The Culture of Debt c­ uriously resembling Moscow’s infamous Jacks of Hearts Club of the 1870s, a loose network of swindlers and forgers, many of them from upper-class families, who often chose wealthy merchants and moneylenders as their victims.67 Chestnokov’s narrative also included a fascinating personal attack against General Buturlin, whom he accused of encouraging his son to borrow money irresponsibly while underage, knowing that his loans would be uncollectable, and of inducing his creditors to keep silent, “knowing the moral principles and powerful connections of the Buturlins.” Eventually the younger Buturlin lost all credit with moneylenders and turned to open fraud. General Buturlin’s behavior, according to Chestnokov, was in line with his “family trade—to loan money to private persons at interest.” In other words, he accused General Buturlin of actually being a much bigger usurer than himself. Chestnokov also claimed that usury was the Buturlins’ hereditary occupation: Such huge profits, I think, even his mother, Yekaterina Pavlovna Buturlina, never received; and this woman, as everyone knows, acquired too large of a reputation in this occupation, to which her son was also called. Beginn