keev was so eager to protect Margarit by personally vouching for him, but it is important to remember that although gendarmes were not permitted to incur debts, they sometimes did; moreover, the position number thirty-five was suspiciously omitted from the list. It therefore appears that lists such as this were far from routine inventories but instead encapsulated intricate strategizing and negotiation among the individuals involved. The second list from 1859 included 68 individuals (four women), who allegedly “participated in various fraudulent activities and in enticing young men to issue debt documents for large amounts.”30 As in the first list, these lenders’ legal identities were split equally between nobles/civil servants (32) and the urban and commercial estates, including merchants (10), craftsmen, townspeople, and foreigners (20), as well as 5 peasants. It is important to explain, however, why only 17 of the lenders had also featured in the first list. One possibility is that the investigation was haphazard. Another explanation is that the second list may have specifically targeted lenders of particular backgrounds, including relatively high-ranking lenders—for instance, a major general, a colonel, and a state councilor—and craftspeople, such as three tailors, three carriage makers, a glove maker, a barber, and a turner’s son. Finally, a third list preserved in the Third Section archive included 81 lenders and was compiled in 1867.31 Uniquely, it included each lender’s 44 The Culture of Debt religion, age, and home address, as well as notes about their conduct and character. Unlike the earlier lists, it featured 23 women (38 percent), either because women were more active in moneylending after the financial liberalization of the 1860s or because the 1859 investigation chose not to prosecute women. Of the 64 lenders whose religion was listed, there were 39 Orthodox (plus at least 8 more, judging by their names), 10 Lutherans, 8 Jews, 4 Catholics, 2 Reformed, and 1 Old Believer. Thus, at least in the 1860s, we cannot claim that any particular ethnic or religious minority was disproportionately represented among the lenders, given that the Orthodox comprised at least 58 percent of the group. As to the lenders’ age, 82 percent of them were between 28 and 51 years, with the average age being 39. Only 3 lenders were over 60, making the stereotypical image of an old miserly usurer a rarity. It is also remarkable that only one lender on this list also appeared in the lists from 1859, suggesting that the careers of those moneylenders who happened to attract the Third Section’s attention did not exceed seven years. In addition to statistical data, the Third Section’s lists of usurers contained information about moral character. This consisted of several elements. One was the lenders’ “reliability” (blagonadezhnost’), which in the context of nineteenth-­century Russia generally meant political loyalty but here must have also referred to the lenders’ willingness to cooperate with police. Out of the eighty-one lenders from the 1867 list, seven were marked as “reliable,” including goldsmith Karl Georg Falk—incidentally the only lender also found on the 1859 list—who was accused of fraud in 1853 and placed under permanent police surveillance, but from that point on had acted in an “excellent and reliable manner in all respects.” Ten of the eighty-one lenders were identified as having been involved in illegal activity. This included complaints from the borrowers, accepting stolen property as collateral, engaging in “dirty speculations” and being swindlers (aferist), embezzling the collateral, and even—in the case of townsman Vasilii Stabrovskii—being a notorious pickpocket. Townsman Alexander Anglin was known to immediately pawn the collateral entrusted to him to other lenders. Four lenders either intended to go out of business or were said to be too poor to act as lenders. Finally, the lenders’ personal lives was also important. Being a family member of another usurer was a minus, whereas having family or owning property appears to have been a plus: for instance, noblewoman Yuvalia Baranovskaia had a son and a daughter, and two lenders owned a house. In a different list of pawnbrokers from 1866, merchant Boris Zakharov lived with Usurers’ Tales 45 a mistress, Mr. Miller had a family, and merchant Kon (Kohn) was married.32 Retired civil servants Shtein and Kuzmin had nice furnishings but bad business reputations. This interest in the lenders’ ­character—paralleled by similar inquiries for the debtors they imprisoned—therefore served to ground the morality of market transactions in such characteristics as personal “reliability,” crime-free life, and personal conduct. Taken together, these lists of course only show us what the Third Section chose to see, but they indicate remarkable variety among Petersburg moneylenders and pawnbrokers in terms of their social position and volume of operations, as well as suggesting huge turnover among practitioners during the financial revolution of the 1860s and possibly a large influx of women.33 Above all, these lists must be conceptualized not so much as mechanical accumulations of data but as products of active, behind-the-scenes negotiation and influence-peddling, likely accompanied by bribes to police agents who nevertheless may not have held all the trump cards. The stakes were high: one could be shortlisted as a particularly harmful usurer, avoid the list altogether, or even be characterized favorably in the report to higher-ups. Gendarme surveillance can thus be regarded as a variation of the more familiar procedure of a lender or rating agency checking a borrower’s credit, except that here lenders rather than the borrowers were scrutinized. The gendarmes themselves acknowledged that their surveillance techniques were far from perfect and blamed their instructions, which limited investigations “solely to malicious [zlovrednye] usurers and especially those of them who entice young men into debt instead of extending the investigation to all usurers without any distinction.”34 In 1859, the previously mentioned Colonel Rakeev complained that such instructions hamstrung his efforts, since it was impossible to determine a priori which of the lenders were malicious usurers. Moreover, the procedure of summoning moneylenders to the Third Section for questioning did not produce any results since none of them were willing to admit any wrongdoing. Nor was it possible to question the debtors unless they first submitted a complaint, which very few were willing to do out of fear of “losing credit among the usurers.”35 For example, during an 1859 investigation, only two debtors were willing to complain, and the gendarmes could do nothing because they did not have evidence to initiate a formal criminal investigation. Colonel Rakeev argued that a much better way to collect information would be through personal contacts with usurers or with their relatives and acquaintances.36 At least once, in 1866, the Third Section acted on this advice 46 The Culture of Debt by sending an officer to 28 pawnshops in Petersburg, offering the same watch—worth 35 rubles—as collateral and recording the terms of the loans at each shop.37 The agent compiling the report noted that there were so many pawnbrokers in Petersburg that it was impossible to list them all, but there were more than 20 who regularly advertised themselves in newspapers, whereas all the others worked without any publicity. Out of 28 lenders, 6 (21 percent) were women, and their social background was, as before, extremely diverse, as listed in Appendix C. Only 14 of them were also on the above-mentioned list from 1867, which was so large and well detailed that this lack of continuity suggests high turnover more than it does the likelihood of buying one’s way out of the list. This list is fascinating not simply for its attention to the lenders’ personal circumstances and character but also for the fact that it is the only document that provides anything like objective data for the monthly interest rates actually charged by Russian lenders.38 It varied from 5 to 12 percent, with 10 being the norm (i.e., the most commonly charged amount as well as the average and the median). The average loan for the 35-ruble watch offered as collateral by the agent was 11.6 rubles, with 10 rubles being the median and the most commonly offered amount. Sixteen of the lenders offered a “grace period,” presumably referring to a period during which the interest was not compounded, ranging from one month to “without limit.” Superficially, these conditions appear to be rather harsh, but not when compared to other high-risk or payday operations in other countries in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, which charged astronomical rates.39 More importantly, this exercise by the Third Section indicates that even this unregulated pawnbroking in the age of Russia’s financial liberalization and transformation operated as a market, within a range of commonly accepted terms and conditions, and was therefore a far cry from the predatory free-for-all that is presumed in existing literature. Whereas the gendarmes were specifically looking for professional highrisk lenders, a more systematic examination suggests that such lenders were completely outnumbered by one-time investors seeking a better return on their money than the low interest rate paid by government-owned banks or those helping relatives or friends. Looking at the debt registers at the Moscow Civil Chamber, we may suppose that individuals issuing multiple loans in a given year were more likely to be “usurers” than those recorded only once. For example, there were only 5 such lenders out of a sample of 138 in 1852, 7 out of 122 in 1854, and 2 out of 55 in 1864.40 For the purposes of comparison, a loan letter register from the backwoods town of Temnikov (Tambov province) in Usurers’ Tales 47 the first three months of 1820 shows that out of 35 creditors, four made more than one loan, including one person who made six loans.41 In-town mortgage loans were more attractive for professional moneylenders: for instance, in 1855, 11 out of 100 lenders loaned more than once (and 11 out of 132 in 1860, though only 3 out of 97 for rural mortgages in 1862).42 As a comparison, transactions between close relatives were more common: 12 in 1852, 14 in 1854, and 8 in 1864 for loan letters. In the early 1700s, debt registers from Moscow and several other towns also contained very few repeat lenders.43 All population classes were thought to be vulnerable to predatory lenders and need police protection. The police paid particular attention to usurers catering to young aristocratic borrowers, whose relatives’ complaints were likely to trigger investigations. Lenders to the rich had to tread carefully, unless of course they were aristocrats themselves. But the problem was not thought to be limited to the upper classes. The agents during the 1866 investigation noted that “as regards the victims of such usury, they are primarily the middle class [srednii klass], i.e., petty officials and poor individuals who barely get by through work and are induced to make such loans mainly because pawning property in the government-run pawn shop is fraught with difficulties and takes a long time.”44 Lenders to the laboring classes usually evaded notice but were sometimes targeted, no doubt due to their religion (if they were Jews), vulnerability, and lack of literacy and social connections. Formal anti-usury legislation was also available against lenders who failed to take adequate legal precautions. For centuries, European laws regulating usury vacillated between prohibiting all interest, setting a legally permissible rate, and banning only practices viewed as predatory, especially compounding the interest. As Western attitudes to credit became more permissive by the late eighteenth century, usury laws were graduall