 Chestnokov) and checked to see which particular 10,000-ruble notes were presented for redemption in 1857, on the premise that Buturlin would redeem the notes as soon as he received them from Chestnokov. However, the gendarmes failed to check whether any 10,000-ruble notes were redeemed in 1858, which would be likely since Chestnokov made his loan at the very end of 1857. The gendarmes also tried to check Chestnokov’s story by looking at his calculations of interest due on the notes, whose amount would help to Usurers’ Tales 61 determine the day on which the notes were originally issued and thus could identify the particular notes that Chestnokov allegedly issued to Buturlin. In this case, it was General Dubensky, the military’s representative on the commission, who pointed out the idiocy of the gendarmes: such a calculation would require 164 billion mathematical operations. The gendarmes also doubted that Chestnokov would have issued Buturlin the entire 120,000 rubles that he was trying to collect. They reexamined the information that General Buturlin sent two of his agents to buy out Chestnokov’s claim against his son. Both agents testified that Chestnokov at one point offered to settle for 75,000 rubles. The commission made much of this evidence to conclude that Chestnokov did not actually issue the entire 120,000 rubles if he agreed to be repaid a smaller amount. This reasoning is completely spurious: many creditors in the mid-nineteenth century would have been perfectly happy to get almost two-thirds of an original investment that had turned sour. Something like 25 percent was more common and 10 percent not unheard of.83 The gendarmes also thought that Chestnokov would not have agreed to lend to Buturlin without expecting a “considerable reward for his risk”—that is, including a huge interest payment as part of the official debt document. In the same vein, Colonel Rakeev estimated that Chestnokov would have required a 300 percent interest payment for the risk. This sounds reasonable in light of what we know about credit practices in Russia at the time. That said, it is notable—though Chestnokov himself did not make the point— that the gendarmes calculated the 300 percent interest to be the market price of the risk of lending to someone as irresponsible as Buturlin yet still held it against him. Another point Chestnokov did not bring up but perhaps should have is that these risk calculations made sense for a loan to the unreliable younger Buturlin but not if Chestnokov actually did think that he was lending money to his capitalist father. Taken together, the four arguments set out by the investigation of the gendarmes sound spurious enough to make one wonder whether the allegedly archaic system of formal proofs could be more fair in this case than the free evaluation of evidence that was practiced by the gendarmes and that would no doubt be similar to arguments by a defense attorney had Buturlin come before a jury trial in a post-reform court.84 At the end of the investigation, the commission still could not decide which of the two protagonists had committed a crime, finding “thoughtlessness” on one side and “unscrupulousness” on the other. All of the logical 62 The Culture of Debt analysis discussed above did not add anything to the body of legally admissible evidence (uliki), which showed the case in a completely different light than the inherent sense of justice of the gendarmes or, alternately, their duty to please their superiors and especially the tsar. The commission was therefore determined to avoid a full-scale trial because they were certain it would end in Chestnokov’s favor. The most amazing, though not elegant, articulation of this legal and political dilemma came from General Dubensky, who argued that “if we had a trial by jury, then it is certain that it would have taken into deep consideration the feelings of the same moral conviction, and would have loudly thrown stones at Chestnokov and Mironov, condemning them as notorious usurers and would protect Buturlin.”85 Dubensky then concluded that a trial by jury, which in our country is replaced by the Third Section, would find that . . . the thread of this entire case combines completely in the hand of Chestnokov, who elected to satisfy his and [his accomplices’] avarice with the most reprehensible type of usury: intentionally enticing a member of a noble Russian family into fraud and dishonor that can be nullified in no other way than through the exemplary punishment of the usurers, by applying to them with Supreme confirmation of that article of the law that commands to remove such persons from the capitals through administrative proceedings.”86 [emphasis added] In retrospect, the analysis and calculations of the gendarmes do not rule out the possibility that Chestnokov really was a professional moneylender who took the usual precautions when dealing with a young aristocrat; however, to a modern observer they raise the strong likelihood that he was an investor who occasionally dabbled in lending but in this case thought he was dealing with the famous capitalist General Buturlin and believed his son’s word of honor. But ultimately the “true” occupation of Chestnokov is not as important for the purposes of this study as showing what the parties involved in the case thought was possible or likely when they presented their conflicting testimony or—in the case of the gendarmes—evaluated it and presented it to their superiors. Lenders on Trial The most important reason Chestnokov and most other lenders could not be convicted was that none of their activities could be proven to have violated the letter of the law. Even before the judicial reform of 1864, the government Usurers’ Tales 63 was firmly determined to uphold the institution of private property and not to intervene in private debt agreements without sufficient evidence of criminal wrongdoing. In contradiction to the commonly held view that the ­imperial Russian government tended to subordinate the rule of law to the arbitrary authority of executive officials—the Third Section being portrayed as one of the worst offenders—the previously mentioned 1861 policy-making memo by Corps of Gendarmes General Ivan Annenkov urged exactly the opposite. Noting that usurers were careful to observe all legal formalities, he urged that “to maintain credit among private persons the government cannot fail to demand the strictest fulfillment of lawfully executed private agreements” and that “the procedure in the courts of law must not be infringed under any pretext.”87 As the Third Section officers were well aware, debtors recognized this and so were reluctant to complain to authorities and risk losing credit with all other lenders. Court records show that usury prosecutions were undertaken successfully only under a very peculiar set of circumstances, such as a careless admission by the lender or witness testimony. The lender whose apartment is so vividly described in Nekrasov’s 1841 short story took a great risk by inviting several clients at once who could potentially testify about his activities in court.88 Contrary to General Dubensky’s optimism, jury trials, once they were introduced in 1866, did not improve the chances of conviction. As a result, when the police wanted to make an example of a particular lender, their best option was to utilize the power of administrative exile, which, as will be seen, was not foolproof either. Perhaps the safest way to avoid legal troubles was not to act as a lender at all but to use a front man (or woman), but this of course raised the problems of reliability and profit-sharing. Those lenders who operated under their own names commonly wrote up the loan as a different type of transaction. One way was to write up the transaction as accepting the amount of the loan for “safekeeping.” Such documents, favored by “professional” moneylenders, were known as sokhrannye raspiski (safekeeping receipts). The agreement for safekeeping (poklazha or otdacha pod sokhranenie) was written up as a hire of movable property, such as cash. Technically speaking, the debtor did not borrow money from the lender but accepted it temporarily for ­safekeeping. The safekeeping receipt had several possible uses but in practice served primarily as a legal fiction allowing creditors to dispense with the form of the loan letter and some of its inconveniences.89 First, the “safekeeping” transaction was only subjected to a “simple” stamp duty rather than to one in 64 The Culture of Debt ­ roportion with the amount borrowed, as was the case with loan letters. The p second practical advantage was that the lender gained more secure rights in his or her investment because unlike with a regular loan, a safekeeping transaction was not subject to Russia’s ten-year statute of limitations, and so the lender’s rights to sue were limited only to both parties’ lifetimes.90 Finally, this type of transaction received preferential treatment in bankruptcy proceedings. In order to prevent this type of agreement from replacing regular loans in practice entirely, the law contained unusually detailed requirements, such as the requirement of a detailed description of the type of property that was being transferred, including the numbers on banknotes and their denomination, as well as the type and year of issue of the coins. This last requirement was, of course, easily circumvented in practice, for example by listing common types of coins that were easily replaced. However—typically for all Russian anti-usury measures—the law stopped short of the one requirement that would have effectively stopped the use of the safekeeping transaction for disguising loans, which was sealing the money package to ensure that it was not spent and then replaced. This indicates that although the tsars and their ministers and senators sought to protect borrowers through formal legal precautions, they at the same time avoided making private credit too inconvenient and too expensive and refused to eliminate a well-known practical adaptation of the law. A contract for the safekeeping or a formal pawning of movable property still provided the borrower with some rights, a risk that many pawnbrokers were not willing to accept, and so a common strategy was to write up the debt as a sale of the item being pawned. This of course placed borrowers completely at the pawnbrokers’ mercy and created easy opportunities for fraud and embezzlement.91 In 1863, a merchant from the town of Sergiev Posad near Moscow, Vasily Smirnov, read a newspaper advertisement by Mikhail Draevsky, a nobleborn clerk at the First Department of the Moscow Aulic Court who owned a small landed estate and added to his income by pawnbroking. Smirnov then sent his grown son Pavlin to borrow 65.50 silver rubles, secured by his wool-covered fox fur coat (worth over 125 rubles), a new wool suit worth 35 rubles, his wife’s silk overcoat with fur lining and collar (75 rubles), and his son’s wool overcoat worth 30 rubles. Between June and October, Smirnov paid Draevsky 10 percent interest each month, but when he wanted to redeem his property in October, with the cold weather approaching, it turned out that the usurer and his wife had sold everything without giving Smirnov Usurers’ Tales 65 any notice. Because a pawnshop transaction was executed as a sale, the only recourse left to Smirnov was to submit a petition to Draevsky’s superiors and the police. At first, Draevsky was able to fend off Smirnov’s complaints to his superiors, but he eventually had to leave government service. However, Smirnov appears never to have recovered his property. Lenders who used a formal debt document such as a loan letter, bill of exchange, or mortgage note took advantage of the fact that the law only prohibited excessive interest but not all interest-taking. In other words, it was up to the borrower to prove that he or she was charged a usurious rate. The key problem here w