as Russia’s system of evidence that relied on so-called formal proofs. As noted previously, proving a criminal case required either documentary proof, a confession, or the sworn testimony of two witnesses. Written evidence, of course, would be the most helpful variety in any case involving debt, but high interest rates were very easy to disguise; the lender would simply list the legal six percent interest rate on the debt document and charge higher amounts in practice by issuing the borrower with a smaller amount than what was stated in writing and making him or her sign a paper acknowledging the receipt of the entire amount.92 Court cases suggest that it was common for moneylenders to make their borrowers sign debt documents for at least twice the amount actually borrowed, ostensibly to protect their investment in the event of default. For example, in the insolvency case of the young Count Dmitrii Nikolaevich Tolstoi, his father’s lawyer argued that the main creditor, merchant Goro­ detskii, always took debt documents for twice the amount actually issued.93 In another case, Gubernial Secretary Dmitrii Sheremetevskii claimed that in 1855 he borrowed 100 rubles from Moscow townsman Nikolai Ivanov but had to write debt documents for 200 rubles and a few months later was sued for the entire amount.94 In post-reform villages, usurers always demanded debt documents for over 100 rubles to have access to the regular court system and thus to avoid the jurisdiction of local peasant courts, which would be biased against them.95 The Annenkov memo found that high-risk lenders routinely required documents for twice the amount actually issued, although Annenkov considered this practice to be abusive. Even more abusive was the practice of taking documents for the amount the lender wished to borrow and then issuing a fraction of the amount over a period of time, in effect opening a secured line of credit.96 In most cases it is difficult to determine whether the excess of the amount stated on the debt document over the amount actually borrowed constituted 66 The Culture of Debt hidden—but reasonable—interest, additional security to ensure repayment, or a predatory practice taking advantage of a borrower’s particularly vulnerable circumstances—or, indeed, all of the above. Among such vulnerable individuals were young aristocrats like Buturlin and Dmitrii Tolstoy, who expected to someday inherit their parents’ vast fortunes. Another situation was the borrower being drunk or otherwise mentally agitated. For example, in 1860 Moscow townsman Mikhail Ulitin had another townsman Aleksei Klimov write out a large number of bills of exchange with different dates and to different persons, but allegedly gave him only a few rubles.97 A similar predicament befell a wealthy Moscow merchant, Klavdii Yeremeev, who in 1871 fell victim to a group of swindlers and signed numerous debt obligations in a prolonged bout of drunkenness. Because most debt documents were short-term, if a debtor did not make a timely payment as required by the usurer, he or she could be asked to sign a new debt document for a still higher amount.98 Whereas debt documents themselves were unlikely to inculpate a moneylender, other written evidence was likely to be insufficiently specific. The case of Gubernial Secretary Dmitrii Sheremetievskii illustrates why usury was so difficult to prove even when there was some written evidence: given that the law did not require the amount borrowed to be transferred immediately upon the signing of the debt document, Sheremetievskii, having signed debt papers for 200 rubles and, as he alleged, having borrowed only 100 rubles, had no way to prove this fact other than by producing his letter to the usurer describing the situation. The court ruled that the letter was not specific enough to show that it applied to that particular loan transaction.99 This case was judged under the pre-1864 evidence rules that gave judges little discretion in weighing evidence; under a legal system giving judges more discretion, the letter would no doubt have been considered more probative. With pre-reform evidence rules, it was generally possible to prove usury only when there was a careless admission by the lender or sworn testimony by more than one witness. In Russia’s legal practice, such cases were rare occurrences indeed. For example, one Moscow pawnbroker, Count Shere­ metiev’s serf Epistimiia Durkina, was convicted for usury in 1861 after she loaned 44 rubles to townsman Sergei Ivanov at an annual rate of 60 percent, secured by two gold watches and an icon frame, and, apparently needing money herself, in turn pawned the watches elsewhere. Durkina appears to have been ignorant of the law because she easily testified that she was charging 5 percent per month—ten times the legal amount—and that the Usurers’ Tales 67 accumulated interest of 76 rubles made it impractical for Ivanov to attempt to redeem his collateral, which he then asked her to sell. The Chamber of Criminal Justice, taking into account Durkina’s admission, sentenced her to be fined 64.8 rubles, nearly three times the amount of excessive interest minus the legal interest. The original sentence by the Moscow Aulic Court was to convict Durkina of fraud for embezzling pawned property, to strip her of her legal rights, give her 50 lashes, and place her in the workhouse for eighteen months; this was typical of pre-reform criminal sentences, which were initially overly harsh and reduced after review by the higher-up Criminal Chamber.100 Witness testimony also led to criminal conviction on rare occasions. In the 1840s, a Dmitrov townsman Demian Pastukhov had an arrangement with a Kishinev merchant Mikhail Gendrikhov, whereby they collected debts on each other’s behalf; by 1851, Pastukhov had collected 3,159 rubles, but he never delivered the money because he claimed it was the interest owed to him for his services. In a conversation with Gendrikhov, Pastukhov claimed that “he never took less than 15% interest per year and that even better people than Gendrikhov pay up.” These words were overheard by merchant Provotorov and townsmen Plotnikov and Sovelov. Because three witnesses were more than the two required for conviction under Russian evidence laws, the Moscow Aulic Court sentenced Pastukhov to three days’ arrest, and the ­decision was affirmed by the Criminal Chamber and the governor general of Moscow.101 In a similar case, collegiate registrar’s wife Elizaveta Shustitskaia (Pere­ shivkina in her second marriage) was prosecuted for usury in 1843, after she took personal effects worth 1,335 paper rubles from Moscow townswoman Ekaterina Bulasheva and gave her 284 paper rubles at an annual rate of 80 percent. Bulasheva paid interest at the end of each month but eventually could not afford this high rate and had to permit Pereshivkina to sell a fox fur coat for 500 paper rubles to pay off the debt. Her witnesses were Class 9 official Ivan Sokovin, chancery clerk Glazatov, and Second Lieutenant Vladimir Schmidt, who all heard Pereshivkina claim that she was charging 7 percent per month. Because there was an issue of Bulasheva bribing a witness, the lower court ruled that usury had not been proven and instead convicted Bulasheva for attempting to influence witnesses, but the Criminal Chamber ruled on December 21, 1856, that Pereshivkina’s usury was proven by three witnesses under oath and punished her with the triple fine required by law. However, her conviction was vacated pursuant to the tsar’s amnesty manifesto of March 27, 1855.102 68 The Culture of Debt Because existing legislation and court procedures made criminal conviction for usury so difficult, the only effective measure was administrative exile, widely used throughout the nineteenth century to remove various categories of undesirable individuals from large cities and other sensitive areas. It was so broadly used by provincial governors in the first half of the century that the tsar’s decree of December 2, 1855, restricted its use to the central government. This restriction was not practical, and many governors of individual provinces saw these powers restored in the 1860s and 1870s, including those of Moscow and St. Petersburg in 1879—that is, even before the famous security law of August 14, 1881, which at once permitted administrative exile in all provinces to which the law applied but limited exile to five years and required approval by the Interior Ministry.103 With respect to usury, administrative exile was typically applied when unhappy debtors—usually a group but sometimes one powerful individual, as in the case of Buturlin—complained about a particular lender or lenders. The authorities usually attempted to mediate a settlement and sometimes threatened the lender with expulsion. This would in effect shut down his or her business, although some semblance of procedure was provided and the borrowers were still legally obligated to repay their loans. This is what happened to Chestnokov. He could take comfort in the fact that the gendarmes found no evidence of a criminal gang.104 But on August 31, 1859, less than six months after the beginning of the investigation, Prince Dolgorukov, chief of the Third Section, ordered Chestnokov’s exile to the small town of Yarensk in northern Vologda province, although unlike political prisoners he had another five weeks to organize his affairs before he was actually removed from Petersburg. In December of that same year, he was transferred to the larger and more civilized town of Ustiug because of an illness, so that he could have access to a doctor. Before 1881, administrative exile did not yet have a legal time limit, and Chestnokov consequently continued to petition the authorities for a pardon, and in 1862 was finally allowed to choose his place of residence anywhere outside Moscow and Petersburg provinces. He chose the town of Tver, which lies approximately halfway between Moscow and Petersburg, within a relatively easy train ride from each, for which reason it was an attractive place of penal exile in the nineteenth century, as well as in the twentieth. Merchant Mironov likewise chose Tver for his residence after he was allowed to return from his exile in another northern town of Kem in Arkhangelsk province. Mironov was 13 years younger than Chestnokov and was able to build a new Usurers’ Tales 69 life for himself, although this new life also involved making new enemies. One of these alerted the gendarmes to the fact that the Moscow–Petersburg railroad effectively undermined police control since exiled undesirables could always come to Petersburg for a few days to carry out their financial dealings. Chestnokov was also allowed to rebuild his life, but by the time he settled in Tver, his seventeen-year-old son Aleksei had been expelled from the First Cadet Corps, and his Petersburg house run by a hired manager was in a bad shape. Then, in February 1863, soon after Chestnokov’s terms of exile had been relaxed, his son—who by that time had entered government service in Petersburg—fell gravely ill, so that Chestnokov asked for permission to visit him. Whereas Mironov had no difficulty making brief illicit visits to the city, Chestnokov was either unable or unwilling to do the same. Petersburg Governor General Prince Arkadii Suvorov proposed to allow him to return for six months, and the Committee of Ministers that examined Chestnokov’s petition also recommended leniency, but the tsar personally rejected it. Chestnokov’s story shows the extent to which even a wealthy person skilled in legal procedure was no match for a millionaire with court connections, and that administrative exile—while mild by the standards of the twentieth century or compared to Shlissel’burg Fortress, where the most dangerous revolutionaries were imprisoned in the nineteenth century— could have very real and ruinous consequences. Such consequences could be more devastating for those 