lower-middle-class individuals who acted as lenders and pawnbrokers for Russia’s mass of poor laborers, a group that was steadily augmenting the urban population in the decades after serf emancipation. For example, in 1879, twenty years after the Chestnokov case, the Moscow Governor expelled several groups of Jews who had been legally residing in the city as artisans and retired soldiers or soldiers’ wives.105 These included the retired private Levik Bich and soldiers’ wives Khaia Markovich, Khaia Schumacher, Malka Baranishnikova, and Sara Landar. Moscow’s police chief persuaded the governor to exile them for the alleged offense of “positively ruining the factory folk. Issuing in exchange for the pawned items a sum that was most minuscule compared to their value, these Jews use all means possible to appropriate the items they accept as pawns, leaving the workers without clothing and shoes and thus provoking their disaffection and complaints.”106 In addition to official anti-Semitism, these women’s plight also resulted from the war against the Ottoman Empire that had started in 1877. According to their wives’ petitions, the soldiers stationed in Moscow were 70 The Culture of Debt suddenly sent to the Balkans, leaving them without any other way of making a living but by peddling and pawnbroking. But while all these individuals were exiled to the remote provinces of northern Russia, such as Viatka, Vologda, and Olonets, the degree to which their economic activities were disrupted varied greatly, depending on their wealth and social status. Baranishnikova’s family ranked slightly above the rest: her husband owned a shop in the center of Moscow, and Baranishnikova herself had taken out a commercial license. It is also conceivable that the Baranishnikovs were able to spend some money on bribing the police. As a result, Baranishnikova, who had a newborn baby and five other children, was permitted to go to her original hometown of Mogilev in Belorussia instead of to the north, while her husband continued to trade in Moscow, although his petitions to allow his wife to come back to him were denied. The grounds for the denial were that Baranishnikova had opened a ready-made clothing store in Mogilev, which the officials considered to be a cover for continuing a moneylending operation; it seems that despite her exile, Baranishnikova was able to remain within the middle class. Other pawnbrokers whose husbands were rank-and-file soldiers likewise petitioned to be sent to their homeland in Poland but were denied, although none of them had newborn babies. Once in Russia’s north, they had a more difficult time integrating into small-town life. For example, the 65-year-old retired soldier Mendel Londar owned a smithy in Moscow with hired workers, but in exile, after finally finding a location where his skills were in demand, he had to rent a workshop to make a living. However, by 1882 all these individuals had been freed from police oversight and were permitted to choose their residence anywhere except the two capitals and their outlying regions. As in the case of Chestnokov, it was essential to continue to submit petitions to the authorities in hopes of a change of policy.107 Also it is important to note that the government was open to relaxing the punishment within a relatively short time. Provincial governors retained their authority to exile undesirable moneylenders until the end of the imperial period, but the policy toward usury changed several times after the Great Reforms. By that time, the government recognized that the legal interest rate of six percent was impossibly low. The implication was that a law that by definition could not reasonably be obeyed tended to undermine the integrity of the legal system. One anonymous individual who denounced a well-known usurer from the 1860s, Vladimir Karpovich, pointed out that the law against usury was easy to circumvent Usurers’ Tales 71 and argued that “if the law . . . is not timely or not satisfactory in our mercantilist age, the government should change or abolish it instead of promoting disrespect for the law.108 Finally, the decree of 1879 abolished all restrictions on loan interest rates in line with the larger Western nineteenth-century trend and also in line with several other measures that liberalized Russia’s financial and credit market in the 1860s and 1870s.109 The law of 1879 specified that special rules were to be introduced at a future date to regulate predatory lending practices that were to be prosecuted as usury; when finally introduced in 1892, the new rule, much like its European counterparts, replaced the mechanical limitation of a permissible interest rate by a more flexible and discretion-based circumstance test designed to prevent the abuse of particularly vulnerable individuals, most importantly peasants.110 This was of course not the only potential solution: it was also possible to retain some minimum restrictions but to ensure that exceptions and loopholes would continue making lending profitable, for example, for commercial lending. The maximum interest rate was almost immediately restricted again by the law of June 8, 1893, to 12 percent. Once again, special rules were added to restrict so-called rural usury, which was seen as a distinct affliction of the Russian countryside.111 However, public trials for usury continued to be rare. One colorful case was reported by the lawyer Grigorii Rozenzweig, in his collection of anecdotes from Russian legal practice; it involved Vladimir Pashkevich, a retired major-general serving as a professor of mathematics at the prestigious Mikhailovskaia Artillery Academy in Petersburg and a wellknown expert in ballistics, who was put on trial in the late 1890s for charging 36 percent interest to his numerous debtors, all of them from prosperous social groups. Pashkevich was convicted even though he used a go-between to act as the legal lender to shield him from legal problems, and he later argued that the loans in question were issued before the new anti-usury law went into effect. On appeal, the Senate accepted Pashkevich’s argument and overturned his conviction.112 Although large joint-stock banks appeared in Russia in the 1860s, individual lenders, whether “usurers” or investors, continued to be crucial for the system of private credit until the end of the imperial period, much as they did in other legal systems.113 Cultural understandings of usury had by then long departed from the longstanding technical meaning of charging any interest at all or charging interest in excess of a low legal limit. Instead, usury in Russia and in other major Western legal systems came to connote predatory 72 The Culture of Debt practices that took advantage of a borrower’s difficult circumstances and exceeded what was considered to be a reasonable reward for lending to highrisk clients. Usury indeed came to stand for the unjust and even irrational aspects of capitalism in general.114 Intellectuals in late imperial Russia saw this point clearly, and their observations and interpretations did not at all correspond to Marx’s model, in which capitalist credit appeared alongside its allegedly archaic usurious variety and the latter continued to exist to finance consumption and smallscale producers.115 For example, an 1875 pamphlet published under the name N. Goremykin argued that Russia’s new commercial banks closely cooperated rather than merely coexisted with usurers who had transformed themselves into credit brokers. Banks preferred to minimize their risk by lending to these intermediaries who then distributed the money at a much higher rate to merchants and entrepreneurs.116 Similarly, in Dmitrii Mamin-Sibiriak’s 1895 novel Bread, examining capitalism in the post-reform Trans-Ural region, the new local capitalist bank quickly seized control over most local industry and commerce, but instead of sidelining usury—practiced, for example, by a village priest—banking greatly stimulated it by making it more socially acceptable and in effect merged with it. The economist Roman Tsimmerman in his 1898 study of rural usury argued that even the most ruthless and exploitative usury was not much different from supposedly advanced capitalist entrepreneurship because it stemmed from similar motivations and employed the same legal and social mechanisms that involved the destruction of traditional communal and family ties. In Tsimmerman’s description, the peasant usurer (kulak) was an agent of unstoppable capitalist transformation and not anything like Marx’s vaguely outlined archaism.117 Rather than being regarded as an outdated model to be discarded, usury thus continued to problematize the nexus between private and public morality and the culture of capitalism and entrepreneurship, as well as the limits of the legal regulation of all of them. Even the most ruthless high-risk lenders were almost always protected by unassailable legal forms, and predatory lending therefore undermined the integrity and credibility of the law as strongly as the potential solutions of either removing the legal barrier altogether or subverting the legal process through administrative intervention. One of the Russian government’s paramount concerns was to uphold the well-being of its propertied elites and consequently the regime of private property, including the system of private credit that could not exist without effective legal mechanisms and Usurers’ Tales 73 ­ rocedures. Paradoxically, this concern at once required some restrictions p against predatory lending, as well as assurances that delinquent debtors would quickly lose their land, homes, serfs, and other possessions, and potentially be subjected to personal arrest as well. This contradiction explains why Russia’s anti-usury laws were mild, why usury prosecutions were rare, and why occasional round-ups of “usurers” were limited in scope. It is also important to remember that “professional” high-risk lenders, who were sometimes little more than swindlers and confidence men and women, constituted a small proportion of all lenders, and their activities, fascinating and revealing as they are of credit practices in the age of Russia’s financial revolution, cannot constitute a comprehensive survey of the system of private credit. The next question for this study is, therefore, who were the lenders and the borrowers if, as a general rule, they were not innocent dupes preyed upon by ruthless predatory usurers? chapt e r 2 Nobles and Merchants T h e m o d e l e stat e manager and memoirist Andrei Bolotov was anything but a spendthrift, even in his younger days as a promising army officer during the Seven Years’ War. While careful to avoid excessive debt both in Russian-occupied Königsberg and then in Petersburg, he was nonetheless involved in credit relationships that transcended geopolitical, ethnic, and social divisions. For example, he owed his Prussian hosts for a year’s worth of lodging; he took up an offer to borrow 150 rubles for relocation expenses from his own serf manservant; he relied on his wealthy and powerful boss, baron N. A. Korf, to loan him money to get settled in St. Petersburg; and in turn, he loaned 30 rubles to his regiment’s physician, somewhat reluctantly because he barely knew the man. Upon coming to the capital in 1762, Bolotov had to raise another 100 rubles to buy one of the fancy uniforms introduced by the new tsar, Peter III. Some of the tailoring could be done on credit, but only after a partial cash payment, for which Bolotov was offered a friendly loan by a fellow officer slightly higher in the service hierarchy.1 Conspicuously missing from Bolotov’s account are organized banking and usury, the two types of relationships until now thought to be the sum total of private credit in imperial Russia. Borrowing from the recently established Noble Loan Bank was never considered, most likely because it was only available to a small group of borrowers with c