on kinship and patronage were far from universal. Nobles routinely either preferred, or were driven by circumstances, to borrow from their social inferiors, while the most common pattern was to mix the two types of borrowing. The estate of Guard Captain Muraviov is one example of a preference for credit ties with one’s peers. At the time of his death in 1848, he owned 3,655 serfs in five different provinces (Orel, Riazan’, Voronezh, Vladimir, and Kaluga) and held a total of six loans from the Moscow Board of Trustees, amounting to 164,455 rubles. His much more modest private loans were from the privy councilor’s wife Davydova (3,500 rubles) and from rotmistr (cavalry captain) of the guard Pokrovskii. Muraviov also guaranteed a loan of 5,500 rubles incurred by his relative, State Councilor Aleksandr Muraviov.102 While a few thousand rubles do not seem a large sum compared to the nearly 165,000 rubles of Board loans, it should be remembered that 3,000 rubles annually would allow a comfortable existence to a gentry family, and when issued all at once in cash was not a trifle even to the likes of Muraviov. Almost half a century earlier, the privy councilor’s wife Ekaterina Naryshkina, who was born into an old but undistinguished gentry family, the Opochinins, and married into an illustrious family of the old Muscovite aristocracy, followed the same pattern in her borrowing: in addition to modest Board loans, around 1813–1815 she owed sums of 1,500 to 5,000 rubles to several other old Muscovite gentry families, including some relatives, such as an Opochinina, an Orlov, a Mansurov, and a Naryshkin.103 By far the most extensive horizontal private credit network I found is that of Anna Bestozheva (sic), widow of a captain in the Imperial Guard, who Nobles and Merchants 93 became insolvent around 1870, fell ill, and died in 1873 without any property but with debts totaling almost 160,000 rubles, all of them private because the government had discontinued its mortgage loans in 1859. Except for four merchants, the rest of Bestozheva’s twenty-one creditors were officers, gentry, and civil servants. Of the entire amount, only 38,000 rubles were Bestozheva’s own debts. The rest she had guaranteed for other individuals, presumably her relatives and friends.104 Those aristocrats who engaged in commerce also liked to deal with their peers. One prominent example of an aristocratic entrepreneur is Prince Andrei Golitsyn, who participated in one of several ill-fated attempts to establish a silk-growing industry in Transcaucasia. Golitsyn became insolvent after the death of his partner, who had provided the necessary sericultural expertise. The list of his twenty-one creditors is notable for the presence of other aristocratic names, such as Demidov, Iurgenev, Kurakin, Potemkin, Voeikov, Baroness Dunka, Counts Orlov and Bobrinskii, and the wealthy and well-connected capitalist, Titular Councilor Yakovlev. The list included only two merchants and one townsman, who, incidentally, was the one creditor who actively pursued the lawsuit against Golitsyn, whereas most of his aristocratic creditors recognized his insolvency as a misfortune and refused to sue.105 Other aristocratic debt portfolios combined debts to peers with those to clear social inferiors. For example, Actual State Councilor Prince Iurii Ivanovich Trubetskoi upon his death in 1851 left private debts amounting to 81,115 rubles (which were dwarfed by his Board debt of almost 600,000 rubles) and an estate of 10,645 serfs, bringing in over 70,000 rubles annually. Trubetskoi’s debts included loan letters from his equals, such as his sister Agrafena Mansurova, and Nadezhda Karnilieva, widow of a collegiate assessor (equivalent to an army major). But Trubetskoi also borrowed 10,000 rubles from a very junior civil servant and slightly less from a townswoman and from a high school student (gimnazist), all three of whom were probably professional moneylenders because their loans were executed as the “safekeeping receipts” typically utilized by high-risk lenders. However, despite Trubetskoi’s occasional sudden need for money, his largest single private loan by far of over 18,000 rubles was from his sister.106 Aristocratic debt portfolios could be more diverse, such as that of Privy Councilor Prince Vasilii Alekseevich Khovanskii, who died in 1850 and who held estates in Ruza and Dmitrov Counties in Moscow province. Khovanskii and his daughter, who was married to an equally ranked Privy Councilor Bulgakov, owed money to five nobles, five merchants, one townswoman, and 94 The Culture of Debt two serfs. One of the serfs must have been a trader, as his debt was only 384 rubles, but the other serf creditor, Egor Duduev, despite being owned by a noblewoman named Shepeleva, must have been either a moneylender or a prosperous merchant since he loaned 6,233 rubles. Interestingly, all but one of Khovanskii’s noble creditors were very highly ranked: Khovanskii’s own wife, a colonel’s wife, a state councilor’s wife, and a collegiate assessor (Class 8). Their loans were much larger than the 6,000 paper ruble loan from the “noble-born maiden” Shemanskaia, likely a professional moneylender.107 Those nobles who were involved in commerce and manufacturing only as an aspect of their management of extensive serf-populated estates also tended to have diversified lists of creditors. One of the more dramatic bankrupts, Actual State Councilor Krotkov, attempted—ultimately unsuccessfully— everything from agriculture to technological innovation to manufacturing and government contracts. His debts of almost 300,000 rubles were held by 39 creditors, of whom 21 were military officers and civil servants, 17 merchants, 1 townsman and 1 foreigner. Of the first category, 12 held a senior rank (Class 8 and higher), suggesting that despite the chaotic character of Krotkov’s entrepreneurship, he still found the most ready and willing source of credit among his social and service peers. At the same time, his involvement in manufacturing and government contracts brought him into close contact with merchants.108 Other enterprising wealthy serfowners also borrowed from creditors who were far beneath them in station. For example, Collegiate Secretary Petr Zubov, in addition to inheriting 3,000 serfs and several factories from his brother, also took over his brother’s debts to eleven persons, including three civil servants, one unspecified member of the gentry, one foreign merchant, three Russian merchants, and three townsmen. To these Zubov added his own additional debts to an army lieutenant and to a civil servant’s wife. The only highly ranked creditor was a collegiate councilor’s wife (Class 6). Whether any of Zubov’s noble creditors were wealthy landowners like himself is not indicated in the record, but half of his debts were owed to persons of the commercial and urban estates; what is clear is that Zubov, despite his considerable wealth and his allegedly desperate attempts to improve the estate’s condition, was either unwilling or unable to form most of his credit connections with peers.109 We know even less about the activities of cavalry Lieutenant Nikolai Engelgardt, from the famous family of aristocratic farmers in southern Kherson province, who accumulated private debts reaching 300,000 rubles. Nobles and Merchants 95 The list of his 39 creditors included 7 military officers, 6 civil servants, 1 unranked member of the gentry, 9 merchants, 2 townsmen, 7 peasants, 5 foreigners, and 2 skilled mining craftsmen. Only a few of these people can be considered Engelgardt’s peers: a landowner Count Raniker, a Count Tolstoy, two Swedes, and another Engelgardt. Clearly, Engelgardt took advantage of the available opportunities to form debt connections with his peers, but either these were either not sufficient for his needs or he did not want to get excessively entangled with his friends and relatives.110 The limitations on the kinds of loans that were available from one’s peers are clearer in the case of the young Count Dmitrii Nikolaevich Tolstoy, a remote relative of the great writer, who lived with his father and went deep into debt to buy himself fine horses and other luxuries. Because Tolstoy had neither his own property nor an established legal personality separate from his father (despite being of age), he had not been able to form the kind of connections with fellow aristocrats that would include the possibility of extending credit. Thus, all four of the officers and civil servants among Tolstoy’s creditors were of low rank. At least some of Tolstoy’s creditors were being investigated for their alleged usurious practices, and so some of these may have been highrisk lenders. Other creditors were most likely vendors who supplied Tolstoy with luxuries, including three merchants, one townsman, two serfs, one craftsman (tsekhovoi), one soldier, and one free peasant.111 It is important to remember that the lists of creditors found in court cases are not necessarily complete because they include only individuals who either initiated a lawsuit or learned about it from newspapers and joined in. Thus the complete debt portfolio of a living, active, and solvent propertied person must have been somewhat different, including amounts owed not only to acquaintances, professional lenders, and business partners but also for the servants’ wages and retailers’ bills. Most of these claims never showed up in court records, but one exception was the case of the aristocratic privy councilor’s wife Princess Natalia Saltykova-Golovkina, who died in 1850, leaving a fabulous property with 10,300 serfs. Saltykova’s recorded debt included some debts for only a few rubles. Among the 49 creditors were three junior civil servants, 13 merchants, 18 serfs and free peasants, 12 townspeople and craftsmen, 1 soldier’s wife, and 1 foreigner; only one, the Aulic Councilor Tuchkov, from whom Saltykova rented her city apartment, could be considered her social peer. The merchants and peasants were mainly personal servants and retail vendors, including a cook and purveyors of bread, coal, hay, firewood, clothing, medicine, 96 The Culture of Debt ­ iscellaneous goods, and horse harnesses. There were 16 tradesmen’s bills, as m well as 17 claims for servants’ wages and 14 money loans. Finally, there was the merchant Iulii Zhianini, to whom Saltykova had pawned various pieces of movable property for 3,300 rubles. Several of these loans were marked as partially paid, and there were no suspicions about Saltykova’s solvency; nor did she owe to the Board of Trustees, or even have large private loans. Thus, unlike many other debt portfolios discussed in this chapter, Saltykova’s probably represents a “normal” case that came to the courts accidentally because of her untimely death rather than because creditors despaired of any other way to collect their money.112 The case also shows that credit relationships involving significant cash loans should be augmented by numerous financial links with servants and retailers. The Urban Classes Although common for the wealthier nobles, mixed borrowing practices were simply unavoidable for the “middling” urban groups. Although the cultural and—in the case of Moscow—even spatial division between the noble and servitor group and Russia’s traditional commercial classes was perceptible throughout the nineteenth century, and “horizontal” and intragroup credit ties were still very important, members of the “middling” groups could not rely on having friends, relatives, or patrons with ready cash and could scarcely avoid borrowing across social and estate lines.113 Consider, for example, the memoirs of Alexander Petrovich Miliukov (1817–1897), a minor literary figure born into a traditional family of Moscow textile industrialists. His father, however, was a mere clerk who had to struggle to give his son an education. In order to enroll him in Moscow’s then-only high school, he had to raise 700 ru