bles for the fee to sign Alexander out of their local community of townspeople (meshchane). Of that sum, 100 rubles came as a friendly loan (tovarishcheskii zaiom) from the local priest who oversaw Alexander’s elementary education, and 500 more were borrowed from the father’s employer, a factory owner, and were going to be subtracted from his wages, although eventually the boss wrote off half of the loan. The last 100 rubles were the hardest to obtain: first, Alexander’s mother managed to borrow 40 rubles from a wealthy merchant with whom she was acquainted. He owned a prosperous business that dyed cheap furs to make them look expensive, but he positively refused to loan the entire 100 rubles. Finally, the mother gathered everything that was valuable in the Nobles and Merchants 97 household—table silver, an old fox coat, her wedding shawl, some small jewelry, and even the heirloom icon frames—to take to a pawnbroker in a different part of Moscow in exchange for 100 rubles. This property was redeemed only a year and a half later, minus the shawl and the jewelry used to pay the interest. It is clear that the Miliukovs’ credit network consisted entirely of members of the urban and commercial classes, including the local priest, but curiously not including members of their own family. It is also notable that this network was ultimately not sufficient, and the family had to resort to a purely market transaction with a pawnbroker, one selected from outside the family’s network of neighbors and acquaintances.114 Merchants who generally dealt with their peers could also form more diverse credit connections. For example, the honorary citizen Nikolai Kuznetsov was a wealthy merchant who began his business already burdened with a 300,000-ruble debt inherited from his father. In 1865 he was put on criminal trial for fraudulent bankruptcy; he owed debts to seventeen creditors, all of whom were either merchants or townspeople. Kuznetsov had long-term relationships with most of his creditors, since they held up to nine of his bills of exchange for different amounts. However, five of his creditors were specifically listed as being from outside Moscow.115 Merchants also occasionally borrowed from nobles and civil servants. For example, Moscow merchant Zhivov had six creditors at the time of his death in the early 1850s, with individual loans varying from 2,800 to 555,000 paper rubles. Of these creditors, four were also merchants, and only the smallest debt of 1,000 silver rubles came from a titular councilor, Shapovalov. However, Zhivov’s house was mortgaged to Messrs. Orlov for 17,428.53 rubles.116 A much more modest merchant, Iakov Chistiakov, owed 2,710 rubles to seven creditors, of which five were merchants, one a merchant of Armenian or “Tatar” (Turkic-Muslim) origin, and one was the titular councilor Nikolaev, to whom Chistiakov owed 350 rubles, less than the average amount.117 A much more diversified debt portfolio was incurred by a modest female merchant Mavra Bubentsova, who sold fish and was not even enrolled in a merchant guild. Her debts were worth over 40,000 rubles (while her merchandise stock was worth 962 rubles); however, almost all of these creditors (claiming debts worth 38,000 rubles) could not present any written proof, making collection virtually impossible. Out of Bubentsova’s nine creditors, three were peasants, three merchants, and three civil servants (one belonging to the lowest Class 14 and two – to Class 12). These estate-crossing links are remarkable given Bubentsova’s low social status. Also notable is the fact that 98 The Culture of Debt Table 2.1 Debts of Liubov’ Pevnitskaia, 1852–1854 Men No. of loans Total amt. Average amt. Women Servitor Clergy Urban and Peasant 12 10 8 6 8 19,306 4,358 7,276 8,739 7,649 1,609 435 909 1,456 956 Data source: TsIAM 92.6.741 / 1, l. 6. Bubentsova’s higher-status creditors all had documented debts that could be pursued in court, while the much larger debts from peasants and merchants, as well as the lowest-ranked civil servant, were not documented.118 Urban property owners who were not enrolled as merchants were likewise unwilling or unable to borrow exclusively or even largely from their peers, although they did like to form some horizontal credit connections as part of their social and financial network. Consider the debts of the collegiate councilor’s wife Liubov’ Pevnitskaia, who owed approximately 24,000 rubles and was accused by her creditors of being a compulsive borrower because she incurred more debts even as it became clear that she was unable to repay most of them. Despite her ownership of 228 serfs in Ruza County, and her husband’s officially high rank (collegiate councilor corresponds to army colonel), she was also connected to Moscow’s clerical circles because her father had been a priest of noble birth, as well as to the world of raznochintsy (individuals of “various ranks,” educated and employed in “white-collar” occupations but neither nobles nor merchants), since her husband was actually employed as a high school teacher. Her debt portfolio reflected this diverse background of clerical, noble, and middling urban elements. Out of 22 creditors, 8 were military officers and civil servants and 6 were clergy (two priests, a bell-ringer, two deacon’s wives, and a priest’s wife), with the latter being Pevnitskaia’s largest creditors both in terms of the total and average loan amounts (see Table 2.1). At the same time, her creditors also included four merchants, two townspeople, and two serfs. Thus, Pevnitskaia’s debt portfolio suggests that her social milieu continued to be her single most important source of credit, but it was not by any means the sole source. Table 2.1 shows that while the loans from men were four to five times as large as the loans from women, loans to Pevnitskaia from members of other estates did not differ drastically, suggesting that Pevnitskaia’s social cluster should be viewed Nobles and Merchants 99 as a single “middling” urban class that brought together individuals of varying legal status.119 Successful entrepreneurs who were nonetheless unable to form sufficiently extensive connections in elite circles had to diversify their credit relationships, as shown by the example of the military engineer Colonel Nikolia, who dabbled in a variety of businesses and governmental contracts in the 1840s and 1850s. By the time Nikolia became insolvent, he owed money to 48 individuals, of whom 28 were nobles, officers, and civil servants, 12 were merchants, 4 peasants, 3 foreigners and 1 clergyman. Similar to Pevnitskaia, Nikolia liked to borrow from other military engineers—there were five of them among his creditors—but could not rely on them for credit to any significant extent. Interestingly, the quickest and most informed creditors who were placed in the first category during the insolvency proceedings and thus were most likely to get repaid included thirteen persons, of whom only one was a merchant.120 Other non-merchant debt portfolios likewise show a combination of strong links between the gentry and Moscow’s commercial classes, some links within one’s milieu, as well as connections with one’s social superiors. For example, the debts of the retired cavalry captain Mikhail Levenets may have resulted from some commercial activity because he owed 35,773 rubles to a Dutchman named Luk and 26,875 rubles to Collegiate Registrar (the lowest Class 14) Zamkov. But at the same time, some of his debt may have been consumer related, such as the 360 rubles to townsman Alatyrtsev and 200 rubles to craftsman Kumisov, while yet another group could be called his “social” debt, such as the 2,500 rubles owed to staff-captain of the guard Dashkov and 8,158 owed to Privy Councilor Prince Iurii Alekseevich Dolgorukov. While Levenets’s service in the cavalry, an expensive branch of military service, implied substantial wealth, it also no doubt led to useful credit connections not available to more modest urban property owners. Levenets even acted as a surety to the higher-ranked Collegiate Councilor Monkevich. At the same time, his credit connections remained diverse, with only one of his twelve creditors being a fellow military officer, five civil servants, three merchants, two townspeople, and one foreigner.121 An even clearer example of the intertwined relationship between entrepreneurship, credit, and social status or connection is the case of collegiate councilor Platon Vasilievich Golubkov (1786–1855). Born to a low-ranking civil service family in Kostroma, Golubkov eventually grew exceedingly wealthy through trade, government contracts, and, most importantly, ownership of 100 The Culture of Debt gold mines in eastern Siberia.122 The list of Golubkov’s creditors shows no less clearly than does his patronage of the arts how economic success and the prestigious character of gold mining improved his social status and led him to aspire to join the likes of the Demidovs and Stroganovs. At the time of his death, Golubkov owed money to fourteen nobles, including a Golitsyna, a Trubetskoi, and a Shakhovskoi, and to only two merchants and one peasant. It is interesting that Golubkov’s largest single debt of 35,000 rubles was held by the peasant freedwoman Aleksandrova, who later enrolled in a merchant guild and was one of the two creditors who initiated the lawsuit.123 Whereas Pevnitskaia, Nikolia, and Golubkov were able to incur substantial debts and to resist collection proceedings perhaps in large part because of their social connections, individuals of similar station in life but without either the landed wealth or a social network had more difficulty resisting insolvency. For example, a British subject named Nikolai Dzhakson ( Jackson) owned a house in Moscow jointly with his mother and brother but made his living by giving lessons and translating literature from English into Russian. He also was pursuing two legal cases: one for 20,000 rubles in the Moscow District Court against the heirs of Major General Poliakov and the other in St. Petersburg against another British subject, Gen [sic], for 1,000 rubles. By the time Dzhakson became insolvent in 1872, his debts reached 54,000 silver rubles owed to 16 persons, of whom 6 were civil servants, 4 merchants, 1 townsman, 1 foreigner, 1 midwife, 1 “maiden” (presumably of gentry origins), and 1 nobleman. Not only did he not borrow from other Englishmen or other Westerners residing in Moscow, aside for one Prussian merchant, but he was involved in a lawsuit with his own countryman.124 This apparent lack of social ties no doubt contributed to his financial ruin, although in the end most of his creditors took pity on him and his family. A gentlewoman of very modest means, staff captain’s wife Avdotia Zerkal’nikova, owed money to seven persons, of whom one was a cavalry officer of the same rank (Class 10) as her husband, and two were a gubernial secretary and his daughter (Class 12), one merchant, one townsman, one foreigner, and one postman’s wife. Notably, Zerkal’nikova either could not or did not want to borrow from persons of superior status, but her credit connections show a strong degree of integration in Moscow’s credit community, which in her case linked such considerably different persons as a cavalry officer and a postman’s wife.125 Even very short debt lists could be diversified; one example is that of the insolvent retired Collegiate Secretary Petr Glushkov, who owed 2,000 Nobles and Merchants 101 Table 2.2 “ Vertical” and “Horizontal” Debt Connections: Relative Disparity in Rank between Lenders and Borrowers Serv.b / 0a 1–2 3–4 5–6 7+ Non-TRc Reg. loan letters, 1852 Serv. / Serv. / Urb. / Other / Othere Urb.d Urb. Other 18 37 29 12 4 15 4 16 1 2 Urban mortg., 1855 3 7 14 4 2 0 5 30 35 0 Rural mortg., 1862 8 10 13 6 8 0 7 22 15 8 a. Disparity in rank according to the Table of Ranks; b. Persons classified under the Table of Ranks; c. Nobles not in state service 