wool. Although this required yet another loan, Krotkov was able to repay much of his debt and made a profit for four years, until the Crimean War ended in 1856 and the demand for woolens went down because the government was no longer buying new uniforms. Then Krotkov tried himself out as inventor, traveling to London to attempt to sell a patent for an “electro-magnetic guard.” However, he was swindled and had to come back to Russia after spending another 20,000 rubles for the trip. On returning to his estate in 1860, he organized a mechanical sawing workshop to manufacture “cheap men’s clothes” out of the woolens made at his factory. For a while he was paying off his debts, but then a clerk sent to Nizhnii Novgorod stole 10,000 rubles’ worth of merchandise. At that point, Krotkov was finally ruined; once serfdom was abolished, he needed cash to continue to operate his factory, which he could not raise because of his debts. He therefore had to lease out the factory, thus losing the income, and had to begin a pyramid scheme of borrowing money solely to repay his old debts. Krotkov became insolvent, in his own words, “despite the fact that throughout his life he never allowed himself to live above his station, and even less to spend his money lightly, while to the contrary using all of his strength and ability to preserve his fortune.” The final blow was delivered in 1874 by a colonel’s wife, Aleksandra Shenshina, who brought to the recently established District Court his letter begging her to wait because his other creditors had forced a sale of his properties for less than half of their value, and so he was left with no means to make any more payments. The court clerk underlined these lines with a pencil and wrote “debtor’s admission.” Unusually for Russian bankruptcy proceedings, none of his thirty-nine creditors had any objections to Krotkov’s testimony and in 1876 held him to be an The Boundaries of Risk 125 “accidental” bankrupt.67 It is difficult to argue that Krotkov was any less “reckless” than, say, Zubov; for instance, both stories included references to natural disasters that according to the Bankruptcy Statute entitled the debtor to full discharge. One possible reason for the leniency to Krotkov was the more liberal attitude to insolvents in the 1870s, leading, for example, to the partial abolition of debt imprisonment in 1879; judging by the earlier examples, Krotkov might not have been so lucky in the 1850s and early 1860s. But it seems that another important reason was that many of Krotkov’s creditors were his ­relatives—with his wife alone accounting for almost one-third of the total amount of the debt—and thus able to influence the proceedings of his bankruptcy board. Overall, however, it seems that full discharge was not an outcome that could be taken for granted, although this conclusion could be affected by the nature of my sources.68 In contrast to the Krotkov case, in the case of Nikolia discussed above, creditors were clearly pressing the debtor to reveal any hidden assets or make some other arrangement for repayment, while in the Zubov case, it is unclear what motives, other than malice and frustration, induced his creditors to declare him “careless,” since there was no chance that Zubov retained any significant property or could acquire any in the future. What is clear is that the discharge could be agreed on as part of a deal between the creditor and the debtor: this is precisely what happened with Moscow merchant Borisovskii, who, legally speaking, was anything but an “accidental” bankrupt, since he was caught hiding merchandise and various household furnishings with his relatives. However, the creditors voted to ignore this inconvenient evidence that would have committed Borisovskii to a criminal trial and thus would have prevented him from repaying any of his debts in the future.69 Conversely, creditors could pressure debtors despite good evidence; for example, Artemii Riazanov (the elderly Old Believer merchant) received no sympathy despite very good witness testimony that said he was “an honest old man” who had become insolvent because of his inexperience in running a textile factory and because of bad prices for raw materials. Cases that I have reviewed contain very few instances of full bankruptcy discharge. The explanation for this is probably that, given that the creditors’ agreement was required for a discharge, those that were sympathetic to the debtor would have already reached a settlement during the early stages of a bankruptcy proceeding. 126 The Culture of Debt In addition to the balance between debtors’ financial and business decisions and those circumstances that were beyond their control, such as natural disasters and widespread price fluctuations, another important factor influencing the way debtors were treated in bankruptcy proceedings was information about their personal character, such as honesty, family commitment, and sobriety. To some extent, this notion was inherent in the very rules of Russian criminal procedure, which were applied in cases of “intentional” bankruptcy. Before the 1864 reform, these included a procedure (known as poval’nyi obysk) similar to early medieval juries in the West: the court investigator questioned twelve and sometimes more members of the defendant’s community of the same legal status (i.e., merchant, peasant, etc.) about the defendant’s behavior and character. In nineteenth-century practice, the answer was virtually always positive, except that in a very few instances, the person so questioned “did not know” anything about the defendant. While this ­particular procedural element had lost its practical meaning by the mid-­ nineteenth century, the question of debtors’ character continued to be crucial in bankruptcy proceedings, considering the central role of the creditors’ discretion and thus of their good opinion about the debtor.70 Another type of evidence that shows the balance between outside circumstances and personal character in determining how debtors were treated was a list of less wealthy debtors who were imprisoned in Moscow in 1826 and were considered for redemption on the occasion of Nicholas I’s coronation festivities, which prompted many charitable donations. These prisoners were all members of Moscow’s “middling” class, including junior civil servants, lesser merchants, townspeople, and peasants engaged in commerce. The list of 71 prisoners included detailed annotations of their character and of the reasons for their debt. These fall into two groups. The first set of 45 persons had debts related to business. To give just a few examples, the foreign merchant Petr Temerer could not repay 630 rubles related to his collapsed cartwrighting business. Merchant Zimin could not repay a 1,000-ruble veksel (commercial promissory note) because his money disappeared in bad debt extended to others. The merchant Kozma Ulianov owed over 4,000 rubles in rent to the city for keeping fisheries on its property and could not repay because of a flood, which also may have ruined townsman Ignatii Lubkov, who owned a mill. Another merchant, Petr Malyshev, rented space for an inn from General Poltoratskii but was ruined when the nearby theater closed down, leaving Malyshev in debt for 2,500 rubles. These were all considerable debts for mid-nineteenth century Russia, vastly exceeding the amounts earned by The Boundaries of Risk 127 manual laborers, for example, but still far short of the large commercial bankruptcies with their toll extending into hundreds of thousands of rubles. The second set of debtors consisted of victims of a wide variety of everyday life circumstances and included individuals of all social estates. For instance, a collegiate registrar’s wife, Maria Aleeva, became heavily indebted because of the slow progress of a legal case in which she was involved. Army Staff Captain Afanasii Bakhterev could not repay 4,000 rubles because his 100 serfs were refusing to pay their quitrent. No fewer than five individuals ended up in prison because they had to borrow to pay for their daughters’ weddings: soldier’s wife Maria Fomina owed 400 rubles; craftsman Ilia Rodionov owed 1,500 rubles; and three other townspeople owed 291, 200, and 600 rubles, respectively. Illness was another common cause, ruining foreigner Fedor Ride and townsman Gerasim Gavrilov (300 and 200 rubles, respectively). Irina Kozlova owed 700 rubles for rent and the expenses of signing up as a Moscow townswoman. Katerina Prakhova, a townswoman, owed 2,800 rubles because her late husband had borrowed from the wife of a civil servant who was later convicted for embezzlement. Townsman Sergei Smirnov still owed 800 rubles for timber used to rebuild his house after the French invasion in 1812. Townsman Konstantin Danilov owed 3,000 rubles that he had borrowed to ransom himself from serfdom. Craftsman Sergei Maksimov had borrowed 280 rubles to pay his taxes.71 This list could be continued, but what is already clear is that aside from such misfortunes as illness, peasant unrest, or legal expenses, the single most common cause of crippling indebtedness for these relatively humble individuals was a too-expensive attempt to better one’s social condition, whether by giving one’s daughter a respectable wedding, rebuilding a house, or escaping serfdom. This suggests an important social role for debt that is difficult to document en masse from any other single source. Although the debtor’s character and actions as well as his or her behindthe-scenes negotiations with creditors seem to have been the two most important factors affecting how they were treated, there is some evidence that mid-nineteenth-century Russian legal practice was at least beginning to recognize that simply engaging in commerce made debt inevitable and insolvency highly possible—even in the absence of famines and enemy invasions. First, Russian merchants and government officials alike tended to conflate large debts and large business turnover. For example, in the criminal bankruptcy trial of the elderly merchant Fedor Solodovnikov and his sons, his creditors and the court that reviewed their decision recognized that the 128 The Culture of Debt Solodovnikovs’ annual business turnover of 800,000 to 900,000 rubles “obviously could not occur without using credit.”72 This statement was made in a much later period than that covered in this study; however, the Solodovnikovs’ business and related indebtedness that eventually resulted in a bankruptcy did go back to the 1850s and 1860s. Earlier, in 1863, the Moscow governor general dispatched his special aide, Titular Councilor Count Konovnitsyn, to oversee renovations in the debtors’ prison. In his report arguing for improved conditions for wealthier debtors, Konovnitsyn noted that “almost always the greater the amount of debt, the larger the debtor’s affairs must have been, [he must have] had more money, and therefore was used to a better life.” The governor did not agree, but Konovnitsyn’s opinion could not have been completely eccentric if it was offered up to the governor in an official report.73 Second, as mentioned earlier, the Bankruptcy Statute did list market fluctuations as a basis for debt discharge, and actual bankrupts did bring up the vicissitudes of commerce to explain their insolvency. For example, the 75-year-old Old Believer merchant Artemii Riazanov unsuccessfully ran a small textile factory and for his debts was imprisoned for over four years and eventually put on trial for criminal bankruptcy. Explaining his failure, Riazanov mentioned high prices for raw cotton and low prices for finished goods that forced him to sell at a loss, in addition to the common stories of theft and the purchase of defective materials. Riazanov was unique among Russian debtors whose cases I reviewed as he described his emotional depression as a contributing factor in his financial misfortune and as explaining his unsatisfactory testimo