ny to the bankruptcy board. Here I have tried to preserve his grammar: I traded in cotton goods and because fortune did not accompany my commerce, my business went badly, and therefore I gradually lost myself and fell in spirit, paying little mind to my thoughts and cares, and came to a kind of sickly condition which included not only a lack of focus but also forgetfulness. And for that reason when proceedings were instituted regarding my inability to pay the debts pursuant to documents issued to creditors for the amounts indicated in them, then I, given my circumstances, agreed to everything as long as I was not constrained and could come back to myself—expecting some more favorable circumstances, which happen frequently in commerce, when a rich man becomes poor and a poor man becomes rich, and so I testified about my The Boundaries of Risk 129 insolvency indeterminately and haltingly, expressing myself for the most part with phrases ‘I don’t know’ and ‘I don’t remember’ . . . and all of this was attributed by my creditors, who became my judges, to my intention to conceal capital and merchandise to their detriment, whereas my testimony clearly spoke to my mental condition.74 Less expressively, the brewer and innkeeper Prokhor Bodrov, who became insolvent in 1867, explained his failure as a general decline of the beer trade, the loss of a large sum in bad debt, trade losses resulting from competition by tax farmers, who until 1863 administered Russia’s alcohol monopoly, and the loss of up to 12,000 rubles that resulted from his attempt to renovate his inn. This went along with a less convincing story of thieves stealing a chest with his account books and debt documents worth up to 20,000 rubles.75 While in those cases that I was able to review creditors usually suspected foul play and were not very inclined to listen to debtors’ stories of declining prices and markets,76 at least the courts that had to review and affirm the initial rulings of bankruptcy boards staffed by creditors approved the notion that market failure could be a mitigating factor. For example, the Moscow Commercial Court, aggressively pursuing an elderly Moscow merchant named Ivan Borisovskii, contrasted his story of an unsuccessful investment in the purchase of several houses in Moscow with an “accidental decline” (nechaiannyi upadok) in trade that could get him more lenient treatment.77 Taken together, it seems that the notion of unfavorable business circumstances leading to indebtedness and bankruptcy was used by debtors and their creditors and judges alike but did not acquire the force of a general outcome-determinative rule, since the lenient treatment did not reliably extend to instances of ­unsuccessful individual investment and risk taking that was interpreted to be reckless. After the 1864 reform, fraudulent bankrupts were tried by juries, who always retained the option of acquitting even those defendants who were obviously guilty, and so the post-reform jury trial should be viewed as one additional—and final—element in Russia’s bankruptcy procedure. Individuals who were formally guilty because they, for example, had destroyed their account books, could still be discharged of their debt in effect by being acquitted by the jury. For example, in 1876 a 49-year-old Moscow merchant, Ivan Yelmanov, was indicted for selling his bread shop to a friend, merchant Lepekhin, and for pawning to him all of the movable property in his apartment. Yelmanov claimed that his insolvency resulted from bad debts by 130 The Culture of Debt bakers but could not provide their names; he also destroyed his account books. His brother, who worked as his clerk, testified that his trade on credit was in very small amounts and that there were no bakers among his debtors. Lepekhin denied being handed over the shop to avoid debt. The jury acquitted Yelmanov.78 Another form of quasi-legal proceeding was the debt lottery, a privilege occasionally granted to high-profile, aristocratic debtors. This was one of the ways in which the central government and the tsar himself could occasionally become closely involved in specific debt cases, especially when a high-profile debtor became bankrupt or died. This intervention occurred through parallel extra-legal procedures rather than through subversion of the court system. Debt lotteries were an interesting alternative to using the court system and were primarily intended for the heirs of Russia’s wealthiest debtors. One example occurred in 1821, when Count Nikolai Golovin, the great-grandson of Russia’s first admiral of the Petrine era, died, leaving 3 million rubles’ worth of property and 7 million rubles’ worth of debts. The late count’s heirs sensibly refused to take on the inheritance, and the government was obligated to authorize a lottery sale administered by a special commission with the minister of the interior as its head. The commission issued 170,000 tickets, each worth 50 rubles. The four winning tickets included portions of Golovin’s extensive landed estates, but there were also 6,009 money prizes ranging from 50 to 200,000 rubles. The drawing was conducted by twelve children from the Gatchina Imperial Orphanage, and information about the lottery and the drawing was published daily in the leading St. Petersburg daily newspaper. The winners included individuals from many different provinces, of various estates (gentry, civil servants, soldiers, merchants, townspeople, and even a serf of Count Sheremetev, who won 25,000 rubles). The lottery had huge resonance across Russia because individuals from many provinces and from different social ranks bought tickets and were eagerly hoping to win. Memoirist Vasilii Gettun bought a ticket for 50 rubles and sent it to a young lady as a sign of affection. Novelist and ethnographer Melnikov-Pecherskii, in his Grandmother’s Tales, wrote, “In her last years grandmother prayed every day to the point of fainting . . . . At that time there was a lottery for the Golovin estate; grandmother bought three tickets and she wanted very badly to win Vorotynets [the estate constituting the main prize]. She prayed for it so hard that every day she would be put to bed The Boundaries of Risk 131 unconscious. The lottery was drawn, grandmother lost, but she did not want to believe it and every day prayed for the rich Vorotynets with its gardens, wharfs, picture galleries, and all the riches of the fabulous estate.” Another reaction, exemplified by characters in Nikolai Leskov’s unfinished novel A Family in Decline (1874), was shock at the fact that human beings (Golovin’s serfs) were being sold at a lottery.79 A similar case occurred when Chamberlain Aleksandr Sergeevich Vlasov, another eighteenth-century grandee, died in 1825, and his heirs refused to take on the estate because of its staggering debts, in his case incurred by acquiring a fabulous art collection of paintings, engravings, bronzes, marbles, porcelain, books, antique weapons, and so on. In this case, 2,154 items were to be drawn at the lottery, likewise established by Alexander I’s special decree explicitly as an alternative to court procedures, which were thought to be ill equipped to deal with a case of such magnitude.80 However, the tickets sold so poorly that the lottery had to be canceled and replaced by the more typical auction sale.81 This kind of alternative procedure seems to have become a notable feature in the culture of debt, even if it was used only sporadically. For example, in 1860 there was a widely publicized lottery of an estate in Warsaw province, which consisted of five sections, each divided into three classes. Prizes were staggering: in only one of the several sections the main prize was 425,700 rubles.82 Official permission was necessary to stage a lottery, which was sometimes denied (perhaps because it was seen merely as a way for the debtor to get out of paying).83 Public lotteries were only used sporadically, but should be seen as an alternative form of bankruptcy discharge and as something of a social safety valve for high-status individuals burdened with hopeless debts. In sum, Russian bankruptcy laws provided for the full discharge of debts for individuals who fell victim to natural disasters, enemy invasions, and sudden market fluctuations that ruined their business. However, actual cases show that the three-fold classification of bankruptcies as unfortunate, reckless, and malintentioned—clear enough on paper but not corresponding to the real practices of Russian merchants and other entrepreneurs and dependent on the discretion of the creditors staffing bankruptcy boards—­ultimately served as a framework for practical negotiations between creditors and debtors, much as they did in France, for example.84 Creditors appear to have been more motivated to recover at least some of their investment than to argue about precise legal definitions. Debtors, in turn, were motivated to 132 The Culture of Debt convince creditors that they did not intentionally deprive them of their money and were not hiding anything of value, or that they still had enough earning potential to recover the loss if allowed to stay in business. Both sets of “bright-line” rules discussed in this chapter were therefore inextricably linked with individual discretion and strategizing and, ultimately, with a set of far less clearly articulated values and assumptions about credit. chapt e r 4 Fraud, Property, and Respectability A n o th e r d e fining set of ideas about credit connected property ownership and wealth with the much more tangled and often unspoken notions of trust and respectability. A wealthy person was usually deemed to be respectable and thus creditworthy, but the roles of risk, contingency, and trust in any credit transaction are also obvious. A rich borrower could easily prove to be the lender’s worst nightmare, by leaving town or engaging in protracted legal battles or simply dying. As Craig Muldrew has pointed out with respect to early modern England, in the absence of modern credit-reporting agencies and large banks, individuals strove to minimize the risk inherent in lending by relying on the legal system.1 But even with criminal penalties provided for fraud, the legal system was not of much help to a lender whose debtor became penniless. So what did borrowers and lenders do as a practical matter to determine creditworthiness? Markers of trust were complex, including not simply documentary proof of property ownership, rich clothing, and good manners but even more importantly the presence of partners, friends, and relatives who helped to demonstrate the potential borrowers’ membership in a network of property owners known to be creditworthy and reputable. The culture of credit was therefore inseparable from the more encompassing “invisible code of honor” that governed respectable conduct in the nineteenth century and whose boundaries were most clearly articulated in the breach.2 Existing studies of nineteenth-century honor unfortunately leave out its connection with credit, but Russian debt cases reveal the same focus on appearances, deception, and the concealment of shame that William 133 134 The Culture of Debt Reddy has described as the “essential feature” of the nineteenth-century culture of honor.3 Potential borrowers needed to project prosperity and inspire confidence even when they were desperate for a quick infusion of cash, and when the time came for repayment, potentially insolvent debtors attempted to convince their creditors that their finances were sound and that postponing the debt would do no harm. As Jonathan Sperber has observed for nineteenth-century Germany, even when both borrowers and lenders were honest, a “gap remained between the knowledge of credit-worthiness, stemming from the face-to-face dealings of individuals, and the broader scope of . . . commerce.”4 The complex connection between trust, respectability, and concealment and deception—as well as the 