803 was a particularly influential example of a civil law system setting the bounds of legal competence, granting extensive authority to the patriarchal adult male head of the household, to be exercised over women, children, and other dependents, including poor laborers.18 Similarly, the laws in force in nineteenth-­ century Russia placed partial restrictions on the legal competence of, for example, foreigners, Jews, monks, and government officials.19 In addition to these partial prohibitions, the law prohibited from entering into any legal contract all persons who were not legally competent, such as those subject to an appointed trusteeship.20 The largest and most clearly defined category of legal incompetents was minors. Whereas in the Muscovite period boys who reached fifteen entered the tsar’s service and were considered legally competent, Peter the Great’s legislation raised the age of majority to eighteen for transactions with movable property and twenty for dealing with real estate.21 Peter’s 1714 law of primogeniture provided that documents issued by persons under twenty were not to be honored. This rule was reiterated in 1752, 1821, 1826, and 1830 and was included in the Digest of the Laws of 1832. These decrees also specified that a minor over seventeen could still incur debt with their guardian’s permission.22 In 1785, Catherine II’s law allowed persons who reached seventeen to manage their real estate but not sell or mortgage it without their guardian’s permission until they reached full majority, which was set at twenty-one.23 Despite its commendable intent, this rule was bound to cause problems— and not simply because people lied about their age. A rather serious technical problem was that by setting the full age of majority at twenty-one while granting a limited capacity to manage property to persons over seventeen, someone who was technically a minor could appear to be independent of their families in most aspects: a young man could be in civil or military 112 The Culture of Debt s­ ervice, and a young woman could marry and move under the jurisdiction of her husband. An additional practical challenge was determining a person’s precise age. In the nineteenth century, this was not always easy, since metrical records could be lost or unavailable, especially for certain categories of the population, such as for Russia’s numerous and economically active Old Believers whose sacraments were not officially recognized.24 Other less conclusive ways to prove age included tax rolls (revizskie skazki), confession records, and circumstantial evidence such as witness testimony. Not surprisingly, abuses and errors were rampant. To address potential abuses, some European legal systems chose to retain some debt responsibility for minors to prevent unjust enrichment, especially when a minor posed as an adult, as was the rule in Austria. Another option that Russian law could have adopted was to discard the concept of limited legal capability at seventeen or to provide for a court-ordered emancipation that was already available in Russia’s Baltic provinces.25 By contrast, Russian law—in line with the pre-reform tendency not to give judges too much interpretive leeway—adopted the strict rule that the only factor that mattered was the person’s actual age at the time of the transaction; neither ­anyone’s subjective belief nor any deception employed could make the transaction valid. In practice, the Senate in the 1860s modified the rule by requiring any minor who issued a debt obligation by certifying his or her age by illegal means to compensate the creditor and by permitting the court to require the adult person to repay a debt incurred before the age of majority if he or she admitted that debt after coming of age.26 These decisions introduced some measure of safety for defrauded creditors at the expense of additional procedures, uncertainty, and judicial discretion, and only served to account for the most extreme cases without modifying the basic rule. In turn, individual creditors and debtors were aware of the rule and took precautions. For example, the registries of loan letters at the Moscow Chamber of Civil Justice included the borrowers’ age in some entries, as well as the guardian’s permission and signature for those actually underage. But despite these precautions, youths apparently often lied in an attempt to take advantage of their creditors. In such cases, the creditors’ best recourse was to complain to the police and initiate a criminal investigation, hoping that this threat would induce repayment. This mechanism is illustrated by the otherwise unexceptional debt collection case against the previously mentioned student of the Imperial Moscow University, Ivan Chulkov. He was born in 1843 to a serf-owning army major The Boundaries of Risk 113 and a serf woman, Agafia Rodionova. At first his parents signed him up as a townsman (meshchanin), as required by law for the children of such unions, but later his mother paid the merchant’s tax for her son “just so he could have that rank.”27 As the young man later stated to the police, on July 14, 1863, he was playing cards with his friend, nobleman V. I. Khlopetskii, who “took advantage of his inexperience” and took from him a bill of exchange for the weighty sum of 4,500 silver rubles. When the police came to Chulkov’s home to collect the money, he claimed that he issued this document as a minor because of his inexperience but never received any money. On the document, however, Chulkov wrote that he was twenty-two years of age. He was freed on the surety of his landlord and told to bring his birth certificate to the police. As the investigation continued, Khlopetskii testified that he had not played cards but had loaned the money to Chulkov so that he could pay his debts. He claimed that he had not known that Chulkov was underage but that the broker (makler) who was recording the transaction began to doubt Chulkov’s age and asked him to write it on the debt document. However, none of these circumstances turned out to be legally relevant. While legally Chulkov could not be required to repay his debt, the police started a criminal investigation of his intentional misrepresentation of his age, and this threat effectively induced him to come to a settlement with Khlopetskii. Eventually, the two of them petitioned the court to discontinue the case, emphasizing that Chulkov “could easily have made a mistake about his age.” The investigator chose to drop the charges, although he was not legally obligated to do so. What could have happened if Chulkov had not settled his case is illustrated by the fraud proceedings against noblewoman Agrafena Krivtsova, who in 1849 signed a loan letter for 5,000 rubles and falsely claimed to be twenty-five, which her husband Nikolai falsely witnessed.28 Krivtsova claimed that she only found out her age when the loan letter was first presented for collection because “as a maiden living in her parents’ house she had no necessity to know her exact age and upon marrying she was deprived of any means to obtain correct information about it.” Her husband unsuccessfully attempted to avoid trouble with the law by claiming that his signature only meant that he certified his wife’s identity and not her age.29 Krivtsova’s original sentence from the Moscow Aulic Court was to leave her “under strong suspicion”—the pre-reform equivalent of a suspended sentence—but free her from the debt collection because of her minority.30 The province-level 114 The Culture of Debt Criminal Chamber held her to be potentially liable to a sentence of one year in the workhouse but freed her from punishment pursuant to the tsar’s amnesty of August 26, 1856. If not for this manifesto, Krivtsova would have lived the rest of her life with the blemish of a criminal conviction, which could have affected her in various ways, even if she had not had to spend any time in prison or the workhouse. Still, although the Senate freed Krivtsova from having to repay the loan, it noted that the creditors still had the right to recoup their losses through additional criminal proceedings. However, the case file contains no indication that such proceedings occurred. These two cases show how a debtor could attempt to use the inflexibility of the law to his or her advantage, whether or not Chulkov or Krivtsova did know their true age at the time of their transactions. Considering that Chulkov was a university student, it is likely that he was better informed about his age than the average Russian of the period. At the same time, these cases show—independently of the question of what the most effective legal rule would have been—that the pre-reform legal system was not nearly as inefficient and inflexible as portrayed by its critics and in practice found a way to enforce through potential criminal sanctions the bright-line prohibition of borrowing by minors. The rule was effective even when the circumstances of the case made the action against a debtor swift and difficult to resist in court, such as the 1845 proceedings against the Senate registrar’s wife Mel’nikova.31 She was sued by a captain’s daughter Olenina for 840 rubles but claimed that she never received the money and had issued the note without knowing she was doing so because of her inability to read shorthand. The police applied Russia’s system of formal evidence to rule that because Mel’nikova admitted the signature on the note was hers, she had to pay, and the Aulic Court affirmed this ruling and sent her to debtors’ prison even as she was further appealing the decision. However, someone must have advised Mel’nikova of the law about minors, and as soon as the court was informed that she was only sixteen when she signed the debt note in 1842, she was freed from arrest. The courts enforced the law even at the expense of parental authority, which the imperial regime usually strove to protect. While normally parents were automatically their children’s guardians, the issue was more complicated when parents and children were on the opposite sides of a transaction, and the former could not be expected to exercise impartial judgment. This was the issue in litigation between a wealthy Moscow merchant Dmitrii Savinov and his daughter, who was married to an army lieutenant, The Boundaries of Risk 115 Aleksandrov. It was common for parents and parents-in-law to use loans— real or fictitious—to secure their power and authority over the younger generation, and this was the case for Savinov. At one point, perhaps due to some personal conflict, he decided to exercise his authority and collect from his daughter an enormous debt of 350,000 rubles that was secured by a mortgage on part of his daughter’s lands.32 The daughter claimed that she had signed the mortgage note at the insistence of her father and that she was then only eighteen, as confirmed by the birth and baptism certificate from the Moscow Spiritual Consistory that she provided to the court. Given that her father must have been aware of his daughter’s age, she argued that he therefore could not legally make her sign the mortgage without appointing a separate guardian to review and approve the transaction. Furthermore, the daughter or her husband unearthed another questionable transaction, an 1841 gift to her brother Dmitrii of four brick shop buildings that were ­originally purchased in her name in 1838. When the gift was registered at the Moscow Civil Chamber, Savinov named himself as his daughter’s guardian, without being affirmed in this capacity by any official institution. Over Savinov’s objections, the Equity Court found that he was not recorded anywhere as being his daughter’s official guardian and, therefore, ruled against him.33 Parents could also attempt to benefit from this rule by having their children sign a debt document in their place, perhaps to avoid having to pay back the debt, although in the case of an old merchant, Artemii Riaz