s allegedly wasteful nobility: contrary to popular belief, its The Boundaries of Risk 107 indebtedness was not excessive compared to its available assets and, moreover, many landowners with large debts were enterprising and prosperous. But the spendthrift image was not entirely invented by moralists and foreign observers: younger nobles and merchants routinely fell into debt from drinking, gambling, and other forms of carousing. Spendthrift behavior no doubt revealed the less rational aspects of human nature and can only in part be explained by the youngsters’ frustration due to their inability to take full advantage of their families’ wealth. Lack of financial education and socialization was another likely factor. However, many stories of alleged wastrels had less to do with an irrational pursuit of pleasure and luxury than with the necessity of maintaining and advancing one’s social and official status. For many young nobles, life in Petersburg and service in the Imperial Guard was a financial gamble—but not necessarily a wasteful or irrational one.5 Nor was it quite as hopeless as it might appear from the letters and petitions of indebted aristocrats hoping for a bailout from a gracious monarch. A social, cultural, and above all legal framework was also in place to restrain inexperienced or wasteful members of the propertied classes. This framework is particularly fascinating because the strict legal rule about borrowing by minors was interwoven with a less formal ad hoc regulation of adult “spendthrifts” and because formal legal rules in Nicholaevan Russia invariably complemented, and underlined the importance of, private discretion and private initiative. Profligate nobles from nineteenth-century fiction are too many to list here, from the indebted nobles in Faddei Bulgarin’s bestselling novel Ivan Vyzhigin (1829) to the young Count Rostov from Tolstoy’s War and Peace, who lost 43,000 rubles in one night to an unscrupulous cavalry officer.6 These characters had real-life counterparts. Consider the young Count Dmitrii Nikolaevich Tolstoy, who was declared insolvent in 1863, with debts approaching 30,000 rubles, some of them secured by various expensive movable properties such as furs. This amount was enough to maintain a very wealthy noble family for a year, while falling short of the six-digit debts of some of Russia’s grandest aristocrats. A large proportion of this money Tolstoy seems to have spent on fine horses, some of which turned out to be worthless. These debts had no discernible connection to any expenses of the military or other state service, since the young count served at the Moscow Noble Assembly apparently solely to avoid imprisonment for his debts. In the end, he was lucky in having his father pay his debts and get the case closed. 108 The Culture of Debt Far less governable was the young Lev Verigin, son of a naval officer, who showed “bad inclinations” from a young age and ran away from home, from foster care, and from several boarding schools. After his seventh escape, in 1865 he was put on a naval vessel Izumrud, bound for Japan. He continued to incur debts throughout the trip and was eventually expelled from the ship in Nagasaki for forging a banknote. In 1868, several months before Lev came of age, his father successfully petitioned to continue to be his guardian to avoid wasting away his property.7 The expectation that the scion of a wealthy family could be tempted to lead a merry life resulting in massive debt was also shared by the creditors of Moscow’s commercial class. For example, in the bankruptcy case of Moscow honorary citizen A. Kalashnikov from the 1870s, one of his creditors wanted to put him on criminal trial for intentional bankruptcy because “being a son of wealthy parents, he early became acquainted with a quite dissolute and merry [razgul’naia i veselaia] life and . . . began to borrow money from various persons in order to later announce himself insolvent.”8 After Alexander Terskii, a prominent Moscow moneylender, died in 1856, his son inherited 16,000 rubles in a bank and almost 60,000 in debt documents. After receiving the cash and collecting from his father’s more reliable debtors, “Terskii started to live lavishly [barski], recklessly, acquired friends and mentors; he had extensive credit from lenders, tailors and other craftsmen and innkeepers; the inheritance was quickly squandered; he was also borrowing recklessly and signed debt obligations.” Terskii was declared insolvent in 1860 but continued to borrow until being placed in debtors’ prison.9 The only son of another wealthy moneylender from that period, Ivan Bri­ ukhatov, likewise began a life of carousing after his father’s death that included participating in a mock religious funeral, leading to a criminal trial for blasphemy in 1878. His co-defendants were members of a group of swindlers known as the Jacks of Hearts Club, and it is important to note that both the swindlers and their victims in that case included rather colorful young merchants who lost all sense of financial reality due to alcoholic stupor. One of the most important victims was a twenty-one-year-old merchant, Klavdii Yeremeev, who had a young wife and a fortune of 150,000 rubles. His bout of drinking and carousing in 1871 also involved issuing debt documents worth around 60,000 rubles, which he could barely remember. Another young ­merchant, Vasily Pegov, son of a prominent Moscow industrialist, drank and partied so much that his father eventually expelled him out of his house, after which Vasily began to forge bills of exchange in his father’s name.10 The Boundaries of Risk 109 Moderately wealthy Muscovites who could not rely on wealthy relatives also signed debt documents while drunk and gambling. For example, in 1863 a young Moscow University student named Ivan Chulkov refused to pay his debt on the grounds that he had been underage at the time and testified that he became drunk and lost a card game, after which “the friendly game suddenly became serious,” and his partner, nobleman Khlopovitskii, forced him to sign a bill of exchange. He claimed to have been so intoxicated that he only remembered writing something to Khlopovitskii’s dictation but did not remember what it was. Chulkov’s story of intoxication, craftiness, and betrayal was completely rejected by his creditor, who claimed that they had never played cards but that he had loaned money to Chulkov so that he could pay his other debts.11 Another example is the case of townsman Aleksei Klimov, who in 1865 borrowed money from another townsman, Mikhail Ulitin. While drunk, Klimov wrote seven backdated bills of exchange for different dates and to different persons, but according to his claim, he received no cash from Ulitin except for some money for a cab.12 It should be noted that not all reckless spendthrifts were men: women, and widows in particular, were also known to go into heavy debt. For example, a wealthy noblewoman, Elizaveta Dolgovo-Saburova, moved to Moscow in 1839 and signed numerous debt documents, both in her own name and as the guarantor for other persons, while suffering from the “white fever” (belaia goriachka, referring to alcoholic delirium) that “made her completely insensible.”13 Not all spendthrift behavior resulted from stupidity or alcoholism, and in some cases it actually indicated an attempt to establish and maintain oneself close to the imperial court, to important grandees, or especially in a prestigious regiment. The memoirist Andrei Bolotov, coming to St. Petersburg in 1762 to serve as General Nikolai Korf ’s aide-de-camp, was clearly reluctant to spend large amounts on horses and gilded uniforms, which could not be accomplished without borrowing, but found that he had no choice if he wanted to retain his advantageous position.14 Twenty-three years later, the young Prince I. M. Dolgorukov, another well-known memoirist, noted that “judging by the common opinion, I established myself in [St. Petersburg] society on a good footing, but look at what this cost me. I am not talking about boredom, strivings, petitions and various whims that I had to withstand here and there. Most of all I was beginning to be oppressed by debt, this ever-wakeful worm that afflicts city dwellers! . . . Foppery made my head dizzy.”15 At the end of 1785 Dolgorukov discovered that he owed as much as 110 The Culture of Debt 2,000 rubles to clothiers, hairdressers, and cabmen. He did not have his own horses or a house, nor did he indulge in any significant gambling and carousing, and so these expenses seem to have stemmed mostly from his position as an officer in the Imperial Guard close to Grand Duke Paul. These demands had not changed much by around 1860, when a member of another ancient Russian aristocratic family, the young Prince Nikolai Pav­ lovich Obolenskii, was unable to obtain a position in the Imperial Guard after finishing his education due to his poor performance in school and had to content himself with entering the less prestigious Elisavetgrad Hussar Regiment. From the very beginning of his service, Obolenskii bombarded his uncle and guardian with letters, which, while disavowing a desire to “stick it to him” in financial matters (uschityvat’), begged him for more money: it turned out that even a regular cavalry regiment required the officers to provide themselves with expensive horses, uniforms, and equipment. Officers who had not acquired a horse quickly enough were transferred to the infantry, the shame of which the young prince could not even contemplate. As the year went on, Obolenskii’s letters became more desperate: although he initially vowed to have not “the slightest intention of taking on new debts,” the gilded Hussar uniform turned out to cost more than 1,700 rubles, and he had to acquire a horse before the inspection by the divisional commander; in his Christmas letter to his uncle, the young prince confessed to having “out of necessity made some debts.” Thus, although Obolenskii regarded his Hussar regiment as beneath his family pedigree, it still proved to be beyond his means, and he had retired from service by 1862. His motivation of maintaining his family’s longstanding prestige is clear from his letters, but it is interesting that his uncle did not seem to think that these debts were inevitable or even useful.16 State service, especially in the capital cities, did demand significant expense, yet the line between luxury and perceived necessity was apparently not always easy to determine. However, potential benefits of debt-financed service in St. Petersburg were also considerable: family status and future income resulted from valuable assignments, promotions, gifts from the tsar, military loot, and government contracts. Aristocratic financial success stories have not attracted as much scholarly attention as spectacular aristocratic bankruptcies. Consider, for example, Catherine II’s key administrator, Prince Alexander Viazemskii, who came from an old but utterly impoverished family and accumulated a fortune of 2 million rubles. In the nineteenth century, Moscow’s flamboyant governor general, Count Arsenii Zakrevskii, came from a modest provincial The Boundaries of Risk 111 family but after attracting Alexander I’s attention was arranged to marry one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia.17 Taking a risk to advance one’s position and connections appears in this light to be entirely compatible with the ­eighteenth- and nineteenth-century ideal of a rational economic decision-maker. Aside from being rescued by relatives or—for the select few—directly by the monarch, spendthrifts and unsuccessful risk takers were protected by a complex web of legal rules prohibiting certain categories of individuals from incurring all or some types of debt. These rules were part of the fundamental legal principle that property transactions could only be effected by persons deemed legally competent. The French Napoleonic Code of 1