 a criminal 120 The Culture of Debt prosecution and by holding out the possibility of a discharge as a reward for cooperation. Legal practice in mid-nineteenth century Russia balanced the two approaches to debt that had existed—and collided—in the West since at least the eighteenth century. The older view assumed that insolvency was caused by a debtor’s immorality and recklessness, while the newer attitude, revealed at first in practice but increasingly also in legislation, shifted some of the risk of failure to creditors when the insolvency stemmed from circumstances beyond the debtor’s control. In Western Europe and North America, the treatment of debtors in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries gradually shifted away from regarding debt and bankruptcy as a moral failing that was to be dealt with through harsh legislation. Although much of dayto-day debt relations continued to rely on personal acquaintance and traditional notions of honor and character, the emerging consensus was that debt was necessary and even beneficial for commerce and that insolvency was primarily an economic, rather than a moral, failure, meaning that individuals taking business risks were no longer to be punished for it.52 Thus the early modern English bankruptcy laws that were penal in character were replaced with the statutes of 1825 and 1849, which offered greater protections to insolvent merchants, and the statute of 1869, which extended bankruptcy protections to non-traders.53 The French law of 1807 was harsh toward debtors, focusing on enabling creditors to identify, seize, and distribute a debtors’ assets, with the result that voluntary agreements between creditors and debtors became the norm in practice and that subsequent ­legislation strove to correct the imbalance and provide some protections for debtors. The effect of the new European bankruptcy laws was that cooperating debtors could enjoy a complete discharge of their debts and could start with a blank slate, free of oppressive legal sanctions and virtually free of social disapproval. At the same time, though, debtors continued to view their condition as limiting their personal autonomy as citizens.54 As to those individuals whose debts were too small to be eligible for bankruptcy protection— the poor and the laboring classes—they were increasingly viewed not as objects of charity but as delinquents who needed to be restrained and ­punished.55 In imperial Russia, a broadly similar movement was also taking place. The landmark Law Code of 1649 did not provide for bankruptcy discharge or specify how a debtor’s assets were to be distributed, but it did require a The Boundaries of Risk 121 ­ ayment moratorium of up to three years when insolvency resulted from p fires, floods, or brigand attacks; after that, all the negative consequences, such as indentured service, still ensued.56 Although the first bankruptcy statute in Russia was enacted in 1740, it never actually went into effect, and during the second half of the eighteenth century bankruptcy practice relied on several fragmentary decrees.57 The important Senate decree of 1767 followed Dutch commercial law and ruled that the majority of the creditors who held most of the debt were to make the decisions. In 1784 this was refined to also give the authority on a bankruptcy board to a minority of the creditors who held the majority of the claims.58 A complete bankruptcy statute was enacted in 1800, and so in this respect imperial Russia was in-step with the overall Western trend. A slightly different version of the statute was adopted in 1832 and remained in force until 1917, with only minor changes. Russian law defined bankruptcy as the inability to repay one’s debts in full. Other signs of bankruptcy included personal admission or flight. Technically, this definition would make virtually any merchant or property owner into a bankrupt and, consequently, made the entire bankruptcy regime completely dependent upon creditors’ confidence. A debt-ridden individual could stay in business for years and, conversely, someone declared bankrupt could actually be completely solvent by today’s standards. Noble landowners who were not technically insolvent could petition the government to establish a “mediating commission” composed of their creditors for the purpose of the orderly ­distribution of the debtor’s assets.59 Although there was some debate in Russia about whether to extend bankruptcy procedures to nobles, there was no widespread resistance and apparently nothing like Sir William Blackstone’s position, which was widely shared in England, that only merchants could possibly become insolvent through no fault of their own, whereas everyone else could only do so through dishonesty.60 As in other major legal systems, Russian law contained separate provisions for commercial and noncommercial bankruptcy, but with its relatively clearly defined system of social estates, the attempt to distinguish between commercial and noncommercial bankruptcy presented particular difficulties for noncommercial debts incurred by merchants, as well as commercial debts incurred by members of other estates. In 1846 this issue was clarified, and commercial bankruptcy rules were extended to persons from all estates, as long as they took out commercial licenses. Finally, another legal issue, likewise not unique to Russia, was what kind of activity should count as trade. According to Gabriel Shershenevich, imperial Russia’s leading 122 The Culture of Debt expert on commercial law, the judicial consensus was that it was not necessary to engage in a series of transactions: it was enough to show the intention to engage in trade, for example, by purchasing merchandise on credit with intent to resell it.61 The law of 1800 also established the framework—already present in the eighteenth-century drafts—of three types of bankruptcy: accidental, reckless, and intentional. Nineteenth-century French bankruptcy law also followed this categorization, distinguishing faillite, banqueroute simple, and banqueroute frauduleuse. The default rule requiring no special showing was to hold an insolvent debtor to be “reckless,” whereas in order to have his or her debts forgiven, an insolvent debtor had to prove that there were external circumstances that affected his or her ability to pay. Among the conditions for this full discharge were a natural disaster or an enemy invasion, or “other accidental decline or bankruptcy, an extraordinary fall in the prices of merchandise, if it will be proven that other merchants suffered the same fall at the same time . . . and other similar circumstances, which he could not prevent.” Conversely, if creditors found that the debtor concealed property that could be used to cover the debt or engaged in any other fraud, they held bankruptcy to be “malintentioned” (zlonamerennoe bankrotstvo), which automatically resulted in criminal prosecution. Unlike usury, fraudulent ­ bankruptcy was punishable with exile to Siberia. The creditors’ findings were reviewed by the Commercial Court and often resulted in litigation, especially when challenged by creditors who were not satisfied with the majority’s decision.62 One example of how the decision was reached in practice is provided by the case of the military engineer Colonel Vladimir Nikolia (Nicolas) who became insolvent in 1870, with debts totaling nearly 185,000 rubles. By that time, he had retired from commerce and worked for the Warsaw-St. Petersburg Railroad, but in the 1850s, he had been heavily involved in municipal engineering projects and government contracts. His misfortunes started in 1859, when his uninsured grain barge on the Volga burned down. Later he built an embankment in the town of Rybinsk, which was destroyed by ice before he officially turned over his work; then he lost money in an “unlucky enterprise of an oil-making factory,” as well as through managing a steamship company in 1851–1863 and designing a water-supply operation in the city of Kazan’.63 Nikolia’s creditors concluded that this kaleidoscope of projects was evidence of “recklessness,” which was punishable by up to five years in a debtors’ prison. Superficially the decision suggests that Russians at that time The Boundaries of Risk 123 had not yet adopted the more debtor-friendly attitude to commercial failure that just then prevailed in Great Britain; but considering that Nikolia’s creditors eventually settled the case, agreeing to set him free to pursue yet another project in exchange for continuing to make payments on his debt, a more likely interpretation is that the creditors were simply trying to pressure Nikolia to agree to favorable settlement terms.64 While it is less clear whether it was Nikolia’s mismanagement or misfortune that most contributed to his insolvency, other cases make much clearer the string of “social” and natural disasters that could build up over years and bring to nothing even wealthy people’s attempts to rebuild their finances. These cases make for some of the most dramatic reading in pre-reform court documents. For example, Prince Andrei Borisovich Golitsyn inherited a debt-ridden estate from his father in 1822, suffered crop failures for two years, massive peasant disobedience, and on the top of that the ruin of his investment in the Sericultural Company in Transcaucasia when one of his partners who had the necessary expertise died and the company was taken over for its debt to the imperial treasury.65 Many of his creditors, especially those of his own social circle, chose to discontinue their claims, considering his bankruptcy to be unintentional, but others continued the suit. A similarly detailed and dramatic testimony was offered by Collegiate Secretary Petr Fedorovich Zubov, who had estates in Arzamas and Maka­ rievsk counties in the Volga region, with nearly 3,000 serfs. Zubov chose to take over this debt-ridden estate from his brother and for several years attempted to improve conditions for his peasants by paying them to develop additional lands, transferring newly bought serfs from central Russia to work on empty lands, and developing a timbering operation (which came to nothing because his creditors shut it down). All these efforts eventually failed, according to Zubov, because of the “unfortunate confluence of circumstances” that included several crop failures, fires destroying both Zubov’s and his peasants’ structures, and the serfs suing Zubov to gain their freedom and refusing to pay their rent, which, in turn, made it impossible for him to repay the mortgage to the Moscow Board of Trustees. The Board then had a trustee appointed over the estate to collect its income, which put an end to Zubov’s attempts to regain his financial autonomy. For his daring in taking on this debt-ridden estate, Zubov was held to be a “careless” bankrupt, although actually arresting him proved to be impossible, since after being expelled from his estate Zubov went into hiding, apparently at his friends’ estates.66 124 The Culture of Debt That the outcome of cases like Zubov’s or Golitsyn’s depended completely upon the creditors’ goodwill and discretion is showed by another almost identical case that did lead to a full discharge. The misfortunes of Actual State Councilor (equivalent to army major general) Sergei Ivanovich Krotkov began in 1847, as soon as he received—as was commonly practiced by the Russian landowning gentry—his portion of his future inheritance while his father was still alive. This transfer was accompanied by various debilitating conditions and was followed by three years of bad harvests in 1847, 1848, and 1849, when Krotkov had to borrow to pay his living expenses and the interest on the Board of Trustees loan, as well as to feed his hungry peasants and their livestock and rebuild their houses. At that point, Krotkov had not yet given up but decided to convert his distillery plant to a textile factory to take advantage of low prices for raw 