and servitors not classified under the Table of Ranks; d. Honorary citizens, merchants, townspeople, craftspeople; e. Foreigners, clergy, peasants. Data sources: TsIAM 50.14.2363 (1852); 1597 (1855); and 1629 (1862). rubles to Collegiate Assessor Mikulyshin, another 2,000 to the second-guild ­merchant Sulaev, and 1,156 rubles to townsman Andreev.126 Considering that there was a significant social gap between Glushkov’s Class 10 rank and Mikulyshin’s rank, it is interesting that Glushkov chose to borrow from a superior. In sum, credit links formed by members of urban and commercial propertied groups were considerably more varied than those of the wealthy landowners. Borrowing within one’s own group remained attractive, but the ­middling groups’ lesser wealth and their inability to utilize formal credit institutions led them to form mixed debt portfolios with members of other social groupings. This conclusion is also confirmed by an analysis of several types of debt ledgers kept at the Moscow Chamber of Civil Justice, categorized according to the service rank and legal estate of the participant. Table 2.2, showing the relative disparity in rank between lenders and borrowers, reveals clusters of transactions between peers, as well as ones crossing estate boundaries. Moreover, it was far more common for nobles and civil servants to do business with merchants and townspeople than with individuals within their own estate but on the opposite end of the Table of Ranks. Borrowers and lenders definitely liked to deal with their peers but were unable or unwilling to do so exclusively or consistently. Lenders Another question that emerges from this account is whether lenders also tended to favor their social peers. Lists of debtors are obviously much less 102 The Culture of Debt common than those of creditors, since lenders were interested in keeping this information private. In St. Petersburg, the Third Section occasionally sent its officers and secret agents to investigate alleged usurers, but such inquiries were limited to lenders who catered to wealthy and aristocratic borrowers. More helpful are lists created when a lender died, became insolvent, or was subject to full-scale prosecution. Such lists suggest that even those lenders who worked with a particular type of borrower also formed connections outside their social and cultural circles. One example of a lender favoring his own kind was Lieutenant Vasilii Nilus, who died in 1852, whereupon the trustees appointed over his estates attempted to sort out his assets and debts. While Nilus owned 147 serfs in the agriculturally rich Orel province, most of his income must have come from his ownership of four residential buildings in Moscow, as well as from his moneylending activities. He strongly preferred to loan money to other officers and civil servants: two of his debtors were staff-captains, one was a titular councilor, one was an Aulic councilor (equal to lieutenant colonel), and one was an unspecified nobleman. Nilus did, however, diversify his investments in other ways, by making several medium-sized loans (of around 2,000; 2,000; 3,000; 6,800; and 8,200 rubles) rather than a few large ones by lending money to one person from St. Petersburg and by securing the loan to one Mr. Krenenberg with a mortgage on a house in the town of Orel. The loan to Titular Councilor Pavlov (for 8,208.50 rubles) must have turned sour because Nilus was engaged in a lawsuit at the time of his death that was being appealed all the way to the Senate. In turn, Nilus himself actively borrowed money: he mortgaged his estate for 14,140 rubles and one of his houses for 1,464 rubles to the Moscow Board of Trustees, possibly in order to loan that money out at a higher rate, and he also mortgaged at least one of his houses for 7,000 rubles to “Mrs. Shamsheva.” Finally, Nilus also took out a cash loan of 865 rubles from townswoman Pisareva, and he owed an unspecified sum of money to his brother.127 Table 2.3 Loans Owed to Aleksandr Terskii, 1856 No. of Loans Total Amt. Average Amt. Men Women Servitor Merchant Urban 22 5 20 4 3 50826.15 8343 50686 7275 2208 2420 1669 2668 1819 736 Data source: TsIAM 50.5.13. Nobles and Merchants 103 Table 2.3 lists loans issued by Second Lieutenant Alexander Terskii, who died in Moscow in 1856. He was a prosperous lender, frequently listed in the city’s debt registers, both as a party to a transaction and as a witness. He catered primarily to nobles and officials, but it is remarkable that over a quarter of his portfolio consisted of merchants and townspeople. Another example of a lender’s portfolio comes from an honorary citizen from the town of Kashira, Nikolai Popov, who inherited 10,000 rubles from his father and lived by lending this money out, allegedly at the legally mandated interest rate and secured by real property. The list of his debtors showed a clear preference for other merchants who were also from Kashira and, if possible, his relatives: out of eight debtors, six were also merchants—of those, four were from Kashira (and of them, three were related to Popov). At the same time, Popov did show some attempt to diversify his investments: one of his debtors was an army captain, and one was a major general. Also diversified were the kinds of debt obligations that Popov accepted: only two were actually mortgages for a factory in Moscow and a house in Kashira, and one was a contractual obligation of unspecified sort, one was a less commonly used safekeeping receipt, and the others were loan letters, which were taken from all categories of borrowers, including officers, a townsman, and an honorary citizen from Kashira.128 In addition to various practical reasons, several likely general considerations explain why Russia’s credit network routinely involved dealings across the boundaries of estate and service rank. One is that nobles possessed assets vastly exceeding their own indebtedness and were also willing to engage in commerce themselves, whether as passive investors or active entrepreneurs. Second, while there was a cultural gap between noble/servitor and commercial groups, it varied in time and space and was bridgeable through marriage and social interaction. Even wealthy aristocrats who preferred to borrow from their peers or from the government still shopped on credit, owed wages to servants, and in need turned to professional moneylenders. Members of the urban and commercial classes in the course of their credit dealings routinely crossed the barriers between merchants, officialdom, and the gentry. Individual debt portfolios and debt registers kept by local courts show that the most common arrangement was to combine horizontal ties with peers and ties across social lines. This prevalence of mixed debt portfolios suggests that personal and informal debt connections, in addition to reinforcing ­traditional Russian hierarchies of legal estate and state service, also 104 The Culture of Debt simultaneously undermined them by uniting a “middling” propertied stratum that included the lesser gentry and civil servants, merchants, and better-off peasants and townspeople. Although property owners in nineteenth-century Russia were a diffuse and amorphous lot, they shared a place of habitation, engaged in the same economic activities, and intermarried. Moreover, as anthropologist David Graeber has also noted, debt relations necessarily involve assumptions of equality that coexist with power and hierarchy.129 In order to engage in debt transactions at all, people have to share a set of attitudes and practices relating to honor, trust, failure, mutual dependence, and reputation in the community as well as determining who could be included in the credit network. chapt e r 3 The Boundaries of Risk W hil e th e n e t w o rk of private debt in imperial Russia was extensive and diverse, it was by no means all-inclusive. Lenders and borrowers operated within a complex web of cultural and legal norms and assumptions linking property ownership with understandings about personal autonomy, personal responsibility, trustworthiness, and risk taking. Some of these norms were legislated as strict, bright-line rules and are therefore a good place to begin to examine the cultural underpinnings of credit. Perhaps the clearest and most unambiguous legal rule pertaining to credit in imperial Russian law was the absolute prohibition on minors under ­twenty-one from engaging in any property transactions without the written approval of their legal guardian. The way this law applied in practice is notable not only because the image of a young, rich spendthrift was so recurrent in nineteenth-century culture but also because this ostensibly strict legal rule was enmeshed within other, more fluid legal and social regimes attempting—as they did in all other major legal systems—to regulate and discipline financial life and risk taking.1 Such regulation was to be accomplished primarily by excluding individuals deemed to be incompetent or untrustworthy, not only minors but also—since children did not always become financially responsible when they came of age—spendthrifts who accumulated massive debts that threatened to ruin their entire kinship group. Another crucially important set of legal rules that sought to police the credit network was the institution of bankruptcy. For centuries, bankruptcy in the West was viewed as something of a symbolic and legal death, publicly 105 106 The Culture of Debt expelling the culprit from the civic realm of property relations, a process hardly more pleasant than being convicted of a crime or declared insane. To an important extent, this attitude persisted in the nineteenth century. The bankrupt’s suicide was a familiar cultural model.2 Consider, for example, the noble-born entrepreneur, Nikolai Makarov, who in 1860 lost his business because of the financial crisis and a falling out with his much more famous companion, the liquor tycoon Vasilii Kokorev. Makarov later wrote in his memoirs, “Ruin I could have weathered with fortitude and patience, but insolvency—never. This is why the very thought of bankruptcy chilled my blood and breathed on me with a deathly chill.” Before deciding to give himself a second chance by writing and publishing, Makarov seriously considered suicide, and one of the self-published novels that he produced to try to fix his finances features a bankrupt nobleman. He wrote, “The thought of the impending bankruptcy paralyzed all of his abilities, killed in him all activity. He could not engage in anything because everywhere he saw the horrible words—bankruptcy, bankrupt.”3 At the same time, by the nineteenth century bankruptcy increasingly came to be seen in most Western legal systems as the outcome of accepting the risk of failure, which under certain circumstances could be viewed as acceptable and result in the discharge of one’s remaining debts. The Russian Bankruptcy Code of 1800 asserted that “a bankrupt must not be considered dishonorable because honor or dishonor do not consist in the title of bankrupt, but solely in the action that led a person into bankruptcy.”4 The legal proceedings therefore involved a highly discretionary evaluation of the debtor’s character and conduct. In practice, therefore, the laws protecting the integrity of the credit system resulted in a rather tangled relationship between legal rules and personal interests and discretion. Even the clearest legal rules were contested, reinterpreted, and modified in practice, much like every other element of personal credit. Innocents and Wastrels The image of an aristocratic spendthrift (in Russian rendered as mot, rastochitel’, tranzhir, rastratchik, or prozhigatel’) ravaging his patrimony through a combination of inexperience and lack of restraint was prominent in nineteenth-century literature and journalism and has influenced subse­ quent historians. We have already noted the problems with the traditional account of Russia’