s well as their power to impose administrative exile and their ability to take over investigations and thus guard against local and regional influences. However, these powers were also limited because the Third Section could not try cases by itself and because highly ranked and well-connected individuals felt free to resist its persuasions. This is what happened in the case of State Councilor Alexander Varentsov, who was married to the daughter of Collegiate Assessor Prince Fedor Andreevich Golitsyn. Despite his modest rank, the prince was wealthy and engaged in moneylending. In 1849, Golitsyn Kinship and Family 175 gave debt notes for 30,000 rubles to his daughter, Sofia, apparently because he worried about his son-in-law’s spending habits and wanted his daughter to use the interest on these notes as her spending money. In the 1850s, the couple had a falling out with Golitsyn, who ended up holding some of Varentsov’s debt, asserting that “whoever trusts me, will never be in loss.” In 1862, Golitsyn transferred these documents to his agent for collection, and Varentsov and his wife complained to the Third Section. The old prince rejected the officers’ advances and adamantly refused to stop his collection procedures. The prince accused his son-in-law of wastefulness and offered to set the amount of the debt aside to be kept for his grandson, Fedor, when he came of age, but refused to make any concessions to Varentsov, asking “can I forgive a man familiar with the rules of Jesuitism, who irritated and incensed my family, a man who threatens and lies instead of asking.” There is no indication that the Third Section’s influence had any results, but it appears that Golitsyn died in 1869, presumably while the dispute was still going on. There is also information that Golitsyn accused his wife of wastefulness (motovstvo) as early as 1842, and that she abandoned him and went abroad. Coupled with the same accusation against Varentsov, this suggests that the family conflict originated in the old prince’s mind. But what is historically important from this sad family saga is the way Fedor Golitsyn used debt to exercise control over his family.40 Even less amicable were parent–child conflicts that involved fraud and forgery and therefore ended up in criminal court. The famous case of the group of swindlers known as the Jacks of Hearts that was tried in Moscow in 1878 included several colorful family disputes involving credit and money, perhaps the most notable one involving a young merchant, Vasily Pegov, who was expelled from his father’s house for inveterate drunkenness and theft and decided to improve his finances by forging his father’s debt obligations. This was a bad idea because the older Pegov was well known in the city as one of the few merchants who never borrowed money and who conducted all of his trade in cash.41 But the temptation to use one’s father’s credit was strong, both in the 1870s and long before the Great Reforms. In the early 1850s, a 24-year-old son of a merchant, Klavdii Rudnev, was caught signing debt documents with his father’s name.42 It was the father himself who suggested to the police that Klavdii, “as he had heard,” issued “many forged bills of exchange.” At first Klavdii fled Moscow, but he soon came back home and was presented to the police by his father, at which point he confessed that he had talked a 176 The Culture of Debt now-deceased foster son of his father’s into forging signatures on the bills of exchange. Klavdii “wasted away” the money thus obtained. At the same time, handwriting experts thought that Klavdii’s father may have been the actual forger, and some of the deceived merchants said that they received the fake bills of exchange directly from him. In any event, the old man died during the investigation, after which Klavdii recanted his confession and claimed that his father had forced him to take the blame, which he agreed to do out of his “burning” filial love and sense of guilt for “past transgressions,” referring to his alleged mismanagement of the family business during his father’s illness. Klavdii even claimed that during the investigation, he learned to imitate his father’s signature to make the original confession more convincing. The Criminal Chamber, while upholding Rudnev’s sentence of Siberian exile, found that his father’s participation was a mitigating factor. While Klavdii’s actual culpability in this case is unclear, his father’s involvement must have had a significant effect upon Klavdii’s motivation, while his testimony adopts the familiar motif of excusing criminal behavior by claiming it was motivated by a desire to live up to respectable ideals—in this case “filial love” and a guilty conscience. Debt and Marital Property Both imperial-era lawyers and modern historians have debated exactly why imperial Russia adopted the regime of separate marital property, which allowed women legal control over their dowry, and the acquisition, ownership, and management of property completely independent from their husbands.43 Pre-reform jurist Dmitrii Meier offered a functional explanation: he pointed out that the rule did not prevent effective joint control over marital property in properly functioning marriages, but it did provide real protection for spouses in poorly functioning relationships. This explanation is certainly sensible but does not explain very much, since there were many perfectly reasonable legal rules in the history of Russian (or any other) legal system that were proposed but never adopted, and vice versa; many very inconvenient rules were stubbornly retained. Historian Michelle Marrese offered another, historical, explanation in her landmark work on property ownership and control by noblewomen in pre-reform Russia. She found that the rule first became practically effective in the first half of the eighteenth century, and she argued that it offered ­additional safety for family property when nobles were frequently exiled and Kinship and Family 177 ­ ispossessed during the political struggles of that period.44 She noted that a d crucial aspect of the rule—namely, the limitations on the spouses’ respective liability for each other’s debts—was only finalized in 1846 after prolonged debates. By that time, the government’s concern was that spouses would abuse the separate property rule by fictitiously transferring property and making fraudulent loans to each other in order to evade creditors.45 To be sure, this concern long predated 1846, but previous legislation was unclear and appeared to distinguish transactions involving nobles and those involving merchants. Decrees issued within the framework of noble property ownership prohibited all real-estate transactions between spouses from 1763 to 1825 out of a concern to protect women from abusive husbands.46 Laws relating to commerce, bankruptcy, and credit had more complex rationale, equally concerned with protecting creditors from fraud. For example, the Bankruptcy Code of 1740 that was enacted but never went into effect would have placed wives’ property in all forms, including their dowry, at the creditors’ disposal, on the rationale that they are “completely obligated to share their husbands’ misfortune.” However, the law of 1797 ordered that transfers between relatives were valid if executed before the other party incurred the debt obligation. That is, a merchant or an entrepreneur could be protected before going into business by transferring some assets to his or her spouse. This provision was supplemented by the Bankruptcy Code of 1800, which allowed creditors to seize the wife’s property only if she conducted business together with her husband.47 The law of 1846 for the first time created a practicable arrangement and essentially elaborated tsar Paul’s decree of 1797: it required the wife of an insolvent husband (or vice versa) to submit proof of her property ownership and allowed her to keep all property either received as dowry, inherited from or gifted by third parties, or purchased with her own money. Moreover, the wife could keep any property gifted by her husband more than ten years before the insolvency. Even wives who could not submit the necessary proof were still somewhat protected by the rule, in that it secured for them all the women’s and children’s clothing and half the dishes, furniture, silverware, carriages, horses, and horse harness in the couple’s possession.48 During insolvency proceedings, wives could be admitted to participate as creditors, but only if the money they lent to their husbands was acquired in one of the ways listed above.49 The law of 1846 remained unchanged until the end of the imperial period and had great significance for Russia’s culture of debt. First, the law 178 The Culture of Debt obviously did not eliminate opportunities for husbands and wives to support each other’s strategizing against creditors by, for example, standing surety for each other, petitioning courts, and participating in insolvency proceedings, as well as invoking the law to resist creditors’ attempts to seize property. Second, the separate property regime created the potential for arm’s-length debt relations between spouses that could be used for various property arrangements that not only promoted family finances, but were utilized in inter-spousal disputes and litigation—or even caused such disputes. Spouses could use debt to formalize dowry arrangements or to dispute them or even to secure divorce. Dowries could be written up in whole or in part as a loan, while women could use their husbands’ debts to themselves as leverage to make them cooperate in divorce proceedings. One commonly used way to take advantage of spouses’ separate legal personalities was to guarantee each other’s debts. There are many examples in the cases that are discussed in detail throughout this book: the collegiate councilor’s wife Liubov’ Pevnitskaia had some of her debts guaranteed both by her husband and by her father, the priest Rozanov, while she likewise guaranteed some of her husband’s debt.50 In 1825, Moscow merchant Marshchev was imprisoned for debt to the Treasury connected to liquor tax farming, whereupon his wife petitioned the governor to release her husband “at her guarantee”.51 Thirty-five years later, when another insolvent merchant, Vasilii Prokhorov, quarreled with his relatives, so that none of them would agree to be his surety to keep him out of debtors’ prison, eventually his wife Iuliia Fedorovna guaranteed his debt, although the documents at the end of the case file show that creditors became suspicious and were inquiring whether she actually owned any property of her own that she could use to guarantee her husband’s debts.52 Even when a wife did not own debt-free property but merely was engaged in a “secured” legal case against someone else, it could prove enough to rescue a bankrupt husband. This happened, for example, with Actual State Councilor Prince Vladimir Sergeevich Golitsyn, who became insolvent after unsuccessfully attempting to run a textile factory near Moscow in partnership with several aristocratic women, including a Bakhmetieva and another Golitsyna, as well as his own wife. Golitsyn himself owned seven serfs plus a salary of less than 550 rubles. In 1849, Golitsyn’s wife Praskovia successfully petitioned the Moscow County Court to guarantee some of the claims against her husband, totaling almost 40,000 paper rubles, by her own claim against Colonel Nikolai Borisovich Golitsyn for 60,500 paper rubles, which she had been Kinship and Family 179 trying to collect since 1826. Unsurprisingly, the creditors refused to in effect take over Praskovia’s ancient lawsuit, but she then petitioned to consider their claims as not concerning her and her property, leaving the creditors with the option of going after her husband’s estate with its seven serfs.53 Much as with parents, wives’ assistance extended to their husbands’ legal proceedings, especia