v, “most people” (that is, his social circle of property-owning gentry and merchants) knew each other’s means “and so only a few tried to bedazzle the others [puskat’ drugim pyl’ v glaza].”24 This statement implies that if these people did not possess accurate information about their neighbors’ and acquaintances’ finances, they would have found it advantageous and effective to fool each other by pretending to be wealthier than they were in reality. Ostrovsky’s play Mad Money (1870) shows how rumors were perceived to have operated in the 1860s. The entire plot revolves around various property-­ owning or at least genteel individuals judging and (mostly) misjudging others’ financial condition; thus, a group of young dandies tricked the Fraud, Property, and Respectability 139 Cheboksarov family, mother and daughter, into believing that a gruff provincial entrepreneur, Vasil’kov, actually owned a gold mine; the latter, in turn, convinced everyone through his lack of outward luxury that he was an upstart of little means, whereas in truth he was a successful railroad contractor. Yet another character, Kuchumov, convinced everyone that he was a wealthy man, largely through his manners and sociability.25 Similarly superficial elements could also cause someone to be denied credit. As noted previously, most commerce at the Nizhnii Novgorod fair was conducted on credit. However, several categories of merchandise were sold only for cash, and several categories of non-Russian merchants—those from Bukhara, Armenia, and Iran—were said to have no credit in Russia and had to conduct their business entirely in cash.26 In a similar vein, Ostrovskii’s character from Mad Money claimed that “young and pretty women cannot borrow money because it is not polite to remind them when they forget about the debt, and it is even less polite to sue them. You either graciously refuse them or you just give them the money.”27 The previously mentioned noble entrepreneur and a graphomaniac Nikolai Makarov bragged in his memoirs that his habit of repaying his debts promptly gave him a reputation for trustworthiness: his fellow officers used to say that “to loan to Makarov is just like putting the money in a bank.” His butcher was excited by his promptness: “Dear Sir! Even if you did not pay me for the entire year, I would not be concerned at all. The money is much safer with you than in my own chest. If someone steals from me, it’s gone. But with you it will always be intact; even if it gets stolen, you will surely repay me. I will never forget how you could easily not pay me a kopeck, because it was my own fault, yet you paid me without any argument or doubt.” According to Makarov, a perceptive Parisian shopkeeper guessed his creditworthiness by just looking at him and entrusted him with a pair of binoculars without asking for his address or even his name: “You will bring the money, you certainly will, I am sure. I know who I am dealing with; I haven’t been sitting here for twenty years for nothing.” Makarov contrasted this episode with a wine merchant in Petersburg who would not sell him two bottles of cheap wine on credit but would sell only one bottle secured by a golden ring worth 15 rubles.28 Indicators of respectability and trustworthiness ranged from attractive physical appearance, speech, and manners to personal possessions and living spaces, as well as one’s social circle. As a starting point, good looks were helpful, especially given the nineteenth-century belief in physiognomy, that 140 The Culture of Debt is, that a person’s appearance reflected his or her character.29 Roman Mikhailovich Medoks (1795–1859), a famous Napoleonic-era confidence man, took advantage of his “English” looks when he was touring the Caucasus in 1812, pretending to be a Guards officer and the tsar’s personal repre­sentative, raising a mountaineer militia.30 Sonya the Golden Hand, a late-­nineteenth-century swindler so legendary that it is now impossible to reconstruct her reliable biography, used her feminine charms to engage in a wide array of frauds and thefts, many of which involved credit.31 Sergei Mikhailovich Fokin, an equally remarkable but completely unknown—aside from his public trial for trigamy in 1867—nobleman swindler was no Apollo by today’s standards, described as “very corpulent . . . with a round full face, thin black hair parted in the middle, thick black eyebrows, small bulging dark eyes, small black round beard.”32 However, his corpulence did not detract from his masculine appeal to his multiple wives and companions and presumably worked in his favor as a sign of prosperity.33 Most signs of respectability were independent of nature and served to indicate one’s level of wealth, as well as more subtle factors such as the degree to which the individual was rooted in his local community and the degree to which his wealth was sufficiently secure to provide the basis for future repayment.34 Even wealthy and powerful people were sensitive to this principle. For example, in the early years of the nineteenth century, Petersburg’s Governor General, Count Peter Tolstoy, was to attend a grand ball and realized that his wife’s jewelry had been pawned at a state-run pawnshop. Because of his position, he was able to borrow the diamonds for the day of the ball, but at the last moment changed his mind, telling his wife, “you almost led me into imposture [sharlatanstvo].” It was less of a dishonor to have his wife not wear her best jewelry than to wear pawned items and send the wrong message about one’s financial condition.35 In the eighteenth century, Prokofii Akinfievich Demidov, remembered as Russia’s first modern banker, used contemporary signs of respectability to induce debt repayment: one aristocratic woman, for instance, in order to borrow money, had to sign a note in which she admitted her sexual licentiousness. On another occasion, Demidov had to loan money to Catherine the Great herself, but to make sure she repaid, he made her lover, Orlov, sign the debt and pledge that he would take three smacks on the head if it was not repaid.36 Hugh Hudson has interpreted Demidov’s eccentric ways as a form of protest against corrupt aristocratic habits and an effort to promote the rights of the middle class, but from the perspective of the culture of debt, Fraud, Property, and Respectability 141 Demidov simply forced his debtors to provide the only form of collateral that could effectively secure the loan.37 To be sure, some perfectly genuine aristocrats were actually swindlers. The young Prince Marcellus Lubomirsky, from perhaps the most illustrious and fabulously wealthy Polish family, fled from St. Petersburg by ship in 1849 after selling his wife’s and his father’s properties, including the entire town of Dubno, to several individuals simultaneously and pocketing nearly 1 million rubles.38 All that the police could do in the aftermath was to ascertain a list of the prince’s deceived creditors and business partners. Vsevolod Andreevich Dolgorukov, one of the key members of the loose network of swindlers dubbed by journalists as the Jacks of Hearts Club in the 1860s, came from the senior branch of his princely family, though his father’s marriage was eventually held to be invalid, and Vsevolod was officially not permitted to use his title.39 One of Sergei Fokin’s accomplices held the rank of kamer-iunker of the imperial court, which the gendarmes thought to have facilitated his frauds. And still another infamous swindler from the 1870s and 1880s, Lieutenant Savin, claimed to have come from a wealthy family and retained his properties long after beginning his criminal career.40 However, most nineteenth-century swindlers needed to be skillful at acquiring the outward trappings of a much wealthier person and then translating the signs of respectability and wealth into cash loans. Sergei Fokin’s story is a typical example of how a successful swindler combined skillful acting, appropriate external trappings of wealth, and a social network that inspired confidence in his targets. After Fokin fled to Moscow from his Petersburg victims in 1859, the gendarmes reported that “Fokin’s usual method of deception is the role of a wealthy landowner that he artfully performs. An excellent apartment, acquaintance with some persons of the highest circles and a life that is luxurious in appearance complete the rest.” One of the victims, the 75-year-old civil servant Aleksandr Petrovich Munster, upon Fokin’s “incessant invitation, found him in a luxurious apartment; that same luxury was manifest in the servants, in rich outfits of his wife, in stylish carriages and in all the external furnishings.”41 In the late 1850s, Fokin took out numerous loans—that he had neither the means nor intention to repay—by claiming to have inherited as many as 2,000 serfs and 400,000 rubles in cash. In reality, as the police and the creditors eventually found out, Fokin’s entire family—consisting of his mother, two sisters, and two brothers, in addition to Sergei himself—owned only between 400 and 600 serfs in Simbirsk, Vladimir, and Tver provinces.42 Fokin’s official rank 142 The Culture of Debt was the unimpressive retired first-rank chancery clerk. His mother was widow of a second lieutenant (podporuchik), and one of his brothers, Nikolai, was retired lieutenant (poruchik). In his younger days, Fokin had taken advantage of the Crimean War to evade the official 1852 ban from residing in Petersburg, and in 1856 he enrolled as an officer cadet in a grenadier regiment that was stationed in the capital, where Fokin managed to stay upon his prompt retirement. Given his large family, Fokin’s alternative to becoming a confidence man would have been service in the lower echelons of bureaucracy or otherwise the modest life of a provincial landowner, completely dependent on the agricultural cycle and on his peasants’ work habits. For nobles and government servitors who did not have even those resources, engaging in illegal schemes was a way to hold on to the respectability that separated even poor nobles from the common folk, especially given that petty fraud and embezzlement often went unreported and were punished informally, if at all.43 The same strategy of combining a genuine genteel upbringing with fictional aristocratic wealth and manners was bread-and-butter for the group of swindlers known as the Jacks of Hearts who operated in post-emancipation Moscow. The several real-life impoverished noblemen from among this loose partnership of criminals were saved from life on the street by their enterprising but uncouth accomplices and given housing and furnishings to stage intense performances as visiting provincial aristocrats or—in one case—as an up-and-coming industrialist from south Russia (something of an economic Promised Land in the mid-nineteenth century). Swindling performances in hotel rooms and luxury apartments was a delicate matter: extrapolating from David Sunderland’s illuminating study of the signs of respectability and trust in Victorian Britain, each knick-knack, each notebook, and each picture in the office or hotel room of a make-believe “industrialist”—as much as of a real one—would carry a symbolic meaning for visiting creditors and business partners. In the case of the Jacks of Hearts, this included fake business correspondence strewn around the desk, fake account books in expensive gold-lettered bindings, and photographs of the products of non-existent agricultural estates.44 Moreover, it seems that such performances would have required the acting skills of a seasoned professional. To go back to the Napoleonic-era Roman Medoks, although he was the son of a British entrepreneur who moved to Moscow and founded its first public theater (eventually to become the Bolshoi), he had to impersonate a Guards officer for months and participate Fraud, Property, and Respectability 143 in social activities of the local elite, exchange gifts, and keep his st