ged bills of exchange and because, according to his testimony, he was striving to support his family and regain his financial soundness. In a proceeding that began in 1880 in the reformed post-1864 court with a jury trial, he pled guilty to forging 236 bills of exchange worth at least 234,000 rubles.54 In his testimony to the police, he recounted a decades-long saga of struggling to maintain his status as a merchant, to hold off creditors, and to counter the effects of various bad financial decisions made by others. From 1855, he had served as a clerk to another merchant for a salary of 300 and then 700 rubles per year. Soon he married and, while continuing his job, started a separate business in ready-made women’s clothes, together with his wife. He was successful at first, accumulated a modest capital of 3,000 rubles, and made useful connections in the business world. However, one of his partners became bankrupt, and the other one—his former employer—embezzled thousands of rubles from their shared business. As Galitskii’s debts started to come due, he decided that his only solution was to forge several bills of exchange in the name of two well-known merchants “whose bills were circulated as easily as cash.” He soon turned this into a habit and was initially able to continue his trade until the forged bills became due, their “issuers” became suspicious, his own credit dried up after he left his dishonest partner, and the entire 148 The Culture of Debt pyramid scheme collapsed. Galitskii decided that there was no escape left and went to the court building to report himself. By turning himself in and spinning his elaborate yarn of hard luck and his tireless efforts to do right despite all obstacles, Galitskii portrayed his motives and many of his actions as fully appropriate for a man of his station in life—thereby leaving bad luck as the only possible explanation for the uncomfortable fact that crimes had indeed been committed. He was convicted but only had to resettle in eastern Siberia for a reduced period of time because the jury recommended leniency. Another case shows why the victims of white-collar embezzlers might ultimately prefer a nonpublic, informal resolution of their case. The slight twist that saved the swindler in question was that Aleksandr Ivanovich Saltykov was a prominent Moscow barrister (prisiazhnyi poverennyi).55 Aside from his legal practice, he earned his living beginning in the early 1870s by investing his clients’ money in loans and mortgages. Earning 7,000 to 8,000 rubles per year, Saltykov was nonetheless burdened with debts incurred in setting up his legal career and by his early marriage, and as early as 1875 he began to embezzle his clients’ money and give them bills of exchange written out in the names of fictitious persons. In the 1880s, Saltykov branched out into fake mortgages, which he always closed himself; he also paid out interest on the fraudulent debt, so that his clients, trusting him as their attorney, never bothered to gather any information about the property allegedly mortgaged to them or about their borrowers. Only in 1891 did one of his numerous high-ranking victims, Actual State Councilor Ternovskii, became suspicious. Saltykov found it necessary to stage his own suicide, assume a fake identity, and move to the city of Kishinev in the southern region of Bessarabia. He stayed there for seven months and then came back to Moscow and surrendered to the police, fully confessing all of his many frauds and mentioning his sense of guilt and his duties to his family as reasons both for committing his crimes and for deciding to surrender. He explained that his schemes resulted from his desire to set things right by incurring more and more fraudulent debt to keep himself afloat long enough to make money from his profession. Thus, by claiming that his crimes stemmed from efforts or intentions to engage in correct or respectable behaviors, Saltykov effectively made what were unquestionably criminal acts seem excusable or even necessary. And this strategy worked: Saltykov was acquitted at the end of his closed-door jury trial. In other words, as with Galitskii, the jury believed Fraud, Property, and Respectability 149 that Saltykov’s alleged efforts to do right according to the standards of respectability trumped his breaking of the law and that unlike Galitskii, he had enough potential to eventually make good the damage. Fraud, Kinship, and Social Networks Nineteenth-century German criminologists and police officials thought, according to Richard J. Evans, that criminals were “virtually a race apart . . . a world of ‘crooks’ that formed a virtual mirror-image of respectable society” and “aped” the “straight” world. Compared to the early modern underworld that relied on open violence and tended to aggregate in an easily identifiable “criminal quarter,” the mid-nineteenth-century criminal, according to Evans, was more “individualistic” and “tended to work on his own,” relying on stealth and deceit. To sum up, he said, “the underworld had gone underground.”56 Although armed brigands and outlaws were still active in many areas in mid-nineteenth-century Russia, it appears that swindling, embezzling, smuggling, and counterfeiting became more profitable than open robbery, and so Evans’s general point seems to apply to Russia as well. However, this emphasis on the individualistic criminal—indeed observable in some swindlers—obscures the fact that more typically “respectable” criminals depended not merely on their wit, good looks, or acting skills but operated by means of a network of friends, relatives, and business partners of various degrees of culpability who could shelter the criminal, help him manage information, reassure the potential victim about the swindler’s alleged wealth and reputation, and, in sum, create the appearance of genuine links within Russia’s network of private credit. Recall the case of Nikolai Bedeker, the déclassé swindler from Hamburg without any possessions or a permanent residence; a superficial look suggests a lone operator relying solely on his wit and charm. However, he would not be have been able to elude the police for as long as he did without relatives and friends. For example, on December 21, 1864, he was being escorted from the prison hospital in Moscow to a police station by two middle-aged soldiers, with whom he at once adopted a tone that marked him as different from a common criminal or from former peasants like themselves. First, he suggested that they take a cab rather than trek across the city to the remote Khamovniki precinct, no doubt offering to pay for the ride. He then talked the guards into stopping by the apartment of his German-speaking sisters, where his “fiancée,” a peasant girl Evdokiia Galkina, was also present, and 150 The Culture of Debt where everyone, of course including the soldiers, proceeded to have tea and vodka. After resuming the trip, Bedeker managed to run away by telling his presumably tipsy guards that he needed to make a stop to pick up some money. Two days later, Bedeker was recaptured at a friend’s house in a village just outside the city. As already mentioned, one of his friends kept an inn; on a different occasion, he was captured at the lodgings of another young “fiancée” of peasant origin. In addition to having accomplices, a successful swindler deployed a complex network of friends and relatives, whose involvement usually remained tenuous enough to evade prosecution. Indeed, one of the key issues for prosecutors in criminal trials was to prove the existence of a criminal conspiracy when the evidence pointed at best to a loose partnership or simply random acquaintance. One basic strategy was to use one’s wife, a sister, or a girlfriend. The wife of one young nobleman swindler discussed throughout this study, Petr Veselkin, was his active helper, although she was not put on trial. The degree of the wives’ possible involvement varied greatly; some were swindlers in their own right, such as Sonya the Golden Hand, who consecutively married several men who were her underlings or at best junior partners. The next level of involvement was for a wife to actively assist her husband– for example, by enticing potential victims. Sergei Fokin effected many of his frauds with the help of his second wife, the widow of a second lieutenant, Elena Plemiannikova, “a young woman of attractive appearance and easy virtue,” who enticed young men to visit her husband’s home. Another report described her as “always distinguished by her particular ability to lure the inexperienced into her nets, and by these means to assist Fokin’s frauds.” Plemiannikova seems to have approached the category of being a swindler in her own right or at least was in an equal partnership with Fokin. She had a child with him but agreed to let him claim that she was only his mistress, not legally married to him, so that he could marry a hapless widow named Uresheva and get her property. After Fokin’s arrest, Plemiannikova petitioned the authorities on his behalf. She even seduced Kudriavtsev, the secretary of the Moscow Criminal Chamber. In exchange for her promise to marry him, he arranged for Fokin’s release from arrest upon his mother’s guarantee, allowing him to eventually escape Russia with a forged passport. The secretary even became financially involved with Fokin, providing him with a loan of 6,000 rubles to use as a down payment for a presumably bogus stearin factory in Moscow (worth 35,000 rubles), which Fokin immediately Fraud, Property, and Respectability 151 resold to a third party for 26,000 rubles in cash. In the end, Plemiannikova fulfilled her promise and married Kudriavtsev. At that same time, Fokin seduced a young girl named Aleksandra Opitz, the ward of a wealthy Mrs. Orlova-Davydova, and talked her into robbing her guardian’s house. Opitz was caught and arrested, but Fokin persuaded Kudriavtsev to help her escape. Fokin then fled with her abroad, and Opitz, now pregnant and described by the famous anarchist Bakunin as “rather interesting,” posed as Fokin’s wife and thereby enhanced his respectability. We have no idea what happened to Opitz after Fokin was finally arrested in Wiesbaden in 1865 and extradited to Russia, but the gendarmes filed away her printed article from The Daily Telegraph from June 4, 1864, about “Tsar Alexander II’s atrocities against the Poles and the Circassians.”57 More remote relatives could also provide crucial assistance to swindlers and, by extension, to regular borrowers, by convincing lenders of their respectability. Fokin’s two sisters, Varvara and Liubov’, were described as “rather sharp and resourceful women” who “complement[ed] the seductive circumstances of his evening parties.” Fokin invited his elderly victim, Collegiate Assessor Aleksandr Munster, to spend time with his family, and Fokin’s mother Ekaterina and his brother Nikolai acted the part of individuals with a large fortune, assuring Munster both verbally and in writing of Fokin’s creditworthiness. Nikolai helped Sergei Fokin to identify potential victims, for example, by making the acquaintance of a young widow of a colonel, named Uresheva, and by borrowing from her 3,000 rubles. Uresheva also became friendly with Fokin’s mother, his sisters Varvara and Liubov’, with his brothers Nikolai and Aleksandr, all of whom concealed the fact that Fokin was already married to Plemiannikova and had a young daughter. After marrying Fokin, Uresheva surrendered to him the control over her house and her money, upon which she was promptly abandoned with her three young children, one of them Fokin’s. Fokin himself was eventually extradited by the Prussians, escaped once again, was caught in Bessarabia, and eventually ended up in Siberian exile, but none of his relatives were even questioned by the police, much less prosecuted. Fokin and his family were careful not to violate the law openly: Moscow gendarmes in May 18