eeding under way.18 However, entangling one’s financial affairs with those of relatives could also be a dangerous path leading to one’s own insolvency, which is what happened to Collegiate Secretary Petr Zubov, discussed throughout this study, who owned nearly 3,000 serfs in the Upper Volga region. When declared insolvent in 1853, Zubov claimed that he had accepted a debt-ridden inheritance from his brother Aleksandr largely because of the latter’s debt of 67,227 silver rubles (300,000 assignat), whereas the other brother, Valerian, wisely refused the inheritance.19 For merchants—who rarely owned far-flung landed estates and typically lived near their families and frequently shuffled their merchandise between shops and warehouses—the preferred solution was to hide movable property with relatives. This included not only merchandise but also furniture, silverware, clothing, jewelry, carriages, and horses. This scheme—the subject of Ostrovsky’s play It’s a Family Matter—was not unique to Russia or Russian merchants and so does not testify to the latter’s exceptional dishonesty, but it was real and widely used. One example is the criminal prosecution of two insolvent Moscow merchants, brothers Nil and Aleksei Bakhrushin. In 1864, their brother Ivan, who owned a fashionable clothing shop, became insolvent and, after moving some merchandise to his brothers’ shop, in 1864 declared to his creditors that he was too ill to continue in business and transferred the shop to Nil, Aleksei, and his son-in-law. What ensued were prolonged negotiations with creditors, several settlements, and a continuing shift of merchandise between the shops. The shops would alternately be emptied out of anything but the poorest quality goods and then filled up again. The police investigator found phony account books and discovered that the Bakhrushins had also managed to install one of their clerks as a member of their own bankruptcy board.20 More remote relatives likewise actively helped debtors hide property. For example, an ex-policeman, Leiba Sumgalter, retired after over 20 years of service but then returned to Moscow to collect a debt from townsman Krasil’nikov, who lost all court proceedings outright but was able to hide his Kinship and Family 167 movable property with his mother-in-law, who successfully claimed it as hers.21 Similarly, the Old Believer merchant Fedor Solodovnikov, who owned a textile factory in the town of Bogorodsk outside Moscow, transferred large amounts of money to his daughters-in-law.22 Moscow flour and wheat merchant Mushnikov, when sued for debt in 1842 (including 1,000 rubles incurred by his late father), transferred merchandise worth 1,500 silver rubles through his wife to his brother Grigorii Volkov and then absconded. This he did despite apparently being amidst a “great strife” with his relatives, whom he described as “insignificant people without much money” who were taking advantage of his success.23 Another merchant, Pavel Lavrentiev, gave fifty-three large cases of tea to his relative, craftsman Lebedev, who in turn gave it to Lavrentiev’s sister-­ in-law Anna Kochnaia, who stored it at Kaluzhskoe Podvorie, an inn in Moscow, from which it was removed by some person whose identity the creditors were unable to uncover. As of May 1865, the creditors were at a loss when an unknown person appeared at their office and reported that Lavrentiev was hiding his property at Kochnaia’s house. Two of the creditors came to her apartment with the police and found Lavrentiev and more than ten cases of tea, which Kochnaia admitted belonged to him. However, Lavrentiev had another line of defense, not surprisingly involving debt: he claimed that he had pawned this tea to his sister-in-law several months before for 1,000 rubles and thus was not concealing any property. While the conclusion of that case file does not survive, Lavrentiev’s defense was likely successful because he produced two witnesses to back up this claim.24 More inventive merchants could distribute property among several relatives in such a way that even when an informant could point to the location of the items, it was not easy for the creditors to identify and seize them. For example, we have already encountered the bankruptcy record of Moscow merchant and honorary citizen Ivan Borisovskii, who owned five houses, two teashops, and a vegetable retail business. When he became insolvent in 1845, it turned out that only one of the houses was free of mortgage and could be seized by the creditors. The police search found merchandise worth only 5,000 paper rubles and no movable property. However, Borisovskii’s former servant, the peasant Egutatov, denounced him for secretly taking various items out of his house and concealing them with his son-in-law, with townsman Alekseev, and in the shed in the courtyard. The second police search located several carriages, a sleigh, and a horse, as well as icons, mahogany furniture, mirrors, a clock, trunks with clothing and boxes with 168 The Culture of Debt bronze, porcelain, and glass dishes, two grand pianos, five cases of tea, ten silver-lined horse collars, some old accounting books, and many other items. Borisovskii claimed that all the property belonged either to his wife or to his brother Martemian, although he could not explain why everything was packed in boxes. The pianos had allegedly been gifted by Martemian to Ivan’s daughters, and the icons were gifted by Ivan’s mother to her grandchildren. The clothes and fur coats were his, and he claimed that he omitted reporting them to the creditors because he alleged that they had only been interested in his furniture during their previous visits. All the property found during this second search was valued at 981.07 rubles. The creditors were not satisfied with this result, arguing that Borisovskii “occupied a huge two-story house, had seven horses, a carriage, and other things, but according to the inventory and the search he had not a single shirt and not a single suit, except for those on his body, no table linen, and not a single spoon or a saltshaker . . . the best and most valuable things are concealed; for instance, there are seven frames that could hold 37 icons, but the icons themselves are missing, there are glass clock cases but no clocks, there are samovar chimneys but no samovars, carafe stoppers but no carafes, and the tableware is packed in boxes as if for transportation.” Other servants and relatives testified that in Borisovskii’s house in the past they had seen numerous valuable items, such as icons in silver frames, bronze clocks, silver spoons, carriages, horses, table linen, and so on, although no one admitted to seeing anything during the official face-to-face meeting (ochnaia stavka) with Egutatov at the police station. The creditors not surprisingly complained about the fact that the police failed to find property during their first search and had not found anything truly valuable during the second one. However, despite all these complaints, the Commercial Court took seriously enough the claims by Borisovskii’s wife and brother that these items belonged to them or to Borisovskii’s daughters and did not allow the sale.25 Cases like Bakhrushin’s, Lavrentiev’s, and Borisovskii’s may not have been representative of typical bankruptcy proceedings, which never made it to the criminal court and are thus more difficult to access today. Individuals who did get caught were either too incompetent to hide property well, unlucky enough to get denounced by their servants and acquaintances, or simply unable to come to an early agreement with their creditors. Their remaining property would in any case most likely provide little satisfaction to their creditors: silverware, carriages and fur coats maintained a façade of financial stability but were actually worth relatively little compared to the merchants’ Kinship and Family 169 debts of tens or even hundreds of thousands of rubles. However, even these relatively unsuccessful attempts to deceive creditors that eventually resulted in criminal prosecution show that distressed debtors in Russia had little chance of resisting their creditors or inducing them to negotiate a settlement without considerable assistance from their family members, other relatives, employees, and domestic servants and that the overwhelming majority of these people remained loyal to their bankrupt patron even when questioned by authorities, showing ties of relation and employment to be usually stronger than the obligation to be forthcoming with creditors and the authorities. Debt, Inheritance, and Family Conflict While family ties assisted individuals in dealing with outside creditors, the converse was also true, and debt relations structured a wide range of strategies within family and kinship groups. Debt helped preserve and enhance power and property interest within such groups, but it also helped transfer wealth to the next generation through inheritance and dowry arrangements. It is important to point out that such arrangements were often conflict-ridden, that they sometimes stretched over many years and even decades, and that legal stratagems could easily fail to work as intended. The simplest strategy would be for borrowers to go to their relatives for loans before seeking help from unrelated individuals. For example, Alexander Terskii, a prosperous Moscow moneylender who died in 1856, held loan letters from his son-in-law and another pair of relatives, most likely his brother and sister-in-law.26 Registers of mortgages and loan letters show that generally between 8 and 14 percent of all transactions in the mid-nineteenth century took place between close relatives.27 The true number was probably higher, since creditors lending to their relatives could dispense with the security of a mortgage or the additional legal protections provided by “registered” loan letters and were thus more likely to use simpler “private” loan letters that are less well preserved. A more complicated use of interfamily debt ties involved inheritance arrangements. For example, individuals who were normally excluded from succession either by law or by custom could use debt to claim their share of an inheritance. The litigation involving the privy councilor’s widow Ekaterina Naryshkina has already been mentioned; she died in 1851 and had lived with her daughter Natalia, whereas her wastrel son Nikolai was banned from the house in 1826. Natalia was entitled by law to inherit only one-fourteenth of 170 The Culture of Debt the real estate and one-tenth of the movable property, and the mother apparently did not want to disinherit her son. But shortly before her death, the mother signed a loan letter to Natalia for 30,000 silver rubles. Natalia was ultimately unsuccessful in enforcing her claim against her mother’s estate, the courts openly favoring the dissolute Nikolai, but the attempt to use debt to effect a more equitable property distribution is nonetheless notable.28 Another virtually identical arrangement shows that this strategy could be attempted to benefit more remote family members. The aristocratic widow of a colonel, Anna Lopukhina, died in 1842, bequeathing 100 serfs to her second nephew, Actual State Councilor Prince Sergei Dolgorukov, a house in Moscow to her granddaughter, colonel’s wife Voyeikova, and absolutely nothing to her niece Tvorogova, who was married to a major general. Tvorogova was the closest person to the almost 90-year-old Lopukhina before her death and executed such sensitive tasks on her aunt’s behalf as inspecting her estates and dealing with serf disobedience, and after Lopukhina’s death she managed the funeral at her own expense. Although she was officially excluded from the inheritance, Tvorogova produced an unwitnessed “safe deposit receipt” from Lopukhina for 15,000 silver rubles, the form being undoubtedly selected for the legal precedence that it provided in bankruptcy or inheritance 