ory free of contradictions. Sonya the Golden Hand seems to have posed as a wealthy noblewoman without any knowledge of foreign languages beyond a few phrases that she, however, could pronounce with a perfect accent. Even what Catriona Kelly has described as a common culture of gentility left much room for variation between aristocrats and lesser nobles.45 For example, when Sergei Fokin went on a swindling spree in several European countries in the early 1860s, the high-born Russian ambassador at The Hague described him as having the “methods and manners of a man who is affluent but nonetheless simple and uneducated” and in particular that he spoke “like a commoner” (prostoliudin).46 Another recent escapee from imprisonment in Russia, anarchist Mikhail Bakunin, received a visit from Fokin in London in 1862. The swindler was offering Bakunin and his friend Alexander Herzen introductions to wealthy friends who were allegedly willing to donate at least 50,000 francs, which, Bakunin emphasized in a private letter promptly intercepted by tsarist agents, “the cause now desperately needs” (underlined in the original). Nonetheless, the aristocratic Bakunin “strongly disliked” Fokin upon introduction and sized him up right away as “a strange gentleman . . . from top to bottom a landowner of Tatar extraction from [the province of ] Simbirsk.” Despite his contempt for the less privileged and less educated provincial gentry, Bakunin was still desperate enough to lend Fokin his ear at least initially.47 In addition to swindling, Fokin had some expertise in procuring money, since an unrelated investigation by the Third Section in 1859 listed him as one of Petersburg’s most notorious usurers, operating in partnership with another man, Anton Bogomolets. Incidentally, that same investigation also listed Fokin as being heavily in debt to another suspected usurer, Gubernial Secretary Andrei Dmitriev.48 The emphasis on acting and pretense was even more important to those swindlers who lacked a genuinely respectable background, and cases of fraud by individuals who did not properly belong to the culture of gentility highlight the ease with which some of the signs of respectability could be manipulated and imitated. In one case with an exceptionally detailed record, the swindler was a citizen of Hamburg, Nikolai Bedeker (born around 1839), who operated in Moscow and inspired trust in his victims through his knowledge of French, his pleasant manners, his beautiful handwriting, and his neat dress and clear, clean-shaven face, which made him stand out among Moscow’s clerks, artisans, and tradesmen.49 Of his background we only know that he 144 The Culture of Debt had no property or older relatives, that his Lutheran family must have seen more affluent times, that he had two slightly younger sisters also living in Moscow who belonged to the estate of townspeople (meshchane), and that his many friends and acquaintances were mostly from the lower orders, including one girlfriend who was a peasant and another who was a townswoman from the southern town of Bolkhov, although one of his friends owned an inn. Bedeker had no permanent dwelling of his own but spent his nights with friends or in various rented rooms, and whenever arrested, he stated his occupation as “commerce on commission” or “buying and selling various items.” Already in 1856, Bedeker was prosecuted for forging a receipt in order to receive a mail package and fleeing from arrest. He was sentenced to three months in the workhouse. Subsequently, he seems to have committed his crimes in sprees according to one particular scheme over the course of just a few days. This strategy, while eventually alarming the police more than usual, prevented his initial victims from communicating information about his activities quickly enough to alert other potential victims. One of his favorite schemes in 1861 was to take advantage of the credit-based system of retail commerce. Bedeker would come to a foreign-owned clothing shop, introduce himself in French, and then take a selection of the product, such as fine shirts or linen, allegedly in order to bring it to a wealthy buyer. The owner would send along a servant girl or come herself, but Bedeker would manage to lose her on the way either by running away or by entering a building and leaving by another door while the woman waited outside. The plan backfired when a serf girl employed by Riga citizen Khristina De Lor managed to chase him down Moscow’s fashionable Kuzhnetskii Most and onto Lubianka Square, where he was tackled by passers-by and arrested. On different occasions, Bedeker helped himself to such diverse items as pianos, “foreign-made liquid paint,” and carpets from Moscow’s Gostinyi Dvor. When addressing the soldiers and policemen who arrested him, Bedeker affected the condescending manner of a gentleman. For example, after escaping from arrest and being recaptured, Bedeker claimed that he only decided to run away when a police officer he met on that day screamed at him for being drunk and waved his fist. This affront to his dignity, apparently, was plausible as an excuse for running from the police. Bedeker’s other favorite scheme, used in 1863 in St. Petersburg, likewise took advantage of his “respectable” manners and appearance. He would dress up as a clerk and visit the houses of various important officials and Fraud, Property, and Respectability 145 merchants, show them beautifully written notices, and claim that there was a foreign ship in port that carried a package for them. The important person would give Bedeker the shipping money and send with him a clerk or a servant, whom he always managed to lose on the way to the port. This scheme, which only rendered him around 20 rubles at any one time, must have been so unprofitable as to suggest that Bedeker did it out of a sense of adventure or kleptomania. With his handwriting and his manners, Bedeker could easily have been employed as a clerk and would likely have earned at least as much as he made with his schemes. While his behavior must have been very uncommon for German immigrants in Russia, the outlines of Bedeker’s story seem to be not atypical for the younger representatives of Russia’s growing and upwardly mobile urban classes who had been exposed to genteel lifestyles but had had no opportunities to earn enough money to adopt them permanently. Bedeker’s female— and ethnically Russian—counterpart, townswoman Maria Lebedeva, was trying to provide for her four small children.50 Lebedeva was the 32-year-old daughter of a Moscow merchant and a widow of a townsman from the nearby town of Podolsk. While she apparently had no material possessions other than the clothes she wore, she made a living by perpetrating fraud and also by teaching music and sewing men’s shirts. It was her status as a music teacher—presumably demonstrated by some actual knowledge of music— that enabled her in 1861 to rent four pianos from different pianomakers and music shops and pawn them to different usurers. When pawning the pianos, Lebedeva claimed them as her own (“because otherwise they would not be accepted as collateral”) and issued a note of sale customary for pawnshop transactions. When she was caught, Lebedeva claimed that she had acted “out of poverty” and only at the insistence of townsmen Smirnov and Rozanov, to whom she owed money. Lebedeva also replicated Bedeker’s stratagem, taking cotton fabric worth 61.16 rubles from the Hamburg-born Anna Winterling, for which Lebedeva’s fictitious fiancé was supposed to pay. She even dabbled in the pawn broking business herself by taking a fox coat from state peasant Smirnov worth 160 rubles but giving him only half the amount and then disappearing, as well as taking a 150-ruble fur coat from townswoman Shustova and later claiming that it had been taken from her on the street by two muggers. Lebedeva thus appears to be a virtual double of Bedeker—except that she was completely Russian, female, and at least to some extent motivated by real responsibilities to her children rather than any sense of derring-do. Interestingly, the pre-reform Moscow Criminal 146 The Culture of Debt Chamber reversed her original conviction and closed the case, holding that she used neither fraud nor violence and that therefore no crime had been committed! Other cases highlighting the complex connection between creditworthiness, reputation, and tangible signs of property ownership involved situations when established credit was claimed to have been damaged in a commercial setting by such factors as quarreling with authorities, being slandered, or becoming the victim of trademark infringement. Trouble with police and other officials could be very damaging, as shown by the persistent petitions of an extremely wealthy Moscow Old Believer merchant and textile manufacturer Ivan Butikov, who in 1859 engaged in a bitter feud with the policemen trying to arrest his son for debt. Not finding the son, the police briefly detained Butikov himself and then placed armed guards around his house, which caused the old merchant to frantically petition the chief of gendarmes and Moscow governor general to argue that such actions were illegal and damaging for his business reputation and his credit.51 Rumors spread by one’s ill-wishers could be just as damaging as actions by Russia’s often heavy-handed police apparatus: Moscow townsman Vasilii Kurochkin, a freed serf and later an innkeeper at Moscow’s Smolensk Market and estate manager to his former master, Major General Grigorii Kolokoltsev, was accused of embezzlement by the late general’s children. In his suit for slander, Kurochkin complained that “through being slandered [posramlenie] by Mrs. Kolokoltsev in this fashion, I and my family fell into complete penury and as a man of commerce engaged in various kinds of trade, I thereby lost all trust in my credit [poterial chrez to vsiakoe doverie v kredit].”52 As part of their legal campaign, the general’s heirs petitioned the Board of Trustees and the Commercial Bank not to issue any loans to Kurochkin or his relatives. The heirs claimed that their investigation of the embezzlement did not have an “official character,” and so Kurochkin could not have lost his credit because the allegations were not published in print. Kurochkin’s criminal “insult and slander” (obida i kleveta) case missed the filing deadline at the Moscow County Court, and Kurochkin was left with far less effective recourse in the civil court. Finally, even an indirect slight such as trademark infringement could be interpreted as harming one’s credit by associating the merchant with inferior-­ quality goods, as was argued by the Prussian subject Stepan Iakovlev Schiffers, who traded in woolen clothes in partnership with another merchant, Shaposhnikov, selling them to China through the famous Kiakhta trading Fraud, Property, and Respectability 147 post in Siberia. Schiffers alleged that Shaposhnikov continued to use their common trademark on his rolls of cloth long after their partnership had ended and thereby “harmed his credit.”53 The Price of Middle-Class Respectability Fokin and other swindlers from the lesser nobility seem to more properly belong with Russia’s still poorly studied middling classes, which also included junior civil servants, merchants, and better-off townspeople and peasants. Some of their stories reveal a more complex connection between respectability and fraud; much as in Victorian Britain, middle-class fraud in Russia reveals a combination of social pressures brought to bear in maintaining a respectable lifestyle and the ease of confusing potential victims. When arrested, middle-class swindlers and embezzlers narrated long stories of their misfortunes and of their struggle to maintain their finances and to regain respectability. One example is the merchant Pavel Galitskii, who began his career of fraud both because his merchant status allowed him to issue easily for