police chief baron Korf, received a timely shipment of money from his country relatives just before he had to pay for his elaborate new uniform.8 Aside from the question of payment, it was not 162 The Culture of Debt unusual to petition the courts on behalf of one’s relatives, especially when they were imprisoned for debt.9 For instance, the young merchant Nikolai Kuznetsov, on criminal trial for fraudulent bankruptcy in 1865, benefited from his mother’s petitions defending his case, which were prepared with the help of top-notch lawyer Aristov.10 More sophisticated and long-term strategies for keeping creditors at bay could involve keeping property away from the children’s control for as long as possible. Sometimes this resulted in rather curious arrangements. Elizaveta Yan’kova, in her famous reminiscences (Grandmother’s Tales) written down by her grandson Dmitry Blagovo, recounted that Prince Dmitry Golitsyn, the popular and powerful Moscow Governor General in 1820–1844, depended on his mother financially for most of his adult life, receiving from her an allowance of 50,000 rubles and controlling a village with one hundred serfs. Only seven years before his own death did he inherit from his mother and finally enjoy her fabulous fortune of landed estates with 16,000 serfs.11 Although his mother, the old Princess Natalia Petrovna Golitsyna, did have a powerful personality, she was also probably trying to preserve the Golitsyns’ properties from her son’s creditors and his likely mismanagement. The best option for creditors who did loan to young heirs was usually to be patient. For example, insolvency proceedings against the previously mentioned Dmitrii Tolstoy ran into difficulties when it turned out that he had no property that was legally his own and that his creditors could seize. Although of age, he lived with his father, who owned everything in their apartment, as well as all the carriages and expensive horses.12 As previously discussed, the expectation of an inheritance was often considered by moneylenders a sufficient guarantee of repayment to extend credit to young persons without any money of their own, which is what also happened in the Tolstoy case. While Russian law provided parents with the option of issuing children their share of their inheritance while they were still alive, and while many parents did choose to do so, the key issue was that neither the children nor their creditors could legally force parents to transfer property during their lifetime, and thus the creditors’ only option would be to wait until the parents died and the child came into possession of the inheritance.13 Conversely, wealthy individuals could attempt to evade their own creditors by devolving at least some of their property to their children or grandchildren. If executed properly, such divisions could be quite effective, as in the case of the noble entrepreneur and memoirist Nikolai Makarov, who lost his factory, his money, and his landed estate during the financial crisis of Kinship and Family 163 1859–1860 but was able to retire to his children’s property near the city of Tula. Makarov’s memoir also provided another example, that of his aunt, Alexandra Shipova, who led a very pleasant and hospitable life on her estate but eventually had to sell all of her 600 serfs, her jewelry, and the “unnecessary” silverware to repay her debts. However, her young son still had 400 serfs that he inherited from his father that were enough to pay for his elite education in St. Petersburg.14 Memoirist Yulia Karpinskaia, writing about another gentry entrepreneur, Pavel Yablochkov, noted that his older daughters, who were given their share of the inheritance early, did not suffer very much from his later business failures, unlike the younger children, who in the end received almost nothing.15 But such arrangements could create legal problems as well, most notably when the parent wished to retain some control over the property or when the children were not willing to wait to assume control. Debt in such cases became a weapon for both sides. This was the situation of Yekaterina Narysh­ kina, the widow of a senator and privy councilor, who in the first half of the nineteenth century held lands populated by over 1,600 serfs. Although she thus belonged to the few thousand of Russia’s wealthiest nobles, 1,100 of these serfs were legally owned by her children, having been transferred in 1804 by her mother and sister. According to the arrangement, Naryshkina could manage her children’s serfs and enjoy the income for the duration of her life, but she could neither sell nor mortgage them. In 1845, six years before her death, she was subjected to a full-scale criminal investigation initiated by a denunciation from her son Nikolai, a wastrel who had been banned from his mother’s house since 1826.16 A retired army officer heavily in debt and at one point exiled by the government to the northern town of Vologda for his dissolute behavior, Nikolai claimed that his mother had let into her house an enterprising young man named Divarii, who had previously been expelled from the Corps of Gendarmes for seducing a lady and who now allegedly induced the elderly woman to take out mortgages on her vast holdings, including the children’s serfs, to satisfy his love of luxury. The governor general of Moscow dispatched a high-ranking aide to investigate, and it turned out that Naryshkina had indeed mortgaged some of the “children’s” estates in 1841 to the Board of Trustees for 31,860 silver rubles. On April 14, 1847, the 78-year-old lady was interrogated in the presence of a procuracy official (striapchii) and a deputy from the nobility, State Councilor Stroev. Naryshkina displayed a very detailed knowledge of all of her properties and their legal status, even though neither her relatives nor a legal adviser 164 The Culture of Debt were present. She denied any illegality, but at the same time claimed that her sole motivation was to deny her son’s creditors the ability to seize these lands and that she used the money to make improvements. But she could not convincingly explain why she never revealed the serfs’ true ownership on her tax rolls. The authorities placed all of Naryshkina’s property and her person under trusteeship, a sanction typically applied to minor children, mentally incompetent persons, spendthrifts, and serfowners who mistreated their serfs more than was socially and legally accepted. However, after Naryshkina exercised her connections in the highest spheres, the trusteeship was left only over the “children’s” properties, and the control over Naryshkina’s own lands was restored to her, although still without the right to sell or mortgage. The government also seems to have removed her case from the jurisdiction of Moscow’s regular courts because her case file stops abruptly shortly after the first interrogation. It seems that Naryshkina actually prevailed in the end because there is no indication that her illegal mortgage was subsequently rescinded. Given Naryshkina’s travails, it is not surprising that property owners were motivated to retain as much control over their property as possible, while at the same time shielding it from their creditors. This was the conundrum of Elizaveta Dolgovo-Saburova, who in 1823 transferred 550 of her serfs to her six minor children and in 1839 moved to Moscow, where she may have engaged in trade and possibly became involved with shady company; she incurred considerable debts, some of them from the known bankrupt Prince Nikolai Engalychev and convicted forger Collegiate Assessor Grigorii Polianskii. Dolgovo-Saburova disputed these debts, but after her death her children stopped pursuing the case, thinking that their property was safe from collection. One can only imagine the shock of the sole surviving son, Ivan, when the creditors tried to take away his estate in the early 1850s and the case was appealed all the way to the Senate, which ruled against him. The ambiguous wording of the gift acted against Elizaveta and her children. On the one hand, she clearly intended to observe the appearances of giving up her ownership of the property: she listed it as the children’s in all official papers and appointed her brother as the trustee over it. At the same time, the Senate ruled that the gift was not finalized and the children never legally came into possession of the property. According to the Senate, the language of the act was that Elizaveta would divide up the property among her children only when they came of age and if they were “respectful.” This argumentation sounds bogus because the conditions referred to the future Kinship and Family 165 division of the property and not to the gift itself. However, she later sold some of the land and also took out a mortgage from a state bank, and further claimed the property as hers on the tax rolls at least once. Finally, the registration procedure at the Yaroslavl’ County Court was never properly completed. Ivan’s arguments were that the children could not officially come into possession at the time of the gift because they were underage, the transfer was clearly meant to be final, and Elizaveta’s sale and mortgage activities violated the terms of the gift but could not be grounds for voiding it. She claimed property as hers on the tax rolls due to an error by her bailiff and, finally, the error in the registration procedure meant that some official had made a mistake and not that Elizaveta’s children should lose their property. Having lost the appeal, Ivan petitioned the tsar to stop the sale of his estate. The procedure in that situation was for the Third Section and the minister of justice, Count Viktor Panin, to opine first. The minister’s opinion was likewise against Ivan. Whereas we may allow that during the formal judicial proceedings Ivan’s creditors could have bribed the Senate officials to rule in their favor, Panin’s reasoning indicates a concern for the creditors who allegedly in good faith purchased the claims against Elizaveta from her original, rather shady, lenders. Panin thought that although Elizaveta did give up some of her property rights, the gift was conditional, the children were never formally brought into possession, and she continued to manage the estate without any constraints until her death. More importantly, Panin then argued that Elizaveta’s creditors did not know about the gift and assumed when they loaned her the money that she was still the owner. The tsar approved Panin’s opinion. In this fashion, the government balanced its concern for preserving property arrangements within noble families with its concern for preventing families from defrauding creditors. Another complicated and not invariably successful strategy to protect family assets was to register loans to a relative in order to gain membership on his or her bankruptcy board in case of future insolvency. Already in the late eighteenth century, the law recognized only transfers that occurred before the debt to the third party was incurred.17 Although the other creditors could challenge or even exclude suspicious debt claims, legally it was nearly impossible to prove whether relatives really did or did not physically transfer the money unless the transaction was properly documented. For example, Colonel Count Ivan Zotov, when he died in 1853, was embroiled in a legal dispute with Cavalry Staff Captain Vasilii Mozharov, who maintained 166 The Culture of Debt that the Zotovs owed him nearly 9,000 silver rubles related to a land sale by the countess. However, the late Zotov’s largest creditor, for over 41,000 rubles, was his son Cavalry Captain Petr Zotov. While it is unclear just how far Petr was able to press his advantage, Mozharov’s actions were clearly constrained because Petr never tired of pointing out in his court petitions that his debt was much larger than Mozharov’s and because Mozharov was ultimately unable to get an insolvency proc