59, soon after his arrival to Moscow, collected information, as was their habit, from servants and neighbors and reported that the family created a “most unfavorable” impression, especially Sergei himself and his older sister Varvara, “who are inclined to actions that are demeaning to ­gentle-born persons.” The police described him as a “terrible 152 The Culture of Debt adventurer and swindler” (uzhasnyi aferist i obmanshchik) but never used the term “illegal.” In addition to his loans in Petersburg, Fokin borrowed 4,000 rubles in Moscow from an unmarried daughter of a civil servant, secured by his wife’s house, which already had a private mortgage for 10,000 rubles. “Fokin is not paying any of his debts,” warned the gendarmes. Yet there was no obvious wrongdoing for which he or his relatives could be immediately arrested. In addition to openly assisting the swindler, relatives and friends could help in small ways by helping the swindler create the impression of having legitimate social relationships. For example, Fokin’s third wife, Uresheva, who was also his victim, was not involved in his frauds but still used her name and her property to get fraudulent loans without at first arousing suspicion, since ordinary persons who were not swindlers routinely used their spouse’s property to get loans or officially had their houses and shops registered under their names. Fokin and other successful swindlers understood that it was also important to have a larger circle of unrelated acquaintances and friends, once again in contradiction to the “lone actor” theory of nineteenth-century criminals. Consider once again the Napoleonic-era Roman Medoks: upon arriving to the Caucasus, allegedly to raise a militia to fight the invasion, he immediately created a network of friends, just as any legitimate visiting noble would have done. The network involved exchanging expensive presents, gambling, and entering into sale transactions involving luxury items. Another case illustrates the importance of a well-centered social network: it involved the previously mentioned petty civil servant Petr Veselkin ­(twenty-two years old in 1841), a hereditary noble with thirty-two serfs in backcountry Zaraisk county.58 Veselkin entered government service as a “junior sorter” at the Riazan’ provincial post office in 1835 and four years later moved to Moscow to serve as a clerk at the Moscow Office of Crown Lands, both of which posts yielded a meager income to complement an equally meager income from his lands. Not surprisingly, in 1841 Veselkin left service, with good recommendations from his superiors. His other, more profitable, occupation was carried out beginning in 1839 with two partners, a former Moscow merchant, Aleksandr Lefort, who typically posed as the representative of a fictitious Prince Dmitrii Kropotkin of Vladimir province, and another former merchant, Ivan Miliutin, who claimed to represent the equally nonexistent Lieutenant Goncharov from Riazan’ province. Veselkin’s wife Klavdia and his brother were also in the group. Fraud, Property, and Respectability 153 With forged powers of attorney and other paperwork, Lefort and Miliutin registered mortgages for their “clients’” fictitious estates and then remortgaged them to actual wealthy landowners in the Moscow area who were looking for investment opportunities. Lefort also took a trip to St. Petersburg to look for victims there but was not successful. Only a few weeks after the last such transaction, one of the victims, Collegiate Assessor Glazunov, decided to double-check and found out that the documents were forged. In the presence of witnesses, he confronted Lefort, who lost his composure and allegedly said, “I already know that the certificate and the power of attorney are false.”59 Veselkin and his friends were able to delay and confuse the investigation for several years, until in 1847 Lefort unexpectedly and voluntarily showed up at a police station in Moscow and confessed the entire scheme, claiming that he composed all the fake mortgage papers, as well as forged pawnshop tickets, together with Veselkin, who “enticed him with promises of a great profit.”60 Many things are striking about this Gogolesque case: Veselkin’s youth, Lefort’s apparently voluntary surrender and confession, and especially one significant disadvantage of Veselkin’s otherwise ingenious scheme—that it was very labor- and time-consuming, requiring complex negotiations, close interaction with the victims, and the forgery of many documents that could be easily checked with the appropriate authorities. For present purposes, the other point to note is that the scheme worked as well as it did despite the effort and great risk involved because of the sheer size of the criminal group. Each member could vouch for and lend an appearance of respectability to the others, which allowed them to earn the trust of their victims. The same strategy on a larger scale was deployed by the group of swindlers known as the Jacks of Hearts, who operated more than twenty years after Veselkin. The police identified almost one hundred individuals directly connected to the case. Several overlapping loose circles of friends and acquaintances incurred fraudulent loans by posing as wealthy individuals, forged debt documents, engaged in retail credit fraud, and opened bogus businesses. These individuals’ interests were so divergent that the prosecution’s case rested almost entirely on the testimony of several defectors. The Jacks of Hearts were ready to swindle each other as easily as they would an outsider. But there is more to this case: in addition to this loose partnership, the extensive case record depicts an entire semi-criminal “upperworld” (to borrow George Robb’s coinage) that, despite the best efforts of nineteenth-century crimi­ nologists, cannot be easily separated from legitimate and semi-legitimate 154 The Culture of Debt c­ ommerce. This was a world not only of swindlers but of usurers and moneylenders, brokers and intermediaries of all kinds, closely linked to local government officials, all of whom were busy buying and selling all types of objects, land, and commercial paper, engaging in loan operations, dealing in smuggled and counterfeit objects, and so on. It is tempting to connect this criminal demi-monde with the growth of Russia’s urban life in the post-reform era, when cities grew and became rapidly filled with peasants trying to find work and gentry who could no longer live off their land. However, it is clear that while the reforms of the 1860s and 1870s boosted these practices, they were building upon the foundation that was already there in the 1840s and 1850s in Russia’s largest cities, such as Petersburg, Moscow, Odessa, Warsaw, and Vilna. The Third Section records, for example, refer to a loose community of swindlers in pre-reform Petersburg, where Fokin himself seems to have been trained, and which even the tsar’s secret police were helpless to suppress. As far back as 1850, Fokin was “involved in the case of the group of persons living by various types of frauds that was then uncovered in St. Petersburg and who named themselves as “trubolioty” (literally, “chimneysweeps,” a nineteenth-century slang word also recorded by Dal as referring to being bankrupt or to being a high-­ society wastrel). I have not been able to find any information about this particular “gang,” but the then-young Fokin avoided further unpleasantness by paying off his victims. In the late 1850s to early 1860s, Fokin’s circle closely resembled that of Veselkin in the 1840s and of the Jacks of Hearts in the late 1860s and 1870s. One key similarity was the participation of individuals from all social groups, including nobles and government officials, merchants, and relatively respectable moneylenders, as well as the more shady brokers, commissioners, pawnbrokers, and pettifoggers. Individual roles within these circles were carefully divided up and practiced. One of Fokin’s friends was Aulic Councilor Romanovsky, who owned a house in Petersburg and was employed by the Naval Ministry. He claimed Fokin was his nephew, was a “great aficionado of cards” and was said by the police to “[loan] money secured by various documents, [buy] up loan obligations and in general to be counted among usurers.” He was said to have purchased his house very cheaply in some “improper” way. Another important friend was the non-serving nobleman Anton Bogomolets, who acted out the role of manager of Fokin’s (nonexistent) estates, allegedly including a large sheep farm producing many thousands of pounds of wool. Fraud, Property, and Respectability 155 This was exactly the same tactic that was later used by the Jacks of Hearts, who liked to employ some real but completely destitute young noble and to pose as his obedient servants and estate managers. Bogomolets acted as a sort of consigliore to Fokin, conducting some legal work for him and sometimes acting as the official front man for Fokin’s fraudulent loans or at least serving as a witness to his transactions. Another important actor was the notary named Kalugin, “Fokin’s constant assistant in his deceptions and fraud.” One of the key Jacks of Hearts was the notary Aleksei Podkovshchikov; in addition, the Collegiate Councilor Sergei Slavyshenskii may have acted as their lawyer before his murder in 1871. Another key role, in Fokin’s case performed by Gubernial Secretary Yakov Yunitsky, was to act as an unrelated party who would reassure (“introduce, persuade, encourage, and sooth”) the victim about Fokin’s reputation and creditworthiness by telling them about rich estates that he allegedly had seen with his own eyes. One of the tsar’s gentlemen of the chamber (kamer-iunker), Rudzevich, lent Fokin’s operations an additional veneer of respectability. To the police, and to us in retrospect, it is clear that Fokin and his accomplices were criminals, but the key point here is that it was not clear at the time. This perhaps suggests the reason the government did not stage a largescale prosecution of Fokin’s acquaintances: not only was there the problem of evidence, but exposing the entire group of Fokin’s accomplices would have been impossible without it becoming public knowledge, at least in Moscow’s commercial circles, which would have severely damaged the entire system of private credit, based as it was on precisely these go-betweens, semi-legal “usurers,” and the fact that many officials, aristocrats, and otherwise respectable individuals seem to have been routinely engaged in rather unsavory commercial and financial schemes. For example, the famous Mother Superior Mitrofaniia was convicted of credit fraud and forgery in 1874. Her story points to the lack of a clear boundary between fraud and manipulation of legal rules and interpersonal ties, and although she was unusually highly placed because of her court connections and although she was prosecuted and convicted, which was also unusual, her worldview and her engagement in business schemes were not unusual at all.61 However, employing a large circle of friends and accomplices was not merely enabling but also sometimes dangerous for the swindlers themselves: accomplices or even simple acquaintances were more likely than relatives to go to the police or unintentionally divulge incriminating information that 156 The Culture of Debt would cause a potential victim to get suspicious. For example, in 1865 the retired Staff Captain Georgii Balakan, who made a living by lending money, was saved only by a lucky accident from a fraudulent scheme concocted by the wife of Aulic Councilor Maria Skrebkova.62 Skrebkova asked Balakan for a loan, but he only agreed on the condition that merchant Ivan Korolev, the affluent former mayor of Moscow, would act as the legal borrower. Balakan visited Korolev in person to make sure he really did agree to this condition, only to find out that he had nothing to do with Skrebkova’s loan and that it 