was his dissolute brother Dmitrii who was posing as the former mayor. Balakan notified the police, staged an ambush, and after a short scuffle caught Dmitrii Korolev and Skrebkova just as they signed the fraudulent debt instrument. Balakan’s case shows that there were certain simple precautions to deter fraud and, in a wider sense, to ensure the reliability of one’s investment in the loan. For instance, in real estate mortgages, it was advisable to write to the provincial authorities that registered mortgages and issued the required reliability certificates to ensure that the property in question actually existed and had not been mortgaged to someone else. Failure to do so—out of neglect or some sense of honorable dealing with one’s fellow landowner—could have unpleasant consequences. For example, in 1865, Moscow merchantess Kurenkova purchased a dacha (a suburban home) in Sokol’niki Park on the outskirts of Moscow from merchant Vasilii Mazurin, paying him 4,500 rubles in advance of the closing. However, Mazurin continued to delay the closing for many months, and Kurenkova eventually found out that the house had been mortgaged to someone else when she and her husband were evicted.63 Similarly, the victims of the Veselkin–Lefort–Miliutin trio discussed above did not think to question the authenticity of the gang’s powers of attorney and the mortgage certificates that they presented. Even Glazunov, who owned an estate just outside Moscow and eventually unmasked the scheme, only became suspicious a few weeks after handing over his money. At that point, it took him no more than a few weeks to unmask the scheme by obtaining all the necessary information from the Riazan’ and Vladimir provincial registers of the powers of attorney, mortgage certificates, and provincial tax rolls. Although he did have the good sense (eventually) to pursue this course, Glazunov was not able to recover his investment. Even less lucky was Gubernial Secretary Aleksei Zaborovskii, who loaned 10,000 silver rubles to Princess Cherkasskaia but was falsely accused by her representative Fraud, Property, and Respectability 157 Konovalov of taking the debt document and never issuing the money.64 While it is possible to speculate that Glazunov may have been a naïve rustic landlord, Zaborovskii had served at the state-owned Commercial Bank and must have had a fairly detailed knowledge of the risks of his trade, yet he was perhaps the hardest-hit white collar crime victim of all that I reviewed, since he spent several years under the threat of being exiled to Siberia, in addition to losing his money. In all of these cases, the immediate cause of the scheme’s success was that lenders and creditors would not deal with each other directly. This was because Russia’s network of private credit had become so large by the mid-nineteenth century that financial links between individuals who were neither acquainted personally nor willing to become acquainted became commonplace. This was a risk that Russia’s elites were often willing to take. Thus the previously mentioned Glebov brothers avoided trouble with the law only through their own good judgment in destroying a key piece of evidence, whereas the precautions by Princess Cherkasskaia and the wealthy and powerful clients of barrister Saltykov were perfectly reasonable— after all, what could be more reliable than employing a highly prominent attorney to screen one’s borrowers? Nonetheless, they failed due to the fragile character of ­nineteenth-century attitudes about trust, respectability, and failure. The culture of credit and notions of creditworthiness were inseparable from objective assessments of individual wealth. However, they equally depended on less tangible markers of respectability and trust, which ensured that wealth was not the borrower’s fleeting condition and would continue to be available in the future to repay the debt. Aside from the cases discussed in this chapter, these signifiers of trust and respectability were not explicitly discussed in most cases that I reviewed; they were made explicit mainly in the breach. Cases of fraud show that in addition to the obvious advantages of good looks, good manners, fashionable clothes, and well-furnished houses and offices, an individual’s social circle was every bit as important to convey creditworthiness. Swindlers’ wives, siblings, and close friends could enable credit fraud largely because these people were seen as vouching for the swindler’s good reputation and rootedness in a given locality. But the converse was also true: the fact that nineteenth-century legitimate commerce was carried out by brokers, lenders, “commissioners,” clerks, 158 The Culture of Debt notaries, and civil servants of questionable morals obscured the line between what was criminal and what was not and created the enabling atmosphere also observed, for example, in the case of Victorian Britain, the prime economic power in the mid-nineteenth century.65 Finally, it follows that the social and kinship circles described in this chapter were crucial in defining and understanding the very nature of private property in imperial Russia. chapt e r 5 Kinship and Family O f th e vari o us t y p e s of personal connections that underpinned Russia’s system of private credit, family ties were among the most important. Parents and children, husbands and wives, brothers and sisters borrowed from each other, sued each other in court, and served on their relatives’ bankruptcy boards. This phenomenon was certainly not unique to Russia; for example, writing about English “middling” classes in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Margaret Hunt explained a similar reliance on kin by the necessity to allocate scarce resources, especially liquid cash, as well as by a lack of bureaucratic structures that lodged significant authority in individual households, which induced creditors and debtors to rely on the moral pressure of kin ties to procure loans and to ensure their repayment, thus compensating for the inadequacies of business ethics, commercial law, a finance system, and reliable communications.1 Similarly, in imperial Russia the lack of formal credit infrastructure combined with an active property market and frequent financial crises led relatives and spouses to help each other to cope with debt and, if necessary, to resist and evade creditors, taking full advantage of legal rules and sometimes adapting and subverting them to suit their ends. Moreover, this personal and informal credit system not only acted as a system of social insurance but also created considerable potential for friction. Patterns of property ownership in early industrial societies, including Russia, emphasized dividing up both assets and debts among relatives. Devolution of property to the younger generations was a lengthy and complex process, sometimes skipping a ­ ­generation and beginning long before children reached majority.2 159 160 The Culture of Debt Whereas existing literature on Russia emphasizes the importance of kinship networks centered on the top stratum of the nobility, it is crucial to examine the overlapping circles of communities that included the lesser gentry, as well as urban and commercial classes.3 Even for moderately wealthy individuals and families, the legal framework was essential for structuring marital and testatory property arrangements, as well as resolving the disputes that often resulted. In Western Europe, the legal restrictions on female inheritance and marital control of property had an immediate influence on the development of private credit, while being adapted creatively by individuals (male or female) to suit their strategies and property interests.4 In imperial Russia, the law likewise privileged a patriarchal family, granting the head of a household extensive control over his wife and children. The distinction was that the law allowed married women in Russia to maintain and control their own separate property. As Michelle Marrese has shown in her groundbreaking book, Russian laws permitting married women to own and control property separately from their husbands were indeed followed in practice, and noblewomen in Russia controlled both urban property and provincial landed estates. Marrese also concluded that Russia’s legal system, “for all of its shortcomings,” allowed women to protect and to advance their and their families’ property interests and that noblewomen using the courts “experienced no greater disadvantages than their male counterparts.”5 Similarly, Galina Ulianova has shown that female merchants and entrepreneurs controlled up to 25 percent of businesses.6 This chapter adds to this developing field of study by identifying a discrete sphere of activity—borrowing and debt management—that was significantly affected by the law of separate property. I also contribute by focusing on family and kinship structures in which women participated and whose interests they advanced—as did other members—through exercising their particular legal rights. In other words, separate property ownership by a married woman could advance not only her own property interests but also her husband’s, and families deployed these legal rights as part of their common strategy. Marital and other family ties helped to secure and promote property rights and interests, both against outsiders and against foolhardy behavior within the family. At the same time, relatives quarreled about debt and used debt to pursue their grievances. Relatives could help each other cope with debt, or they could end up burdening each other with it. The same conclusion, of Kinship and Family 161 course, applies to the relevant legal rules themselves: some were enacted to protect kinship groups and others to prevent abuses against third parties, but taken together they served as important strategic tools, whether to maintain the status quo or to change existing property distributions within kinship networks and between generations. Coping with Debt Perhaps the most important way in which family and kinship relations affected the culture of credit was for relatives to help each other cope with indebtedness. If family members were unable or unwilling to simply pay the money owed, they had the option to devise strategies, such as hiding an insolvent’s property from creditors or ensuring that the debtor owed some money to his or her relatives, who would then be admitted to participate in bankruptcy proceedings. Another way to protect the family’s property was to take some preemptive steps through inheritance or trusteeship arrangements that would prevent property from falling into the hands of relatives who were vulnerable to creditors. The most direct way to help one’s relatives was to pay their debts. For example, we have already encountered the young Count Dmitrii Tolstoy, who in the early 1860s incurred substantial debts due to his love of good horses and other luxuries. His father managed to buy up most of Dmitrii’s debts and get the insolvency case closed, as well as to foil the sole recalcitrant creditor by complaining about him to the gendarmes, who started an investigation into his predatory lending practices. The father also assisted his son by taking over the burden of the legal proceedings. Almost one hundred years previously, memoirist Prince Ivan Dolgorukov was similarly bailed out by his own father for his debt incurred by having to maintain a proper lifestyle as an officer of the Imperial Guard in St. Petersburg.7 According to Dolgorukov’s memoirs, this was done with good cheer, presumably in the hopes that the young prince would imbibe the moral lesson and in the future avoid endangering his family’s finances. Less wealthy families likewise supported their relatives by helping them pay their debts and avoid making new ones. For example, another eighteenth-­ century­memoirist, Andrei Bolotov, after moving to St. Petersburg to take up a lucrative position with the 