eport. In a verbal exchange that in its repetitious form resembles a folk tale, Butikov kept asking Shkinskii, “Why are you here, what do you want,” as if he did not already know, and replied to the policeman’s demands, just as confidently as before, that he simply would not allow the police to conduct a search, and as to the report, he was free to write two reports if he wanted, but he, Butikov, would provide neither ink nor pen for that purpose. Shkinskii was then induced to gather up his entourage and retreat to the police station to write his report there. It is remarkable that the household of a wealthy merchant, such as Butikov, could not be protected against a sudden police raid, but Butikov was able to rally and fend off the police after they had already penetrated all his defenses. In the morning, Puzanov, the precinct bailiff, summoned Butikov in the hopes of persuading him to surrender his son. The old man was detained for several hours, during which time he had another verbal altercation with Shkinskii and then with Puzanov, who also became offended at Butikov’s use of the familiar form of address, to which Butikov responded that he even addressed generals in this way, and that in any event, he had for many years “lived in concord with the police and even frequently patronized them.” Obviously, Butikov’s notions of living in concord with the police were different from those of the policemen themselves, and he was prepared to enforce his view. Notably, during his detention Butikov was not constrained or harmed in any way other than having his overcoat taken from him. Puzanov had to let him go when a procuracy official showed up at the police station and saw Butikov there.23 However, policemen were stationed around Butikov’s house day and night to seize Stepan if he returned home. The old merchant hired the “well-known” Moscow lawyer Aristov and initiated a series of petitions to the city police chief, the governor general, and the head of the Third Section. Butikov’s petitions adopted two lines of attack: the first was to point out that Stepan’s debt was in dispute and that, in fact, the policemen were attempting to collect on a debt obligation that had already been determined to be bad by their own superiors. The second 202 Debt and the Law line of attack was to emphasize the rudeness and invasiveness of Shkinskii’s visit, the harm to Butikov’s business reputation, and the “dishonor” inflicted upon him “in the opinion of the public.” All of the complaints were written in simple language, characteristic of the higher-level, better-educated bureaucrats of the time and entirely free of the convoluted legalese typical of Russian daily court practice well into the 1860s. The documents did not burden their high-profile audience with citations to any particular legal statutes, but made it perfectly clear exactly which of Butikov’s legal rights had been violated. Butikov’s complaint went to the Moscow governor general, Pavel Tuchkov, and was assigned to his aide Shimanovskii, who outranked the bailiff Puzanov. Shimanovskii’s investigation did not at first produce any satisfactory results. Shkinskii and the other policemen were protected by the Moscow police chief, Prince Kropotkin, and they did their best to avoid an interview with Shimanovskii, engaging instead in a vicious quarrel over control of bureaucratic language. The issue was that Butikov’s testimony was initially recorded through a procuracy official who provided dictation for the record, no doubt to provide a smoother narrative. One of Shkinskii’s fellow officers, Smirnov, who was also interrogated by Shimanovskii, thought that this way of doing things favored Butikov and refused to sign the protocol, provoking Shimanovskii’s fury. Shimanovskii’s interactions with the local policemen are notable as a collision between “high” and “low” bureaucratic cultures during the Great Reforms, the former represented by the highly educated governor’s aide and the latter represented by boorish and not very literate ex-soldiers. Furthermore, this altercation points to an unlikely alliance forged in the course of the investigation between a schismatic merchant and the tsar’s “enlightened” bureaucrats, who in only a few years were to carry out the reforms. The policemen successfully stalled the investigation until April 1860, when Shimanovskii received another complaint against Puzanov, this time from a lowly police scribe named Nikolskii. The ostensible reason for this complaint was Nikolskii’s fear of being implicated in the investigation because his boss Puzanov allegedly ordered him to tamper with the police report to show Butikov’s behavior in an unfavorable light. Nikolskii also alleged (1) that Puzanov had illegally detained Butikov at the police station; (2) that Puzanov lost Nikolskii’s service certificate; (3) that Puzanov searched Nikolskii’s property without cause; (4) that Puzanov freed from arrest his brother’s household serf, who was found to possess counterfeit banknotes; and (5) that Puzanov embezzled the money assigned for transporting prisoners. Debtors and Bureaucrats 203 These allegations conveniently provided Shimanovskii with a strategy to rid the Moscow police of Puzanov. In order to demonstrate his objectivity, he launched an inspection of all the police precincts, most of which, including Puzanov’s, were found to have some required documentation missing and some trivial irregularities in their account books. When asked why he was unable to keep the books in proper order, Puzanov replied that he was new to his position and was overwhelmed by emergencies happening in the large city, such as fires, robberies, and dead bodies found on the street. When asked why he considered these ordinary events to be so overwhelming, he responded that he was new at his job and to him any incident seemed like a huge emergency. Shimanovskii eventually achieved his goal. As of early 1861, the case had been closed due to the “discharge of the person against whom the complaint was brought, which turned out to have been substantiated in part.” The term for “discharge” (uvol’nenie) did not necessarily mean dismissal for cause, as it does today—it could also refer to a voluntary departure—but it is hardly conceivable that Puzanov would voluntarily leave his lucrative position so early. In March 1861, Butikov’s attorney certified that he would discontinue the case and had no further claims against Puzanov, who had been dismissed, or Shkinskii, who appears to have kept his job, possibly because of his court connections through the tsar’s physician. In sum, Puzanov absorbed the punishment for his subordinate’s rudeness as well as for his own, and Butikov vindicated his honor in a rather roundabout way. This much does not depart from the stereotype of Russian bureaucratic routine. It is, however, striking that Butikov thought himself superior and in a position to act condescendingly toward the city police. Police officers, still employing brute physical force, appear as more subaltern here than the schismatic merchant, who was not supposed by historians to have that kind of influence in the mid-nineteenth century. Butikov’s wealth allowed him to overcome two noble-born and decorated, though uncouth, policemen not yet used to paying the proper respect to Moscow’s merchant class. The policemen’s superiors both in Moscow and in St. Petersburg—among Russia’s most powerful statesmen—were perfectly capable of smoothing over the affair as a misunderstanding, but at the same time clearly believed it was important to placate Butikov in some way. While Butikov was much wealthier and better connected than most Muscovites, his case was not an isolated incident. For example, the “foreigner” Viktor Rozetti, a 35-year-old Lutheran son of a French music teacher who worked as a traffic agent on a railroad, had a similar confrontation with 204 Debt and the Law the police in 1864.24 When the police came to his house to inventory his property, he refused to cooperate, claiming that everything in the house belonged to his mother and sisters. Notably, the police did not simply break the moneybox after Rozetti refused to surrender its key. Moreover, when a policeman reminded him that he was acting on the orders of the police office (Uprava), Rozetti said “with fervor” that “the Uprava means nothing to me, I want to shit on the Uprava, and you I can just kick out.” The police did not beat or arrest the recalcitrant man but simply left, ordering him to be at home the next morning. The police ruling about the incident was that Rozetti’s words were proven by two witnesses, and so he could be prosecuted, but it was not proven that the policemen could consider themselves under threat, and therefore Rozetti was to be merely placed under house arrest. Rozetti, however, submitted his version of the story to the court, claiming that he was a “well-bred” person and never allowed himself insolent expressions about the police. He complained that the police showed up without warning and “charged together with some other persons into my sisters’ bedrooms,” adding that a “well-behaved person should not enter ladies’ rooms without permission.” Rozetti also accused the two police witnesses of having taken part in the mayhem. The court did not accept this accusation, which after all would have undermined the very purpose of employing public witnesses in police operations. Finally, Rozetti argued that his house arrest would prevent him from working. The police responded that it would not be possible to inventory Rozetti’s property without going into the rooms and that Rozetti’s sisters were not present. While the police officer admitted that he had not been endangered, he noted Rozetti’s “excitement, disobedience to the Sovereign Authority, and insolence” and explained that he had refrained from his search so as not to increase this insolence. The Aulic Court first freed Rozetti, pending trial, so he could continue with his job and then ruled that although Rozetti was clearly guilty of insulting the police, he had acted in a state of irritation that might have been induced by police actions, and so he should be given a talking-to (vnushenie). This ruling, like many others of that period, had been prepared beforehand, with a blank left for the exact punishment, into which the word vnushenie was inscribed. Rozetti perhaps could afford to be insolent because he was educated, but the state peasant Nikifor Semenov certainly was not.25 He was an illiterate 40-year-old engaged in the gilding craft. In 1863, he was summoned to a Debtors and Bureaucrats 205 police station, told that his property was to be inventoried to satisfy a debt claim by the peasant woman Alekseeva, and asked to accompany the police to his apartment and be present during the inventory. Semenov then pronounced unspecified “indecent and insulting” words about the police, for which a policeman was dispatched to take him back to his apartment. However, Semenov sat down on the pavement in the middle of the street and started to scream, “Help! The police are robbing me.” It is likely Semenov knew that without him the police were not legally permitted to conduct the inventory. After the inventory finally started, he again began to curse, to push the public witness, and to threaten the policeman with a beating. When later interrogated about the incident, Semenov revealed some knowledge of legal procedures by challenging the police witnesses on the grounds that they served the officials who were complaining about his behavior. The case file is incomplete, but it is sufficiently clear that even a peasant in the 1860s was not afraid to enter into an altercation with the police and had some idea about its procedures. While Butikov’s experience and relations in the world of officialdom facilitated the successful outcome of his feud with the police, we should not exaggerate their impact.26 It was not connections alone 