ould be worked out even after many years of litigation, as, for example, in the Tvorogova case, which involved a debt claim against the highly ranked Prince Dolgorukov, who for many years successfully delayed Tvorogova’s claim. In 1859, seventeen years after the suit began, Tvorogova’s property was taken under trusteeship, and her son, no doubt realizing that he was unlikely to win in court against one of the most important bureaucrats of the empire at the time, reached an agreement with Dolgorukov to discontinue their suit: Tvorogova’s son would not demand payment of the debt, and Dolgorukov Debtors and Bureaucrats 223 would not ask for the damages, fees, and penalties that would be due to him had he won the case. However, Tvorogova’s trustee, a civil servant named Kuzmin, would not agree to stop the suit but petitioned the court that his case was “righteous” (pravoe) and that he could not see what kind of damages Dolgorukov might have suffered in the case. Both the Noble Trusteeship Board and the courts agreed, and as of 1863, the case was still ongoing.83 In addition to mutual accounting and negotiation, another important aspect of settlement involved debt forgiveness. The tsars were known to pay the debts of their favored servitors, although sometimes a servitor refused the gift.84 In 1805, Alexander I offered to pay the debts of Petersburg governor Count Peter Tolstoy as he was leaving his post to join the army. The tsar noted that others in similar positions retired with fortunes, but Tolstoy instead had came to ruin. However, Tolstoy refused the favor, ostensibly not wanting to be an example to spendthrifts.85 Vasilii Gettun, the memoirist who narrated this anecdote, had himself both benefitted from debt forgiveness and extended it to others, such as when he destroyed the debt documents received from the Engelgardt family, whose court case he lost as their representative.86 While cases of debt forgiveness by private persons commonly involved debtors from humble ranks, one notable exception was the 1871 case of Colonel Nikolia.87 A well-off engineer and entrepreneur, he became insolvent, but his creditors, impressed by his new patent for using old rails to construct bridges and other buildings, were willing to free him from “all consequences of insolvency” in exchange for a payment of 3,000 rubles over the course of five years, 40 percent profit from the patent, and the eventual 100 percent payment of all debts. One of the creditors, however, protested, citing Nikolia’s previous business failures, and proposed to continue the operations of his bankruptcy board. Apparently it could be a bad idea to be the last creditor to hold out; in 1865 old Count Tolstoy bought up his son Dmitrii’s debt and had his insolvency case closed, although some of the Moscow moneylenders resisted. The last creditor to hold out had to eventually settle with the count instead of selling his claim.88 The more common kind of debt forgiveness cases involved impoverished debtors who clearly had no hope of repaying. The peasant Voronov forgave the debt of one of his workmen, townsman Viktor Lebedev, “because of his poverty.”89 A “trading” peasant woman Mavra Bubentsova, who made her living selling fish, became insolvent, and her daughter offered to pay one percent of her debt as a settlement. However, the creditors “condescended” to 224 Debt and the Law her “ruined and impoverished condition” and discontinued “all collection” against her.90 A 52-year-old Moscow merchant, Sofia Tepfer, was indicted for selling off her late husband’s movable property instead of turning it over to his creditors.91 She claimed to have done it out of necessity to feed her children and because of her “extreme poverty.” She submitted a special certificate of her poverty from the senior Lutheran pastor in Moscow. The Moscow Magistrate Court sentenced her to a year in the workhouse but ruled “to pass no judgment on this matter” because the creditors had discontinued their claims against her. In another case, townswoman Maria Lebedeva, who claimed to be a music teacher, rented pianos from various Moscow music shops, and then proceeded to pawn them, but was absolved from criminal responsibility by one of the pawnbrokers because of his consideration for her repentance and because she had small children.92 Despite these cases, it would not be accurate to conclude that “settlement” usually meant that a debtor was able to avoid paying the full amount or that Russian courts were slanted in the debtor’s favor. The opposite kind of situation was also common, with a creditor having considerable leverage vis-à-vis his debtor and forcing him to enter into a clearly disadvantageous settlement. For example, Collegiate Secretary Semen Briukhatov, a prominent Moscow usurer, was indicted in criminal court for defrauding nobleman Nikolai Avramov from Tiraspol’.93 Briukhatov apparently purchased the estate of Avramov’s uncle without paying the promised amount. In revenge, Briukhatov had Avramov placed in the debtors’ prison in Moscow for his 15,000-ruble debt. After about six months, in March 1866, Avramov and Briukhatov submitted a joint petition to the Moscow governor general, asking him to discontinue all prosecution of Briukhatov. Avramov emphasized that the case was basically civil in character and that “a peaceable settlement is permitted not only in civil cases, but also in criminal ones.” He asked that all the relevant documents be returned to Briukhatov, that the interdiction be removed from his property, and that he be allowed to go abroad for medical treatment. However, only six days later, Avramov submitted another petition to Governor Dolgorukov, claiming that “being deprived of freedom, which is extremely necessary to me because of my other affairs, devastated morally by my misery, with my health completely ruined, I was in desperate circumstances and hardly in possession of my reason. . . . Briukhatov, having learned that the investigation of his actions was taking an unfavorable turn, suggested to me to stop the case by settlement. Excited simply by the thought of Debtors and Bureaucrats 225 freedom . . . , I gladly accepted Briukhatov’s offer.” In exchange for dropping his claims, Avramov would be freed from prison and get back the purchase agreement for the land Avramov was selling, as well as the moneyless bill of exchange that was in Briukhatov’s possession. However, Briukhatov did none of these things, for which reason Avramov asked the authorities to consider the settlement void. A similar impasse occurred in the case of nobleman Vladislav Khlopetskii, who was trying to collect money from the university student Ivan Chulkov.94 The debtor turned out to have been a minor, thus making the debt void. However, Chulkov himself was going to be prosecuted for fraudulently misrepresenting his age, and in the end it was worthwhile for the two of them to settle; in the end, Chulkov paid the debt, and both parties petitioned the court to close the case because it was all a “misunderstanding which cleared up at our personal meeting.” The police and the Aulic Court accepted this story and closed the case. Pressure to settle a lawsuit could also occur completely outside the legal framework and involve “peer” influence. One memorable example is the case of the young Prince Nikolai Obolenskii, who owed 14,500 silver rubles to a major general’s wife, Anna von Bussau, possibly as part of a complicated inheritance arrangement.95 The case record includes the following curious document: Certificate: We, the signatories below, certify, according to our conscience and honor, that Lieutenant Prince Nikolai Obolenskii, at the apartment of Anna Pavlova, Major General’s widow von Bussau, on the sixteenth day of this August, 1863, in our presence, brought his apology for still not paying her his debt pursuant to the loan letter for 15,000 rubles, and, inviting us to be witnesses to his words, offered her to pay in the beginning of this September, 1863, nine thousand rubles, promising on his honor to pay the other six thousand rubles at the first opportunity. In certification of which we issue this certificate which includes our seal and our signature. Saint Petersburg, August 20, 1862 [sic]. Signed: Major-General Maleev, Gubernial Secretary A. Kametetskii, Major De Galet96 Von Bussau clearly enrolled the help of her kinship and acquaintance network to tie down her reluctant debtor. It is also virtually certain that her late husband was Major-General Wilhelm von Bussau, who was killed in battle on the Malakhov redoubt in Sevastopol in 1855, which would explain the 226 Debt and the Law special attention shown to his widow by other members of Russia’s service elite.97 However, the solemn ritual seems to have had little influence on Obolenskii’s determination not to pay that debt. On November 22, von Bussau petitioned the Aulic Court, claiming that Obolenskii had visited her, asked to finish this affair “peaceably,” and offered settlement conditions, which she rejected because she no longer believed his promises. She attached the draft settlement agreement brought to her by Obolenskii: We below-mentioned have concluded between us a peaceful resolution in regard to the property division between me and my sister . . . , according to which my part is to include ___ [serf ] souls in the Beltsy County of Tver province, which souls with their apportioned land have been already submitted for redemption. The redemption certificates that are to be received I will turn over to von Bussau to satisfy [my debt] . . . the rest of the money will come from a “merchant’s bill of exchange” for ten years.98 This note suggests that Obolenskii intended to take advantage of the impending liberation of the serfs and pay with the redemption certificates issued by the government to serfowners as payment for the serfs they were losing. Von Bussau’s reluctance no doubt stemmed from the fact that redemption certificates were to be redeemed by the government only in the remote future, and in the near term, if she wanted to benefit from Obolenskii’s payment, she would have to sell them at a considerable discount. In sum, it appears that out-of-court settlements could be used by individuals from all property-owning groups and involve a variety of strategies and arrangements. They could favor either creditor, debtor, or both. A settlement could involve a commercial arrangement or a charitable debt forgiveness; it could reveal either a legal stalemate, or, to the contrary, a realization by one of the parties that he or she could not win the dispute. Settlements therefore reveal another, less formal aspect of pre-reform legal practice, showing that the organizational structure introduced by Catherine II in 1775, which delegated an important role to the less formal dispute resolution mechanisms, found its manifestation in actual court practice and that pre-reform civil law, in this important sense, could serve as a mere background framework for private negotiation and debt restructuring. The tsarist bureaucracy is often interpreted as powerful yet archaic and brittle and thus unable to deploy the empire’s resources with the same efficiency as Russia’s Western European competitors. But on the level of daily practical Debtors and Bureaucrats 227 interactions, the culture of personal credit and, by extension, of private property depended on negotiation and compromise between property owners and government officials of all ranks. Private individuals, even those who were not particularly wealthy, routinely bribed, made friends with, and on occasion openly challenged the police or even such mighty figures as Moscow’s governor general, all in order to protect their property or their reputation. Court procedures were available and readily deployed, but so were out-of-court settlements designed to avoid prolonged legal battles. Officials’ ability to manipulate and even subvert the law was rea