he ability to use the wife’s dowry in exchange for providing an equivalent amount of property as security in the event that he lost the dowry through bad investment or other circumstances. This system, adopted in some mid-nineteenth century Continental legal systems, was not the default rule in Russia, where the dowry remained under the wife’s complete control.68 However, it could be arranged through a marriage contract. For example, in the 1850s, a lieutenant of the Imperial Guard, Prince Aleksandr Kol’tsov-Mosal’skii, issued loan letters for 7,500 rubles to his wife Elena (née Ghika, a well-known feminist and Romantic artist and writer who used the pen name Dora d’Istria).69 According to the husband, this was done to enable him to repay his 5,000-ruble debt to a merchant’s wife, Sofia Miller, for which debt Elena acted as a surety. When Elena sued her husband, he claimed that because he had already repaid Miller’s debt, the loan letter should be nullified. However, the wife in her petition interpreted the story differently, arguing that her husband actually gave her the loan letter to guarantee the part of her dowry that she turned over to her husband to enable him to repay his other debts. To support her claim, she sent to the Moscow Aulic Court from Florence, where she was living, carefully arranged and annotated extracts of her husband’s letters that she had translated into Russian and had notarized by the Russian consul in Livorno. These letters showed that the prince had a habit 184 The Culture of Debt of spending his wife’s as well as his own property and was at least on paper feeling guilty about it. However, the court refused to accept copies of extracts of the letters as proof since the consul only certified the translations and not the original letters. Although Elena had no less a person working on her behalf than the future chief of the Third Section Aleksandr Potapov, she lost the first proceeding at Moscow Aulic Court, which held that her own petition admitted that the letter was “moneyless” because it was issued to guarantee her dowry. According to the court, Article 2017 of the Civil Code provided that loan letters “given in exchange for work performed, ser­ vices, merchandise,” etc. were still collectable. Incidentally, the legal scholar Konstantin Pobedonostsev in his treatise interpreted this rule as requiring that something of value be transferred—and here the husband clearly benefited by getting the money to pay this debt, which makes the decision appear incorrect. Unfortunately, the records from the rest of the case do not survive, so we do not know if this was its final chapter.70 Much more successful was another aristocratic woman, Anna Shevich, who held a “safekeeping note” from her estranged husband for 60,000 rubles. The couple exchanged arguments at the Aulic Court for over three years in 1863–1865. The husband recounted that Anna petitioned for divorce in 1862 in Kaluga, after an “unpleasantness” had manifested between them, and she moved to live with her father. The husband allegedly implored her to end the “unpleasantness,” and the wife agreed but, knowing her father’s dislike for her husband, suggested that the husband write a debt note in her name with the sole purpose of showing it to the father, thereby convincing him not to hinder the reconciliation. But having obtained the note, Anna remained with her father and stopped the proceedings in Kaluga, only to restart them in Moscow, and used the debt to persuade her husband not to hinder the divorce proceedings, by threatening him with a debt collection. The husband argued, rather convincingly to a modern reader, that his wife would hardly have loaned him 60,000 rubles while quarreling with him and engaging in divorce proceedings. The husband also submitted a letter from Anna, where, he claimed, she explicitly admitted that she was only using the debt to get the divorce: I cannot understand why you call [this note] moneyless. It is true, I did not give you the money precisely on the day you wrote the note, but it does state that the money was taken at different times. [underlined in the original] You should not think that I am tormented by the thought that I Kinship and Family 185 want to proceed against you using a moneyless note, and I feel completely confident in this respect, because honestly I do not at all consider this note moneyless; this is not what I need, but rather [I am tormented by the fact that] I am compelled to employ such methods, which do not at all fit my character, and do not agree with my ways of thought. If there was not this other business between us, I would never even think to talk about this money, which I gave you not meaning to ever demand it back, and which I will never demand, if you will not hinder the divorce.”71 Confronted with this letter, Anna claimed that it did not constitute a proof according to the Russian Civil Code and that, if anything, it showed that the debt was not moneyless. She was demonstrating a rather sophisticated understanding of the law, arguing that her statement that she did not in the future intend to ask for the money back was not a condition for the loan but simply an intention that could always change later. And even if the money did constitute a gift, she could demand it back according to Article 974 of the Civil Code because of her husband’s “slander and clear disrespect.” Whether or not the letter was a threat to her husband was completely irrelevant because it did not in any way suggest that the note was moneyless. While it is not clear how the courts would eventually rule, the husband chose not to try his luck. As of March 1866, Anna Shevich was referred to as the wife of Titular Councilor Popov and was said to have gone abroad. Thus, the final resolution of the court was to close the case because the wife had “returned the note to her husband and thereby acknowledged that it did not require payment.”72 This case is perhaps illustrative of the pre-reform legal system in that it clearly shows some of the requirements for success in litigation: first, a certain amount of guile; second, access to qualified professional assistance; and third, recognition that the legal system was often more effectively used by threatening litigation than by an actual suit. Another use of debt was to enable husbands to seize a portion of their wives’ property that was officially off-limits to them. For example, another notable mid-nineteenth century female Romantic author, the major-­general’s wife Ekaterina Lachinova, signed a promise to her husband in 1837 to pay him 30,000 assignat rubles out of the 100,000-ruble dowry that her father was supposed to provide for her to pay for Lachinov’s expenses during the first seven years of the marriage. The agreement was that if the father, Chamberlain Petr Shelashnikov (a wealthy tax farmer), did not pay this money, the husband could still recover this amount through the debt. In 186 The Culture of Debt order to prevent “marital discord” between the spouses, the wife’s mother acted as a surety. Lachinov sued his wife and her mother in 1847 but was unsuccessful.73 Another aristocrat who attempted to get his hands on his wife’s property via debt was Prince Ivan Aleksandrovich Urusov, who in 1864 sued his wife, Yekaterina Ivanovna, pursuant to a loan letter for 10,000 rubles that had been issued in 1860. The wife presented as security an estate in Tver province but claimed the suit to be illegal, arguing that “the above-mentioned loan letter is moneyless, taken from me by trick during my difficult illness—in the last month of my pregnancy, and given by me with the sole purpose of providing for my husband’s future in the event of my death, on the condition that he desist from collecting the debt while I am still alive.” Apparently, Urusova had allowed her husband to manage her property, and before a trip abroad in 1858 had issued a will under his persuasion, but seeing how he mismanaged her property and wishing to provide for her children, she nullified the will and instead issued the loan letter so as not to deprive him of a living in the event of her death. Urusova’s petition reversed gender stereotypes: This current [debt] collection [proceeding] against me is even more unjust, because during the many years of our life together, my husband had no means of his own and all the maintenance of the house, children, and of himself was always effected, and is still effected, solely at my expense; my husband’s capital, which he received after his father’s death, was squandered by him before 1860, according to his assurances in order to improve my estate in Kaluga province and on various speculations; however, my estate not only was not improved, but rather was brought to a ruinous condition. But in October 1860 my husband did not have ten thousand rubles that he could loan me; otherwise, he should have been able to give exact directions as to when exactly and for what purpose I borrowed this kind of money from him, while being very ill and not leaving my room for several months, as well as where he kept this amount, in what kind of bills it was given to me and who else knew about this? Otherwise his suit is an abuse of my trust, with which he, not in any way helping me in bringing up five children and taking all of his maintenance from me, is using a document that was taken from me by deceit in the above-mentioned circumstances, to harm the entire family.74 Kinship and Family 187 At the end of this petition (composed by townsman Kusovnikov and presented to the court by Collegiate Assessor Zhuazel’), Urusova requested the police to investigate the “moneylessness” of the loan letter. The police forwarded the case to the Aulic Court without making any kind of determination or resolution, so the court sent it back, reporting to Urusova that once the police did make an official resolution, she could submit her petition to the appropriate court that had jurisdiction over her, in the event “she wished to begin a legal suit.”75 It appears that dowries were often paid in debt documents, which is what Alexander Akakievich Demidov did when his daughter Anna married a former guard officer, Viacheslav Bolobonov. According to Anna, she gave her husband 15,000 rubles of her dowry and another 10,000 that she inherited from her mother to enable him to pay his debts and instead took debt documents that were not written up correctly. After their marriage failed, she continued to live on her husband’s interest payments, and after he stopped making them, she petitioned the government in 1859 to make him issue her proper debt documents that would give her the same priority as her husband’s other creditors. The husband’s version of the story could not have been more different: he insisted that he received not cash but his own debt documents for the money that he originally borrowed from his father-in-law. The weak spot in Bolobonov’s claim was that he neglected to tear up these documents but instead kept them in his desk, and his wife managed to remove them. Bolobonov was compelled to continue his payments under the threat of having his estate taken over by a trustee, and in 1861, his property was going to be auctioned off because of his insolvency.76 A much easier solution for a spendthrift husband in need of money was to sell the wife’s loan document to another person, which is what Gubernial Secretary Ivan Martynovskii did with the 10,000-ruble loan letter from his wife Avdotia. The husband sold the letter to merchant Andrei Eikhel’, who in turn sold it to another merchant, Pavel Bronnikov. Once the demand for payment trickled back to Martynovskaia in 1853, she claimed that she had made the final payment to her husband, and she presented his receipt as well as witnesses who confirmed that she had to borrow money to pay off her husband, and that he had promised to tear up the letter. The receipt dated August 17, 1852, stated that t